Adolescent Medicine

PART

XI

Hormonally driven physiologic changes and ongoing neurologic development occur in the setting of social structures that foster the transition
from childhood to adulthood. This period of development comprises
adolescence, which is divided into three phases—early, middle, and
late adolescence—each marked by a characteristic set of biologic, cognitive, and psychosocial milestones (Table 150.1). Although individual
variations in the timing and pace of development undoubtedly exist,
these changes follow a predictable pattern of occurrence. Gender and
culture profoundly affect the developmental course, as do physical,
social, and environmental influences (Fig. 150.1). Given the interaction of these domains, a biopsychosocial perspective is best suited to
approach the healthcare of the adolescent.

Chapter 150

Adolescent Physical and
Social Development
Cynthia M. Holland-­Hall and
Maria D. Brown
See also Part XXIV and Chapters 599 and 600.
During the preteen, teenage, and young adult years, young people
undergo not only dramatic changes in physical appearance but also
rapid changes in physiologic, psychologic, and social functioning.

PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT

Puberty is the biologic transition from childhood to adulthood. Pubertal changes include the appearance of the secondary sexual characteristics, increase in height, change in body composition, and development

Table 150.1  Milestones in Early, Middle, and Late Adolescent Development
VARIABLE

EARLY ADOLESCENCE

MIDDLE ADOLESCENCE

LATE ADOLESCENCE

Approximate age range

10-­13 yr

14-­17 yr

18-­21 yr

Sexual maturity rating*

1-­2

3-­5

5

Physical

• Females: secondary sex
characteristics (breast, pubic,
axillary hair), start of growth spurt
• Males: testicular enlargement,
start of genital growth

• Females: peak growth velocity,
menarche (if not already attained)
• Males: growth spurt, secondary
sex characteristics, nocturnal
emissions, facial and body hair,
voice changes
• Change in body composition
• Acne

• Physical maturation slows
• Increased lean muscle mass in males

Cognitive and moral

• Concrete operations
• Egocentricity
• Unable to perceive long-­term
outcome of current decisions
• Follow rules to avoid punishment

• Emergence of abstract thought
(formal operations)
• May perceive future implications,
but may not apply in decision-­
making
• Strong emotions may drive
decision-­making
• Sense of invulnerability
• Growing ability to see others’
perspectives

• Future-­oriented with sense of
perspective
• Idealism
• Able to think things through
independently
• Improved impulse control
• Improved assessment of risk vs
reward
• Able to distinguish law from morality

Self-­concept/identity
formation

• Preoccupied with changing body
• Self-­consciousness about
appearance and attractiveness

• Concern with attractiveness
• Increasing introspection

• More stable body image
• Attractiveness may still be of
concern
• Consolidation of identity

Family

• Increased need for privacy
• Exploration of boundaries of
dependence vs independence

• Conflicts over control and
independence
• Struggle for greater autonomy
• Increased separation from parents

• Emotional and physical separation
from family
• Increased autonomy
• Reestablishment of “adult”
relationship with parents

Peers

• Same-­gender peer affiliations

• Intense peer group involvement
• Preoccupation with peer culture
• Conformity

• Peer group and values recede in
importance

Sexual

• Increased interest in sexual
anatomy
• Anxieties and questions about
pubertal changes
• Limited capacity for intimacy

• Testing ability to attract partner
• Initiation of relationships and
sexual activity
• Exploration of sexual identity

• Consolidation of sexual identity
• Focus on intimacy and formation of
stable relationships
• Planning for future and commitment

*See text and Figures 150.2 and 150.3.

1158
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 150 u Adolescent Physical and Social Development
2

3

4

5

1159

Media

Peers

Employment

Education

Family of origin
Family of one’s own
Childhood Adolescence
(10–24 years)

Adulthood

Old age

Fig. 150.1 Changing proximal social determinants of health across

A
2

3

4

5

the life course. During adolescence, social determinants from outside
the family become greater, with major influences of peers, media, education, and the beginning of workplace influences. Community and
structural determinants remain consistently influential, as shown by the
background shading. (From Patton GC, Sawyer SM, Santelli JS, et al.
Our future: a Lancet commission on adolescent health and wellbeing.
Lancet. 2016;387:2423–2478, Fig. 2.)

of reproductive capacity. Two principal physiologic events occur
during puberty: adrenarche and gonadarche. Adrenal androgen production, chiefly dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS), rises in
response to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Increases in serum
concentrations of DHEAS result in the development of adult-­like body
odor and faint genital hair (adrenarche), occurring as early as 6-­8 years
of age. Gonadal sex steroid production occurs with activation of the
hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal (HPG) axis (gonadarche). Maturation of the gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH) pulse generator
is among the earliest neuroendocrine changes associated with the onset
of puberty. Under the influence of GnRH, the pituitary gland secretes
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH);
initially this occurs in a pulsatile fashion primarily during sleep, but
this diurnal variation diminishes throughout puberty. LH and FSH
stimulate corresponding increases in gonadal androgens and estrogens. The triggers for these changes are incompletely understood. The
activation of the HPG axis may be mediated by increasing adiposity
and associated insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, elevated androgens, and leptin. Both genetic and environmental (epigenetic) factors
contribute to the regulation of pubertal timing.

Sexual Development

The progression of the development of the secondary sex characteristics may be described using the sexual maturity rating (SMR) scale
(ranging from 1, prepubertal, to 5, fully mature adolescent) or Tanner
stages. Figures 150.2 and 150.3 depict the physical findings of breast
and pubic hair maturation at each SMR (Tables 150.2 and 150.3).
Although the ages at which individual pubertal changes occur may
vary, the timing and sequence of these changes relative to one another
is predictable (Figs. 150.4 and 150.5). The wide range of normal progress through sexual maturation is affected by genetics, the psychosocial environment, nutrition, and overall health status. Environmental
exposures may also play a role.
In males the first visible sign of puberty and the hallmark of SMR 2
is testicular enlargement, beginning as early as 9.5 years, followed by
the development of pubic hair. This is followed by penile growth during
SMR 3. Peak growth occurs when testis volumes reach approximately
9-­10 cm3 during SMR 4. Under the influence of LH and testosterone,
the seminiferous tubules, epididymis, seminal vesicles, and prostate

B
Fig. 150.2 Sexual maturity ratings (2-­5) of pubic hair changes in ado-

lescent males (A) and females (B) (see Tables 150.2 and 150.3). (Courtesy J.M. Tanner, MD, Institute of Child Health, Department for Growth
and Development, University of London.)

enlarge. Sperm may be found in the urine by SMR 3; nocturnal emissions may be noted at this time as well. Some degree of breast tissue
growth, typically bilateral, occurs in 40–65% of males during SMR 2-­4
as a presumed consequence of a relative excess of estrogenic stimulation. This usually resolves with ongoing maturation.
In females, typically the first visible sign of puberty and the hallmark
of SMR 2 is the appearance of breast buds (thelarche), between 7 and
12 years of age. A significant minority of females develops pubic hair
(pubarche) prior to thelarche. Less visible changes include enlargement
of the ovaries, uterus, labia, and clitoris and thickening of the endometrium and vaginal mucosa. A clear vaginal discharge may be present
before menarche (physiologic leukorrhea). Menses typically begins
within 3 years of thelarche, during SMR 3-­4 (average age 12.5 years;
normal range 9-­15 years) (see Fig. 150.5). The timing of menarche
is determined largely by genetics; contributing factors likely include
adiposity, chronic illness, nutritional status, and the physical and psychosocial environment. Early menstrual cycles often are anovulatory
and thus somewhat irregular, but typically occur every 21-­45 days and
include 3-­7 days of bleeding, even during the first year after menarche.
The onset of puberty and menarche appear to be occurring at earlier
ages than previously reported in the United States (see Chapter 599).
Several studies from 1948 to 1981 identified the average age for the
onset of breast development as ranging from 10.6 to 11.2 years of age. A
subsequent prospective study suggests an earlier average age of onset of
8.8 years in Black females and 9.6 years in White females. Almost 25%
of Black females and 10% of White females initiate breast development

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1160 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
1

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

by 7 years of age. A 2020 systematic review and meta-­analysis demonstrated an almost 3 months per decade decrease in age of thelarche
between 1977 and 2013 worldwide. Early breast development may be
associated with a slower tempo of puberty (i.e., longer time to menarche). There also appears to be a trend toward decreasing ages for the
onset of pubic hair development and menarche. Data from the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), a nationally
representative, longitudinal survey in the United States, show a decline
in the average age of menarche of 4.9 months between the 1960s and
2002. This may be partially explained by changes in the ethnic makeup
of the sample. Changes in the timing of menarche within ethnic groups
were significantly smaller. The reasons for the larger decrease in age for
breast development have been postulated to include the epidemic of
childhood obesity and exposure to estrogen-­like environmental agents
(endocrine disruptors), but further research in this area is needed.
Although fewer data are available on changes in the timing of puberty
in males, they appear to be experiencing a similar trend. Although the
method of assessing the onset of puberty (i.e., inspection vs palpation
of the testes) varies between studies, it appears that the average age for
the onset of genital and pubic hair development may have decreased by
1-­2 years over the past several decades in many industrialized countries. Evidence for an association of obesity with the timing of puberty
in males has been inconsistent.

Somatic Growth

5

5

Fig. 150.3 Sexual maturity ratings (1-­5) of breast changes in adolescent females. (Courtesy J.M. Tanner, MD, Institute of Child Health, Department for Growth and Development, University of London.)

Linear growth acceleration begins in early adolescence for all genders,
with 15–20% of adult height accrued during puberty. Females attain
a peak height velocity (PHV) of 8-­9 cm/year at SMR 2-­3, approximately 6 months before menarche. Males typically begin their growth
acceleration at a later SMR stage and achieve a PHV of 9-­10 cm/
year later in the course of puberty (SMR 3-­4). Males continue their
linear growth for approximately 2-­3 years after females have stopped
growing, accounting for an average difference of 11-­13 cm in height
between adult males and females (Fig. 150.6). The growth spurt begins
distally, with enlargement of the hands and feet, followed by the arms
and legs, and finally the trunk and chest. This growth pattern imparts
a characteristic “awkward” appearance to some early adolescents. Body

Table 150.2  Sexual Maturity Rating (SMR) Stages in Females
SMR STAGE

PUBIC HAIR

BREASTS

1

Preadolescent

Preadolescent

2

Sparse, lightly pigmented, straight, medial border of labia

Breast and papilla elevated as small mound; diameter of areola
increased

3

Darker, beginning to curl, increased amount

Breast and areola enlarged, no contour separation

4

Coarse, curly, abundant, but less than in adult

Areola and papilla form secondary mound

5

Adult feminine triangle, spread to medial surface of thighs

Mature, nipple projects, areola part of general breast contour

From Tanner JM. Growth at Adolescence, 2nd ed. Oxford, England: Blackwell Scientific; 1962.

Table 150.3  Sexual Maturity Rating (SMR) Stages in Males
SMR STAGE

PUBIC HAIR

PENIS

TESTES

1

None

Preadolescent

Preadolescent

2

Scant, long, slightly pigmented

Minimal change/enlargement

Enlarged scrotum, pink, texture altered

3

Darker, starting to curl, small amount

Lengthens

Larger

4

Resembles adult type, but less quantity;
coarse, curly

Larger; glans and breadth increase
in size

Larger, scrotum dark

5

Adult distribution, spread to medial
surface of thighs

Adult size

Adult size

From Tanner JM. Growth at Adolescence, 2nd ed. Oxford, England: Blackwell Scientific; 1962.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 150 u Adolescent Physical and Social Development

cm/yr

Strength spurt

Height spurt

Genital SMR

2

3

4

5

12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

50

1161

50

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Age (yr)

Fig. 150.6 Height velocity curves for American males (solid line) and
Pubic hair SMR

8

9

10

11

2

12

3

13

4

females (dashed line) who have their peak height velocity at the average age (i.e., average growth tempo). (From Tanner JM, Davies PSW.
Clinical longitudinal standards for height and height velocity for North
American children. J Pediatr. 1985;107:317.)

5

14

15

16

17

Age (yr)

Fig. 150.4 Sequence of pubertal events in males. Although the age

of onset of puberty is variable, the sequence of events relative to one
another is predictable. SMR, Sexual maturity rating.

Height spurt

Menarche

Breast SMR 2

Pubic hair SMR

8

9

10

3

Because skeletal growth precedes muscle and tendon growth, sprains
and strains may be more common during this time as well.
Cardiovascular changes in middle adolescence include increased
heart size, higher blood pressure, and increases in blood volume and
hematocrit, particularly in males. Coupled with an increase in lung
vital capacity, these changes lead to greater aerobic capacity. Androgenic stimulation of sebaceous and apocrine glands may result in acne
and body odor. Rapid enlargement of the larynx, pharynx, and lungs
leads to changes in vocal quality in males, typically preceded by vocal
instability (voice cracking). Elongation of the optic globe may result in
the development of myopia (see Chapter 660). Dental changes include
jaw growth, loss of the final deciduous teeth, and eruption of the permanent cuspids, premolars, and finally, molars (see Chapter 353).
Orthodontic appliances may be needed, secondary to growth exacerbations of bite disturbances. Physiologic changes in sleep patterns and
increased sleep requirements occur, causing many adolescents to delay
sleep onset at night, with subsequent difficulty awakening for early
school start times in the morning (see Chapter 31). The mechanism of
delayed circadian rhythm has not been elucidated but likely involves
changes in both circadian and homeostatic sleep regulatory processes.

NEUROLOGIC, COGNITIVE, AND MORAL
DEVELOPMENT
4

2

3

4

11

12

13

5

5

14

15

16

17

Age (yr)

Fig. 150.5 Sequence of pubertal events in females. Although the age
of onset of puberty is variable, the sequence of events relative to one
another is predictable. SMR, Sexual maturity rating.

composition changes as well after attainment of PHV. Males undergo
an increase in lean body mass (“strength spurt”), whereas females
develop a higher proportion of body fat. Scoliosis, if present, may progress with rapid axial skeleton growth (see Chapter 720.1). From 50% to
65% of total body calcium is laid down during puberty. Bone growth
precedes increases in bone mineralization and bone density, which may
increase the adolescent’s risk of fracture during times of rapid growth.

As children progress through adolescence, they develop and refine
their ability to use formal operational thought processes. Abstract,
symbolic, and hypothetical thinking replaces the need to manipulate
concrete objects. Middle and late adolescents develop the ability to
consider multiple options and to assess the long-­term consequences of
their actions. The capacity for verbal expression is enhanced. Because
adolescents’ decision-­making and subsequent behaviors are the primary determinants of their mortality and morbidity, understanding
these cognitive processes is of critical importance.
Both structural and functional brain development continue throughout adolescence. Cortical gray matter volume peaks in preadolescence,
then decreases because of selective “pruning” of rarely used synaptic
connections, slowly declining as the third decade of life is approached.
Cerebral white matter volume increases until mid-­to-­late adolescence,
reflecting increasing myelination and subsequent facilitation of integrated brain activity and more efficient transmission of information
between different regions of the brain, enhancing the “signal-­to-­noise”
ratio. Although the frontal lobes and prefrontal cortex, regions of the
brain associated with executive function, have been considered to be
among the last regions to mature, other cortical regions show similarly
prolonged trajectories of maturation. Without question, adolescents
are capable of the complex cognitive processes attributed to frontal
lobe function. Cognitive control, however, continues to improve into
adulthood, with progressive maturation and integration of component

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1162 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
processes such as working memory, inhibition and impulse control,
performance monitoring, and motivational circuitry.
The behavioral correlates of adolescent neurodevelopment remain
speculative but are increasingly supported by a rapidly expanding body
of research. Adolescents appear to demonstrate a unique sensitivity
to the effects of dopamine on reward-­relevant subcortical structures
such as the ventral striatum and the ventral tegmental area, with some
studies demonstrating increased activation in this region when receiving rewards relative to children or adults. Other studies show reduced
responsiveness to aversive stimuli in adolescents. This altered responsiveness to risk vs reward, paired with incomplete frontal lobe myelination and thus immature impulse control, may underlie the increased
risk taking and novelty seeking seen in adolescents. Early maturation
and distinct patterns of neural reactivity in the amygdala and other
limbic structures may explain the strong role that social and emotional stimuli play in adolescents, sometimes overwhelming the frontal
executive function systems that facilitate the interpretation and regulation of those social and emotional experiences. This may explain why
adolescents are more likely to make poor decisions in highly emotionally charged situations relative to mature adults. These “hot cognition”
processes may result in the adolescent making a different decision in
the context of a strong affective experience than he or she would in
a less emotional state (“cool cognition”). These two types of cognitive
processes may not develop at the same rate; the adolescent may be able
to use higher brain structures and functions more effectively when in
states of lower emotional arousal.
Early adolescents often continue to employ the concrete operational
cognitive processes of childhood. Although formal operational cognition is developing, it may be applied inconsistently across different
domains. A young adolescent may be able to use abstract thought when
completing schoolwork, but not when working through a personal
dilemma. Early adolescence also is characterized by egocentricity—the
belief of some adolescents that they are the center of everyone’s attention. Despite being largely imagined, this perception of always being
“on stage” can be stressful for adolescents, who may feel that others
are constantly judging or evaluating them. Early adolescents express a
greater need for privacy than they did in childhood and begin to appreciate the privacy of their own thoughts. With ongoing cognitive development, middle adolescents are more able to consider the needs and
feelings of other people. Their creativity and intellectual abilities are
enhanced. Because of their increased capacity for abstract thought in
combination with a persistent perception of uniqueness, middle adolescents may feel a sense of immortality and immunity to the consequences of risky behaviors. Late adolescents are more future oriented
and able to delay gratification. They can think more independently,
consider others’ views, and compromise. They have a stronger sense of
self and more stable interests. Under times of stress, adolescents may
temporarily revert to the cognitive processes and coping strategies used
at younger ages.
Moral development generally accompanies cognitive development. Preadolescents, concrete and individualistic, follow rules to
please authority figures and avoid punishment. As they move into early
adolescence, they develop a stronger sense of right and wrong but are
likely to perceive these as absolute and unquestionable. Middle and late
adolescents may establish a sense of morality driven by their desire to
be seen as a good person, to behave in a manner according to their
perceived place in society, or by their sense of obligation to care for
others. Moral decision-­making, however, still may be highly subject to
emotional context. Late adolescents may develop a rational conscience
and an independent system of values, although these often are largely
consistent with parental values. While going through this complex
developmental process, religious or political organizations that promote simple answers to complex social or moral questions may hold
great appeal to the adolescent.

PSYCHOSOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

In contrast to cognitive development, psychosocial development
correlates more strongly with pubertal status and physical maturation than with chronological age. Whereas cognitive development

is more biologically determined, psychosocial development is
subject to greater environmental and cultural influences. Indeed,
cultural variation can be dramatic. Some late adolescents move
immediately from high school into marriage, childbearing, working, and financial independence; others remain dependent on the
parents while pursuing their own education for several more years,
in a period sometimes referred to as emerging adulthood. Psychosocial development also may be nonlinear, with different domains of
growth progressing along different timelines. An overriding theme
of psychosocial development is the concept of identity formation
and consolidation as the adolescent moves away from the nurturing protection of the family, develops an increased affiliation with
the peer group(s), and ultimately defines himself or herself as an
individual.
Separation from the parents is a hallmark of adolescent development. Early adolescents start to seek out more privacy at home,
spending less time with the parents. They begin to reject parental
advice and involvement in their decision-­making as they explore
the boundaries of their dependence on, and independence from,
their parents. With evolving cognitive skills, an adolescent can
conceive of an ideal parent and contrast this ideal with his or her
own parents. Adolescents may seek out alternative adult role models, such as teachers, coaches, or parents of friends. Parent–child
conflict often peaks during middle adolescence, with disagreements
over privileges, independence, and other limits set by the parents.
Adolescents may appear intermittently to seek and reject parental
acceptance. It is theorized that perhaps the adolescent needs to conceive of the parents as “wrong” in order to ameliorate the pain of
separating from them. Throughout this time, however, the parents
remain a critical source of nurturing and support for the adolescent
and continue to exert significant influence over the adolescent’s
decision-­making. Paradoxically, frequent arguments and conflict
may coexist with strong emotional bonds and closeness. The late
adolescent may reestablish a more “adult–adult” type of relationship
with the parents, once again seeking out and considering parental
advice and guidance as they enter adulthood.
Increasing importance of the peer group also may buffer the emotional trauma of separating from the parents (see Fig. 150.1). Early
adolescents tend to socialize largely with same-­gender peers, both in
their individual friendships and larger groups. Females’ peer groups
tend to be more relationship oriented, whereas males’ peer groups are
more likely to be centered around a particular interest or activity. In
both cases, group cohesion and a sense of belonging become important. Peers become increasingly important in middle adolescence,
during which time the adolescent may experiment with being a part
of different groups and “try on” different identities. These groups may
include all genders. Peer groups may arise from organized activities,
such as sports or clubs, or may simply be friendship based. Gang
membership is another form of peer acceptance. Conformity with
the peers in manners of dress, speech, and behavior is a normal part
of this process and should not necessarily be viewed negatively. Similarly, peer pressure may exist, but its influence over the adolescent’s
decision-­making may be positive, negative, or negligible. Acceptance
and successful navigation of peer groups during adolescence may
give the individual more confidence to move into and out of various
social, academic, and professional groups in the future. Late adolescents are less vulnerable to peer group influence, having moved closer
to establishing their own stable identity. Their cognitive skills allow
them to choose selectively among different peer groups, endorsing
and adopting individual values and behaviors that best reflect who
they are becoming.
Early adolescents have increased sexual awareness and interest,
which may manifest as sexual talk and gossip, and often is focused
on sexual anatomy. Masturbation and other sexual exploration,
sometimes with same-­sex peers, are common. The prevalence of
other forms of sexual behavior varies by culture; in general, these
behaviors are less common in early adolescents. Romantic relationships, if they exist at all, lack emotional depth. Sexual curiosity, experimentation, and activity become more common among

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 150 u Adolescent Physical and Social Development
middle adolescents. Same-­sex attraction is common; sexual orientation may become clear to some adolescents, but still may be evolving in others during this time. Dating behaviors may be seen, but
this is culture dependent and may not be a popular construct for all
adolescents. Individual relationships often continue to emphasize
sexual attraction over emotional intimacy. Relationships that occur
during middle adolescence may be short and intense. Emotional
intimacy and more permanent relationships may not be seen until
late adolescence. At that time, relationships increasingly involve
love and commitment and demonstrate greater stability.
Body image may affect (and be affected by) adolescents’ psychosocial development as well. Early and middle adolescence are usually the ages during which poor or distorted body image and eating
disorders develop. Early adolescents undergo rapid physical changes
and may experience uncertainty about whether all these anatomic
and physiologic changes are progressing normally. Reassurance
from adults, including their healthcare providers, may be comforting. As puberty comes to an end and these changes slow, the middle
adolescent’s preoccupation may shift to whether they are attractive
to others. A strong emphasis on physical appearance during this
time is common. Although this focus on physical appearance may
continue into adulthood, late adolescence generally is characterized by a shifting balance toward introspection, with somewhat less
emphasis placed on external characteristics.
The timing of pubertal changes also can affect psychosocial development and well-­being. The progression of pubertal changes in males
is generally associated with a positive self-­
image. Early-­
maturing
males tend to have greater self-­confidence, social, and academic success, whereas later-­maturing males are at risk for more internalizing
behaviors and diminished self-­esteem. Females may initially perceive
changes in their physical appearance more negatively. This appears to
be especially true for early-­maturing females, some of whom experience greater decreases in self-­esteem, engage in more disruptive
behaviors, and have more conflict with their parents than do on-­time
or late-­maturing females. Early-­maturing females may be more comfortable associating with older peers and may subsequently be exposed
to peer pressure around things like sexual activity and substance use
at younger ages. Still lacking the cognitive skills to effectively navigate
these situations, they may be vulnerable to making poor decisions that
place their health and safety at risk. Many other factors influence how
adolescents experience puberty, and supportive peers and adults can
have a positive impact on psychosocial development at any maturational stage. With successful navigation of these domains, emerging
adults move into the world with a strong sense of personal identity
and their place in society. They are able to work toward a vocation
and financial independence and to manage the responsibilities of
adulthood.

IMPLICATIONS FOR PROVIDERS, PARENTS, AND
POLICYMAKERS

Providers can help parents approach their child’s adolescent years by
reframing some of the “challenges” of adolescence as normal developmental milestones that should be anticipated and accepted. Puberty
and emerging sexuality should be approached as positive and health-­
affirming life changes, rather than focusing discussions only on the negative reproductive risks and outcomes. Even good-­natured teasing about
bodily changes can be detrimental to the adolescent’s self-­image. Early-­
maturing females and late-­maturing males should be supported, recognizing their potential increased exposure to psychosocial challenges.
Identification of strengths and emerging positive coping strategies
should be promoted in all youth, particularly those with chronic illness
or other challenges. Providers need to determine the young adolescent’s
cognitive development and capacity for abstract thought and tailor their
communication and counseling style accordingly. Physical examinations
should be performed in private with the parent outside the exam room
(provided the adolescent is comfortable with this), which also affords the
adolescent and provider an opportunity to discuss confidential issues.
Reassurance of normal development should be provided.

1163

As adolescents develop more independence and parent–child
conflict peaks, providers should remind parents that this is typical and that arguing does not mean the adolescent does not value
the parents’ input and perspectives. Although some may rebel initially, most adolescents ultimately adopt a value system very similar
to that of their parents. Even if discussions feel ineffective to parents, they should continue to demonstrate and model these values
to their child. Similarly, rather than categorically dismissing their
child’s “negative” interests, such as playing a violent video game,
parents should be encouraged to use these opportunities to model
critical thinking about the impact of such an activity. Potentially
negative peer groups may be approached the same way, while fostering the development of positive peer networks. Authoritative
parenting, in which clear and appropriate negotiated limits are
set in the context of a caring and mutually respectful parent–child
relationship, is most strongly associated with positive psychosocial development. Parental connectedness and close supervision or
monitoring of the youth’s activities and peer group can be protective
against early onset of sexual activity and involvement in behaviors
that may threaten their safety and can foster positive youth development. Parents should also assume an active role in their adolescent’s
transition to adulthood to ensure that their child receives appropriate preventive health services.
Parents and providers may each work with adolescents to foster
good decision-­making. In addition to providing adolescents with
accurate and complete health information, the adolescent’s cognitive ability to use this information in various contexts must be
considered. Visits with providers can be used to promote independence among adolescents by spending time separately with both
caregivers and the adolescent, allowing the adolescent space to
voice concerns and receive appropriate information about making
healthy decisions and recognizing behaviors that may be placing
their health at risk.
Adolescents may find themselves needing to make important decisions in highly charged situations where they may be unable to manage their emotions and use their higher cognitive functions to examine
the consequences of their decision. For example, a couple in a sexual
situation with high emotional arousal may make the decision to proceed with unprotected intercourse. By anticipating this situation ahead
of time, under conditions of lower emotional arousal, and making a
plan to deal with this, they may make a different decision (e.g., stick
with their prior decision never to have sex without protection) when
the time comes. Parents and healthcare providers are in a position to
encourage and foster this anticipation and planning under conditions
of “cool cognition.”
Providers may need to help parents distinguish normal adolescent development and risk-­taking behaviors from possible signs of
a more serious mental health or conduct problem. Bids for autonomy, such as avoiding family activities, demanding privacy, and
increasing argumentativeness, are normal; extreme withdrawal
or antagonism may be dysfunctional, signaling a mental health or
substance use concern. Bewilderment and dysphoria at the start of
middle school are normal; continued failure to adapt several months
later suggests a more serious problem. Although some degree of risk
taking is normal, progressive escalation of risk-­taking behaviors
is problematic. In general, when the adolescent’s behaviors cause
significant dysfunction in the domains of home life, academics,
or peer relationships, they should be addressed by the parents and
healthcare provider, and referral to a mental health provider may be
considered. In most cases, parents can be reassured that although
adolescence can pose unique challenges, their adolescent, like most
adolescents, will come through it to become a successful and happy
adult.
At national and international levels, adolescents are at risk for environmental, health, behavioral, and societal challenges. Table 150.4 provides suggestions to address these issues.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1164 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 150.4  Recommended Action Bundles* for Adolescent and Young Adult Health Problems and Risks

PROBLEM/
RISK AREA

STRUCTURAL

Sexual and
reproductive
health,
including HIV

Legislation
18 yr as the minimum
age of marriage
Allow provision of
contraception to
legal minors
Legalize abortion

Undernutrition

Fortification of foods
(e.g., iron, folate)

SOCIAL
MARKETING

COMMUNITY
INTERVENTIONS,
INCLUDING
FAMILY

ELECTRONIC
HEALTH,
MOBILE
HEALTH

Promote
community
support for
sexual and
reproductive
health and HIV
health access
for adolescents

Cash transfer
programs, with
payments linked
to staying in
school
Positive youth
development
Peer education

Target
knowledge,
attitudes,
and risk
behaviors

Infectious
diseases

SCHOOLS

HEALTH
SERVICE
SECTOR

Quality secondary
education
Comprehensive
sexuality
education
Safe schools with
clean toilets
and facilities for
menstrual care
School-­based
health services
with condoms
and modern
contraceptives

Condoms and
affordable modern
contraception,
including long-­
acting reversible
contraception
Early HIV and STI
diagnosis and
treatment
Male circumcision
Antenatal, delivery,
and postnatal care
Transition to adult
care for HIV

Micronutrient
supplements
(particularly in
pregnancy)
Protein-­energy
supplementation
Deworming
Cash transfer
program
Nutrition education

Micronutrient
supplements
Healthy school
meals

Screening and
micronutrient
supplementation

Deworming
Bed net distribution

HPV vaccination
Deworming

Early identification
and treatment
Adolescent
vaccinations (HPV,
childhood catch-­up)
Deworming
Bed net distribution
Seasonal malaria
chemoprevention

Multicomponent
interventions that
target violent
behavior and
substance use

Trauma care

Violence

Gun control
Legalize
homosexuality and
protect women from
violence and sexual
coercion
Youth justice reforms
to promote second
chances and
diversion from
custody
16 yr as the minimum
age for criminal
responsibility

Promote
knowledge
of the effects
of violence
and available
services

Promote parent
skills and
parent–child
communication
Positive youth
development
Promote gender
equality
Economic
empowerment
Group training
for awareness,
knowledge, and
skills

Unintentional
injury

Graduated licensing
Mandatory helmet
wearing
Multicomponent
traffic injury control

Promote
knowledge of
risks

Police enforcement
of traffic injury
control

Alcohol and
illicit drugs

Limit alcohol sales
to underage
adolescents
Taxation on alcohol
Drunk-­driving
legislation
Restrict illicit alcohol
Interventions in
licensed premises
Diversion from youth
justice and custody
Graduated drinking

Advertising
restrictions
Campaigns
to build
community
awareness

Promote
parent–child
communication
and parenting
skills
Needle-­syringe
exchange access
Mentoring

Trauma care,
including first
responders (e.g.,
ambulances)
Target
knowledge,
attitudes,
and risk
behaviors

Alcohol-­free
policies

Risk screening
and motivational
interviewing

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 151 u Delivery of Healthcare to Adolescents

1165

Table 150.4  Recommended Action Bundles* for Adolescent and Young Adult Health Problems and Risks—cont’d

PROBLEM/
RISK AREA

STRUCTURAL

SOCIAL
MARKETING

COMMUNITY
INTERVENTIONS,
INCLUDING
FAMILY

ELECTRONIC
HEALTH,
MOBILE
HEALTH

HEALTH
SERVICE
SECTOR

SCHOOLS

Tobacco

Tobacco control,
including taxation,
pricing, and
advertising control
Youth access
restrictions
Legislation for
smoke-­free air

Anti-­tobacco
campaigns

Interventions
to promote
parent skills and
parent–child
communication

Text
messaging
adjunct to
quitting

Smoke-­free policies
Multicomponent

Routine screening
and motivation
interviewing to
promote cessation

Mental
disorders
and suicide

Restriction of access
to means

Promote
adolescent
mental health
literacy

Gatekeeper training

Electronic
mental
health
interventions

Educational
interventions
Gatekeeper
training
School-­based
mental health
services

Practitioner training
in depression
recognition and
treatment
Routine assessment
of mental health,
including self-­harm
and suicide risk

School-­based
health services

Promote self-­
management
Promote transition to
adult healthcare

Multicomponent
interventions
involving
education about
healthy diet
and increasing
opportunities
for physical
education

Manage
comorbidities of
obesity

Chronic
physical
disorders
Overweight
and obesity

Peer support
initiatives

Taxation of high-­
sugar, high-­salt, and
high-­fat foods
Front-­of-­pack
nutrition labels
Restriction of fast-­
food advertising

Promote
physical
activity

Create
opportunities for
maintenance of
physical activity in
daily life

Interactive or
personalized
feedback
interventions

*Actions in bold have an evidence base in adolescents and young adults; actions in italics are promising but without yet a strong evidence base in adolescents and young adults.
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; HPV, human papillomavirus; STI, sexually transmitted infection.
From Patton GC, Sawyer SM, Santelli JS, et al. Our future: a Lancet commission on adolescent health and wellbeing. Lancet. 2016;387:2423–2478, p. 2458.

Chapter 151

Delivery of Healthcare
to Adolescents
Samantha V. Hill and
Tamera Coyne-­Beasley
Healthcare providers play an important role in nurturing healthy
behaviors among adolescents, because the leading causes of death and
disability among adolescents are preventable. Adolescence provides
a unique opportunity to prevent or modify health conditions arising
from behaviors that develop in the second decade of life and that can
lead to substantial morbidity and mortality, such as trauma, suicide,
cardiovascular and pulmonary disease, type 2 diabetes, reproductive
health issues, and cancer (see Chapter 150, Table 150.4).
Health systems in each community should be in place to ensure comprehensive and high-­quality care to adolescents. Health insurance coverage that is affordable, continuous, confidential, and not subject to
exclusion for preexisting conditions should be available for all adolescents
and young adults. Comprehensive, coordinated benefits should meet the
developmental needs of adolescents, particularly for reproductive, mental health, dental, and substance use services. Safety net providers and
programs that provide confidential services, such as school-­based health
centers, federally qualified health centers, family planning services, and
clinics that treat sexually transmitted infections (STIs) in adolescents and

young adults, need to have assured funding for viability and sustainability.
Quality-­of-­care data should be collected and analyzed by age so that the
performance measures for age-­appropriate healthcare needs of adolescents are monitored. Affordability is important for access to preventive
services. Family involvement should be encouraged, but confidentiality
and adolescent consent are critically important and should be addressed
with intentionality at each visit.
Healthcare providers, trained and experienced in adolescent care, should
be available in all communities. Healthcare providers should be adequately
compensated to support the range and intensity of services required to
address the developmental and health service needs of adolescents. The
development and dissemination of provider education about adolescent
preventive health guidelines have been demonstrated to improve the
content of recommended care (Table 151.1). The ease of recognition or
expectation that an adolescent’s needs can be addressed in a setting relates
to the visibility and flexibility of sites and services. Staff at sites should be
approachable, linguistically capable, culturally humble, and able to balance
trauma-­
informed care with healing-­
centered engagement approaches
with attention to equity and social determinants of health. Health services
should be coordinated to respond to goals for adolescent health at the
local, state, and national levels. The coordination should address service
financing and delivery in a manner that reduces disparities in care.
Although most adolescents in the United States have seen a
healthcare provider in the past year and report a usual source of
healthcare, adolescents are less likely to receive preventive care
services. According to the 2019 National Health Interview Survey,
an estimated 92% of 12-­to 17-­year-­old U.S. adolescents had a well
child visit within the past year. Uninsured adolescents are the least
likely to receive care. The National Health Interview Survey found
that 8% of 15-­to 18-­year-­olds were uninsured, whereas 61% and
31% had private and public insurance in 2016, respectively.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1166 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
70

Table 151.1  Bright Futures/American Academy of
Pediatrics Recommendations for Preventive
Healthcare for 11-­to 21-­Year-­Olds

HISTORY

Annual

MEASUREMENTS
Body mass index
Blood pressure

Annual
Annual

SENSORY SCREENING
Vision
Hearing

PROCEDURES
Immunization*
Hematocrit or hemoglobin
Tuberculin test
Dyslipidemia screening

Annual

Cervical dysplasia screening‡

Annual
If risk assessment positive
If risk assessment positive
Once at 9-­11 yr, and once at
17-­21 yr
If sexually active
Once between ages 15 and 18 yr
Discuss and offer at earlier age
and annually if risk assessment
positive.
Beginning at age 21 yr

ORAL HEALTH

Annual; refer to dental home

ANTICIPATORY GUIDANCE

Annual§

STI screening
HIV screening†

40

Uninsured

30
20
Public coverage

10

At 12 yr and 15 yr visits or if risk
assessment positive
Screen with audiometry,
including 6,000-­ and 8,000-­Hz
high frequencies once at 11-­
14 yr, once at 15-­17 yr, and once
at 18-­21 yr.

DEVELOPMENTAL/BEHAVIORAL ASSESSMENT
Developmental surveillance
Annual
Psychosocial/behavioral
Annual
assessment
Depression screening
Annual for 12 yr and older
Tobacco, alcohol, and drug use
If risk assessment positive
assessment
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

50
Percent

PERIODICITY AND
INDICATIONS

Private coverage

60

*Schedules per the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, published annually
at http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/index.html and http://redbook.solutio
ns.aap.org/SS/Immunization_Schedules.aspx.
†The CDC recommends universal, voluntary HIV screening of all sexually active people
beginning at age 13 yr. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends offering
routine HIV screening to all adolescents at least once by 16-­18 yr of age and to those
younger if at risk. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends offering
routine HIV screening to all adolescents age 15 yr and older at least once and to
those younger if at risk. Patients who test positive for HIV should receive prevention
counseling and referral to care before leaving the testing site.
‡Screening for cervical cancer, April 2012, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. http://ww
w.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/uspscerv.htm.
§Refer to specific guidance by age as listed in Bright Futures guidelines.
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; STI, sexually transmitted infection.
Adapted from Hagan JF, Shaw JS, Duncan PM, eds. Bright Futures: Guidelines for
Health Supervision of Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 4th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL:
American Academy of Pediatrics; 2017.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) has
expanded access to both commercial health plans and Medicaid for
young adults age 19-­26 years (Fig. 151.1); the proportion of young
adults with insurance increased from 65.7% to 73.8%. ACA provisions
require that commercial health plans continue dependent coverage to
26 years, regardless of the young adult’s financial or dependent status,
marriage, or educational enrollment; mandate university and college student health plans enhance consumer protections for students;
provide financial assistance for young adults to enroll into health
insurance exchanges with incomes ranging from 133% to 399% of

0

1998

2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012
(Jan-Sept)

Fig. 151.1 Percentage of adults 19-­25 years of age with health insur-

ance by coverage type and percentage uninsured at the time of the
interview: United States, 1997 to September 2012. Note: Estimates for
2012 are based on data collected in January through September. Data
are based on household interviews of a sample of the civilian noninstitutionalized population. (Data from CDC/NCHS, National Health Interview Survey, 1997–2012, Family Core Component.)

the federal poverty level in Medicaid expansion states; and offer
preventive healthcare services (to include contraceptive care) free
of any cost sharing, deductibles, or copayments. In states that have
expanded Medicaid coverage, all adults with incomes <133% of the
federal poverty level are eligible to enroll. After passage of the ACA,
14% of 18-­to 24-­year-­olds still remained uninsured.
The complexity and interaction of physical, cognitive, and psychosocial developmental processes during adolescence require sensitivity and skill on the part of the health professional (see Chapter 150).
Health education and promotion, as well as disease prevention, should
be the focus of every visit (Table 151.2).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) currently recommends
routine adolescent vaccines for universal administration beginning at
the 11-­to 12-­year-­old visit or as soon as possible: (1) tetanus-­diphtheria-­
acellular pertussis vaccine (Tdap), (2) the meningococcal conjugate
vaccine (MCV4) with a booster at age 16 years, (3) the human papillomavirus vaccine (HPV) series, and (4) the COVID-­19 vaccine (see
Chapter 215). ACIP recommends annual influenza vaccination and hepatitis A virus (HAV) vaccination to adolescents and young adults who
have not previously received the HAV vaccine series if immunity against
HAV is desired or for those at increased risk for infection, such as men
who have sex with men (MSM), injection drug users (IDUs), and those
with chronic liver disease or clotting factor disorders, or those who live
in endemic areas. Although another meningococcal vaccine (MenB) is
not routinely recommended for all adolescents, the ACIP recommends
a MenB vaccine series for people ages 16-­23 based on shared clinical
decision-­making with the patient (or parent/guardian) to provide short-­
term protection against serogroup B meningococcal disease.
The time spent on various elements of the screening will vary with
the issues that surface during the assessment. However, time for
screening and assessment is important for all adolescents, and the
ideal model of adolescent care requires a minimum of 20 minutes per
visit. For lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, intersex, and asexual youth (see
Chapters 153 and 154), emotional and psychologic concerns related to
their experiences, from fear of disclosure to the trauma of discrimination or bullying or violence, may direct the clinician to spend more
time assessing emotional and psychologic supports in the young person’s environment. For youth with chronic illnesses or special needs,
the assessment of at-­risk behaviors should not be omitted or deemphasized by assuming they do not experience the “normal” adolescent
vulnerabilities.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 151 u Delivery of Healthcare to Adolescents

1167

Table 151.2  Adolescent Screening Recommendations
11-­ TO 14-­YR-­OLD VISIT

15-­ TO 17-­YR-­OLD VISIT

18-­ TO 21-­YR-­OLD VISIT

ACTION

ACTION

ACTION

UNIVERSAL SCREENING
Cervical dysplasia*

N/A

N/A

Pap smear all young women at 21 yr visit

Depression

Annual adolescent depression
screen beginning at 12 yr visit

Annual adolescent
depression screen

Annual adolescent depression screen

Dyslipidemia

Lipid screen once at 9-­11 yr

Lipid screen once at 17-­21 yr

Lipid screen once at 17-­21 yr

Hearing

Once at 11-­14 yr
Audiometry, including 6,000-­ 
and 8,000-­Hz high frequencies

Once at 15-­17 yr
Audiometry, including
6,000-­ and 8,000-­Hz high
frequencies

Once at 18-­21 yr
Audiometry, including 6,000-­ and 8,000-­Hz high
frequencies

HIV†

Selective screening (see later)

HIV test once at 15-­18 yr

HIV test once at 15-­18 yr

Tobacco, alcohol, or drug
use

Annual tobacco, alcohol, or
drug use screen

Annual tobacco, alcohol, or
drug use screen

Annual tobacco, alcohol, or drug use screen

Vision

At 12 yr visit
Objective measure with age-­
appropriate visual acuity
measurement using HOTV or
Lea symbols, Sloan letters, or
Snellen letters

At 15 yr visit
Objective measure with age-­
appropriate visual acuity
measurement using HOTV
or Lea symbols, Sloan
letters, or Snellen letters

N/A

11-­14 YR OLD VISIT
SELECTIVE SCREENING

RISK ASSESSMENT (RA)

ACTION IF RA+

15-­17 YR OLD VISIT

18-­21 YR OLD VISIT

ACTION IF RA+

ACTION IF RA+

Anemia

Positive on risk screening
questions

Hemoglobin or hematocrit

Hemoglobin or
hematocrit

Hemoglobin or
hematocrit

Dyslipidemia (if not
universally screened
at this visit)

Positive on risk screening
questions and not previously
screened with normal results

Lipid profile

Lipid profile

Lipid profile

HIV†

Positive on risk screening
questions

HIV test

HIV test (if not
universally screened
at this visit)

HIV test (if not
universally screened
at this visit)

Oral health (through 16 yr
visit)

Primary water source fluoride
deficient

Oral fluoridation
supplementation

Oral fluoridation
supplementation

N/A

STIs
Chlamydia

Sexually active females

Gonorrhea

Sexually active females

Chlamydia and gonorrhea
NAAT (test at all sites
where patient engages in
sex)

Chlamydia and
Chlamydia and
gonorrhea NAAT
gonorrhea NAAT
(test at all sites where
(test at all sites
patient engages in sex)
where patient
engages in sex)

Syphilis

Sexually active and positive on
risk screening questions

Syphilis test

Syphilis test

Syphilis test

Tuberculosis

Positive on risk screening
questions

Tuberculin skin test

Tuberculin skin test

Tuberculin skin test

Vision at other ages

Positive on risk screening
questions at 11, 13, and
14 yr visits

Objective measure with age-­
appropriate visual acuity
measurement using HOTV
or Lea symbols, Sloan
letters, or Snellen letters

Objective measure with
age-­appropriate visual
acuity measurement
using HOTV or Lea
symbols, Sloan letters,
or Snellen letters

Objective measure
with age-­appropriate
visual acuity
measurement using
HOTV or Lea
symbols, Sloan
letters, or Snellen
letters

*Screening for Cervical Cancer. April 2012. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
†The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends universal, voluntary HIV screening of all sexually active people beginning at age 13 yr. The American Academy of

Pediatrics recommends routine HIV screening offered to all adolescents at least once by 16-­18 yr of age and to those younger if at risk. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommends routine HIV screening offered to all adolescents age 15 yr and older at least once and to those younger if at risk. Patients who test positive for HIV should receive
prevention counseling and referral to care before leaving the testing site.
NA, Not applicable; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test; STIs, sexually transmitted infections.
Adapted from Hagan JF, Shaw JS, Duncan PM, eds. Bright Futures: Guidelines for Health Supervision of Infants, Children, and Adolescents, 4th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL:
American Academy of Pediatrics; 2017 and Bright Futures/American Academy of Pediatrics: Recommendations for Preventive Pediatric Health Care (Periodicity Schedule), 2017.
https://www.aap.org/en-­us/Documents/periodicity_schedule.pdf.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1168 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

151.1 Legal Issues
Samantha V. Hill and Tamera Coyne-­Beasley
The rights of an individual, including those of adolescents, vary widely
between nations. In the United States, the right of a minor to consent to
treatment without parental knowledge differs between states and is governed by state-­specific minor consent laws. Some consent laws are based
on a minor’s status, such as minors who are emancipated, parents, married, pregnant, in the armed services, or mature. In some states, minors
can be considered emancipated if they are or have served in the armed
services or are living apart from parents and are economically independent through gainful employment. A mature minor is a minor who is
emotionally and intellectually mature enough to give informed consent
and who lives under the supervision of a parent or guardian. Courts have
held that if a minor is mature, a physician is not liable for providing beneficial treatment. There is no formal process for recognition of a mature
minor. The determination is made by the healthcare provider.
Some minor consent laws are based on services a minor is seeking,
such as emergency care, sexual healthcare, substance abuse, or mental healthcare (Table 151.3). All 50 states and the District of Columbia explicitly allow minors to consent for their own health services for
STIs. Approximately 25% of states require that minors be a certain age
(generally 12-­14 years) before they can consent for their own care for
STIs. No state requires parental consent for STI care or requires that
providers notify parents that an adolescent minor child has received
STI services, except in limited or unusual circumstances.
Minors’ right to consent for contraceptive services varies from state
to state. Almost 50% of states and the District of Columbia explicitly
authorize all minors to consent for their own contraceptive services,
and 50% of states permit minors to consent for their own contraceptive
services under specific circumstances, such as being married, a parent,
currently or previously pregnant, over a certain age, or a high school
graduate, or per physician’s discretion. The FDA has approved a nonprescription daily oral contraceptive (norgestrel) intended to reduce
barriers to access to an effective birth control measure.
A minor’s right to consent for mental healthcare and substance use
treatment services varies by state and age of the minor, whether care is
medical vs nonmedical (e.g., counseling), and whether care is delivered

as an inpatient vs outpatient basis. Minor consent laws often contain
provisions regarding confidentiality and disclosure, even when general
state consent laws do not have such provisions.
The confidentiality of medical information and records of a minor
who has consented for his or her own reproductive healthcare is governed by numerous federal and state laws. Laws in some states explicitly
protect the confidentiality of STI or contraceptive services for which
minors have given their own consent and do not allow disclosure of
the information without the minor’s consent. In other states, laws grant
physicians discretion to disclose information to parents.
The confidentiality of medical information and records of a minor
who has consented for their own healthcare is also governed by numerous federal and state laws. Laws in some states explicitly protect the
confidentiality of STI, contraceptive, or mental health services for
which minors have given their own consent and do not allow disclosure
of the information without the minor’s consent. In other states, laws
grant physicians discretion to disclose information to parents. Title X
and Medicaid both provide confidentiality protection for family planning services provided to minors with funding from these programs.
Federal regulations issued under the Federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, known as the HIPAA Privacy Rule,
defer to state and “other applicable laws” with respect to the question of
whether parents have access to information about care for which a minor
has given consent. Thus both the state laws that either prohibit or permit
disclosure of confidential information and the federal Title X and Medicaid laws that protect the confidentiality of care for adolescents are important under the HIPAA Privacy Rule in determining when confidential
information about health services for minors can be disclosed to parents.
Billing for confidential services is complex. Commercial health plans
send home an explanation of benefit (EOB) to the primary insured or
the primary beneficiary, listing services rendered by the provider and
reimbursed by the health plan. An EOB documenting that confidential health services were rendered to their adolescent dependent that
is received by a parent may disclose those services. In addition, copayments automatically generated with certain billing codes for office
visits and medications can be a barrier for adolescents receiving care,
including treatment. One way to circumvent a breach of confidentiality
from EOBs is to have the adolescent call the insurance company; however, this can be a time-­consuming process.

Table 151.3  Types of Minor Consent Statutes or Rules of Common Law That Allow for Medical Treatment of a Minor Patient
Without Parental Consent
LEGAL EXCEPTIONS TO INFORMED
CONSENT REQUIREMENT

MEDICAL CARE SETTING

The “emergency” exception

• The child is suffering from an emergent condition that places his or her life or health in danger
• The child’s legal guardian is unavailable or unable to provide consent for treatment or transport
• Treatment or transport cannot be safely delayed until consent can be obtained
• The professional administers only treatment for emergent conditions that pose an immediate
threat to the child

The “emancipated minor” exception

• Married
• Economically self-­supporting and not living at home
• Active-­duty status in the military
• In some states, a minor who is a parent or pregnant
• Some states might require a court to declare the emancipation of a minor

The “mature minor” exception

Most states recognize a mature minor, in which a minor, usually ≥14 yr, displays sufficient maturity
and intelligence to understand and appreciate the benefits, risks, and alternatives of the proposed
treatment and to make a voluntary and reasonable choice on the basis of that information; states
vary or whether a judicial determination is required

Exceptions based on specific medical
condition (state laws vary)

Minor seeks:
• Mental health services
• Pregnancy and contraceptive services
• Testing or treatment for HIV infection or AIDS
• Sexually transmitted infection testing and treatment
• Drug and alcohol addiction treatment

Data from American Academy of Pediatrics: consent for emergency medical services for children and adolescents. Pediatrics 2011;128:427–433.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 151 u Delivery of Healthcare to Adolescents
In March 2020, in response to the COVID-­19 pandemic, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was
passed. Part of this act requires rapid release of all patient documentation (e.g., notes, laboratory results, problem and medication lists) and
poses a new challenge to the provision of confidential health services
to adolescents.
Providers may elect to establish a policy of discussing with their adolescent patients when medical records and other information will be
disclosed and developing a mechanism to alert office staff as to what
information in the chart is confidential. For legal and other reasons, a
chaperone should be present whenever an adolescent patient’s genitalia
is examined.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

151.2 Screening Procedures
Samantha V. Hill and Tamera Coyne-­Beasley

INTERVIEWING THE ADOLESCENT

The preparation for a successful interview with an adolescent patient
varies based on the history of the relationship with the patient.
Patients (and their parents) who are going from preadolescence
to adolescence while seeing the same provider should be guided
through the transition. Although the rules for confidentiality are
the same for new and continuing patients, the change in the physician–patient relationship, allowing more privacy during the visit
and more autonomy in the health process, may be threatening for
the parent and the adolescent. For new patients, the initial phases
of the interview are more challenging given the need to establish
rapport rapidly with the patient in order to meet the goals of the
encounter. Issues of confidentiality and privacy should be explicitly stated along with the conditions under which that confidentiality may need to be altered, that is, in life-­or safety-­threatening
situations. For new patients, the parents should be interviewed with
the adolescent or before the adolescent to ensure that the adolescent does not perceive a breach of confidentiality. The clinician
who takes time to listen, avoids judgmental statements and the use
of street jargon, and shows respect for the adolescent’s emerging
maturity will have an easier time communicating with the adolescent. The use of open-­ended questions, rather than closed-­ended
questions, will further facilitate history taking. (The closed-­ended
question, “Do you get along with your father?” leads to the answer
“yes” or “no,” in contrast to the question, “What might you like to
be different in your relationship with your mother?” which may
lead to an answer such as, “I would like her to stop always worrying
about me.”)
The goals of the interview or clinical encounter are to establish an
information base, identify problems and issues from the patient’s perspective, and identify problems and issues from the perspective of the
clinician, based on knowledge of the health and other issues relevant
to the adolescent age-­group. The adolescent should be given an opportunity to express concerns and the reasons for seeking medical attention. The adolescent and the parent should be allowed to express the
strengths and successes of the adolescent, in addition to communicating problems.
The effectiveness of an interview can be compromised when the
interviewer is distracted by other events or individuals in the office,
when extreme time limitations are obvious to either party, or when
there is expressible discomfort with either the patient or the interviewer. The need for an interpreter when a patient is hearing impaired
or a translator if the patient and interviewer are not language compatible provides a challenge, but not necessarily a barrier, under most
circumstances (see Chapter 12). Observations during the interview can

1169

be useful to the overall assessment of the patient’s maturity, presence or
absence of depression, and the parent–adolescent relationship. Given
the key role of a successful interview in the screening process, excellent training and experience should be sought by clinicians providing
comprehensive care to adolescent patients.

PSYCHOSOCIAL ASSESSMENT

A few questions should be asked to identify the adolescent who
is having difficulty with peer relationships (Do you have a best
friend with whom you can share even the most personal secret?),
self-­image (Is there anything you would like to change about yourself?), depression (In the past year have you felt depressed or sad
most days, even if you felt okay sometimes?), school (How are your
grades this year compared with last year?), personal decisions (Are
you feeling pressured to engage in any behavior for which you do
not feel you are ready?), substance use (Have you ever tried smoking, vaping, alcohol, weed, or prescription drugs that were not prescribed for you?), and an eating disorder (Do you ever feel that
food controls you, rather than vice versa?). Standardized screening for depression with validated tools such as the PH-­Q9 modified
for teens is also helpful. The HEADS/SF/FIRST mnemonic, basic
or expanded, can be useful in guiding the interview if encounter
forms are not available (Table 151.4). Based on the assessments,

Table 151.4  Adolescent Psychosocial Assessment:
HEADS/SF/FIRST Mnemonic
Home. Space, privacy, frequent geographic moves, neighborhood
Education/School. Frequent school changes, repetition of a grade/in
each subject, teachers’ reports, vocational goals, after-­school educational
clubs (e.g., language, speech, math), learning disabilities
Abuse. Physical, sexual, emotional, verbal abuse; parental discipline
Drugs. Tobacco, electronic cigarettes or vaping devices, alcohol,
marijuana, inhalants, “club drugs,” “rave” parties, others; drug of
choice, age at initiation, frequency, mode of intake, rituals, alone or
with peers, quit methods, number of attempts
Safety. Seat belts, helmets, sports safety measures, hazardous activities,
driving while intoxicated
Sexuality/Sexual Identity. Reproductive health (use of contraceptives,
presence of sexually transmitted infections, feelings, pregnancy)
Family and Friends
Family: Family constellation; genogram; single/married/separated/
divorced/blended family; family occupations and shifts; history of
addiction in first-­ and second-­degree relatives; parental attitude
toward alcohol and drugs; parental rules; chronically ill, physically
or mentally challenged parent
Friends: Peer cliques and configuration (“preppies,” “jocks,”
“nerds,” “computer geeks,” cheerleaders), gang or cult
affiliation
Image. Height and weight perceptions, body musculature and physique,
appearance (including dress, jewelry, tattoos, body piercing as
fashion trends or other statement)
Recreation. Sleep, exercise, organized or unstructured sports,
recreational activities (television, video games, computer games,
internet and chat rooms, church or community youth group
activities [e.g., Boy (BSA)/Girl Scouts; Big Brother/Sister groups,
campus groups]). How many hours per day, days per week involved?
Spirituality and Connectedness. Use HOPE* or FICA† acronym;
adherence, rituals, occult practices, community service or
involvement
Threats and Violence. Self-­harm or harm to others, running away,
cruelty to animals, guns, fights, arrests, stealing, fire setting, fights
in school
*HOPE, Hope or security for the future; organized religion; personal spirituality and
practices; effects on medical care and end-­of-­life issues.
†FICA, Faith beliefs; importance and influence of faith; community support.
From Dias PJ: Adolescent substance abuse: assessment in the office. Pediatr Clin North
Am 2002;49:269–300.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1170 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
appropriate counseling or referrals are recommended for more
thorough probing or for in-­depth interviewing.

The pubertal growth spurt may involve the optic globe, resulting in
its elongation and myopia in genetically predisposed individuals (see
Chapter 658). Vision testing should therefore be performed to detect
this problem before it affects school performance.

provide reassurance about development. The peak incidence of germ
cell tumors of the testes is in late adolescence and early adulthood.
Because varicoceles often appear during puberty, the examination
also provides an opportunity to explain and reassure the patient
about this entity (see Chapter 582). Self-­examination is no longer
recommended because of the low incidence and high recovery rates
of testicular cancer in this age-­group. Palpation of the scrotum along
with visual inspection should be performed to document bilaterally
descended testicles.

Audiometry

Pelvic Examination

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Vision Testing

Highly amplified music of the kind enjoyed by many adolescents may
result in hearing loss or tinnitus (see Chapter 676). A hearing screening
is recommended by the Bright Futures guidelines for adolescents who
are exposed to loud noises regularly, have had recurring ear infections,
or report problems.

Blood Pressure Determination

Criteria for a diagnosis of hypertension are based on age-­specific
norms that increase with pubertal maturation (see Chapter 471). Individuals younger than 13 years old whose blood pressure (BP) exceeds
the 95th percentile for their age are suspect for having hypertension,
regardless of the absolute reading, and a BP between the 90th and 95th
percentiles should receive appropriate counseling relative to weight
and have a follow-­up examination in 6 months. Individuals 13-­18 years
old with a BP of 130-­139/80-­89 are suspect for having hypertension,
and those with a BP of 120-­129/80 should receive appropriate counseling relative to weight and have a follow-­up examination in 6 months.
Those with elevated BPs should have their BP measured on three separate occasions to determine the stability of the elevation before moving forward with an intervention strategy. The technique is important;
false-­positive results may be obtained if the cuff covers less than two
thirds of the upper arm. The patient should be seated, and an average
should be taken of the second and third consecutive readings, using the
change rather than the disappearance as the diastolic pressure. Most
adolescents with BP elevation have labile hypertension. If BP is below
2 standard deviations (SD) for age, anorexia nervosa and Addison disease should be considered.

Scoliosis

See Chapter 720.
Approximately 5% of male and 10–14% of female adolescents have a
mild curvature of the spine. This is 2-­4 times the rate in younger children. Scoliosis is typically manifested during the peak of the height
velocity curve, at approximately 12 years in females and 14 years in
males. Females should be screened twice, once between 11 and 12 and
again between 13 and 14, and males should be screened between 12
and 13. Curves measuring >10 degrees should be monitored by an
orthopedist until growth is complete.

Breast Examination

See Chapters 158 and 588.
Visual inspection of the young and middle adolescent female’s
breasts is performed to evaluate progression of sexual maturation and
provide reassurance about development. The American Cancer Society
no longer recommends a clinical breast exam as a screening method
for women in the United States. Breast self-­exam is also no longer recommended as an option for women of any age.

Scrotum Examination

Visual inspection of the young and middle adolescent male testicles is performed to evaluate progression of sexual maturation and

See Chapter 585.

Laboratory Testing

The increased incidence of iron-­deficiency anemia after menarche
directs the performance of a hematocrit annually in females with moderate to heavy menses. The reference standard for this test changes
with progression of puberty, as estrogen suppresses erythropoietin (see
Chapter 496). Populations with nutritional risk should also have the
hematocrit monitored. Androgens have the opposite effect, causing the
hematocrit to rise during male puberty; sexual maturity rating (SMR)
1 males have an average hematocrit of 39%, whereas those who have
completed puberty (SMR 5) have an average value of 43%. Tuberculosis (TB) testing is important in adolescents with risk factors, such
as an adolescent with HIV, living in a household with someone with
HIV, incarcerated, homeless, from a country where TB is common,
or those with other risk factors, because puberty has been shown to
activate this disease in those not previously treated. Hepatitis C virus
(HCV) screening should be offered to all adolescents 18 years and
older regardless of their risks. It should also be offered to adolescents
who report risk factors, such as IDU, received blood products or organ
donation before 1992, or long-­term hemodialysis. The rate of acute
hepatitis C has remained the highest among persons age 20-­39 years,
similar to age-­groups at highest risk for fatal overdose in the United
States and age at initiation of IDU among certain U.S. populations.
Compared with 2018, the greatest increase in the rates of acute hepatitis C were observed among those age 40-­49 years (31% increase),
followed by those age 30-­39 years (23% increase). For the first time
in more than a decade, the rate of acute hepatitis C decreased slightly
among those age 20-­29 years. Rates have consistently been lowest
among those age <20 years or ≥60 years. Sexually active adolescents
should undergo screening for STIs per CDC guidelines, regardless of
symptoms (see Chapter 163). There are clear indications for chlamydia
and gonorrhea screening of females ≤24 years old, but less sufficient
evidence to support routine screening in young men. Based on feasibility, efficacy, and cost-­effectiveness, evidence is insufficient to recommend routine chlamydia screening in all sexually active young men.
However, screening of sexually active young males should be considered in clinical settings associated with a high prevalence of chlamydia
(e.g., adolescent clinics, correctional facilities, sexually transmitted
disease clinics) and should be offered to all young MSM. HIV screening should be discussed and offered at least once to all adolescents age
15-­18 years and to younger and older adolescents who are at increased
risk. Routine screening of adolescents who are asymptomatic for certain STIs (e.g., syphilis, trichomoniasis, herpes simplex virus, HPV)
is not recommended. However, young MSM and pregnant adolescent
females might require more thorough evaluation for all sexually transmitted diseases. Because cervical cancer incidence is low and complications from procedures may outweigh benefits of screening adolescent
females, cervical cancer screening should not begin until age 21 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1171

Chapter 152

Transitioning to Adult
Care
Joseph M. Truglio and Nikita Barai
The importance of thoughtfully and intentionally transitioning care
of adolescents from pediatric to adult services, particularly for adolescents with special healthcare needs (SHCN), has been recognized for more than 2 decades. The Society of Adolescent Health
and Medicine defines health care transitions as “the purposeful,
planned movement of adolescents and young adults (AYA) with
chronic physical and medical conditions from child-­centered to
the adult-­oriented health care system.” For adolescents with SHCN,
successful transition is associated with improved health outcomes
and quality of life, whereas poorly managed transitions may lead to
loss of a medical home and worsening of chronic disease control.
All adolescents, regardless of SHCN, are likely to benefit from the
autonomy, continuity of care, and self-­management skills that are
facilitated by a successful transition.
Guidelines emphasize that transition is a process, not an event,
and encompasses much more than simply the transfer of care from
one clinician to another. The guidelines make recommendations
and provide practice-­based resources for implementing elements of
transition support in pediatric, family medicine, internal medicine,
and combined internal medicine–pediatric practices. This includes
providing assistance for the patient in adapting to an adult model
of healthcare delivery as they transition from one practice/clinician
to another or as they transition between models of care within the
same practice. It also emphasizes the importance of the many members of the patient’s care team (primary and specialty care, physical
and occupational therapy, school and/or vocational support, mental
health clinicians, and so on) that support the patient before, during,
and after the transition process. Table 152.1 represents the key elements of healthcare transition. Tools to assist providers with these
steps are available online from the National Center for Health Care
Transition Improvement (www.gottransition.org).
The process begins with the development of a transition policy
and its dissemination to all families of young adolescents, ensuring
families understand that transition planning will be an element of
health maintenance and chronic care management visits throughout the adolescent years. By middle adolescence, a transition plan
should be developed with the youth and family caregivers and
updated at subsequent visits until the patient is ready for implementation of the adult care model in early adulthood. Periodic readiness assessments are key to planning and anticipating challenges.
Critical to the transition process is skills training for the adolescent
in communication, self-­advocacy, and self-­care. Some youth with
SHCN depend on caregivers for navigating the healthcare system
on their behalf, and it is not realistic to expect increased independence. For these youth, addressing guardianship, long-­term care
planning, and advance directives are important. Care coordination
facilitates navigation and engagement in an adult-­oriented health
system, especially for adolescents with SHCN. The goal is to help all
youth maximize their potential as they become young adults.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 152.1  Key Elements of the Transition of Healthcare
Process
• Written transition policy to be shared with youth, families,
providers, and staff, explaining the process and the
responsibilities of all team members
• Transitioning youth registry to track the progress of each patient
through the transition process
• Longitudinal readiness checklists assessing the youth’s ability for
independence, self-­management, and communicating with the
adult healthcare system, as well as the family’s readiness to assist
the patient in achieving these goals
• Written transition plan documenting the steps to be conducted
to meet the needs identified in the readiness assessment and
identifying appropriate adult care resources
• For youth with SHCN, expanded transition services, including
attention to insurance, entitlements, guardianship, and vocational
needs, in addition to adult subspecialty care
• Appropriate communication between the pediatric and adult
medical home and subspecialists, including a portable medical
summary and care plan delivered to the patient and caregivers
• Transfer of care, within the 18-­ to 21-­yr-­old range, to adult
providers, to whom pediatric providers continue to serve as a
resource until transition is complete

Chapter 153

Gender Identity and
Transgender Care
Abby Walch and Stephen M. Rosenthal
TERMINOLOGY

Sex refers to the physical or genetic characteristics that differentiate
between biologic maleness or femaleness (e.g., sex chromosomes,
gonads, internal and external genital structures). Sex designated
(assigned) at birth is typically based on the appearance of the external genitalia. In the absence of atypical genitalia, which may indicate a
difference of sexual development requiring further evaluation, sex is
designated at birth as either male or female.
Gender identity refers to one’s internal core sense of gender. Gender is not binary, and although most people identify their gender as
being male (boy or man) or female (girl or woman), others may identify as both, neither, or another gender completely. The gender identity
of an individual cannot be known until they reach a certain level of
psychosocial development and self-­awareness to identify it themself.
Development of gender identity likely results from a complex interplay
of biologic, environmental, and cultural factors. This concept is supported by compelling studies in several biomedical disciplines including genetics, endocrinology, and neurology. Gender expression refers
to one’s external manifestations of gender (e.g., choice of name, pronouns, clothing, hairstyle), whereas gender role describes the behaviors, attitudes, and personality traits considered to be masculine or
feminine by a society or culture during a particular period.
Many cultures recognize and accept as normal more than two genders. In the Philippines, Bakla is considered a third gender; many are
community leaders. In India, the third gender is Hijras, and Aboriginal
(Australian) terms such as brotherboy and sistergirl are used to refer to
transgender and gender-­diverse people.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1172 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Indigenous Nations (America) peoples may have three to five genders: male, female, Two Spirits female, Two Spirits male, and transgender. Navajo refer to Two Spirits as Nádleehí (transformed), and the
Cheyenne term for Two Spirits is Hemaneh (half man, half woman). In
all these societies, Two Spirits people are honored and often leaders in
their tribe.
Cisgender refers to people who have a gender identity that aligns
with their sex designated at birth. Gender incongruence is the term
used when gender identity does not align with the sex designated at
birth. Transgender and gender diverse (TGD) is an umbrella term
used to describe a diverse group of people with gender incongruence.
All TGD gender identities are normal, healthy variations within the spectrum of possible gender identities. Individuals with gender identities that
are not exclusively male or female may describe themselves as gender
nonbinary, genderqueer, or genderfluid. Some of these individuals
may also identify as transgender while others may not.
Gender dysphoria refers to the distress experienced by TGD individuals caused by gender incongruence. This term replaced “gender
identity disorder” in the most recent Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM)-­5 published in 2013, focusing the clinical
concern on the distress an individual may experience because of gender dysphoria and underscoring the nonpathologic nature of TGD gender identities. Not all TGD individuals experience gender dysphoria,
and use of this term, although sometimes necessary to obtain gender-­
affirming therapies, may be considered offensive and stigmatizing by
some.
It is important to distinguish gender identity as separate from
sexual orientation, which refers to an individual’s sexual attraction
to another person. Gender identity does not predict sexual orientation, and a person with any gender identity may have any sexual
orientation.

which TGD individuals encounter significant oppression and discrimination. What is evident is the importance of accepting and valuing the gender
identities as reported by TGD children at any point in time and the recognition that gender may not be binary and may change over time.
Gender incongruence that occurs in young children does not invariably
persist into adolescence and adulthood. Studies based on earlier versions
of the DSM demonstrate that gender dysphoria or gender incongruence
in prepubertal children persists in a minority of these individuals. Future
studies may reveal different persistence rates, as DSM-­5 criteria for the
diagnosis of gender dysphoria are narrower compared to previous versions. Although it is currently not possible to predict which children will
persist in their asserted TGD identity, certain factors are associated with
persistence of a TGD identity. Receipt of a gender dysphoria diagnosis in
childhood, increased intensity of gender dysphoria as measured on gender
dysphoria scales, social gender transition in childhood, sex designated as
female at birth, and older age at clinic intake have been associated with
higher persistence rates of TGD identities. Although not well studied, the
assigned male at birth verbal toddler who asserts “I am a girl” (rather than
“I want to be a girl”) has a high likelihood of persistence.
Recognition that social gender transition in prepubertal children is
associated with a higher likelihood of persistence should not prevent children from making this transition. Social transition, when completed early,
may result in more favorable outcomes for some TGD children and should
be done with input from a qualified mental health provider. Currently, persistence of gender incongruence and gender dysphoria can only reliably
be assessed after the onset of puberty. Gender dysphoria that emerges or
worsens with puberty onset is associated with a very high rate of persistence of that individual’s TGD identity into adulthood, an observation that
is fundamental to the rationale for the provision of medical interventions
in TGD youth who meet criteria for treatment.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Optimally, the diagnostic evaluations of TGD youth are performed by
a multidisciplinary team comprising medical and mental health professionals. Current clinical practice guidelines recommend that gender
incongruence and gender dysphoria be diagnosed by a qualified mental health gender specialist after a thorough psychodiagnostic evaluation. Specific criteria for the mental health gender specialist in their
role providing care for TGD youth are outlined elsewhere, whereas the
recommendations in this chapter are intended for medical providers.
Although the involvement of a mental health gender specialist in the
diagnostic evaluation of TGD youth is recommended by current clinical
practice guidelines prior to initiating any medical therapies, it is recognized that this may not always be possible. Mental health gender specialists may be inaccessible in certain areas, and the insistence that a TGD
child establish mental healthcare in this circumstance could delay care
indefinitely. Additionally, if an early pubertal TGD child presents with significant gender dysphoria, and if requiring input from a mental health gender specialist before initiating puberty blockers would create a significant
delay in care, resulting in the development of irreversible secondary sexual
characteristics, this could be harmful. Therefore in limited circumstances
it may be reasonable to initiate gender-­affirming medical therapies without input from a mental health gender specialist, though with the increasing use of telehealth, there may be greater access to mental health gender
specialists. Providers involved in the diagnostic evaluation of TGD youth
should be thoughtful about their strengths and limitations and refer for
further evaluation as needed to provide optimal care.
At the initial clinic visit, medical providers should obtain information from TGD youth and their families about the child’s gender journey. This information should include their current understanding of
their gender identity, challenges faced in addition to support received
in their families and surrounding communities, any distress associated
with their body and if so whether it changed with puberty, and a full
medical and mental health history. After obtaining this information,
in TGD youth seeking gender-­affirming medical therapies, the medical provider then must decide whether the individual fulfills criteria
for treatment (Table 153.1) for gender dysphoria/gender incongruence
according to the DSM-­5 (Table 153.2).

Early studies likely underestimated the size of the TGD population due
to reliance on reports of individuals who accessed gender-­related mental health or medical care and because of the lack of questions related to
gender identity on population-­based surveys. With newer study methods and increased societal recognition and acceptance of the diverse
spectrum of genders, it is now evident that the prevalence of TGD persons is higher than previously thought. With improved access to multidisciplinary gender clinics, TGD youth are seeking gender-­affirming
medical treatment at increasing rates.
In 2022, a report from the Williams Institute of the University
of California Los Angeles School of Law, informed by the Center
for Disease Control and Prevention’s (CDC’s) Behavior Risk Factor Surveillance System and the Youth Risk Behavior Survey carried
out from 2017 to 2020 and 2017 to 2019, respectively, revealed that
0.5% of U.S. adults (18 years and older) and 1.4% of adolescents and
young adults (13-­17 years) identify as transgender. A population-­
based study of self-­reported gender identity in high school students
carried out in Minnesota in 2016 reported a 2.7% prevalence of
TGD individuals. An international review in 2016 estimated the
TGD population worldwide to be 25 million with 0.5–1.3% of birth-­
designated males and 0.4–1.2% of birth-­designated females having
TGD gender identities.
There has been a striking inversion in the sex ratio of TGD youth
seeking services for gender dysphoria. Reports from Europe and North
America prior to 2005–2006 revealed a predominance of birth-­designated
males. Since then, and for unclear reasons, there has been a predominance
of birth-­designated females. A 2017 survey of 25 gender centers in the
United States, Europe, and Chile demonstrated that 63% of youth being
treated were transitioning from female to male.

Clinical Presentation

TGD youth may recognize and reveal their gender identity to others at
any age. Some will communicate their identity in early childhood as soon
as they are able to talk. Others may not acknowledge or share their identity until adulthood, largely influenced by a cis-­heteronormative society in

Diagnostic Evaluation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1173
Table 153.1  Criteria for Gender-­Affirming Hormone
Therapy for Adolescents

Table 153.2  DSM-­5 Criteria for Gender Dysphoria in
Adolescents and Adults

Adolescents are eligible for GnRH agonist treatment if:

A. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed
gender and natal gender of at least 6 mo in duration, as manifested
by at least two of the following:
1. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed
gender and primary and/or secondary sex characteristics
(or in young adolescents, the anticipated secondary sex
characteristics)
2. A strong desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or secondary
sex characteristics because of a marked incongruence with
one’s experienced/expressed gender (or in young adolescents,
a desire to prevent the development of the anticipated
secondary sex characteristics)
3. A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex
characteristics of the other gender
4. A strong desire to be of the other gender (or some alternative
gender different from one’s designated gender)
5. A strong desire to be treated as the other gender (or some
alternative gender different from one’s designated gender)
6. A strong conviction that one has the typical feelings and
reactions of the other gender (or some alternative gender
different from one’s designated gender)

1. A QUALIFIED MHP HAS CONFIRMED THAT:

• T
 he adolescent has demonstrated a long-­lasting and intense pattern
of gender nonconformity or gender dysphoria (whether suppressed or
expressed)
• Gender dysphoria worsened with the onset of puberty
• Any coexisting psychologic, medical, or social problems that could
interfere with treatment (e.g., that may compromise treatment adherence)
have been addressed, such that the adolescent’s situation and
functioning are stable enough to start treatment
• The adolescent has sufficient mental capacity to give informed consent/
assent to this (reversible) treatment

2. AND THE ADOLESCENT:

• H
 as been informed of the effects and side effects of treatment (including
potential loss of fertility if the individual subsequently continues with sex
hormone treatment) and options to preserve fertility
• Has given informed consent/assent and (particularly when the adolescent
has not reached the age of legal medical consent, depending on
applicable legislation) the parents or other caretakers or guardians have
consented to the treatment and are involved in supporting the adolescent
throughout the treatment process

3. AND A PEDIATRIC ENDOCRINOLOGIST OR OTHER CLINICIAN
EXPERIENCED IN PUBERTAL ASSESSMENT:
• A
 grees with the indication for GnRH agonist treatment
• Has confirmed that puberty has started in the adolescent (Tanner stage
≥G2/B2)
• Has confirmed that there are no medical contraindications to GnRH
agonist treatment

Adolescents are eligible for subsequent sex hormone treatment if:
1. A QUALIFIED MHP HAS CONFIRMED:

• T
 he persistence of gender dysphoria
• Any coexisting psychologic, medical, or social problems that could
interfere with treatment (e.g., that may compromise treatment adherence)
have been addressed, such that the adolescent’s situation and
functioning are stable enough to start sex hormone treatment
• The adolescent has sufficient mental capacity (which most adolescents
have by age 16 years) to estimate the consequences of this (partly)
irreversible treatment, weigh the benefits and risks, and give informed
consent/assent to this (partly) irreversible treatment

2. AND THE ADOLESCENT:

• H
 as been informed of the (irreversible) effects and side effects of
treatment (including potential loss of fertility and options to preserve
fertility)
• Has given informed consent/assent and (particularly when the adolescent
has not reached the age of legal medical consent, depending on
applicable legislation) the parents or other caretakers or guardians have
consented to the treatment and are involved in supporting the adolescent
throughout the treatment process

3. AND A PEDIATRIC ENDOCRINOLOGIST OR OTHER CLINICIAN
EXPERIENCED IN PUBERTAL INDUCTION:
• A
 grees with the indication for sex hormone treatment
• Has confirmed that there are no medical contraindications to sex
hormone treatment

MHP, mental health professional.
Data from Coleman E, Radix AE, Bouman WP, et al. Standards of care for the health
of transgender and gender diverse people, Version 8. Int J Transgend Health.
2022;23(Suppl 1):S1-S259.

Gender-­Affirmative Care

TGD youth have historically faced high rates of discrimination and barriers in medical care settings. Pediatric primary care providers play a
vital role in assessing the gender identities of their patients during routine well child checks, and they should be relied upon as a trusted source
of validation, support, and reassurance to TGD youth and their families
(Table 153.3). If a provider feels unable to address gender-­related issues,
then referral to another provider who can is recommended. If additional
information on gender-­affirming medical therapies is desired, referral to

B. The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning
Specify if:
1. The condition exists with a disorder of sex development
2. The condition is posttransitional, in that the individual has
transitioned to full-­time living in the desired gender (with or
without legalization of gender change) and has undergone (or is
preparing to have) at least one sex-­related medical procedure or
treatment regimen—namely, regular sex hormone treatment or
gender reassignment surgery confirming the desired gender
(e.g., penectomy, vaginoplasty in natal males; mastectomy or
phalloplasty in natal females)
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. Copyright
2013. American Psychiatric Association.

a provider with expertise in the care of TGD youth is appropriate. Available resources for youth, family, and providers are noted in Table 153.4.
Pediatric providers should follow a gender-­affirmative care model
(GACM) in their practices. In a GACM, providers offer a supportive,
open-­minded environment while facilitating discussion and exploration of their patients’ gender identities. Within this care model, the
following messages are relayed: (1) TGD identities and diverse gender
expressions are normal, healthy variations, (2) gender identity develops through a complex interplay of biologic, environmental, and cultural factors, and (3) coexisting mental health issues are more often
caused by stigma and discrimination than by internal psychologic disturbances within the TGD child. Key components of gender-­affirming
clinics are highlighted in Figure 153.1.
Pediatric providers should help TGD youth explore the various
options available for gender affirmation. Some TGD youth will require
medical or surgical interventions for affirmation of their gender,
whereas others will not. Social transition is a nonmedical intervention
that may occur gradually or all at once. It may occur in only some environments and not in others, or it may occur in all spaces in which TGD
individuals find themselves. Social transition may include adaptions
to name and/or pronouns, changes to hairstyle and/or clothing, use
of devices to hide unwanted physical features (e.g., binders to create a
smoother contour of the chest) or to create the appearance of desired
physical features (e.g., packers to achieve the appearance of a genital
bulge), and steps to access appropriate restroom facilities at school,
work, or other public locations. Social transition may also include legal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1174 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 153.3  Strategies for Supporting TGD Youth
DOMAIN

STRATEGIES

Clinical settings

Use of affirmed name and pronouns in clinical spaces and inclusion of this information in the electronic medical
record (EMR)
Training for clinical staff
Use of affirming imagery, inclusive intake forms
Gender-­neutral bathroom spaces
Open-­ended, nonjudgmental discussion about gender identity
Sensitive, trauma-­informed care
History taking using nongendered language

Relationships with family/
caregivers

Assistance with disclosure of identity to family when desired by the youth
Psychoeducation on gender development and the benefits of supporting TGD youth
Promoting practices such as use of affirmed name and pronouns
Education about social transitioning
Providing space and support for parents to express concerns without youth present
Support for disclosure to extended family or other important people
Referrals to support groups or family counseling

Educational settings

Education for school staff on gender concepts and zero tolerance for transphobia
Advocating for the use of affirmed name and pronouns
Advocacy for inclusive sexual education curriculum
Advocacy for youth to use preferred bathrooms, locker rooms, and dorms and participate with desired sports
teams

Public identification

Assistance with documentation for changing legal name and/or gender marker
Documentation of the patient’s gender identity to ensure safe passage during travel

From Voss RV, Simons L. Supporting the health of transgender and gender-­diverse youth in primary care settings. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:259–270, Table 2; with data
from Guss CE, Woolverton GA, Borus J, et al. Transgender adolescents’ experiences in primary care: a qualitative study. J Adolesc Health. 2019;65:344–349.

Table 153.4  Resources for Youth, Parents, and Providers
ONLINE RESOURCE
Resources for youth

Gender Spectrum (genderspectrum.org)
The Trevor Project (thetrevorproject.org)
Transgender Law Center
(transgenderlawcenter.org)
TransAthlete (transathlete.com)
TransLifeline (translifeline.org)

Resources for families
and caregivers

Resources for
providers

PFLAG/PTI (pflag.org)
Family Acceptance Project (familyproject.
sfsu.edu)
Gender Spectrum (genderspectrum.org)
National Center for Transgender Equality
(transequality.org)
Trans Youth Family Allies (imatyfa.org)
World Professional Association for
Transgender Health Standards of Care
(wpath.org)
Endocrine Society Gender Dysphoria/
Gender Incongruence Practice Guidelines
(www.endocrine.org)
UCSF Transgender Center for Excellence
(transcare.ucsf.edu/guidelines)
National LGBTQIA + Health Education
Center (lgbtqiahealtheducation.org)

From Voss RV, Simons L. Supporting the health of transgender and gender-­diverse
youth in primary care settings. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:259–270, Table 3.

affirmation in which an individual updates their name and/or gender
marker on legal documents.

MENTAL HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS

Although the vast majority of TGD youth do not have any underlying
severe psychiatric illnesses, they are at increased risk of internalizing
disorders and life-­threatening behaviors. Studies have demonstrated
an increased prevalence of anxiety, depression, obsessive-­compulsive
disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, eating disorder, self-­
harm

PROVIDERS with
appropriate
knowledge and
resources
EMR tools that
appropriately
document sex and
gender identity, along
with name/pronouns
in use

POLICIES that
prevent discrimination
and ensure
confidential care

AFFIRMING
CLINICS
FOR TGD
YOUTH
ART, FORMS,
AND MEDIA
MATERIALS that reflect
and ACCOMMODATIONS
that are safe/accessible
for all patients
and families

STAFF that are
trained to address
patients appropriately
and provide
affirming treatment

CARE that is
strength-based,
trauma-informed,
and confidential

Fig. 153.1 Key components of an affirming clinic for TGD youth.
(Adapted from Allen BJ, Rosenthal SM. Care of transgender, nonbinary,
and gender diverse youth. In Allen DB, Nadeau K, Kappy MS, Geffner
ME, eds. Pediatric Endocrinology: Principles and Practice, 3rd ed. New
York: McGraw Hill; 2020: Fig. 7-­2.)

behavior, suicidal ideation, and suicide attempts in TGD youth compared to cisgender controls. These conditions and behaviors are not
inherent to an individual’s gender identity, but rather often occur secondary to a lack of societal acceptance, stigma, discrimination, and poor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1175
access to gender-­affirming mental health and medical care. A higher
co-­occurrence of autism spectrum disorder among individuals with
gender dysphoria and vice versa has also been demonstrated in addition
to higher rates of homelessness, physical violence, substance abuse, and
high-­risk sexual behaviors compared to the general population.
In addition to determining the presence or absence of gender dysphoria as part of the psychodiagnostic evaluation, there are many
important reasons to consider involving a mental health gender specialist in the evaluation and care of TGD youth before and during the
provision of gender-­affirming medical care. Mental health gender specialists may (1) evaluate for the presence of and provide treatment for
coexisting mental health concerns, (2) provide family counseling and
supportive psychotherapy to assist youth with the exploration of their
gender identity and alleviate any distress secondary to gender dysphoria, (3) provide education, assist in decision-­making, and refer as indicated for gender-­affirming medical therapies, (4) educate and advocate
for TGD youth and their families in their community, and (5) provide
TGD youth and their families with information for support groups. An
emphasis should be placed on the nonpathologic nature of TGD gender identities, and conversion or reparative therapies aimed at changing an individual’s gender identity are ineffective and unethical (and
illegal in certain places) practices that should not be pursued.
Despite the increased risk for mental health comorbidities in TGD
youth, studies have provided evidence of protective factors resulting
in positive mental health outcomes. Education regarding and access
to gender-­
affirming medical interventions at early pubertal stages
resulted in less gender dysphoria and better mental health and well-­
being in TGD youth. Additionally, TGD youth with supportive family
environments have better mental health outcomes and quality of life.
This knowledge underscores the importance of involving a qualified
mental health professional to facilitate supportive home environments
as needed and educating TGD youth and their families on options for
gender-­affirming medical therapies.
Another aspect of support is to provide access to other children/adolescents who are TGD. Many have identified like-­minded friends in their
own community, but others may develop a community through summer camps, group meetings associated with a treatment center, or the
internet.

Gender-­Affirming Medical Care

Affirming medical and surgical options in TGD individuals who
require them to bring their body into alignment with their gender
identity are essential, medically necessary interventions that have
clear mental health benefits, some of which might even be lifesaving. Mental health benefits of gender-­affirming medical therapies
include the alleviation of gender dysphoria and the avoidance of
worsening of any underlying psychologic distress. Options available
to TGD youth vary depending on their pubertal and developmental
stage, and care should be individualized based on the goals of the
child rather than applied as a blanket algorithm. At each decision
point, careful consideration should be given to the potential risks,
benefits, and likely outcomes of each treatment, and use of signed
consent forms, or informed assent forms in the case of individuals <18 years of age, attesting to an understanding of these considerations are advised before initiating any gender-­affirming medical
therapies. Medical care for TGD youth is based primarily on the
World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH)
Standards of Care (SOC) published in 2022 and the Endocrine Society’s clinical practice guidelines, last published in 2017. TGD seeking gender-­affirming hormone therapy must satisfy certain criteria
before proceeding (see Table 153.1).
Current standards of care and clinical practice guidelines for the
gender-­affirming medical care of TGD youth are based on compelling
research from short-­to medium-­term studies, a 22-­year follow-­up case
report, and expert opinion. Although large longitudinal observational
outcome studies are ongoing, there remains a paucity of long-­term outcome data currently available. Nevertheless, refusing to deliver timely
medical interventions for TGD youth is not a neutral option. A delay
or withholding of care may prolong or worsen gender dysphoria and

mental health and lead to the development of irreversible physical
changes that may require invasive surgical interventions in the future.

PUBERTY BLOCKERS
Treatment Criteria and Timing

Pubertal hormone suppression is recommended in TGD youth who
meet criteria for treatment (see Table 153.1). No medical interventions
are recommended before the onset of puberty. TGD youth are eligible
for treatment only after the onset of puberty. Medical providers should
monitor for physical exam findings consistent with Tanner stage 2,
including breast buds in youth designated female at birth and testicular volume ≥4 mL in youth designated male at birth. Laboratory assays,
including ultrasensitive gonadotropin and sex steroid levels obtained
in the early morning, can be used to confirm the onset of puberty.
However, gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (GnRH) is released from
the hypothalamus in a pulsatile manner, and in early puberty, gonadotropin and sex steroid hormone levels may overlap with prepubertal
ranges if checked at random times.

Goals of Therapy

When initiated early in puberty, pubertal suppression allows for
expansion of the diagnostic phase with additional time for gender
identity exploration before deciding whether or not to proceed with
gender-­affirming sex hormone (GAH) therapy. Pubertal suppression
also prevents the development of undesirable, irreversible secondary
sex characteristics not aligned with the individual’s gender identity.
These irreversible characteristics include breast development, female
body habitus, and possibly short stature in individuals designated
female at birth and low voice, laryngeal prominence, male bone configuration, tall stature, and male hair pattern on the face and extremities in individuals designated male at birth. Some, but not all, of these
features can only be addressed later with surgery, but pubertal suppression is preferred. Pubertal suppression initiated in early puberty
is thought to be fully reversible; if suspended or discontinued, endogenous puberty will resume.
Pubertal suppression can also be considered in TGD youth in later
stages of puberty with the goal of achieving menstrual suppression in
individuals designated female at birth or the goal of blocking androgen
effects in individuals designated male at birth. However, studies do not
currently exist that inform whether pubertal blockers can be used as a
monotherapy (and for how long) in adolescents older than 14 without
posing a risk to skeletal health, given that prolonged deficiency of sex
steroids could result in impaired bone mineral density (BMD) during
later adolescence and adulthood.

Treatment Options

GnRH agonists are the preferred agents for pubertal suppression
in TGD youth. GnRH agonists are long-­acting medications that are
highly effective in suppressing gonadotropin release through GnRH
receptor desensitization. Once started, GnRH agonists may result in
some regression of previously developed secondary sex characteristics,
including atrophy of breast tissue and a reduction in testicular size.
GnRH agonists are available as injectables given every 1-­6 months or
as subcutaneous implants that last 1-­2 years.
Although GnRH agonists are the most effective and preferred option
for pubertal suppression, they are costly and may be inaccessible to
TGD individuals without insurance coverage. Antiandrogens and
progestins with antiandrogen properties, including spironolactone,
cyproterone, bicalutamide, and medroxyprogesterone, provide additional options for pubertal suppression. These medications are not as
efficacious in suppressing the HPG axis as compared to GnRH agonists, and concern regarding potential side effects have limited their
use. The various medications available for pubertal suppression can be
found in Table 153.5.

Potential Adverse Effects

Before initiating treatment for pubertal suppression, it is important to discuss potential adverse effects with TGD youth and their
guardians. The primary risks of treatment with GnRH agonists

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1176 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 153.5  Available Formulations of Medications Used for Pubertal Blockade
ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

MEDICATION
GnRH agonists

Progestins

Antiandrogens

DOSING FREQUENCY

DOSE

Leuprolide acetate

Intramuscular

Every 1-­3 mo

11.25-­30 mg

Triptorelin

Intramuscular

Every 24 wk

22.5 mg

Histrelin

Subcutaneous implant

Every 1-­2 yr

50 mg

Medroxyprogesterone

Oral

Daily

Up to 40 mg

Intramuscular

Every 3 mo

150 mg

Spironolactone

Oral

1-­2 times/day

25 mg initially, up to 100-­300 mg
divided twice daily

Cyproterone acetate

Oral

Daily

Up to 100 mg

Bicalutamide

Oral

Daily

50 mg

GnRH, Gonadotropin-­releasing hormone.
Adapted from Allen BJ, Rosenthal SM. Care of transgender, nonbinary, and gender diverse youth. In: Allen DB, Nadeau K, Kappy MS, Geffner ME, eds. Pediatric Endocrinology:
Principles and Practice, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw Hill; 2020.

Table 153.6  Baseline and Follow-­Up Protocol During
­Suppression of Puberty
EVERY 3-­6 MO
Anthropometry: height, weight, sitting height, blood pressure,
­Tanner stages
EVERY 6-­12 MO
Laboratory: LH, FSH, E2/T, 25-­OH vitamin D
EVERY 1-­2 YR
Bone density using DXA
Bone age on x-­ray of the left hand (if clinically indicated)
DXA, Dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry; E2, estradiol; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone;
LH, luteinizing hormone; T, testosterone.
Adapted from Hembree WC, Cohen-­Kettenis PT, Delemarre-van de Waal HA, Gooren LJ,
et al; Endocrine Society. Endocrine treatment of transsexual persons: an Endocrine
Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94(9):3132–3154.

include impaired bone mineralization, compromised fertility (if
followed by GAH therapy), and unknown effects on brain development and metabolism.

Bone Health

GnRH agonist treatment initiated early in puberty is associated with an
increased risk of compromised BMD. Assessment of BMD in TGD individuals is challenging in part because it is not clear whether scores should
be compared to norms for the individual’s sex designated at birth or to
norms for their gender identity. Previous studies have demonstrated an
expected stabilization or decline in BMD Z-scores during treatment with
GnRH agonists without recovery to baseline after treatment with GAH
therapy in all instances. In one study, BMD Z-scores normalized in transmales but remained below zero in transfemales 3 years after the addition
of GAH therapy. Potential explanations for differences include differences
in lifestyle, exercise, and vitamin D levels. In early pubertal TGD youth
treated with GnRH agonists, vitamin D status should be monitored and
supplemented, if necessary, and adequate dietary calcium intake and
weight-­bearing exercise should be encouraged to optimize bone health.
BMD should also be monitored every 1-­2 years during GnRH agonist
treatment and, if the individual undergoes phenotypic transition with
gender-­affirming sex hormones, should continue to be monitored as
described in the Endocrine Society’s clinical practice guideline (Tables
153.6 and 153.7).

Fertility

Before initiating treatment for pubertal suppression, counseling must
be provided regarding options for fertility preservation. TGD adolescents and their families should be given the opportunity to meet with a
specialist in reproductive endocrinology before initiating therapy or at
any point during gender-­affirming medical therapy as desired. When
initiated early in puberty, GnRH agonists inhibit gonadal tissue maturation. If discontinued, the effects of GnRH agonists on fertility are
reversible, and gamete maturation will resume. However, if followed
by GAH therapy, fertility is likely to be compromised. If TGD youth
desire fertility preservation, delaying or temporarily discontinuing
pubertal suppression to promote spermatogenesis and oocyte maturation to allow for gamete collection is an option. The attainment of
mature gametes occurs during the later stages of puberty when irreversible secondary sexual characteristics have developed, however,
features that are undesirable for many TGD youth. Individuals who
decide to continue pubertal suppression may elect to preserve immature gonadal tissue in the hopes that ongoing studies and future preservation techniques will allow for the maturation and preservation of
viable gametes. Although in vitro maturation of human germ cells has
not yet been accomplished, a report described in vivo maturation and
subsequent cryopreservation of oocytes in a transgender male adolescent treated with a GnRH agonist starting in early puberty. This was
achieved 2 years after the initiation of GnRH agonist therapy and without the discontinuation of pubertal suppression.
In contrast to TGD youth who initiate GnRH agonist therapy in
early puberty, cryopreservation of mature sperm or eggs is an option
before initiating gender-affirming medical therapy in late puberty or
postpuberty (Table 153.8). If GAH therapy is initiated without fertility
preservation in these individuals, it may be possible to discontinue hormone therapy in the future to allow for recovery of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­
gonadal (HPG) axis and subsequent gamete maturation.
Stopping estrogen in individuals designated male at birth may allow for
recovery of testicular function and collection of sperm. Discontinuation of testosterone in individuals designated female at birth may allow
for ovarian recovery and release of eggs, and some who have desired
this have had successful pregnancies. Unfortunately, even when counseling is provided, very few TGD youth pursue fertility preservation
because of the high associated costs and invasiveness of some procedures and concerns regarding potential delays to medical transition.

Brain Development

Very few studies thus far have assessed the impact of GnRH agonist
therapy on brain development. Attainment of executive functioning is
a milestone that is typically achieved during puberty. A single cross-­
sectional study comparing TGD adolescents treated with GnRH agonists

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1177
Table 153.7  Baseline and Follow-­Up Protocol During Induction of Puberty
Anthropometry

Height,* sitting height,* weight, blood pressure, Tanner stages*

Every 3-­6 mo

Laboratory studies

Testosterone: testosterone, hemoglobin/hematocrit, lipids, 25-­OH vitamin D*
Estrogen: estradiol, prolactin, 25-­OH vitamin D*

Every 3-­12 mo

Imaging*

DXA to evaluate bone mineral density†

Every 1-­2 yr

Left hand radiograph to evaluate bone age (as clinically indicated)
*Only indicated in individuals previously treated with pubertal blockers.
†BMD should be monitored into adulthood (until the age of 25-30 yr or until peak bone mass has been reached).

DXA, Dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry.
Adapted from Hembree WC, Cohen-­Kettenis PT, Delemarre-van de Waal HA , Gooren LJ , et al; Endocrine Society. Endocrine treatment of transsexual persons: an Endocrine Society
clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009;94(9):3132–3154.

Table 153.8  Fertility Preservation Options for Transgender Patients
FERTILITY PRESERVATION METHOD

PROCEDURE

TIMING OF INTERVENTION

ASSIGNED MALE AT BIRTH
Sperm cryopreservation

Sperm is collected from ejaculated
semen ± electrical or vibratory
stimulation

1. Before initiation of gender-­affirming hormone therapy
or surgery
2. If gender-­affirming hormone therapy already initiated,
consider 3-­mo cessation of estrogen

Surgical sperm extraction

Sperm is obtained surgically from the
testis (TESE) or epididymis (PESA)

1. Before initiation of gender-­affirming hormone therapy
or surgery
2. If gender-­affirming hormone therapy already initiated,
consider 3-­mo cessation of estrogen

Ovarian stimulation followed by surgical
egg retrieval and egg freezing

1. Before initiation of gender-­affirming hormone therapy
or surgery
2. If gender-­affirming hormone therapy already initiated,
consider 3-­mo cessation of testosterone

Embryo cryopreservation

Ovarian stimulation followed by surgical
egg retrieval, IVF, and embryo freezing

1. Before initiation of gender-­affirming hormone therapy
or surgery
2. If gender-­affirming hormone therapy already initiated,
consider 3-­mo cessation of testosterone

Ovarian tissue cryopreservation

Surgical removal and freezing of ovarian
tissue

Before gender-­affirming surgery involving removal of
ovaries

ASSIGNED FEMALE AT BIRTH
Oocyte cryopreservation

PESA, Percutaneous epididymal sperm aspiration; TESE, testicular sperm extraction; IVF, in vitro fertilization.
From Montoya MN, Peipert BJ, Whicker D, Gray B. Reproductive considerations for the LGBTQ+ community. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:283–297, Table 2.

to untreated TGD adolescents found no significant differences in executive functioning. However, animal studies have suggested that GnRH
agonists may affect cognitive function, and one transgender adolescent
was reported to demonstrate a lack of expected variation in white matter
fractional anisotropy (a measure of brain maturation thought to typically
occur during puberty) and a 9-­point drop in operational memory testing
after approximately 2 years of treatment with a GnRH agonist. A subsequent systematic review and meta-analysis found no adverse impacts
of hormone therapy on cognitive function in transgender young adults.
Additional long-­term studies are necessary to assess the impact of GnRH
agonist therapy more fully on brain development in TGD youth.

Metabolism and Other Effects

A few studies have evaluated the effects of GnRH agonists on various
metabolic and physiologic parameters and future surgical outcomes.
A decrease in lean body mass, an increase in fat percentage, and
weight gain have been reported in studies of TGD adolescents treated
with GnRH agonists. TGD youth designated female at birth who start
GnRH agonist therapy may also experience hot flashes, especially if
this treatment is initiated in the later stages of puberty. TGD youth
designated male at birth who initiate pubertal suppression in early
puberty will have limited growth of their genitalia, which may require
alternative techniques for penile inversion-vaginoplasty if gender-­
affirming genital surgery is desired in the future, and counseling
should be provided in this regard before initiating treatment with a
pubertal blocker.

Alternative Therapy Side Effects

GnRH agonist therapy for pubertal suppression may not be an option
for all TGD youth, and alternative therapies are also associated with
potential adverse effects. Spironolactone may cause electrolyte abnormalities, polyuria, and orthostasis. Concern for potential hepatotoxicity associated with cyproterone acetate and bicalutamide treatment
has limited their use. Progestin treatment may cause hot flashes, headaches, acne, depression, weight gain, lipid changes, and irregular menstrual bleeding in individuals designated female at birth.

Monitoring Protocol

Efficacy and potential adverse effects of treatment should be monitored
closely in TGD youth treated with pubertal suppression according to
the protocol outlined in Table 153.6. For individuals treated with spironolactone, serum electrolytes should be monitored every 3 months
for the first year of therapy and then annually.
A clear endpoint for pubertal suppression can be difficult to determine. It is generally recommended that GnRH agonists not be continued as monotherapy past age 14 years (nor initiated as a monotherapy
past age 14 years) because of the potential adverse effects on bone
health. The decision must ultimately be made to discontinue pubertal
suppression all together or to initiate concurrent treatment with GAH
therapy. It is recognized that this decision point can be difficult for
TGD adolescents, particularly for some with nonbinary gender identities who may not desire certain physical changes that may occur with
sex hormone therapy. Although current guidelines suggest that GnRH

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1178 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

Table 153.9  Protocol Induction of Puberty
MEDICATION
Estrogen

17β−estradiol

ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

DOSING
FREQUENCY

Oral/sublingual

Daily

Transdermal

Testosterone

Testosterone
enanthate/
cypionate

Every 3-­5 days

Subcutaneous

Weekly

Intramuscular

Every 2 wk

INITIAL DOSE

DOSE
ESCALATION

PB: 5 μg/kg/day

5 μg/kg every 6 mo

PP: 1 mg

1 mg every 6 mo

PB: 6.25-­12.5 μg/24 hr

12.5 μg/24 hr every
6 mo

PP: 25-­50 μg/24 hr

25 μg/24 hr every
6 mo

PB: 12.5 mg/m2

12.5 mg/m2 every
6 mo

PP: 37.5 mg

37.5 mg every 6 mo

PB: 25 mg/m2

25 mg/m2 every
6 mo

PP: 75 mg

75 mg every 6 mo

ADULT DOSE
2-­6 mg/day
50-­200 μg/24 hr

30-­100 mg/wk

60-­200 mg every
2 wk

PB, Pubertal blocker initiated in early puberty; PP, postpuberty.
Adapted from Hembree WC, Cohen-­Kettenis PT, Gooren L, et al. Endocrine treatment of gender-­dysphoric/gender-­incongruent persons: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017;102:3869–3903, Table 8; and from Allen BJ, Rosenthal SM. Care of transgender, nonbinary, and gender diverse youth. In: Allen DB, Nadeau
K, Kappy MS, Geffner ME, eds. Pediatric Endocrinology: Principles and Practice, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw Hill; 2020, Fig. 7-­2.

agonist therapy may be continued in conjunction with sex hormone
therapy until gonadectomy (if pursued), it is often possible to discontinue this therapy in individuals designated female at birth who initiate
treatment with testosterone once adult levels of testosterone have been
reached.

GENDER-­AFFIRMING SEX HORMONE THERAPY
Treatment Criteria and Timing

GAH therapy is a medically necessary intervention for many TGD
adolescents. GAH therapy is partially reversible, and it is the responsibility of the medical provider to ensure the adolescent meets criteria
for treatment before initiating therapy (see Table 153.1). GAH treatment may be initiated in TGD adolescents who request this therapy
after a multidisciplinary team of medical and mental health providers
has confirmed the persistence of gender dysphoria/gender incongruence
and if the adolescent has sufficient mental capacity to give informed
consent/assent. Most adolescents are felt to have sufficient mental
capacity to provide informed consent by age 16 years; however, there
may be compelling reasons to initiate therapy earlier. TGD youth
treated with pubertal suppression at Tanner stage 2, which may occur
as early as 8-­9 years of age, may incur certain risks if this treatment is
continued as monotherapy until 16 years of age. Prolonged pubertal
suppression may be detrimental to bone health, and it may have detrimental effects on mental health if puberty is delayed well beyond
the majority of an individual’s peers. Treatment with GAH therapy
therefore should be individualized with consideration given to earlier initiation as clinically indicated. Initiation of GAH should follow
an evaluation by a qualified mental health gender specialist (separate
from any evaluation focused on prior use of pubertal suppression),
the signing of consent/assent forms, the obtainment of baseline labs,
and consideration of fertility preservation.

Goals of Therapy

The goals of GAH therapy are (1) to reduce endogenous sex hormone
levels to prevent the development of secondary sex characteristics
in individuals previously treated with pubertal blockers or to reduce
secondary sex characteristics in those who have already progressed
through any degree of puberty and (2) to provide exogenous sex hormones to allow for phenotypic changes aligned with an individual’s
gender identity. GAH therapy must be individualized based on the
adolescent’s goals rather than applying a one-­size-­fits-­all approach,
though it is important to achieve a level of either testosterone or estrogen that is in the normal range for a person’s developmental stage.

Treatment Options

In TGD adolescents whose puberty was blocked in early Tanner stages,
puberty induction with GAH treatment should be initiated using a
gradually increasing dose schedule (Table 153.9). Initial exogenous sex
hormone levels are insufficient to suppress endogenous sex hormone
secretion, and pubertal blockade should be continued. As sex hormone
doses increase, GnRH agonist treatment may often be discontinued in
individuals designated female at birth who are treated with testosterone therapy. Adult doses of exogenous testosterone therapy are often
sufficient to suppress the HPG axis. In contrast, pubertal suppression
must often be continued in individuals designated male at birth who
are treated with estrogen therapy. Adult doses of estrogen therapy
are insufficient in suppressing the HPG axis and testosterone release.
Ongoing adjunctive therapy with a GnRH agonist or antiandrogen
therapy (e.g., spironolactone) to block testosterone secretion and/or
action is required indefinitely or until gonadectomy, if pursued. Not all
TGD adolescents will pursue gonadectomy, and long-­term studies are
needed to determine the potential risks of prolonged treatment with
GnRH agonists.
In TGD adolescents who present for gender-­affirming medical therapy in late puberty or after completion of puberty, pubertal induction
with sex hormones can start at higher doses and can occur more rapidly (see Table 153.9).
At this time, no evidence has demonstrated that any of the following medically approved types or methods of administering
hormones is superior to others in yielding the desired phenotypic
changes. Protocols for some formulations of estrogen and testosterone are not available. Protocols that do exist are outlined in Table
153.9. It is important to emphasize to patients that individual variations in outcomes will occur based on several factors including
genetics, body type, and compliance.

Estrogen

Estrogen can be given via transdermal, oral, or injectable routes. The
naturally occurring form, 17β−estradiol, is preferred to synthetic (e.g.,
ethinyl estradiol) and conjugated estrogens (e.g., Premarin), which
cannot easily be monitored in the serum. Compared to synthetic
estrogens, 17β−estradiol is also associated with a lower risk of venous
thromboembolism (VTE). Serum estradiol levels can be monitored,
with the eventual goal of achieving values in the normal range for premenopausal females (100-­200 pg/mL).
TGD individuals who pursue estrogen therapy should be educated on the expected timeline of physical changes (Table 153.10).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1179
Table 153.10  Timeline of Effects from Gender-­Affirming Sex Hormone Therapy
EFFECT
Estrogen

Testosterone

ONSET

MAXIMUM

REVERSIBILITY

Redistribution of body fat

3-­6 mo

2-­3 yr

Likely

Decreased muscle mass/strength

3-­6 mo

1-­2 yr

Likely

Softening of skin/decreased oiliness

3-­6 mo

Unknown

Likely

Decreased sexual desire

1-­3 mo

3-­6 mo

Likely

Decreased spontaneous erections

1-­3 mo

3-­6 mo

Likely

Breast growth

3-­6 mo

2-­3 yr

Not possible without surgery

Decreased testicular volume

3-­6 mo

2-­3 yr

Unknown

Decreased sperm production

Unknown

>3 yr

Unknown

Decreased terminal hair growth

6-­12 mo

>3 yr

Possible

Scalp hair

Variable

Skin oiliness/acne

1-­6 mo

1-­2 yr

Likely

Facial/body hair growth

6-­12 mo

4-­5 yr

Unlikely without electrolysis

Scalp hair loss

6-­12 mo

Increased muscle mass/strength

6-­12 mo

2-­5 yr

Likely

Fat redistribution

1-­6 mo

2-­5 yr

Likely

Cessation of menses

1-­6 mo

Clitoral enlargement

1-­6 mo

1-­2 yr

Unknown

Vaginal atrophy

1-­6 mo

1-­2 yr

Unknown

Deepening of voice

6-­12 mo

1-­2 yr

Not possible without surgery

Unlikely

Likely

Adapted from Hembree WC, Cohen-­Kettenis PT, Gooren L, et al. Endocrine treatment of gender-­dysphoric/gender-­incongruent persons: an Endocrine Society clinical practice
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2017;102:3869–3903, Table 12; and from Allen BJ, Rosenthal SM. Care of transgender, nonbinary, and gender diverse youth. In Allen DB, Nadeau
K, Kappy MS, Geffner ME, eds. Pediatric Endocrinology: Principles and Practice, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw Hill; 2020, Tables 7-­11 and 7-­12.

Treatment will lead to some changes that are likely reversible and
others, such as breast development, that are irreversible without
surgery.

Testosterone

Naturally occurring testosterone may be given transdermally via gels
or patches, through subcutaneous or intramuscular injections, or via
implantation of subcutaneous pellets. Oral testosterone undecanoate is Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved for use in
the United States but is not currently in wide use. It is important to
counsel patients on the potential transfer to others via direct contact
when transdermal formulations are used. Testosterone levels can be
monitored in the serum, with the eventual goal of achieving values in
the normal male range (typically 320-­1,000 ng/dL, depending on the
specific assay).
TGD individuals treated with testosterone should be educated on
the expected timeline of physical changes (see Table 153.10). Treatment will lead to some changes that are likely reversible and others
that are not, such as facial hair growth, which is irreversible without
electrolysis. Adult levels of testosterone are typically sufficient to
suppress the HPG axis and induce amenorrhea in TGD individuals
designated female at birth. However, unplanned pregnancies have
been reported, emphasizing the need for ongoing contraceptive counseling in these individuals. If undesired uterine bleeding persists, or
if menstruation is causing significant dysphoria before the initiation of testosterone therapy, a progestin or other agent may be used
for menstrual suppression. If estrogen is tolerable, combined continuous oral contraceptives (with limited intervals for breakthrough
menses) are more effective in achieving menstrual suppression and
are better for maintaining bone health than progestin-­only options.
For TGD adolescents who prefer nonestrogen-­containing medications, progesterone-­only pills, medroxyprogesterone acetate shots,

and progesterone-­containing intrauterine or implantable devices
are available.

Potential Adverse Effects

Clinicians should inform TGD adolescents of the potential for adverse
effects of GAH treatment. Risk for adverse effects is higher when supraphysiologic or inadequate doses of sex hormones are used, which
should be avoided. Before initiating therapy, risk factors for adverse
effects should be assessed and minimized when possible. GAH treatment has implications for fertility, which must be discussed before initiating therapy as noted previously.

Risks with Estrogen

The most serious risks associated with estrogen therapy include VTE,
cardiovascular disease, and cerebrovascular accident. The risk increases
with higher estrogen doses and supraphysiologic estradiol levels. Risk
factors for these conditions should be assessed and addressed before
initiating estrogen therapy. Tobacco cessation counseling should be
provided as indicated. Oral ethinyl estradiol in particular appears to
increase the risk of VTE, and it should not be used for GAH therapy
in individuals at high risk. Estrogen may also cause growth of pituitary
lactotroph cells and hyperprolactinemia, which resolves with a reduction or discontinuation of therapy in most individuals. Other potential
adverse effects include weight gain, cholelithiasis, and hypertriglyceridemia. TGD adults treated with estrogen therapy have been shown to
have an increased risk for developing breast cancer compared with a
general population of men in a retrospective Dutch study, although the
risk was still lower than in the general population of women. Another
retrospective Dutch study spanning five decades demonstrated an
increased mortality risk in TGD individuals treated with estrogen
therapy compared with a general population of men and general population of women with high risks of death because of cardiovascular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1180 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
disease, lung cancer, HIV-­related disease, and suicide; however, the
study was not designed to attribute the cause of the increased mortality
risk to a specific effect of estrogen therapy. Absolute contraindications
to estrogen therapy include previous VTE related to an underlying
hypercoagulable condition, history of estrogen-­sensitive neoplasm,
and end-­stage chronic liver disease.

Risks with Testosterone

Testosterone therapy is primarily associated with potential risks of
developing acne, weight gain, hypertension, polycythemia, and a
more atherogenic lipid profile (i.e., elevated low-­density lipoprotein,
elevated triglyceride, and decreased high-­density lipoprotein cholesterol levels). Risk increases with sustained, supraphysiologic testosterone levels. Risk factors for these conditions should be assessed
and addressed before initiating testosterone therapy. Despite being
associated with a more atherogenic lipid profile, numerous studies
have shown no increased risk of cardiovascular disease in individuals
treated with testosterone. Additional studies are needed to determine
if therapy is associated with an increased risk for cerebrovascular
disease. Historically, oral testosterone formulations have been associated with increased risk for transaminitis and severe liver dysfunction, whereas injectable formulations are not. Because of the concern
that aromatization of testosterone to estradiol may increase risk in
patients with a history of estrogen-­sensitive malignancies, consultation with an oncologist should be considered before initiating
therapy in such patients. Absolute contraindications to testosterone
therapy include current pregnancy, unstable coronary artery disease,
and untreated polycythemia (hematocrit ≥55%).

Monitoring Protocol

Efficacy and potential adverse effects of treatment should be monitored
closely in TGD youth treated with GAH therapy at baseline and follow-­up

according to the protocol outlined in Table 153.7. Clinical evaluation
and laboratory monitoring are recommended every 3 months during
the first year of GAH therapy and then 1-­2 times annually thereafter.
All evaluations should include a physical exam, including measurement
of weight and blood pressure. Chest and genitourinary exams may be
sensitive issues for TGD youth and should only be conducted as needed
to guide management. Evaluations should include questions regarding
occurrence of potential adverse events and satisfaction with phenotypic
changes on medical therapies. Medication dosing adjustments should
occur as needed with the goal of avoiding supraphysiologic and subphysiologic hormone levels that may increase the risk for adverse effects.

Surgical Therapy

Gender-­affirming surgeries may be pursued by some TGD individuals
to better align their bodies with their gender identities. In these individuals, surgery is medically necessary and an essential step to alleviate their gender dysphoria. Surgeries are irreversible interventions, and
most, including those that directly affect fertility such as gonadectomy
and/or hysterectomy, are not recommended until an individual reaches
age 18 years or the age of legal majority in their country. The Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline and WPATH SOC acknowledge
that mastectomy may be considered in TGD adolescents before age 18
years, taking into consideration the physical and mental health status
of the individual. Hormone therapy should not be considered a prerequisite to accessing gender-­affirming surgical procedures in individuals
who do not desire hormone therapy nor in those in whom it is medically contraindicated. Surgeries may occur after the appropriate assessments by qualified medical and mental health professionals responsible
for the care of the TGD individual have been performed and confirm
that criteria for surgery are met. Individuals who undergo gonadectomy will require ongoing hormone replacement therapy to prevent
adverse effects, including osteoporosis.

Table 153.11  Recommendations for Breast and Reproductive Tract Cancer Screening
ORGAN

TRANSGENDER WOMEN

TRANSGENDER MEN

Breast/chest

Discuss mammography in transwomen age >50 yr with additional risk
factors for breast cancer (body mass index >35 kg/m2, estrogen and/or
progestin use >5 yr, family history)
• Family history of BRCA mutations: prophylactic mastectomy could be
recommended, with consecutive primary reconstruction

Patients who have not undergone bilateral mastectomy
should follow cisgender women recommendations
for breast cancer screening
Patients who have undergone chest reconstructive
surgery should be offered physical examination
and/or chest ultrasound

Cervix

Not recommended (transwomen do not have a cervix)
• Patients should be routinely examined to detect HPV-­related lesions

Patients with an intact cervix should follow the
recommendations for cisgender women
• Consider self-­collected vaginal swabs to test for
high-­risk HPV DNA
• Pathologists should be aware if patient is taking
testosterone
• Patients who have undergone total hysterectomy
and have no history of high-­grade cervical
precancerous lesion or cervical cancer can
discontinue cervical cancer screening

Ovarian

N/A

Do not routinely screen
• Transmen at increased risk (identified BRCA
gene mutation and family history) should be
referred for genetic counseling
• Consider risk-­reduction salpingo-­oophorectomy

Endometrial

N/A

Do not routinely screen
• Unexplained bleeding (in patients under
testosterone who had reached amenorrhea)
should be evaluated

Prostate

Monitor the following framework for cisgender men
• PSA cutoffs may be lower in transgender men receiving antiandrogens
• Consider transvaginal digital examination and ultrasound

N/A

N/A, Not applicable; PSA, prostate-­specific antigen.
From Labanca T, Manero I, Pannunzio M. Transgender patients: considerations for routine gynecologic care and cancer screening. J Gynecol Cancer. 2020;30:1990–1996, Table 4.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 153 u Gender Identity and Transgender Care 1181
Primary Care: Screening

Not all TGD adults have had gender-­affirming chest or reproductive
organ surgery. Because of this, they may be at risk for cancers not typically screened for based on their affirmed or biologic gender. Suggested
breast and reproductive cancer screening recommendations are noted
in Table 153.11.

THERAPY FOR NONBINARY YOUTH

Youth with nonbinary gender identities are increasingly presenting
for gender-­affirming medical care. Although current clinical care
guidelines recognize that gender exists on a spectrum and may not
always be binary, research and guidelines to date have been largely
grounded in the binary gender narrative. Some individuals with
nonbinary gender identities will seek treatment as outlined in current clinical practice guidelines, but not all will. The Endocrine
Society clinical practice guidelines state that tailoring of current
protocols to the individual may be acceptable if done within the context of accepted safety guidelines using a multidisciplinary approach
including mental health support. Additionally, the WPATH SOC
state they are intended to be flexible to meet the diverse healthcare needs of the individual, and health professionals may modify
them in consultation with their TGD patients. However, evidence-­
based protocols are not yet available for nonbinary individuals, and
neither the Endocrine Society nor the WPATH provide guidelines
specific to the care of nonbinary youth. Nonbinary individuals have
been shown to have higher rates of depression, anxiety, and self-­
harm compared to their binary transgender peers. In addition, they
often encounter more barriers in their attempts to access gender-­
affirming medical care, even when care is accessed at specialized
gender clinics. As a result, some feel forced to identify within the
gender binary to obtain desired medical therapies or choose to not
seek care.
Until future studies inform clinical practice guidelines outlining therapeutic approaches specific to nonbinary youth, gender-­
affirming care for nonbinary youth should be individualized.
Providers should frame care using the concept of embodiment
rather than transition, the latter implying a linear path within the
gender binary. Ongoing dialogue and support are essential in helping nonbinary youth navigate a potentially nonlinear path. Providers should explore the individual’s internal awareness of self,
specific areas of gender dysphoria, and their embodiment goals
to offer specific therapies toward affirming the individual’s gender. Specific expected outcomes of the possible interventions (e.g.,
increased facial hair with testosterone or chest growth with estrogen) should be discussed rather than describing therapies as masculinizing or feminizing in nature. Difficult decisions may need to
be made, particularly for nonbinary youth treated with pubertal
suppression who do not desire any secondary sex characteristics.
There is the potential for negative impacts on bone health from prolonged monotherapy with pubertal blocking agents, and this should
be avoided. Providers should expect to have conversations about
balancing the individual’s priorities in their specific embodiment
goals and to discuss the known potential risks and benefits of various treatment options in order to provide optimal care to their nonbinary patients. Patients should be counseled about the importance
of maintaining a minimum threshold level of sex steroids—typically
a normal adult range of either estrogen or testosterone—to preserve
general health.
Like TGD youth with binary gender identities, available medical
interventions for nonbinary youth may include pubertal suppression, sex hormones, and surgeries. Desired and unwanted effects
should be discussed and balanced in decision-­making regarding

therapies. Existing treatment protocols may be modified to achieve
patient embodiment goals if deemed safe with a plan for close follow-­up monitoring. Potential modifications may include gradual
titration or tapering of doses, low-­dose or limited testosterone therapy, lower doses of estrogen therapy, intermittent hormone dosing,
use of both estrogen and testosterone, and use of adjunctive medications. After initiating a new treatment, follow-­up visits should
include a discussion of physical changes noted and whether they
are in alignment with the patient’s embodiment goals, with adjustments made as needed.

Mental Health Outcomes of Treatment

Multiple studies have demonstrated the positive impact of gender-­
affirming medical and surgical interventions on mental health
outcomes in TGD adolescents. A prospective study of 55 TGD
adolescents and young adults in the Netherlands published in
2014 demonstrated resolution of gender dysphoria and improvement in general psychologic functioning after sequential treatment with GnRH agonist therapy, GAH treatment, and gender
reassignment surgery. These individuals were also shown to have
a sense of well-­being equivalent or superior to that seen in age-­
matched controls from the general population, and none regretted treatment. A cross-­
sectional survey administered by the
National Center for Transgender Equality to more than 20,000
U.S. TGD adults age 18-­36 years demonstrated that those treated
with GnRH agonists for pubertal suppression during adolescence
had a significantly lower odds of lifetime suicidal ideation compared to those who wanted, but did not receive, such treatment.
The largest observational study assessing the impact of genderaffirming medical care on the mental health of TGD adolescents
and young adults in the United States (n = 315, age 12-­20 years)
demonstrated significant improvements in psychosocial functioning, decreases in depression and anxiety, and increases in appearance congruence, positive affect, and life satisfaction. Other studies
have also reported on improvement of mental health measures,
quality of life, global psychosocial functioning, and body image in
response to treatment with gender-­affirming medical care.

Challenges to Care

TGD youth not only face high levels of discrimination in their lived
environments, but those who succeed in accessing medical care
often encounter stigma and discrimination within healthcare settings. Research on the experiences of TGD persons of color, a group
that faces startingly high rates of violence and homicide, is an area
in need of much attention. In the United States, gender-­affirming
medical therapies are currently not FDA-­approved for use in TGD
youth, and insurance companies often deny coverage of these medically necessary, essential, and even lifesaving interventions. Some
families can pay out-­of-­pocket for treatments when coverage is
denied, whereas others cannot, furthering the socioeconomic divide
between wealthy and impoverished. Efforts in multiple U.S. states to
criminalize the medical care of TGD youth are ongoing and in need
of significant advocacy and education. In addition, participation
in same-­gender sporting activities has created significant barriers
among TGD athletes. Some athletic bodies have placed barriers to
same-­gender participation, requiring transfemales to start suppressive therapy early in puberty or to monitor testosterone levels, with
a cutoff level prohibiting participation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1182 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

Chapter 154

Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual
Adolescents
Stewart L. Adelson and Mark A. Schuster
Understanding a child’s or adolescent’s sexual and emotional development is an essential part of any comprehensive pediatric evaluation. For youth who are or might be gay, lesbian, or bisexual (GLB
also noted as LGB in the LGBT abbreviation), such understanding is particularly important. GLB youth as a group have the same
health and developmental needs typical of youth in general, and their
sexual orientation is part of the normal spectrum of human sexuality. However, they encounter distinct developmental challenges and
can have additional physical and mental health needs related to their
orientation and others’ reaction to it. Their sexual orientation may
be different from that expected by some families, peers, and society;
they are at risk of peer rejection, bullying, violence, or family nonacceptance more frequently than most youth. Although the majority of
GLB adolescents grow up physically and mentally healthy, they are at
increased risk for certain health problems as a result of these stresses
and the epidemiology of health threats such as HIV and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs). In addition, healthcare providers
may also have biases and assumptions about the GLB community
(Table 154.1).
Sexual orientation refers to an individual’s attraction to others
based on sex or gender. It encompasses emotional and erotic desires,
physiologic arousal, sexual behavior, sexual identity, and social
role. As sexuality develops, youth can be oriented entirely toward

a particular sex or gender, or more than one, to various degrees on
a continuum. Homosexuality involves orientation toward people
of one’s same sex or gender, and bisexuality involves orientation
toward males and females. Gay is a common term for both males
and females who have same-­sex attractions; lesbian refers to gay
females. Increasing numbers of youth describe themselves as having a nonbinary gender identity (see Chapter 153). Accordingly,
some do not fit binary categories of sexual orientation and use other
terms to describe themselves, such as pansexual (attracted to all
genders). Those unsure of their orientation are curious or questioning. The term young men who have sex with men (YMSM) is
sometimes used in the research literature to denote male youth who
engage in sexual activity with other males, regardless of how they
identify themselves.

PREVALENCE OF HOMOSEXUALITY
AND BISEXUALITY IN YOUTH

Some junior high and high school students self-­identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual (Fig. 154.1). Some who do not identify as GLB report
same-­sex attraction, fantasies, or behavior. Some are unsure of their
sexual orientation. Certainty about sexual orientation tends to increase
through adolescence with sexual experience, although one can be
aware of one’s orientation without having had sexual partners. Those
who fear nonacceptance may try to suppress or deny their orientation.
Consequently, various aspects of an individual’s orientation—attraction, behavior, and identity—may not always be consistent with each
other throughout development. Not all youth with homosexual attraction or experience identify as gay, consistent in part with reluctance
about having or revealing a gay identity and underscoring the differences among attraction, behavior, and identity. A report providing
national estimates of the number of high school students with GLB
identity in 2019 found that 2.5% said they were gay or lesbian, 8.7%
said they were bisexual, and 4.5% reported being unsure of their sexual
orientation (see Fig. 154.1).

Table 154.1  Common Assumptions to Avoid When Caring for Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Queer Patients
ASSUMPTION TYPE

DO NOT ASSUME THAT…

Identity

• Lesbian, gay, or bisexual people are cisgender
• A person has to identify as either male or female
• A person’s gender or sexual orientation is a major aspect of a person’s identity
• Being lesbian, gay, bisexual, or queer is always hard
• LGBQ people cannot adjust to stressors

Sexual orientation

• All patients are heterosexual
• People exploring their sexuality have a need to categorize into established sexual orientations
• Bisexuality is a phase or that bisexual people are confused
• Sexual orientation aligns with sexual behavior

Sexual behavior

• All LGBQ people are sexually active (some are celibate or asexual)
• Gay men do not have sex with women or lesbian women do not have sex with men
• All gay men have multiple partners and engage in high-­risk behavior
• Sexual behavior will remain stable over time
• Lesbians are not at risk of HPV or other STIs
• Bisexual people are promiscuous or are always unfaithful

Relationships and family

• Lesbian women do not want to be pregnant or are not at risk of pregnancy
• Interpersonal violence does not occur in LGBQ couples
• LGBQ patients do not have children or do not wish to have children
• All adults of reproductive age have an interest in parenting
• LGBQ people do not have strong family ties
• LGBQ patients have ties to their families of origin

Anatomy

• Queer people all want to change their bodies with surgeries or hormones
• Anything about the body of an LGBQ patient

HPV, Human papillomavirus; STI, sexually transmitted illness.
Adapted from Makadon HJ, Mayer KH, Potter J, Goldhammer H. The Fenway Guide to Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Health, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: American College of
Physicians, 2015; and Suarez Lupez E, Siegel J, Streed Jr C. The annual examination for lesbian, gay, and bisexual patients. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:191–212, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 154 u Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Adolescents

Heterosexual/straight
Gay/lesbian
Bisexual
Not sure
YRBS 2019 - students were restricted to these choices

Fig. 154.1 Sexual identities among high school students. YRBS; Youth

Risk Behavior Study. (From HHS Youth Risk Behavior Survey from 2019:
US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. (2020, Aug 21). Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance -- United States, 2019. MMWR Supplement, 69(1) https://www.
cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/yrbs/pdf/2019/su6901-H.pdf.)

DEVELOPMENT OF SEXUAL ORIENTATION IN
CHILDHOOD AND ADOLESCENCE

Sexual orientation development appears to begin prenatally and
continue through childhood and adolescence and into adulthood.
Both gender role behavior in childhood and sexual orientation in
puberty and adolescence are partly influenced by prenatal genetic
and neuroendocrine factors. Sociocultural and psychologic factors
also influence sexual development. A gay or lesbian sexual orientation is sometimes preceded developmentally in childhood by
nonconforming gender expression or variation from population
averages in expression of gender-­related behavior such as activities, interests, styles, and other attributes recognized as masculine
or feminine, like toy preferences and preference for playmates of
a particular gender. Childhood gender nonconformity is significantly associated with nonheterosexual orientation, especially in
males. However, it is not experienced by all gay or lesbian people,
and not all children with nonconforming gender role behavior
are gay or lesbian. When present, however, nonconformity causes
many gay people to feel different from peers during childhood, even
before sexual desire or identity emerges. Depending on the setting,
gender-­nonconforming children may experience ostracism, bullying, or family nonacceptance. These reactions to gender nonconformity can lead to later difficulty with gender-­related self-­esteem and
long-­term mental health problems.
Less frequently, gay or lesbian sexual orientation in adolescence
is preceded by childhood gender variant identity, a phenomenon
in which the gender identity of an individual at any age differs from
phenotypic sex and assigned sex at birth (see Chapter 153).

STIGMA, RISK, AND RESILIENCE

People experiencing same-­sex attraction and behavior exist in all societies. The meaning, acceptance, and legality of non-­heterosexual attraction vary greatly with cultural, historical, and social contexts. Although
gay people are more visible and accepted in some societies, youth are
often exposed to antigay attitudes. For many GLB youth, revealing their
sexual orientation (coming out) to family, peers, healthcare providers,
and others is a significant step. Specific racial, ethnic, religious, and other
demographic groups may experience distinct developmental stressors.
A comprehensive understanding of a youth’s sexual development and
health must consider intersecting sociodemographic factors influencing
a youth’s experience of a nonheterosexual orientation. For example, race,
ethnicity, and religious affiliation—and the reactions of others to one’s
demographic characteristics—can influence comfort disclosing an GLB
identity, involvement in GLB socialization, access to religious affirmation, and processes of coming out.

1183

Some GLB youth experience difficulty coping with stigma. A
longitudinal study that investigated bullying and victimization
among youth from 5th through 10th grade found that the females
and males who identified as GLB in 10th grade were more likely
than their peers to report that they had been bullied and victimized across grades. GLB youth may be perceived by others as different before they themselves have any GLB attraction or experience
or identify as GLB. Even when not overtly threatened, GLB youth
frequently encounter negative attitudes that force them to hide
at a time when family and peer acceptance holds great developmental significance. Family nonacceptance, feeling unsafe due to
school harassment, and peer bullying related to sexual orientation
elevate risk in GLB adolescents for depression, anxiety, substance
abuse, suicidal thoughts and attempts, and social problems such
as truancy, dropping out, running away, and homelessness. Mental
health problems, sexual risk-­taking, or substance use may increase
exposure to HIV and other STIs. Stigma may also impede access to
healthcare in some communities.
Nevertheless, most GLB youth are resilient, with good physical
and mental health despite possible pervasive stresses. Family connectedness and school support and safety are important protective
factors against depression, suicidal thoughts and attempts, and
substance abuse. GLB antiharassment policies and organizations
such as genders and sexualities alliances (also sometimes called
gay-­straight alliances) and antibullying programs are associated
with increased school safety for GLB youth. It is therefore important to reduce stigma, support acceptance, and promote resilient
coping.

HEALTH
Depression and Suicidality

Compared to their heterosexual peers, GLB youth and those who
are not sure of their sexual orientation have a higher prevalence of
suicidality. Family rejection, bullying, and other victimization motivated by homophobia account statistically for increased depression
and suicidal thoughts and attempts in GLB adolescents. Suicidal
thoughts or attempts are highest during the interval after recognition
of same-­sex attraction or a same-­sex sexual experience but before
self-­acceptance as gay.

Sexually Transmitted Infections

The epidemiology of STIs, related to specific sexual practices and prevalence of certain STIs in GLB communities, informs recommended counseling, screening, and treatment strategies (Table 154.2). Anal intercourse
has been shown to be the most efficient route of infection by hepatitis B (see
Chapter 406), cytomegalovirus (see Chapter 302), and HIV (see Chapter
322). Oral-­anal and digital-­anal contact can transmit enteric pathogens,
such as hepatitis A. Unprotected oral sex also can lead to oropharyngeal
disease in the receptive partner and gonococcal and nongonococcal urethritis in the insertive partner. Certain STIs, particularly ulcerative diseases, such as syphilis and herpes simplex virus infection, facilitate spread
of HIV. YMSM are also at risk for infections with Shigella spp. and Mpox
(see Chapter 163).
Among U.S. adolescents and young adults, YMSM, and especially Black
YMSM, continue to face the greatest prevalence of HIV/AIDS. Although
possible, female-­to-­female sexual transmission of HIV is inefficient, and
females who only engage in sex with females are less likely than other youth
to acquire an STI. However, males and females who identify as gay or lesbian may engage in sexual activity with partners who are not of the same
gender; counseling and screening for all types of STIs are still relevant.

Substance Abuse

Compared with their heterosexual peers, GLB youth appear to use
alcohol and other substances at higher rates, including more binge
drinking and earlier onset and more rapid trajectory of substance use.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1184 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
More substantial substance use may be greatest in youth who, although
they do not identify as GLB, have attraction to or engage in sexual
behavior with others of their gender.

Obesity and Disordered Eating

Compared with heterosexual females, lesbian and bisexual females are
generally more likely to be obese or overweight. In contrast, young
gay and bisexual males are more likely to have body image concerns
and to restrict eating or engage in compensatory weight loss strategies

compared to heterosexual boys. Binge eating may also be more common
in GLB youth.

Psychosocial Problems

Academic underachievement, truancy, and dropping out of school are
frequently associated in GLB adolescents with homophobic victimization, harassment, violence, and feeling unsafe at school. Studies suggest
that youth who eventually identify as GLB have higher rates than other
youth of experiencing child abuse and of running away or being kicked

Table 154.2  The 6 Ps of a Complete Sexual History
P

OBJECTIVES

QUESTIONS

Partners

• Determine the number and gender/sex of partners
• Determine partner risk factors (other partners, drug
use)

“Are you currently sexually active?”
“Have you ever been sexually active?”
“When you have sex, what is the gender of your partners? What
anatomy is used for sex?”
“How do you describe your sexual orientation?”
“How many partners have you had in the past 6 (or 12) months?”
“Has anyone ever forced themselves on you sexually or touched
you sexually in an unwanted way?”*
Remember to ask about opposite-­sex partners

Practices

• If a patient has had more than one partner in the
past 12 mo (or has a partner who has other sex
partners)
• Explore their sexual practices and behaviors,
because they will guide assessment of risk and
determination of testing

“What types of sex are you having?”
“When having sex, do you have vaginal, anal, and/or oral sex?”
“If you have anal sex, do you have insertive sex, receptive sex, or
both?” In colloquial words, “Are you a top, a bottom, or vers?”
“Do you have any alternative sexual practices?” (i.e., kinks,
BDSM, fisting)
“Do you use alcohol or drugs during sex?”
“Have you ever exchanged sex for money, drugs, food, or
shelter?”
“Do you use lubricants during sex? What kind?”
“Do you use sex toys? How often? Do you share them? Do you
clean them?”
Put bluntly, questions should aim to answer who is putting what,
where, when, and how

Protection from STI

• If a patient has had more than one partner in the
past 12 mo (or has a partner who has other sex
partners)†
• Based on patient risk profile, ask these questions
accordingly
• Explore the patient’s use of barrier methods
• Explore the patient’s use of PrEP

“How do you keep yourself safe during sex”
“Do you use condoms/dental dams when having vaginal, anal,
and/or oral sex? How often? All the time? Most of the time?
About half of the time? Rarely?”
If no, “Why not?”
“Do you and your partners use any other protection against
STI?”
“Do you or your partner use PrEP? “Are you interested in
starting PrEP?”

Past history of STI

• Explore patient STI history as a risk factor for future
STI

“Have you ever been tested for HIV or other STIs?”
“Have you ever been diagnosed with an STI?”
If yes, “When were you diagnosed? How were you treated?”
“Would you like to be tested? And which parts of your body
should we check?”
“Has your current or any former partners ever been diagnosed
with an STI?” If yes, “Have you been tested for the same STI?”

Pleasure/pain

• Recognize the importance of pleasure in sexual
intimacy and well-­being

“Are you satisfied with your sexual life?”
“Do you have any pain with sex?”
“Do you have any problems with erection, lubrication,
ejaculation, or orgasm?”

Prevention/planning
of pregnancy

• Evaluate desire for/risk of pregnancy

“Are you concerned about getting pregnant or getting your
partner pregnant?”
“Are you using contraception or practicing any form of birth
control?”
“Do you need any information on birth control?”

*For more information, please see, “Sexual Health and the LGBTQ+ Community,” by Taylor NM, King CK.. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:271-­282.
†For patients who report one or fewer partners in the last 12 mo, ask whether they have any concerns about STI.
BDSM, Bondage and discipline, dominance and submission, sadism and masochism; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; PrEP, preexposure prophylaxis.
From Suarez S, Lupez E, Siegel J, Streed Jr C. The annual examination for lesbian, gay, and bisexual patients. Prim Care Clin Office Pract. 2021;48:191–212, Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 154 u Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Adolescents
out of their homes. GLB young people are overrepresented among
homeless and runaway populations across the United States, which can
expose them to drugs, sexual abuse, and other health risks.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CARE
Evaluation

The goal of GLB pediatric care is physical health, social and emotional well-­being, and healthy development. Physicians should provide nonjudgmental care to all adolescents, including those who are
GLB or questioning (see Chapter 153, Table 153.1, and Table 154.1).
They should receive the age-­appropriate history, examination, and
anticipatory guidance recommended for adolescents in general.
The physical examination and laboratory evaluation of GLB and
questioning adolescents are the same as for any teenager. However,
providers should appropriately screen for special potential medical
and psychosocial threats to GLB teenagers’ health.
A nonjudgmental healthcare environment is important, with
open communication and a positive relationship with youth and
families. In the waiting room, written material about sexual orientation, support groups, and community resources will signal openness to discussing sexuality. Registration forms recognizing the
possibility of same-­gender parents signal a safe setting (e.g., forms
can list parent/guardian #1, parent/guardian #2). Sexual history
questions should avoid heterosexual assumptions (e.g., ask “Are you
dating someone?” vs “Do you have a boyfriend/girlfriend?”). This
is important at all ages. For example, asking a 6-­year-­old male if he
has a girlfriend may convey an unsupportive message if he discovers
later that he would like a boyfriend. Explaining confidentiality and
incorporating into each adolescent visit private time with no parent
in the room (see Chapter 137) may facilitate discussing sexual orientation, as may use of appropriate health history forms such as the
American Medical Association’s Guidelines for Adolescent Prevention Services Questionnaire.
Clinicians should remember that any youth might be GLB whether
or not they are identified or perceived as such, so clinicians should not
presuppose a particular orientation (see Table 154.1). Competency in
conveying sensitivity, acceptance, and respectfulness; effective communication skills; and appropriate attention to privacy and confidentiality (including practices related to billing and record requests) are
fundamental to providing high-­quality care. While remaining attuned
to youth’s preferences, explicit or implied, for discussing sexual orientation, providers can tactfully take the lead, if necessary, regarding any
pressing areas of clinical concern.

Medical and Sexual Health

STIs are covered in Chapter 163, but issues specific to GLB youth
are included here. Use of latex condoms for fellatio, and dental dams
and cut-­open latex condoms for anilingus and cunnilingus, should
be discussed with adolescents. Recommendations also include use
of latex condoms for sexual appliances. In addition, it is important to
emphasize that people who have been using alcohol or other drugs
are at increased likelihood for engaging in riskier sexual activity. It
is important not to assume that a gay male or female who does not
identify as bisexual has not had sex with someone of a different sex
or gender; lesbians can still have an unplanned pregnancy. Therefore prevention counseling about unintended pregnancy is relevant

1185

to all adolescents. Similarly, youth who identify as heterosexual
and whose attractions are not to those of the same sex or gender
may still have sexual activity with a partner of the same sex or
gender.
Although vaccination against hepatitis A and B is recommended
for all children, it is particularly recommended that nonvaccinated
adolescent males who are having (or are likely to have) sex with
males receive catch-­up vaccines. The same recommendation applies
to the human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine for males. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that males
who are engaging in sexual activity with males have annual testing for HIV, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, syphilis, urethral gonorrhea,
and chlamydia (if engaging in insertive oral or anal intercourse),
oral gonorrhea (if engaging in receptive oral intercourse), and rectal gonorrhea and chlamydia (if engaging in receptive anal intercourse). The CDC also recommends HIV pre-­exposure prophylaxis
(PrEP) for adolescents who are engaging in or plan to engage in
sexual behavior placing them at “substantial ongoing risk of HIV
exposure and acquisition.”

Mental Health

Awareness of mental health and social problems is important when caring for GLB youth, as for all youth. Clinicians should monitor for depression, suicidality, anxiety, and substance abuse and know their community’s
mental health resources. Minor psychosocial problems might be handled
by referral to a support group for patients (e.g., a school gay-­straight or
genders-­sexualities alliance, other community support group) or for parents and others (e.g., Parents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays).
In some communities, agencies and organizations serving the GLB community can help with social, educational, vocational, housing, and other
needs.
Individuals or families who harbor negative attitudes may inquire
about mental health treatment to avert or change a gay or bisexual
orientation (conversion therapy). However, a GLB orientation is not
an illness, and all leading health organizations have concluded that
such change is neither possible nor warranted. Conversion therapy
is illegal in 18 states; 22 states have no law or policy.
It is important to distinguish between a GLB orientation, which is not
a mental illness, and mental health problems (e.g., depression) for which
GLB youth are at elevated risk. While understanding different families’ values, clinicians must recognize the morbidity and mortality associated with
stigma and attempt to foster physical and emotional health. Individual or
family therapy might be indicated.
Clinicians should also monitor for specific stressors, such as bullying
and other homophobic victimization, family nonacceptance, and abuse.
Failure to confront harassment constitutes tacit assent. Anticipatory guidance, referral, and substance abuse treatment should be considered for the
subset of GLB youth who use alcohol, drugs, or tobacco, some of whom
may be using these to manage painful feelings related to conflicts over their
sexuality.
Adolescents with serious psychiatric symptoms, such as suicidality,
depression, and substance abuse, should be referred to mental health specialists with competency in treating GLB adolescents (see Chapter 40).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1186 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

Chapter 155

The Epidemiology of
Adolescent Health
Problems
Samantha V. Hill and Tamera Coyne-­Beasley
Adolescence is the first period of life where the major determinants of
morbidity and mortality are behavioral rather than congenital or infectious. As adolescents make the transition from childhood to adulthood, they establish behaviors that affect both their current and future
health. Adolescence is a time of immense biologic, psychologic, and
social change (see Chapter 150). Many of the psychologic changes have
a biologic substrate in the development and eventual maturation of the
central nervous system, particularly the frontal lobe areas responsible
for executive functioning (Fig. 155.1). In addition to cognitive development, there are both risk and protective factors for adverse adolescent
health behaviors that are dependent on the social environment and the
mental health of an adolescent (Table 155.1).
Many adolescents continually confront the task of making healthy
choices while struggling with impulsivity that can lead to unintentional consequences, such as injuries, sexually transmitted infections
(STIs), or drug overdoses. Adolescents are also challenged with adopting behaviors that will affect their future adult health, such as eating
nutritiously; engaging in physical activity; and choosing not to use
tobacco (including vapes and e-­cigarettes), alcohol, cannabis, or illicit
substances. Environmental factors and social determinants of health in
and among an individual’s family, peers, school, and community also
contribute to adolescents’ health and risk behaviors. The U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance Survey, a school-­based survey of a nationally representative
sample of U.S. high school students, demonstrates that youth begin
engaging in behaviors that place their health at risk during adolescence
(Fig. 155.2).
Although according to the 2018 CDC National Health Interview
Survey (https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/shs/tables.htm), a probability sample survey conducted annually, an estimated 83% of 12-­to
17-­year-­olds report excellent or very good health, 11% reported limitation in usual activities because of one or more chronic conditions, 10%
missed 6-­10 school days in the past year, 6% are uninsured, 5% have
no usual place of healthcare, 10% have asthma, 12% have respiratory

allergies, 10% have a learning disability, 13% have attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder, and 18% take prescription medications routinely. In 2018 the mortality rate among adolescents 15-­19 years of age
was 49 deaths per 100,000 population. Although varying by gender,
the leading causes of death overall among adolescents 15-­19 years of
age are (1) unintentional injuries, (2) suicide, and (3) homicide (Table
155.2).
Within the adolescent population, disparities in health occur. Adolescent health outcomes and behaviors vary among populations that
can be defined by being Black, ethnicity, gender, education, income,
disability, geographic location (e.g., rural or urban), or sexual orientation. Health disparities result from multiple factors affecting social
determinates of health, including poverty, environmental threats,
inadequate access to healthcare, individual and behavioral factors, racism and other systemic biases, and educational and other inequalities
(Table 155.3).

ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE

Adolescents in the United States make fewer visits to physicians for
ambulatory office visits than any other age-­group; school-­age children and adolescents are more likely than younger children to have
unmet health needs and delayed medical care. Adolescents who actually receive preventive care may still not have access to time alone
with their provider to discuss confidential health issues such as
STIs, HIV, or pregnancy prevention. Less than half (22% of 13-­to
14-­year-­­olds and 43% of 15-­to 18-­year-­olds) of adolescents have time
alone with their healthcare provider during a preventive healthcare
visit; sexually experienced teens report sexual health discussions
more often than nonsexually experienced teens, but the frequency is
still low at 81% and 65% for sexually experienced young women and
men, respectively.
The 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) has
improved access to care for young adults 18 to 24 years old. The ACA
permits children to receive benefits from their parents’ health plans
through age 26 years. Although accomplishments have been made in
improving adolescent health, Healthy People provides science-­based,
10-­year national objectives for measuring and improving the health
of all Americans by establishing benchmarks and monitoring progress
over time. The Healthy People 2030 agenda includes 24 adolescent-­
specific objectives with a goal of improving the healthy development,
health, safety, and well-­being of adolescents and young adults over the
next 10 years (Table 155.4). This science-­based initiative is centered
around a framework for public health prevention priorities and actions
to improve the health status of U.S. youth.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 155.1 It has been speculated that the
Early Adolescence
Puberty heightens
emotional arousability,
sensation-seeking,
reward orientation

Middle Adolescence
Period of heightened
vulnerability to risk-taking
and problems in regulation
of affect and behavior

Late Adolescence
Maturation of frontal
lobes facilitates
regulatory
competence

impact of puberty on arousal and motivation
occurs before the maturation of the frontal
lobes is complete. This gap may create a period of heightened vulnerability to problems
in the regulation of affect and behavior, which
might help to explain the increased potential
in adolescence for risk-­
taking, recklessness,
and the onset of emotional and behavioral
problems. (From Steinberg L. Cognitive and
affective development in adolescence. Trends
Cogn Sci. 2005;9:69–74.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 155 u The Epidemiology of Adolescent Health Problems

1187

Table 155.1  Identified Risk and Protective Factors for Adolescent Health Behaviors
BEHAVIOR

RISK FACTORS

PROTECTIVE FACTORS

Smoking

Depression and other mental health problems, alcohol use,
disconnectedness from school or family, difficulty talking
with parents, minority ethnicity, low school achievement,
peer smoking

Family connectedness, perceived healthiness,
higher parental expectations, low prevalence
of smoking in school

Alcohol and drug misuse

Depression and other mental health problems, low self-­
esteem, easy family access to alcohol, working outside
school, difficulty talking with parents, risk factors for transition
from occasional to regular substance misuse (smoking,
availability of substances, peer use, other risk behaviors)

Connectedness with school and family,
religious affiliation

Teenage pregnancy

Deprivation, city residence, low educational expectations,
sexual intercourse, lack of access to sexual health services,
drug and alcohol use

Connectedness with school and family,
religious affiliation

Sexually transmitted infections

Mental health problems, substance misuse, exploration of
sexuality and sexual identity (sexual activity)

Connectedness with school and family,
religious affiliation

Adapted from McIntiosh N, Helms P, Smyth R, eds. Fofar and Arneil’s Textbook of Pediatrics, 6th ed. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2003:1757–1768; and Viner R, Macfarlane A.
Health promotion. BMJ. 2005;330:527–529.

90
9th grade
12th grade

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

t
gh
rw

ve
O

ly

Ph

ys

ic

al

ei

tiv
ac
in

ly
al
xu

Se

e

e
tiv

e

ac

a

ki

an
iju

ar
m

C

ur

re

nt

us

ng

e

in
e

ng
Bi

nt

C

ur

re

dr

D
EN

ed
pt
m

te
At

us
s

ic
su

ea
w

ry
ar
C

id

n
po

e
iv
dr
d
an
k
rin
D

e

0

Fig. 155.2 Selected health behaviors among 9th-and 12th-grade high school students. ENDs, Electronic nicotine delivery systems. (Data from
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: 1991-2021 High school youth risk behavior survey data. http://nccd.cdc.gov/youthonline.)

Table 155.2  Leading Causes of Death Among 15-­to 19-­Year-­Olds by Gender, United States, 2018-2021*
LEADING
CAUSES OF
DEATH

MALE
CAUSE OF DEATH

FEMALE
MORTALITY RATE PER
100,000 POPULATION

CAUSE OF DEATH

MORTALITY RATE PER
100,000 POPULATION

#1

Unintentional injuries

32.4

Accidents (unintentional
injuries)

14.3

#2

Assault (homicide)

21.6

Intentional self-­harm (suicide)

5.2

#3

Intentional self-harm

16.1

Malignant neoplasms

3.6

*Based on data from Heron M. Deaths: leading causes for 2018-­2019, CDC WONDER Online Database 2021. https://wonder.cdc.gov/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1188 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 155.3  Adolescent Health Outcomes by Ethnicity, United States, 2018-­2019
OUTCOME
Deaths*
Births†

WHITE

BLACK

AI/AN

API

HISPANIC

45.4

79.8

62.8

23.4§

29.3

29.2

2.7§

18.2
37.1

11.4

25.8

Obese‡‡

12.5

18.2

7.9

33.3§

Asthma‡

10.1

18.0

17.8

8.2§

12.5

16.3

11.5§

13.8
1080.4

Depressed**

14.0

9.5

Chlamydia*

857.5

4,894.0

2343.1

310.3§

Gonorrhea*

134.5

1506.1

559.9

44.9§

179.8

5.6

12.2§

7.4

HIV*

2.1

34.8

*2019 rates per 100,000 15-­ to 19-­yr-­old population by race/ethnicity.
†2019 rates of births in per 1,000 15-­ to 19-­yr-­old females by race/ethnicity.
‡Percent high school students reporting health outcome in 2018.
**Prevalence of 12-­ to 17-­yr-­olds reporting health outcome in 2017.
‡‡Percent high school students reporting health outcome in 2017.
§Rates of Asian-­only race.
AI/AN, American Indian or Alaska Native; API, Asian or Pacific Islander; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.

Table 155.4

Healthy People 2030 Adolescent Health (AH) Objectives

 

• AH-­01: Increase the proportion of adolescents who had a
preventive healthcare visit in the past year.
• AH-­02: Increase the proportion of adolescents who speak privately
with a provider at a preventive medical visit.
• AH-­03: Increase the proportion of adolescents who have an adult
they can talk to about serious problems.
• AH-­04: Increase the proportion of students participating in the
School Breakfast Program.
• AH-­05: Increase the proportion of 4th-­graders with reading skills at
or above the proficient level.
• AH-­06: Increase the proportion of 4th-­graders with math skills at or
above the proficient level.
• AH-­07: Reduce chronic school absence among early adolescents.
• AH-­08: Increase the proportion of high school students who
graduate in 4 years.
• AH-­09: Reduce the proportion of adolescents and young adults
who are not in school or working.
• AH-­10: Reduce the rate of minors and young adults committing
violent crimes.
• AH-­D01: Increase the proportion of trauma-­informed early
childcare settings and elementary and secondary schools.
• AH-­D02: Increase the proportion of children and adolescents with
symptoms of trauma who get treatment.

• AH-­D03: Reduce the proportion of public schools with a serious
violent incident.
• AH-­R01: Increase the proportion of adolescents who get support for
their transition to adult healthcare.
• AH-­R02: Increase the proportion of adolescents in foster care who
show signs of being ready for adulthood.
• AH-­R03: Increase the proportion of eligible students participating in
the Summer Food Service Program.
• AH-­R04: Increase the proportion of 8th-­graders with reading skills at
or above the proficient level.
• AH-­R0: Increase the proportion of 8th-­graders with math skills at or
above the proficient level.
• AH-­R06: Increase the proportion of schools requiring students to take
at least two health education courses from 6 to 12.
• AH-­R07: Increase the proportion of secondary schools with a start
time of 8:30 am or later.
• AH-­R08: Increase the proportion of secondary schools with a full-­time
registered nurse.
• AH-­R09: Increase the proportion of public schools with a counselor,
social worker, and psychologist.
• AH-­R10: Increase the proportion of students served under the
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act who earn a high school
diploma.
• AH-­R11: Reduce the rate of adolescents and young adult victimization
from violent crimes.

From U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Healthy People 2030, available at: https://health.gov/healthypeople/about/workgroups/adolescent-­health-­workgroup.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 156 u Violent Behavior 1189

Chapter 156

Violent Behavior
Michael N. Levas and
Marlene D. Melzer-­Lange
Violence is recognized by the World Health Organization (WHO) as a
leading worldwide public health problem. The WHO defines violence
as “the intentional use of physical force or power, threatened or actual,
against oneself, another person, or against a group or community that
either results in or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death,
psychologic harm, maldevelopment or deprivation” (see Chapter 15).
Youths may be perpetrators, victims, or observers of violence (or any
combination of the three roles, wherein the roles are unclear), with
varying severity of impact on the individual, family, and larger community. Risk factors for youth violence include poverty, socially disorganized communities, war and other regional conflicts, substance misuse
(in the child or family), behavioral health disorders (attention-­deficit,
hyperactivity, conduct disorder), poor school performance, social isolation, child trafficking, runaway youth, criminal or gang involvement
(child or family), bullying, and low parental involvement.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Deaths per 100,000 people aged 10–24

In 2019 (and 2021), homicide in the United States was the third leading cause of death for 10-­to 24-­year-­olds, totaling 4,965 deaths, which
were largely males (85%) killed by a handgun (79%). The 2019 homicide rate for teens age 12-­17 years was 3.43/100,000 youth, down 63%
from 8.4/100,000 youth in 1993. The WHO reports that other than
the United States, where the youth and young adult homicide rate was
11/100,000, most countries with homicide rates above 10/100,000 are
developing nations or countries with socioeconomic instability. In the
United States the prevalence of behaviors that contribute to violence
has not decreased, as fighting, weapon carrying, and cyberbullying
remain prevalent among youth. Furthermore, the rate of homicide in
youth had been declining since the peak in the 1990s but showed an
increase in 2017 that has continued (Fig. 156.1). Adolescent reports
of physical fighting have decreased from 42% in 1991 to 22% in 2019.
Violence at U.S. schools remains a significant problem, with 8.1% of
students reporting being in a physical fight on school property one or

more times in the preceding 12 months in 2019. The 2019 Youth Risk
Behavior Surveillance System reported 13.1% of youths overall carried
a weapon such as a gun, knife, or club in the last 30 days; 2.8% carried
the weapon to school; and 7.4% reported being threatened or injured
with a type of weapon on school property. Males are more likely than
females to carry a gun or weapon and therefore may need more support and engagement at home and at school. These violence-­related
behaviors at school affect the general students’ perception of safety.
More than 8.7% of students did not go to school on one or more days
in the preceding 30 days because they felt it was unsafe. School-­based
prevention programs initiated at the elementary school level have been
found to decrease violent behaviors in students. Increased surveillance of students is warranted both on and around school property to
improve student safety.
Adolescent relationship abuse (dating violence/reproductive
coercion) occurs between two people in a close relationship and can
be physical (punching, kicking, hitting, shoving), emotional (shaming,
bullying, controlling, stalking), or sexual (forcing a partner to engage
in a sexual act when he or she does not consent to it). Incidents of adolescent relationship abuse are not uncommon, with 22.4% of females
and 15% of males experiencing some type of partner violence between
the ages of 11 and 17 years. It may start with teasing, name calling, or
shaming but often progresses electronically, with frequent calls, texting,
or posting sexual pictures of a partner on social media. Risk factors for
being a victim of adolescent relationship abuse include those who use
alcohol, believe violence is acceptable, have a lack of adult supervision,
or have a peer who is in a violent relationship. Most teens do not report
the behaviors because of fear of retaliation from the partner. Teens who
are victims of adolescent relationship abuse are more likely to experience decreased school performance, have thoughts about suicide, use
drugs and alcohol, develop an eating disorder, experience depression,
and are more likely to be victimized during college and into adulthood.
School-­based prevention programs that address attitudes and behaviors linked with adolescent relationship abuse, such as Safe Dates and
Dating Matters, offer training experiences to change social norms
among teens.

ETIOLOGY

The WHO places youth violence in a model within the context of three
larger types of violence: self-­
inflicted, interpersonal, and collective.
Interpersonal violence is subdivided into violence largely between family members or partners and includes child abuse. Community violence
occurs between individuals who are unrelated. Collective violence
incorporates violence by people who are members of an identified group

12
10
Suicide1,2

8

Homicide3

6
4
2
0

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2015

2017

2019

2021

Fig. 156.1 Suicide and homicide death rates among people aged 10–24, United States, 2001–2021. 1No statistically significant trend from 2001–2007,

then significant increasing trend from 2007–2021 (p < 0.05). 2Rate significantly lower than the rates for homicide from 2001–2009 and significantly
higher from 2011–2019 (p < 0.05). 3No statistically significant trend for homicides from 2001–2006, then significant decreasing trend from 2006–2014,
and a significant increasing trend from 2014–2021 (p < 0.05). The rate in 2021 was not significantly different than the rate in 2020 (p < 0.05). NOTES:
Suicides are identified with International Classification of Diseases, 10th Revision codes U03, X60–X84, and Y87.0, and homicides with codes U01–
U02, X85–Y09, and Y87.1. Access data table at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db471-tables.pdf#1. SOURCE: National Center for
Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, Mortality data file. (From Curtin SC, Garnett MF. Suicide and Homicide Death Rates Among Youth and
Young Adults Aged 10–24: United States, 2001–2021. NCHS Data Brief. 2023 Jun;(471):1–8. Fig 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1190 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
against another group of individuals with social, political, or economic
motivation. The types of violence in this model have behavioral links,
such that child abuse victims are more likely to experience violent and
aggressive interpersonal behavior as adolescents and adults. Overlapping
risk factors for the types of violence include firearm availability, alcohol
use, and socioeconomic inequalities. The benefit to identifying common
risk factors for the types of violence lies in the potential for intervening
with prevention efforts and gaining positive outcomes for more than one
type of violent behavior. The model further acknowledges four categories
that explore the potential nature of violence as involving physical, sexual,
or psychologic force and deprivation.
The social-­
ecologic model of public health focuses on both
population-­level and individual-­level determinants of health and their
respective interventions. On the individual level, there may be two types
of antisocial youth: life course persistent and limited. Life course–limited offenders have no childhood aberrant behaviors and are more likely
to commit status offenses such as vandalism, running away, and other
behaviors symbolic of their struggle for autonomy from parents. Life
course–persistent offenders exhibit aberrant behavior in childhood,
such as problems with temperament, behavioral development, and cognition; as adolescents they participate in more victim-­oriented crimes.
The existence of adverse childhood experiences foretells future health
issues and subsequent violence. This hypothesis proposes that precursors
such as child abuse and neglect, a child witnessing violence, adolescent
sexual and physical abuse, and adolescent exposure to violence and violent assaults predispose youths to outcomes of violent behavior, violent
crime, delinquency, violent assaults, suicide, or premature death. This
public health model also emphasizes the community environment and
resiliency of the individual and family. An additional common paradigm
for high-­risk violence behavior poses a balance of risk and protective factors at the individual, family, and community levels.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The identified risk factors for youth violence include poverty, association with delinquent peers, poor school performance or low education
status, disconnection from adult role models or mentors, prior history
of violence or victimization, poor family functioning, childhood abuse,
substance misuse, and certain mental health disorders. The most common disorders associated with aggressive behavior in adolescents are
intellectual disabilities, learning disabilities, moderately severe language disorders, and mental health disorders such as attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and mood disturbances. In general,
youth with mental health disorders are not violent. However, the link
between severe mental illness and violent behaviors is strongest for
those with coexisting alcohol or substance abuse or dependence.
Inability to master prosocial skills such as the establishment and
maintenance of positive family/peer relations and poor resolution of
conflict may put adolescents at higher risk of physical violence and other
risky behaviors. The single, most protective factor is the existence of one
or more significant adult mentors in the child’s life. Conduct disorder
and oppositional defiant disorder are specific psychiatric diagnoses
whose definitions are associated with violent behavior (Table 156.1).
They occur with other disorders such as ADHD (see Chapter 50) and
increase an adolescent’s vulnerability for juvenile delinquency, substance
use or abuse, sexual promiscuity, adult criminal behavior, incarceration,
and antisocial personality disorder. Other co-­occurring risk factors for
youth violence include use of anabolic steroids, gang tattoos, belief in
one’s premature death (inability to see oneself as surviving to adulthood), preteen alcohol use, and placement in a juvenile detention center.

DIAGNOSIS

The assessment of an adolescent at risk or with a history of violent
behavior or victimization should be a part of the health maintenance
visit of all adolescents. The answers to questions about recent history
of involvement in a physical fight, carrying a weapon, or firearms in
the household, as well as concerns that the adolescent may have about
personal safety, may suggest a problem requiring a more in-­depth
evaluation. The FISTS mnemonic provides guidance for structuring
the assessment (Table 156.2). Another screening tool, Violence Injury

Table 156.1  Oppositional Defiant Disorder and Conduct
Disorder
OPPOSITIONAL DEFIANT
DISORDER
• Often being angry or losing
one’s temper
• Often arguing with adults or
refusing to comply with adults’
rules or requests
• Often resentful or spiteful
• Deliberately annoying others
or becoming annoyed with
others
• Often blaming other people
for one’s own mistakes or
misbehavior

CONDUCT DISORDER
• Breaking serious rules, such
as running away, staying out
at night when told not to, or
skipping school
• Being aggressive in a way that
causes harm, such as bullying,
fighting, or being cruel to
animals
• Lying, stealing, or damaging
other people’s property on
purpose

Courtesy Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Children’s Mental Health, https://
www.cdc.gov/childrensmentalhealth/behavior.html, accessed August 4, 2021.

Table 156.2  FISTS Mnemonic to Assess an Adolescent’s
Risk of Violence
F: Fighting (How many fights were you in last year? What was the
last?)
I: Injuries (Have you ever been injured? Have you ever injured
someone else?)
S: Sex (Has your partner hit you? Have you hit your partner? Have
you ever been forced to have sex?)
T: Threats (Has someone with a weapon threatened you? What
happened? Has anything changed to make you feel safer?)
S: Self-­defense (What do you do if someone tries to pick a fight?
Have you carried a weapon in self-­defense?)
Adapted with permission from the Association of American Medical Colleges. Alpert
EJ, Sege RD, Bradshaw YS. Interpersonal violence and the education of physicians.
Acad Med. 1997;72:S41–S50.

Protection and Risk Screen (VIPRS), has been validated to predict
future violence among youth in the primary care setting (Table 156.3).
The additional factors of physical or sexual abuse, serious problems at
school, poor school performance and attendance, multiple incidents
of trauma, substance use, and symptoms associated with behavioral
disorders are indications for evaluation by a behavioral health professional. In a situation of acute trauma, assault victims are not always
forthcoming about the circumstances of their injuries for fear of retaliation or police involvement. Stabilization of the injury or the gathering
of forensic evidence in sexual assault is the treatment priority; however,
once this is achieved, addressing a more comprehensive set of issues
surrounding the assault is appropriate.

TREATMENT

In the patient with acute injury secondary to violent assault, the treatment plan should follow standard protocols, which include the stabilization of the injury, evaluation and treatment of the injury, evaluation
of the assault circumstance, psychologic evaluation and support, social
service evaluation of the circumstances surrounding the assault, and a
treatment plan on discharge that is designed to protect the adolescent
from subsequent injury episodes, prevent retaliation, and minimize the
development of psychologic disability. Victims and witnesses of violence are at risk for posttraumatic stress disorder and future aggressive
or violent behavior. Using a trauma-­informed care approach enables
providers to help these victims and witnesses so that they can develop
linkages to recovery and resilience. Hospital-­based violence intervention programs have shown success by supporting violently injured
youth and their families in the emergency department, hospital, or
community. Credible messenger and violence interrupter programs
have shown promise in decreasing the cycle of violence and retaliation
in the community after violent events.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 156 u Violent Behavior 1191
Table 156.3  Violence Injury and Perpetration Risk Screen (VIPRS Scale): Percent and Odds of Future Violence Perpetration by
Question Type
PROTECTIVE FACTORS

%

1. Do your parents expect you to do well at
school?
Most of the time
Sometimes
Rarely/never

93
6.1
0.6

2. Are your grades mostly
A/B average
C average
D/F average

77.9
16.6
5.5

ODDS OF ASSOCIATION WITH VIOLENCE PERPETRATION IF
PROTECTIVE FACTOR NOT PRESENT OR (95% CI)
6.1 (1.1-­33.83)

5.8 (1.7-­19.2)

% POSITIVE

ODDS OF ASSOCIATION WITH FUTURE VIOLENCE PERPETRATION IF
RISK FACTOR PRESENT (OR 95% CI)

3. Have you been suspended from school in
the last year?
Yes

17

47 (11.1-­201)

4. How many fights have you been in during
the last year?
0
1-­5

82
18

10.7 (3.2-­35.6)

5. Have you ever smoked marijuana or used
other drugs?
Yes

23

4.6 (1.5-­14.2)

6. Have you or your friends ever been in
trouble with the law?*
Yes
Males
Females

38.2
40.8
36.2

2.1 (0.72-­6.2)
8.6 (1.4-­54.2)
0.85 (0.19-­3.8)

7. Are you or your friends involved with a
gang or tagging crew?
Yes

7.0

4.6 (0.93-­23.0)

8. Do you feel you are hyperactive, or have
you ever been diagnosed with ADHD*
Yes
Males
Females

14.8
15.9
14.0

3.0 (0.88-­10.3)
0.83 (0.08-­8.5)
6.4 (1.3-­30.7)

9. Have you had any friends who have
committed suicide?
Yes

11

3.7 (0.93-­14.4)

10. Have you ever been injured in a fight?
Yes

10

4.3 (1.1-­17.6)

11. When was the last time you hurt someone
else in a fight?
In the past month
Between 1 and 6 mo ago
Between 6 and 12 mo ago
Over 1 yr ago
Never
Positive if ≤12 mo ago

4.3
6.7
3.7
11.6
73.8
14.6

24.6 (4.3-­138.7)

12. When was the last time you watched a
fight?
In the past month
Between 1 and 6 mo ago
Between 6 and 2 mo ago
Over 1 yr ago
Never
Positive if ≤12 mo ago

25
13.4
11.6
22.6
27.4
50

6.1 (1.6-­22)

RISK FACTORS

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1192 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 156.3  Violence Injury and Perpetration Risk Screen (VIPRS Scale): Percent and Odds of Future Violence Perpetration by
Question Type—cont’d
ODDS OF ASSOCIATION WITH FUTURE VIOLENCE PERPETRATION IF
RISK FACTOR PRESENT (OR 95% CI)

RISK FACTORS

% POSITIVE

13. How many times has someone beat you
up in the last 6 mo?
0
1-­6

91.2
9.8

6.2 (1.1-­34.2)

14. How many times has someone asked you
to fight in the last 6 mo?
0
1-­6

75
25

3.6 (1.1-­11.7)

*Questions 6 and 8 display gender differences, because these two questions reveal statistically significant differences between genders.
Modified from Sigel EJ, Hoffenberg A, Hart J, Dodge M. Development and psychometric properties of a violence screening tool for primary care. J Adolesc Health. 2011;48:358–365,
Table 4.

Table 156.4  Preventing Youth Violence (CDC)

Table 156.5  Prevention of Youth Violence (WHO)

STRATEGY

Promising prevention programs include:
• Life skills and social development programs designed to help
children and adolescents manage anger, resolve conflict, and
develop the necessary social skills to solve problems
• Whole-­school approaches to violence prevention in educational
facilities
• Programs that support parents and teach positive parenting skills
• Preschool programs that provide children with academic and
social skills at an early age
• Therapeutic approaches for youths at high risk of being involved
in violence
• Reducing access to alcohol
• Interventions to reduce the harmful use of drugs
• Restrictive firearm licensing
• Community and problem-­oriented policing
• Interventions to reduce concentrated poverty and to upgrade
urban environments

APPROACH

Promote family environments
that support healthy
development

Early childhood home visitation
Parenting skill and family relationship
programs

Provide quality education
early in life

Preschool enrichment with family
engagement

Strengthen youth skills

Universal school-­based programs

Connect youth to caring
adults and activities

Mentoring programs
After-­school programs

Create protective community
environments

Modify the physical and social
environment
Reduce exposure to community-­level
risks
Street outreach and community
norm change

Intervene to lessen harms
and prevent future risk

Treatment to lessen the harms of
violence exposures
Treatment to prevent problem
behavior and further involvement
in violence
Hospital-­community partnerships

From David-­Ferdon, C, Vivolo-­Kantor AM, Dahlberg LL, et al. A Comprehensive
Technical Package for the Prevention of Youth Violence and Associated Risk Behaviors.
Atlanta, GA: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention; 2016.

Multiple treatment modalities are used simultaneously in managing
adolescents with persistent violent and aggressive behavior and range
from cognitive-­behavioral therapy involving the individual and family
to specific family interventions (parent management training, multisystemic treatment) and pharmacotherapy. Treatment of comorbid
conditions, such as ADHD, depression, anxiety, and substance abuse,
appears to reduce aggressive behavior.

PREVENTION

The WHO recognizes a multifactorial approach to prevention: parenting and early childhood development strategies, school-­based academic
and social skills development strategies, strategies for young people at
higher risk of or already involved in violence, and community-­and
society-­level strategies (Tables 156.4 and 156.5). Parenting and early
childhood development approaches concentrate on working with
families to provide nonviolent parenting through home visitation and
parent groups as well as teaching coping strategies and nonviolent
conflict resolution for all children and families. School-­based social
skills development strategies focus on students’ families and peer

Preventing youth violence requires a comprehensive approach that addresses the social
determinants of violence, such as income inequality, rapid demographic and social
change, and low levels of social protection.
Courtesy World Health Organization: Youth Violence. https://www.who.int/news-­
room/fact-­sheets/detail/youth-­violence, accessed August 11, 2022.

relationships, especially those with the potential to trigger aggressive
or violent responses. Solutions include improving coping or problem-­
solving skills, anti-bullying campaigns, peer mediation, adolescent
relationship abuse prevention, and after-­school programs. Strategies for young people at higher risk of, or already involved in, violence include therapeutic behavioral health approaches, crime victim
services, vocational training, mentoring, and gang intervention. These
youth are at highest risk for repeat injury or incarceration. Community-­
and societal-­level approaches include broader advocacy and legislative
actions and changing the cultural norm toward violent behaviors.
A specific prevention strategy can incorporate several approaches, such
as the handgun/firearm prevention recommendations that include gun-­
lock safety, public education, and legislative advocacy. Other efforts are
directed toward establishing a national database to track and define the
problem of youth violence. The National Violent Death Reporting System collects and analyzes violent death data from all 50 states, the District
of Columbia, and Puerto Rico and aims to improve surveillance of current
trends, to share information state to state, to build partnerships among
state and community organizations, and to develop and implement prevention and intervention programs. The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention characterizes specific successful prevention programs, including Striving to Reduce Youth Violence Everywhere (STRYVE), and summarizes program content on its website (www.cdc.gov).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Substance Use Disorder
Cora Collette Breuner
Many adolescents engage in the use of a wide range of substances,
including alcohol, tobacco products, natural marijuana and synthetic
cannabinoids, opiates, psychoactive agents (amphetamine, cocaine,
MDMA, 3,4-­
methylenedioxymethamphetamine), hallucinogens,
inhaled products (glue, organic solvents, nitrous oxide), and stimulants. Their reactions to and the consequences of these exposures are
influenced by a complex interaction among biologic and psychosocial
development, environmental messages, legality, and societal attitudes.
The potential for adverse outcome with occasional use, such as motor
vehicle crashes, violence, and other injuries, is sufficient justification to
consider any substance use in adolescents a considerable risk.
Individuals who initiate substance use at an early age are at a greater
risk for developing a substance use disorder than those who begin
using substances in early adulthood. Substance use disorder is diagnosed when the recurrent use of the substance causes clinically significant impairment, including health problems, disability, and failure
to meet major responsibilities at work, school, or home. Substance
use in younger adolescents may act as a substitute for developing
age-­appropriate coping strategies and enhance vulnerability to poor
decision-­making. Most (88%) people report that their age of first alcohol use was <21 years old, the legal drinking age in the United States.
Inhalants have been identified as a popular first substance for youth in
eighth grade (age 13-­14 years).
Substance use disorder is a pervasive phenomenon and infiltrates
every socioeconomic and cultural segment of the population. It is one
of the costliest and most challenging public health problems facing all
societies and cultures. The challenge to the clinician is to identify youth at
risk for substance use disorder and offer early intervention. The challenge
to the community and society is to create norms that decrease the likelihood of adverse health outcomes for adolescents and promote and facilitate opportunities for adolescents to choose healthier and safer options.
Recognizing those substances with the greatest harm, and at times focusing on harm reduction with or without abstinence, is essential in the
approach to the adolescent with substance use disorder (Fig. 157.1).

ETIOLOGY

Substance use disorder has multifactorial origins (Fig. 157.2). Social
determinants of health, including economic stability, education, health
and healthcare, neighborhood environment, and social and community context, all have an impact on adolescents and can lead to
substance use disorder and use. Biologic factors, including genetic predisposition, are established contributors. Behaviors such as ineffective
self-­control, poor school performance, involvement with the juvenile
justice system, and emotional trends such as low self-­esteem are frequently associated with or predate the onset of substance use. Psychiatric disorders often coexist with adolescent substance use. Conduct
disorders and antisocial personality disorders are the most common
diagnoses coexisting with substance use, particularly in males. Teens
with depression (see Chapter 39.1), attention-­deficit disorder (Chapter
50), anxiety (Chapter 38), and eating disorders (Chapter 41) have high
rates of substance use. The determinants of adolescent substance use
disorder and substance use are explained using numerous theoretical
models and include factors at the individual level, the level of significant relationships with others, and the level of the setting or environment. These models include a balance of risk and protective or coping
factors contributing to individual differences among adolescents with
similar risk factors who escape adverse outcomes.
Risk factors for adolescent substance use disorder may differ from
those associated with adolescent substance use. Adolescent substance

3.0

1193

Class
A
B
C
No class

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Opiates*
Cocaine
Barbiturates
Street methadone
Alcohol
Ketamine
Benzodiazepines
Amphetamine
Tobacco
Buprenorphine
Cannabis
Solvents
4-MTA
LSD
Methylphenidate
Anabolic steroids
GHB
Ecstasy
Alkylnitrates
Khat

Chapter 157

Mean score (from independent experts)

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder

Fig. 157.1 Mean harm scores for 20 substances as determined by an
expert panel based on three criteria: physical harm to user, potential for
dependence, and effect on family, community, and society. Classification under the Misuse of Substances Act, when appropriate, is shown
by the color of each bar. Class A substances are deemed potentially
most dangerous; class C least dangerous. *Heroin, fentanyl, fentanyl
derivatives. (From Nutt D, King LA, Saulsbury W, et al. Development of
a rational scale to access the harm of substances of potential misuse.
Lancet 2007;369:1047–1053.)

Distal factors
addressed by developmental,
treatment, and harm-reduction
interventions
Neurobiologic damage,
social and developmental
problems

Early onset of
substance use,
deficits in early
development

High
availability
of substances

Optimal neurobiologic
development and
attachments

Levels of problems
with mental health, crime,
antisocial behavior

Level of harm from
substance abuse

Risky patterns of substance
use (including combined use),
risky settings

Delayed onset
of substance
use, increased
intelligence

Reduced
availability
of substances

Low-risk use patterns
(including abstinence)
and settings

Proximal factors
addressed by regulatory,
brief, treatment, and harmreduction interventions

Fig. 157.2 Protection and risk model for distal and proximal determinants of risky substance use disorder and related harms. (From Toumbourou JW, Stockwell T, Neighbors C, et al. Interventions to reduce harm
associated with adolescent substance use. Lancet 2007;369:1391–1571.)

use is more commonly related to social and peer factors, whereas use
disorder is more often a function of psychologic and biologic factors.
The likelihood that an otherwise normal adolescent would experiment
with substances may depend on the availability of the substance to the
adolescent, the perceived positive or otherwise functional value to the
adolescent, the perceived risk associated with use, and the presence
or absence of restraints, as determined by the adolescent’s cultural or
other important value systems.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1194 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Specific historical questions can assist in determining the severity
of the substance problem through a rating system (Table 157.1). The
type of substance used (marijuana vs cocaine), the circumstances of
use (alone or in a group setting), the frequency and timing of use (daily
before school vs occasionally on a weekend), current mental health
status, and general functional status, including sleep habits and screen
use, should all be considered in evaluating any adolescent found to be
using a substance. The stage of substance use should also be considered (Table 157.2). A teen may spend months or years in the experimentation phase trying a variety of illicit substances, including the
most common substances: alcohol, tobacco products, and marijuana.
Often it is not until regular use of substances results in negative consequences (problem use) that the adolescent is identified as having a
problem, either by parents, friends, teachers, or a healthcare provider.
Having emotionally supportive parents with open communication
styles, involvement in organized school activities, having mentors or
role models outside the home, and recognition of the importance of
academic achievement are examples of important protective factors
against developing problematic use.

of recreational or medical marijuana. The magnitude of the increase
was greater in states with legal medical or recreational marijuana. Synthetic cannabinoids have significant psychotropic effects and addictive
potential. Severe neuropsychiatric toxicity is often different from and
more severe than marijuana.
The number of 12th graders who report using any of the prescription psychotherapeutic substances, including amphetamines, sedatives (barbiturates), tranquilizers, and narcotics other than heroin,
decreased in 2019. Prevalence was 14% for ever used and 7.0% for 30-­
day use, indicating that a substantial portion of adolescents still misuse
prescription substances including opioids. Rural adolescents are also
more likely than urban adolescents to misuse prescription substances.
In a large-­scale study of 16,209 adolescent exposures to prescription
substances, 52.4% were females, and the mean age was 16.6 years. The
five most frequently misused substances were hydrocodone (32%),

EPIDEMIOLOGY

1

Potential for use

2

Experimentation: learning the euphoria

3

Regular use: seeking the euphoria

4

Regular use: preoccupation with the “high”

5

Burnout: use of substances to feel normal

Alcohol, tobacco products, and marijuana are the most commonly
reported substances used among U.S. teens (Table 157.3). The prevalence of substance use and associated risky behaviors vary by age,
gender, race/ethnicity, and other sociodemographic factors. Younger
teenagers tend to report less use of substances than do older teenagers,
except for inhalants (in 2016, 4.4% in 8th grade, 2.8% in 10th grade,
1.0% in 12th grade). In 2019, a total of 50.1% of U.S. high school students had ever used electronic vapor products, and 24.1% had ever
tried cigarette smoking. Current electronic vapor product use was
32.7%, current cigarette smoking was 6.0%, current cigar smoking was
5.7%, and current smokeless tobacco use was 3.8%. Approximately
36.5% of students were current users of any tobacco product, and 8.2%
were current users of two or more tobacco products. Males have higher
rates of substances use than females, with greatest differences seen in
their higher rates of use of tobacco products including vaping, chewing
and cigarettes/cigars, and anabolic steroids.
Fewer students engaged in some high-­risk substance use–related
behaviors from 2009 through 2019. However, approximately one in
seven students are still reporting lifetime use of any illicit drug or misuse of prescription medicine.
Marijuana use has been trending down over the past several years
among adolescents, though there is variation in the extent and rate of
use in different racial/ethnic groups. Use also depends on grade level,
urban vs rural location, class size, and state laws regarding legalization

Table 157.2  Stages of Adolescent Substance Use
STAGE

DESCRIPTION
•
•
•
•

 ecreased impulse control
D
Need for immediate gratification
Available substances, alcohol, inhalants
Need for peer acceptance

• U
 se of inhalants, tobacco, marijuana, and alcohol with
friends
• Few, if any, consequences
• Use may increase to weekends regularly
• Little change in behavior
• U
 se of other substances (e.g., stimulants, LSD,
sedatives)
• Behavioral changes and some consequences
• Increased frequency of use; use disorder alone
• Buying or stealing substances
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

 aily use of substances
D
Loss of control
Multiple consequences and risk taking
Estrangement from family and “straight” friends
 olysubstance use/cross-­addiction
P
Guilt, withdrawal, shame, remorse, depression
Physical and mental deterioration
Increased risk taking, self-­destructive, suicidal

Table 157.1  Assessing the Seriousness of Adolescent Substance Use
VARIABLE

0

+1

Age (yr)

>15

<15

Sex

Male

Female

Family history of substance use

+2

Yes

Setting of substance use

In group

Affect before substance use

Happy

School performance

Good, improving

Recently poor

Use disorder before driving

None

Yes

History of accidents

None

Time of week

Weekend

Time of day
Type of substance

Marijuana, beer, wine

Alone
Always poor

Sad

Yes
Weekdays
After school

Before or during school

Hallucinogens, amphetamines

Whiskey, opiates, cocaine,
barbiturates

Total score: 0-­3, less worrisome; 3-­8, serious; 8-­18, very serious.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 157.3  Trends in Annual Prevalence (%) of Use Disorder of Various Substances for Grades 8, 10, and 12 Combined
PEAK YEAR–2021 CHANGE

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019E 2020 2021

LOW YEAR–2021 CHANGE

2020–2021 ABSOLUTE PROPORTIONAL ABSOLUTE PROPORTIONAL
CHANGE CHANGE
CHANGE (%)a
CHANGE
CHANGE (%)a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Any illicit drugc

24.8

24.9

25.9

27.3

27.6

27.1

28.6‡

27.2

26.8

25.3

26.5

27.1

27.7

27.3

19.9

−7.4 sss

−7.8 sss

−28.1

―

―

Any illicit drug
other than
marijuanac

12.4

11.9

11.6

11.8

11.3

10.8

11.4‡

10.9

10.5

9.7

9.4

9.3

9.0

9.2

5.6

−3.6 sss

−5.3 sss

−48.7

―

―

Any illicit drug
including
inhalantsc

27.6

27.6

28.5

29.7

29.8

29.0

30.5‡

28.5

28.4

26.3

28.3

28.8

29.0

29.2

21.5

−7.8 sss

−7.8 sss

−26.6

―

―

Marijuana/hashish
Synthetic
marijuana

21.4
―

21.5
―

22.9
―

24.5
―

25.0
―

24.7
8.0

25.8
6.4

24.2
4.8

23.7
4.2

22.6
3.1

23.9
2.8

24.3
2.6

25.2
2.9

2
2.2

17.9
1.6

−6.7 sss
−0.6 ss

−12.1 sss
−6.4 sss

−40.3
−80.3

―
―

―
―

Inhalants

6.4

6.4

6.1

6.0

5.0

4.5

3.8

3.6

3.2

2.6

2.9

2.9

2.9

3.4

2.9

−0.5

−7.3 sss

−71.6

+0.2

+0.3

Hallucinogens
LSD
Hallucinogens
other than LSD
Ecstasy (MDMA)d
Salvia

3.8
1.7
3.3

3.8
1.9
3.2

3.5
1.6
3.0

3.8
1.8
3.3

3.7
1.8
3.1

3.2
1.6
2.7

3.1
1.6
2.5

2.8
1.7
2.1

2.8
1.9
1.9

2.8
2.0
1.8

2.7
2.1
1.8

2.7
2.0
1.7

2.9
2.2
1.9

3.4
2.5
2.0

2.4
1.5
1.7

−1.0 s
−0.9 ss
−0.3

−3.6 sss
−4.8 sss
−2.4 sss

−60.4
−75.6
−58.3

―
+0.1
―

―
+0.6
―

3.0
―

2.9
―

3.0
―

3.8
3.5

3.7
3.6

2.5
2.7

2.8‡
2.3

3.4
1.4

2.4
1.2

1.8
1.2

1.7
0.9

1.5
0.8

1.6
0.8

1.3
0.8

0.8
0.5

−0.5 s
−0.3 s

−2.6 sss
−3.1 sss

−76.0
−85.1

―
―

―
―

Cocaine
Crack
Other cocaine

3.4
1.5
2.9

2.9
1.3
2.6

2.5
1.2
2.1

2.2
1.1
1.9

2.0
1.0
1.7

1.9
0.9
1.7

1.8
0.8
1.5

1.6
0.7
1.5

1.7
0.8
1.5

1.4
0.6
1.2

1.6
0.7
1.3

1.5
0.6
1.3

1.4
0.7
1.3

1.4
0.6
1.4

0.7
0.4
0.5

−0.8 ss
−0.2
−0.9 sss

−3.8 sss
−2.0 sss
−3.5 sss

−85.0
−82.6
−86.6

―
―
―

―
―
―

Heroin
With a needle
Without a needle
OxyContin
Vicodin

0.8
0.5
0.7
3.5
6.2

0.8
0.5
0.6
3.4
6.1

0.8
0.5
0.5
3.9
6.5

0.8
0.6
0.6
3.8
5.9

0.7
0.5
0.5
3.4
5.1

0.6
0.4
0.4
2.9
4.3

0.6
0.4
0.4
2.9
3.7

0.5
0.4
0.3
2.4
3.0

0.4
0.3
0.3
2.3
2.5

0.3
0.3
0.2
2.1
1.8

0.3
0.2
0.2
1.9
1.3

0.3
0.2
0.2
1.7
1.1

0.3
0.2
0.2
1.7
1.0

0.2
0.2
0.1
1.4
0.9

0.2
0.1
0.1
0.9
0.6

−0.1
0.0
0.0
−0.5
−0.2

−1.1 sss
−0.6 sss
−1.0 sss
−3.0 sss
−5.9 sss

−85.5
−84.3
−92.7
−77.3
−90.6

―
―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―
―

Amphetaminesc
Ritalin
Adderall
Methamphetamine
Bath salts
(synthetic
stimulants)

6.5
2.8
―
1.4
―

5.8
2.6
―
1.3
―

5.9
2.5
4.3
1.3
―

6.2
2.2
4.5
1.3
―

5.9
2.1
4.1
1.2
―

5.6
1.7
4.4
1.0
0.9

7.0‡
1.7
4.4
1.0
0.9

6.6
1.5
4.1
0.8
0.8

6.2
1.4
4.5
0.6
0.7

5.4
1.1
3.9
0.5
0.8

5.0
0.8
3.5
0.5
0.5

5.0
0.8
3.5
0.5
0.7

4.6
0.9
3.1
0.5
―

4.6
1.0
3.3
0.7
―

2.7
0.5
1.7
0.2
―

−1.9 sss
−0.6
−1.6 sss
−0.5 ss
―

−3.9 sss
−3.7 sss
−2.8 sss
−3.9 sss
―

−59.5
−88.3
−61.3
−96.1
―

―
―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―
―

Tranquilizers

4.5

4.3

4.5

4.4

3.9

3.7

3.3

3.4

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.2

3.1

2.7

1.2

−1.4 sss

−4.3 sss

−77.8

―

―

OTC cough/cold
medicines

5.0

4.7

5.2

4.8

4.4

4.4

4.0

3.2

3.1

3.2

3.0

3.2

2.8

3.7

2.7

−1.1 s

−2.7 sss

−50.3

―

―

Rohypnol

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.8

0.9

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.7

0.5

0.4

0.5

1.0

0.2

−0.7 sss

−0.7 sss

−71.3

―

―

GHBb

0.7

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

Ketamineb

1.0

1.2

1.3

1.2

1.2

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―
Continued

Table 157.3  Trends in Annual Prevalence (%) of Use Disorder of Various Substances for Grades 8, 10, and 12 Combined—cont’d
PEAK YEAR–2021 CHANGE

LOW YEAR–2021 CHANGE

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019E 2020 2021

2020–2021 ABSOLUTE PROPORTIONAL ABSOLUTE PROPORTIONAL
CHANGE CHANGE
CHANGE (%)a
CHANGE
CHANGE (%)a

Alcohol
Been drunk
Flavored
alcoholic
beverages
Alcoholic
beverages
containing
caffeine

50.2
29.7
40.8

48.7
28.1
39.0

48.4
28.7
37.8

47.4
27.1
35.9

45.3
25.9
33.7

44.3
26.4
32.5

42.8
25.4
31.3

40.7
23.6
29.4

39.9
22.5
28.8

36.7
20.7
25.3

36.7
20.4
25.9

36.1
20.0
26.1

35.9
19.5
24.6

38.3
22.1
26.5

30.2
15.5
20.0

−8.1 sss
−6.6 sss
−6.5 sss

−31.1 sss
−21.4 sss
−24.5 sss

−50.7
−57.9
−55.1

―
―
―

―
―
―

―

―

―

―

19.7

18.6

16.6

14.3

13.0

11.2

10.6

10.1

9.2

8.6

7.8

−0.8 sss

−11.9 sss

−60.3

―

―

Any vaping
Vaping nicotine
Vaping marijuana
Vaping just
flavoring

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

―
―
―
―

21.5
13.9
6.8
17.2

28.9
21.6
9.9
21.8

31.9
27.3
15.6
18.6

30.7
27.1
16.3
15.8

22.1
19.2
11.6
10.0

−8.6 sss
−7.9 sss
−4.7 ss
−5.8 sss

−9.9 sss
−8.1 sss
−4.7 ss
−11.8 sss

−30.9
−29.7
−28.9
−54.3

+0.6
+5.3 sss
+4.8 sss
―

+2.6
+37.7
+69.7
―

Juul

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

―

23.8

20.6

9.1

−11.5 sss

−14.7 sss

−61.7

―

―

Dissolvable
tobacco products

―

―

―

―

―

1.4

1.4

1.2

1.1

0.9

0.9

1.0

1.0

0.9

0.7

−0.2

−0.7 s

−48.7

―

―

Snus

―

―

―

―

―

5.6

4.8

4.1

3.8

3.6

2.6

3.0

2.2

2.7

1.6

−1.1 ss

−4.0 sss

−72.0

―

―

Steroids

1.1

1.1

1.0

0.9

0.9

0.9

0.9

0.9

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.9

1.1

0.4

−0.7 sss

−1.6 sss

−79.5

―

―

aThe proportional change is the percent by which the most recent year deviates from the peak year (or the low year) for the drug in question. So, if a drug was at 20% prevalence in the peak year and declined to 10% prevalence in the most recent year, that

would reflect a proportional decline of 50%.
bQuestion was discontinued among 8th and 10th graders in 2012.
cIn 2013, for the questions on the use of amphetamines, the text was changed on two of the questionnaire forms for 8th and 10th graders and four of the questionnaire forms for 12th graders. This change also affected the any illicit drug indices. Data

presented here include only the changed forms beginning in 2013.
dIn 2014, the text was changed on one of the questionnaire forms for 8th, 10th, and 12th graders to include “molly” in the description. The remaining forms were changed in 2015. Data for both versions of the question are presented here.
eDrug prevalence results in 2019 combine results from paper-­and-­pencil surveys with those completed using electronic tablets. In 2019, students in a randomly selected half of schools completed MTF surveys on paper-­and-­pencil and students in the other

half completed the surveys using electronic tablets. Analysis of this randomized controlled trial demonstrated that these results did not significantly differ across survey mode (Miech RA, Couper MP, Heeringa SG, et al. The impact of survey mode on US
national estimates of adolescent drug prevalence: results from a randomized controlled study, Addiction). Results for student attitudes and beliefs in 2019 are based on answers from paper-­and-­pencil surveys only because these appear more susceptible
to survey mode effects.
Notes: – indicates data not available. ‡ indicates a change in the question text. When a question change occurs, peak levels after that change are used to calculate the peak year to current year difference. Values in bold equal peak levels since 1991. Values
in italics equal peak level before wording change. Level of significance of difference between classes: s = 0.05, ss = 0.01, sss = 0.001. Any apparent inconsistency between the change estimate and the prevalence estimates for the two most recent years is
the result of rounding.
Modified from Miech RA, Johnston LD, O’Malley PM, et al. Monitoring the Future National Survey Results on Drug Use, 1975–2021: Volume I, Secondary School Students. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan; 2022.
Available https://monitoringthefuture.org/wp-­content/uploads/2022/12/mtf2022.pdf

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder
amphetamines (18%), oxycodone (15%), methylphenidate (14%),
and tramadol (11%). Many of these substances can be found in the
home of friends; some are over-­the-­counter (OTC) substances (dextromethorphan, pseudoephedrine), whereas others are purchased from
substance dealers at schools and colleges. Adolescents often combine
opioids with marijuana, alcohol, cocaine, and tranquilizers, putting
them at risk for serious complications and overdose.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although manifestations vary by the specific substance of use, adolescents who use substances often present in an office setting with no
obvious physical findings. Substance use disorder is more frequently
detected in adolescents who experience trauma such as motor vehicle crashes, bicycle injuries, or violence. Eliciting appropriate historical information regarding substance use, followed by blood alcohol
and urine substance screens, is recommended in emergency settings.
Although waning in popularity, the illicit substances known as “club
drugs” still need to be considered in the differential diagnosis of a teen
with an altered sensorium. An adolescent presenting to an emergency
setting with an impaired sensorium should be evaluated for substance
use as a part of the differential diagnosis (Table 157.4). Screening
for substance use is recommended for patients with psychiatric and
behavioral diagnoses. Other clinical manifestations of substance use
are associated with the route of use; intravenous substance use is associated with venous “tracks” and needle marks, and nasal mucosal injuries are associated with nasal insufflation of substances. Seizures can
be a direct effect of substances such as cocaine, synthetic marijuana,
and amphetamines or an effect of substance withdrawal in the case of
barbiturates or tranquilizers.

1197

SCREENING FOR SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS

In a primary care setting the annual health maintenance examination
provides an opportunity for identifying adolescents with substance
use disorder. The direct questions and the assessment of school performance, family relationships, and peer activities may necessitate a
more in-­depth interview if there are suggestions of difficulties in those
areas. Several self-­report screening questionnaires also are available,
with varying degrees of standardization, length, and reliability. The
CRAFFT mnemonic is specifically designed to screen for adolescents’
substance use in the primary care setting (Table 157.5). Privacy and
confidentiality must be established when asking the teen about specifics of their substance experimentation or use. Interviewing the parents can provide additional perspective on early warning signs that
go unnoticed or disregarded by the teen. Examples of early warning
signs of teen substance use disorder are change in mood, appetite, or
sleep pattern; decreased interest in school or school performance; loss
of weight; secretive behavior about social plans; or valuables such as
money or jewelry missing from the home. The use of urine substance
screening is recommended when select circumstances are present: (1)
psychiatric symptoms to rule out comorbidity or dual diagnoses, (2)
significant changes in school performance or other daily behaviors,
(3) frequently occurring accidents, (4) frequently occurring episodes
of respiratory problems, (5) evaluation of serious motor vehicular or
other injuries, and (6) as a monitoring procedure for a recovery program. Most initial screening uses an immunoassay method, such as the
enzyme-­multiplied immunoassay technique, followed by a confirmatory test using highly sensitive, highly specific gas chromatography–
mass spectrometry. The substances that can cause false-­positive results
should be considered, especially when there is a discrepancy between

Table 157.4  Most Common Toxic Syndromes
ANTICHOLINERGIC SYNDROMES
Common signs
Common causes

Delirium with mumbling speech, tachycardia, dry, flushed skin, dilated pupils, myoclonus, slightly elevated temperature,
urinary retention, and decreased bowel sounds. Seizures and dysrhythmias may occur in severe cases.
Antihistamines, antiparkinsonian medication, atropine, scopolamine, amantadine, antipsychotic agents, antidepressant
agents, antispasmodic agents, mydriatic agents, skeletal muscle relaxants, and many plants (notably jimsonweed and
Amanita muscaria).

SYMPATHOMIMETIC SYNDROMES
Common signs
Delusions, paranoia, tachycardia (or bradycardia if the substance is a pure α-­adrenergic agonist), hypertension, hyperpyrexia,
diaphoresis, piloerection, mydriasis, and hyperreflexia. Seizures, hypotension, and dysrhythmias may occur in severe cases.
Common causes
Cocaine, amphetamine, methamphetamine (and its derivatives 3,4-­methylenedioxyamphetamine, 3,4-­methylenedioxymetha
mphetamine, 3,4-­methylenedioxyethamphetamine, and 2,5-­dimethoxy-­4-­bromoamphetamine), some synthetic marijuana,
and OTC decongestants (phenylpropanolamine, ephedrine, and pseudoephedrine). In caffeine and theophylline
overdoses, similar findings, except for the organic psychiatric signs, result from catecholamine release.
OPIATE, SEDATIVE, OR ETHANOL INTOXICATION
Common signs
Coma, respiratory depression, miosis, hypotension, bradycardia, hypothermia, pulmonary edema, decreased bowel sounds,
hyporeflexia, and needle marks. Seizures may occur after overdoses of some narcotics, notably propoxyphene.
Common causes
Narcotics, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, ethchlorvynol, glutethimide, methyprylon, methaqualone, meprobamate, ethanol,
clonidine, and guanabenz.
CHOLINERGIC SYNDROMES
Common signs
Confusion, central nervous system depression, weakness, salivation, lacrimation, urinary and fecal incontinence,
gastrointestinal cramping, emesis, diaphoresis, muscle fasciculations, pulmonary edema, miosis, bradycardia or
tachycardia, and seizures.
Common causes
Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides, physostigmine, edrophonium, and some mushrooms.
From Kulig K. Initial management of ingestions of toxic substances. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1677–1681.

Table 157.5  CRAFFT Mnemonic Tool
• Have you ever ridden in a Car driven by someone (including yourself)
who was high or had been using alcohol or substances?
• Do you ever use alcohol or substances to Relax, feel better about
yourself, or fit in?
• Do you ever use alcohol or substances while you are by yourself
(Alone)?

• Do you ever Forget things you did while using alcohol or substances?
• Do your Family or Friends ever tell you that you should cut down
on your drinking or substance use?
• Have you ever gotten into Trouble while you were using alcohol or
substances?

From the Center for Adolescent Substance Use Research (CeASAR). The CRAFFT Screening Interview. (Copyright John R. Knight, MD, Boston Children’s Hospital, 2015.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1198 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
the physical findings and the urine substance screen result. Current
guidelines strongly discourage routine home-­based or school-­based
testing.

RISK FACTORS

DIAGNOSIS

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-­5) no
longer identifies substance use disorder as those of abuse or of dependence. A substance use disorder is defined by a cluster of cognitive,
behavioral, and physiologic symptoms that indicate that an adolescent
is using a substance even though there is evidence that the substance
is harming the adolescent. Even after detoxification, a substance use
disorder may leave persistent changes in brain circuits with resulting
behavioral changes. There are 11 criteria that describe a pathologic
pattern of behaviors related to use of the substance, falling into four
categories: impaired control, social impairment, increased risk, and
pharmacologic criteria. The first category, impaired control, describes
an individual taking increasing amounts of the substance who
expresses a persistent desire to decrease use, with unsuccessful efforts.
The individual may spend a great deal of time obtaining the substance,
using the substance, or recovering from its effects and expresses an
intense desire for the substance, usually in settings where the substance
had been available, such as a specific type of social situation. The second cluster of criteria (5-­7) reflects social impairment, including the
inability to perform as expected in school, at home, or at a job; increasing social problems; and withdrawing from the family. The third cluster
addresses increased risk associated with use of the substance, and the
fourth cluster addresses pharmacologic responses (tolerance and/or
withdrawal). The total number of criteria present is associated with a
determination of a mild, moderate, or severe disorder.
These criteria may have limitations with adolescents because of
differing patterns of use, developmental implications, and other age-­
related consequences. Adolescents who meet diagnostic criteria should
be referred to a program for substance use disorder treatment unless the
primary care physician has additional training in addiction medicine.

COMPLICATIONS

Substance use disorder in adolescence is associated with significant
comorbidities and acts of juvenile delinquency. Youth may engage in
other high-­risk behaviors such as robbery, burglary, substance dealing, or prostitution for the purpose of acquiring the money necessary
to buy substances. Regular use of any substance eventually diminishes
judgment and is associated with unprotected sexual activity with its
consequences of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections,
including HIV, as well as physical violence. Substance use disorder is
closely associated with trauma in the adolescent population. Several
studies of adolescent trauma victims have identified cannabinoids and
cocaine in blood and urine samples in significant proportions (40%),
in addition to the more common identification of alcohol. Any use of
injected substances involves the risk of hepatitis B and C viruses and
HIV (see Chapter 322).

TREATMENT

Adolescent substance use disorder is a complex condition requiring a
multidisciplinary approach that attends to the needs of the individual,
not just substance use. Fundamental principles for treatment include
accessibility to treatment, using a multidisciplinary approach, employing individual or group counseling, offering mental health services,
monitoring of substance use while in treatment, and understanding that recovery from substance use/addiction may involve multiple
relapses. For most patients, remaining in treatment for a minimum
period of 3 months may result in a significant improvement.

PROGNOSIS

Table 157.6  Domains of Risk and Protective Factors for
Substance Use Prevention

For adolescent substance users who have been referred to a substance
treatment program, positive outcomes are directly related to regular
attendance in posttreatment groups. Outcomes are worse for males
with learning problems or conduct disorder than for those without
such disorders. Peer use patterns and parental use have a major influence on outcome for males. The chronicity of a substance use disorder

DOMAIN

PROTECTIVE FACTORS

Early aggressive
behavior

Individual

Self-­control

Lack of parental
supervision

Family

Parental monitoring

Substance use

Peer

Academic competence

Substance
availability

School

Anti–substance use disorder
policies

Poverty

Community

Strong neighborhood attachment

From National Institute on Substance Use. Preventing Substance Use Disorder Among
Children and Adolescents: A Research-­Based Guide for Parents, Educators, and
Community Leaders, NIH Pub No 04-­4212(B), 2nd ed. Bethesda, MD: NIDA; 2003.

makes relapse an issue that must always be considered when managing
patients after treatment, and appropriate assistance from a healthcare
professional qualified in substance use disorder treatment should be
obtained.

PREVENTION

Preventing substance use disorder among adolescents requires prevention efforts aimed at the individual, family, school, and community levels. The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) of the U.S. National
Institutes of Health has identified essential principles of successful prevention programs. Programs should enhance protective factors (parent
support) and reduce risk factors (poor self-­control), should address all
forms of substance use (legal and illegal), should address the specific
type(s) of substance use within an identified community, and should be
culturally competent to improve effectiveness (Table 157.6). Prevention
programs need to target emotionally and socially intense times such as
life/school transitions for adolescents to adequately anticipate potential
substance use disorder. Examples of effective research-­based substance
use prevention programs featuring a variety of strategies are listed on
the NIDA website (www.drugabuse.gov) and on the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention website (www.prevention.samhsa.gov).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.1 Alcohol
Cora Collette Breuner
Alcohol is the most widely used substance of abuse among America’s
youth, and a higher proportion use alcohol than use tobacco or other
substances, but the numbers are trending down. According to the 2020
Monitoring the Future (MTF) study, by the end of high school, 61.5% of
students had reported ever using alcohol and 26% of eighth graders had
reported ever using alcohol. Early initiation of alcohol use increases the
risk for a variety of developmental problems during adolescence and
is frequently an indicator of future substance use. Drinking by children, adolescents, and young adults has serious negative consequences
for the individuals, their families, their communities, and society as a
whole. Underage drinking contributes to a wide range of costly health
and social problems, including motor vehicle crashes (the greatest
single mortality risk for underage drinkers); suicide; interpersonal
violence (e.g., homicides, assaults, rapes); unintentional injuries such
as burns, falls, and drowning; brain impairment; alcohol dependence;
risky sexual activity; academic problems; and alcohol and other drug
poisoning.
Multiple factors can affect a young teen’s risk of developing a drinking problem at an early age (Table 157.7). One third of high school
seniors admit to combining drinking behaviors with other risky behaviors, such as driving or taking additional substances. Binge drinking

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder
Table 157.7  Risk Factors for a Teen Developing a
Drinking Problem
FAMILY RISK FACTORS
• Low parental supervision
• Poor parent to teen communication
• Family conflicts
• Severe or inconsistent family discipline
• Having a parent with an alcohol or substance problem
INDIVIDUAL RISK FACTORS
• Poor impulse control
• Emotional instability
• Thrill-­seeking behaviors
• Behavioral problems
• Perceived risk of drinking is low
• Begins drinking before age 14 yr

remains especially problematic among older teens and young adults;
31% of high school seniors report having five or more drinks in a row
in the last 30 days. Higher rates of alcohol use disorder are seen in
males (23.8%) than in females (19.8%). Teens with binge-­drinking patterns are more likely to be assaulted, engage in high-­risk sexual behaviors, have academic problems, and be injured than those teens without
binge-­drinking patterns.
Alcohol contributes to more deaths in young individuals in the
United States than all the illicit substances combined. Among studies of
adolescent trauma victims, alcohol is reported to be present in 32–45%
of hospital admissions. Motor vehicle crashes are the most frequent
type of event associated with alcohol use, but the injuries span several
types, including self-­inflicted wounds.
Alcohol is often mixed with energy drinks (caffeine, taurine, sugars), which can result in a spectrum of alcohol-­related negative behaviors. Caffeine may counter the sedative effects of alcohol, resulting in
more alcohol consumption and a perception of not being intoxicated,
thus leading to risk-­taking behavior such as driving while intoxicated.
In addition, aggressive behavior, including sexual assaults and motor
vehicle or other injuries, has been reported. Both alcohol and caffeine
overdoses have also been reported.

PHARMACOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Alcohol (ethyl alcohol or ethanol) is rapidly absorbed in the stomach and
is transported to the liver and metabolized by two pathways. The primary
metabolic pathway contributes to the excess synthesis of triglycerides, a
phenomenon that is responsible for producing a fatty liver, even in those
who are well nourished. Engorgement of hepatocytes with fat causes necrosis, triggering an inflammatory process (alcoholic hepatitis), later followed
by fibrosis, the hallmark of cirrhosis. Early hepatic involvement may result
in elevation in γ-­glutamyltransferase (GGT) and serum glutamic-­pyruvic
transaminase (alanine transaminase). The second metabolic pathway,
which is used at high serum alcohol levels, involves the microsomal enzyme
system of the liver, in which the cofactor is reduced to nicotinamide-­
adenine dinucleotide phosphate. The net effect of activation of this pathway
is to decrease metabolism of substances that share this system and to allow
for their accumulation, enhanced effect, and possible toxicity.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Alcohol acts primarily as a central nervous system (CNS) depressant.
It produces euphoria, grogginess, talkativeness, impaired short-­term
memory, and an increased pain threshold. Alcohol’s ability to produce vasodilation and hypothermia is also centrally mediated. At very
high serum levels, respiratory depression occurs. Its inhibitory effect
on pituitary antidiuretic hormone release is responsible for its diuretic
effect. The gastrointestinal (GI) complications of alcohol use can occur
from a single large ingestion. The most common is acute erosive gastritis, manifesting as epigastric pain, anorexia, vomiting, and heme-­
positive stools. Less frequently, vomiting and mid-­abdominal pain may

1199

be caused by acute alcoholic pancreatitis; the diagnosis is confirmed
by the finding of elevated serum amylase and lipase levels.

DIAGNOSIS

Primary care settings provide the opportunity to screen teens for alcohol use disorder or problem behaviors. Brief alcohol screening instruments such as CRAFFT (see Table 157.5) perform well in a clinical
setting as techniques to identify alcohol use disorders A score of 2 or
higher is a positive screen, indicating a need for additional assessment.
Teenagers in the early phases of alcohol use exhibit few physical
findings. Recent use of alcohol may be reflected in elevated GGT and
aspartate transaminase levels.
In acute care settings the alcohol overdose syndrome should be
suspected in any teenager who appears disoriented, lethargic, or comatose. Although the distinctive aroma of alcohol may assist in diagnosis,
confirmation by analysis of blood is recommended. At levels >200 mg/
dL, the adolescent is at risk of death, and levels >500 mg/dL (median
lethal dose) are usually associated with a fatal outcome. When the level
of obtundation appears excessive for the reported blood alcohol level,
head trauma, hypoglycemia, or ingestion of other substances should be
considered as possible confounding factors.

TREATMENT

The usual mechanism of death from alcohol overdose syndrome is respiratory depression; artificial ventilatory support must be provided until
the liver can eliminate sufficient amounts of alcohol from the body. In a
patient without chronic alcohol use, it generally takes 20 hours to reduce
the blood level of alcohol from 400 mg/dL to zero. Dialysis should be
considered when the blood level is >400 mg/dL. As a follow-­up to acute
treatment, referral for treatment of the alcohol use disorder is indicated.
Group counseling, individualized counseling, and multifamily educational intervention have proved to be effective interventions for teens.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.2 Tobacco, E-­Cigarettes, and Other
Tobacco Products
Brian P. Jenssen

CIGARETTES

Tobacco use and addiction often start in childhood or adolescence, a
period when the brain has heightened susceptibility to nicotine addiction. Nearly 90% of adult cigarette smokers began smoking before age
18. Factors associated with youth tobacco use include exposure to
smokers (friends, parents), tobacco availability, low socioeconomic
status, poor school performance, low self-­esteem, lack of perceived risk
of use, and lack of skills to resist influences to use tobacco.
The landscape of tobacco product use among youth has shifted dramatically over the past decade. Various sources are used to capture
data on tobacco use. Similar trends have been observed across cross-­
sectional surveys with data on youth use, including, for example, the
National Youth Tobacco Survey, Monitoring the Future, and the Youth
Risk Behavior Surveillance system.
Based on 2022 data, current use of any tobacco product was reported
by 11.3% (3.08 million) of all students, including 16.5% (2.51 million)
of high school and 4.5% (530,000) of middle school students. E-cigarettes
were the most used tobacco product among high school (14.1%; 21.4
million) and middle school (3.3%; 380,000) students. Among high
school students, 5.2% reported current use of any combustible tobacco
product. By product, current use among high school students was highest for e-cigarettes (14.1%), followed by cigars (2.8%), cigarettes (2.0%),
smokeless tobacco (1.6%), hookahs (1.5%), nicotine pouches (1.4%),
heated tobacco products (1.1%), and pipe tobacco (0.7%). Among middle
school students, 1.6% reported current use of any combustible tobacco
product. By type of product, current use among middle school students

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1200 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
was highest for e-cigarettes (3.3%), followed by cigarettes (1.0%), smokeless tobacco (0.7%), heated tobacco products (0.7%), cigars (0.6%), hookahs (0.5%), nicotine pouches (0.5%), and pipe tobacco (0.3%).
Tobacco use tends to be higher among males compared to females
and by those identifying as lesbian, gay, or bisexual compared to heterosexual or uncertain sexual identity. Tobacco is used by teens in all
regions of the world, although the form of tobacco used differs. In the
Americas and Europe, cigarette smoking is the predominant form of
tobacco use, followed by cigars and smokeless tobacco; in the Eastern
Mediterranean, hookah use is prevalent; in Southeast Asia, smokeless
tobacco products are used; in the Western Pacific, betel nut is chewed
with tobacco; and pipe, snuff, and rolled tobacco leaves are used in
Africa. Cigarette use by teens in low-­and middle-­income nations is
increasing.

PHARMACOLOGY

Nicotine, the primary active ingredient in cigarettes, is addictive. Nicotine is absorbed by multiple sites in the body, including the lungs, skin,
GI tract, and buccal and nasal mucosa. The action of nicotine is mediated through nicotinic acetylcholine receptors located on noncholinergic presynaptic and postsynaptic sites in the brain and causes increased
levels of dopamine. Nicotine also stimulates the adrenal glands to
release epinephrine, causing an immediate elevation in blood pressure,
respiration, and heart rate. The dose of nicotine delivered to the user
in a cigarette depends on a variety of factors, including puffing characteristics. A smoker typically takes 10 puffs within the span of 5 minutes
and absorbs 1-­2 mg of nicotine (range: 0.5-­3 mg). The Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) is planning to reduce the permissible amount of
nicotine in cigarettes. Cotinine, the major metabolite of nicotine, has
a biologic half-­life of 19-­24 hours and can be detected in urine, serum,
and saliva.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cigarettes are addictive by design and result in life-­shortening diseases in half of their long-­term users. Each year, approximately
480,000 deaths are attributable to smoking, responsible for 1 of every
5 deaths and 1 of every 3 cancer deaths in the United States. Cigarette smoking has severe adverse health consequences for youth and
young adults, including increased prevalence of chronic cough, sputum production, wheezing, and worsening asthma. Smoking during
pregnancy increases prenatal and perinatal morbidity and mortality,
either causing or exacerbating the risks of preterm birth, low birthweight, congenital malformations, stillbirth, and sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS) and sudden unexplained infant death (SUID).
Withdrawal symptoms, including irritability, decreased concentration, increased appetite, and strong cravings for tobacco, can occur
when adolescents try to quit.

ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES (E-­CIGARETTES)

E-­cigarettes are handheld devices that produce an aerosol created
from a solution of nicotine, flavoring chemicals, humectants such as
propylene glycol, and often other constituents unknown and unadvertised to the consumer. There is wide variability in terminology, product design, and engineering of these products, with alternative names
including e-­cigs, electronic cigars, electronic hookah, e-­hookah, and
vaping devices. The tobacco industry continues to develop new products that contain nicotine but may not be recognized as a tobacco
product by teens. The unique flavors offered in e-­cigarette solutions,
the majority of which are confectionary in nature and appealing to
children, have been shown to encourage youth experimentation, regular use, and addiction.
Known harmful toxicants and carcinogens have been found in
e-­cigarette solutions, in device emissions, and within the bodies of
adolescent users. Multiple systematic reviews and meta-­analyses have
found e-­cigarette use is associated with an increased risk of subsequent cigarette smoking initiation and current cigarette smoking
in young people. There is a critical need for e-­cigarette regulation,

legislative action, and counter-­promotion to prevent children, adolescents, and young adults from transitioning from e-­cigarettes to
traditional cigarettes and minimize the potential public health harm
from e-­cigarette use. The FDA should regulate all tobacco and nicotine products to protect public health.

HOOKAH

Hookah (water pipe) smoking uses specially treated tobacco that comes
in a variety of flavors. Many teens believe incorrectly that hookah
does not contain nicotine. Emerging evidence indicates that hookah
may involve comparable health risks to cigarettes, including nicotine
dependence. Both human and machine simulation studies of hookah
use consistently find that smoke content and user toxicant exposure,
including carbon monoxide, tar, and nicotine, are at least comparable
to that of cigarettes. Secondhand smoke from hookahs can be a health
risk for nonsmokers exposed to harmful toxicants.

TREATMENT

The 2020 U.S. Surgeon Report on smoking cessation emphasizes that
smoking cessation is beneficial at any age, reducing the risk of premature death, adding as much as a decade to life expectancy, while also
reducing the risk of many adverse health effects. More than half of
adolescents who use tobacco products report that they want to quit,
and more than half report making at least one quit attempt in the past
year. Thus for adolescents who want to stop tobacco or e-­cigarette use,
it is reasonable to consider referral to behavioral cessation supports.
Behavioral interventions for adults have significant evidence supporting their effectiveness, and many youth and young adult supports are
modeled off of these programs.
Little research has been conducted assessing the effectiveness
of pharmacologic therapies for combustible tobacco use among
adolescents. The 2020 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation concluded there was inadequate evidence on the benefits and harms of medications for tobacco cessation in children
and adolescents. Nonetheless, consensus panels recommend that
for adolescents who want to stop tobacco or e-­cigarette use with
moderate to severe tobacco dependence, it is reasonable to consider
pharmacotherapy, especially nicotine replacement therapy (NRT).
Cessation medications are not approved by the FDA for use with
children or adolescents, and NRT cannot be purchased OTC by persons younger than 18 years of age. However, cessation medications
can be prescribed for and used by youth under the supervision of
a physician. NRT is also available as a patch, gum, inhaler, nasal
spray, lozenge, or microtab (Table 157.8). Tobacco dependence
treatment for youth should be tailored to the patient’s level of nicotine dependence and readiness for change. Given the very high rates
of nonadherence during therapy and relapse after discontinuation
of therapy among adolescents in the trials of these medications,
close follow-­up is recommended.
Pediatric clinicians can connect patients to effective behavioral
interventions, including telephone, text message, smartphone app,
internet, and community-­
based resources. Free telephone-­
based
treatment (800-­
QUIT-­
NOW) has been shown to improve smoking cessation rates. Smoke-­free TXT, offered by the National Cancer
Institute, engages teens to quit smoking using free, daily text messaging. Teens can sign up online (teen.smokefree.gov) or text QUIT
to iQUIT (47848). A smartphone-­based app, quitSTART, helps teens
track cravings, monitor moods, use cessation tips, and follow quitting attempts. Truth Initiative has an evidence-­based program, This Is
Quitting, which is targeted to teens who want to stop using e-­cigarettes
(https://truthinitiative.org/thisisquitting). The American Academy
of Pediatrics offers a brief, practical guide that is designed to support pediatric health clinicians in providing behavioral and pharmacologic support to help youth quit (https://services.aap.org/en/pati
ent-­care/tobacco-­control-­and-­prevention/youth-­tobacco-­cessation/).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder

1201

Table 157.8  Smoking Cessation Pharmacotherapy Available in the United States*
THERAPY
BRAND

NAME

FDA-­APPROVED ADULT DOSING

AVAILABILITY†

STUDIED IN
ADOLESCENTS

The 4-­mg strength should be used by patients
who smoke ≥25 cigarettes a day; otherwise,
2-­mg strength should be used.
Wk 1-­6: 1 piece every 1-­2 hr
Wk 7-­9: 1 piece every 2-­4 hr
Wk 10-­12: 1 piece every 4-­8 hr
6-­16 cartridges a day for up to 12 wk

OTC*

Yes

Rx

No

The 4-­mg strength should be used by patients
who smoke their first cigarette within 30 min
of waking; otherwise, 2-­mg strength should
be used.
Wk 1-­6: 1 lozenge every 1-­2 hr
Wk 7-­9: 1 lozenge every 2-­4 hr
Wk 10-­12: 1 lozenge every 4-­8 hr
1-­2 sprays/hr up to a maximum of 80 sprays
per day
For patients who smoke >10 cigarettes daily:
Step 1: one 21-­mg patch daily for wk 1-­6
Step 2: one 14-­mg patch daily for wk 7-­8
Step 3: one 7-­mg patch daily for wk 9-­10
For patients who smoke <10 cigarettes daily:
Begin with 14-­mg patch daily for 6 wk, followed
by 7-­mg patch for 2 wk.

OTC

No

Rx

Yes

OTC

Yes

150 mg PO in morning for 3 days, then increase
to 150 mg PO bid

Rx

Yes

0.5 mg PO in morning for 3 days; increase to
0.5 mg PO bid for 4 days, then increase to
1 mg PO bid

Rx

Yes

STRENGTHS

NICOTINE REPLACEMENT THERAPY
Gum‡

Nicorette

2 mg, 4 mg

Inhaler

4 mg

Lozenge

Nicotrol
Inhaler
Commit,
Nicorette
mini

Nasal spray

Nicotrol NS

0.5 mg/spray

Transdermal
patch‡

NicoDerm
CQ

7, 14, 21 mg/24 hr

NONNICOTINE THERAPY
Bupropion SR‡ Zyban
Varenicline

Chantix

2 mg, 4 mg

150-­mg
sustained-­
release tablets
0.5-­, 1-­mg tablets

*None are FDA approved for use in patients younger than 18 years of age.
†OTC, Over the counter; Rx, prescription product; PO, by mouth (orally); bid, twice daily.
‡Generics are available.

From JP Karpinski et al: Smoking cessation treatment for adolescents. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther 2010;15:249–260

157.3 Marijuana
Cora Collette Breuner
Marijuana (cannabis, pot, weed, hash, grass), derived from the
Cannabis sativa hemp plant, is the most commonly used illicit substance. The main active chemical, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
is responsible for its hallucinogenic properties. THC is absorbed
rapidly by the nasal or oral routes, producing a peak of subjective
effect at 10 min and 1 hour, respectively. Marijuana is generally
smoked as a cigarette (reefer, joint), in a pipe, or ingested (edibles).
Although there is much variation in content, each cigarette contains
8–10% THC. Another popular form that is smoked, a “blunt,” is a
hollowed-­out small cigar (tobacco leaf) refilled with marijuana, and
thus also contains nicotine. Marijuana products (hash oil or leaf)
can also be used in some vaping devices or hookah pens. Hashish is
the concentrated THC resin in a sticky black liquid or oil. Although
marijuana use by U.S. teens has declined in the last decade, ∼25%
of high school students have used marijuana at least once during
the previous 30 days. About 8% of students report having tried
marijuana before age 13, with a range of 4.3–18.5% across various
states, indicating the need for early prevention efforts. Adolescents
living in states where medical marijuana is legal report a higher use

40
*Past-year
use in 12th
graders.

30
20
10
0

1993
Using

2003

2013

Perceived harm
(saw great risk in smoking marijuana occasionally)

Fig. 157.3 As the perceived harm of marijuana drops, use disorder
goes up. The 36.4% using in 2013 equates to about 11 students in the
average class. (From NIH National Institute on Substance Use.)
of cannabis edibles. It is important to recognize that as perceived
harm drops, marijuana use increases. (Fig. 157.3). In addition, the
potency of cannabis has increased substantially in part to marketing
and legal sales.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1202 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 157.9  Acute and Chronic Adverse Effects of
Cannabis Use
ACUTE ADVERSE EFFECTS
• Anxiety and panic, especially in naïve users
• Psychotic symptoms (at high doses)
• Road crashes if a person drives while intoxicated
• Cannabis hyperemesis syndrome
CHRONIC ADVERSE EFFECTS
• Cannabis dependence syndrome (in about 1 in 10 users)
• Chronic bronchitis and impaired respiratory function in regular
smokers
• Psychotic symptoms and disorders in heavy users, especially those
with a history of psychotic symptoms or a family history of these
disorders
• Impaired educational attainment in adolescents who are regular
users
• Subtle cognitive impairment in those who are daily users for 10 yr
or more
• Impaired tasks of sequencing ability, cognitive processing speed,
inhibition, and sustained attention
Modified from Hall W, Degenhardt L. Adverse health effects of non-­medical cannabis
use. Lancet. 2009;374:1383–1390.

Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) is characterized by
recurrent episodes of vomiting associated with abdominal pain and
nausea; patients often find relief by taking a hot shower or bath (Table
157.10). Cannabis use typically has been chronic (>1-­2 year) and frequent (multiple times per week). There is considerable similarities
between CHS and cyclic vomiting syndrome (see Chapter 390). Treatment of CHS includes stopping marijuana use, antiemetics, and topical
capsaicin.
The increased THC content of marijuana of 5-­to 15-­fold compared to that of the 1970s is related to the observation of a withdrawal syndrome occurring 24-­48 hours after discontinuing the
substance. Heavy users experience malaise, irritability, agitation,
insomnia, substance craving, shakiness, diaphoresis, night sweats,
and GI disturbance. The symptoms peak by the fourth day and
resolve in 10-­14 days. Certain substances may interact with marijuana to potentiate sedation (alcohol, diazepam) and stimulation
(cocaine, amphetamines) or may be antagonistic (propranolol,
phenytoin).
Behavioral interventions, including cognitive-­behavioral therapy
(CBT) and motivational incentives, have shown to be effective in treating marijuana dependency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.4 Inhalants
Table 157.10  Rome IV Criteria for CHS Diagnosis
CATEGORY

FEATURES

Essential

Stereotypical episodic vomiting resembling
CVS in terms of onset, duration, and
frequency
Presentation after prolonged, excessive
cannabis use
Relief of vomiting episodes by sustained
cessation of cannabis use

Supportive remarks

May be associated with pathologic bathing
behavior (prolonged hot baths or showers)

CHS, Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome; CVS, cyclic vomiting syndrome.
From Zhu JW, Gonsalves CL, Issenman RM, Kam AJ. Diagnosis and acute management
of adolescent cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome: a systematic review. J Adolesc
Health. 2021;68:246–254, Table 1, p. 248.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In addition to the desired effects of elation and euphoria, marijuana
may cause impairment of short-­term memory, poor performance of
tasks requiring divided attention (e.g., those involved in driving), loss
of critical judgment, decreased coordination, and distortion of time
perception (Table 157.9). Visual hallucinations and perceived body
distortions occur rarely, but “flashbacks” or recall of frightening hallucinations experienced under marijuana’s influence may occur, usually
during stress or with fever.
Smoking marijuana for a minimum of 4 days/week for 6 months
appears to result in dose-­related suppression of plasma testosterone
levels and spermatogenesis, prompting concern about the potential
deleterious effect of smoking marijuana before completion of pubertal growth and development. There is an antiemetic effect of oral
THC or smoked marijuana, often followed by appetite stimulation,
which is the basis of the substance’s use in patients receiving cancer
chemotherapy.
An amotivational syndrome has been described in long-­term marijuana users who lose interest in age-­appropriate behavior; proof of the
causative relationship remains equivocal. Chronic use is associated
with increased anxiety and depression, learning problems, poor job
performance, hyperemesis, and respiratory problems such as pharyngitis, sinusitis, bronchitis, and asthma (see Table 157.9).

Cora Collette Breuner
Inhalants, found in many common household products, comprise
a diverse group of volatile substances whose vapors can be inhaled
to produce psychoactive effects. The practice of inhalation is popular among younger adolescents and decreases with increasing age.
Young adolescents are attracted to these substances because of
their rapid action, easy availability, and low cost. Products that are
abused as inhalants include volatile solvents (paint thinners, glue,
e-­cigarette solvents known as “dripping,” toluene, acetone, refrigerants, gasoline, cleaning fluids, correction fluids), aerosols (spray
paint, nitrous oxide, hair spray), gases (propane tanks, lighter fluid),
nitrites (“poppers” or “video head cleaner”), and propellants used in
whipped cream dispensers. The most popular inhalants among young
adolescents are glue, shoe polish, and spray paint. The various products contain a wide range of chemicals with serious adverse health
effects (Table 157.11). Huffing, the practice of inhaling fumes, can be
accomplished using a paper bag containing a chemical-­soaked cloth;
spraying aerosols directly into the nose/mouth; or using a balloon,
plastic bag, or soda can filled with fumes. The percentage of adolescents using inhalants has remained stable, with 5.8% of high school
students reporting having ever used inhalants. Eighth and ninth
graders report highest use, suggesting targeted prevention strategies
for this age-­group.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The major effects of inhalants are psychoactive (Table 157.12). The
intoxication lasts only a few minutes, so a typical user will huff repeatedly over an extended period (hours) to maintain the high. The immediate effects of inhalants are similar to alcohol: euphoria, slurred
speech, decreased coordination, and dizziness. Toluene, the main
ingredient in model airplane glue and some rubber cements, causes
relaxation and pleasant hallucinations for up to 2 hours. Euphoria is
followed by violent excitement; coma may result from prolonged or
rapid inhalation. Volatile nitrites, such as amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite,
and related compounds marketed as room deodorizers, are used as
euphoriants, enhancers of musical appreciation, and sexual enhancements among older adolescents and young adults. They may result in
headaches, syncope, and lightheadedness; profound hypotension and
cutaneous flushing followed by vasoconstriction and tachycardia;
transiently inverted T waves and depressed ST segments on electrocardiography; methemoglobinemia; increased bronchial irritation;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder

1203

Table 157.11  Hazards of Chemicals Found in Commonly
Used Inhalants

Table 157.13  Documented Clinical Presentations of Acute
and Chronic Volatile Substance Use

Amyl nitrite, butyl nitrite (“poppers,” “video head cleaner”): sudden
sniffing death syndrome, suppressed immunologic function, injury
to red blood cells (interfering with oxygen supply to vital tissues)
Benzene (found in gasoline): bone marrow injury, impaired
immuno­logic function, increased risk of leukemia, reproductive
system toxicity
Butane, propane (found in lighter fluid, hair and paint sprays):
sudden sniffing death syndrome via cardiac effects, serious burn
injuries (because of flammability)
Freon (used as a refrigerant and aerosol propellant): sudden sniffing
death syndrome, respiratory obstruction and death (from sudden
cooling/cold injury to airways), liver damage
Methylene chloride (found in paint thinners and removers,
degreasers): reduction of oxygen-­carrying of blood, changes to the
heart muscle and heartbeat
Nitrous oxide (“laughing gas, Whippits, i.e., whipped cream
dispensers), hexane: death from lack of oxygen to the brain,
altered perception and motor coordination, loss of sensation, limb
spasms, blackouts caused by blood pressure changes, depression
of heart muscle functioning; vitamin B12 deficiency
Toluene (found in gasoline, paint thinners and removers, correction
fluid): brain damage (loss of brain tissue mass, impaired cognition,
gait disturbance, loss of coordination, loss of equilibrium, limb
spasms, hearing and vision loss), liver and kidney damage
Trichloroethylene (found in spot removers, degreasers): sudden sniffing
death syndrome, cirrhosis of the liver, reproductive complications,
hearing and vision damage

Ventricular fibrillation
Asystolic cardiac arrest
Myocardial infarction
Ataxia
Agitation
Limb and trunk incoordination
Tremor
Visual loss
Tinnitus
Dysarthria
Vertigo
Hyperreflexia
Acute confusional state
Conjunctivitis
Acute paranoia
Depression
Oral and nasal mucosal ulceration
Halitosis
Convulsions/fits
Headache
Peripheral neuropathy
Methemoglobinemia
Acute trauma

Table 157.12  Stages in Symptom Development After
Use of Inhalants

cause pulmonary hypertension, restrictive lung defects or reduced
diffusion capacity, peripheral neuropathy, hematuria, tubular acidosis, and possibly cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. Chronic inhalant use has long been linked to widespread brain damage and
cognitive abnormalities that can range from mild impairment
(poor memory, decreased learning ability) to severe dementia.
High-­frequency inhalant users were significantly more likely than
moderate-­and low-­frequency users to experience adverse consequences of inhalant intoxication, such as behavioral, language, and
memory problems. Certain risky behaviors and consequences, such
as engaging in unprotected sex or fighting while high on inhalants, were dramatically more common among high-­f requency than
low-­frequency inhalant users. Death in the acute phase may result
from cerebral or pulmonary edema or myocardial involvement (see
Table 157.13).

STAGE

SYMPTOMS

1: Excitatory

Euphoria, excitation, exhilaration, dizziness,
hallucinations, sneezing, coughing, excess
salivation, intolerance to light, nausea and
vomiting, flushed skin and bizarre behavior

2: Early CNS
depression

Confusion, disorientation, dullness, loss of
self-­control, ringing or buzzing in the head,
blurred or double vision, cramps, headache,
insensitivity to pain, and pallor or paleness

3: Medium CNS
depression

Drowsiness, muscular incoordination, slurred
speech, depressed reflexes, and nystagmus or
rapid involuntary oscillation of the eyeballs

4: Late CNS
depression

Unconsciousness that may be accompanied
by bizarre dreams, epileptiform seizures, and
EEG changes

CNS, Central nervous system; EEG, electroencephalogram.
From Harris D. Volatile substance use. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2006;91:ep93–
ep100.

and increased intraocular pressure. There may be dermatologic
findings, including perianal/perioral dermatitis (“huffer rash”),
frostbite, and contact dermatitis, as well as epistaxis, nasal ulcers,
and conjunctivitis.

COMPLICATIONS

Model airplane glue is responsible for a wide range of complications related to chemical toxicity, to the method of administration
(in plastic bags, with resultant suffocation), and to the dangerous
setting in which the inhalation occurs (roof tops). Common neuromuscular changes reported in chronic inhalant users include difficulty coordinating movement, gait disorders, muscle tremors, and
spasticity, particularly in the legs (Table 157.13). Chronic use may

Muscle weakness
Abdominal pain
Cough
Aspiration pneumonia
Chemical pneumonitis
Coma
Visual and auditory hallucinations
Acute delusions
Nausea and vomiting
Pulmonary edema
Photophobia
Rash
Jaundice
Anorexia
Slurred speech
Diarrhea
Weight loss
Epistaxis
Rhinitis
Cerebral edema
Visual loss
Burns
Renal tubular acidosis

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of inhalant abuse is difficult because of the ubiquitous nature
of the products and decreased parental awareness of the dangers. In the
primary care setting, providers need to ask parents if they have witnessed any unusual behaviors in their teen; noticed high-­risk products
in the teen’s bedroom; seen paint on the teen’s hands, nose, or mouth;
or found paint-­or chemical-­coated rags. Complete blood count, coagulation studies, and hepatic and renal function studies may identify the
complications. In extreme intoxication, a user may manifest symptoms
of restlessness, general muscle weakness, dysarthria, nystagmus, disruptive behavior, and occasionally hallucinations. Toluene is excreted
rapidly in the urine as hippuric acid, with the residual detectable in the
serum by gas chromatography.

TREATMENT

Treatment is generally supportive and directed toward control of
arrhythmia and stabilization of respirations and circulation. Withdrawal symptoms do not usually occur.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1204 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

157.5 EVALI

having ever used MDMA was 8.4% of college students; 12th-­grade lifetime use was 2.8% in 2021.

E-­cigarette or vaping use–associated lung injury.
See Chapter 450.

Clinical Manifestations

Several naturally occurring and synthetic substances are used by
adolescents for their hallucinogenic properties. They have chemical
structures similar to neurotransmitters such as serotonin, but their
exact mechanism of action remains unclear. Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy, MDMA), and
hallucinogenic magic mushrooms (psilocybins) are the most commonly reported hallucinogens used. Peyote (mescaline) derived from
a cactus flower is chemically related to MDMA. Ayahuasca is another
plant-­derived hallucinogen found in South America whose active
agents are N,N-­dimethyltryptamine (DMT) and harmala alkaloids,
which act as a monoamine oxidase inhibitor. Another hallucinatory
agent is derived from a poisonous toad (Bufo alvarius), native to the
Sonoran Desert, which produces 5-­MeO-­DMT in its venom gland.
251-­NBOMe (N-­Bomb) is a designer substance that interacts with the
5HT-­2a receptor and has sympathomimetic and hallucinogenic properties (Table 157.14).

Euphoria, a heightened sensual awareness, and increased psychic and
emotional energy are acute effects. Compared to other hallucinogens,
MDMA is less likely to produce emotional lability, depersonalization,
and disturbances of thought. Nausea, jaw clenching, teeth grinding, and
blurred vision are somatic symptoms, whereas anxiety, panic attacks,
and psychosis are the adverse psychiatric outcomes. A few deaths have
been reported after ingestion of the substance. In high doses, MDMA
can interfere with the body’s ability to regulate temperature. The resultant hyperthermia in association with vigorous dancing at a “rave” has
resulted in severe liver, kidney, and cardiovascular system failure and
death. No specific treatments are recommended for acute toxicity.
Chronic MDMA use can lead to changes in brain function, affecting
cognitive tasks and memory. These symptoms may occur because of
MDMA’s effects on neurons that secrete serotonin as a neurotransmitter. The serotonin system plays an important role in regulating mood,
aggression, sexual activity, sleep, and sensitivity to pain. A high rate of
dependence has been found among MDMA users. MDMA exposure may
be associated with long-­term neurotoxicity and damage to serotonin-­
containing neurons. In nonhuman primates, exposure to MDMA for
only 4 days caused damage to serotonin nerve terminals that was evident 6-­7 years later. There are no specific pharmacologic treatments for
MDMA addiction. Substance use recovery groups are recommended.

LYSERGIC ACID DIETHYLAMIDE

PHENCYCLIDINE

157.6 Hallucinogens
Cora Collette Breuner

LSD (acid, big “d,” blotters) is a very potent hallucinogen that is made
from lysergic acid found in ergot, a fungus that grows on rye and other
grains. Its high potency allows effective doses to be applied to absorbent paper, or it can be taken as a liquid or a tablet. The onset of action
can be 30-­60 minutes, and it peaks at 2-­4 hours. By 10-­12 hours, individuals return to the preingestion state. Among U.S. 12th graders, 4%
report trying LSD at least once.

Clinical Manifestations

The effects of LSD can be divided into three categories: somatic (physical effects), perceptual (altered changes in vision and hearing), and
psychic (changes in sensorium). The common somatic symptoms are
dizziness, dilated pupils, nausea, flushing, elevated temperature, and
tachycardia. The sensation of synesthesia, or “seeing” smells and “hearing” colors, as well as major distortions of time and self, have been
reported with high doses of LSD. Delusional ideation, body distortion,
and suspiciousness to the point of toxic psychosis are the more serious of the psychic symptoms. LSD is not considered to be an addictive substance because it does not typically produce substance-­seeking
behavior.

Treatment

An individual is considered to have a “bad trip” when the sensory experiences cause the user to become terrified or panicked. These episodes
should be treated by removing the individual from the aggravating
situation and placing them in a quiet room with a calming friend. In
situations of extreme agitation or seizures, use of benzodiazepines may
be warranted. “Flashbacks,” or LSD-­induced states after the drug has
worn off, and tolerance to the effects of the drug are additional complications of its use.

METHYLENEDIOXYMETHAMPHETAMINE

MDMA (“X,” ecstasy, Molly), a phenylisopropylamine hallucinogen, is
a synthetic compound similar to hallucinogenic cactus-­derived mescaline and the stimulant methamphetamine. Like other hallucinogens,
this substance is proposed to interact with serotoninergic neurons in
the CNS. It is the preferred substance at “raves,” all-­night dance parties, and is also known as one of the “club substances” along with γ-­
hydroxybutyrate (GHB) and ketamine. Nationwide, the prevalence of

Phencyclidine (PCP) (Sernyl, angel dust, hog, peace pill, sheets) is an
arylcyclohexalamine whose popularity is related in part to its ease of
synthesis in home laboratories. One of the by-­products of home synthesis can cause cramps, diarrhea, and hematemesis. It is a “dissociative
substance” that produces feelings of detachment from the surrounding
environment and self. The substance is thought to potentiate adrenergic effects by inhibiting neuronal reuptake of catecholamines. PCP
is available as a tablet, liquid, or powder, which may be used alone or
sprinkled on cigarettes (joints). The powders and tablets generally contain 2-­6 mg of PCP, whereas joints average 1 mg for every 150 mg of
tobacco leaves, or approximately 30-­50 mg per joint. The prevalence
of PCP use (a hallucinogenic substance) among U.S. 12th graders is
approximately 1%.

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical manifestations are dose related and produce alterations
of perception, behavior, and autonomic functions. Euphoria, nystagmus, ataxia, and emotional lability occur within 2-­3 minutes after
smoking 1-­5 mg and last for 4-­6 hours. At these low doses the user is
likely to experience shallow breathing, flushing, generalized numbness
of extremities, and loss of motor coordination. Hallucinations may
involve bizarre distortions of body image that often precipitate panic
reactions. With doses of 5-­15 mg, a toxic psychosis may occur, with
disorientation, hypersalivation, and abusive language lasting for >1
hour. Hypotension, generalized seizures, and cardiac arrhythmias typically occur with plasma concentrations of 40-­200 mg/dL. Death has
been reported during psychotic delirium from hypertension, hypotension, hypothermia, seizures, and trauma. The coma of PCP may
be distinguished from that of the opiates by the absence of respiratory
depression; the presence of muscle rigidity, hyperreflexia, and nystagmus; and lack of response to naloxone. PCP psychosis may be difficult
to distinguish from schizophrenia. In the absence of a history of use,
the diagnosis depends on urinalysis.

Treatment

Management of the PCP-­intoxicated patient includes placement in a
darkened, quiet room on a floor pad, safe from injury. Acute alcohol
intoxication may also be present. For recent oral ingestion, gastric
absorption is poor, and induction of emesis or gastric lavage is useful.
Diazepam, in a dose of 5-­10 mg orally or 2-­5 mg intravenously, may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder

1205

Table 157.14  Classes of Hallucinogens
CHEMICAL NAMES

PLANTS OR NATURAL SOURCES; SYNTHETIC AGENTS; “SLANG NAMES”

INDOLEAMINES
Lysergamides (Ergolines)
d-­Lysergic acid diethylamide
d-­Lysergic acid amide

Alkytryptamines
α-­Methyltryptamine
N,N-­dimethyltryptamine (DMT)
5-­Methoxy-­N,N-­dimethyltryptamine (5-­MeO-­DMT)
Psilocybin (4-­phophoryloxy-­DMT)
Psilocin (4-­OH-­DMT)
5-­Methoxy-­N,N-­diisopropyltryptamine (5-­MeO-­DIPT)
Bufotenine (5-­OH-­DMT)
Diethyltryptamine
Ibogaine
PHENYLETHYLAMINES
Mescaline (3,4,5-­trimethoxyphenethylamine)
3,4-­methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)
3,4-­methylenedioxyethamphetamine (MDEA)
Methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA)
4-­Bromo-­2,5-­dimethoxyamphetamine (DOM)
Paramethoxyamphetamine (PMA)
ARYLCYCLOHEXYLAMINES (PIPERIDINE DERIVATIVES)
Phencyclidine (PCP)
Ketamine
Dextromethorphan
PIPERAZINES
Benzylpiperazine (BZP)
Trifluoromethylphenylpiperazine (TFMPP)
Methylenedioxybenzylpiperazine (MDBP)
m-­Chlorophenylpiperazine (mCPP)
p-­Methoxyphenylpiperazine (MeOPP)

LSD; Delysid; “acid,” “blotter,” “stamps,” “dots,” “trips,” “paper,”
“a-­bombs,” “pyramids”
Ipomoea violacea (morning glory), Rivea corymbosa (Mexican ololiuqui),
Argyreia nervosa (Hawaiian baby woodrose), Merremia tuberose
(Hawaiian woodrose)
AMT; “alpha”
Piptadenia peregrina, Anadenanthera peregrina, Prestonia amazenicum,
Mimosa hostilis, Vivola calophylla; “businessman’s trip”
Bufo alvarius
Psilocybe sp, Panaeolus sp, Conocybe sp, Inocybe sp, Gymnopilus sp,
Lycoperdon sp, Pluteus genus; “magic mushrooms,” “shrooms,” “alice”
“Foxy methoxy,” “foxy”
Ch’an Su
DET
Tabernanthe iboga
Peyote cactus (Lophophora williamsii)
Ecstasy; “XTC,” “X,” “E,” “Adam,” “the hug drug”
“Eve”
“Serenity, tranquility, and peace” [STP]

Angel dust; “hog,” “wacky weed,” “T,” “killer weed”
Ketalar, ketaject, ketanest, “special K,” “K,” “K-­hole,” “vitamin K”
“DXM,” “dex,” “robotripping,” “CCC,” “skittles,” “red devils”
“Legal E,” “legal X,” “A2”

TETRAHYDROCANNABINOIDS
Tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-­THC, Δ1-­THC)

Dronabinol (Marinol); Cannabis sativa (marijuana, hashish)

DITERPENE ALKALOIDS
Salvinorin A, C
Myrisicin, saffron

Salvia divinorum; sage
Myristica fragrans (nutmeg, mace)

ANTICHOLINERGIC AGENTS
Atropine (d,l-­hyoscyamine)
Scopolamine (L-­hyoscine)

Atropa belladonna (deadly nightshade), Datura stramonium (jimson weed)
Transderm Scop; Datura stramonium (jimson weed), Hyoscyamus
niger (henbane)

From Traub SJ. Hallucinogens. In Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds. Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2007: Table 45.1.

be helpful if the patient is agitated and not comatose. Rapid excretion
of the substance is promoted by acidification of the urine. Supportive
therapy of the comatose patient is indicated with particular attention
to hydration, which may be compromised by PCP-­induced diuresis.
Inpatient and/or behavioral treatments can be helpful for chronic
PCP users.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.7 Cocaine
Cora Collette Breuner
Cocaine, an alkaloid extracted from the leaves of the South American
Erythroxylum coca, is supplied as the hydrochloride salt in crystalline
form. With snorting, it is rapidly absorbed into the bloodstream from
the nasal mucosa, detoxified by the liver, and excreted in the urine as
benzoylecgonine. Smoking the cocaine alkaloid (freebasing) involves
inhaling the cocaine vapors in pipes or cigarettes mixed with tobacco

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1206 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
or marijuana. Accidental burns are potential complications of this
practice. With crack cocaine, the crystallized rock form, the smoker
feels “high” in <10 seconds. The risk of addiction with this method is
higher and more rapidly progressive than from snorting cocaine. Tolerance develops, and the user must increase the dose or change the
route of administration, or both, to achieve the same effect. To sustain
the high, cocaine users repeatedly use cocaine in short periods known
as “binges.” Substance dealers often place cocaine in plastic bags or
condoms and swallow these containers during transport. Rupture
of a container produces a sympathomimetic crisis (see Table 157.4).
Cocaine use disorder among U.S. high school students has decreased
in the last decade, with 2.5% of 12th graders having tried the substance
(any route) at least once.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cocaine is a strong CNS stimulant that increases dopamine levels by
preventing reuptake. Cocaine produces euphoria, increased motor
activity, decreased fatigability, and mental alertness. Its sympathomimetic properties are responsible for pupillary dilation, tachycardia,
hypertension, and hyperthermia. Snorting cocaine chronically results
in loss of sense of smell, nosebleeds, and chronic rhinorrhea. Injecting cocaine increases risk for HIV infection. Chronic users experience
anxiety, irritability, and sometimes paranoid psychosis. Lethal effects
are possible, especially when cocaine is used in combination with other
substances, such as heroin, in an injectable form known as a “speedball.” When taken with alcohol, cocaine is metabolized by the liver to
produce cocaethylene, a substance that enhances the euphoria and is
associated with a greater risk of sudden death than with cocaine alone.
Pregnant adolescents who use cocaine place their fetus at risk of premature delivery, complications of low birthweight, and possibly developmental disorders.

TREATMENT

There are no FDA-­approved medications for treatment of cocaine
addiction. CBT has been shown to be effective when provided in combination with additional services and social support. Oral sustained-­
release dexamphetamine has been shown to be partially effective in
adults with cocaine dependence.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.8 Amphetamines
Cora Collette Breuner
Methamphetamine, commonly known as meth, is a nervous system stimulant and Schedule II substance with a high potential for
abuse. Most of the methamphetamine currently used is produced
in illegal laboratories. It is a white, odorless, bitter-­tasting powder
that is particularly popular among adolescents and young adults
because of its potency and ease of absorption. It can be ingested
orally, smoked, needle-­injected, or absorbed across mucous membranes. Amphetamines have multiple CNS effects, including release
of neurotransmitters and an indirect catecholamine agonist effect.
Approximately 0.6% of 12th graders reported using methamphetamine at least once.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Methamphetamine rapidly increases the release and blocks the reuptake of dopamine, a powerful “feel good” neurotransmitter (Table
157.15). The effects of amphetamines can be dose related. In small
amounts, amphetamine effects resemble other stimulants: increased
physical activity, rapid and/or irregular heart rate, increased blood
pressure, and decreased appetite. High doses produce slowing of cardiac conduction in the face of ventricular irritability. Hypertensive and
hyperpyrexic episodes can occur, as can seizures (see Table 157.4).
Binging may result in the development of psychotic ideation with the
potential for sudden violence. Cerebrovascular damage, psychosis,
severe receding of the gums with tooth decay, and infection with HIV
and hepatitides B and C can result from long-­term use. A withdrawal
syndrome is associated with amphetamine use, with early, intermediate, and late phases (see Table 157.15). The early phase is characterized as a “crash” phase with depression, agitation, fatigue, and desire
for more of the substance. Loss of physical and mental energy, limited
interest in the environment, and anhedonia mark the intermediate
phase. In the final phase, substance craving returns, often triggered by
particular situations or objects.

TREATMENT

Acute agitation and delusional behaviors can be treated with haloperidol or droperidol. Phenothiazines are contraindicated and may cause

Table 157.15  Signs and Symptoms of Intoxication and Withdrawal
OPIATES

AMPHETAMINES/COCAINE

BENZODIAZEPINES

Behavior

Apathy and sedation; disinhibition;
psychomotor retardation; impaired
attention and judgment

Euphoria; apathy and sedation; abusiveness or
aggression; labile mood; impaired attention;
anterograde amnesia; impaired psychomotor
performance; interference with personal
functioning

Signs

Drowsiness; slurred speech; pupillary
constriction (except anoxia from
severe overdose—dilation);
decreased level of consciousness

Overdose

Respiratory depression; hypothermia

Euphoria and sensation of increased
energy; hypervigilance; grandiosity,
aggression, argumentative; labile mood;
repetitive stereotyped behaviors;
hallucinations, usually with intact
orientation; paranoid ideation;
interference with personal functioning
Dilated pupils; tachycardia (occasionally
bradycardia, cardiac arrhythmias);
hypertension; nausea/vomiting; sweating
and chills; evidence of weight loss;
dilated pupils; chest pain; convulsions
Sympathomimetic symptoms

Withdrawal

Craving to use; lacrimation; yawning;
rhinorrhea/sneezing; muscle aches or
cramps; abdominal cramps; nausea/
vomiting/diarrhea; sweating;
dilated pupils; anorexia; irritability;
tremor; piloerection/chills;
restlessness; disturbed sleep

INTOXICATION

Dysphoric mood (sadness/anhedonia);
lethargy and fatigue; psychomotor
retardation or agitation; craving;
increased appetite; insomnia or
hypersomnia; bizarre or unpleasant
dreams

Unsteady gait; difficulty in standing; slurred
speech; nystagmus; decreased level
consciousness; erythematous skin lesions or
blisters
Hypotension; hyperthermia; depression of gag
reflex; coma
Tremor of tongue, eyelids, or outstretched
hands; nausea or vomiting; tachycardia;
postural hypotension; psychomotor agitation;
headache; insomnia; malaise or weakness;
transient visual, tactile, or auditory
hallucinations or illusions; paranoid ideation;
grand mal convulsions

From Haber PS, Demirkol A, Lange K, et al. Management of injecting substance users admitted to hospital. Lancet. 2009;374:1284–1292.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder
a rapid drop in blood pressure or seizure activity. Other supportive
treatment consists of a cooling blanket for hyperthermia and treatment of the hypertension and arrhythmias, which may respond to
sedation with lorazepam or diazepam. For the chronic user, comprehensive CBT interventions have been demonstrated as effective treatment options.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.9 Stimulant Use and Diversion
Cora Collette Breuner
In MTF 2021, 4.6% of 12th graders reported using OTC diet pills in
their lifetime and 1.1% in the past 30 days. These include nonprescription stimulants of two general types: pseudoamphetamines, usually
sold by internet/mail order, and OTC stimulants, primarily diet and
“stay-­awake” pills. These substances usually contain caffeine, ephedrine, and/or phenylpropanolamine.
The misuse of a stimulant medication, defined as taking a stimulant not prescribed by a healthcare provider and not in accordance
with healthcare provider guidance, has been growing over the past
two decades, with an increase in prevalence rates of nonprescription
stimulant use among both adolescents and young adults in the past
10 years. Nonprescription use of methylphenidate (MPH) in 2000 was
1.2%, increasing to 2% for MPH and 7.5% for nonprescription mixed
amphetamine salts (AMPs) in 2015.
The majority of nonprescription stimulant users reported obtaining
the substances by diversion, a process for obtaining the substance from
peers. Diversion occurs quite often and can begin in childhood, adolescence, or young adulthood. Lifetime rates of diversion ranged from
16–29% of students with stimulant prescriptions. One survey reported
that 23.3% of middle and high school students taking prescribed stimulants had been solicited to divert their medication to others at a rate that
increased from middle to high school. It has been shown that 54% of
college students prescribed stimulants for attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) had been approached to divert their medication.
In U.S. college students, nonprescription use of stimulants is more prevalent among particular subgroups (males; members of fraternities/sororities; with lower grade point averages; more likely to use alcohol, cigarettes,
marijuana, MDMA, or cocaine) and types of colleges (northeastern region,
with more competitive admission standards). Lifetime prevalence of nonprescription stimulant use was 6.9% and past-­month prevalence 2.1%.
According to a survey of 334 ADHD-­diagnosed college students taking
prescription stimulants, 25% misused their own prescription medications.
Scholastic pressures, including the need to succeed academically, and persistent social and financial demands place many students at an increased
risk for misuse of various substances, especially at the end of school terms.
A web-­based survey of medical and health profession students found that
the most common reason for nonprescription stimulant use was to focus
and concentrate during studying.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Misuse of stimulants is associated with psychosis, seizures, dysrhythmias, myocardial infarction, cardiomyopathy, and even sudden death.
Intentional misuse of MPH or AMPs in combination with other substances leads to adverse medical consequences. Importantly, 14% of the
emergency department (ED) visits for stimulant use were associated
with cardiovascular (CV) events. Psychosis includes visual hallucinations, delusions, anorexia, flattening of affect, and insomnia mediated by
dopaminergic excess. The CV effects include hypertension, arrhythmias,
tachycardia, cardiomyopathy, cardiac dysrhythmias, necrotizing vasculitis, and CV accidents. Case reports include serious CV adverse drug reactions (ADRs), sudden death, and psychiatric disorders. Many patients
report sleep difficulties (72%), irritability (62%), dizziness and lightheadedness (35%), headaches (33%), stomachaches (33%), and sadness (25%).
Other health risks include loss of appetite, weight loss, and nervousness.
Many users are involved in heavy episodic alcohol use while using MPH

1207

or AMPs. Most users of MPH or AMPs are unaware of these adverse
effects and predominantly “feel good” about taking these medications.
Despite reports that MPH misuse is a healthcare issue, >82% of primary
care physicians did not suspect misuse of prescribed ADHD medication in
one report, and <1% thought that their patients were diverting prescribed
ADHD medication. Improved monitoring for malingering and patient
misuse may assist stopping diversion of these medications. An ADHD
diagnosis should be confirmed in those requesting ADHD medication,
and they should be screened for use of other substances.

TREATMENT

Treatment for nonprescription stimulant overdose is similar as that for
amphetamine overdose. Haloperidol or droperidol is recommended
for acute agitation and delusional behaviors. Phenothiazines are contraindicated and may cause a rapid drop in blood pressure or seizure
activity. Hyperthermia may require use of a cooling blanket, and
sedation with a benzodiazepine is recommended for treatment of the
hypertension and arrhythmias. In those with chronic use, inpatient or
outpatient substance use interventions using CBT have been shown to
be the most effective treatment option.
Monitoring of the diversion and misuse of pharmaceutical stimulants must be a priority. More data need to be obtained on the prevalence, patterns, and harmful effects in adolescents and young adults.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.10 Opiates/Opioids
Cora Collette Breuner
Opiates refers to natural derived drugs (morphine, codeine, opium),
whereas opioids refers to natural, semisynthetic, and synthetic agents.
Heroin is a highly addictive synthetic opiate substance made from a naturally occurring substance (morphine) in the opium poppy plant. It is a
white or brown powder that can be injected (intravenously or subcutaneously), snorted/sniffed, or smoked. Intravenous (IV) injection produces
an immediate effect, whereas effects from the subcutaneous route occur
in minutes, and from snorting, in 30 minutes. After injection, heroin
crosses the blood-­brain barrier, is converted to morphine, and binds to
opiate receptors. Tolerance develops to the euphoric effect, and the chronic
user must take more heroin to achieve the same intense effect. Heroin use
among U.S. teens peaked in the mid-­1990s but is resurgent in some suburban communities, as is the use of prescription opioids found in the home.
Nationwide, 2.9% of high school students report having tried heroin at least
once. Fentanyl is a more potent opiate and is responsible for many opiate
overdoses. Other opioid drugs are noted in Table 157.16. Synthetic opioid
fentanyl-derived analogues or nitrazene drugs (novel potent opioids:NPO)
are much more potent than fentanyl and require higher and multiple doses
of naloxone to reverse an overdose. NPOs include brorphine, isotonitazene, metonitazene, and N-piperidinyl etonitazene. Fentanyl is often illicitly manufactured and may be mixed with other substances, including
xylazine, a nonopioid sedative. Xylazine, also known as tranq, is a veterinary drug that in humans produces central nervous system and respiratory
depression, as well as bradycardia and hypotension. Xylazine also produces
poorly healing cutaneous ulcerations at the site of injection and at distal
sites. In 2022, fentanyl-xylazine combinations have been responsible for
a significant number of overdose deaths; there is no antidote for xylazine.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations are determined by the purity of the heroin
or its adulterants, combined with the route of administration (oral
vs injection). The immediate effects include euphoria, diminution in
pain, flushing of the skin, and pinpoint pupils (see Table 157.15). An
effect on the hypothalamus is suggested by the lowering of body temperature. The most common dermatologic lesions are the “tracks,”
the hypertrophic linear scars that follow the course of large veins.
Smaller, discrete peripheral scars, resembling healed insect bites, may
be easily overlooked. The adolescent who injects heroin subcutaneously may have fat necrosis, lipodystrophy, and atrophy over portions

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1208 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 157.16  Types and Actions of the Most Commonly Prescribed and Used Opioids
TYPE OF OPIOID

ACTION ON OPIOID RECEPTOR

Alfentanil

Fully synthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors

Buprenorphine

Semisynthetic

Partial agonist of μ-­receptors and NOP receptors; antagonist of κ-­receptors

Codeine

Natural

Weak agonist of μ-­receptors

Diamorphine (heroin)

Semisynthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors, δ-­receptors, and κ-­receptors; predominant binding to μ-­receptors

Dihydrocodeine

Semisynthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors

Fentanyl

Fully synthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors, δ-­receptors, and κ-­receptors; predominant binding to μ-­receptors

Hydromorphone

Semisynthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors and κ-­receptors; predominant binding to μ-­receptors

Methadone

Fully synthetic

Agonist of μ-­receptors

Morphine

Natural

Agonist of μ-­receptors, δ-­receptors, and κ-­receptors; predominant binding to μ-­receptors

Oxycodone

Semisynthetic

Weak agonist of μ-­receptors, δ-­receptors, and κ-­receptors; predominant binding to
μ-­receptors

Pentazocine

Fully synthetic

Partial agonist of δ-­receptors and κ-­receptors; antagonist of μ-­receptors

Pethidine (meperidine)

Fully synthetic

Agonist of κ-­receptors

Tramadol

Fully synthetic

Weak agonist of μ-­receptors

Information presented is from the DrugBank and PubChem databases.
NOP, Nociceptin opioid peptide.
From Fountas A, Van Uum S, Karavitaki N. Opioid-­induced endocrinopathies. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2020;8:68–80.

of the extremities. Attempts to conceal these stigmata may include
amateur tattoos in unusual sites. Skin abscesses secondary to unsterile techniques of substance administration are usually found. There
is a loss of libido; the mechanism is unknown. The chronic heroin
user may resort to prostitution to support the habit, thus increasing
the risk of sexually transmitted diseases (including HIV), pregnancy,
and other infectious diseases. Constipation results from decreased
smooth muscle propulsive contractions and increased anal sphincter
tone. The absence of sterile technique in injection may lead to cerebral microabscesses or endocarditis, usually caused by Staphylococcus aureus or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Abnormal serologic reactions
are also common, including false-­positive Venereal Disease Research
Laboratories and latex fixation tests. Infectious complications are
usually not seen with oral prescription opioid use unless the pills are
dissolved and injected.

WITHDRAWAL

After ≥8 hours without heroin, the addicted individual undergoes
a series of physiologic disturbances over 24-­36 hours, referred to
collectively as “withdrawal” or abstinence syndrome (see Table
157.15). The earliest sign is yawning, followed by lacrimation,
mydriasis, restlessness, insomnia, “goose flesh,” cramping of the
voluntary musculature, bone pain, hyperactive bowel sounds and
diarrhea, tachycardia, and systolic hypertension. Although the
administration of methadone is the most common method of
detoxification, buprenorphine, an opiate agonist-­
antagonist, is
available for detoxification and maintenance treatment of heroin
and other opiates. Buprenorphine has the advantage of offering less
risk of addiction, overdose, and withdrawal effects and can be dispensed in the privacy of a physician’s office. Combined with behavioral interventions, it has a greater success rate of detoxification.
A combination substance, buprenorphine plus naloxone, has been
formulated to minimize use during detoxification. Clonidine and
tramadol have also been used to manage opioid withdrawal.
Substances used to treat opioid use disorder, a chronic relapsing
problem, traditionally include methadone maintenance and buprenorphine. Use-­
deterrent opioid pill formulations (when pain control
requires an opioid) include pills resistant to crushing that form a viscous gel when dissolved or pills with a sequestered opioid antagonist
(naltrexone).

OVERDOSE SYNDROME

Overdose syndrome is an acute reaction after administration of an opiate. It is the leading cause of death among substance users. Many opiate
overdoses are complicated by polydrug use (Fig. 157.4). The clinical
signs include stupor or coma, seizures, miotic pupils (unless severe
anoxia has occurred), respiratory depression, cyanosis, and pulmonary
edema. The differential diagnosis includes CNS trauma, diabetic coma,
hepatic (and other) encephalopathy, Reye syndrome, and overdose of
alcohol, barbiturates, PCP, or methadone. Diagnosis of opiate toxicity
is facilitated by IV administration of naloxone 0.1 mg/kg, not to exceed
2 mg, which causes dilation of pupils constricted by the opiate. Diagnosis is confirmed by the finding of opiates in the urine and/or serum.

TREATMENT

Treatment of acute heroin overdose consists of maintaining adequate oxygenation and continued administration of naloxone, a pure opioid antagonist (see Chapter 94). It may be given intravenously, intramuscularly,
subcutaneously, as a nasal spray, or by endotracheal tube. Naloxone has
an ultra-­rapid onset of action (1 minute) and duration of action of 20-­60
minutes. Naloxone is often available in the field, carried by first responders. Take-­home naloxone may also be given to substance users, their family, or friends; such programs have been effective in treating overdoses. If
there is no response, other etiologies for the respiratory depression must be
explored. Naloxone may have to be repeated if given by nasal route or continued for 24 hours if methadone, rather than shorter-­acting heroin, has
been taken. Higher and prolonged naloxone dosing is required for novel
potent opioid overdoses. Admission to the intensive care unit is indicated
for patients who require continuous naloxone infusions (rebound coma,
respiratory depression) and for those with life-­threatening arrhythmias,
shock, and seizures.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

157.11 Synthetic Cannabinoids
Cora Collette Breuner
Bath salts refers to a group of previously OTC, but now illicit, often
home synthesized, substances containing one or more chemicals similar to cathinone, an amphetamine-­like stimulant found in the khat

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 157 u Substance Use Disorder
Milwaukee County, WI (n=459)

Cook County, IL (n=1867)

Connecticut (n=1258)

Dallas-Fort Worth Metro Area,
TX (n=310)

Jefferson County, AL
(n=292)

1209

Methamphetamine
Heroin
Cocaine
Fentanyl and fentanyl analogs
Los Angeles County, CA (n=2327)

Tarrant, Parker, Johnson, and
Denton counties

Fig. 157.4 Proportional drug combinations involved in fatal overdoses in U.S. jurisdictions with detailed medical examiner data available, 2020.

Based on death investigations that were completed at the time of data request. Official counts by jurisdictions may differ as all investigations are
completed. These areas were chosen to provide a country-­wide view. (From Humphreys K, Shover CL, Andrews CM, et al. Responding to the opioid
crisis in North America and beyond: recommendations of the Stanford-­Lancet commission. Lancet. 2022;399:555–604, Fig. 5.)

plant. The bath salts, marketed under ever-­changing brand names (e.g.,
Lunar Wave, Cloud Nine, Vanilla Sky), are sold online or in substance
paraphernalia stores as a white or brown crystalline powder and can be
ingested, inhaled, or injected. The most current information about teen
use of bath salts is from the 2016 MTF survey of 8th, 10th, and 12th
graders, who report use of 0.9%, 0.8%, and 0.8%, respectively. The synthetic cathinones found in bath salts include methylone, mephedrone,
and 3,4-­methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV), all of which are chemically similar to amphetamines and MDMA (ecstasy).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The chemicals in bath salts raise brain dopamine levels, causing the user
to feel a surge of euphoria, with increased sociability and sex drive.
In addition, the user may experience a surge in norepinephrine, causing
reactions such as an elevated heart rate, chest pain, vasoconstriction,
diaphoresis, hyperthermia, dilated pupils, seizures, arrhythmias, and
high blood pressure. Users also experience psychiatric symptoms such
as aggressive behavior, panic attacks, paranoia, psychosis, delirium,
self-­mutilation, and hallucinations caused by elevated serotonin levels.
Intoxication from bath salts may cause excited delirium syndrome,
which includes dehydration, rhabdomyolysis, and kidney failure.

TREATMENT

Treatment of overdose should be directed at specific complications
but often includes benzodiazepines or propofol for agitation and other
neuropsychiatric manifestations. The synthetic cathinones in bath salts
are highly addictive, triggering intense cravings in those who consume
them frequently. This may result in dependence, tolerance, and strong
withdrawal symptoms, as seen in other highly addictive substances.
The sale of two of the synthetic cathinones, mephedrone and MDPV, is
illegal in the United States.

SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS (MARIJUANA)

Spice, K2, crazy clown, aroma, black mamba, blaze, dream, and
funky monkey are some of the common street names for synthetic

marijuana, which is a mixture of herbs or plant materials that have
been sprayed with artificial chemicals similar to THC, the psychoactive ingredient in marijuana. One active group of chemicals is the
carboxamides, which are not detected by standard assays to detect
THC. In the United States the chemicals in “spice” are designated
a Schedule I controlled substance (as is marijuana) by the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA), thereby making it illegal to
sell, buy, or possess them. Nonetheless, synthetic marijuana is the
second most common illicit substance used by high school seniors.
More than 10% of high school seniors used synthetic marijuana in
the last year.
Synthetic marijuana is mainly used by smoking, or mixed with
marijuana, or brewed as a tea for drinking. The chemicals in synthetic marijuana affect the same receptors as THC and produce
similar effects as seen in cannabis use, such as relaxation, elevated
mood, and altered perception. In addition, sympathomimetic symptoms are quite common and are the cause of significant toxicity.
Symptoms of intoxication depend on the individual compounds in
the community and include vomiting, tachycardia, hypertension,
hyperthermia, confusion, extreme anxiety, profuse sweating, agitation, aggression, dysphoria, hallucinations, seizures, rhabdomyolysis, dystonia, unresponsiveness, confusion, catatonia, “zombie-­like”
behaviors, psychosis, coma, and myocardial ischemia. Some of
the neuropsychiatric manifestations may last for 1-­4 weeks and at
times resemble autoimmune encephalitis syndromes. Patients often
require psychopharmacology for agitation or frank psychosis. In
response to legislation to ban the chemicals in OTC synthetic marijuana products, manufacturers alter and substitute the chemicals in
the product, keeping it on the legal market and leaving teens particularly vulnerable to potential health effects.
Synthetic marijuana is not detected by standard toxicology screening but can be identified in specialized laboratories.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1210 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

Chapter 158

Chapter 159

The Breast

Menstruation-­Related
Disorders

Cynthia M. Holland-­Hall
Breast development is often the first visible sign of puberty in the
adolescent female. Pediatric practitioners must be able to distinguish normal breast development, including normal variants, from
pathologic breast disorders. Visual inspection of the breast tissue
should routinely be a component of the adolescent’s general physical examination. Breast development during puberty is described
using the Sexual Maturity Rating (SMR) scale, progressing from
SMR 1 to SMR 5 as the breast becomes more mature (see Chapter
150, Fig. 150.2).

FEMALE DISORDERS
See Chapter 588.

MALE DISORDERS

Pubertal gynecomastia, benign glandular proliferation in the male
breast, occurs in up to 65% of healthy adolescent males (see Chapter
625). The incidence of gynecomastia has increased over the past
20 years, suggesting that changes in the endogenous or exogenous
sex-­steroid environment have occurred. It is thought that an imbalance of estrogen and androgen concentrations contributes, at least
in part, to the development of gynecomastia. Elevations of insulin-­
like growth factor (IGF)-­1 have also been demonstrated. The onset
of physiologic gynecomastia typically is between 10 and 13 years,
peaking at SMR 3-­4. Careful physical examination is essential to
distinguish between true gynecomastia, characterized by a discrete disk of palpable glandular tissue under the nipple-­areolar
complex, and pseudogynecomastia, characterized by more diffuse,
bilateral adiposity of the anterior chest wall. Physiologic gynecomastia regresses spontaneously in up to 90% of adolescents within
18-­24 months but may transition into lipomastia. Reassurance and
continued observation are recommended in most patients; surgery
may be indicated in severe or persistent cases. No medical therapies
for gynecomastia have been approved for use in adolescents by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Small, noncontrolled trials of
antiestrogens, such as tamoxifen, appear promising, but more evidence is needed. Conditions associated with nonphysiologic gynecomastia include endocrine disorders, liver disease, neoplasms,
chronic disease, and trauma. It can also be seen as a late effect in
childhood cancer survivors. Although dozens of medications are
implicated as possible causes of gynecomastia, convincing evidence
exists only for a few, including several antiandrogens and other
exogenous hormones, isoniazid, antiretrovirals, and histamine-­2
receptor blockers. Calcium channel blockers, isotretinoin, statins,
certain antipsychotics, proton pump inhibitors, lavender, and tea
tree oil may be causative. Among drugs of misuse, alcohol, opioids, and anabolic steroids may be associated with gynecomastia,
but minimal evidence supports an association with marijuana or
amphetamines.
Other breast pathology in males is uncommon. Benign masses such
as neurofibromas, lipomas, and dermoid cysts have been reported in
the male breast. Males with Klinefelter syndrome have an elevated risk
of breast cancer (see Chapter 623), but this malignancy is otherwise
exceedingly rare in adolescents.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fareeda Haamid and Gina S. Sucato
See also Chapter 587.
At least 400 lifetime episodes of menstruation are predicted in those
who menstruate, yet many adolescents consistently report stigma,
inadequate health education, and hesitance to discuss their menses
with trusted adults. Clinicians should normalize menstruation and
avoid unnecessarily medicalizing this natural process. Menstrual disturbances, including delayed onset, irregularity, heavy flow, and pain,
occur in 75% of adolescent females. For adolescents with minor variations from normal (Table 159.1), an explanation of symptoms and reassurance may be all that is needed. Severe dysmenorrhea or prolonged
menstrual bleeding can be not only frightening but a cause of persistent
morbidity requiring more intensive management, potentially including
referral to a specialist in adolescent gynecology.

NORMAL MENSTRUATION

The average age of menarche, or first menses, was thought to vary
according to ethnic origin and socioeconomic status (SES). A prospective U.S. study of nearly 1,100 diverse females demonstrated no
correlation between SES and menarche yet a statistically significant
correlation with SES and thelarche; lower SES was associated with
earlier pubertal onset. There is often a close concordance of the age at
menarche between mother and daughter, which suggests genetic factors are determinants in addition to individual factors such as weight,
exercise level, and chronic medical conditions. The age of menarche
has declined in countries and populations experiencing improved
nutritional standards and other living conditions. In U.S. females, the
average age of menarche, 12.5 years, has been relatively stable over the
last few decades. Higher body mass index (BMI) is associated with earlier onset of menarche.
The onset of breast budding (thelarche) is the first sign of puberty in
most females, though it has decreased worldwide by a mean of roughly
3 months per decade from 1977 to 2013. Menarche typically occurs
within 2-­3 years of thelarche during breast sexual maturity rating
(SMR; i.e., Tanner stage) 4. Longer cycle lengths ranging between 21
and 45 days occur initially then periods gradually become more regular. However, for most adolescents, by 3 years postmenarche, menstrual
cycle patterns are similar to adults, occurring every 21-­35 days.

MENSTRUAL IRREGULARITIES

In young adolescents, many menstrual variations are explained by
anovulation caused by immaturity of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­ovarian
Table 159.1  Characteristics of Normal Menses*
Cycle length**

21-­35 days
21-­45 days during first 3 yr after menarche

Duration of menses

7 or fewer days

Blood flow

6 or fewer soaked menstrual products per day
Infrequent overflow of menstrual cups

*Adolescents with two or more cycles outside this range or who skip their period for 3
consecutive months warrant evaluation.
**A cycle begins with the first day of one period and extends to the first day of the next.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 159 u Menstruation-Related Disorders
axis governing the menstrual cycle. Significant deviations from normal
should prompt a search for organic pathology in a logical and cost-­
effective manner. An accurate menstrual history is an important, but
often lacking, first step toward a diagnosis. At menarche, all patients
should be encouraged to track their periods.
A range of terms has previously been used to describe abnormal
menstrual bleeding. Terms such as “menorrhagia and metrorrhagia”
are imprecise, confusing, and not linked to any specific underlying
pathology. Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) is the preferred term
for uterine bleeding that is abnormal in regularity, volume, frequency, or duration. AUB is further specified by adding descriptive
terms such as heavy menstrual bleeding or intermenstrual bleeding.
A qualifier is added to categorize the etiology of abnormal bleeding.
Of the nine categories, the three most relevant to adolescents are
ovulatory dysfunction (AUB-­O), previously referred to as dysfunctional uterine bleeding and discussed in Chapter 159.2; coagulopathy (AUB-­C); and not otherwise classified (AUB-­N).
In addition to a standard medical history noting hospitalizations,
chronic illness, and medication and supplement use, a complete history for evaluating a patient with menstrual irregularity should include
the timing of pubertal milestones, such as onset of pubic and axillary
hair and breast development; a detailed patient menstrual history; age
of menarche and overall menstrual pattern of mother and sisters; and a
family history of gynecologic problems. The complete review of systems
should elicit any changes in headache pattern or vision; the presence of
galactorrhea; and any changes in skin, hair, or bowel patterns. Changes
in diet, level of exercise, and sports participation are also important
factors when generating a differential diagnosis. The patient should be
interviewed alone, and the confidential history should assess substance
use, consensual sexual activity, forced sexual behavior, abuse, and other
psychosocial stressors.
Assessment of basic growth parameters should include weight,
height, and BMI and a thorough review of the growth chart. Physical examination should document heart rate, blood pressure, SMR,
signs of androgen excess, such as hirsutism or severe acne, and signs
suggestive of an eating disorder (see Chapter 41), such as bradycardia, cachexia, lanugo, or knuckle calluses. A careful external genital
examination should be performed. An internal pelvic examination is
rarely necessary in the absence of sexual activity. Any internal exam
being considered for young adolescents should be performed with
proper equipment and technique by a clinician with expertise in this
age-­group. Transabdominal pelvic ultrasound can be a useful adjunct
for evaluating anatomic abnormalities in the adolescent; when indicated, MRI can provide greater detail of pelvic anatomy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

159.1 Amenorrhea
Fareeda Haamid and Gina S. Sucato
Amenorrhea, the absence of menstruation, generally requires evaluation at age 15 years, or if there has been no menstruation within 3 years
of the onset of puberty (primary amenorrhea), or if there has been no
menstruation for the length of three previous cycles in a postmenarchal patient (secondary amenorrhea). However, the following caveats exist: lack of any pubertal signs by age 13 years in a female should
prompt evaluation for pubertal delay; in sexually active patients, or
those with other symptoms suggesting pathology, evaluation should
be initiated without waiting for three missed cycles; in patients whose
breast development started between age 8 and 9 years, observation
for >3 years may be warranted in some cases, given data suggesting
that the age of thelarche has decreased but the age of menarche has
not. Conversely, expectant management with close follow-­up can be

1211

Table 159.2  Causes of Primary or Secondary Amenorrhea
Pregnancy (regardless of history can cause primary or secondary
amenorrhea)
Functional hypothalamic states (stress, weight loss, undernutrition,
high levels of exercise, energy deficit even at normal weight)
Relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-­S) (inadequate energy intake
causing impaired physiologic function, including amenorrhea,
bradycardia, and low bone density)
Eating disorders
Premature ovarian insufficiency (autoimmune, idiopathic, galactosemia,
or secondary to radiation or chemotherapy)
Hypothalamic and/or pituitary damage (e.g., irradiation, tumor,
traumatic brain injury, surgery, hemochromatosis, midline central
nervous system defects such as septooptic dysplasia, autoimmune
pituitary hypophysitis)
Thyroid disease (hyper-­ or hypo-­; hypothyroidism more likely to be
associated with increased bleeding)
Prolactinoma
Systemic disease (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, cyanotic
congenital heart disease, sickle cell disease, cystic fibrosis, celiac
disease)
Hyperandrogenism (polycystic ovary syndrome, nonclassic congenital
adrenal hyperplasia, adrenal tumor or dysfunction)
Drugs and medications (e.g., illicit drugs, atypical antipsychotics,
hormones)
Turner syndrome (including mosaicism)

Table 159.3  Additional Causes of Primary Amenorrhea
Physiologic/constitutional delay
Anatomic abnormalities
Müllerian agenesis
Imperforate hymen
Transverse vaginal septum
Genetic disorders
46,XY disorders of sexual development (e.g., androgen insensitivity
syndrome, 5α-­reductase deficiency, 17α-­hydroxylase deficiency)
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis (associated with various chromosome
patterns)
Turner syndrome (resulting from 45,X or a variety of mosaic or other
abnormal karyotypes)
Genetic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (e.g., X-­linked Kallmann
syndrome)

considered in a patient whose history, physical examination showing
some pubertal development, and family history suggest constitutional
delay of puberty.
The differential diagnosis of amenorrhea is broad (Table 159.2) and
requires a careful history and physical exam to guide any necessary diagnostic studies. Understanding the timing and tempo of the patient’s pubertal milestones is key to the evaluation. The first step in the amenorrhea
evaluation is to ascertain whether the patient has ever had any menstrual
bleeding. Conditions that can interrupt the menstrual cycle can also prevent menarche; therefore some aspects of the evaluation of primary and
secondary amenorrhea are identical. In females with primary amenorrhea,
genetic and anatomic conditions must also be considered (Table 159.3).

HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Important historical elements include dietary intake, exercise level, and
a thorough review of any ongoing symptoms, including fever, headache,
vision changes, chronic respiratory or gastrointestinal (GI) complaints,
bowel habit changes, galactorrhea, changes in hair or nails, excessive body
hair, severe acne, unexplained musculoskeletal complaints, and changes in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1212 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
vaginal discharge, which may decrease in females who are hypoestrogenic.
Any underlying medical conditions and the adequacy of their control
should be noted, as well as the presence of any renal or skeletal anomalies,
some of which may have associated reproductive system anomalies. Clinicians should document medications, particularly those for psychiatric
conditions. Family history of menarcheal age, eating disorders (see Chapter 41), and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS; see Chapter 589) should
be elicited. A thorough social history is necessary, especially concerning
the presence or absence of sexual activity or abuse (see Chapter 16.1).
Physical examination should begin with careful attention to growth
chart trajectories. In addition to a search for undiagnosed systemic disease, clues to an eating disorder, thyroid disease, or hyperandrogenism
should be sought. The exam should assess for BMI, orthostatic pulses,
blood pressure, abnormal dentition, anosmia or hyposmia (suggestive
of Kallmann syndrome; see Chapter 623.2), parotid enlargement, thyroid gland palpation, hepatosplenomegaly, abdominal mass, lymphadenopathy, and SMR (see Chapter 150). Skin examination should note any
lanugo, dry or doughy skin, loss of hair from scalp or eyebrows, striae,
acanthosis nigricans, or acne. Clinicians should assess for glandular
breast tissue via palpation in patients with primary amenorrhea. The
external genital exam should note SMR and appearance of the vagina,
which should be pink and moist; thin, dry, reddened mucosa suggests
estrogen deficiency. The clitoral width should be <1 cm. In the patient
with primary amenorrhea, vaginal patency can be painlessly assessed
using a slender saline-­moistened swab and careful avoidance of the
hymen. If physical assessment of the cervix and uterus is not tolerated, a
transabdominal pelvic ultrasound is advisable in patients with primary
amenorrhea, followed by MRI if more detail is needed.

LABORATORY STUDIES

A urine pregnancy test, serum prolactin levels, thyroid-­stimulating hormone, and follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) are reasonable to measure in all patients presenting with amenorrhea (Fig. 159.1). Elevation
of FSH (>30 mIU/mL) in an amenorrheic female suggests ovarian insufficiency, and if confirmed with repeat testing, should be followed with a

First-line evaluation
of amenorrhea:
TSH, Prolactin,
FSH, HCG
(and US if primary
amenorrhea)

Probable diagnosis of:
thyroid disease,
hyperprolactinemia,
pregnancy and/or
anatomic abnormalities
should be referred for
appropriate management

Low or normal FSH suggests

Elevated FSH suggests

Hypothalamic/pituitary injury
Female athlete/eating disorders
Systemic illness
Constitutional delay
Hyperandrogenic disorders

Ovarian insufficiency
as a result of cancer
treatment, autoimmune
or systemic disease,
genetic, and other
uncommon disorders
Repeat FSH
Evaluate for celiac and
other autoimmine disorders
Consider karyotype
MRI pelvis, adrenal
antibodies and
specialist referral

Fig. 159.1 Initial diagnostic testing algorithm to evaluate amenorrhea. FSH, Follicle-­stimulating hormone; HCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging;
US, ultrasound.

pelvic ultrasound, karyotype, and specialist referral. Diagnostic tests in the
patient presenting with amenorrhea should be tailored to the history and
physical exam.
In patients with signs of androgen excess (e.g., severe acne or hirsutism) or other physical stigmata associated with PCOS (rapid pubertal weight gain, acanthosis nigricans) consider measuring levels of
17-­hydroxyprogesterone (17-­OHP), free and total testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS), and androstenedione; all preferably
collected in the morning. PCOS affects up to 15% of females; diagnostic
criteria for adolescents are controversial but include variations of menstrual irregularity (ranging from amenorrhea to AUB) and clinical or
biochemical hyperandrogenism. The interpretation of polycystic ovarian
morphology identified on ultrasound in adolescents can be challenging,
and an ultrasound is not necessary for diagnosis in adolescents.
With the exceptions of pregnancy, constitutional delay, and imperforate hymen, conditions causing primary amenorrhea are associated with
reduced fertility; thus their diagnosis may cause profound emotional
responses in patients and families. Therefore before ordering studies to
confirm these diagnoses (e.g., karyotype, MRI of reproductive anatomy),
the clinician should carefully consider the implications and be prepared to
refer to specialists with experience managing the long-­term treatment of
such diagnoses.
In patients presumed to have hypothalamic amenorrhea, based on
prepubertal luteinizing hormone (LH) and low FSH levels using an
ultrasensitive assay and consistent history and physical exam, MRI of the
brain is not necessary in all patients. However, MRI should be considered for patients presenting with a headache history that has changed
from baseline; persistent emesis; change in thirst, urination, or vision;
elevated prolactin or galactorrhea; or other neurologic symptoms.

TREATMENT

Treatment for amenorrhea widely varies depending on the underlying cause. Many diagnoses require referral to clinicians in specialties
such as endocrinology, adolescent medicine, and gynecology; often,
collaboration with other disciplines such as psychology or nutrition
is indicated. The mainstay of PCOS treatment is suppression of ovarian androgens, typically with combined hormonal contraception
(i.e., estrogen and progestin) and lifestyle modifications to decrease
obesity and insulin resistance. Patients with abnormal glucose tolerance may benefit from the addition of metformin. Spironolactone,
an androgen receptor blocker, can also be used to reduce androgen
effects, including hirsutism. Metabolic syndrome is highly prevalent
in PCOS; thus clinicians should evaluate for comorbid diabetes and
hyperlipidemia with periodic lipid and hemoglobin A1c screening. It is
crucial to normalize weight and improve nutritional status for patients
with eating disorders or other hypoestrogenic conditions of energy
imbalance. It is not routinely recommended to initiate hormonal therapy in these patients. However, short-­term use of transdermal estrogen therapy (E2) to protect bone health may be considered for those
who remain amenorrheic after a trial of nutritional and activity modification. For females with amenorrhea due to partial or total ovarian
insufficiency, exogenous hormones are required for all pubertal development. Experts recommend starting at age 10-­12 years with low-­dose
transdermal estrogen, progressing to increased doses of estrogen and
cyclic progestin. Continued maintenance therapy can be accomplished
with higher-­dose combination products, as found in typical combined
hormonal contraceptive pills, patches, and vaginal rings.
In the absence of a clear indication such as PCOS, hormonal medications (e.g., combined hormonal methods) to produce monthly
bleeding are not recommended for patients with secondary amenorrhea because it will mask the patient’s subsequent menstrual pattern. However, in patients with normal postpubertal estrogen levels,
progesterone can be useful to periodically (every 4-­12 weeks) induce
shedding of the endometrial lining to avoid buildup and subsequent
heavy menses. One commonly used regimen is medroxyprogesterone 10 mg PO daily for the first 7-­14 days of the month.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 159 u Menstruation-Related Disorders

159.2 Abnormal Uterine Bleeding
Fareeda Haamid and Gina S. Sucato
Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) is a broad term used to describe any
menstrual bleeding pattern that deviates from physiologic patterns.
Clinicians are encouraged to categorize the abnormal pattern based
on the patient’s complaint, which is typically irregular (AUB/IMB:
intermenstrual bleeding) or heavy (AUB/HMB: heavy menstrual
bleeding).

IRREGULAR MENSTRUAL BLEEDING

Menstrual status should be treated as a vital sign; at every preventative
care or comprehensive visit clinicians should document the first day of
the last menstrual period and the menstrual pattern. Although menses are frequently irregular in the early postmenarcheal years, further
evaluation is necessary when menstrual patterns vary too widely from
what is normal for age. Even in the first postmenarcheal year, menses are usually not less frequent than every 45 days. Menses become
increasingly regular with age, and by 3 years after menarche typically
occur every 21-­35 days, lasting 3-­7 days. Personal cycle duration is usually established by age 19 or 20 years.
In the early postmenarcheal years, the most common cause of AUB in
adolescents is anovulation caused by immaturity of the hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­ovarian axis. In the absence of a mid-­cycle LH surge to
stimulate ovulation, there is no corpus luteum production of progesterone. Without the stabilizing effects of progesterone on the endometrial lining, there is increased risk of irregular bleeding. AUB caused

1213

by ovulatory dysfunction (AUB-­O; previously termed dysfunctional
uterine bleeding), describes irregular bleeding in the absence of specific anatomic, systemic, or endocrinologic disease. Although it is the
most common cause of abnormal menstrual bleeding in adolescents,
AUB-­O is a diagnosis of exclusion. It is important to remember that
most conditions that cause amenorrhea can first cause anovulation,
which is a key risk for heavy irregular bleeding. Table 159.4 lists the
causes of AUB and vaginal bleeding. Adolescents rarely present with
complaints of unusually short or light menses. However, short, light,
or infrequent menstrual patterns that have changed from a previously
established pattern may need to be evaluated similarly to secondary
amenorrhea.
Unscheduled bleeding during the use of hormonal contraception
frequently occurs, particularly with progestin-­only methods. Common
causes include medication nonadherence, interactions with prescribed
or over-­the-­counter medications, and smoking. Patients should be
reassured such bleeding is benign and not an indication to stop an otherwise satisfactory contraceptive method.

HEAVY AND PROLONGED MENSTRUAL BLEEDING

Irregular bleeding, particularly from anovulation, can be long and
heavy (see Table 159.4). However, a hematologic cause (AUB-­C)
should be strongly considered in patients with regular, cyclic menses
that are long and/or heavy, especially if heavy menses occurs at the
onset of menarche and bleeding disorder symptoms are present. von
Willebrand disease and other coagulation disorders are found in up to
13% and 20%, respectively, of patients with heavy menstrual bleeding.
Other symptoms suggestive of bleeding disorders include changing

Table 159.4  Causes of Vaginal Bleeding in Adolescence
CAUSES OF VAGINAL BLEEDING

EXAMPLES

FEATURES

Immature hypothalamic-­pituitary-­
ovarian axis (AUB-­O)

Patient within 2 yr of menarche

Patient responds to hormonal treatment.

Weight changes, disordered eating,
or excessive exercise

Anorexia nervosa, bulimia, weight gain or loss of
more than 10 pounds from any etiology

Weight loss more frequently results in lighter, less
frequent menses.

Endocrinologic causes

Thyroid disease, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)

Bleeding typically increases with hypothyroidism
and decreases with PCOS and hyperthyroidism.

Pregnancy complication

Threatened abortion, postpartum or postabortal
endometritis

History of sexual activity and/or pregnancy

Infection

Cervicitis, condyloma, pelvic inflammatory disease

Bleeding is usually not heavy and may occur during
or after sexual intercourse.

Trauma

Sexual assault, straddle injuries

History will be evident in patients of menstruating
age unless there is cognitive disability.

Vaginal foreign body

Toilet paper, broken condoms, tampons

Associated with odor and vaginal discharge, but
usually not heavy bleeding.

Hematologic causes
(AUB-­C)

Type 1, 2, 3 von Willebrand disease, platelet function
disorders, thrombocytopenia (idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura, drug induced),
symptomatic hemophilia carrier, clotting factor
deficiency, leukemia, aplastic anemia

Bleeding is heavy and/or long and frequently
regular, may present at menarche, and may be
accompanied by a suggestive personal or family
history
(hysterectomy, uterine ablation, cautery for epistaxis)
or physical exam (ecchymoses, petechiae).

Medications

Estrogens and progestins in combined hormonal
contraception
Androgens
Drugs that affect prolactin (estrogens,
phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants,
metoclopramide)
Anticoagulants (heparin, warfarin, aspirin, NSAIDs)
SSRIs

Affect the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­ovarian axis,
endometrial lining, platelets, or coagulation
pathway.

Anatomic

Partial obstruction of vagina or uterus causing
asynchronous bleeding; cervical or endometrial
polyps or myomas; hemangioma; uterine vascular
malformation; genital/reproductive tract cancer

Most of these entities are extremely rare, especially
reproductive tract cancers.

Systemic disease

Celiac disease, rheumatoid arthritis, Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome and other connective tissue disorders

Accompanied by other condition-­specific signs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1214 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
a pad or tampon more than hourly, passing clots larger than 1 inch
in diameter, iron deficiency, menses longer than 7 days, a history of
hemorrhagic ovarian cysts, excessive bleeding from wounds or postoperatively, mucosal bleeding (epistaxis or GI tract), and first-­degree
relatives with heavy menses or epistaxis requiring medical treatment.
Inherited collagen disorders such as Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome are associated with vascular collagen abnormalities; thus patients with heavy
menses and manifestations of joint hyperflexibility may require a
hematology referral.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Table 159.5 lists laboratory tests to consider in patients with long, heavy
bleeding. Females with persistent heavy bleeding despite negative first-­
line testing should be referred to a hematologist for testing for platelet
function disorders, factor deficiencies, and other less common disorders. In the initial evaluation, rapidity of blood loss in conjunction with
the hemoglobin establishes the bleeding severity: mild (hemoglobin
10-­11 g/dL), moderate (hemoglobin 7-­10 g/dL), or severe (hemoglobin <7 g/dL). Iron deficiency is defined as serum ferritin of <15 μg/mL.

TREATMENT

In bleeding that has resulted in mild anemia, the patient should
keep a menstrual calendar to follow the subsequent flow patterns.
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; e.g., naproxen)
are more effective than placebo in treating heavy bleeding and can
also treat concurrent dysmenorrhea. Clinicians may need to educate patients and families about the noncontraceptive medical indications for hormonal contraception given the unnecessary stigma
commonly associated with these medications. Active bleeding typically responds well to cycling with any combined hormonal contraceptive method containing estrogen and progestin starting with
once-­daily dosing; up to twice-­daily dosing may be considered until
bleeding stops. Patients with estrogen contraindications such as
migraine with aura, uncontrolled hypertension, or thrombotic risks
can be treated with progestins alone, such as medroxyprogesterone
10 mg orally daily or norethindrone acetate 5-­10 mg PO daily, either
continuously or for 10-­14 days per month. The latter regimen will
be followed by monthly bleeding.
Iron deficiency with or without anemia should be treated with 65 mg
elemental oral iron once daily until serum ferritin >30 μg/mL. Dosing more frequently than daily has not been shown to be beneficial.
Ferritin and hemoglobin should be repeated 4 weeks after treatment

Table 159.5  Laboratory Tests to Evaluate Patients with
Abnormal Uterine Bleeding
Complete blood count with platelets
Ferritin
Urine pregnancy test (regardless of history)
Thyroid function studies
Total and free testosterone*
Liver and kidney function studies
Nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) or equivalent testing for
Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Trichomonas
vaginalis
Prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time
von Willebrand factor antigen, vWF activity (such as ristocetin cofactor),
and factor VIII† activity
Pelvic ultrasound (if palpable mass or bleeding persists despite
treatment)
*In patients with signs or symptoms suggestive of polycystic ovary syndrome, such as
acne, hirsutism, obesity, acanthosis nigricans, and a history of infrequent menses.
†Any abnormalities should be referred to a hematologist. False-­negative von Willebrand tests and false-­positive platelet function studies have been observed in the
setting of anemia. It is preferable to obtain tests before estrogen treatment is started
to minimize false-­negative results. Repeat testing is common in patients for whom
there is a high pretest suspicion.

is initiated. Once anemia is corrected, iron should be continued once
daily for 3 months to replenish iron stores. A referral to hematology
may be warranted for insufficient response or intolerance of oral iron
for consideration of intravenous (IV) iron therapy.
With moderate anemia, any of the hormonal regimens noted earlier can be used. However, it may be necessary in patients with more
brisk bleeding to start with three to four combined oral contraceptive (COC) pills (or three to four doses of medroxyprogesterone
10 mg) per day, with additional medication to control nausea. The
dose can usually be tapered to daily dosing over the next 2 weeks.
Patients with ongoing rapid bleeding, syncope or lightheadedness,
hemodynamic instability, or hemoglobin of <7 g/dL should be
treated in the hospital.
Patients with severe anemia should be treated with one of the
hormone tapers described earlier, in addition to IV fluid or blood
products as indicated; it is advisable to draw necessary hematologic
laboratory studies before transfusion. Patients with emesis or other significant symptoms may be initially treated with conjugated estrogens
25 mg IV every 4-­6 hours for 1-­2 days. A COC or progestin regimen
should be added within 24-­48 hours because progestin is needed to
stabilize the endometrial lining and can be used as maintenance therapy after hospital discharge. In the exceptionally rare case of a patient
whose bleeding cannot be controlled hormonally, options for gynecologic interventions include intrauterine Foley balloon placement or
uterine packing to tamponade the uterus mechanically. Dilation and
curettage, performed frequently in adults, is almost never indicated
in adolescents and can increase blood loss in patients with bleeding
disorders.
Hormonal AUB treatment should continue for at least 3-­
6
months, depending on the patient’s age, prior menstrual history,
and severity of presentation, before reassessing the need for ongoing
therapy. Additional options for maintenance therapy include combined hormonal transdermal patches and vaginal rings; depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate 150 mg intramuscularly (IM) or 104
mg subcutaneously (SC) every 3 months; and placement of a levonorgestrel intrauterine device (IUD), depending on the patient’s
preference and/or concurrent need for long-­term contraception.
For patients who need or choose to avoid hormonal therapy, antifibrinolytics such as tranexamic acid 1,300 mgPO 3 times daily can
be used for up to 5 days during monthly menstruation in patients
who do not have an increased risk of thrombosis.
Females with a known bleeding disorder may be up to 5 times more
likely to develop heavy menstrual bleeding. Therefore it can be helpful
while the patient is premenarcheal to devise a proactive plan in collaboration with the patient’s hematology team in the event of acute heavy
menstrual bleeding, which can occur at menarche.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

159.3 Dysmenorrhea
Fareeda Haamid and Gina S. Sucato
Dysmenorrhea, painful uterine cramps that precede and accompany
menses, occur in up to 90% of 17-­to 24-­year-­olds. Although dysmenorrhea is frequently severe enough to interfere with school and other
activities, many adolescents undertreat their symptoms, and fewer seek
medical care.
Dysmenorrhea may be primary or secondary. Primary dysmenorrhea, characterized by the absence of any specific pelvic pathologic
condition, is the more commonly occurring form, accounting for
approximately 90% of cases. After ovulation, withdrawal of progesterone results in synthesis of prostaglandins by the endometrium, which
stimulates local vasoconstriction, uterine ischemia and pain, and
smooth muscle contraction, explaining uterine and GI symptoms.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 159 u Menstruation-Related Disorders
Secondary dysmenorrhea results from underlying pathology,
such as anatomic abnormality, or infection, such as pelvic inflammatory disease. However, the most common cause of secondary dysmenorrhea in adolescents is endometriosis, a condition in which
implants of endometrial tissue are found outside the uterus, usually near the fallopian tubes and ovaries. Often, other family members have endometriosis. Severe menstrual pain is characteristic of
endometriosis; however, adolescents may also have noncyclic pain.
Although primary dysmenorrhea is almost always the cause, a careful
history and physical examination are required for adolescents who
present with pelvic pain. An internal pelvic exam is not required in

1215

females who are not sexually experienced and whose presentation is
consistent with primary dysmenorrhea. Constipation can vary cyclically in many females, especially those with irritable bowel syndrome,
and often significantly contributes to the pain. Mittelschmerz, brief
severe pain with ovulation, occurs at mid-­cycle. Table 159.6 lists the
differential diagnosis and “red flags” for secondary dysmenorrhea.
Ovarian cysts, a frequent concern of families, are usually transient
and painless.
Treatment for primary dysmenorrhea is aimed at preventing or decreasing prostaglandin production. The mainstay of first-­line treatment is prostaglandin synthetase inhibition with NSAIDs (Table 159.7) beginning at,

Table 159.6  Differential Diagnosis of Dysmenorrhea in Adolescents*
PRESENTATION

DIAGNOSIS

Primary

Crampy pelvic pain may be accompanied by aching/
heaviness in lower back and upper thighs, nausea,
emesis, diarrhea, headache, mastalgia, fatigue,
and dizziness; symptoms begin at or shortly before
menstrual flow onset and last 1-­3 days.

Normal physical exam; internal exam only for sexually active
adolescents. Ultrasound can be reserved for patients with
atypical presentations (e.g., onset at menarche) or pain
despite NSAIDs and hormonal therapy.

Endometriosis and
adenomyosis†

Increasingly severe dysmenorrhea despite
adequate therapy; pain exacerbated during
menses or noncyclical pain.

Increased risk in patients with obstructive anomalies and
possibly bleeding disorders; however, most adolescents
with endometriosis have normal anatomy and bleeding
indices; visual diagnosis is made during surgery and
confirmed by tissue sample.

Müllerian anomalies with
partial outflow
obstruction

Pain begins at or shortly after menarche and
occurs with bleeding; presence of known renal tract
anomaly (often coexists with müllerian anomaly).

Pelvic ultrasound will demonstrate uterine anomalies (e.g.,
rudimentary uterine horn); MRI may be required to identify
some lesions (e.g., obstructed hemivagina).

Pelvic inflammatory
disease

Abrupt onset of dysmenorrhea more severe
than baseline in a sexually active adolescent;
presentation can range from mild discomfort to
acute abdomen.

Clinical diagnosis made by finding lower abdominal
tenderness plus cervical motion tenderness, uterine
or adnexal tenderness on bimanual pelvic examination
(see Chapter 146); supporting features include dysuria,
dyspareunia, vaginal discharge, fever, and increased white
blood cell count.

Pregnancy complication

Coincident pain and bleeding may be
misdiagnosed as dysmenorrhea.

Urine test positive for human chorionic gonadotropin.

*Bold entries indicate “red flags” for diagnosis.
†Adenomyosis is the presence of endometrial tissue within the uterine myometrium.

Table 159.7  Treatment for Dysmenorrhea
NSAIDs (for up to 5 days)

MEDICATION

REGIMEN

COMMENTS

Ibuprofen 200 mg
Naproxen sodium 275 mg

2 tablets PO q4-­6h
550 mg loading dose, then 275 mg PO
q6h
400 mg loading dose, then 200 mg PO
q12h prn pain

Over-­the-­counter
Patients may prefer the equivalent 550 mg
PO q12h dosing regimen.
Can be used for patients with bleeding
disorders.

Continuous hormone regimens vs
standard 21 hormone days followed
by 7 placebo days may offer better
relief but may increase the risk
of unscheduled intermenstrual
bleeding.
DMPA 150 mg IM or 104 mg SC q3mo;
levonorgestrel intrauterine device for
up to 8 yr; etonogestrel implant

Treatment can be based on patient
preference.

11.25 mg IM q3mo

Consider for presumed endometriosis
unresponsive to hormonal methods; add-­
back hormones advised to prevent bone
loss.

Celecoxib (cyclooxygenase
[COX]-­2 inhibitor)*
Hormonal contraception

Combined hormonal
contraceptive

Progestin-­only methods

Gonadotropin-­releasing
hormone agonist

Depot leuprolide

DMPA has potential side effects of weight
gain, interference with expected bone
density increase during adolescence, and
higher discontinuation rates than LARC
methods.

*This medication may cause serious cardiovascular and gastrointestinal events. Use with caution in patients with impaired renal or liver dysfunction, heart failure, or a history of GI
bleeding or ulcer. Full prescribing information can be found at https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2018/020998s050lbl.pdf
DMPA, Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate; LARC, long-­acting reversible contraceptive; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1216 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 159.8  Criteria for Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
A. In the majority of menstrual cycles, at least five symptoms must
be present in the final week before the onset of menses, start to
improve with a few days after the onset of menses, and become
minimal or absent in the week post menses.
B. One (or more) of the following symptoms must be present:
1. Marked affective lability (e.g., mood swings; feeling suddenly
sad or tearful, or increased sensitivity to rejection).
2. Marked irritability or anger or increased interpersonal conflicts.
3. Marked depressed mood, feelings of hopelessness, or self-­
deprecating thoughts.
4. Marked anxiety, tension, and/or feelings of being keyed up or
on edge.
C. One (or more) of the following symptoms must additionally be
present, to reach a total of five symptoms when combined with
symptoms from criterion B.
1. Decreased interest in usual activities (e.g., work, school,
friends, and hobbies).
2. Subjective difficulty in concentration.
3. Lethargy, easy fatigability, or marked lack of energy.
4. Marked change in appetite, overeating, or specific food
cravings.
5. Hypersomnia or insomnia.
6. A sense of being overwhelmed or out of control.
7. Physical symptoms such as breast tenderness or swelling, joint
or muscle pain, a sensation of “bloating,” or weight gain.
Note: The symptoms in criteria A-­C must have been met for most
menstrual cycles that occurred in the preceding year.
D. The symptoms are associated with clinically significant distress or
interference with work, school, usual social activities, or relationships
with others (e.g., avoidance of social activities; decreased
productivity and efficiency at work, school, or home).
E. The disturbance is not merely an exacerbation of the symptoms of
another disorder, such as major depressive disorder, panic disorder,
persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), or a personality disorder
(although it may co-­occur with any of these disorders).
F. Criterion A should be confirmed by prospective daily ratings
during at least two symptomatic cycles. (Note: The diagnosis may
be made provisionally prior to this confirmation.)
G. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment)
or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed., pp. 171–172.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

or preferably the day before, menstruation. High doses of around-­the-­
clock treatment are rarely needed for more than the first 2 days. More
data are needed to make specific treatment recommendations regarding
exercise, but females should be reassured that participation in usual sports
and extracurricular activities is not only permissible but a benchmark of
adequate treatment.
For those adolescents whose pain does not optimally respond to
dosed NSAIDs, or who also require contraception, the currently
available forms of hormonal contraception will improve dysmenorrhea. Up to three cycles may be required to appreciate the full
benefit. Methods and regimens that eliminate a placebo interval
may provide better relief. Despite various studies of adjuvant treatments including heat, aromatherapy, acupressure, acupuncture,

transcutaneous nerve stimulation, herbal remedies, yoga, and
dietary supplements, hormonal medications are the mainstay of
second-­line treatment. Females whose pain persists despite more
than 3 months of adequate hormonal therapy require further evaluation and treatment and referral to a specialist, as endometriosis
has been found in up to 69% of adolescents who underwent laparoscopy for persistent pelvic pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

159.4 Premenstrual Syndrome and
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Fareeda Haamid and Gina S. Sucato
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS), which occurs in up to 30% of adolescents, is marked by symptoms such as mood changes, bloating,
and breast tenderness that begin in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle (i.e., the time between ovulation and the first day of
bleeding) and improve within a few days after the onset of menses.
Adolescents are often reassured by education about the relationship
of symptoms to the menstrual cycle. Lifestyle interventions such
as exercise and stress reduction sometimes provide adequate relief.
For more severe symptoms, cognitive-­behavioral therapy may be
useful. Current data do not support routine recommendations for
any vitamin, mineral, or other dietary supplements in the absence
of documented deficiency. There is not strong evidence supporting
the effectiveness of combined hormonal contraceptive methods for
PMS. However, some experts suggest this treatment option for adolescents who also have dysmenorrhea, acne, or contraceptive needs.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is distinguished
from other depressive disorders by its timing; mood symptoms are
precipitated by ovulation, recur in the luteal phase, and disappear
at the end of menstruation. It is distinguished from PMS by the
severity and consequences of the affective symptoms. PMDD causes
significant distress and functional impairment and may be accompanied by physical and behavioral symptoms (Table 159.8). It is a
distinct, treatment-­responsive depressive disorder. PMDD occurs
in 2–6% of menstruating females worldwide. Accurate diagnosis
requires use of a menstrual calendar to prospectively document
cyclic symptoms. Other mental health conditions such as depression and anxiety disorders may be exacerbated before or during
menses, but symptoms will occur throughout the cycle.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are first-­line
therapy for PMDD and severe PMS. In contrast to the treatment of
depression, SSRIs can be rapidly effective for premenstrual symptoms and thus can be prescribed either continuously or intermittently, beginning at ovulation (or whenever in the luteal phase
symptoms begin) and ending when symptoms resolve. Adolescents
can be prescribed the standard regimens used for adults, such as
fluoxetine 20 mg PO daily. For adolescents who also need contraception, the drospirenone 3 mg and ethinyl estradiol 0.02 mg combination pill delivered for 24 days followed by 4 inactive days has
been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for PMDD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 160 u Contraception

Chapter 160

Contraception
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
The consequences of sexual activity, including unintended pregnancy
(see Chapter 161) and sexually transmitted infections (STIs; Chapter
163), occur in adolescents at higher rates than in adults. Significant
barriers, including access to confidential care, may delay an adolescent’s ability to access reproductive healthcare until after initiation of
sexual activity, and many may become pregnant and/or acquire an STI
during this interval. Early and appropriate counseling and education
with adolescents, including direct discussion of the risks of unintended
pregnancy and STI prevention, can help to mitigate these risks; adolescents who plan sexual initiation are 75% more likely to use contraception at sexual debut. Therefore appropriate patient-­centered counseling
and provision of contraception as warranted are an essential component of comprehensive healthcare for adolescents. Female refers to cis-­
female but theoretically would include all those with a uterus engaging
in sexual behaviors that put them at risk for pregnancy.

CONTRACEPTIVE EFFECTIVENESS

To decrease rates of unintended pregnancy, the American Academy of
Pediatrics (AAP) and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommend that healthcare providers counsel about
and ensure access to all contraceptive methods for their adolescent

1217

patients. Comparing typical effectiveness of contraceptive methods,
Figure 160.1 illustrates a tiered system of contraceptive methods ranging from more effective to least effective. These tiers are categorized by
typical-­use failure rates, which reflect the effectiveness of a method for
the average person who may not always use the method consistently
or correctly (Table 160.1). For example, for oral contraceptive pills, the
typical-­use failure rate is 7%, whereas the perfect-­use failure rate is <1%.
Tier 1 methods, the most effective, include those with failure rates of
<1 pregnancy per 100 women in a year of typical use, and reversible
Tier 1 methods include intrauterine devices (IUDs) and implants. Tier
2 methods have failure rates of 4-­7 pregnancies per 100 women in a year
of typical use and include injectable contraception, oral contraceptive
pills, contraceptive patches, and the vaginal ring. Tier 3 methods have
failure rates of >13 pregnancies per 100 women per year of typical use
and include the male and female condom, the diaphragm, withdrawal,
the sponge, fertility awareness–based methods, and spermicides.

160.1 Contraceptive Use
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman

SEXUAL ACTIVITY

According to the 2021 Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System, 30% of
U.S. high school students had ever had sexual intercourse and approximately 22% reported being currently sexually active. These numbers
have been decreasing since 2015. However, significant decreases noted
from 2019 to 2021 may be attributable to the effect of the COVID pandemic on behaviors.

How to make your method
most effective

More effective
Less than 1 pregnancy per
100 women in 1 year
TIER 1

After procedure follow healthcare provider’s
instructions on when to resume sexual
activity with no concerns or risk of pregnancy.
IUD/Implant: May depend on timing of insertion
and/or contraceptive use prior to insertion.
Implant

Vasectomy*

Tubal
occlusion/
ligation*

IUD

Vasectomy: *Please note that it would be highly
unlikely for an adolescent to undergo vasectomy
or tubal ligation/occlusion, as these are mostly
permanent methods of preventing pregnancy
that require informed consent from the individual.

Injectable: Get repeat injections on time

4-7 pregnancies per
100 women in 1 year
TIER 2

Pills: Take a pill each day
Injectable

Male
Condom

Pill

Fertility AwarenessBased Methods

Less effective
More than 13 pregnancies per
100 women in 1 year
TIER 3

Withdrawal

Patch

Diaphragm

Female
Condom

Ring

Sponge

Patch, ring: Keep in place, change on time

Condoms, sponge, withdrawal,
spermicides, diaphragm: Use
correctly every time you have sex
Fertility awareness-based
methods: Abstain or use condoms
on fertile days. May utilize FDA-approved
app (Natural Cycles) to better track ovulation.

Spermicides

Fig. 160.1 Effectiveness of contraceptive methods. (Modified from Trussell J, Aiken ARA, Micks E, Guthrie K. Contraceptive efficacy, safety, and
personal considerations. In: Hatcher RA, Nelson AL, Trussell J, et al., eds. Contraceptive Technology, 21st ed. New York: Ayer Company Publishers;
2018:102.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1218 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 160.1  Efficacy of Contraceptives
FAILURE RATE (%)*
METHOD

TYPICAL USE

PERFECT USE

Implant
Nexplanon

0.1

0.1

Intrauterine Devices (IUDs)

ParaGard T380A
Mirena

0.8
0.1

0.6
0.1

Liletta

0.1

0.1

Kyleena

0.2

0.2

Skyla

0.4

0.3

4

0.2

Combination Oral
Contraceptives

7

Progestin-­
Only Oral
Contraceptives

SOME ADVANTAGES

SOME ADVERSE EFFECTS AND
DISADVANTAGES

Convenience; long-­term
contraception; efficacy not
dependent on patient adherence;
rapid return of fertility after
removal

Irregular bleeding; amenorrhea, insertion and/or
removal complications

Convenience; long-­term
contraception; efficacy not
dependent on patient adherence;
rapid return of fertility after
removal
Effective for 10 yr; nonhormonal
Effective for 8 yr; decreased
menstrual bleeding and improved
symptoms of dysmenorrhea

Rare uterine perforation; risk of infection with
insertion

Decreased menstrual bleeding
and improved symptoms of
dysmenorrhea
Smaller T-­frame and narrower
insertion tube
Smaller T-­frame and narrower
insertion tube

Irregular/heavy bleeding and dysmenorrhea
Irregular bleeding in first 3-­6 mo, followed by
amenorrhea; unpredictable suppression of
ovulation and potential ovulatory SE (ovarian
cysts, PMS, dysmenorrhea)
Irregular bleeding in first 3-­6 mo; unpredictable
suppression of ovulation and potential ovulatory
SE (ovarian cysts, PMS, dysmenorrhea)
Irregular bleeding in first 3-­6 mo; unpredictable
suppression of ovulation and potential ovulatory SE
(ovarian cysts, PMS, dysmenorrhea), unpredictable
bleeding pattern for the duration of use
Irregular bleeding in first 3-­6 mo; unpredictable
suppression of ovulation and potential ovulatory SE
(ovarian cysts, PMS, dysmenorrhea), unpredictable
bleeding pattern for the duration of use

Convenience of q3mo injections;
same as progestin-­only oral
contraceptives

Delayed return to fertility, irregular bleeding, and
amenorrhea; weight gain; decreased bone mineral
density while receiving injections

0.3

Protection against ovarian and
endometrial cancer; suppresses
ovulation, which can improve
symptoms of PMS, PMDD, and
dysmenorrhea; quick return to
fertility upon discontinuation

Increased rate of thromboembolism, which
increases with age and in those with underlying
risks for blood clots, nausea; headache;
contraindicated with breastfeeding

7

0.3

Safe in breastfeeding women and
those with underlying risk of
blood clots

Irregular, unpredictable bleeding; must take at
same time every day, unpredictable suppression
of ovulation

Transdermal Patch

7

0.3

Convenience of once-­weekly
application; same benefits as
combination oral contraceptives

Application site reactions; detachment; increased
estrogen exposure as compared with oral
contraceptives

Vaginal Ring

7

0.3

Convenience of once-­monthly
application, benefits similar to
combination oral contraceptive
pills

Discomfort of ring or with insertion; vaginal
discharge

Diaphragm with
Spermicide

17

16

Low cost

High failure rate; cervical irritation; there can be
increased risk of urinary tract infection and toxic
shock syndrome with improper and prolonged
use; some require fitting by healthcare
professional; may be difficult to obtain; available
only by prescription

21

5

Protection against STIs; covers
external genitalia; OTC

13

2

Protection against STIs, OTC, male
participation

High failure rate; difficult to insert; may be less
appealing because of need to stop during sexual
activity
High failure rate; allergic reactions; may be less
appealing because of need to stop during sexual
activity; breakage possible

Cervical Cap

16–32

9–26

Effective for 48 hr; can be used for
∼2 yr

High failure rate, cervical irritation, risk of toxic
shock, limited sizes, requires prescription

Withdrawal

20

4

No drugs or devices

High failure rate

Sponge

14–27

9–20

OTC; low cost; no fitting required;
provides 24 hr of protection

High failure rate; contraindicated during menses;
increased risk of toxic shock syndrome with
improper and prolonged use

Injectable
Depo-­Provera

Condoms Only
Female
Male

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

Chapter 160 u Contraception

1219

Table 160.1  Efficacy of Contraceptives—cont’d
FAILURE RATE (%)*

SOME ADVERSE EFFECTS AND
DISADVANTAGES

METHOD

TYPICAL USE

PERFECT USE

Fertility
Awareness–
Based Methods

15

—

Low cost; no drugs or devices

High failure rate; can be difficult to use properly if
periods/ovulation are not well established/regular,
requires periods of abstinence

21

16

Available OTC
—

Phexxi

14

5

Microbicidal effect, increased
viscosity as compared to other
spermicides

High failure rate; local irritation; must be reapplied
with repeat intercourse; unknown effect on HIV
transmission, cost
Requires a prescription, local irritation; must be
reapplied with repeat intercourse; cannot be
used with vaginal ring, cost/insurance coverage

No Method

85

85

—

—

Spermicide
Nonoxynol-­9

SOME ADVANTAGES

*Risk of unintended pregnancy during first year of use; data from Trussel J et al: In: Hatcher RA, Nelson AL, Trussell J, et al., eds. Contraceptive Technology, 21st ed. New York: Ayer
Company Publishers; 2018.
STIs, Sexually transmitted infections; OTC, over the counter; N-­9, Nonoxynol 9.
Adapted from Choice of contraceptives. Med Lett 2018;60(1557):161.

greatly increased over the last 50 years. Factors associated with contraceptive use at first sex include increasing age among teens up to age 17
years, time spent in college, and planning their sexual debut.
More than half of sexually experienced female teens are currently
using the most effective reversible contraceptives or moderately effective contraceptive methods. U.S. teens’ use of hormonal methods at last
intercourse is less frequent compared with teens in other developed
countries. A higher likelihood of female current contraceptive use is
associated with older age at sexual initiation, aspirations for higher
academic achievement, acceptance of one’s own sexual activity, and a
positive attitude toward contraception. Despite the importance of dual-­
method use to protect against both unwanted pregnancy and STIs, only
33% of sexually active female U.S. teens report using a barrier method
(condoms) plus another method of contraception at last sexual activity.

Switzerland
Netherlands
Denmark
Finland
Germany
Greece
Canada
Australia
United States
0

5

10

15

Fig. 160.2 Teen birthrates in high-­income countries, 2020. Live births

per 1,000 females age 15-­19 yr. (Data from The World Bank Group.
United Nations Population Division, World Population Prospects. https:
//data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.ADO.TFRT.)

Although U.S. teens and European teens have similar levels of sexual activity and ages of sexual debut, U.S. teens are less likely to use
contraception and less likely to use the most effective methods. Teen
pregnancy rates have been declining worldwide—a result of delayed
initiation of sexual activity and increased contraceptive use. Despite
this decline, the United States still had the highest teen birthrate in the
Western industrialized world as of 2020, with 16.7 live births per 1,000
females age 15-­19 years (Fig. 160.2). This is 8 times higher than the teen
birthrate in Switzerland, which has the lowest rate in Western Europe.
As of 2020 the teenage pregnancy rate in the United States is 31 pregnancies per 1,000 women, with a rate of 13.6/1,000 in those 15-­17 years
and 56.9/1,000 in those 18-­19 years. The majority of these pregnancies
are unintended, and one in five births are a repeat birth, indicating an
unmet need for reliable, effective contraception that teens will correctly
and consistently use.

USE OF CONTRACEPTION AMONG TEENS

According to the 2017–2019 National Survey of Family Growth, 78%
of females and 89% of males who had their first sexual intercourse
before age 20 years used a contraceptive method at first intercourse.
The method most used by teenage females is the condom, followed by
withdrawal (both least effective methods) and then the pill (a moderately effective method). IUDs and implants, the most effective reversible methods, are used by 20% of females 15-­19 years, with the implant
being more commonly used (15%). Use of contraception at first sex has

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.2 Contraceptive Counseling
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
The adolescent preventive health visit offers opportunities for confidential discussions with all adolescents and the opportunity to identify
and discuss sexual practices that may be putting the adolescent at risk
for STIs or unintended pregnancy. It is also a time to discuss safe sexual
behaviors, including abstinence (see Chapter 151). It is important to
ask specifically about adolescents’ sexual behaviors to make sure your
counseling is appropriate for their sexual activity. Adolescents with
medical conditions, either chronic or acute, are particularly vulnerable to having sexual and reproductive health omitted from their visits,
although they have similar sexual health and contraceptive needs (see
Chapter 756). Their comorbidities or concurrent medication use may
make STIs and unintended pregnancy an increased health risk and
may affect contraceptive counseling/options. The U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use (MEC) outlines medical conditions associated with increased risk for adverse health events with
pregnancy and provides recommendations for who can safely use specific contraceptive methods.
The goals of adolescent contraceptive counseling are to (1) understand adolescent experiences, preferences, perceptions, and misperceptions about pregnancy and use of contraceptives; (2) help adolescents
understand the risks of unprotected sexual intercourse, including STIs
and unintended pregnancy; (3) educate adolescents about the various contraceptive methods available using information that is medically accurate, balanced, and provided in a nonjudgmental manner;
and (4) engage in patient-­centered counseling so the adolescent feels
empowered to choose a safe and effective method that can either be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1220 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
provided on site or be easily obtained through prescription or by referral. If adolescents are comfortable and willing to include their parents
in this discussion, it is also always helpful to engage parents in the
decision-­making process and address any parental questions and concerns. Providers should be aware of state laws affecting confidentiality
and an adolescent’s ability to access confidential contraceptive services
(see Chapter 151). Most states allow adolescents confidential access
to contraceptive services, but given that many adolescents are under
their parents’ insurance plan, confidentiality may be unintentionally
breached through billing and explanation of benefit statements, as well
as through the open notes mandate. This should be discussed with
adolescents, especially those who are very concerned about disclosing
sexual health information to their parents or guardians.
Counseling should include a review of all contraceptive methods
available that the adolescent can use safely (see U.S. MEC). Long-­
acting reversible contraception (LARC/IUDs and implants) is a safe
and effective option for many adolescents, including those who have
not been pregnant or given birth. The adolescent should be counseled
about method effectiveness using typical-­use failure rates. Although
it is important to highlight the methods most effective at preventing
pregnancy, it is also imperative to provide contraceptive counseling
within the framework of reproductive justice and to avoid any coercion
due to provider preference or bias. The focus of contraceptive counseling should be on the priorities of the adolescent, and the adolescent
should be allowed to explore all options and determine which method
is most appropriate for their contraceptive needs and priorities. It is
important to ask about use of withdrawal and discuss its risks given
that 60% of female teens have used it for contraception and it has a
typical-­use failure rate of 20%. Abstinence should also be discussed as
an option even if teens have engaged in sexual intercourse in the past.
Abstinence may be the best option if adolescents do not have another
method available at a particular time.
Necessary concepts to address while discussing individual methods include how effective the method is, how long the method works,
what behaviors are required for correct and consistent use, what side
effects may be seen, any noncontraceptive benefits of the method (e.g.,
reduced menstrual bleeding, protection from STIs), and what signs
or symptoms of complications should prompt a return visit. Reviewing common side effects allows teens to anticipate and cope with any
changes with reassurance and may avoid method discontinuation.
Weighing the possibility of certain side effects with the possibility of
an unintended pregnancy may also help with the conversation. It is
also important to address any specific misperceptions teens may have
for certain contraceptives regarding side effects, effectiveness, or effect
on future fertility.
Once an adolescent chooses a method, the provider and adolescent
should discuss clear plans on correct and consistent use of the chosen
method and strategies for appropriate follow-­up (see Table 160.1). Providers should help the adolescent consider potential barriers to correct and consistent use (e.g., forgetting to take a pill daily) and develop
strategies to deal with each barrier (e.g., use of reminder systems such
as daily text messages or phone alarms). The provider should assess
whether the teen understood the information discussed and may confirm by asking the teen to repeat back key concepts.
The U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations for Contraceptive Use
provides guidance for providers regarding when to start contraception,
how to be certain the woman is not pregnant at contraception initiation, and what examinations and tests are recommended before initiating contraception. Generally, women may start a contraceptive method
other than an IUD at any time, and an IUD may be placed when a
provider is reasonably certain that a woman is not pregnant. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) defines this as a patient
who has no symptoms or signs of pregnancy, is ≤7 days after the start
of normal menses, has not had sexual intercourse since the start of last
normal menses, and has been correctly and consistently using a reliable
method of contraception
Most women do not require any special exam or additional screening for STIs before initiating contraception if they have been recently
screened according to the CDC’s STI treatment guidelines. A blood

pressure reading is advisable. A pelvic examination is only required
for placement of an IUD, unless otherwise indicated. STI screening
is appropriate at and/or before IUD placement, even if a patient does
not report sexual activity, as some patients may choose to not disclose
this information to their provider. Gonorrhea and chlamydia screening using a self-­or provider-­collected vaginal swab or urine sample is
recommended unless symptoms require a pelvic exam. IUD placement
should not be delayed to receive screening results. Cervical cancer
screening is not recommended until age 21.
Providers should offer confidential services to adolescents and
observe all relevant state laws and legal obligations (e.g., notification
or reporting of sexual abuse). Chapter 151 discusses confidentiality
and consent issues related to contraceptive management. Providers
should also encourage adolescents to involve parents or guardians in
their healthcare decisions, while giving parents clear information on
their teen’s right to confidentiality, privacy, and informed consent. All
services should be provided in a youth-­friendly manner, meaning that
they are accessible, equitable, acceptable, appropriate, comprehensive,
effective, and efficient. Resources are available that describe ways to
ensure a teen-­friendly reproductive health visit.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.3 Long-­Acting Reversible Contraception
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
Long-­acting reversible contraception (LARC) includes four levonorgestrel (LNG) IUDs, the copper (Cu) IUD, and the etonogestrel subdermal implant. LARC methods are the only Tier 1 methods that are
reversible (see Fig. 160.1). Their efficacy is the result of the fact that
LARC does not require frequent office or pharmacy visits and does
not depend on user adherence for effectiveness. In the Contraceptive
CHOICE Project in St. Louis, Missouri, >9,000 women were given the
contraceptive method of their choice at no cost and were followed for
2-­3 years. The failure rates among women of all ages, including adolescents who used oral contraceptive pills, transdermal patch, or vaginal ring, were >20 times higher than the failure rates for those using a
LARC method. Acceptance, continuation, and satisfaction in this project were also higher among adolescents using LARC compared with
adolescents using non-­LARC methods. ACOG and AAP support the
use of LARC methods for adolescents. The U.S. MEC supports safe use
of both IUDs and implants for adolescents and nulliparous women.
Implants are considered Category 1 for all ages, and IUDs are considered Category 2 for women <20 years old and for nulliparous women
(Table 160.2).

INTRAUTERINE DEVICES

IUDs are small, flexible, plastic objects introduced into the uterine cavity through the cervix. They differ in size, shape, presence or absence
of hormone, and dose of hormone delivered daily. In the United States,
five IUDs are currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA): the CuT380A (Paragard) and four LNG IUDs (Liletta,
Kyleena, Mirena, and Skyla).
The LNG IUDs also have various actions, from thickening of cervical
mucus and inhibiting sperm survival to suppressing the endometrium.
LNG IUDs are effective and approved for use from 3 to 8 years. The
Cu IUD releases copper ions into the uterine cavity, which induces an
inflammatory response within the endometrium. Copper also impairs
sperm motility/migration, inhibits the acrosomal reaction, and impairs
implantation. As with the other IUDs, the Cu IUD is reversible, safe for
use in nulliparous women, and effective for at least 10 years. All IUDs
have typical-­use failure rates of <1% (see Fig. 160.1). All LARC methods are appropriate and safe to use in the postpartum period.
Mirena is FDA approved for the treatment of heavy menstrual
bleeding, and studies in adults have demonstrated an 80% reduction
in menstrual blood loss in Mirena users, with 50% of users reporting amenorrhea after 2 years of use. Among the other LNG IUDs,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 160 u Contraception
Table 160.2  Categories of Medical Eligibility Criteria for
Contraceptive Use
Category 1: A condition for which there is no restriction for the use
of the contraceptive method
Category 2: A condition for which the advantages of using the
method generally outweigh the theoretical or proven risks
Category 3: A condition for which the theoretical or proven risks
usually outweigh the advantages of using the method
Category 4: A condition that represents an unacceptable health risk
if the contraceptive method is used

Table 160.3  Conditions Classified as Category 3 and 4 for
Combined Hormonal Contraceptive Use
Category 4 (a condition that represents an unacceptable health risk
if the contraceptive method is used)
Complicated valvular heart disease
Current breast cancer
Severe decompensated cirrhosis
Deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism (acute; history, not
on anticoagulation or on established therapy for at least 3 mo with
higher risk recurrence; major surgery with prolonged immobilization)
Complicated diabetes with nephropathy, retinopathy, neuropathy, or
other vascular disease or duration of diabetes >20 yr
Migraine with aura
Poorly controlled hypertension (blood pressure >160/100 mm Hg) or
hypertension with vascular disease
Ischemic heart disease (history of or current)
Hepatocellular adenoma
Malignant liver tumor
Peripartum cardiomyopathy (diagnosed <6 mo before or with
moderately or severely impaired cardiac function)
Postpartum <21 days
History of cerebrovascular accident
Systemic lupus erythematosus with positive antiphospholipid
antibodies
Thrombogenic pathogenic variants
Viral hepatitis (acute or flare)
Category 3 (a condition for which the theoretical or proven risks
usually outweigh the advantages of using the method)
Past breast cancer with no evidence of disease for 5 yr
Breastfeeding and <1 mo postpartum
Deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism (history of DVT/PE
with lower risk recurrence)
Gallbladder disease (current, medically treated)
History of malabsorptive bariatric surgery
History of cholestasis and past combined oral contraceptive–related
Hypertension (adequately controlled or blood pressure
<160/100 mm Hg)
Peripartum cardiomyopathy with mild impairment or >6 mo
Postpartum 21-­42 days with other risk factors for venous
thromboembolism
Drug interactions (ritonavir-­boosted protease inhibitors; certain
anticonvulsants; rifampin or rifabutin)
First-­degree family member with a history of a blood clot/clotting
disorder/thromboembolic event
From Curtis KM, Tepper NK, Jatlaoui TC, et al. U.S. medical eligibility criteria for
contraceptive use, 2016, MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65(RR-­3):1–104.

amenorrhea at 2 years is reported at 26% for Liletta users, and Kyleena
and Skyla report prolonged and irregular bleeding at 1 year in 5–20%
of users. Heavier bleeding patterns and increased dysmenorrhea are
reported in users of the Cu-­IUD. Patients should be counseled on
bleeding patterns and expected changes to their menstrual bleeding
after IUD insertion (Table 160.3).
Common misconceptions of IUDs among healthcare providers are
that IUDs can cause or increase the risks of infections, cause infertility,

1221

and generally are not safe or tolerated by teens or nulliparous women;
these misconceptions can be a barrier for teens desiring an IUD to
access these highly effective and safe methods. IUDs do not increase
risk of infertility and may be inserted safely in teenagers regardless of
parity (Category 2; see Table 160.2).
Although early studies suggested an increased risk for upper genital
tract infection, because of the passing of a foreign body through the
cervix, new studies have refuted these concerns. Therefore clinicians
are encouraged to consider the use of IUDs in adolescents despite relatively high prevalence rates of STIs in this population. Teens should
be screened for gonorrhea and chlamydia at and/or before IUD placement, although placement should not be delayed if results have not
returned and there are no signs of current infection (e.g., purulent discharge, erythematous cervix). If STI testing is positive with an IUD
in place, the patient may be treated without removing the IUD if she
wants to continue the method.
There has been evidence that rates of IUD expulsion are higher in
adolescents as compared to older women. The data are limited, but the
risk seems to be higher with Cu-­IUD vs hormonal IUD, previous IUD
expulsion, and concomitant use of the menstrual cup. A paracervical
block with lidocaine may reduce patient discomfort during placement
and, along with other medications (e.g., NSAIDs, anxiolytics), may be
considered on an individual patient basis, but these are not routinely
recommended.

IMPLANTS

One contraceptive implant is available in the United States. The single
rod that releases 60 μg/day of etonogestrel has been updated to a radiopaque rod with a new inserter. This progestin-­only method keeps
etonogestrel at steady serum levels for at least 3 years and primarily works to inhibit ovulation. Similar to the levonorgestrel IUD, the
progestin acts on the uterus to cause an atrophic endometrium and
thicken cervical mucus to block sperm penetration; its typical-­use failure rate is also <1% (see Fig. 160.1). Unlike the IUD, no pelvic exam is
required for insertion. A trained provider can quickly place or remove
the implant in the upper arm under local anesthesia. The most common side effect of the contraceptive implant is irregular and unscheduled/unpredictable bleeding. This can include irregular or infrequent
bleeding, amenorrhea, and less often, prolonged or frequent bleeding.
Although the continuation rates are favorable and comparable to the
IUD, the most common reason for discontinuation is dissatisfaction
with bleeding patterns. It is important that adolescents be appropriately
counseled on the potential for changes to their bleeding pattern before
insertion of the implant. Adolescents who present with troublesome
bleeding should be evaluated for any underlying gynecologic abnormalities, bleeding or blotting disorders, and the presence of an STI.
If these are not present and adolescents desire treatment, they can be
treated with a short course of NSAIDs (5-­7 days) or low-­dose combined oral contraceptives (COCs) if no contraindications to estrogen
exist (10-­20 days). Any and all adolescents desiring implant removal
because of side effects should be offered prompt removal as indicated.
One potential unique complication of this method relates to localized infection and other side effects after implantation, such as bleeding, hematoma, or scarring, and if inserted too deeply into the muscle,
neural damage or migration; however, these events are rare, occurring
in <1% of patients. Minor side effects, such as bruising or skin irritation, are more common but most often resolve without treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.4 Other Progestin-­Only Methods
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
Several progestin-­only contraceptive methods are available and include
the LNG IUDs and implant (see Chapter 160.3), as well as an injectable
and progestin-­only pills. These methods do not contain estrogen and
may be useful for teens with contraindications to estrogen use or in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1222 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 160.4  Hormonal Intrauterine Devices
MIRENA

KYLEENA

LILETTA

Duration of use

FDA approved 8 yr

FDA approved 5 yr

FDA approved 8 yr

FDA approved 3 yr

SKYLA

Daily hormone delivery
over time

20 mcg LNG/day → 9 mcg/
day (52 mcg total)

17.5 mcg LNG/day → 7.4
mcg/day
(19.5 mcg total)

19.5 mcg LNG/day → 9.8
mcg/day
(52 mcg total)

14 mcg LNG/day → 5 mcg/
day (13.5 mcg total)

Device size

32 mm × 32 mm

28 mm × 30 mm

32 mm × 32 mm

28 mm × 30 mm

Diameter of insertion rod

4.4 mm

3.8 mm diameter

4.4 mm diameter

3.8 mm diameter

FDA, Food and Drug Administration; LNG, levonorgestrel.

patients who prefer a method without estrogen such as gender-­diverse
adolescents and young adults (Table 160.4). They are considered safe
for use in teens (Category 1 or 2; see Table 160.2). Progestins thicken
cervical mucus to block sperm entry into the uterine cavity and induce
an atrophic endometrium leading to either amenorrhea or less menstrual blood loss; the implant and injectable also suppress ovulation,
whereas the progestin-­only pills and LNG IUDs may affect the frequency of ovulation but do not suppress it completely. Teens should
be provided anticipatory counseling regarding bleeding irregularities
that may normally occur in the first 3-­6 months of any hormonal contraception use.

DEPO-­PROVERA

An injectable progestin, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA,
Depo-­Provera) is a Tier 2 contraceptive method available as a deep
intramuscular (IM) injection (150 mg) or as a subcutaneous (SC)
injection (104 mg) with typical-­use failure rates of 4% (see Table 160.1).
Both preparations must be readministered every 3 months (13 weeks).
When appropriate, DMPA can be given up to 3 weeks before or 7 days
after the 13 weeks scheduled interval without any effect on contraceptive efficacy. DMPA works by inhibiting ovulation and thickening cervical mucus. DMPA may be preferred by patients or parents who are
caring for a child with intellectual disabilities. Common concerns with
DMPA include bleeding changes, bone effects, and weight gain. After
1 year of use, 50% of DMPA users develop amenorrhea, which may be
an added advantage for teens with heavy menstrual bleeding, dysmenorrhea, anemias, or blood dyscrasias. It may also be advantageous for
those desiring menstrual suppression because of physical or developmental disabilities that make hygiene difficult or those in whom menstruation causes gender dysphoria. Studies have demonstrated bone
mineral density (BMD) loss in adolescents with DMPA use, but this
has not been shown to directly increase fracture risk. It is unclear how
this decrease in BMD affects the risk for osteoporosis later in life. Other
studies have found that BMD is recovered after discontinuation of this
method, and it is thus considered safe for use in this population with
appropriate counseling and consideration of other risk factors for bone
health. Healthcare providers should speak at length with teens and parents, when appropriate, who are already at high risk for low BMD, such
as those receiving chronic corticosteroid therapy or those with eating
disorders (see Chapter 749). They should discuss and decide together
if DMPA is an appropriate contraceptive choice. Patients and providers need to balance the potential bone effects of DMPA with the bone
effects that can occur with a teenage pregnancy. Although the FDA
issued a black box warning in 2004 because of Depo’s BMD effects, the
AAP and ACOG do not recommend limiting duration of DMPA use
and do not recommend routine BMD screening for females using it.
Early weight gain may be predictive of progressive gain over time; thus
those teens gaining weight in the first 3-­6 months after the initiation
of DMPA should be monitored and continue to engage in discussions
about healthy eating and exercise habits.

PROGESTIN-­ONLY PILLS

Progestin-­only oral contraceptive pills (POPs) are available and safe
for use in adolescents. POPs (mini pills) are quickly effective after 2
days of initiation in thickening cervical mucus, but do not reliably

inhibit ovulation. Prior to 2019, the only progestin pill available in
the United States contained 0.35 mg of norethindrone. Norethindrone
has a short half-­life, and it is important that this pill is taken at the
same time every day, which can make adherence difficult. If a pill is
>3 hours late from normal time, an unintended pregnancy may occur.
POPs have a typical-­use failure rate of 7% (see Table 160.1). Norethindrone POPs are taken continuously, and as a result, the bleeding
pattern is variable—ranging from amenorrhea to irregular and unpredictable breakthrough bleeding. Acceptance by adolescents is limited
by the necessity of taking the pill at the same time daily, and bleeding
irregularities
In 2019 the FDA approved a new POP—Slynd—which contains 4
mg of drospirenone. This is higher than the dose found in COCs. Drospirenone is an analog of spironolactone with a longer half-­life of ∼25-­
30 hours, which allows for more flexibility with timing of pills. It also
has some antimineralocorticoid activity and therefore should be used
with caution in those who may take other medications or have medical
comorbidities that can put them at risk for hyperkalemia. Slynd comes
in a 28-­day pill pack with four inactive pills intended to cause a scheduled withdrawal bleed. Slynd primarily suppresses ovulation. Studies
have demonstrated its safety and efficacy along with high rates of satisfaction among users (85%). There may still be unscheduled bleeding, but it seems to be more favorable than what is experienced with
norethindrone use.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.5 Combined Hormonal Contraceptives
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
Combined hormonal contraceptives (CHCs) are methods that include
an estrogen in combination with a progestin that has progestational,
estrogenic, and androgenic properties. Methods available in the United
States include several formulations of COCs, a transdermal patch,
and a vaginal ring. The major mechanism of action of the estrogen-­
progestin combination is to prevent the surge of luteinizing hormone
and thereby inhibit ovulation. Additional effects to the reproductive
tract include thickening of the cervical mucus, which prevents sperm
penetration, and thinning of the endometrial lining, which may
decrease menstrual blood loss. Typical-­use failure rates for all CHCs
are the same at 7%.
The COCs, patch, and vaginal ring are classified together as CHCs
in the U.S. MEC for Contraceptive Use, and recommendations mostly
consider estrogen exposure for a given condition or characteristic
(see Tables 160.3 and 160.4). Thromboembolic events such as venous
thromboembolism (VTE), pulmonary embolism, or stroke are some of
the more serious potential complications of exogenous estrogen use.
These serious adverse events are exceedingly rare in adolescents who
do not have other risk factors for thromboembolic events. Although
the risk of blood clots is increased in those who smoke cigarettes, the
likelihood of its occurrence is very small in adolescents, and thus clinically insignificant, compared to the risk of morbidity and mortality
from other pregnancy-­related complications, including blood clots

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 160 u Contraception
associated with the high estrogen levels that occur during pregnancy
and in the postpartum period.

COMBINED ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES

Oral contraceptive pills (OCs) can be either COCs or POPs and are
commonly referred to as “the pill.” The pill is one of the most common
contraceptive methods used among women of all ages. To decrease risk
of pregnancy and increase continuation, providers are encouraged to
provide OCs at the time of patient presentation to start immediately
rather than waiting for next menses, as long as the provider is reasonably sure that the patient is not pregnant. Providers are also encouraged to provide up to 13 pill packs at a time, based on evidence that
more pill packs provided is associated with higher continuation rates.
However, it is important to see an adolescent in follow-­up once starting
contraception to discuss adherence and satisfaction with the method
selected. Advanced provision of emergency contraceptive pills is also
recommended should patients miss pills and have unprotected sex. The
effectiveness of COCs depends on adherence, and it can be difficult for
any patient to remember to take a pill each day. Figures 160.3 and 160.4
list the rules for missed pills or after vomiting or diarrhea.
COCs contain between 50 μg and 10 μg of an estrogenic substance,
typically ethinyl estradiol, and as many as 10 progestins are available
in the United States for combined pills. Multiple preparations are available to help select the formulation that satisfies an individual patient,
with minimal side effects. Studies looking at the effects of estrogen dosing on bone health have found lower rates of bone accrual in those
taking COCs containing 20 mcg as compared with nonusers. It is recommended that adolescents start on a COC containing 30-­35 μg of an
estrogenic substance.

If one hormonal pill is late:
(24 hours since a pill
should have been taken).

COCs can be packaged as 28-­day monophasic pills, which contain
the same dose of active pills for 21 or 24 days, followed by 7 or 4 days of
placebo pills, respectively. Monophasic formulations are also available
for extended cycles of 91 days or 1 year so that withdrawal bleeding does
not occur each month, but at the end of each extended cycle. Extended
cycling of monophasic COCs for adolescents has some anticipated
benefits associated with increased ovarian activity suppression and may
decrease failure rates. Other advantages include menstrual suppression
in those patients in whom that is a priority and diminished frequency
of hormonal withdrawal (premenstrual) effects, including headaches
and migraines, mood changes, and heavy monthly bleeding. The most
common side effect of extended-­cycle OCs is intermenstrual bleeding
and/or spotting, with the total days of bleeding over the first year of
treatment being similar for extended-­cycle users and users following
a 28-­day-­cycle regimen. The unscheduled bleeding pattern diminishes
over time. Multiphasic pill packs contain various levels of estrogen and
progestin for 21 active pills and contain 7 placebo pills. Multiphasic
formulations are not available for extended-­cycle use. Providers can
refer to the U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations for Contraceptive
Use to counsel patients on how to manage late or missed COCs.
The short-­term adverse effects of COCs, such as nausea and weight
gain, often interfere with compliance in adolescent patients. These
effects are usually transient and may be overlooked by the beneficial effects of a shortened menses and the relief of dysmenorrhea.
The inhibition of ovulation or the suppressant effect of estrogens on
prostaglandin production by the endometrium makes COCs effective in preventing dysmenorrhea (see Chapter 159). Acne is typically
improved by COCs, as estrogen can reduce the effects of circulating
androgens. There is no evidence that one particular COC is superior to

If one hormonal pill has been
missed: (24 to 48 hours since
a pill should have been taken).

• Take the late or missed pill as
soon as possible.
• Continue taking the remaining
pills at the usual time (even if it
means taking two pills on the
same day).
• No additional contraceptive
protection is needed.
• Emergency contraception is not
usually needed but can be
considered if hormonal pills
were missed earlier in the cycle
or in the last week of the
previous cycle.

1223

If two or more consecutive hormonal
pills have been missed: (48 hours since
a pill should have been taken).

• Take the most recent missed pill as
soon as possible. (Any other missed
pills should be discarded.)
• Continue taking the remaining pills at
the usual time (even if it means taking
two pills on the same day).
• Use back-up contraception (e.g.,
condoms) or avoid sexual intercourse
until hormonal pills have been taken
for 7 consecutive days.
• If pills were missed in the last week of
hormonal pills (e.g., days 15–21 for
28-day pill packs):
– Omit the hormone-free interval by
finishing the hormonal pills in the
current pack and starting a new
pack the next day.
– If unable to start a new pack
immediately, use back-up
contraception (e.g., condoms) or
avoid sexual intercourse until
hormonal pills from a new pack
have been taken for 7 consecutive
days.
• Emergency contraception should be
considered if hormonal pills were
missed during the first week and
unprotected sexual intercourse
occurred in the previous 5 days.
• Emergency contraception may also
be considered at other times as
appropriate.

Fig. 160.3 Algorithm showing recommended actions after late or missed combined oral contraceptives. (From Curtis KM, Jatlaoui TC, Tepper NK,
et al. U.S. selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65[RR-­4]:1–66, Fig. 2, p. 28.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1224 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Vomiting or diarrhea (for any
reason, for any duration) that
occurs within 24 hours after
taking a hormonal pill.

Vomiting or diarrhea, for any
reason, continuing for 24 to
48 hours after taking any
hormonal pill.

• Taking another hormonal pill
(redose) is unnecessary.
• Continue taking pills daily at the
usual time (if possible, despite
discomfort).
• No additional contraceptive
protection is needed.
• Emergency contraception is not
usually needed but can be
considered as appropriate.

Vomiting or diarrhea, for any reason,
continuing for 48 hours after taking any
hormonal pill.

• Continue taking pills daily at the usual
time (if possible, despite discomfort).
• Use back-up contraception (e.g.,
condoms) or avoid sexual intercourse
until hormonal pills have been taken
for 7 consecutive days after vomiting or
diarrhea has resolved.
• If vomiting or diarrhea occurred in the
last week of hormonal pills (e.g., days
15–21 for 28-day pill packs):
– Omit the hormone-free interval by
finishing the hormonal pills in the
current pack and starting a new
pack the next day.
– If unable to start a new pack
immediately, use back-up
contraception (e.g., condoms) or
avoid sexual intercourse until
hormonal pills from a new pack
have been taken for 7 consecutive
days.
• Emergency contraception should be
considered if vomiting or diarrhea
occurred within the first week of a new
pill pack and unprotected sexual
intercourse occurred in the previous 5
days.
• Emergency contraception may also be
considered at other times as
appropriate.

Fig. 160.4 Algorithm showing recommended steps after vomiting or diarrhea while using combined oral contraceptives. (From Curtis KM, Jatlaoui

TC, Tepper NK, et al. U.S. selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65[RR-­4]:1–66, Fig. 5, p. 30.)

another in targeting acne, but theoretically it would be better to use a
pill with nonandrogenic progestins (see Chapter 710). Drospirenone,
a progestin with antimineralocorticoid activity, has been shown to
reduce premenstrual symptomatology, but the potential for hyperkalemia as a side effect eliminates patients with renal, liver, or adrenal
diseases and patients taking certain medications.
The FDA has concluded that drospirenone-­containing OCs may be
associated with a higher risk of VTE than other progestin-­containing
pills. Although no studies have provided consistent estimates of the
comparative risk of VTE between OCs that contain drospirenone and
those that do not, or accounted for patient characteristics that may affect
VTE risk, there has been a threefold increased risk of VTE reported for
drospirenone-­containing pills as compared with products containing
levonorgestrel or other progestins. As a result, the FDA requires that
labeling be revised for the OCs marketed under the Beyaz, Safyral, Yasmin, and Yaz brands. This clot risk has not been established for Slynd,
which contains 4 mg of drospirenone and no estrogenic component.
Despite the risk of VTE with all OCs, the absolute risk remains lower
than the risk of developing VTE during pregnancy or the postpartum
period.

TRANSDERMAL PATCH

The transdermal patch releases a combination of ethinyl estradiol and
a progestin daily. It is applied to the lower abdomen, buttocks, or upper
body, excluding the breasts. It is worn continuously for 1 week and
changed weekly for a total of 3 weeks, then no patch is worn for the
fourth week, at which time bleeding occurs (see Table 160.1). Limited
studies in adolescents suggest higher rates of partial or full detachment compared with adults, with high patient satisfaction and 50–83%
continuation rates from 3 to 18 months of use (Fig. 160.5). As with
other combined hormonal methods, the patch is a Tier 2 contraceptive.
Providers can refer to the U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations to

counsel patients on how to manage delayed application or detachment
of the patch.
The first patch available was Ortho Evra, now available only in a
generic version called Xulane. It releases 35 μg ethinyl estradiol and
150 μg norelgestromin daily. Compared with the pharmacokinetics of
COCs, the area under the curve for the patch is about 55% higher for
patch users. This caused concerns about increased risk of clots with
higher estrogen exposure, although there have been no data to confirm
this risk. Studies to date have had conflicting data on the risk of VTE
in patients using nonoral combined hormonal contraception. There is
also concern for efficacy of the patch in those whose weight was >90 kg,
and this should be discussed with patients in consideration of use. The
Xulane patch can be used to extend cycles similar to COC extended-­
cycle pills. Patients may choose to wear patches consecutively without
any “patch-­free week” but should be aware that this can carry a risk of
breakthrough bleeding, as occurs with extended-­cycle COC use.
In 2020 Twirla was developed to address the need for a lower-­dose
product to reduce the cumulative estrogen exposure from patch use.
Twirla releases 30 μg ethinyl estradiol (EE) and 120 μg levonorgestrel
(LNG) daily, and the maximum steady-­state concentrations were 60%
(EE) and 18% (LNG) as compared with Xulane. Initial studies did not
demonstrate a significantly decreased clot risk as compared to other
methods of combined hormonal contraception, but as with Xulane,
efficacy seemed to be affected by body mass index (BMI), in particular
in those who were categorized by BMI as obese. Twirla was not studied
for extended use.

VAGINAL RING

The vaginal contraceptive ring is a flexible, transparent, colorless vaginal ring that is inserted into the vagina by the patient. It releases a daily
dose of ethinyl estradiol and a progestin. It remains in place for 3 weeks,
during which time these hormones are absorbed. It is then typically

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 160 u Contraception
Delayed application or detachment* for 48
hours since a patch should have been applied
or reattached.

Delayed application or detachment* for 48
hours since a patch should have been applied
or reattached.

• Apply a new patch as soon as possible. (If
detachment occurred 24 hours since the
patch was applied, try to reapply the patch
or replace with a new patch.)
• Keep the same patch change day.
• No additional contraceptive protection is
needed.
• Emergency contraception is not usually
needed but can be considered if delayed
application or detachment occurred earlier
in the cycle or in the last week of the
previous cycle.

• Apply a new patch as soon as possible.
• Keep the same patch change day.
• Use back-up contraception (e.g., condoms)
or avoid sexual intercourse until a patch has
been worn for 7 consecutive days.
• If the delayed application or detachment
occurred in the third patch week:
– Omit the hormone-free week by
finishing the third week of patch use
(keeping the same patch change day)
and starting a new patch immediately.
– If unable to start a new patch
immediately, use back-up
contraception (e.g., condoms) or avoid
sexual intercourse until a new patch has
been worn for 7 consecutive days.
• Emergency contraception should be
considered if the delayed application or
detachment occurred within the first week
of patch use and unprotected sexual
intercourse occurred in the previous 5 days.
• Emergency contraception may also be
considered at other times as appropriate.

1225

*If detachment takes place but the woman is unsure when the detachment occurred, consider the
patch to have been detached for 48 hours since a patch should have been applied or reattached.

Fig. 160.5 Algorithm showing recommended actions after delayed application or detachment with combined hormonal patch. (From Curtis KM,

Jatlaoui TC, Tepper NK, et al. U.S. Selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65[RR-­4]:1–66, Fig.
3, p. 28.)

removed for 7 days during which time a withdrawal bleed should
occur. If the ring is accidentally expelled or removed for intercourse,
it should be reinserted; however, if it is out of place ≥48 hours or the
ring is not replaced within 7 days after removal, a backup method of
contraception should be used (Fig. 160.6). The vaginal ring is a Tier 2
contraceptive. Providers can refer to the U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations to counsel patients on how to manage delayed insertion or
reinsertion with the vaginal ring.
The first contraceptive ring available was NuvaRing, which measures
about 2.1 inches in diameter and releases 1 μg ethinyl estradiol and
120 μg etonogestrel daily. Users use one ring per 4-­week cycle with 3
weeks in and 1 week out and a scheduled withdrawal bleed. It should be
noted that although it is labeled for 28 days of use, it contains enough
hormones to be used for up to 35 days and can be replaced once every
calendar month. The ring can be used to extend cycles similar to COC
extended-­cycle pills. Patients may choose to use the Nuva Ring consecutively without any “ring-­free week” but should be aware that this can
carry a risk of breakthrough bleeding, as occurs with extended-­cycle
COC use. Annovera is FDA approved and offers a single ring, which
can be reused for 13 consecutive cycles and does not require refrigeration when not in use. Annovera has a diameter of about 2.2 inches and
releases 13 μg of EE and 150 μg of segesterone acetate daily. It has not
been studied for extended use, and initial studies did not include those
with a BMI >29 kg/m2.

CONTRAINDICATIONS

Contraceptive counseling should include a discussion and assessment
for any absolute or relative contraindications to estrogen use. Contraindications to the use of estrogen-­containing methods include those
conditions for which CHCs pose an unacceptable health risk (Category
4) in the U.S. MEC for Contraceptive Use (see Table 160.3); current
breast cancer; severe cirrhosis, acute deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism (DVT/PE) or history of DVT/PE with higher risk for
recurrence, major surgery with prolonged immobilization, diabetes
with nephropathy, retinopathy, or neuropathy, migraines with focal

neurologic aura, stage II hypertension, vascular disease, ischemic heart
disease, hepatocellular adenoma or malignant liver tumors, multiple
risk factors for cardiovascular disease, peripartum cardiomyopathy,
postpartum <21 day, complicated solid-­organ transplantation, history
of cerebrovascular accident, systemic lupus erythematosus with positive antiphospholipid antibodies, thrombogenic pathogenic variants,
and complicated valvular heart disease. The initial history taken before
prescribing CHCs should specifically address these risks. The U.S. MEC
provides contraceptive safety guidance with >1,800 recommendations
for >120 medical conditions or characteristics. According to the MEC,
obesity is not a contraindication to estrogen or contraceptive use, and
these adolescents would be considered at high risk for pregnancy complications. Therefore adolescents with obesity should be counseled on
and offered contraception when indicated and if desired by the patient.
Other things to discuss and consider when evaluating an adolescent
for COC use are a family history of blood clots or clotting disorders
and any medications that might interact with COCs. If a patient has
a first-­degree relative with history of VTE, evaluation for a familial
thrombophilia is advisable. There are few medication interactions for
progestin-­only methods, but there are medications that may be affected
by or affect levels of COCs. This includes certain anticonvulsants and
psychotropic medications as well as herbal supplements, which may
affect COC levels. The CDC has a resource for antiretrovirals and their
potential for interactions with hormonal contraception. Lexicomp and
UpToDate provide additional information on interactions with COCs.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.6 Emergency Contraception
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
Unprotected intercourse at mid-­
cycle carries a pregnancy risk of
20–30%. At other times during the cycle, the risk is 2–4%. Emergency

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1226 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Delayed insertion of a new ring or delayed
reinsertion* of a current ring for 48 hours
since a ring should have been inserted.

Delayed insertion of a new ring or delayed
reinsertion* for 48 hours since a ring should
have been inserted.

• Insert ring as soon as possible.
• Keep the ring in until the scheduled ring
removal day.
• No additional contraceptive protection is
needed.
• Emergency contraception is not usually
needed but can be considered if delayed
insertion or reinsertion occurred earlier in
the cycle or in the last week of the previous
cycle.

• Insert ring as soon as possible.
• Keep the ring in until the scheduled ring
removal day.
• Use back-up contraception (e.g., condoms)
or avoid sexual intercourse until a ring has
been worn for 7 consecutive days.
• If the ring removal occurred in the third
week of ring use:
– Omit the hormone-free week by
finishing the third week of ring use and
starting a new ring immediately.
– If unable to start a new ring
immediately, use back-up contraception
(e.g., condoms) or avoid sexual
intercourse until a new ring has been
worn for 7 consecutive days.
• Emergency contraception should be
considered if the delayed insertion or
reinsertion occurred within the first week of
ring use and unprotected sexual intercourse
occurred in the previous 5 days.
• Emergency contraception may also be
considered at other times as appropriate.

*If removal takes place but the woman is unsure of how long the ring has been removed, consider
the ring to have been removed for 48 hours since a ring should have been inserted or reinserted.

Fig. 160.6 Algorithm showing recommended actions after delayed insertion or reinsertion with combined vaginal ring. (From Curtis KM, Jatlaoui
TC, Tepper NK, et al. U.S. selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2016. MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65[RR-­4]:1–66, Fig. 4, p. 29.)

Table 160.5  Possible Indications for Emergency
Contraception
SEXUAL ASSAULT
HIGH-­RISK SEXUAL ACTIVITY
No contraception during intercourse
Intoxication (alcohol, drugs)
Coitus interruptus
CONTRACEPTION FAILURES
Condom breaking, spillage, leaks, intentional removal
Dislodgement and/or breaking of diaphragm, female condom,
cervical cap
Expulsion of IUD
Spermicide failure to melt before coitus
DELAYED OR MISSED CONTRACEPTION
2 consecutive missed days of combined oral contraceptive
1 missed day of progestin-­only oral contraceptives
>2-­wk late injection of depot medroxyprogesterone
≥2 days late start of vaginal ring or patch cycle
Incorrect timing of spermicide/gel before sexual activity
OTHER
Exposure to teratogens in the absence of contraception
IUD, Intrauterine device.

contraception (EC) refers to methods of contraception that are used
after sexual intercourse to reduce the risk of pregnancy but do not
interrupt an existing pregnancy. EC may be used up to 120 hours after
unprotected intercourse or contraceptive failure. Table 160.5 lists the
indications for use of EC. EC methods include the Cu IUD, LNG 52-­
mg IUD, and emergency contraceptive pills, which include ulipristal acetate, LNG, and COCs following the Yuzpe method. Although

the mechanism of action of the IUD as EC is unclear, all emergency
contraceptive pills work to delay ovulation and are effective only for
intercourse that occurs before administration. Initiation of a regular
contraceptive method is necessary to prevent pregnancy for any intercourse that occurs for the remainder of the cycle and for future cycles. If
pregnancy has already occurred, emergency contraceptive pills will not
terminate an existing pregnancy or have teratogenic effects on the fetus.
Teens can access EC information through a hotline at
888-­NOT-­2-­LATE to obtain EC pills over the counter (OTC). The
Guttmacher Institute maintains an up-­
to-­
date listing on EC. The
ACOG and AAP recommend advance provision of EC pills for at-­risk
adolescents to remove barriers to access and increase awareness of the
utility of EC. No examination or testing is required before use of EC,
but a follow-­up appointment is recommended to determine the effectiveness of treatment and to diagnose a possible early pregnancy. The
visit also provides an opportunity to counsel the adolescent, explore
the situation leading up to the unprotected intercourse or contraceptive failure, test for STIs, offer HIV testing, and engage in a discussion
about contraception when appropriate. It is also important to engage
adolescent males in discussions about the availability and use of EC
if they have engaged in unprotected intercourse, especially when and
how to access Plan B, which is available OTC.

COPPER IUD

The CuT380A (Paragard) is not FDA approved for EC, but it has been
shown to be >99% effective if used within 5 days (120 hours) after
unprotected sex. The additional benefit of using the Cu IUD for EC is
that it also provides long-­term reversible contraception. Efficacy of the
Cu-­IUD is not affected by BMI.

LNG 52-­mg IUD

The Mirena IUD is not FDA approved for EC, but studies have shown
it is as effective/noninferior to the Cu-­IUD for EC if used within 5 days
(120 hours) after unprotected sex. Similar to the Cu-­IUD, it also provides
long-­term reversible contraception and efficacy is not affected by BMI.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 160 u Contraception
ULIPRISTAL ACETATE

Ulipristal acetate (UPA) is available for EC and is FDA approved for
use up to 120 hours after unprotected sex. UPA is available only by
prescription regardless of age. A few studies have shown it to be more
effective than LNG at and beyond 72 hours. If starting OC pills after
taking UPA, it is recommended to start or resume pills no sooner than 5
days after taking UPA to avoid decreased efficacy of contraceptive pills
as a result of its antiestrogenic effect. Studies have shown an increased
risk of ovulation if COC pills are started immediately after UPA use.
Studies have not looked at UPA efficacy when Depo or a progestin-­
containing LARC is initiated immediately after UPA use. If starting
a method requires an extra visit (e.g., IUDs, implant, Depo-­Provera),
starting the method at the time of ulipristal use may be considered,
weighing the risk of decreasing the effectiveness of ulipristal with the
risk of not starting a contraceptive method. Patients should be encouraged to take a pregnancy test within 3 weeks after UPA use either in
the office or on their own. Studies have suggested UPA is less effective
in overweight and obese women (BMI >25). This should be discussed
with patients, and all attempts should be made to provide UPA as soon
as possible after unprotected sexual activity.

LEVONORGESTREL

In 2013 the FDA approved the emergency contraceptive drug Plan B
One-­Step as an OTC option for all persons of childbearing potential.
Experience with adolescents has demonstrated more effective use of
EC with advance provision, and this is not associated with more frequent unprotected intercourse or less condom and/or pill use. Nausea and vomiting are uncommon side effects, and LNG has been
shown to be more effective at preventing pregnancy than the Yuzpe
method. However, LNG has been shown to be less effective than UPA
when taken ≥72 hours and in women who are obese and overweight
(BMI >25). This should be discussed with women in deciding with EC
method is most appropriate for use. Patients should be encouraged to
take a pregnancy test within 3 weeks after EC use either in the office or
on their own.

Yuzpe Method

The Yuzpe method has been replaced by the more effective methods of
EC, but may be useful for women who do not have access to other methods and/or already have COCs at home and desire EC. It is most effective
when taken up to 72 hours after unprotected intercourse. For EC, COC
pills with 200 μg ethinyl estradiol and 2 mg norgestrel or 1 mg levonorgestrel should be taken in two doses, 12 hours apart. This method is effective in reducing the risk of pregnancy by 75%. The most common side
effects are nausea (50%) and vomiting (20%), prompting some clinicians
to prescribe or recommend antiemetics along with the COCs.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.7 Condoms

1227

prevent pregnancy. Although condom use at last sexual intercourse
had steadily increased from the early 1990s to the mid-­2000s, the
percentage of students reporting condom use at last intercourse has
remained stable, with 54% of adolescents reporting condom use at last
intercourse. Earlier increases in condom use were thought to be the
result of increased awareness of HIV risks. Only 9% of high school
students reported using dual methods of contraception (condom plus
something else) at last intercourse. The main advantages of condoms
are their low price, availability without prescription, male involvement
in the responsibility for contraception, and effectiveness in preventing transmission of STIs, including HIV and human papillomavirus
(HPV). The typical-­use failure rate for male condoms is 18% for all
users and is thought to be higher in adolescents. For the most effective
dual protection, male latex condoms are recommended as protection
against STIs and should be used in conjunction with another method
of contraception. According to the National Survey of Family Growth,
only 21.3% of females used another contraceptive method along with a
condom at last sex during the past 12 months.
There is only one female condom available in the United States. It is
available OTC or can be ordered online. It is nonlatex. It can be harder to
use properly and has a higher typical-­use failure rate (21%) than the male
condoms. There are no human studies demonstrating its effectiveness
against STIs. Adolescents intending to use this method should be provided
education on proper use and hands-­on practice to ensure effective use.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

160.8 Other Barrier Methods
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
Although these methods are not widely available or used, they are
important to know about for patients who wish to use nonhormonal
contraception at the time of intercourse.

DIAPHRAGM, CERVICAL CAP, AND SPONGE

These methods have few side effects but are much less likely to be
used by teenagers. Typical-­use failure rates exceed 14%. The sponge
has limited OTC availability in the United States, and the cervical cap
and diaphragm require a visit with a healthcare provider for fitting.
The cervical cap and sponge have lower failure rates in nulliparous
women, whereas the diaphragm has similar rates among nulliparous
and parous women. The sponge is used with water, whereas the cervical cap and diaphragm are used with spermicide before being placed
over the cervix. Adolescents may feel less comfortable and be less likely
to use these methods because of the messiness of the jelly or the need
for insertion and removal interrupting the spontaneity of sex (to be
inserted before sex and left in for several hours afterward). Spermicide
must be reapplied before every act of intercourse. Adolescents may also
be less comfortable touching their genitals.

Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
The use of condoms is the only contraceptive method that protects
against pregnancy and STIs, including HIV. Condoms, also referred
to as barrier contraception, prevent sperm from being deposited in the
vagina. The use of condoms in conjunction with hormonal contraception (or Cu IUD) is always recommended to reduce the risk of pregnancy and protect against STIs. This is sometimes referred to as dual
protection. Although correct and consistent condom use with every act
of sexual intercourse theoretically protects against pregnancy and STIs,
providers should encourage adolescents to use condoms for STI/HIV
protection along with a more effective method for pregnancy protection.
No major medical side effects are associated with condom use, and
condoms are available for use by males and females. Nonlatex condoms
are available for those with a latex allergy, and these include lambskin
and synthetic polyurethane condoms. Lambskin condoms do not protect against HIV and other viral infections, although they do work to

160.9 Other Contraceptive Methods
Mary E. Romano and Elizabeth M. Alderman
The only OTC spermicide available in the United States is Nonoxynol­9 (N-­9). It is available as a foam, film, gel, cream, suppository, and
tablet. It must be placed in the vagina no more than 1 hour before
intercourse and again before each act of intercourse/ejaculation. Side
effects, although rare, include local irritation or contact vaginitis. There
have been concerns about the vaginal and cervical mucosal damage
observed with N-­9 and its impact on HIV transmission. Results thus
far have been inconclusive. There were some studies that suggested
that N-­9 is gonococcicidal and spirocheticidal, but this has not been
substantiated in randomized clinical trials. Spermicides should be used
in combination with barrier methods because their typical-­use failure
rate alone is 21%

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1228 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Phexxi is a prescription vaginal gel that is FDA approved. It is nonhormonal and user controlled. It can be used alone or in conjunction
with other methods, although it is not recommended for use with the
intravaginal ring. It is prepackaged in a single-­dose applicator and must
be inserted intravaginally up to 1 hour before vaginal intercourse. It
works to maintain vaginal pH in an acidic range (∼3.5 to 4.5) despite
the presence of alkaline semen/sperm, which limits motility and incapacitates sperm. When compared with other OTC spermicidal gels,
Phexxi has a higher viscosity, which minimizes vaginal leakage of the
product and is thought to further affect sperm motility and provide
an additional barrier to cervical penetration. Data also suggest Phexxi
may have microbicidal effects in that by maintaining an acidic vaginal pH, Phexxi may enhance the vagina’s natural microbicidal mechanisms. This effect seems more consistent and reliable than what has
been found with the use of N-­9. As with N-­9, the most commonly
reported side effect was vaginal discomfort and irritation. There has
been no evidence that it affects HIV transmission. It should not be used
in women with recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs) or any urinary
tract abnormalities.

15-­to 19-­year-­old females consistently used contraceptive methods at
last intercourse.
The improvement in U.S. female teen birthrates is attributed to
three factors: more teens are delaying the onset of sexual intercourse,
are using some form of contraception when they begin to have sexual
intercourse, and are using long-­lasting contraceptive agents such as
injections, implants, and intrauterine devices (IUDs).
Most pregnancies among U.S. adolescents are unintended (unwanted
or mistimed); 88% of births to teenagers 15-­17 years old were the result
of unintended pregnancies. Birthrate statistics underestimate actual
adolescent pregnancy rates because the birthrate numerator includes
the number of actual births per 1,000 individuals in that age-­group, but
the pregnancy rate includes actual births, abortions, and best estimates
of fetal loss per 1,000 adolescents in that age-­group.
The reported abortion rate among adolescents in 2019 for those <15
years of age was 0.4 per 1,000 females (of the same age-­group), and for
those 15-­19 years, it was 6.0 per 1,000; this compares to the most common age for having an abortion (20-­29) of 18-­19 per 1,000 females. It
is unknown how many abortions go unreported (see Chapter 161.1).

WITHDRAWAL

ETIOLOGY

The pregnancy risk with use of withdrawal as a contraceptive method
is probably underestimated in adolescents, and a high typical-­use failure rate of 20% should be specifically addressed with all adolescents,
given that up to 60% of teens have reported using withdrawal for
contraception.

FERTILITY AWARENESS–BASED METHODS

Fertility awareness methods require that one be aware of the fertile
days of their menstrual cycle and either avoid intercourse during that
time or use barrier contraception. Methods typically involve calculating the length of one’s menstrual cycle, observing changes in body temperature and/or cervical secretions. Fertility awareness methods are
based on regular ovulatory cycles, which are less common in teens, and
therefore fertility awareness methods may be difficult for a teenager to
use effectively. Methods include the Standard Days method, basal body
temperature method, Billings method, and lactational amenorrhea. Be
aware that the lactational amenorrhea method may be a highly effective, temporary contraceptive method if the following criteria are met:
(1) no return of menses, (2) the infant is <6 months old, and (3) the
woman is exclusively breastfeeding. There is an FDA-­approved mobile
application—Natural Cycles—that may be used to best predict fertility
days to plan for abstinence or barrier contraceptive use. Other apps do
exist, but they are not FDA approved.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 161

Adolescent Pregnancy
Cora Collette Breuner
EPIDEMIOLOGY

There has been a trend of decreasing teen births and pregnancies since
1991 (Fig. 161.1). Teen birthrates in the United States are at a historic
low secondary to increased use of contraception at first intercourse,
use of dual methods of condoms and hormonal contraception among
sexually active teenagers, and access to abortion (see Chapter 161.1).
Despite these data, the United States continues to lead other industrialized countries in having high rates of adolescent pregnancy, with
>700,000 pregnancies per year. Nonetheless, the National Survey of
Family Growth (NSFG) 2006–2010 revealed that less than one third of

In industrialized countries with policies supporting access to protection against pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections (STIs),
older adolescents are more likely to use hormonal contraceptives and
condoms, resulting in a lowered risk of unplanned pregnancy. Younger
teenagers are likely to be less deliberate and logical about their sexual
decisions, and their sexual activity is likely to be sporadic or even coercive, contributing to inconsistent contraceptive use and a greater risk
of unplanned pregnancy. Better personal hopes for employment and
higher educational goals are associated with lowered probability of
childbearing in most groups. In nonindustrialized countries, laws permitting marriage of young and mid-­teens, poverty, and limited female
education are associated with increased adolescent pregnancy rates.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Adolescents may experience the traditional symptoms of pregnancy:
morning sickness (vomiting, nausea that may also occur any time of
the day), swollen tender breasts, weight gain, and amenorrhea. Often
the presentation is less classic; headache, fatigue, abdominal pain,
dizziness, and scanty or irregular menses are common presenting
complaints.
In the pediatric office, some teens are reluctant to divulge concerns
of pregnancy. Denial of sexual activity and menstrual irregularity
should not preclude the diagnosis in face of other clinical or historical information. An unanticipated request for a complete checkup or a
visit for contraception may uncover a suspected pregnancy. Pregnancy
is still the most common diagnosis when adolescents present with secondary amenorrhea.

DIAGNOSIS

Table 161.1 provides classic symptoms, laboratory tests, and physical
changes in the diagnosis of pregnancy.
On physical examination, the findings of an enlarged uterus, cervical
cyanosis (Chadwick sign), a soft uterus (Hegar sign), or a soft cervix
(Goodell sign) are highly suggestive of an intrauterine pregnancy. A
confirmatory pregnancy test is always recommended, either qualitative or quantitative. Modern qualitative urinary detection methods are
efficient at detecting pregnancy, whether performed at home or in the
office. These tests are based on detection of the beta subunit of human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Although claims for nonprescription
home pregnancy tests may indicate 98% detection on the day of the
first missed menstrual period, sensitivity and accuracy vary considerably. Office or point-­of-­care tests have increased standardization and
generally have increased sensitivity, with the possibility of detecting a
pregnancy within 3-­4 days after implantation. However, in any menstrual cycle, ovulation may be delayed, and in any pregnancy, the day
of implantation may vary considerably, as may rate of production of
hCG. This variability, along with variation of urinary concentration,
may affect test sensitivity. Consequently, each negative test should be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 161 u Adolescent Pregnancy

Rate per 1,000 females

100

80

18–19 years

60
15–19 years
40
15–17 years
20
0
1991

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020
2021

Fig. 161.1 Birth rates for teenagers by age of mother: United States,

final 1991–2020 and provisional 2021. Source: National Center for
Health Statistics, National Vital Statistics System, Natality. (From Hamilton BE, Martin JA, Osterman JA, Division of Vital Statistics, National
Center for Health Statistics. Births: provisional data for 2021. Nat Vital
Stats Rapid Release. 2022;20, Fig. 2.)

Table 161.1  Diagnosis of Pregnancy Dated from First Day
of Last Menstrual Cycle
CLASSIC SYMPTOMS
Missed menses, breast tenderness, nipple sensitivity, nausea,
vomiting, fatigue, abdominal and back pain, weight gain, urinary
frequency.
Teens may present with unrelated symptoms that enable them to
visit the doctor and maintain confidentiality.
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
Tests for human chorionic gonadotropin in urine or blood may be
positive 7-­10 days after fertilization, depending on sensitivity.
Irregular menses make ovulation/fertilization difficult to predict.
Home pregnancy tests have a high error rate.
PHYSICAL CHANGES
2-­3 wk after implantation: cervical softening and cyanosis.
8 wk: uterus size of orange.
12 wk: uterus size of grapefruit and palpable suprapubically.
20 wk: uterus at umbilicus.
If physical findings are not consistent with dates, ultrasound will
confirm.

repeated in 1-­4 weeks if there is a heightened suspicion of pregnancy. The
most sensitive pregnancy detection test is a serum quantitative βhCG
radioimmunoassay, with reliable results within 7 days after fertilization. This more expensive test is used primarily during evaluations for
ectopic pregnancy, to detect retained placenta after pregnancy termination, or in the management of a molar pregnancy. It is used when
serial measurements are necessary in clinical management.
Although not used for primary diagnosis of pregnancy, pelvic or
vaginal ultrasound can be helpful in detecting and dating a pregnancy.
Pelvic ultrasound will detect a gestational sac at about 5-­6 weeks (dated
from last menstrual period) and vaginal ultrasound at 4.5-­5 weeks.
This tool may also be used to distinguish diagnostically between intrauterine and ectopic pregnancies.

PREGNANCY COUNSELING AND INITIAL
MANAGEMENT

Once the diagnosis of pregnancy is made, it is important to begin
addressing the psychosocial and the medical aspects of the pregnancy.

1229

The patient’s response to the pregnancy should be assessed and her
emotional issues addressed. It should not be assumed that the pregnancy was unintended. Discussion of the patient’s options should be
initiated. These options include (1) releasing the child to an adoptive
family, (2) electively terminating the pregnancy, and (3) raising the
child herself with the help of family, father of the baby, friends, and/
or other social resources. Options should be presented in a supportive,
informative, nonjudgmental fashion; for some young women, they may
need to be discussed over several visits. Physicians who are uncomfortable in presenting options to their young patients should refer their
patients to a provider who can provide this service expeditiously. Pregnancy terminations implemented early in the pregnancy are generally
less risky and less expensive than those initiated later. These include
the prescription use of mifepristone and misoprostol within 10 weeks
(the World Health Organization [WHO] recommends 12 weeks) of the
pregnancy (see Chapter 161.1).
Other issues that may need discussion are how to inform and involve
the patient’s parents and the father of the infant; implementing strategies for ensuring continuation of the young mother’s education; discontinuation of tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drug use; discontinuance
and avoidance of any medications that may be considered teratogenic;
starting folic acid, calcium, and iron supplements; proper nutrition;
and testing for STIs. Especially in younger adolescents, the possibility
of coercive sex (see Chapter 162) must be considered and appropriate social work/legal referrals made if abuse has occurred, although
most pregnancies are not a result of coercive sex. Patients who elect to
continue their pregnancy should be referred as soon as possible to an
adolescent-­friendly obstetric provider.
Risk factors for teen pregnancy include growing up in poverty, having parents with low levels of education, growing up in a single-­parent
family, fewer opportunities in their community for positive youth
involvement, neighborhood physical disorder, foster care (such teens
are more than twice as likely to become pregnant than those not in
foster care), and having poor performance in school (see “Psychosocial
Outcomes/Risks for Mother and Child” later).

The Importance of Prevention

Teen pregnancy and childbearing bring substantial social and economic costs through immediate and long-­term impacts on teen parents
and their children. In 2010, teen pregnancy and childbirth accounted
for at least $9.4 billion in costs for increased healthcare and foster care,
increased incarceration rates among children of teen parents, and
lost tax revenue because of lower educational attainment and income
among teen mothers.

ADOLESCENT FATHERS

Those who become fathers as adolescents also have poorer educational
achievement than their age-­matched peers. They are more likely than
other peers to have been involved with illegal activities and with the
use of illegal substances. Adult men who father the children of teen
mothers are poorer and educationally less advanced than their age-­
matched peers and tend to be 2-­3 years older than the mother, but any
combination of age differences may exist. Younger teen mothers are
more likely to have a greater age difference between themselves and the
father of their child, raising the issue of coercive sex or statutory rape
(see Chapter 162).
Male partners have a significant influence on the young woman’s
decision/desire to become pregnant and to parent her child. Sensitively
and appropriately including the male partner in discussions of family planning, contraception, and pregnancy options may be a useful
strategy in improving outcomes for all. This can only be successful if
the young female patient is willing to have her partner involved in such
discussions.

MEDICAL COMPLICATIONS OF MOTHERS AND
BABIES

Although pregnant teens are at higher-­than-­average risk for some
complications of pregnancy, most teenagers have pregnancies that are
without major medical complications, delivering healthy infants. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1230 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
miscarriage/stillbirth risk for adolescents is estimated at 15–20%. In
the United States, elective pregnancy termination rates peaked from
1985 to 1988 at 41–46%, decreasing since then to approximately 30%
in 2008. Teen mothers have low rates of age-­related chronic disease
(diabetes or hypertension) that might affect the outcomes of a pregnancy. They also have lower rates of twin pregnancies than older
women. They tolerate childbirth well with few operative interventions.
However, compared with 20-­to 39-­year-­old mothers, teens have higher
incidences of low birthweight infants, preterm infants, neonatal deaths,
passage of moderate to heavy fetal meconium during parturition, and
infant deaths within 1 year after birth. The highest rates of poor outcomes occur in the youngest and most economically disadvantaged
mothers. Gastroschisis, although rare, has a much higher incidence
in infants of teen mothers, for reasons that are unclear. Teen mothers
also have higher rates of anemia, pregnancy-­associated hypertension,
and eclampsia, with the youngest teens having rates of pregnancy-­
associated hypertension higher than the rates of women in their 20s
and 30s. The youngest teens also have a higher incidence of poor weight
gain (<16 lb) during their pregnancy. This correlates with a decrease in
the birthweights of their infants. Poor maternal weight gain also has
correlated strongly with teens’ late entrance into prenatal care and with
inadequate use of prenatal care. Sexually active teens have higher rates
of STIs than older sexually active women.
Globally, many young women who become pregnant have been
exposed to violence or abuse in some form during their lives. There is
some evidence that teenage women have the highest rates of violence
during pregnancy of any group. Violence has been associated with
injuries and death as well as preterm births, low birthweight, bleeding, substance abuse, and late entrance into prenatal care. An analysis
of the Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System indicates that in the
United States 1991–1999, homicide was the second leading cause of
injury-­related deaths in pregnant and postpartum women. Women age
19 years and younger had the highest pregnancy-­related homicide rate
(see Chapter 156).
Ectopic pregnancy occurs in 1–2% of conceptions and is more common in women with a previous history of an ectopic pregnancy, pelvic
inflammatory disease, prior appendicitis, infertility, in utero exposure
to diethylstilbestrol, and possibly an IUD. Most ectopic pregnancies are
in the fallopian tube (tubal pregnancy). Manifestations include vaginal
spotting after a missed menstrual period that may progress to more
intense vaginal bleeding (suggestive of spontaneous abortion); vaginal
bleeding is absent in 10–20%. Abdominal pain is associated with distention of the fallopian tube; tubal rupture results in more intense pain,
hemorrhagic shock, and peritonitis. Some women have nonspecific
abdominal complaints and are misdiagnosed with gastroenteritis. Cervical motion and adnexal tenderness (and adnexal mass) may be present. Transvaginal sonography (not transabdominal) is the diagnostic
test of choice to detect an ectopic pregnancy and reveals an adnexal
mass and no uterine pregnancy. Nonetheless, some women will have
pregnancy of unknown location by transvaginal sonography; approximately 20% of these will have an ectopic pregnancy. Measurement of
sensitive quantitative serum βhCG levels together with transvaginal
sonography has value in diagnosing an ectopic pregnancy. If the initial βhCG is above the discriminatory zone (level at which one expects
an intrauterine pregnancy) but on transvaginal sonography there is
no intrauterine pregnancy, there may be an ectopic pregnancy or an
abnormal uterine pregnancy. In addition, if the βhCG is below the
discriminatory level (usually <3,000 mIU/mL) with no definitive diagnosis by sonography, serial βhCG testing should be performed every
48 hours. In a normal uterine pregnancy, βhCG levels should increase
approximately 50% every 48 hours; declining levels may suggest a miscarriage or an ectopic pregnancy. Some would perform a dilation and
curettage and check for products of conception or follow serial βhCG
levels. If there are no products of conception or if βhCG levels plateau
or increase, an ectopic pregnancy is present. Treatment of unstable or
advanced patients is usually by laparoscopic surgery or by laparotomy.
Because of early detection, many patients remain stable (unruptured).
Stable patients with an unruptured ectopic pregnancy may be treated
with single-­dose, or more often, multidose methotrexate to induce

abortion. Contraindications to methotrexate in a stable patient include
size of the ectopic mass (>3.5 cm) and embryonic cardiac motion.
Prematurity and low birthweight increase the perinatal morbidity and mortality for infants of teen mothers. These infants also have
higher-­than-­average rates of sudden infant death syndrome (see Chapter 423), possibly because of less use of the supine sleep position or
cosleeping, and are at higher risk of both intentional and unintentional
injury (see Chapter 17). One study showed that the risk of homicide is
9-­10 times higher if a child born to a teen mother is not the mother’s
firstborn compared with the risk to a firstborn of a woman age 25 years
or older. The perpetrator is often the father, stepfather, or boyfriend of
the mother.
After childbirth, depressive symptoms may occur in as many as 50%
of teen mothers. Depression seems to be greater with additional social
stressors and with decreased social supports. Support from the infant’s
father and the teen’s mother seems to be especially important in preventing depression. Pediatricians who care for parenting teens should
be sensitive to the possibility of depression, as well as to inflicted injury
to mother or child; appropriate diagnosis, treatment, and referral to
mental health or social agencies should be offered and facilitated.

PSYCHOSOCIAL OUTCOMES/RISKS FOR MOTHER
AND CHILD
Educational Issues

Pregnancy and birth are significant contributors to high school dropout rates among girls. Only about 50% of teen mothers receive a high
school diploma by age 22, whereas approximately 90% of women who
do not give birth during adolescence graduate from high school. Mothers who have given birth as teens generally remain 2 years behind their
age-­matched peers in formal educational attainment at least through
their third decade. Maternal lack of education limits the income of
many of these young families (see Chapter 1).
The children of teenage mothers are more likely to have lower school
achievement and to drop out of high school, have more health problems, and face unemployment as a young adult.

Substance Use

See also Chapter 157.
Teenagers who abuse drugs, alcohol, and tobacco have higher pregnancy rates than their peers. Most substance-­abusing mothers appear
to decrease or stop their substance use while pregnant. Use begins to
increase again about 6 months postpartum, complicating the parenting
process and the mother’s return to school.

Repeat Pregnancy

In the United States, approximately 20% of all births to adolescent
mothers (age 15-­19) are second order or higher. Prenatal care is begun
even later with a second pregnancy, and the second infant is at higher
risk of poor outcome than the first birth. Mothers at risk of early repeat
pregnancy (<2 years) include those who do not initiate long-­acting
contraceptives after the index birth, those who do not return to school
within 6 months of the index birth, those with mood disorders, those
receiving major childcare assistance from the adolescent’s mother,
those who are married or living with the infant’s father, those having peers who were adolescent parents, and those who are no longer
involved with the baby’s father and who meet a new boyfriend who
wants to have a child. To reduce repeat pregnancy rates in these teens,
programs must be tailored for this population, preferably offering
comprehensive healthcare for both the young mother and her child.
Healthcare providers should remember to provide positive reinforcement for teen parenting successes (i.e., compliment teen parents when
they are doing a good job).

Children Born to Teen Mothers

Many children born to teen mothers have behavioral problems that
may be seen as early as the preschool period. Many drop out of school
early (33%), become adolescent parents (25%), or, if male, are incarcerated (16%). Explanations for these poor outcomes include poverty,
parental learning difficulties, negative parenting styles of teen parents,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 161 u Adolescent Pregnancy
maternal depression, parental immaturity, poor parental modeling,
social stress, exposure to surrounding violence, and conflicts with
grandparents, especially grandmothers. Continued positive paternal
involvement throughout the child’s life may be somewhat protective
against negative outcomes. Many of these poor outcomes appear to be
attributable to the socioeconomic/demographic situation in which the
teen pregnancy has occurred, not solely to maternal age. Even when
socioeconomic status and demographics are controlled, infants of teen
mothers have lower achievement scores, lower high school graduation
rates, increased risk of teen births themselves, and, at least in Illinois
(where records include age of birth mother), a higher probability of
abuse and neglect.
Comprehensive programs focused on supporting adolescent mothers and infants using life skills training, medical care, and psychosocial
support demonstrate higher employment rates, higher income, and less
welfare dependency in participating adolescents.

PREVENTION OF TEEN PREGNANCIES

Adolescent pregnancy is a multifaceted problem that requires multifactorial solutions. The provision of contraception and education
about fertility risk from the primary care physician is important but
insufficient to address the problem fully. Family and community
involvement are essential elements for teen pregnancy prevention.
Strategies for primary prevention (preventing first birth) are different from the strategies needed for secondary prevention (preventing second or more births). Over the past 30 years, many models of
teen pregnancy prevention programs have been implemented and
evaluated. Table 161.2 lists the common components of successful
evidence-­based programs.
Abstinence-­only sexual education aims to teach adolescents to wait
until marriage to initiate sexual activity but, unfortunately, does not
mention contraception. Abstinence education is sometimes coupled
with “virginity pledges” in which teenagers pledge to remain abstinent
until they marry. Other educational programs emphasize HIV and
STI prevention and in the process prevent pregnancy, whereas others
include both abstinence and contraception in their curricula. Sex education and teaching about contraception do not lead to an increase in
sexual activity. Teenagers who participate in programs with comprehensive sex education components generally have lower rates of pregnancy than those exposed solely to abstinence-­only programs or no sex
education at all.
In many U.S. communities, programs that engage youth in community service and that combine sex education and youth development
are also successful in deterring pregnancy. Programs vary in their sites
of service from schools to social agencies, health clinics, youth organizations, and churches. Programs must be tailored to the cultural background, ethnicity, age-­group, and gender of the group being targeted
for the prevention services.

Table 161.2  Common Components of Most Successful
Evidence-­Based Programs to Prevent Teen
Pregnancy
• Information is provided about the benefits of abstinence.
• Information is provided about contraception for those who are
already sexually active.
• Information is provided about the signs and symptoms of STIs
and how to prevent STIs.
• Interactive sessions on peer pressure are presented.
• Teenagers are taught communication skills.
• Programs are tailored to meet the needs of specific groups of
young people (e.g., young men or young women, cultural groups,
younger or older teens).
STI, Sexually transmitted infection.
Adapted from Suellentrop K. What Works 2011–2012: Curriculum-­Based Programs That
Help Prevent Teen Pregnancy. Washington, DC: National Campaign to Prevent Teen
and Unplanned Pregnancy, http://www.c-­hubonline.org/sites/default/files/resources/m
ain/What_Works_0.pdf.

1231

Secondary prevention programs are fewer in number. In the United
States, some communities have tried to “pay” young mothers not to
become pregnant again, but these efforts have not always been fruitful.
Home visiting by nurses has been successful in some areas, and many
communities have developed “Teen Tot” clinics that provide a “one-­
stop shopping model” for healthcare for both the teen mother and the
baby in the same site at the same time. Both programs have reported
some successes.
In the practice setting, the identification of the sexually active adolescent through a confidential clinical interview is a first step in pregnancy prevention. The primary care physician should provide the
teenager with factual information in a nonjudgmental manner and
then guide the teenager in the decision-­making process of choosing
a contraceptive (see Chapter 160). The practice setting is an ideal setting to support the teenager who chooses to remain abstinent. When
a teenager does become pregnant and requires prenatal care services,
healthcare providers should remember that the pregnant teenager is
an adolescent who has become pregnant, not a pregnant woman who
happens to be an adolescent.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

161.1 Abortion
Alison S. Kliegman and Robert M. Kliegman
Abortion is a safe, common, and essential reproductive healthcare
evidence–based intervention. Worldwide ∼30% of all pregnancies
and ∼60% of all unintended pregnancies are voluntarily terminated.
In the past by age 45 ∼25% of U.S. pregnant persons had an abortion. The WHO defines abortion as the termination of pregnancy
before 20 weeks’ gestation. Abortions can be voluntary or spontaneous (miscarriages). Access to reproductive care, including abortion care, is considered by all health organizations as a basic human
right. The American Academy of Pediatrics supports a young person’s right of “access to comprehensive, evidence-­based reproductive healthcare services, including abortion.” Abortion should be
available to any person requesting it without a specific indication.
The most common indication is unintended (unplanned) pregnancy, which includes not being able to afford a child, poorly timed
pregnancy, and not having a suitable partner; additional indications
include being subjected to coercive sexual encounters, as well as
medical conditions that place the pregnant person at risk and certain fatal fetal conditions.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Most abortions occur in patients between 20 and 30 years of age (Table
161.3). In addition, the majority of abortions occur in the first trimester (Fig. 161.2). The highest ratio of abortion (number of abortions per
1,000 live births) is noted in persons <15 years (Fig. 161.3). Among
15-­to 19-­year-­olds, the United States has one of the highest rates of
adolescent pregnancy but among one of the lowest rates of adolescent
pregnancies ending in abortion when compared to other developed
countries (Fig. 161.4). Seventy-­five percent of adolescent pregnancies
in the United States are unplanned, while ∼30% end with an abortion
(among those 15-­17 years).

Abortion Care

The WHO 2022 report recommends that:
• Abortions must be decriminalized
• Be made available at request
• Be made available by telemedicine
• Be made available for self-­management, not just in clinic
• Have a wide range of eligible providers
• Provide an enabling environment (Fig. 161.5)
The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine
provides an outline for continuum of abortion care; preabortion, pregnancy termination, and post-­abortion care (Fig. 161.6).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1232 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
1000

Table 161.3  Characteristics of Persons Who Had an
Abortion in an Outpatient Setting in 2014,
by Percent

600

PERCENT

90

Cumulative
% abortions

80

87

82

97

96

100

74

70

65

60
50

50
40

DEN

60

0
≥4

9
–3
35

30

–3

4

9
–2

FRA

SWI
SIN
NET
SVN

50

SWE

NOR
FIN
SPAICE
EST
HUN ENG

40

BEL

SCO NZ

ISR
POR

30

USA

20
SVK

10
0

10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Pregnancies per 1,000 females 15–19 years old

Fig. 161.4 Percentage of teen pregnancies ending in abortion is in-

versely correlated with teen pregnancy rate. BEL, Belgium; DEN, Denmark; ENG, England and Wales; EST, Estonia; FIN, Finland; FRA, France;
HUN, Hungary; ICE, Iceland; ISR, Israel; NET, The Netherlands; NOR,
Norway; NZ, New Zealand; POR, Portugal; SCO, Scotland; SIN, Singapore; SPA, Spain; SVK, Slovakia; SVN, Slovenia; SWE, Sweden; SWI,
Switzerland; USA, United States. (From Sedgh G, Finer LB, Bankole A,
et al. Adolescent pregnancy, birth, and abortion rates across countries:
levels and recent trends. J Adolesc Med. 2010;56:223–230, Fig. 1.)

32

30
20
10

4

70

95

93

90

25

gal abortion in selected states of the United States in 2001. Abortion ratio refers to number of abortions per 1,000 live births. (From Strauss LT,
Herndon J, Chang J, et al. Abortion surveillance–United States, 2001.
MMWR Surveill Summ. 2004;53:1–32.)

Note: Percentages may not sum to 100 because of rounding.
Sources: *Jones RK, Jerman J. Characteristics and circumstances of U.S.
women who obtain very early and second trimester abortions. PLoS One.
2017b;12:e0169969 (n = 8,098); †Jerman J, Jones RK, Onda T. Characteristics of
U.S. abortion patients in 2014 and changes since 2008. 2016. [October 17, 2016].
https://www​.guttmacher​.org/sites/default​/files/report_pdf/characteristics-­us-­
abortion-­patients-­2014​.pdf (n = 8,380).
Modified from National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health
and Medicine Division; Board on Health Care Services; Board on Population Health
and Public Health Practice; Committee on Reproductive Health Services. Assessing the
Safety and Quality of Abortion Care in the U.S. Washington, DC: National Academies
Press; 2018: Table 1-­2.

% abortions

–2

Age group (yrs)

Fig. 161.3 Abortion ratio by age-­group of persons who obtained a le-

Family Income as a Percentage of Federal Poverty Level†
<100
49.3
100-­199
25.7
≥200
25.0

100

20

12.2
29.0
39.2
19.7

19

Education*
Not a high school graduate
High school graduate or GED
Some college or associate’s degree
College graduate

5–

29.2
26.0
11.7
33.1

0

5

Prior Pregnancies*
No prior pregnancies
Prior birth only
Prior abortion only
Prior birth and abortion

200

<1

3.6
8.2
33.6
26.3
16.0
12.2

400

<1

Age*
<15-­17
18-­19
20-­24
25-­29
30-­34
35+

Percent of teen pregnancies ending in abortion

CHARACTERISTIC

800

10

14

4 4

0
4

5

18

18

14

10

7

5

4

3

2

1

6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15
Number of weeks’ gestation at time of abortion

1

3

16 17+

Fig. 161.2 Percentage and cumulative percentage of outpatient
abortions by weeks’ gestation, 2014–2015. (From Jones RK, Jerman J.
Characteristics and circumstances of US women who obtain very early
and second trimester abortions. PLoS One 2017; 12(1):e0169969.)

Methods

Abortion methods vary depending on gestational age, location (in
clinic vs self-­managed), and procedure (medical vs surgical). Medically managed abortion (“abortion pill”) is FDA approved up to 10
weeks, although the WHO suggests up to 12 weeks and has also been
used “off label” at later gestational ages. It consists of mifepristone

(a potent progesterone antagonist) 200 mg PO × one dose, followed
within 24-­48 hours by misoprostol 800 μg (a prostaglandin to induce
uterine contractions) by buccal, sublingual, or vaginal routes. Medical abortion represents ∼50% of abortions in the United States
(Fig. 161.7). This treatment is available in clinic but also via telehealth, where a prescriber then mails the medication to be taken at
home (self-­managed medical abortion). This latter mail order availability is FDA-­approved. Self-­managed medical abortion is safe and
∼96% effective; complications are rare (∼1%) and include hemorrhage or infection; no deaths have been reported from self-­managed
medical abortion. Contraindications include porphyria, a bleeding
disorder, taking anticoagulants, adrenal insufficiency, long-­term
systemic steroid use, ectopic pregnancy, and the presence of an IUD.
Acute side effects during a self-­managed abortion are to be expected
and include nausea and vomiting, headaches, diarrhea, and flulike
symptoms and, once the abortion starts, cramping and bleeding.
Excessive bleeding (two or more pads per hour for >2 hours), fever
(>100°F), or severe abdominal pain requires medical attention. After

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 161 u Adolescent Pregnancy

F

Pre-ab
ort
ion

Priming
, Pa
in
Ant man
ibi
oti age
cs
m

Context-s
peci
fic
ser
vic
e-d
eli
Home
ve
ry
Ph
arm
ac
Self

Fi

Po

services
ther
to o
ks
Lin
cility
el fa
lev
ergh
Hi

Abortion

kers
wor

Respect for
human rights

e

sir
ed
)

M
a

lth
ea
rh
he

WHO

a
surgical me
rm
al and
tho
edic
fo
ds
In nt, M

rt
bo
-a
st

WHERE

s
entres
Prim
each c
ary
outr
y
t
i
ca
un
re
fa
mm
ci
o
lit
C
o
r
k
w
e
h
r
s
alt
e
h
d
e
s
a
-b
Ot
ty
ili
ounselling (wher
ed
n, c
ac
tio
e
,
tion
ep lications
rac p
nt com
Co ing
g
na
ion

HOW

mo
dit
ie

y

y

Co
m

es
nc
na

es
ch
oa
r
p
ap

in health systems
n with
atio
r
g
e
Int

1233

WHAT

Ena

Values & Preferences

bling environment

Supportive
framework of
law and policy

Supportive
health systems

Availability and
accessibility
of information

Fig. 161.5 Conceptual framework of the WHO abortion care guidelines. (From World Health Organization. Abortion Care Guideline. Geneva:
World Health Organization; 2022. License: CC BY-­NC-­SA 3.0 IGO. Fig.1 https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240039483.)

the abortion, do not use tampons for ∼5 days and get a pregnancy test
∼3 weeks later to ensure a complete abortion. After that, a contraceptive should be started in sexually active individuals (may not be indicated in cases of rape or incest). Medical abortion has an exceptional
safety record; long-­term studies demonstrate no adverse effect on fertility, premature birth, breast cancer, or mental health issues.
The medications can be available by online consultation from Aid
Access (aidaccess.org); pills will be mailed directly from Aid Access to
persons in all states permitting self-­managed abortion. “Shield laws” protect telemedicine providers serving patients in states where abortion is
illegal.
Surgical methods for abortion require in-­clinic presence and a skilled
provider. These include suction curettage (aspiration method) used
between ∼6 and 16 weeks’ gestation, dilation, and evacuation (∼12-­
24 weeks); induction of labor; and, if necessary, rarely a hysterotomy
(C-­section) at >24 weeks. Anesthesia (local or general) is needed for these
procedures.
Restricting access to or banning legal abortions will not reduce the
total number of abortions but increases the risk of criminalization
and potentially the number of unsafe procedures. On a global basis,
unsafe abortions represent ∼45% of all abortions. Unsafe abortion
increases the risk of incomplete abortion (retained products of conception), hemorrhage, infection, uterine perforation, other organ
injury, and infertility. Restricting access to abortion with resultant
pregnancy will have adverse economic and educational consequences for the pregnant adolescent (see Chapter 161). In addition,
the United States has one of the highest maternal mortality rates

(23.8 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2020) of developed countries.
The risk of death from pregnancy is much higher than from any
form of legal abortion.

Challenges and Barriers

There are multiple logistic and legal challenges to obtaining an abortion. Some are generalizable to all ages, whereas others are specific to
adolescent patients.
Some states have a complete ban against abortions, necessitating travel
to another state or country. In other states, there is a limit to gestational age
(usually first trimester). Many are limiting abortion to 6 weeks or when
fetal heart beats are detected. The majority of states require a physician to
perform an abortion. Some states restrict the use of public funding, and
others restrict private insurance use for abortions. In one study, ∼45% of
fees were paid by the pregnant person; in states that ban Medicaid funding for abortion, the patient pays the full cost. States vary in the requirement for preabortion “counseling” and a waiting period. If “counseling”
is needed, it should be from an abortion provider, not a state mandated
program, which may be biased against abortion.
The criminalization of abortion (the pregnant person, the provider,
others involved) has created a climate of enhanced surveillance and
added barriers. Laws have been proposed to require abortion providers to register all patients requesting an abortion. These reporting mandates will compromise patient-­provider confidentiality and
possibly violate Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) regulations. Nonetheless HIPAA may not be applicable if
legal action is filed against a patient and/or provider. Other laws will

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1234 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Preabortion

Pregnancy termination

• Telehealth
• Physical exam/laboratory tests
• Informed consent
• Patient counseling
• Contraceptive counseling

• Medication
• Aspiration
• Dilation and evacuation
• Induction

Postabortion
• Follow-up care
• Contraceptive services
(referral or provision)

Fig. 161.6 Continuum of abortion care. (Modified from National

Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health and Medicine
Division; Board on Health Care Services; Board on Population Health
and Public Health Practice; Committee on Reproductive Health
Services. Assessing the Safety and Quality of Abortion Care in the U.S.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2018: Fig.1-­1.)

(http://www.aidaccess.org) is an online international abortion consult
service that will make mifepristone/misoprostol available by mail
(including minors). Another site (http://www.ineedana.com) helps
locate the nearest abortion provider, and http://www.elevatedaccess.org
helps arrange flights to legal abortion sites.
Other resources include Women on Web http://www.
womenonweb.org/en/ and Planned Parenthood as a patient navigator
or provider of abortions.
To get help with funding: National Network of Abortion Funds
https://abortionfunds.org/ or https://prochoice.org/
Locating Plan C pills: https://www.plancpills.org/?gclid=CjwKCAjw
_b6WBhAQEiwAp4HyIKGkcL2gncj28MXzfN1eONGC4a3p_I9FLRx
f_4I_v8NZ5HqDD04JwxoC6LQQAvD_BwE
Help with a self-­managed abortion: https://www.mahotline.org/
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Medication abortion
60%

54%*
39%

40

31%

Chapter 162

24%
20

14%

17%

Adolescent Sexual Assault

6%
0%
0
2000

2001

2005

2008

2011

2014

2017

2020

Fig. 161.7 As of 2020, medication abortions account for the majority
of all U.S. abortions. *Based on preliminary data. (From Guttmacher
Institute. Medication abortion now accounts for more than half of all US
abortions, 2022. https://www.guttmacher.org/print/article/2022/02/me
dication-­abortion-­now-­accounts-­more-­half-­all-­us-­abortions.)

permit private citizens to sue pregnant persons having an abortion
or those who help (even those transporting the pregnant person to
another state). With these legal obstacles in place, patients seeking
an abortion must be vigilant in keeping abortion-­seeking behaviors
private and unavailable to litigious prosecution. This should include
internet browsing and searches, text messages, period tracking apps,
payments, and travel plans, all of which may be used as evidence.
Although a self-­managed medically induced abortion is clinically
indistinguishable from a spontaneous miscarriage, a prosecutor
may use electronic information as evidence to identify an induced
abortion.
The concept of fetal personhood and laws defining this as starting at
conception add another legal concern. Fetal personhood proponents
suggest that the unborn fetus has rights similar to a child after birth
and that any action thought to harm the fetus will be considered illegal. Pregnant persons can thus be detained or arrested for actions perceived as harmful to the fetus (beginning in the first trimester). Most
of the cases have been related to a pregnant person’s use of drugs; such
patients have been accused of child abuse or even distributing drugs to
a minor. In addition to the effects that the concept of fetal personhood
will have on abortions, it may have implications for persons with an
IUD, those using emergency contraception, embryos created for IVF,
and those experiencing an ectopic pregnancy.
In addition to challenges experienced by all persons seeking an abortion, adolescents who are minors have age-­specific barriers. Minors may
not be able to travel to locations providing abortion (finances, driver’s
license, purchase airline ticket) and in most states, they are required
to have some form of parental (grandparent or other adult relative in
some states) involvement by notification or actual consent (PNA). PNA
can be avoided by using a judicial bypass after appealing to a judge. In
this case, the judge will determine if the adolescent requesting an abortion is “mature and informed.” States with legal access to abortion may
eliminate PNA altogether (e.g., Illinois).
Various organizations have facilitated access to self-­managed abortions or to provide referrals to the nearest abortion provider. Aid Access

Allison M. Jackson, Adrianne R. Artis, and
Norrell K. Atkinson
Rape is an act of violence, not an act of sex. Rape is historically defined
as coercive sexual intercourse involving physical force or psychologic
manipulation of a female or a male. Recognizing that sexual intercourse is not a requirement for the definition, the U.S. Department of
Justice (DOJ) defines rape as “the penetration, no matter how slight,
of the vagina or anus with any body part or object, or oral penetration
by a sex organ of another person, without the consent of the victim.”
Though definitions may vary by state, sexual assault is a more inclusive
term that according to the U.S. DOJ “means any nonconsensual sexual
act proscribed by Federal, tribal, or State law, including when the victim lacks capacity to consent.”

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Exact figures on the incidence of rape are unavailable because sexual
assault is underreported. In the 2019 National Crime Victimization
Survey, only 0.56 per 1,000 persons over 12 years of age reported sexual assault to police. According to the National Intimate Partner and
Sexual Violence Survey of 2015 (NISVS 2015), over 43% women and
nearly 25% of men experienced some form of sexual violence in their
lifetime. Females exceed males as reported rape victims, but male rape
may be more underreported than female rape.
Adolescence is a high-­risk age-­group for sexual assault, with 43.2%
of females and 51.3% of males experiencing their first sexual assault
before the age of 18 years, and 81.3% of females and 70.8% males experiencing their first sexual assault before the age of 25 years (NISVS 2015).
Between 1995 and 2013 the rate of rape and sexual assault was highest
for adolescent females between ages 18 and 24 years. The National Survey of Children’s Exposure to Violence (NatSCEV 2014) revealed that
12.9% of 14-­to 17-­year-­olds experienced any sexual victimization in
the past year, 21.7% had experienced any sexual victimization in their
lifetime, 4.2% experienced sexual assault in the past year, and 10.2% in
their lifetime. This survey also demonstrated how other experiences
with violence compound the risk for sexual victimization. Youth with
a history of maltreatment by a caregiver were four times more likely to
experience sexual victimization and more than four times more likely
to experience sexual victimization if they were a witness to violence.
Among older adolescents age 18-­24 years, the rate of rape and sexual

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1234 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Preabortion

Pregnancy termination

• Telehealth
• Physical exam/laboratory tests
• Informed consent
• Patient counseling
• Contraceptive counseling

• Medication
• Aspiration
• Dilation and evacuation
• Induction

Postabortion
• Follow-up care
• Contraceptive services
(referral or provision)

Fig. 161.6 Continuum of abortion care. (Modified from National

Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health and Medicine
Division; Board on Health Care Services; Board on Population Health
and Public Health Practice; Committee on Reproductive Health
Services. Assessing the Safety and Quality of Abortion Care in the U.S.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2018: Fig.1-­1.)

(http://www.aidaccess.org) is an online international abortion consult
service that will make mifepristone/misoprostol available by mail
(including minors). Another site (http://www.ineedana.com) helps
locate the nearest abortion provider, and http://www.elevatedaccess.org
helps arrange flights to legal abortion sites.
Other resources include Women on Web http://www.
womenonweb.org/en/ and Planned Parenthood as a patient navigator
or provider of abortions.
To get help with funding: National Network of Abortion Funds
https://abortionfunds.org/ or https://prochoice.org/
Locating Plan C pills: https://www.plancpills.org/?gclid=CjwKCAjw
_b6WBhAQEiwAp4HyIKGkcL2gncj28MXzfN1eONGC4a3p_I9FLRx
f_4I_v8NZ5HqDD04JwxoC6LQQAvD_BwE
Help with a self-­managed abortion: https://www.mahotline.org/
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Medication abortion
60%

54%*
39%

40

31%

Chapter 162

24%
20

14%

17%

Adolescent Sexual Assault

6%
0%
0
2000

2001

2005

2008

2011

2014

2017

2020

Fig. 161.7 As of 2020, medication abortions account for the majority
of all U.S. abortions. *Based on preliminary data. (From Guttmacher
Institute. Medication abortion now accounts for more than half of all US
abortions, 2022. https://www.guttmacher.org/print/article/2022/02/me
dication-­abortion-­now-­accounts-­more-­half-­all-­us-­abortions.)

permit private citizens to sue pregnant persons having an abortion
or those who help (even those transporting the pregnant person to
another state). With these legal obstacles in place, patients seeking
an abortion must be vigilant in keeping abortion-­seeking behaviors
private and unavailable to litigious prosecution. This should include
internet browsing and searches, text messages, period tracking apps,
payments, and travel plans, all of which may be used as evidence.
Although a self-­managed medically induced abortion is clinically
indistinguishable from a spontaneous miscarriage, a prosecutor
may use electronic information as evidence to identify an induced
abortion.
The concept of fetal personhood and laws defining this as starting at
conception add another legal concern. Fetal personhood proponents
suggest that the unborn fetus has rights similar to a child after birth
and that any action thought to harm the fetus will be considered illegal. Pregnant persons can thus be detained or arrested for actions perceived as harmful to the fetus (beginning in the first trimester). Most
of the cases have been related to a pregnant person’s use of drugs; such
patients have been accused of child abuse or even distributing drugs to
a minor. In addition to the effects that the concept of fetal personhood
will have on abortions, it may have implications for persons with an
IUD, those using emergency contraception, embryos created for IVF,
and those experiencing an ectopic pregnancy.
In addition to challenges experienced by all persons seeking an abortion, adolescents who are minors have age-­specific barriers. Minors may
not be able to travel to locations providing abortion (finances, driver’s
license, purchase airline ticket) and in most states, they are required
to have some form of parental (grandparent or other adult relative in
some states) involvement by notification or actual consent (PNA). PNA
can be avoided by using a judicial bypass after appealing to a judge. In
this case, the judge will determine if the adolescent requesting an abortion is “mature and informed.” States with legal access to abortion may
eliminate PNA altogether (e.g., Illinois).
Various organizations have facilitated access to self-­managed abortions or to provide referrals to the nearest abortion provider. Aid Access

Allison M. Jackson, Adrianne R. Artis, and
Norrell K. Atkinson
Rape is an act of violence, not an act of sex. Rape is historically defined
as coercive sexual intercourse involving physical force or psychologic
manipulation of a female or a male. Recognizing that sexual intercourse is not a requirement for the definition, the U.S. Department of
Justice (DOJ) defines rape as “the penetration, no matter how slight,
of the vagina or anus with any body part or object, or oral penetration
by a sex organ of another person, without the consent of the victim.”
Though definitions may vary by state, sexual assault is a more inclusive
term that according to the U.S. DOJ “means any nonconsensual sexual
act proscribed by Federal, tribal, or State law, including when the victim lacks capacity to consent.”

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Exact figures on the incidence of rape are unavailable because sexual
assault is underreported. In the 2019 National Crime Victimization
Survey, only 0.56 per 1,000 persons over 12 years of age reported sexual assault to police. According to the National Intimate Partner and
Sexual Violence Survey of 2015 (NISVS 2015), over 43% women and
nearly 25% of men experienced some form of sexual violence in their
lifetime. Females exceed males as reported rape victims, but male rape
may be more underreported than female rape.
Adolescence is a high-­risk age-­group for sexual assault, with 43.2%
of females and 51.3% of males experiencing their first sexual assault
before the age of 18 years, and 81.3% of females and 70.8% males experiencing their first sexual assault before the age of 25 years (NISVS 2015).
Between 1995 and 2013 the rate of rape and sexual assault was highest
for adolescent females between ages 18 and 24 years. The National Survey of Children’s Exposure to Violence (NatSCEV 2014) revealed that
12.9% of 14-­to 17-­year-­olds experienced any sexual victimization in
the past year, 21.7% had experienced any sexual victimization in their
lifetime, 4.2% experienced sexual assault in the past year, and 10.2% in
their lifetime. This survey also demonstrated how other experiences
with violence compound the risk for sexual victimization. Youth with
a history of maltreatment by a caregiver were four times more likely to
experience sexual victimization and more than four times more likely
to experience sexual victimization if they were a witness to violence.
Among older adolescents age 18-­24 years, the rate of rape and sexual

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 162 u Adolescent Sexual Assault 1235
assault was 1.2 times higher for those not enrolled in college than those
in college. Further, several studies of youth in the juvenile justice system demonstrate a particularly high prevalence of prior sexual victimization of young females in that setting. Rape occurs worldwide and
is especially prevalent in war and armed conflicts. The World Health
Organization estimates that rape and domestic violence are responsible for 5–16% of healthy years of life lost by females of reproductive
age.
Female adolescents and young adults have the highest rates of rape
compared to any other age-­group. The normal developmental growth
tasks of adolescence may contribute to this vulnerability in the following ways: (1) the emergence of independence from parents and the
establishment of relationships outside the family may expose adolescents to environments with which they are unfamiliar and situations
that they are unprepared to handle; (2) dating and becoming comfortable with one’s sexuality may result in activities that are unwanted, but
the adolescent is too inexperienced to avoid the unwanted actions;
and (3) young adolescents may be naïve and more trusting than they
should be (see Chapter 150). Many teens are technologically competent, which gives sexual perpetrators access to unsuspecting vulnerable populations who were previously beyond their reach. Social media
and online dating sites represent a major risk for adolescents, as they
facilitate correspondence with individuals unknown to them or protective family members, while simultaneously providing a false sense of
security because of remote electronic communications. A determined
perpetrator can obtain specific information to identify the adolescent
and arrange for a meeting that is primed for sexual victimization.
Some adolescents are at higher risk of being victims of rape than
others (Table 162.1).

TERMINOLOGY

Sexual violence is a term that broadly encompasses criminal acts
including sexual assault, rape and sexual abuse, and which disproportionately affects adolescents and young adults. Because of the prevalence of sexual violence in the adolescent population, it is important
for healthcare providers to have a general understanding of the types
of sexual violence that may affect children and adolescents. Providers
should also be aware that every state carries their own legal definition
of these crimes. These definitions dictate if or how a crime is prosecuted, which could affect survivors who have disclosed sexual violence.
Delayed disclosures of sexual violence are common. The circumstances and relationship of the assailant to the survivor can often affect
if, when, and how a child or youth discloses an assault. Sexual violence
is typically perpetrated by someone who knows their victim; less frequently the assailant is a stranger. The gender of the survivor may also
affect the disclosure process. Males are less likely to disclose sexual violence compared with females. Individuals who are transgender, gender
nonconforming, nonbinary, or other noncisgender identities are less
likely to disclose sexual assault than those who identify as cisgender.

Table 162.1  Adolescents at High Risk of Rape
Victimization
MALE, FEMALE, NONBINARY ADOLESCENTS
Drug and alcohol users
Runaways
Those with intellectual disability or developmental delay
Street youths
Transgender youth
Youths with a history of sexual abuse
PRIMARILY FEMALES
Survivors of prior sexual assault
Newcomers to a town or college
PRIMARILY MALES
Those in institutionalized settings (detention centers, prison)
Gay males

In any scenario where rape is facilitated by threats, coercion, physical
force, or illicit and/or legal substances, the disclosure process for a survivor of sexual assault can be impacted.

TYPES OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE

Sexual assault is defined as sexual contact or behavior that occurs
without explicit consent of the victim. It can include things such as
attempted rape, rape, fondling, or forcing a person to perform sexual
acts. It is important to remember that force is not always physical, but
it can also be intimidation or coercive control of the person. Force may
also include threatening to hurt the person or those close to them.
Rape is a form of sexual assault involving penetration. Not all sexual assaults are rape. Rape can further be defined as stranger rape vs
acquaintance rape. Intimate partner sexual violence is a form of
acquaintance rape. An intimate partner is defined as a person with
which the survivor has had a close personal or sexual relationship; thus
this form of sexual violence can be prevalent among adolescents. Intimate partner sexual violence can often start with controlling or emotionally abusive behaviors, which then escalate to assault.
Rape can frequently involve illicit and/or legal substances to facilitate the assault. Drug-­facilitated rape involves perpetrators administering substances such as γ-­hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), flunitrazepam
(Rohypnol), and ketamine hydrochloride to their victim. More commonly, substances such as alcohol, tetrahydrocannabinoids (THC),
benzodiazepines, stimulants, barbiturates, opioids, or other drugs are
used during the course of an assault. Detection of these drugs requires
a high index of suspicion, and a medical evaluation within 8-­12 hours
is necessary for prompt detection of these substances, Specific testing
is used that is more sensitive than routine toxicology screens, which are
often insufficient.
Sexual abuse is a type of child abuse (see Chapter 17). The American Academy of Pediatrics defines child sexual abuse as a child or adolescent who engages in sexual activities that they cannot comprehend,
for which they are developmentally unprepared and unable to give
informed consent, and/or when there is a violation of the legal or social
taboos of society. It includes many things ranging from oral, genital,
or anal contact and fondling by or of the child, to noncontact abuses,
such as exhibitionism, voyeurism, or various forms of child exploitations such as pornography.
The commercial sexual exploitation of children (CSEC), also
known as sex trafficking, is a more complex form of sexual violence
and is considered a form of child abuse (see Chapter 16). Sex trafficking is federally defined as the recruiting, harboring, transporting, providing, obtaining, patronizing, or soliciting of an individual through
the means of force, fraud, or coercion for commercial sex. Although a
pimp often personally recruits victims, they may use others to recruit.
These youth may experience physical and sexual assault by the pimp
as well as the “johns.” Many of these youth have a history of child maltreatment, increasing their vulnerability to this form of abuse. Fear of
the consequences of disclosure and the survival skills acquired often
yield a very guarded presentation in the healthcare setting.
Survivors of sexual violence often experience long-­term symptoms
related to the trauma they have sustained. Untreated trauma can negatively affect the physical and emotional health of an adolescent into
adulthood. Engagement in trauma-­focused therapy, combined with a
supportive environment for the adolescent to grow, can help to mitigate the effects of the trauma that they have sustained. Providers should
be knowledgeable of trauma-­focused therapists in their community
where adolescent survivors of sexual violence can receive care.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The adolescent’s acute presentation after a rape may vary considerably,
from histrionics to near-­mute withdrawal. Even if they do not appear
afraid, most victims are extremely fearful and very anxious about the
incident, the rape report, the examination, and the entire process,
including potential repercussions. Because adolescents are between the
developmental lines of childhood and adulthood, their responses to
rape may have elements of both child and adult behaviors. Many teens,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1236 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
particularly young adolescents, may experience some level of cognitive
disorganization.
Adolescents may be reluctant to report rape for a variety of
reasons, including self-­blame, fear, embarrassment, or in the circumstances of drug-­facilitated rape, uncertainty of event details.
Adolescent victims, unlike child victims who elicit sympathy and
support, often face intense scrutiny regarding their credibility and
inappropriately misplaced societal blame for the assault. This view
is baseless and should not be used during an evaluation of any teenage victim of sexual violence. When adolescents do not report a
rape, they may present at a future date with concerns for pregnancy;
symptoms of or concerns for a sexually transmitted infection (STI);
and symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (see Chapter 38),
such as sleep disturbances, nightmares, mood swings, and flashbacks. Other teens may present with psychosomatic complaints or
difficulties with schoolwork. All adolescents should be screened for
possible sexual victimization at health examination visits.

INTERVIEW AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

The purpose of the adolescent medical evaluation after a sexual
assault is to provide medical care for the teen and to collect and
document evidence of the assault when applicable. Although many
teens delay seeking medical care, others present to a medical facility within 72 hours (or up to 96 hours depending on the protocol
used) of the rape, at which time forensic evidence collection should
be offered to the patient. Whether presenting acutely or more
remotely, a comprehensive physical exam is recommended to the
extent that the patient allows. Experienced clinicians with training
and knowledge of forensic evidence collection and medical-­legal
procedures should complete the rape evaluation or supervise the
evaluation when possible.
The clinician’s responsibilities are to provide support, obtain
the history in a nonjudgmental and noncoercive manner, conduct
a complete examination without retraumatizing the victim, and
collect forensic evidence. The clinician must complete laboratory
testing, administer prophylaxis treatment for STIs and emergency
contraception, arrange for counseling services, and file a report to
appropriate authorities in accordance with the law. In some jurisdictions, healthcare professionals are required to report all sexual
assaults of minors regardless of the relationship of the victim to the
perpetrator. Although healthcare professionals are legally mandated
to report sexual abuse, when the perpetrator is an acquaintance or
stranger, some jurisdictions leave the decision of reporting up to
the victim, requiring the victim to report the sexual assault. It is not
the clinician’s responsibility to decide whether a sexual assault has
occurred; the legal system will make that determination. Furthermore, absence of injury does not exclude the possibility that sexual
assault occurred.
Ideally, a clinician trained in forensic interviewing should obtain
the history. In all cases, the history should be obtained by asking
only open-­ended questions to obtain information about (1) what
happened, (2) where it happened, (3) when it happened, and (4)
who did it. After obtaining a concise history, including details of
the type of physical contact that occurred between the victim and
the assailant, the clinician should conduct a thorough and complete physical examination and document all injuries (nongenital
and genital). Clinicians should provide sensitive, nonjudgmental
support during the entire evaluation, as the adolescent victim has
experienced a major trauma and is susceptible to retraumatization
during this process. Each component of the evaluation should be
explained in detail to the victim, allowing the adolescent as much
control as possible, including refusal to complete any part or all of
the forensic evidence collection process. For sensitive examinations like these, a chaperone should be offered. Additionally, it is
often useful to permit a trusted supportive person, such as a family

member, friend, or rape crisis advocate, to be present during the
evaluation if that is the adolescent’s wish.
The examining clinician should be familiar with forensic evidence
collection and the physical evidence recovery kit (PERK) before initiating the examination. In the United States, each state’s PERK is different, but most include some or all of the following components:
swabs of suspected semen deposits, swabs of bite mark impressions to
collect genetic markers (DNA, ABO group); swabs of any penetrated
orifice or body surface where saliva may be present; and documentation of acute cutaneous injuries using body diagram charts and
photographs with visible standard measurements. Areas of restraint
should be carefully inspected for injuries; these areas include the
extremities and neck. Inspection of the skin may also reveal suction
injuries or bite impressions. Inspection of the mouth, with particular
attention to the oral frenula and palate, may reveal mucosal injury.
Although use of alternative light sources, such as the Wood lamp or
blue light, enhance detection of semen and saliva, other common
substances such as urine and lotion also fluoresce with alternative
light sources. Swabs of sites that fluoresce under such light should be
obtained for further forensic analysis.
The genital examination of a female rape victim should be
undertaken with the patient in the lithotomy position. The prone
knee-­chest position may be used as an exam-­clarifying technique,
specifically to evaluate the posterior rim of the hymen and perianal
area. The genital exam of a male rape victim should be undertaken
with the patient in the supine position. The clinician’s exam should
include careful inspection of the entire pelvic, genital, and perianal areas. The clinician should document any acute injuries such
as edema, erythema, petechiae, bruising, hemorrhage, or tearing.
Aqueous solution of toluidine blue (1%), which adheres to nucleated cells, may be used during the acute examination to improve
visualization of microtrauma in the perianal area. Any disruption to
the superficial epidermis will allow for dye uptake and thus cannot
differentiate between disruption of the skin from trauma, irritation,
or infection. Additionally, a colposcope may be used to provide
magnification and photo documentation of injuries.

LABORATORY DATA

When adolescents present for medical care within 72-­120 hours of
a sexual assault, a forensic evidence collection kit should be offered
to the patient. The time frames of eligibility for forensic evidence
collection vary according to jurisdiction, so it is important to know
the criteria of the jurisdiction investigating the assault. Regardless
of an adolescent’s decision to have evidence collection completed,
medical care, including physical examination, laboratory testing
(Table 162.2), and prophylactic therapies, should be offered to the
patient. Follow-­up evaluations should be scheduled to repeat these
laboratory studies.

TREATMENT

Treatment includes prophylactic antimicrobials for STIs (see
Chapter 163) and emergency contraception (see Chapter 160.6).
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports
that trichomoniasis, bacterial vaginosis, gonorrhea, and chlamydia
are the most frequently diagnosed infections among women who
have been sexually assaulted. Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended for adolescent rape victims because of the risk of acquiring
an STI and the risk of pelvic inflammatory disease (Table 162.3).
HIV postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) must be considered and an
infectious disease specialist consulted if higher transmission risk
factors are identified (e.g., knowing that the perpetrator is HIV-­
positive, significant mucosal injury of the victim) to prescribe a
triple-­antiretroviral regimen (Fig. 162.1). Hepatitis B infection can
be prevented with immunoglobulin and/or vaccination depending
on the victim’s immunization status and the perpetrators status;
thus similar considerations should be made for possible exposure

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 162 u Adolescent Sexual Assault 1237
Table 162.2  Laboratory Evaluation of Sexual Assault
Within 8-­12 hr (if Indicated by History)
Urine and blood for date rape drugs (GHB, Rohypnol, and
ketamine)
Within 24 hr (if Indicated by History)
Blood for comprehensive toxicology screen (for other classes of
drugs)
Within 72 hr (or up to 96 hr Depending on Protocol Used)
Forensic evidence kit
Pregnancy test
Hepatitis B screen (hepatitis B surface antigen, surface antibody,
and core antibody)
Syphilis (rapid plasma reagin [RPR] or Venereal Disease Research
Laboratory [VDRL])
HIV (HIV 1/2 Ag/Ab immunoassay, point-­of-­care testing can be
useful in persons unlikely to follow up with a provider)
Bacterial vaginosis (BV) and candidiasis: point-­of-­care testing and/
or wet mount of vaginal secretions with measurement of pH and
KOH application for whiff test
Trichomonas vaginalis: nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs)
by urine or vaginal specimen or point-­of-­care testing (i.e., DNA
probes) from vaginal specimen
Chlamydia and Neisseria gonorrhoeae: NAATs at sites of
penetration or attempted penetration:

Table 162.3  Postexposure Prophylaxis (PEP) for Acute
Sexual Assault Victims
ROUTINE
Recommended
regimen for STI
prophylaxis

• Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM once in a single
dose*
PLUS
• Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice a day for
7 days (azithromycin 1 g orally in a single
dose should be considered in persons at
high risk for noncompliance)
PLUS (for females)
• Metronidazole 500 mg orally twice a day
for 7 days (2 g orally in a single dose
should be considered in persons at high
risk for noncompliance)

Pregnancy prophylaxis

Levonorgestrel (Plan B) 1.5 mg orally in a
single dose
**Ulipristal acetate (Ella) 30 mg is effective
for up to 120 hr

HPV

Assess HPV vaccination history; vaccine
should be provided at initial evaluation if
unimmunized or partially immunized
• If unimmunized and >15 yr at the time of
the initial exam, give first dose and, two
follow-­up doses at 1-­2 mo and 6 mo
• If <15 yr, a single follow-­up dose at 6-­12 mo
• If partially immunized, a follow-­up dose
if >5 mo since the first dose or >12 wk
since the second dose

• N. gonorrhoeae: oropharynx (*), rectum (*), urine (**)
• Chlamydia: rectum (*), urine (**)
*Men who have sex with men (MSM) should be offered screening of gonorrhea and
chlamydia if they report receptive oral or anal sex during the preceding year even if
there was not contact at these sites during the assault.
**NAAT can be obtained on a dirty urine sample as an alternative to a genital swab.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases:
treatment guidelines 2015, MMWR Recomm Rep. 2015;64(RR-­3):1–140; and Updated
guidelines for antiretroviral postexposure prophylaxis after sexual, injection drug use,
or other nonoccupational exposure to HIV—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep. 2016;65:458.

to the hepatitis B virus in vaccinated/unvaccinated individuals.
Human papilloma virus (HPV) vaccination is also recommended
because persons who have been sexually assaulted are also at risk
for infection, and the efficacy of the HPV vaccine is high. Clinicians should review the importance for the patient’s compliance
with medical treatment, psychologic treatment, and follow-­up care.
Counseling should be provided about the symptoms of STIs and the
need for urgent follow-­up if symptoms develop. Abstinence from
sexual intercourse should be recommended until the completion of
the STI prophylactic course.
At the time of presentation, the clinician should address the
need for follow-­up care, including psychologic counseling. Adolescent victims are at increased risk of posttraumatic stress disorder,
depression, self-­abusive behaviors, suicidal ideation, delinquency,
substance abuse, eating disorders, and sexual revictimization. It is
important for the adolescent victim and parents to understand the
value of timely counseling services to decrease these potential long-­
term sequelae. Counseling services should be arranged during the
initial evaluation, with follow-­up arranged with the primary care
physician to improve compliance.

FOLLOW-­UP

Follow-­up evaluation should be arranged within 1 week of the initial
evaluation with a child abuse pediatrician or a Child Advocacy Center to
provide an opportunity for prompt review of STI test results, to monitor
for medication adherence and possible side effects, to ensure healing and
documentation of injuries, and to evaluate for the resolution of symptoms
initially present, the development of new physical symptoms, or emerging mental health concerns. If no STI prophylaxis was given, follow-­up

AS INDICATED
HIV†

Hepatitis B

Preferred regimen
• Tenofovir 300 mg and fixed-­dose
combination emtricitabine 200 mg
(Truvada) once daily
PLUS
• Raltegravir 400 mg orally twice a day
OR
• Dolutegravir 50 mg orally once a day
All persons with a potential exposure within
72 hours should be offered PEP, which
includes a 28-­day course of a three-­drug
antiretroviral regimen.
Alternative regimens available. Specific
indications for vaccine, immunoglobulin,
and/or booster depend on assailant’s
status

*If ≥150 kg, give 1 g of ceftriaxone IM once.
**Provided for patients with negative urine pregnancy screen. In addition, an antiemetic
(Compazine, Zofran) can be prescribed for patients receiving emergency contraception.
†HIV PEP is provided for patients with penetration and when the assailant is known to
be HIV-­positive or at high risk because of a history of incarceration, intravenous drug
use, or multiple sexual partners. If provided, laboratory studies must be drawn before
administration of medication (HIV, CBC, LFTs, BUN/Cr, amylase, lipase), and follow-­up
must be arranged.
Data from Workowski, KA, Bachmann, LH, Chan, PA Sexually Transmitted Infections
Treatment Guidelines, 2021. MMWR Recomm Rep 2021;70:128-­135.

testing for gonorrhea, chlamydia, and trichomonas can be repeated in
1-­2 weeks after the assault. If prophylaxis was provided, follow-­up testing is not needed unless symptoms develop. If infection in the assailant
cannot be ruled out, serologic testing for syphilis can be repeated in 4-­6
weeks and 3 months, and for HIV in 6 weeks and 3 months.

PREVENTION

Primary prevention may be accomplished through education of preadolescents and adolescents on the issues of consent, rape, healthy

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1238 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Substantial
exposure risk

≤72 hours
since exposure

Negligible
exposure risk

>72 hours
since exposure

Source patient
known to be
HIV-positive

Source patient
of unknown
HIV status

PEP
recommended

Case-by-case
determination

PEP not
recommended

Substantial risk for HIV acquisition

Negligible risk for HIV acquisition

Exposure of
vagina, rectum, eye, mouth,
or other mucous membrane,
nonintact skin, or percutaneous contact

Exposure of
vagina, rectum, eye, mouth,
or other mucous membrane,
intact or nonintact skin, or
percutaneous contact

With
blood, semen, vaginal secretions, rectal
secretions, breast milk, or any body fluid
that is visibly contaminated with blood
When
the source is known to be HIV-positive

With
urine, nasal secretions, saliva, sweat,
or tears if not visibly contaminated
with blood
Regardless
of the known or suspected HIV status
of the source

Fig. 162.1 Algorithm to evaluate the need for nonoccupational HIV postexposure prophylaxis among adult and adolescent survivors of sex-

ual assault. (From Workowski, KA, Bachmann, LH, Chan, PA. Sexually transmitted infections treatment guidelines, 2021. MMWR Recomm Rep.
2021;70:128–135; adapted from Announcement: updated guidelines for antiretroviral postexposure prophylaxis after sexual, injection-­drug use, or
other nonoccupational exposure to HIV—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:458.)

relationships, internet dangers, and drug-­and alcohol-­
facilitated
rape. Prevention messages should be targeted at males, females, and
nonbinary youth at high schools and colleges. Particular emphasis on
prevention efforts during college orientation is highly recommended.
High-­risk situations that may increase the likelihood of a sexual
assault should be discouraged, such as the use of drugs or alcohol,
drinking from a container that has been left unattended, and accepting drinks from strangers. Secondary prevention includes informing
adolescents of the benefits of timely medical evaluations when rape
has occurred. Individual clinicians should ask adolescents about past
experiences of forced and unwanted sexual behaviors and offer help

in dealing with those experiences. The importance of prevention cannot be overstated because adolescents are disproportionately affected
by sexual assault, and they are particularly vulnerable to long-­term
consequences.
Counseling services for family members of the victim may improve
their ability to provide appropriate support to the adolescent victim.
Caution parents not to use the assault as a validation of their parental
guidance, as it will only serve to place blame inappropriately on the
adolescent victim.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections

Chapter 163

Sexually Transmitted
Infections
Tamera Coyne-­Beasley, Nefertiti H. Durant,
and Samantha V. Hill
Age-­specific rates of many sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are
highest among sexually experienced adolescents and young adults,
after controlling for sexual activity. Although some STI pathogens
present as STI syndromes with a specific constellation of symptoms,
most are asymptomatic and only detected by a laboratory test. The
approach to prevention and control of these infections lies in education, screening, and early diagnosis and treatment.

ETIOLOGY

Any adolescent who has had oral, vaginal, or anal sexual intercourse is
behaviorally vulnerable to acquiring an STI. Not all adolescents are at
equal risk; physical, behavioral, and social factors contribute to an adolescent’s risk. Adolescents who initiate sex at a younger age; youth residing in detention facilities; youth attending STI clinics; youth involved
in commercial sex exploitation or survival sex and exchange sex for
drugs, money, food, or housing; young males having sex with males
(YMSM); adolescent women and young adult women having sex with
older men; transgender youth; youth with disabilities; and youth who
are injection drug users are at higher risk for STIs. Risky behaviors,
such as sex with multiple concurrent partners or multiple sequential
partners of limited duration, failure to use barrier protection consistently and correctly, and increased biologic susceptibility to infection
also contribute to risk (Table 163.1). Although all 50 states and the
District of Columbia explicitly allow minors to consent for their own
Table 163.1  Circumstances Contributing to Adolescents’
Susceptibility to Sexually Transmitted
Infections
PHYSICAL
Younger age at puberty
Cervical ectopy
Smaller introitus leading to traumatic sex
Asymptomatic nature of sexually transmitted infection
Uncircumcised penis
BEHAVIOR INFLUENCED BY DEVELOPMENTAL STAGES
Early adolescence: Lack ability to think abstractly
Middle adolescence: Believe in uniqueness and lack of vulnerability
SOCIAL FACTORS
Poverty
Limited access to “adolescent-­friendly” healthcare services
Adolescent health-­seeking behaviors (forgoing care because of
confidentiality concerns or denial of health problem)
Sexual abuse, trafficking, and violence
Lower levels of condom use
Mental health issues and substance use/abuse
Decreased access to confidential medical care leading complexity in
seeking care
Homelessness
Young adolescent females with older partners
Young men having sex with men
Data from Wangu, G Burstein. Adolescent sexuality: updates to the Sexually Transmitted
Infection Guidelines. Ped Clin North Am. 2017;64:389–341; and Spear LP. Adolescent
neurodevelopment. J Adolesc Health. 2013;52:S7–S13.

1239

sexual health services (at varying ages), many adolescents encounter
multiple obstacles to accessing this care, including poverty, insurance
coverage, and fears of lack of confidentiality (see Table 163.1). Adolescents who are survivors of sexual assault need reassurance, protection,
and appropriate intervention when these circumstances are uncovered
(see Chapter 162).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

STI prevalence varies by age, gender, race, and ethnicity. In the United
States, although adolescents and young adults ages 15-­24 represent
25% of the sexually experienced population, this age-­group accounts
for almost 50% of all incident STIs each year.
Chlamydia is the most frequently reported infectious disease in the
United States and is the second most common STI in U.S. adolescents
and young adults after human papillomavirus (HPV). In 2019, young
adult females ages 20-­24 (3,797.8 cases per 100,000 females) followed by
females ages 15-­19 (2,697.0 cases per 100,000 females) had the highest
rates of chlamydia in the United States (Fig. 163.1). Notably age-­specific
rates of reported cases of chlamydia among males, although substantially
lower than rates among females, were still highest in young adult males
20-­24 years (1,680.0 cases per 100,000 males). Chlamydia remains common among all races and ethnic groups. In 2021, a total of 1,644,416
cases of Chlamydia trachomatis infection were reported to the CDC,
making it the most common notifiable sexually transmitted infection
in the United States for that year. This case count corresponds to a rate
of 495.5 cases per 100,000 population, an increase of 3.9% compared
with the rate in 2020. During 2020 to 2021, rates of reported chlamydia
increased among both males and females, in all regions of the United
States, among most age groups, and among all race/Hispanic ethnicity
groups. Rates of reported chlamydia are highest among adolescents and
young adults. In 2021, almost two-thirds (58%) of all reported chlamydia
cases were among persons aged 15–24 years.
Reported rates of other bacterial STIs are also high among adolescents and young adults. In 2021, gonorrhea rates among adolescents
were 360.1/100,000 for males ages 15-­19 compared to 587.8/100,000
for young women ages 15-­19. Gonorrhea rates for young adult males
ages 20-­24 years old (844.2/100,000) were significantly higher than
rates for males at any other age/sex group and slightly lower than for
young women ages 20-­24 (873.2/100,000).
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is a clinical syndrome that
results from the ascension of microorganisms from the cervix and
vagina to the upper genital tract. PID is a serious complication of chlamydia and gonorrhea, two of the most common reportable infectious
diseases and STIs in the United States. PID rates are highest among
females ages 15-­24 compared with older women.
Syphilis rates have increased at an alarming rate, especially among
males, since 2000. In 2021, young adult males age 20-24 had the third
highest rate of primary and secondary syphilis at 51.2 per 100,000. Rates
among adolescent males ages 15-19 were lower at 12.0 per 100,000.
Age group
(Years)
0
0

Male rate*
3,900

Female rate*
3,900

11.7 10–14 83.1
15–19
20–24
1,680.0
25–29
1,087.4
30–34
658.0
767.9
35–39
385.2
388.7
40–44
231.7
167.2
114.9 45–54 73.7
46.9 55–64 20.1
7.9 65+ 2.5

2,697.0

823.0

357.4

Total

3,797.5
1,672.1

628.8

Fig. 163.1 Chlamydia: Rates of reported cases by age group and sex,
United States, 2021. (Data from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention: www.cdc.gov/std/statistics/2021/data.zip.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1240 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Age group
(Years)
0
0

Male rate*
70

12.0
51.2
68.1
67.7
51.3
37.1
24.8
14.8
25.2

Female rate*
70

0.0 10–14 0.2
7.5
15–19
19.5
20–24
22.3
25–29
18.9
30–34
16.7
35–39
12.2
40–44
5.8
45–54
55–64 1.7
65+ 0.2
3.1
Total

7.3

Fig. 163.2 Primary and secondary syphilis—Rates of reported cases by

age group and sex, United States, 2021. (Data from the Centers for Disease
and Control and Prevention: www.cdc.gov/std/statistics/2021/data.zip.)

Rates of female primary and secondary syphilis are much lower than
male rates (7.5/100,000 among 15-19 year olds; 19.5/100,000 among
20-24 year olds).
Adolescents also carry a large burden of viral STIs. U.S. youth are at
persistent risk for HIV infection. However, according to the 2021 Youth
Risk Behavior Survey, only 6% of high school students have ever been
tested for HIV. Adolescents (persons aged 13–19 years) and young
adults (persons aged 20–24 years) accounted for 21% of the 36,801
diagnoses of HIV infection in 2019 in the United States and 6 dependent areas. They are the least likely of any age group to be aware of
their HIV infection, retained in care, or have a suppressed viral load.
From 2015 through 2019 in the United States and 6 dependent areas,
the number of diagnoses of HIV infection among adolescents and
young adults for males, females, and transgender MTF decreased. In
2019, diagnoses of HIV infection among adolescent and young adult
males (85%) and females (12%) accounted for approximately 97%
of HIV diagnoses. Transgender MTF adolescents and young adults
accounted for 3% of annual diagnoses. From 2015 through 2019 in
the United States, the rate of diagnosis of HIV infection for Asian,
Black/African American, and multiracial adolescents decreased. The
rates of diagnosis of HIV infection for Hispanic/Latino and White
adolescents remained stable. In 2019, the highest rate was 23.5 for
Black/African American adolescents, followed by 6.3 for Hispanic/
Latino, and 4.2 for multiracial adolescents. Racial and ethnic disparities persist.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most frequently acquired
STI in the United States. According to the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), prevalence of HPV vaccine types 6, 11, 16, and 18 (4vHPV) declined between the prevaccine (2003–2006) and vaccine (2009–2012) eras: from 11.5% to
4.3% among females ages 14-­19 and from 18.5% to 12.1% among
females ages 20-­24. Within 6 years of introduction of the HPV vaccine, there was a 64% decrease in 4vHPV-­type prevalence among
female youth ages 14-­19 and a 34% decrease among young adult
women ages 20-­24. Efforts are ongoing to improve vaccination
among all youth.
Herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-­2) is the most prevalent viral
STI (see Chapter 299). According to NHANES data, prevalence of both
HSV-­1 and HSV-­2 decreased from 1999–2000 to 2015–2016 (from 59.4%
to 48.1% and from 18.0% to 12.1%, respectively). According to Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) data, seroprevalence for
HSV-­2 for adolescents ages 14-­19 was low, at 0.8. It is important to note
that among young adults ages 20-­29, HSV-­2 prevalence is higher, at 7.6%.
Prevalence of HSV-­1 among 14-­to 19-­year-­olds was 27% compared to
41% among those ages 20-­29. There are notable ethnic, racial, and gender
disparities in HSV prevalence. Prevalence of HSV-­1 was highest among
Mexican American persons and lowest among non-­Hispanic White
persons. HSV-­2 prevalence was highest among Hispanic Black persons

Fig. 163.3 Cervical ectopy. (From Seattle STD/HIV Prevention Training Center, University of Washington, Claire E. Stevens.)

and lowest among non-­Hispanic Asian persons. Both HSV-­1 and HSV-­2
were higher among females than males.

PATHOGENESIS

During puberty, increasing levels of estrogen cause the vaginal epithelium
to thicken and cornify and the cellular glycogen content to rise, with the
latter causing the vaginal pH to fall. These changes increase the resistance
of the vaginal epithelium to penetration by certain organisms (including
Neisseria gonorrhoeae) and increase the susceptibility to others (Candida
albicans and Trichomonas; see Chapter 330). The transformation of the
vaginal cells leaves columnar cells on the ectocervix, forming a border of
the two cell types on the ectocervix known as the squamocolumnar junction. The appearance is referred to as ectopy (Fig. 163.3). With maturation,
this tissue involutes. Before involution, it represents a unique vulnerability
to infection for adolescent females. The association of early sexual debut
and younger gynecologic age with increased risk of STIs supports this
explanation of the pathogenesis of infection in young adolescents.

SCREENING

Early detection and treatment are primary STI control strategies. Some of
the most common STIs in adolescents, including HPV, HSV, chlamydia,
and gonorrhea, are usually asymptomatic and, if undetected, can be spread
inadvertently by the infected host. Screening initiatives for chlamydial
infections have demonstrated reductions in PID cases by up to 40%. Federal and professional medical organizations recommend annual chlamydia
and gonorrhea screening for sexually active females <25 years old (Table
163.2). The lack of a dialog about STIs or the provision of STI services
at annual preventive service visits to sexually experienced adolescents is
a missed opportunity for screening and education. Comprehensive, confidential, reproductive health services, including STI screening, should be
offered to all sexually experienced adolescents (see Table 163.2).

COMMON INFECTIONS AND CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS

STI syndromes are generally characterized by the location of the
manifestation (vaginitis, enteritis) or the type of lesion (genital ulcer).
Certain constellations of presenting symptoms suggest the inclusion of
a possible STI in the differential diagnosis.

Urethritis

Urethritis is an STI syndrome characterized by inflammation of the
urethra, usually caused by an infectious etiology. Urethritis may present with urethral discharge, dysuria, urethral irritation, or meatal
pruritus. Urgency, frequency of urination, erythema of the urethral
meatus, and urethral pain or burning are less common clinical presentations. Approximately 30–50% of males are asymptomatic but
may have signs of discharge on diagnosis. On examination, the classic
finding is mucoid or purulent discharge from the urethral meatus (Fig.
163.4). If no discharge is evident on exam, providers may attempt to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections

1241

Table 163.2  Routine Laboratory Screening Recommendations for Sexually Transmitted Infections in Sexually Active
Adolescents and Young Adults
CHLAMYDIA TRACHOMATIS AND NEISSERIA GONORRHOEAE
• Routine screening for C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae of all
sexually active females age <25 yr is recommended annually.
• Extragenital chlamydia and gonorrhea screening (pharyngeal or
rectal) can be considered on the basis of reported sexual behaviors
and exposure, through shared clinical decision-­making between
the patient and the provider.
• Routinely screen sexually active adolescent and young adult MSM
at sites of contact for chlamydia (urethra, rectum) and gonorrhea
(urethra, rectum, pharynx) at least annually regardless of condom
use. NAAT is preferred for provider or self-­collected specimens.
More frequent screening (i.e., at 3-­ to 6-­mo intervals) is indicated
for MSM, including those taking PrEP and those with HIV infection,
if risk behaviors persist or if they or their sex partners have multiple
partners or anonymous partners or have sex with illicit drug use.
• Consider screening for C. trachomatis of sexually active adolescent
and young adult males annually who have a history of multiple
partners in clinical settings with high prevalence rates, such as jails
or juvenile correction facilities, national job training programs, STD
clinics, high school clinics, or adolescent clinics.
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (HIV)
The following recommendations apply to testing for HIV:
• HIV testing is recommended for all adolescents and young adults
seeking STI evaluation and/or treatment who are not already
known to have HIV infection. Testing should be routine at the time
of the STI evaluation, regardless of whether the patient reports any
specific behavioral risks for HIV.
• The CDC and USPSTF recommend HIV screening at least once for
all persons age 13-­64 yr or 15-65, respectively.
• Persons at higher risk for HIV acquisition, including sexually
active gay, bisexual, and other MSM, should be screened for HIV
at least annually. Providers can consider the benefits of offering
more frequent screening (e.g., every 3-­6 months) among MSM at
increased behavioral risk for acquiring HIV.
• All pregnant adolescents should be tested for HIV during the first
prenatal visit. A second test during the third trimester, preferably at
<36 weeks’ gestation, should be considered and is recommended
for adolescents and young adults who are at high risk for acquiring
infection.
• HIV screening should be voluntary and free from coercion. Patients
should not be tested without their knowledge.
• Providers should use a laboratory-­based antigen/antibody (Ag/
Ab) combination assay as the first test for HIV, unless persons are
unlikely to follow up with a provider to receive their HIV test results;
in those cases screening with a rapid POC test can be useful.
• Providers should test for HIV RNA if initial testing according to the
HIV testing algorithm recommended by the CDC is negative or
indeterminate when concerned about acute HIV infection (https://
stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/50872).
• HIV screening should be discussed and offered to all adolescents
at least once by age 16-­18 yr and throughout young adulthood in
healthcare settings. HIV risk should be assessed annually for >13 yr
and offered if HIV risk factors are identified.

• Routinely screen sexually active adolescent and young adult
MSM at least annually regardless of condom use. More frequent
screening (i.e., at 3-­ to 6-­mo intervals) is indicated for MSM who
have multiple or anonymous partners or who have sex with illicit
drug use.
SYPHILIS
• Syphilis screening should be offered to sexually active adolescents
reporting risk factors, including MSM.
• Routinely screen sexually active adolescent and young adult
MSM at least annually regardless of condom use. More frequent
screening (i.e., at 3-­ to 6-­mo intervals) is indicated for MSM who
have multiple or anonymous partners or who have sex with illicit
drug use.
• Screen women at 1st prenatal visit, at 28 weeks, at delivery if at
greater behavioral risk.
• Screen asymptomatic women who may have increased behavioral
vulnerability (history of incarceration, transactional sex, higher rate
in community).
• Providers should consult with their local health department
regarding local syphilis prevalence and associated risk factors that
are associated with syphilis acquisition.
HEPATITIS B VIRUS
• All MSM should be screened with HBsAg, HBV core antibody, and
HBV surface antibody.
• Vaccination against both HAV and HBV is recommended for
all MSM when a previous infection or vaccination cannot be
documented.
HEPATITIS C VIRUS AND UNIVERSAL HEPATITIS C SCREENING
• The CDC recommends hepatitis C screening at least once in
a lifetime for all adults age 18 yr and older, except in settings
where the prevalence of HCV infection (HCV RNA positivity) is
<0.1%.
• Hepatitis C screening for all pregnant women during each
pregnancy, except in settings where the prevalence of HCV
infection (HCV RNA positivity) is less than 0.1%.
• Screening adolescents younger than 18 yr old for HCV who report
risk factors, that is, injection drug use, receipt of an unregulated
tattoo, received blood products or organ donation before 1992,
received clotting factor concentrates before 1987, or long-­term
hemodialysis.
• Given the high HCV prevalence among young injection drug users,
screening should be strongly considered.
• All people living with HIV should be screened during the initial HIV
evaluations and at least annually thereafter.
• Screening should be performed using HCV antibody assays
followed by HCV RNA testing for those with a positive antibody
test.
• Routine screening of adolescents and young adults who are
asymptomatic for certain STIs (i.e., syphilis, trichomoniasis, BBV,
HSV, HAV, and HB) is not typically recommended.

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-­guidelines/screening-­recommendations.htm and https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/guideline
sc.htm.

express discharge by applying gentle pressure to the urethra from the
base distally to the meatus 3-­4 times. Chlamydia trachomatis and N.
gonorrhoeae are the most commonly identified pathogens. Mycoplasma
genitalium has been associated with urethritis, but data supporting
Ureaplasma urealyticum have been inconsistent. Trichomonas vaginalis can cause nongonococcal urethritis (NGU), but the prevalence
varies. HSV-­1, HSV-­2, and Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) are also potential
urethritis pathogens in some cases. Sensitive diagnostic C. trachomatis
and N. gonorrhoeae tests are available for the evaluation of urethritis.
However, other pathogens can be considered when NGU is not responsive to treatment. Noninfectious causes of urethritis include urethral
trauma or foreign body. Unlike in females, urinary tract infections
(UTIs) are rare in males who have no genitourinary medical history.

In the typical sexually active adolescent male, dysuria and urethral discharge suggest the presence of an STI unless proven otherwise.

Epididymitis

The inflammation of the epididymis in adolescent males is most often
associated with an STI, most frequently C. trachomatis or N. gonorrhoeae. The presentation of unilateral scrotal swelling and tenderness,
often accompanied by a hydrocele and palpable swelling of the epididymis, associated with the history of urethral discharge constitute the
presumptive diagnosis of epididymitis. Males who practice insertive
anal intercourse are also vulnerable to Escherichia coli infection. Testicular torsion, a surgical emergency usually presenting with sudden
onset of severe testicular pain, should be considered in the differential

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1242 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

Fig. 163.5 Mucopurulent cervical discharge positive swab test. (From

Seattle STD/HIV Prevention Training Center, University of Washington,
Claire E. Stevens and Ronald E. Roddy. http://www2a.cdc.gov/stdtraini
ng/ready-­to-­use/pid.htm.)

Fig. 163.4 Gonococcal urethral discharge. (From Seattle STD/HIV
Prevention Training Center, University of Washington, Connie Celum
and Walter Stamm.)

diagnosis (see Chapter 582). The evaluation for epididymitis should
include obtaining evidence of urethral inflammation by physical exam,
Gram stain of urethral secretions, urine leukocyte esterase test, or
urine microscopy. A C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae nucleic acid
amplification test (NAAT) should be performed.

Vaginitis

Vaginitis is a superficial infection of the vaginal mucosa frequently
presenting as vaginal discharge, with or without vulvar involvement
(see Chapter 586). Bacterial vaginosis, vulvovaginal candidiasis,
and trichomoniasis are the predominant infections associated with
vaginal discharge. Bacterial vaginosis is caused by replacement of
the normal hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)–producing Lactobacillus species vaginal flora by an overgrowth of anaerobic microorganisms,
as well as Gardnerella vaginalis, Ureaplasma, and Mycoplasma. It is
diagnosed based on an individual having at least three out of four
of Amsel’s criteria: (1) thin, gray, homogenous discharge, (2) vaginal pH >4.5, (3) fishy odor after the addition of potassium hydroxide
(KOH) to discharge, and (4) at least 20% clue cells present on wet
prep. It is important to note that research has shown there to be significant variability in providers’ abilities to read wet preps; thus standardization of wet prep analysis via laboratories is recommended. BV
NAATs are also available but should be used only by symptomatic
women because accuracy has not been determined for asymptomatic women. Researchers do not know the cause of bacterial vaginosis
or how some women acquire it. We do know the condition typically
occurs in sexually active women. We also know that sexual activity is
associated with increased frequency of bacterial vaginosis. Additionally, history of a diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis increases the risk of
acquisition of other STIs. Vulvovaginal candidiasis, usually caused by
C. albicans, can trigger vulvar pruritus, pain, swelling, redness, and
dysuria. Findings on vaginal examination include vulvar edema, fissures, excoriations, or thick curdy vaginal discharge. Trichomoniasis
is caused by the protozoan T. vaginalis. Infected females may present with symptoms characterized by a diffuse, malodorous, yellow-­
green vaginal discharge with vulvar irritation or may be diagnosed by
screening an asymptomatic patient. Cervicitis can sometimes cause a
vaginal discharge. Laboratory confirmation is recommended because
clinical presentations may vary and patients may be infected with
more than one pathogen.

Fig. 163.6 Inflamed cervix caused by gonococcal cervicitis. (From

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: STD clinical slides. http://
www.cdc.gov/std/training/clinicalslides/slides-­dl.htm.)

Cervicitis

The inflammatory process in cervicitis involves the deeper structures
in the mucous membrane of the cervix uteri. Vaginal discharge can be
a manifestation, but cervicitis is frequently asymptomatic. Patients also
present with complaints of irregular or postcoital bleeding. Two major
diagnostic signs characterize cervicitis: (1) a purulent or mucopurulent
endocervical exudate visible in the endocervical canal or on an endocervical swab specimen (e.g., swab sign; Fig. 163.5), called mucopurulent cervicitis or cervicitis, and (2) sustained endocervical bleeding
easily induced by gentle passage of a cotton swab through the cervical os, signifying friability. Cervical changes associated with cervicitis
must be distinguished from cervical ectopy in the younger adolescent
to avoid the overdiagnosis of inflammation (Fig. 163.6 and see Fig.
163.3). The pathogens identified most frequently with cervicitis are C.
trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae, although no pathogen is identified in
most cases. HSV is a less common pathogen associated with ulcerative
and necrotic lesions on the cervix.

Pelvic Inflammatory Disease

PID encompasses a spectrum of inflammatory disorders of the female
upper genital tract, including endometritis, salpingitis, tuboovarian
abscess, and pelvic peritonitis, usually in combination rather than
as separate entities. N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis predominate
as the involved pathogenic organisms in younger adolescents (see
Chapters 238 and 271), although PID should be approached as having

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections
a multiorganism etiology, including pathogens such as anaerobes, G.
vaginalis, Haemophilus influenzae, enteric gram-­negative rods, and
Streptococcus agalactiae. In addition, cytomegalovirus, Mycoplasma
hominis, U. urealyticum, and M. genitalium may be associated with
PID. PID (tuboovarian abscess) has rarely been reported in virgins and
is usually caused by E. coli and associated in some patients with obesity
and possible pooling of urine in the vagina.
PID is difficult to diagnose because of the wide variation in symptoms and signs. Many females with PID have subtle or mild symptoms,
resulting in many unrecognized cases. Healthcare providers should
consider the possibility of PID in young, sexually active females presenting with vaginal discharge or abdominal pain.
The clinical diagnosis of PID is based on the presence of at least one
of the minimal criteria, either cervical motion tenderness, uterine tenderness, or adnexal tenderness, to increase the diagnostic sensitivity
and reduce the likelihood of missed or delayed diagnosis. Providers
should also consider that adolescents are the population in whom PID
is typically diagnosed and thus should have a low threshold for initiating empirical treatment. In addition, the majority of females with
PID have either mucopurulent cervical discharge or evidence of white
blood cells (WBCs) on a microscopic evaluation of a vaginal fluid–
saline preparation. If the cervical discharge appears normal and no
WBCs are observed on the wet prep of vaginal fluid, the diagnosis of
PID is unlikely, and alternative causes of pain should be investigated.
Specific, but not always practical, criteria for PID include evidence of
endometritis on biopsy, transvaginal sonography or MRI evidence of
thickened, fluid-­filled tubes, or Doppler evidence of tubal hyperemia
or laparoscopic evidence of PID.

Enteritis

Among men who have sex with men (MSM), both Chlamydia and the
gonococcus can cause enteric (colitis, proctitis) symptoms. In addition,
infections with enteric pathogens (Shigella, Campylobacter, Ameba)
have been noted.

Sepsis

Although there are rare urogenital tract cases of meningococcal infections with heterosexual intercourse (similar to gonococcus), men
who have sex (particularly oral sex) with men are at increased risk

1243

for invasive meningococcal infections, which often occur as an outbreak. Meningococcus may colonize the pharyngeal, anal, or urethral
mucosa. Meningococcemia must be distinguished from disseminated
gonococcal infection (DGI), which will manifest with a gram-­negative
diplococci-­
positive blood culture along with tenosynovitis, septic
arthritis, petechial/pustular rash, and less often, endocarditis.

Genital Ulcer Syndromes

An ulcerative lesion in a mucosal area exposed to sexual contact is the
unifying characteristic of infections associated with genital ulcer syndromes. Genital ulcer lesions are most frequently seen on the penis and
vulva, but also occur on oral and rectal mucosa, depending on the adolescent’s sexual practices. HSV and Treponema pallidum (syphilis) are
the most common organisms associated with genital ulcer syndromes.
Table 163.3 presents the clinical characteristics differentiating the
lesions of the most common infections associated with genital ulcers,
along with the required laboratory diagnosis to identify the causative
agent accurately.
Genital herpes, the most common ulcerative STI among adolescents, is a chronic, lifelong viral infection. Two sexually transmitted
HSV types have been identified: HSV-­1 and HSV-­2. The majority
of cases of recurrent genital herpes are caused by HSV-­2. However,
among young women and MSM, an increasing proportion of anogenital herpes has been HSV-­1. Most HSV-­2–infected persons are unaware
of their diagnosis because they experience mild or unrecognized infections but continue to shed virus intermittently in the genital tract.
Therefore most genital herpes infections are transmitted by asymptomatic persons who are unaware of their infection.
Although the initial herpetic lesion is a vesicle, by the time the
patient presents clinically, the vesicle often has ruptured spontaneously,
leaving a shallow, painful ulcer (Fig. 163.7A). Recurrences are generally less intense and painful (see Fig. 163.7B). Up to 50% of first genital
herpes episodes are caused by HSV-­1. However, recurrences and subclinical shedding are much more frequent for genital HSV-­2 infection.
Syphilis is a less common cause of genital ulcers in adolescents
than in adults. Syphilis is caused by T. pallidum. Primary syphilis
presents as a single painless ulcer or chancre at the site of infection. However, it can also present with multiple atypical or painful lesions. Secondary syphilis manifestations include skin rash,

Table 163.3  Signs, Symptoms, and Presumptive and Definitive Diagnoses of Genital Ulcers
SIGNS/SYMPTOMS

HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS

SYPHILIS (PRIMARY)

CHANCROID

Ulcers

Vesicles rupture to form
shallow ulcers

Ulcer with well-­demarcated, indurated borders
and a clean base (chancre)

Nonindurated and undermined
borders and a purulent base

Painful

Painful

Painless*

Painful

Number of lesions

Usually multiple

Usually single

Multiple

Inguinal
lymphadenopathy

First-­time infections may
cause constitutional
symptoms and
lymphadenopathy

Usually mild and minimally tender

Unilateral or bilateral painful
adenopathy in >50%
Inguinal bubo formation and rupture
may occur

Clinical suspicion

Typical lesions; positive HSV-­2
type–specific virologic test
from the lesion by NAAT or
culture
OR Type-­specific serologic
testing

A presumptive diagnosis requires two
laboratory serologic tests, a nontreponemal
test (i.e., VDRL or RPR), and a treponemal
test (TP-­PA] assay, various EIAs,
chemiluminescence assays [CIA], and
immunoblots or rapid treponemal assay)

If all four criteria are met:
1. ≥1 Painful genital ulcers
2. Typical ulcers and regional
lymphadenopathy
3. No evidence of T. pallidum
4. HSV-­1 or HSV-­2 NAAT or HSV
culture performed on the ulcer
exudate or fluid are negative

Definitive diagnosis

Detection of HSV by culture
or PCR from ulcer scraping
or aspiration of vesicle fluid

Identification of Treponema pallidum from a
chancre or lymph node aspirate on dark-­field
microscopy

Detection of Haemophilus ducreyi by
culture

*Primary syphilitic ulcers may be painful if they become coinfected with bacteria or one of the other organisms responsible for genital ulcers.
EIA, Enzyme immunoassay; HSV, herpes simplex virus; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RPR, rapid plasma reagin; VDRL, Venereal Disease Research Laboratories.
From https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-­guidelines/default.htm

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1244 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine

A

B

Fig. 163.7 A, Initial herpes infection showing multiple erosions with polycyclic outlines surrounded by an erythematous halo and associated with
intense pain. B, Erosions surrounded by an erythematous halo. Clinical signs and symptoms of recurrences are usually less intense than those of
initial infection. (From Martín JM, Villalón G, Jordá E. Update on treatment of genital herpes. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2009;100:22–32, Figs. 1 and 2.)

mucocutaneous lesions, and lymphadenopathy in addition to other
nonspecific symptoms (e.g., sore throat, malaise), gastrointestinal
symptoms (e.g., hepatitis), and renal symptoms. Tertiary syphilis
presents with cardiac involvement, gummatous lesions, tabes dorsalis, and general paresis. Latent syphilis lacks clinical manifestations
and is detected by serologic testing. Latent syphilis acquired within
the preceding year is referred to as early latent syphilis. Latent syphilis acquired at least 1 year prior is referred to as late latent syphilis.
Infections of the central nervous system (CNS) (neurosyphilis), of
the visual system (ocular syphilis), or auditory system (otosyphilis)
can occur at any stage.
Lymphogranuloma venereum caused by C. trachomatis serovars
L1-­L3 is uncommon, although outbreaks do occur in MSM. In these
circumstances, proctitis or proctocolitis is the usual manifestation.
HIV is often present in affected men. Unusual infectious causes of genital, anal, or perianal ulcers in the United States and other industrialized
countries include chancroid and donovanosis.
Monkeypox (see Chapter 767) has been reported after sexual contact, particularly among MSM.
The differential diagnosis of genital ulcers also includes Behçet disease (see Chapter 202), Crohn disease (see Chapter 382.2), aphthous
ulceration, and acute genital ulcers caused by cytomegalovirus (see
Chapter 302) or EBV (see Chapter 301). Acute genital ulcers often follow a flu or mononucleosis-­like illness in an immunocompetent person
and are unrelated to sexual activity. The lesions are 0.5-­2.5 cm in size,
bilateral, symmetric, multiple, painful, and necrotic and are associated
with inguinal lymphadenopathy. This primary infection is also associated with fever and malaise. The diagnosis may require EBV titers or
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing. Treatment is supportive care,
including pain management.

Genital Lesions and Ectoparasites

Lesions that present as outgrowths on the surface of the epithelium
and other limited epidermal lesions are included under this categorization of syndromes. HPV can cause genital warts and genital-­
cervical abnormalities that can lead to cancer (see Chapter 313).
Genital HPV types are classified according to their association with
cancer. Infections with low-­risk types, such as HPV types 6 and 11,
can cause benign or low-­grade changes in cells of the cervix, genital warts, and recurrent respiratory papillomatosis. High-­risk HPV
types can cause cervical, anal, vulvar, vaginal, head, and neck cancers. High-­risk HPV types 16 and 18 are detected in approximately

70% of cervical cancers. Persistent infection increases the risk of
cervical cancer. Molluscum contagiosum and condyloma latum
associated with secondary syphilis complete the classification of
genital lesion syndromes.
As a result of the close physical contact during sexual contact, common ectoparasitic infestations of the pubic area occur as pediculosis
pubis or the papular lesions of scabies (see Chapter 709.2).

HIV, Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C

HIV and hepatitis B virus (HBV) present as asymptomatic, unexpected occurrences in most infected adolescents. High vaccination coverage rates among infants and adolescents have resulted
in substantial declines in acute HBV incidence among U.S.-­born
adolescents. Risk factors identified in the history or routine screening during prenatal care are much more likely to result in suspicion
of infection, leading to the appropriate laboratory screening, than
are clinical manifestations in this age-­group (see Chapters 322 and
406). HIV incidence among adolescents has also declined, though
disparities based on race, ethnicity, gender, and region persist.
Young adults continue to be affected by HIV as well. The US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends all individuals
between ages 15 and 65 be tested for HIV at least once in their life,
and the CDC recommends HIV testing once between 13 and 64 and
once a year based on behaviors. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) incidence
continues to be on the rise not only among individuals known to be
part of the “baby boomer” generation but also among young adults.
Because of the rise in injection opioid use and HCV, the American
Association for the Study of Liver Disease and Infectious Disease
Society of America (AASLD–IDSA), and CDC recommend HCV
screening among all individuals 18 years old and older. They also
recommend screening based on risk behaviors among individuals
younger than age 18 (see Table 163.2).

DIAGNOSIS

Most often, adolescents infected with bacterial and viral STI pathogens do not report symptoms suggestive of infection. With the use
of very sensitive, noninvasive chlamydia and gonorrhea NAAT, providers are finding that most genital infections in females and many
males are asymptomatic. A thorough sexual history is key to identifying adolescents who should be screened for STIs and for identifying those who require a laboratory diagnostic evaluation for an STI
syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections
When eliciting a sexual health history, discussions should be appropriate for the patient’s developmental level. In addition to questions
regarding vaginal or urethral discharge, genital lesions, and lower
abdominal pain among females, one should ask about prior treatment
of any STI symptoms, including self-­treatment using nonprescription
medications. Dyspareunia is a consistent symptom in adolescents with
PID. Providers must ask about oral or anal sexual activity to determine
sites for specimen collection.
Urethritis should be objectively documented by evidence of inflammation or infectious etiology. Patient complaint without objective
clinical or laboratory evidence does not fulfill diagnostic criteria.
Inflammation can be documented by (1) observing urethral mucopurulent discharge, (2) ≥2 WBCs per high-­power field on microscopic
examination of Gram stain urethral secretions, (3) urine microscopic
findings of ≥10 WBCs per high-­power field of first-­void urine specimen, or (4) a positive urine leukocyte esterase test of a first-­void
specimen. Laboratory evaluation is essential to identify the involved
pathogens to determine treatment, partner notification, and disease
control. C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae NAATs of a urine specimen
are recommended. The presence of gram-­negative intracellular diplococci on microscopy obtained from a male urethral specimen confirms
the diagnosis of gonococcal urethritis.
An essential component of the diagnostic evaluation of vaginal,
cervical, or urethral discharge is a chlamydia and gonorrhea NAAT.
NAATs are the most sensitive tests available in such cases and are
licensed for use with urine, urethral, vaginal, and cervical specimens.
Many of the chlamydia NAATs are approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) to test patient-­collected vaginal swabs
in the clinical setting and liquid cytology specimens. Female vaginal
swab specimens and male first-­void urine are considered the optimal
specimen types. Female urine remains an acceptable chlamydia and
Saline: 40X objective

gonorrhea NAAT specimen, but it may have slightly reduced performance when compared with cervical or vaginal swab specimens. Urine
is the recommended specimen for male urethral infection. Gonorrhea and chlamydia NAATs perform well on rectal and oropharyngeal
specimens and can be performed by clinical laboratories that have
completed the appropriate verification studies to obtain Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA) approval.
Evaluation of adolescent females with vaginitis includes laboratory
data. Traditionally, the cause of vaginal symptoms was determined by
pH and microscopic examination of the discharge. However, CLIA-­
waived point-­of-­care vaginitis tests are available. Using pH paper,
an elevated pH (i.e., >4.5) is common with bacterial vaginosis and
trichomoniasis. Because pH testing is not highly specific, discharge
should be further examined. For microscopic exam, a slide can be
made with the discharge diluted in 1-­2 drops of 0.9% normal saline
solution and another slide with discharge diluted in 10% KOH solution. Examining the saline specimen slide under a microscope may
reveal motile or dead T. vaginalis or clue cells (epithelial cells with
borders obscured by small bacteria), which are characteristic of bacterial vaginosis. WBCs without evidence of trichomonads or yeast
are usually suggestive of cervicitis. This evaluation has been consistently shown to be highly subjective, which is why there are more
NAAT tests available for diagnosis. The yeast or pseudohyphae of
Candida species are more easily identified in the KOH specimen
(Fig. 163.8). The sensitivity of microscopy is approximately 50%
and requires immediate evaluation of the slide for optimal results.
Therefore lack of findings does not eliminate the possibility of infection. More sensitive point-­of-­care vaginitis tests include the OSOM
Trichomonas Rapid Test (Sekisui Diagnostics, Lexington, MA), an
immunochromatographic capillary flow dipstick technology with
reported 83% sensitivity. The OSOM BVBLUE Test (Sekisui) detects
Saline: 40X objective

Saline: 40X objective
RBCs

1245

Saline: 40X objective

NOT a clue cell
PMN

Trichomonas*
Clue cell

Trichomonas*
Yeast
buds

PMN

Folded
squamous
epithelial
cells

Trichomonas*

Sperm

Squamous
epithelial
cell

RBCs

PMN

Yeast buds
PMNs

NOT a clue cell

Artifact
Saline: 40X objective

Saline: 40X objective

Lactobacilli 10% KOH: 10X objective

10% KOH: 40X objective
Yeast pseudohyphae

Yeast
pseudohyphae

Masses of yeast
pseudohyphae

Lactobacilli

Yeast
buds
PMNs

Squamous
epithelial
cell

Lysed
squamous
epithelial
cells

Artifact
Lactobacilli

Squamous epithelial cells

NOT a clue cell

Yeast
buds

Lysed squamous epithelial cells

Fig. 163.8 Common normal and abnormal microscopic findings during examination of vaginal fluid. KOH, Potassium hydroxide solution; PMN,

polymorphonuclear leukocyte; RBCs, red blood cells. (From Adolescent Medicine: State of the Art Reviews, vol. 14, no. 2. Philadelphia: Hanley &
Belfus; 2003:350–351.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1246 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 163.4  Pathologic Vaginal Discharge
INFECTIVE DISCHARGE
COMMON CAUSES
Organisms
Candida albicans
Trichomonas vaginalis
Chlamydia trachomatis
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycoplasma genitalium
Conditions
Bacterial vaginosis
Acute pelvic inflammatory disease
Postoperative pelvic infection
Postabortal sepsis
Puerperal sepsis
LESS COMMON CAUSES
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Syphilis
Escherichia coli

OTHER REASONS FOR
DISCHARGE
COMMON CAUSES
Retained tampon or condom
Chemical irritation
Allergic responses
Ectropion
Endocervical polyp
Intrauterine device
Atrophic changes
LESS COMMON CAUSES
Physical trauma
Vault granulation tissue
Vesicovaginal fistula
Rectovaginal fistula
Neoplasia
Cervicitis

From Mitchell H. Vaginal discharge—causes, diagnosis, and treatment. BMJ.
2004;328:1306–1308; and Sexually Transmitted Infections Treatment Guidelines, 2021:
Vulvovaginal Itching, Burning, Irritation, Odor or Discharge: https://www.cdc.gov/std/tr
eatment-­guidelines/vaginal-­discharge.htm.

Table 163.5  Evaluation for Pelvic Inflammatory
Disease (PID)
2021 CDC DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
Minimal Criteria
• Cervical motion tenderness
or
• Uterine tenderness
or
• Adnexal tenderness
Additional Criteria to Enhance Specificity of the Minimal Criteria
• Oral temperature >38.3°C (101°F)
• Abnormal cervical or vaginal mucopurulent discharge*
• Presence of abundant numbers of WBCs on saline microscopy of
vaginal secretions*
• Elevated ESR or C-­reactive protein
• Laboratory documentation of cervical Neisseria gonorrhoeae or
Chlamydia trachomatis infection
Most Specific Criteria to Enhance the Specificity of the Minimal
Criteria
• Transvaginal sonography or MRI techniques showing thickened,
fluid-­filled tubes, with or without free pelvic fluid or tuboovarian
complex, or Doppler studies suggesting pelvic infection (e.g.,
tubal hyperemia)
• Endometrial biopsy with histopathologic evidence of endometritis
• Laparoscopic abnormalities consistent with PID
Differential Diagnosis (Partial List)
• Gastrointestinal: appendicitis, constipation, diverticulitis,
gastroenteritis, inflammatory bowel disease, irritable bowel
syndrome
• Gynecologic: ovarian cyst (intact, ruptured, or torsed),
endometriosis, dysmenorrhea, ectopic pregnancy, mittelschmerz,
ruptured follicle, septic or threatened abortion, tuboovarian
abscess
• Urinary tract: cystitis, pyelonephritis, urethritis, nephrolithiasis
• ESR, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate; WBCs, white blood cells
*If the cervical discharge appears normal and no WBCs are observed on the wet prep of
vaginal fluid, the diagnosis of PID is unlikely and alternative causes of pain should be
investigated.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): https://www.cdc.gov/
std/treatment-­guidelines/pid.htm.

elevated vaginal fluid sialidase activity, an enzyme produced by bacterial pathogens associated with bacterial vaginosis, including Gardnerella, Bacteroides, Prevotella, and Mobiluncus, and has a reported

90% sensitivity. Both tests are CLIA waived, with results available in
10 minutes.
Clinical laboratory–based vaginitis tests are also available. The
Affirm VPIII (Becton Dickenson) is a moderate-­complexity nucleic
acid probe test that evaluates for T. vaginalis, G. vaginalis, and C. albicans and has a sensitivity of 63% and specificity of >99.9%, with results
available in 45 minutes. Some gonorrhea and chlamydia NAATs also
offer an assay for T. vaginalis testing of female specimens tested for
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis, considered the gold standard for
Trichomonas testing.
Objective signs of vulvar inflammation in the absence of vaginal
pathogens, along with a minimal amount of vaginal discharge, suggest
the possibility of mechanical, chemical, allergic, or other noninfectious
irritation of the vulva (Table 163.4).
The definitive diagnosis of PID is difficult based on clinical findings
alone. Clinical diagnosis is imprecise, and no single historical, physical,
or laboratory finding is both sensitive and specific for the diagnosis
of acute PID. Clinical criteria have a positive predictive value of only
65–90% compared with laparoscopy. Although healthcare providers
should maintain a low threshold for the diagnosis of PID, additional
criteria to enhance the specificity of diagnosis, such as transvaginal
ultrasonography, can be considered (Table 163.5).
Cell culture and PCR are the preferred HSV tests. Viral culture
sensitivity is low, and intermittent viral shedding causes false-­
negative results. NAATs, including PCR assays for HSV DNA, are
more sensitive and increasingly available for diagnosing genital HSV.
The Tzanck test is insensitive and nonspecific and should not be considered reliable.
Accurate type-­specific HSV serologic assays are based on the HSV-­
specific glycoproteins G2 (HSV-­2) and G1 (HSV-­1). Both laboratory-­
based point-­
of-­
care tests are available. Because almost all HSV-­
2
infections are sexually acquired, the presence of type-­specific HSV-­2
antibody implies anogenital infection. The presence of HSV-­1 antibody
alone is more difficult to interpret because of the frequency of oral HSV
infection acquired during childhood. Type-­
specific HSV serologic
assays might be useful in the following scenarios: (1) recurrent genital symptoms or atypical symptoms with negative HSV cultures; (2) a
clinical diagnosis of genital herpes without laboratory confirmation;
and (3) a patient with a partner with genital herpes, especially if considering suppressive antiviral therapy to prevent transmission.
For syphilis testing, nontreponemal tests, such as the rapid plasma
reagin (RPR) or Venereal Disease Research Laboratories (VDRL), and
treponemal testing, such as fluorescent treponemal antibody absorbed
tests, the T. pallidum passive particle agglutination (TP-­PA) assay, and
various enzyme and chemiluminescence immunoassays (EIA/CIA),
are recommended. However, many clinical laboratories have adopted
a reverse sequence of screening in which a treponemal EIA/CIA is performed first, followed by testing of reactive sera with a nontreponemal
test (e.g., RPR). Treponemal tests often remain positive for life, with
only 15-25% becoming serologically nonreactive, if treated early in
primary syphilis. A positive treponemal EIA or CIA test can identify
both previously treated and untreated or incompletely treated syphilis.
False-­positive results can occur, particularly among populations with
low syphilis prevalence. Persons with a positive treponemal screening test should have a standard nontreponemal test with titer (RPR or
VDRL) to guide patient management decisions. If EIA/CIA and RPR/
VDRL results are discordant, the laboratory should perform a different
treponemal test to confirm the results of the initial test. Patients with
discordant serologic results by EIA/CIA and RPR/VDRL testing whose
sera are reactive by TP-­PA testing are considered to have past or present
syphilis; if sera is TP-­PA nonreactive, syphilis is unlikely (Fig. 163.9).
Rapid HIV testing with third-­and fourth-­generation test results
available in 10-­20 minutes can be useful when the likelihood of adolescents returning for their results is low. Point-­of-­care CLIA-­waived tests
for whole blood finger stick (fourth generation) and oral fluid specimen (third generation) testing are available. Clinical studies have demonstrated that the rapid HIV test performance is comparable to those
of EIAs. Because some reactive test results may be false positive, every
reactive rapid test must be confirmed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections

1247

Treponemal (Immunoassay)

Reactive

Nonreactive
Step 1

Nontreponemal

Reactive

Nonreactive
Step 2

Supplemental treponemal*

Reactive

Nonreactive
Step 3

Consistent with
current or past syphilis
infection

Consistent with past
or potential early
syphilis infection

Inconclusive for
syphilis infection;
potentially early
infection or false
positive

No laboratory
evidence of syphilis
infection

Lab interpretation

Fig. 163.9 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)–recommended algorithm for reverse-­sequence syphilis screening: Treponemal test screening followed by nontreponemal test confirmation. *The supplemental treponemal test should use a unique platform and/or antigen different from the first
treponemal test. (From Association of Public Health Laboratories. Suggested Reporting Language for Syphilis Serological Testing. Association of Public
Health Laboratories August 2020 https://www.aphl.org/programs/infectious_disease/std/Documents/ID-2020Aug-Syphilis-Reporting-Language.pdf.)

Table 163.6  Management Guidelines for Uncomplicated Bacterial STIs in Adolescents and Adults
PATHOGEN

RECOMMENDED REGIMENS

ALTERNATIVE REGIMENS AND SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Chlamydia trachomatis

Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2×/day for 7
days
For pregnancy:
Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose

Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose
OR
Levofloxacin 500 mg orally 1×/day for 7 days
For pregnancy:
Amoxicillin 500 mg orally 3×/day for 7 days

Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(cervix, urethra, and
rectum)

Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM in a single dose
for persons weighing <150 kg
If chlamydial infection has not been
excluded, treat for chlamydia with
doxycycline 100 mg orally 2×/day for
7 days
For person weighing >150 kg, ceftriaxone
1g should be administered

If cephalosporin allergy or unavailable:
Gentamicin 240 mg IM in a single dose PLUS Azithromycin 2 g orally in
a single dose
OR
Cefixime 800 mg orally in a single dose

Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(pharynx)

Ceftriaxone 500 mg IM in a single dose for
person weighing <150 kg
Ceftriaxone 1g IM for a person weighing
≥150 kg

Treponema pallidum
(primary and secondary
syphilis or early latent
syphilis, i.e., infection
<12 mo)

Benzathine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM
in a single dose

Penicillin allergy: Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice daily for 14 days or
tetracycline 500 mg orally 4 times daily for 14 days; limited data suggest
ceftriaxone 1-­2 g daily either IM or IV for 10-­14 days
OR
Azithromycin 2 g orally in a single dose has been effective, but treatment
failures have been documented
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1248 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 163.6  Management Guidelines for Uncomplicated Bacterial STIs in Adolescents and Adults—cont’d
PATHOGEN

RECOMMENDED REGIMENS

ALTERNATIVE REGIMENS AND SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Treponema pallidum (late
latent syphilis or syphilis
of unknown duration)

Benzathine penicillin G 7.2 million units
total, administered as three doses of 2.4
million units IM each at 1-­wk intervals

Penicillin allergy: Doxycycline 100 mg orally twice daily for 28 days or
tetracycline 500 mg orally 4 times daily for 28 days, with close serologic
and clinical follow-­up

Treponema pallidum
(neurosyphilis, ocular
syphilis, and otosyphilis)

Aqueous crystalline penicillin G 18-­24
million units per day, administered
as 3-­4 million units by IV every 4 hr or
continuous infusion, for 10-­14 days

Procaine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM 1×/day for 10-­14 days
PLUS Probenecid 500 mg orally 4×/day for 10-­14 days

Haemophilus
ducreyi (chancroid:
genital ulcers,
lymphadenopathy)

Azithromycin 1 g orally in a single dose
OR
Ceftriaxone 250 mg IM in a single dose
OR
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally 2× daily for 3
days
OR
Erythromycin base 500 mg orally 3× daily
for 7 days

Chlamydia trachomatis
serovars L1, L2, or L3
(lymphogranuloma
venereum)

Doxycycline 100 mg orally 2× daily for 21
days

Alternative: Erythromycin base 500 mg orally 4× daily for 21 days
OR
Azithromycin 1 g orally once weekly for 3 wk

IM, Intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases: treatment guidelines, 2021. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2021;70:1–187, https://www.cdc.gov/std/
treatment-­guidelines/default.htm.

Table 163.7  Management Guidelines for Uncomplicated Miscellaneous Sexually Transmitted Infections in Adolescents
and Adults
PATHOGEN

RECOMMENDED REGIMENS

ALTERNATIVE REGIMENS AND SPECIAL
CONSIDERATIONS

Trichomoniasis

Women:
Metronidazole 500 mg orally 2×/day for 7 days
Men:
Metronidazole 2 g orally in a single dose

For women and men: Tinidazole 2 g orally in a
single dose

Phthirus pubis (pediculosis
pubis, e.g., pubic lice)

Permethrin 1% cream rinse applied to affected areas and
washed off after 10 min
OR
Pyrethrins with piperonyl butoxide applied to affected
areas and washed off after 10 min
Launder clothing and bedding

Malathion 0.5% lotion applied for 8-­12 hr and
washed off
OR
Ivermectin 250 μg/kg orally, repeat in 7-­14 days

Sarcoptes scabiei (scabies)

Permethrin 5% cream applied to all areas of the body
(from neck down), wash after 8-­14 hr
OR
Ivermectin 200 μg/kg body weight orally, repeated in 14
days
Launder clothing and bedding

Lindane (1%) 1 oz of lotion or 30 g of cream in thin
layer to all areas of body from neck down; wash
off after 8 hr

Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases: treatment guidelines. MMWR. 2021;64(RR-­3); https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-­
guidelines/STI-­Guidelines-­2021.pdf.

TREATMENT

See Part XV for chapters on the treatment of specific microorganisms
and Tables 163.6-­163.8. Treatment regimens using nonprescription
products for candidal vaginitis and pediculosis reduce financial and
access barriers to rapid treatment for adolescents, but potential risks
for inappropriate self-­treatment and complications from untreated,
more serious infections must be considered before using this
approach. Minimizing noncompliance with treatment, notifying and
treating the sexual partners, addressing prevention and contraceptive
issues, offering available vaccines to prevent STIs, and making every
effort to preserve fertility are additional physician responsibilities.

Chlamydia-­and gonorrhea-­infected males and females should be
retested approximately 3 months after treatment, regardless of whether
they believe that their sex partners were treated, or whenever persons
next present for medical care in the 12 months after initial treatment.
Adolescents who are pregnant with chlamydia and gonorrhea infections should be retested in approximately 1 month after treatment. Adolescents with oral gonorrhea should be retested in 7-14 days. Once an
infection is diagnosed, partner evaluation, testing, and treatment are recommended for sexual contacts within 60 days of symptoms or diagnosis,
or the most recent partner if sexual contact was >60 days, even if the
partner is asymptomatic. Abstinence is recommended for at least 7 days

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 163 u Sexually Transmitted Infections

1249

Table 163.8  Management Guidelines for Uncomplicated Genital Warts and Genital Herpes in Adolescents and Adults
PATHOGEN

RECOMMENDED REGIMENS

ALTERNATIVE REGIMENS AND SPECIAL
CONSIDERATIONS

HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS (HPV)
External anogenital
warts (penis, groin,
scrotum, vulva,
perineum, external
anus, and perianus)

Patient applied:
Imiquimod 3.75–5% cream self-­applied to warts at bedtime nightly
for up to 16 wk; wash off after 6-­10 hr
OR
Podofilox 0.5% solution or gel self-­applied to warts twice daily for
3 consecutive days each wk followed by 4 days of no therapy.
May be repeated for up to four cycles.
OR
Sinecatechins 15% ointment self-­applied 3 times daily for up to 16
wk. Do not wash off after use, and avoid genital, anal, and oral
sexual contact while ointment is on skin.
Provider-­administered:
Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen or cryoprobe. Repeat
applications every 1-­2 wk.
OR
Surgical removal either by tangential scissor excision,
electrocautery, tangential shave excision, curettage, laser or
electrosurgery.
OR
Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) or bichloracetic acid (BCA) 80–90%;
small amount applied only to warts and allowed to dry, when
white “frosting” develops; can be repeated weekly.

Cervical warts

Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen
OR
Surgical removal
OR
TCA or BCA 80–90% solution
Management should include consultation with a specialist.

Vaginal warts

Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen; avoid cryoprobe use because of
risk for vaginal perforation and fistula formation.
OR
Surgical removal
OR
TCA or BCA 80–90%; small amount applied only to warts and
allowed to dry, when white “frosting” develops; can be repeated
weekly.

Urethral meatal warts

Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen
OR
Surgical removal

Intraanal warts

Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen
OR
Surgical removal
OR
TCA or BCA 80–90% applied to warts. A small amount should be
applied only to warts and allowed to dry, at which time a white
“frosting” develops. Can be repeated weekly.

HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS (HSV; GENITAL HERPES)
First clinical episode
Treat for 7-­10 days with one of the following:
Acyclovir 400 mg orally 3× daily
Valacyclovir 1 g orally 2× daily
Famciclovir 250 mg orally 3× daily

Provider administered:
Podophyllin resin 10–25% in a compound tincture
of benzoin applied to each wart and then allowed
to air-­dry; thoroughly wash off after 1-­4 hr; can
be repeated weekly. Systemic toxicity has been
reported when podophyllin resin was applied to
large areas of friable tissue and was not washed
off within 4 hr.
Many persons with external anal warts also have
intraanal warts and might benefit from inspection
of anal canal by digital examination, standard
anoscopy, or high-­resolution anoscopy.

Management of intraanal warts should include
consultation with a specialist.

Consider extending treatment if healing is
incomplete after 10 days of therapy.

Episodic therapy for
recurrences

Treat with one of the following:
Acyclovir 800 mg orally 2× daily for 5 days
Acyclovir 800 mg orally 3× daily for 2 days
Valacyclovir 500 mg orally 2× daily for 3 days
Valacyclovir 1,000 mg orally once daily for 5 days
Famciclovir 1,000 mg orally 2× daily for 1 day
Famciclovir 500 mg orally once, then 250 mg 2× daily for 2 days
Famciclovir 125 mg orally twice daily for 5 days

Effective episodic treatment of recurrences requires
initiation of therapy within 1 day of lesion onset
or during the prodrome that precedes some
outbreaks. The patient should be provided with
a supply or a prescription for the medication with
instructions to initiate treatment immediately
when symptoms begin.

Suppressive therapy
to reduce frequency
of recurrences

Treat with one of the following:
Acyclovir 400 mg orally 2× daily
Valacyclovir 500 mg orally once daily* or 1 g orally once daily
Famciclovir 250 mg orally 2× daily

All patients should be counseled regarding
suppressive therapy availability, regardless of
number of outbreaks per year. Because the
frequency of recurrent outbreaks diminishes
over time in many patients, providers should
periodically discuss the need to continue therapy.
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1250 Part XI u Adolescent Medicine
Table 163.8  Management Guidelines for Uncomplicated Genital Warts and Genital Herpes in Adolescents and
Adults—cont’d
PATHOGEN

ALTERNATIVE REGIMENS AND SPECIAL
CONSIDERATIONS

RECOMMENDED REGIMENS

Daily suppressive
therapy in persons
with HIV infection

Acyclovir 400-­800 mg orally 2-­3× daily
OR
Famciclovir 500 mg orally 2× daily
OR
Valacyclovir 500 mg orally 2× daily

If lesions persist or recur in a patient receiving
antiviral treatment, acyclovir resistance should
be suspected and a viral culture obtained for
phenotypic sensitivity testing. Consultation with
an infectious disease specialist is recommended.

Episodic infection in
persons with HIV

Acyclovir 400 mg orally 3× daily for 7-­10 days
OR
Famciclovir 250 mg orally 3×/day for 7-­10 days
OR
Valacyclovir 1g orally 2× for 7-­10 days

If lesions persist or recur in a patient receiving
antiviral treatment, acyclovir resistance should
be suspected and a viral culture obtained for
phenotypic sensitivity testing. Consultation with
an infectious disease specialist is recommended.

Daily suppressive
therapy of recurrent
genital herpes in
pregnant women

Treatment is recommended to start at 36 wk gestation:
Acyclovir 400 mg orally 3× daily
OR
Valacyclovir 500 mg orally 2× per day

*Valacyclovir 500 mg once daily might be less effective than other valacyclovir or acyclovir dosing regimens in patients who have very frequent recurrences (i.e., ≥10 episodes per yr).
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases: treatment guidelines, MMWR 2021;64(RR-­3): https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-­
guidelines/STI-­Guidelines-­2021.pdf.

Table 163.9  Option for Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV Prevention
GENERIC

DOSE

FREQUENCY

POPULATION

Tenofovir disproxil fumarate
+ emtricitabine (F/TDF)*

200 mg/300 mg

Daily pill

Any person weighing at least 35 kg

Tenofovir alafenamide
+emtricitabine (F/TAF)

200 mg/25 mg

Daily pill

Individuals engaging in anal sex
who are cis male, transwomen
weighing at least 35 kg

Cabotegravir

200 mg/mL

Every 2 month
injection

Any person weighing at least 35 kg

*F/TDF is also available by brand name and generic depending on insurance. It can also be used as intermittent dosing for cis-men and transwomen engaging in anal sex.

after both patient and partner have completed treatment. A test for pregnancy should be performed for all females with suspected PID because
the test outcome will affect management. Repeat testing 3 months after
treatment is also recommended for Trichomonas infection.
Diagnosis and therapy are often carried out within the context of a
confidential relationship between the physician and the patient. Therefore the need to report certain STIs to health department authorities
should be clarified at the outset. Health departments are Health Insurance Portability and Affordability Act (HIPAA) exempt and will not
violate confidentiality. The health department’s role is to ensure that
treatment and case finding have been accomplished and that sexual
partners have been notified of their STI exposure. Expedited partner
therapy (EPT), the clinical practice of treating sex partners of patients
diagnosed with chlamydia or gonorrhea by providing prescriptions or
medications to the patient to take to the partner without the healthcare provider first examining the partner, is a strategy to reduce further
transmission of infection. In randomized trials, EPT has reduced the
rates of persistent or recurrent gonorrhea and chlamydia infection.
Serious adverse reactions are rare with recommended chlamydia and
gonorrhea treatment regimens, such as doxycycline, azithromycin, and
ceftriaxone. Transient gastrointestinal side effects are more common
but rarely result in severe morbidity. Most states expressly permit EPT
or may allow its practice. Resources for information regarding EPT and
state laws are available at the CDC website.

PREVENTION

Healthcare providers should integrate comprehensive sexuality
education into clinical practice with children from early childhood

through adolescence. Providers should counsel adolescents regarding
sexual behaviors associated with risk of STI acquisition and should
educate using evidence-­based prevention strategies, which include
a discussion of abstinence and other risk reduction strategies, such
as consistent and correct condom use, and distribution of educational materials for reinforcement. The USPSTF recommends high-­
intensity behavioral counseling to prevent STIs for all sexually active
adolescents.
The following recommendations for the primary prevention of STIs
through vaccination are based on published guidelines from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices:
• HPV vaccination is recommended through age 26 years for males
and females not vaccinated previously at the routine age of 11
or 12 years. Vaccination can be started at age 9. Two doses of
HPV vaccine are recommended for most persons starting the series before their 15th birthday; three doses are recommended at ≥
15 years.
• The HBV vaccination series is recommended for all adolescents and
young adults who have not previously received the universal HBV
vaccine series during childhood.
• Mpox vaccination is recommended for gay, bisexual, transgender
persons and if the patient has had sexual or intimate contact with
someone who may have mpox. Mpox vaccination is a two-dose
schedule separated by 4 weeks.
Preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) offers another strategy to specifically prevent HIV infection (Table 163.9).
The CDC and USPSTF recommend offering HIV PrEP to adolescents weighing ≥35 kg and young adults who are HIV negative and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

