Allergic Disorders
Chapter 182

Allergy and the
Immunologic Basis
of Atopic Disease
Cezmi A. Akdis and Scott H. Sicherer
Allergic or atopic patients have an altered state of reactivity to common
environmental and food antigens that do not cause clinical reactions in
unaffected people. Patients with clinical allergy usually produce immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies to the antigens that trigger their illness.
The term allergy represents the clinical expression of IgE-­mediated
allergic diseases that have a familial predisposition and that manifest as
hyperresponsiveness in target organs such as the lung, skin, gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and nose. The significant increase in the prevalence
of allergic diseases in the last few decades is attributed to changes in
environmental factors such as exposure to tobacco smoke, air pollution, indoor and outdoor allergens, respiratory viruses, obesity, and
perhaps a decline in certain infectious diseases (hygiene hypothesis).
The incidence of allergic asthma and atopic dermatitis started to
grow to epidemic proportions after the 1960s. Since 2000, the prevalence of food allergy, eosinophilic esophagitis, and drug-­induced anaphylaxis has also risen to epidemic proportions. Currently more than
1 billion patients worldwide are expected to have at least one kind of
allergic disease. The hygiene hypothesis, biodiversity hypothesis and
epithelial barrier hypothesis are the three main hypotheses that propose mechanisms for the development of allergic diseases.

HYGIENE HYPOTHESIS

The relatively recent onset of the epidemics of allergic, autoimmune, and
metabolic conditions leads to the question of what might underlie their
development. A prominent hypothesis is the hygiene hypothesis, which
proposes that certain microorganisms or infections protect against
inflammatory diseases, and that their loss, due to hygiene measures,
results in an increase in allergy, asthma, and autoimmunity. Growing up
on a traditional farm has a protective effect from asthma and allergies,
which provides a prominent example of the hygiene hypothesis. Children in Amish communities in the United States, where traditional dairy
farming is practiced, are highly protected from asthma and allergies. In
contrast, Hutterite communities have a significantly higher prevalence of
asthma and allergies in children. Interestingly, they practice industrialized farming with extensive cleaning measures. Early development of a
T-­helper type 1 (Th1) response together with T-­regulatory cell (Treg)
response were proposed to play a role in prevention of allergic diseases.

BIODIVERSITY HYPOTHESIS

Allergic diseases are associated with a microbiome with increased colonization of opportunistic pathogens. The biodiversity hypothesis states that
the observed increase in allergies is due to a loss of symbiotic relationships
with bacteria and dysbiosis caused by changes in the microbiome of the
gut, skin, and respiratory system. Healthy microbiota on the surface of the
mucosal barrier regulates many aspects of epithelial barrier homeostasis,
such as the modulation of barrier permeability and expression of epithelial barrier molecules, angiogenesis, vascular permeability, local microinflammation, and mucosal tolerance. Young children at risk of developing

PART

XIII

allergies have been shown to suffer from gut microbiome dysbiosis with an
overall reduced microbiome diversity. The dysbiotic microbiota has been
characterized by an underrepresentation of certain bacterial taxa that may
produce immune regulatory and epithelial barrier healing or protective
factors, such as short-­chain fatty acids, retinoic acid, and vitamin D.
Several shortcomings of the hygiene and biodiversity hypotheses
include the fact that water sanitation was established in many western
cities in the 1920s, but allergy and asthma epidemics only started in the
1960s. The protective role of parasitic infections that increase biodiversity
has been questioned for the same reason. Many parasitic infections started
to decrease in 1910 in New York, whereas allergies started to increase
after the 1960s. Allergic asthma is still on the rise in some cities in Asia
and Africa, which have low standards of hygiene. Another limitation of
the hygiene hypothesis and biodiversity hypothesis is that probiotics are
not viable alternatives for the prevention or treatment of allergies. Moreover, studies of migrants who move from developing countries to affluent
regions demonstrate a rapid increase in asthma and allergic diseases. It
appears that domestic living conditions, increased birth by cesarean section, antibiotic usage, dietary practices, urbanization, and indoor air pollution are more prominent factors compared with general public hygiene.

EPITHELIAL BARRIER HYPOTHESIS

The epithelial barrier hypothesis is a broader hypothesis that covers
hygiene and biodiversity hypotheses and adds further insights in the
pathogenesis and recent development of allergic diseases. The defective
epithelial barrier concept also applies to many autoimmune and metabolic diseases showing increased prevalence during the last few decades,
such as diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, liver steatosis,
and obesity. There is epidemiologic evidence from humans and disease
models in laboratory animals that demonstrate that even trace amounts
of certain toxic substances can damage epithelial barriers, initiate inflammation of the epithelium, and increase microbial dysbiosis and bacterial
translocation toward the inside and beneath the epithelium. The epithelial barrier consists of four main components: the epithelial microbiota;
the epithelial cell; structural proteins, such as filaggrin, loricrin, and
involucrin and tight junctions and adherence junctions; and secreted
epithelial products, such as mucus, antimicrobial peptides and fatty
acids. Humans are exposed daily to a variety of toxins and chemicals,
and substantial data demonstrate disruption of the epithelial barrier by
allergens, certain bacteria and their toxins, fungi, viruses, laundry and
dishwasher detergents, household cleaners, surfactants, enzymes and
emulsifiers used in the food industry, cigarette smoke, particulate matter,
diesel exhaust, ozone, nanoparticles, and microplastics.
Epithelial cell activation and release of epithelial cell cytokines, such
as interleukin (IL)-­25, IL-­33, and thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP)
play a major role in the development and exacerbation of allergic diseases. Local tissue inflammation opens epithelial barriers. Open epithelial barriers in the mucosa allow the entrance of foreign substances,
including allergens, into deeper tissues. Both Th1 and T-­helper type 2
(Th2) inflammation affect the skin and mucosal epithelial barriers. Th2
cells and group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILCs-­2) play major roles utilizing IL-­13 as major cytokines in the opening of the tight junction barrier.
Microbial dysbiosis caused by transepithelial translocation of commensal microbes, colonization by opportunistic pathogens, and decreased
biodiversity are hallmarks of barrier damaged tissues. Colonization by
opportunistic pathogens in the microbiota takes place in tissues with a
defective epithelial barrier. A dysregulated subepithelial immune response,
local inflammation, and incorrect regeneration and remodeling take place
as the continuum and chronicity of the local inflammation. Migration of
inflamed cells to other affected tissues and systemic low-­level immune activation and microinflammation are additional players in the development
and exacerbation of many chronic inflammatory diseases (Fig. 182.1).

1367
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1368 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

DC
ILC2

MC

MØ
B cell

T cell

Defective epithelial
barrier healing capacity
due to inflammation
Chronic skin and mucosal
inflammation

Exposure to epithelial
barrier-damaging agents and opening
of the skin and mucosal barriers

Systemic immune response to
commensals and opportunistic
pathogens

Colonization of opportunistic
pathogens S. aureus, Moraxella,
Haemophilus, pneumococcus

Microbial translocation
to inter-and subepithelial areas

Microbial dysbiosis characterized with
decreased biodiversity and
change in commensals

Fig. 182.1 The physiopathology of the epithelial barrier hypothesis. Genetic defects in barrier-­related molecules or exposure to epithelial barrier-­
damaging agents cause an opening of the skin and mucosal tight junction barriers. This is followed by translocation of microbiota to inter-­and subepithelial areas and colonization of opportunistic pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus, Moraxella, Haemophilus and pneumococcus. An immune
response develops toward commensals and opportunistic pathogens in the gut and respiratory system and systemic inflammation takes place. In most
cases of allergic diseases, a systemic type 2 inflammation predominates, and is directed against allergens, but also commensals and opportunistic
pathogens. Anti–S. aureus antibodies show a very high prevalence in asthma, chronic sinusitis, and atopic dermatitis. This is associated with microbial
dysbiosis and decreased biodiversity of commensals. Chronic inflammation in the subepithelial area develops as the main pathogenetic feature of
these diseases. Defective epithelial barrier healing capacity due to inflammation and epigenetic changes take place, developing a vicious circle of leaky
barriers, microbial dysbiosis, and chronic inflammation. DC, Dendritic cell; IL, interleukin; ILC, innate lymphoid cells; MC, mast cell; Mø, macrophage.

KEY ELEMENTS OF ALLERGIC DISEASES
Allergens

Allergens are almost always proteins, but not all proteins are allergens.
For a protein antigen to display allergenic activity, it must induce IgE
production, which must lead to a type 1 hypersensitivity response on
subsequent exposure to the same protein. Biochemical properties of
the allergen; stimulating factors of the innate immune response around
the allergen substances at the time of exposure; stability of the allergen
in the tissues, digestive system, skin, or mucosa; and the dose and time
of stay in lymphatic organs during the interaction with the immune
system are factors that may cause an antigen to become an allergen.
This is distinguished from general antigen responses, which induce a
state of immune responsiveness without associated IgE production.
Most allergens are proteins with a molecular weight of 10-­70 kDa.
Molecules <10 kDa do not bridge adjacent IgE antibody molecules on the
surfaces of mast cells or basophils. Most molecules >70 kDa do not pass
through mucosal surfaces, a feature needed to reach antigen-­presenting
cells (APCs) for stimulation of the immune system. Allergens frequently
contain proteases, which promote skin and mucosal epithelial barrier dysfunction and increase allergen penetration into host tissues. A
relatively high dose of exposure and stability of the allergenic protein
in body fluids to reach the immune cells are important determinants of
an allergen. Low molecular weight moieties, such as drugs, can become
allergens by reacting with serum proteins or cell membrane proteins to
be recognized by the immune system. Carbohydrate structures can also

be allergens and are most relevant with the increasing use of biologics in
clinical practice; patients with cetuximab-­induced anaphylaxis have IgE
antibodies specific for galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose.

T Cells

Everyone is exposed to potential allergens. Atopic individuals respond
to allergen exposure with rapid expansion of Th2 cells that secrete cytokines, such as IL-­4, IL-­5, and IL-­13, favoring IgE synthesis and eosinophilia. Allergen-­specific IgE antibodies associated with atopic response
are detectable by serum testing or positive immediate reactions to allergen extracts on skin-­prick testing. The Th2 cytokines IL-­4 and IL-­13
play a key role in immunoglobulin isotype switching to IgE (Fig. 182.2).
IL-­5 and IL-­9 are important in the differentiation and development of
eosinophils. The combination of IL-­3, IL-­4, and IL-­9 contributes to mast
cell activation. T-­cell and eosinophil migration to allergic inflammation areas are controlled by IL-­4 and IL-­13 upregulating their adhesion
to endothelial cell walls. IL-­9 is responsible for mucus production. Th2
cytokines are important effector molecules in the pathogenesis of asthma
and allergic diseases; acute allergic reactions are characterized by infiltration of Th2 cells into affected tissues. In addition, IL-­25, IL-­33, and TSLP
secreted from epithelial cells on exposure to allergens and respiratory
viruses contribute to Th2 response and eosinophilia.
A fraction of the immune response to allergens results in activation
and proliferation of Th1 cells. Th1 cells are typically involved in the
eradication of intracellular organisms, such as mycobacteria, because

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 182 u Allergy and the Immunologic Basis of Atopic Disease

EOS
IL-4
IL-5

GM-CSF

IL-9
IL-4, IL-9

IgE

IL-13
DC

CD40L CD40

MHCTCR

Th2

B cell
IgE

IL-3

Allergen

IL-4
IL-9

Mast cell

Stem cell factor

Fig. 182.2 Role of Th2 cytokines in allergic cascade. DC, Dendritic

cell; EOS, eosinophil; GM-­
CSF, granulocyte-­
macrophage colony-­
stimulating factor; IL, interleukin.

Innate immune
response stimulating
substances

of the ability of Th1 cytokines to activate phagocytes and promote the
production of opsonizing and complement-­fixing antibodies. The Th1
component of allergen-­specific immune response contributes to chronicity and the effector phase in allergic disease. Activation and apoptosis of epithelial cells induced by Th1 cell–secreted interferon-­γ (IFN-­γ),
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, and Fas-­ligand constitute an essential
pathogenetic event for the formation of eczematous lesions in atopic
dermatitis and bronchial epithelial cell shedding in asthma.
Chronic lesions of allergic reactions are characterized by infiltration of
Th1 and Th17 cells. This is important because Th1 cytokines such as IFN-­
γ can potentiate the function of allergic inflammatory effector cells such as
eosinophils, thereby contributing to disease severity. Th17 and Th22 cells
link the immune response to tissue inflammation; IL-­17A and IL-­17F and
IL-­22 are their respective prototype cytokines. Although both T-­helper cell
subsets play roles in immune defense to extracellular bacteria, IL-­17 augments inflammation, whereas IL-­22 plays a tissue-­protective role. Cytokines in the IL-­17 family act on multiple cell types, including epithelial cells
and APCs, to cause the release of chemokines, antimicrobial peptides, and
proinflammatory cytokines to enhance inflammation and antimicrobial
responses. In addition, Th9 cells produce IL-­9, but not other typical Th1,
Th2, and Th17 cytokines, and constitute a distinct population of effector T
cells that promotes tissue inflammation. Figure 182.3 depicts the complex
cytokine cascades involving Th1, Th2, Th9, Th17, and Th22 cells.
Tregs are a subset of T cells thought to play a critical role in expression of allergic and autoimmune diseases. These cells have the ability to
suppress effector T cells of Th1, Th2, Th9, Th17, and Th22 phenotypes
(Fig. 182.4). Tregs express CD4+CD25+ surface molecules and immunosuppressive cytokines such as IL-­10, IL-­35, and transforming growth
factor-­β (TGF-­β1). The forkhead box/winged-­helix transcription factor
gene FOXP3 is expressed specifically by CD4+CD25+ Tregs and programs their development and function. Adoptive transfer of Tregs inhibits the development of airway eosinophilia and protects against airway
hyperreactivity in animal models of asthma. T-­cell response to allergens
in healthy individuals shows a wide range, from no detectable response
to involvement of active peripheral tolerance mechanisms mediated by
different subsets of Tregs. Individuals who are not allergic even though
they are exposed to high doses of allergens, such as beekeepers and cat
Polarization
signals

Antigen

Micromilieu: vitamins,
cytokines, histamine,
adenosine, aryl hydrocarbons

naive
T cell

DC

Differentiation
cytokines:

1369

IL-21, IL-18,
IL-27

IL-4

IL-4
TGF-

TGF-, IL-6, IL-1
IL-21, IL-23

TGF-
IL-6

IL-21

Th1

Th2

Th9

Th17

Th22

TFH

Functions:

Intracellular
pathogens,
apoptosis of
tissue cells

Helminths,
allergic
inflammation,
IgE, chronic
eosinophilic
inflammation

Mucus
production,
tissue
inflammation

Extracellular
pathogens,
chronic
neutrophilic
inflammation

Tissue
inflammation

Antibody
synthesis

Effector
cytokines:

IFN-

IL-6, IL-8, IL-17A,
IL-17F, IL-22, IL-26

IL-22

IL-21

IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-13, IL-9, IL-10
IL-25, IL-31, IL-33

Fig. 182.3 Effector T-­cell subsets. Following antigen presentation by dendritic cells (DCs), naïve T cells differentiate into Th1, Th2, Th9, Th17,

Th22, and follicular helper (TFH) effector subsets. Their differentiation requires cytokines and other cofactors that are released from DCs and also
expressed in the micromilieu. T-­cell activation in the presence of interleukin-­4 (IL-­4) enhances differentiation and clonal expansion of Th2 cells, perpetuating the allergic response. IFN-­γ, Interferon-­γ; TGF-­β, transforming growth factor-­β. (From Akdis M, Palomares O, van de Veen W, et al. TH17
and TH22 cells: A confusion of antimicrobial response with tissue inflammation versus protection. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012;129:1438–1449.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1370 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Suppression
of Th17 effector cells
Suppression
of Th1
effector cells

Suppression
of Th2
effector cells

Fig. 182.4 Control of allergen-­specific immune

responses. FoxP3+, CD4+, CD25+, and Tr1 cells
contribute to the control of allergen-­
specific immune responses in several major ways: suppression
of dendritic cells (DCs) that support the generation
of effector T cells; suppression of Th1, Th2, and
Th17 cells; suppression of allergen-­
specific IgE,
and induction of IgG4 and/or IgA; suppression of
mast cells, basophils, and eosinophils; interaction
with resident tissue cells and remodeling; and suppression of effector T-­cell migration to tissues. IL,
Interleukin. (From Akdis CA, Akdis M. Mechanisms
and treatment of allergic disease in the big picture of regulatory T cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2009;123:735–746.)

B cell

Th1

Suppression of effector
T cell migration to tissues
T reg

Th2

Endothelial cells

Basophil

Eosinophil

DC

Remodeling in
the tissues
Direct and indirect
suppressive effects
on mast cells, basophils,
and eosinophils

owners, show a detectable allergen-­specific IgG4 response accompanied
by IL-­10–producing Tregs. It is thought that CD4+CD25+ Tregs play
an important role in mitigating the allergic immune response, and that
the lack of such cells may predispose to the development of allergic diseases. Patients with pathogenic variants in the human FOXP3 gene lack
CD4+CD25+ Tregs and develop severe immune dysregulation, with polyendocrinopathy, food allergy, and high serum IgE levels (XLAAD/IPEX
disease) (see Chapter 165.4). In addition to Treg cells, IL-­10–secreting
and allergen-­specific Breg cells increase during allergen-­specific immunotherapy and may play a role in allergen tolerance.

Innate Lymphoid Cells

Immune responses in populations of lymphoid cells that lack rearranged
T-­and B-­cell antigen receptors and surface markers for myeloid and
lymphoid lineages, such as T, B, and natural killer (NK) cells, show similarities to Th1, Th2, and Th17/Th22 types of immune responses. These
latter cells are defined as ILC1s, ILC2s, and ILC3s, respectively, based
on their transcription factors and cytokine production patterns. ILC1s
mainly produce IFN-­γ; ILC2s produce IL-­5, IL-­9, and IL-­13; and ILC3s
produce IL-­17 and IL-­22 without any need of antigen/allergen exposure.
Strong evidence indicates that ILCs play substantial roles in protection
against infection and the pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases, such
as asthma, allergic diseases, and autoimmune diseases. ILCs control the
mucosal environment through close interaction with epithelial cells and
other tissue cells, cytokine production, and induction of chemokines that
recruit suitable cell populations to initiate and promote distinct types
of immune response development and tissue inflammation. ILC2s are
likely involved in the induction of asthma, allergic rhinitis, eosinophilic
esophagitis, and atopic dermatitis through activation by epithelium-­
derived cytokines (e.g., IL-­33, IL-­25, TSLP) and interaction with other
immune cells. IL-­10–secreting ILCs with an immune regulatory function have been reported. These cells develop from ILC2s and play suppressive roles in allergic inflammation, particularly through IL-­10.

Antigen-­Presenting Cells

Induction of IgG4
Suppression of IgE

Th17

Dendritic cells (DCs), Langerhans cells, monocytes, and macrophages
have the ability to present allergens to T cells, thereby modulating allergic inflammation by controlling the type of T-­cell development. APCs
are a heterogeneous group of cells that share the property of antigen
presentation in the context of the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) and are found primarily in lymphoid organs and the skin. DCs
and Langerhans cells are unique in their ability to prime naïve T cells

Mast cells

Suppression of
inflammatory
dendritic cells.
Induction of
IL-10-producing
dendritic cells

and are responsible for the primary immune response, or the sensitization phase of allergy. Monocytes and macrophages are thought to
contribute to activating memory T-­cell responses on reexposure to
allergen, which characterizes the elicitation phase of allergy.
Peripheral DCs residing in sites such as the skin, intestinal lamina
propria, and lung are relatively immature. These immature DCs take up
antigens in tissues and then migrate to the T-­cell areas in locally draining lymph nodes. The DCs undergo phenotypic and functional changes
during migration, characterized by increased expression of MHC class
I, MHC class II, and co-­stimulatory molecules that react with CD28
expressed on T cells. In the lymph nodes, they directly present processed
antigens to resting T cells to induce their proliferation and differentiation.
Mature DCs have been designated as myeloid or plasmacytoid on
the basis of their ability to favor Th1 or Th2 differentiation, respectively.
The critical factor for polarization to Th1 cells is the level of IL-­12 produced by myeloid DC. In contrast, plasmacytoid DCs have low levels
of IL-­12. Plasmacytoid DCs particularly play a role in antiviral immunity by rapid production of high amounts of IFN-­α and help B cells for
antibody production. There is considerable interest in the role of TSLP,
which is overexpressed in the mucosal surfaces and skin of atopic individuals. TSLP enhances Th2 differentiation by inducing expression of
OX40L on immature myeloid DCs in the absence of IL-­12 production.
Tissue macrophages are also acting as APCs. They show two main effector subsets in tissues, namely the M1 and M2 macrophages. M1 macrophages are classically activated, typically by IFN-­γ or lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) like innate immune response stimulating substances, and produce proinflammatory cytokines, phagocytize microbes, and initiate an
immune response. M1 macrophages produce nitric oxide (NO) or reactive
oxygen intermediates (ROIs) to protect against bacteria and viruses. M2
macrophages are alternatively activated by allergen exposure and certain
cytokines such as IL-­4, IL-­10, or IL-­13. M2 macrophages will produce
either polyamines to induce proliferation or proline to induce collagen
production. These macrophages are associated with wound healing and
tissue repair remodeling and activation of Th2 cells and ILC2s.
Presence of allergen-­specific IgE on the cell surfaces of APCs is a
unique feature of atopy. Importantly, the formation of high-­affinity IgE
receptor I (FcεRI)/IgE/allergen complexes on APC surfaces greatly facilitates allergen uptake and presentation. The clinical importance of this
phenomenon is supported by the observation that FcεRI-­positive Langerhans cells bearing IgE molecules are a prerequisite for skin-­applied,
aeroallergen provocation of eczematous lesions in patients with atopic
dermatitis. The role of the low-­affinity IgE receptor II (FcεRII, CD23)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 182 u Allergy and the Immunologic Basis of Atopic Disease
on monocytes/macrophages is less clear, although under certain conditions it apparently can also facilitate antigen capture. Cross linking of
FcεRII, as well as FcεRI, on monocytes/macrophages leads to the release
of inflammatory mediators. There is a critical role for DCs in induction
of oral tolerance; tolerogenic DCs are compartmentalized within the
mucosa and present antigen through a mechanism designed to produce
a Th1/Treg-­suppressive response that ablates allergen-­specific T cells.

Immunoglobulin E and Its Receptors

The acute allergic response depends on IgE and its ability to bind selectively to the α chain of the high-­affinity FcεRI or the low-­affinity FcεRII
(CD23). Cross linking of receptor-­bound IgE molecules by allergen initiates a complex intracellular signaling cascade, followed by the release
of various mediators of allergic inflammation from mast cells and
basophils. The FcεRI molecule is also found on the surface of antigen-­
presenting DCs (e.g., Langerhans cells), but differs from the structure
found on mast cells/basophils in that the FcεRI molecule found on DCs
lacks the β chain. CD23 is found on B cells, eosinophils, platelets, and
DCs. Cross linking and FcεRI aggregation on mast cells and basophils
can also lead to anaphylaxis (see Chapter 174). Differential expression
of tyrosine kinases responsible for positive and negative regulation of
mast cell/basophil degranulation are thought to be responsible for this
aberrant allergic response.
The induction of IgE synthesis requires two major signals. The first signal (signal 1) initiates IL-­4 or IL-­13 activation of germline transcription at
the ε Ig locus, which dictates isotype specificity. The second signal (signal
2) involves the engagement of CD40 on B cells by CD40 ligand expressed
on T cells. This engagement results in activation of the recombination
machinery, resulting in DNA switch recombination. Interactions between
several co-­stimulatory molecule pairs (CD28 and B7; lymphocyte function–associated antigen-­1 and intercellular adhesion molecule-­1; CD2 and
CD58) can further amplify signal 1 and signal 2 to enhance IgE synthesis.
Factors that inhibit IgE synthesis include Th1-­type cytokines (IL-­12, IFN-­
α, IFN-­γ), IL-­10 from Tregs, Breg cells, and regulatory DCs and microbial
DNA containing CpG (cytosine-­phosphate-­guanine) repeats.

Eosinophils

Allergic diseases are characterized by peripheral blood and tissue eosinophilia. Eosinophils participate in both innate and adaptive immune
responses and, like mast cells, contain dense intracellular granules that
are sources of inflammatory proteins (see Fig. 169.1). These granule
proteins include major basic protein, eosinophil-­derived neurotoxin,
peroxidase, and cationic protein. Eosinophil granule proteins damage
epithelial cells, induce airway hyperresponsiveness, and cause degranulation of basophils and mast cells. Major basic protein released from
eosinophils can bind to an acidic moiety on the M2 muscarinic receptor
and block its function, thereby leading to increased acetylcholine levels
and the development of increased airway hyperreactivity. Eosinophils
are also a rich source of prostaglandins and leukotrienes (LTs); in particular, cysteinyl LT C4 contracts airway smooth muscle and increases
vascular permeability. Other secretory products of eosinophils include
cytokines (IL-­4, IL-­5, TNF-­α), proteolytic enzymes, and ROIs, all of
which significantly enhance allergic tissue inflammation.
Several cytokines regulate the function of eosinophils in allergic disease. Eosinophils develop and mature in the bone marrow from myeloid
precursor cells activated by IL-­3, IL-­5, and granulocyte-­macrophage
colony-­
stimulating factor (GM-­
CSF). Allergen exposure of allergic
patients causes resident hematopoietic CD34 cells to express the IL-­5
receptor. The IL-­5 receptor activation induces eosinophil maturation,
causing eosinophils to synthesize granule proteins, prolonging their
survival, potentiating degranulation of eosinophils, and stimulating
release of eosinophils from the bone marrow. GM-­CSF also enhances
proliferation, cell survival, cytokine production, and degranulation of
eosinophils. Certain chemokines, such as RANTES (regulated on activation, normal T-­cell expressed and secreted), macrophage inflammatory
protein-­1α (MIP-­1α), and eotaxins are important for recruiting eosinophils into local allergic tissue inflammatory reactions. Eotaxins mobilize
IL-­5–dependent eosinophil colony–forming progenitor cells from the
bone marrow. These progenitors are rapidly cleared from the blood and
either return to the bone marrow or are recruited to inflamed tissue sites.

1371

Mast Cells

Mast cells are derived from CD34 hematopoietic progenitor cells that arise
in bone marrow. On entering the circulation, they travel to peripheral tissue, where they undergo tissue-­specific maturation. Mast cell development
and survival relies on interactions between the tyrosine kinase receptor
c-­kit expressed on the surface of mast cells and the fibroblast-­derived c-­kit
ligand, the stem cell factor. Unlike mature basophils, mature mast cells do
not typically circulate in the blood. They are instead widely distributed
throughout connective tissues, where they often lie adjacent to blood vessels and beneath epithelial surfaces that are exposed to the external environment, such as the respiratory tract, GI tract, and skin. So placed, mast
cells are positioned anatomically to participate in allergic reactions. At least
two subpopulations of human mast cells are recognized: mast cells with
tryptase and mast cells with both tryptase and chymase. Mast cells with
tryptase are the predominant type found in the lung and small intestinal
mucosa, whereas mast cells with both tryptase and chymase are the predominant type found in skin, the GI submucosa, and blood vessels.
Mast cells contain, or produce on appropriate stimulation, a diverse
array of mediators that have different effects on allergic inflammation
and organ function. They include preformed granule-­associated mediators (histamine, serine proteases, proteoglycans) and membrane-­derived
lipid, cytokine, and chemokine mediators arising from de novo synthesis
and release. The most important mast cell–derived lipid mediators are
the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase metabolites of arachidonic acid,
which have potent inflammatory activities. The major cyclooxygenase
product of mast cells is prostaglandin D2, and the major lipoxygenase
products are the sulfidopeptide LTs: LTC4 and its peptidolytic derivatives
LTD4 and LTE4. Mast cells also can produce cytokines that promote Th2-­
type responses (IL-­4, IL-­13, GM-­CSF) and inflammation (TNF-­α, IL-­6)
and regulate tissue remodeling (TGF, vascular endothelial cell growth
factor). Immunologic activation of mast cells and basophils typically
begins with cross-­linkage of IgE bound to the FcεRI with multivalent
allergen. Mast cell surface FcεRI is increased by IL-­4 and IgE. Surface
levels of FcεRI decrease in patients receiving treatment with anti-­IgE
antibody that lowers serum IgE, which is of potential therapeutic interest.

MECHANISMS OF ALLERGIC TISSUE
INFLAMMATION

IgE-­
mediated immune responses can be classified chronologically
according to three reaction patterns. The early-­phase response is the
immediate response after allergen is introduced into target organs.
This response is characterized by mast cell degranulation and release
of preformed mediators, occurring within an immediate time frame of
1-­30 minutes after allergen exposure and resolving within 1-­3 hours.
Acute reactions are associated with increased local vascular permeability, which leads to leakage of plasma proteins, tissue swelling, and
increased blood flow, as well as itching, sneezing, wheezing, and acute
abdominal cramps in the skin, nose, lung, and GI tract, respectively,
depending on the targeted organ.
A second, late-­phase response can occur within hours of allergen
exposure, reaching a maximum at 6-­12 hours and resolving by 24
hours. Late-­phase responses are characterized in the skin by edema,
redness, and induration; in the nose by sustained nasal blockage; and
in the lung by airway obstruction and persistent wheezing. In general,
late-­phase responses are associated with early infiltration of neutrophils and eosinophils, followed by basophils, monocytes, macrophages,
and Th2-­type cells. Recruitment of inflammatory cells from the circulation requires increased expression of adhesion molecules on their cell
surfaces and expression of their ligand on endothelial cells, which are
under the control of cytokines. Several hours after allergen exposure,
TNF-­α released by activated mast cells induces the vascular endothelial
expression of cell adhesion molecules, and this change leads to transendothelial migration of various inflammatory cells. Preferential accumulation of eosinophils occurs through interactions between selective
adhesion molecules on the eosinophil cell surface (e.g., α4β1-­integrin or
very late antigen-­4); vascular cell adhesion molecule-­1 surface expression can be enhanced by IL-­4 and IL-­13 on endothelial cells. ILC2s
receive signals from the epithelial cells, such as IL-­33, TSLP, and IL-­25,
and are activated and start to release their cytokines IL-­5 and IL-­13 to
initiate a type 2 immune response.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1372 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Chemokines are chemotactic cytokines that play a central role in
tissue-­directed migration of inflammatory cells. RANTES, MIP-­1α,
monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP)-­3, and MCP-­4 are chemoattractants for eosinophils and mononuclear cells, whereas eotaxins are
relatively selective for eosinophils. These chemoattractants have been
detected in epithelium, macrophages, lymphocytes, and eosinophils at
sites of late-­phase responses and allergic tissue inflammation. Blockade
of these chemokines leads to significant reduction in tissue-­directed
migration of allergic effector cells.
In the third reaction pattern, chronic allergic disease, tissue inflammation can persist for days to years. Several factors contribute to persistent tissue inflammation, including recurrent exposure to allergens
and microbial agents. The repeated stimulation of allergic effector cells
such as mast cells, basophils, eosinophils, and Th2 cells contributes to
unresolved inflammatory conditions. Additionally, Th2-­type cytokines
(IL-­3, IL-­5, GM-­CSF) secreted during allergic reactions can prolong
survival of allergic effector cells by delaying apoptosis. Local differentiation of tissue-­infiltrating eosinophil precursors induced by IL-­5
results in self-­generation of eosinophils, further sustaining damage of
local tissue. Tissue remodeling leading to irreversible changes in target
organs is also a feature of chronic allergic disease. In asthma, remodeling involves thickening of the airway walls and submucosal tissue, as
well as smooth muscle hypertrophy and hyperplasia, which are associated with a decline in lung function. This is an unexpected role for
eosinophils in airway remodeling as well as chronic inflammation. In
atopic dermatitis, lichenification is an obvious manifestation of skin
remodeling.
Generally, it is considered that a type 2 immune response underlines
a majority of asthma cases, atopic dermatitis, chronic rhinosinusitis,
and allergic rhinitis as a general characteristic of an immune/inflammatory response. Type 2 immune response involves Th2 cells, type 2 B
cells, ILC2, IL-­4–secreting NK T cells, basophils, eosinophils, and mast
cells and their major cytokines. From a complex network of cytokines,
IL-­4, IL-­5, IL-­9, and IL-­13 are mainly secreted from the immune system cells, and IL-­25, IL-­31, IL-­33, and TSLP from tissue cells, particularly epithelial cells. Many asthma-­related antigens, such as protease
allergens, fungal extracts, and viral infection, trigger IL-­33, TSLP, and
IL-­25 production from epithelial cells and various immune cells and
induce eosinophilic asthma–like airway inflammation through activation of lung ILC2s.
IL-­31 plays a role in pruritus in atopic dermatitis. Th2 cytokines
do not only maintain allergic inflammation but also influence tissue
remodeling by activating resident cells in target organs; IL-­4, IL-­9, and
IL-­13 induce mucus hypersecretion and metaplasia of mucus cells;
IL-­4 and IL-­13 stimulate fibroblast growth and synthesis of extracellular matrix proteins; and IL-­5 and IL-­9 increase subepithelial fibrosis.
TGF-­β produced by eosinophils and fibroblasts can also enhance subepithelial fibrosis. IL-­11 expressed by eosinophils and epithelial cells
contributes to subepithelial fibrosis, in addition to enhancing deposition of collagen and the accumulation of fibroblasts. The resulting
tissue injury amplifies further epithelial injury through proinflammatory cytokine release, extracellular matrix deposition in target organs,
and angiogenesis. Genetic predisposition to aberrant injury-­repair
responses may contribute to chronicity of illness. Once the allergic
immune response is established, it can be self-­perpetuating due to a
general type 2 immune response and can lead to chronic disease in
genetically predisposed individuals. The subsequent infiltration of Th1
cells and Th17 cells enhances the inflammatory potential of allergic
effector cells and contributes to chronic tissue inflammatory responses
through the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. In
addition, an autoimmune response might be playing a causative role
in allergic inflammation resulting from possible mechanisms through
IgE autoantibodies, IgG autoantibodies, and Th1-­cell and Th17-­cell
autoreactivity.

GENETIC BASIS OF ATOPY

Allergic diseases are complex genetic conditions susceptible to environmental triggers. Several major groups of genes are associated with
allergic diseases: genes that regulate systemic expression of atopy

(increased IgE synthesis, eosinophilia, mast cell responses) and that are
usually expressed among various allergic diseases, genes that control
barrier function in specific target organs (e.g., skin in atopic dermatitis,
lung in asthma, GI tract in food allergy), and genes encoding pattern-­
recognition receptors of the innate immune system that engage microbial pathogens and influence adaptive immune responses (Fig. 182.5).
Once allergic responses have been initiated, a genetic predisposition
to chronic allergic inflammation and aberrant injury-­repair responses
contribute to tissue remodeling and persistent disease.
Atopic diseases have a strong familial predisposition, with approximately 60% heritability found in twin studies of asthma and atopic
dermatitis. The 5q23-­35 region comprises several genes implicated in
allergic disease pathogenesis, including genes coding for Th2 cytokines
(IL-­3, IL-­4, IL-­5, IL-­9, IL-­13, GM-­CSF). Among these, IL4 is a well-­
studied potential candidate gene. A nucleotide change at position 589
of the IL4 promoter region is associated with the formation of a unique
binding site for nuclear factor for activated T cells (NF-­AT) transcription factor, increased IL-­4 gene transcription, higher NF-­AT binding
affinity, and increased IgE production. Similarly, IL13 coding region
variants have been associated with asthma and atopic dermatitis. An
association has been found between atopy and a gain-­of-­function polymorphism on chromosome 16, which codes for the α subunit of the
IL-­4R. This finding is consistent with the important role of IL-­4, IL-­13,
and their receptors in the immunopathogenesis of allergic diseases.
Genome-­wide searches have also linked atopy to chromosome region
11q13. The gene encoding the β subunit of FcεRI-­β has been proposed
to be the candidate gene in this region. The β subunit gene modifies the
FcεRI activity on mast cells, and several variants of FcεRI-­β are associated with asthma and atopic dermatitis. Chromosome 6 contains genes
coding for human leukocyte antigen class I and class II molecules,
which regulate the specificity and intensity of the immune responses to
specific allergens. IgE responses to specific allergens, such as ragweed
antigen Amb a V and mite allergen Der p I, have been linked to specific
MHC class II loci. TNF-­α, a key cytokine that contributes to the influx
of inflammatory cells, is also located on chromosome 6. TNF-­α polymorphisms are associated with asthma. A recent genome-­wide association study showed that genetic polymorphisms in the gene encoding
IL-­33, which is a major activator of ILC2s, and its receptor IL-­1RL1
(ST2) are strongly linked to asthma development.
Barrier dysfunction has a key role in the pathogenesis of allergic diseases. Genetic linkage studies of atopic dermatitis have demonstrated
the importance of chromosome 1q21, which contains a cluster of genes
involved in epidermal differentiation. Filaggrin is a protein that is
essential in the formation of the stratum corneum. Null pathogenic
variants of the filaggrin gene are strongly associated with early-­onset
and severe atopic dermatitis. Pathogenic variants in the gene encoding
the serine protease inhibitor SPINK5 has been shown to cause Netherton disease, a single-­gene disorder associated with erythroderma,
food allergy, and high serum IgE levels. A common polymorphism
in SPINK5 (in particular, Glu420Lys) increases the risk of developing atopic dermatitis and asthma. SPINK5 is expressed in the outer
epidermis and is thought to be critical to neutralizing the proteolytic
activity of Staphylococcus aureus and common allergens such as Der
p I, which use these proteases to penetrate the skin to induce allergic
responses. Barrier dysfunction is involved in other allergic diseases,
such as asthma and rhinosinusitis, but likely involves other barrier
genes, such as those encoding tight junctions. Epithelial tight junctions
form a strong barrier on the apical side of mucosal epithelial cells and
stratum granulosum of the skin. Epithelial tight junction defects shown
in asthma and atopic dermatitis have been linked to two mechanisms,
such as polymorphisms in certain claudin molecules or epigenetic regulation of the tight junction molecules. Epithelial cells obtained from
asthmatic tissues cannot form a strong barrier in cultures. Chemical
inhibition of histone deacetylases strengthens the barrier development
capacity of these epithelial cells.
Candidate genes associated with asthma susceptibility have been
identified by positional cloning: GPRA (G-­protein–coupled receptor for asthma susceptibility on chromosome 7p14), ADAM-­33 (a
disintegrin and metalloproteinase 33 on chromosome 20p), and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 182 u Allergy and the Immunologic Basis of Atopic Disease

1373

Asthma
AB13BP, ACO1,
ATG3, BTNL2, C11orf71, C1orf100,
C5orf56, CDHR3,CDK2,CHCHD9, COL22A1,
CRB1, CRCT1, CTNNA3, DENND1B, EDIL3, FAM19A2
GAB1, GSDMA, HPSE2, IGSF3, IKZF4, IL15RA, IL2RA,
IL2RB, IL5RA, IL6R, KIAA1271, KLF6, KLHL5, LOC338591,
LOC729675, MKLN1, NDFIP1, NOTCH4, ORMDL3, PBX2,
PCDH20, PDE4D, PRKCQ, PRKG1, PSAP, PTHLH, PYHIN1,
RBM17, RORA, SCG3, SIM2, SLC22A5, SLC30A8, SPATS2L,
T, TLE4, TNS1, VAV3, XKR6, XPR1, ZNF432, ZNF614,
ZNF665, ZNF841

C6orf10

Atopic
dermatitis

TLR1,
TSLP,
WDR36
IL1RL1

ACTL9, ADO,
BAT1, CARD11,
CCDC80, CREBL1,
CYP24A1, EGR2,
FLG, GLB1, GPSM3,
KIF3A, LOC100505634,
LOC100630917,
MIR1208, NCF4,
NLRP10, OR10A3,
OVOL1, PFDN4,
TNXB, ZNF365

GSDMB,
IKZF3, IL33,
RANBP6,
SMAD3

Rhinitis

IL18R1

CLEC16A,
ZBTB10

IL18RAP

CROCC, DAB2,
DHRS7, ENTPD6,
ETS1, FOXA1, GATA3,
GLI3, IL1RL2, IL21R,
NFATC2, PEX14,
PLCL1, PPM1A,
PTGER4, SEMA6A,
TPD52, TTC6

LRRC32
EMSY,
HLA-C
TMEM232,
ID2, IL4R

ADAD1, BCL6,
CAMK4, MICA,
TLR6, TLR10

ANAPC1, COL21A1,
FAM114A1, HLA-B, IL21,
KIAA1109, MICB, MIR574,
MYC, PVT1, SGK493

LPP

HLA region,
SLC25A46
IL13,
RAD50
IL2, STAT6

Atopy

ABL2, CDH13, CRIM1,
DARC, DNAH5, DOCK10,
EPS15, FCER1A, HCG27,
HLA-A, HLA-G, LOC730217,
NAB2, OPRK1, OR10J3,
OR6X1, SUCLG2, SYNPO2,
TLN1, TMEM108, WWP2,
ZNF71

Serum lgE

Fig. 182.5 Overlapping sets of genes have been reported in genome-­wide association studies (GWASs) for asthma, rhinitis, serum immunoglobu-

lin E (IgE) levels, atopy, and atopic dermatitis, supporting a common genetic element within the mechanisms predisposing individuals toward different allergic disease phenotypes. GWASs have also identified many genes in association with only one allergic disease phenotype; these most likely
represent the tissue-­specific component of each allergic disease (e.g., FLG in the epidermal barrier in atopic dermatitis). More GWASs have been
conducted analyzing genetic variants associated with asthma than with other allergic diseases. In the future it is likely that more risk variants for other
allergic diseases will be identified. Genes reported in more than one GWAS are shown in bold font. The genes reported for SNPs detected to be
significantly associated (P ≤ 1 × 10−5) with each allergic disease phenotype were obtained by searching the National Human Genome Research Institute GWAS catalog. (From Holloway JW. The genetics of allergic disease and asthma. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds. Pediatric
Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021. Fig. 3.3, p 22.)

DPP10 (dipeptidyl peptidase 10 on chromosome 2q14). The functions of these genes do not fit into classical pathways of atopy and
therefore provide new insights into asthma pathogenesis. GPRA
encodes a G-­protein–coupled receptor, with isoforms expressed in
bronchial epithelial cells and smooth muscle in asthmatic persons,
suggesting an important role for these tissues in asthma. ADAM-­
33 is expressed in bronchial smooth muscle and has been linked
to bronchial hyperresponsiveness. DPP10 encodes a dipeptidyl
dipeptidase that can remove the terminal 2 peptides from certain
proinflammatory chemokines, a change that may modulate allergic
inflammation.

Pattern-­recognition receptors of the innate immune system, which
are expressed by epithelial cells and DCs, are associated with disease
susceptibility. These receptors recognize specific microbial components. Polymorphisms in CD14 (engages endotoxin), Toll-­like receptor
2 (which engages S. aureus), and T-­cell immunoglobulin domain and
mucin domain (which engage hepatitis A virus) correlate with asthma
and/or atopic dermatitis susceptibility. Dysregulation of these frontline
immune defense systems would permit abnormal response to common
environmental allergens.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 182 u Allergy and the Immunologic Basis of Atopic Disease
Bibliography
Akdis CA. Does the epithelial barrier hypothesis explain the increase in allergy, autoimmunity and other chronic conditions? Nat Rev Immunol. 2021;32(22):749–751.
Akdis CA, Arkwright PD, Brüggen MC, et al. Type 2 immunity in the skin and lungs.
Allergy. 2020;75(7):1582–1605.
Bachert C, Akdis CA. Phenotypes and emerging endotypes of chronic rhinosinusitis.
J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2016;4(4):621–628.
Celebi Sözener Z, Cevhertas L, Nadeau K, Akdis M, Akdis CA. Environmental factors
in epithelial barrier dysfunction. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;145(6):1517–1528.
Cevhertas L, Ogulur I, Maurer DJ, et al. Advances and recent developments in asthma in 2020. Allergy. 2020;75(12):3124–3146.
Kortekaas Krohn I, Shikhagaie MM, Golebski K, et al. Emerging roles of innate lymphoid cells in inflammatory diseases: Clinical implications. Allergy.
2018;73(4):837–850.
Kuo IH, Yoshida T, De Benedetto A, et al. The cutaneous innate immune response in
patients with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013;131:266–278.
Liu AH, Anderson 3rd WC, Dutmer CM, et al. Advances in asthma 2015: across the
lifespan. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016;138(2):397–404.
Mjösberg J, Spits H. Human innate lymphoid cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2016;138(5):1265–1276.

1373.e1

Morita H, Kubo T, Rückert B, Ravindran A, et al. Induction of human regulatory innate lymphoid cells from group 2 innate lymphoid cells by retinoic acid. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2019;143(6). 2190–2201.e9.
Palomares O, Akdis M, Martín-­Fontecha M, Akdis CA. Mechanisms of immune
regulation in allergic diseases: the role of regulatory T and B cells. Immunol Rev.
2017;278(1):219–236.
Tang TS, Bieber T, Williams HC. Does “autoreactivity” play a role in atopic dermatitis? J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012;129:1209–1215.
Van de Veen W, Stanic B, Yaman G, et al. IgG4 production is confined to human IL-­
10-­producing regulatory B cells that suppress antigen-­specific immune responses.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2013;131:1204–1212.
Vercelli D. Remembrance of things past: HLA genes come back on the allergy stage. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 129:846–847
Wang M, Tan G, Eljaszewicz A, et al. Laundry detergents and detergent residue after
rinsing directly disrupt tight junction barrier integrity in human bronchial epithelial cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2019;143(5):1892–1903.
Zabielinski M, McLeod MP, Aber C, et al. Trends and antibiotic susceptibility
patterns of methicillin-­
resistant and methicillin-­
sensitive Staphylococcus
aureus in an outpatient dermatology facility. JAMA Dermatol. 2013;149(4):427–
432.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1374 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

Chapter 183

Diagnosis of Allergic
Disease
Supinda Bunyavanich, Jacob Kattan, and
Scott H. Sicherer
ALLERGY HISTORY

Obtaining a complete history from the allergic patient involves eliciting a description of all symptoms along with their timing and duration,
exposure to common allergens, and responses to previous therapies.
Because patients often suffer from more than one allergic disease, the
presence or absence of other allergic diseases, including allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, asthma, food allergy, eosinophilic esophagitis, atopic
dermatitis, and drug allergy, should be determined. A family history
of allergic disease is common and is one of the most important factors
predisposing a child to the development of allergies. The risk of allergic
disease in a child approaches 50% when one parent is allergic and 66%
when both parents are allergic, with maternal history of atopy having a
greater effect than paternal history.
Several characteristic behaviors are often seen in allergic children.
Because of nasal pruritus and rhinorrhea, children with allergic rhinitis often perform the allergic salute by rubbing their nose upward
with the palm of their hand. This repeated maneuver may give rise
to the nasal crease, a horizontal wrinkle over the bridge of the nose.
Characteristic vigorous rubbing of the eyes with the thumb and side of
the fist is frequently observed in children with allergic conjunctivitis.
The allergic cluck is produced when the tongue is placed against the
roof of the mouth to form a seal and withdrawn rapidly in an effort to
scratch the palate. The presence of other symptoms, such as fever, unilateral nasal obstruction, and purulent nasal discharge, suggests other
diagnoses.
The timing of onset and the progression of symptoms are relevant.
The onset of recurrent or persistent nasal symptoms coinciding with
placement in a daycare center might suggest recurrent infection rather
than allergy. When patients present with a history of episodic acute
symptoms, it is important to review the setting in which symptoms
occur as well as the activities and exposures that immediately precede
their onset. Symptoms associated with lawn mowing suggest allergy
to grass pollen or fungi, whereas if symptoms occur in homes with
pets, animal dander sensitivity is an obvious consideration. Reproducible reactions after ingestion of a specific food raise the possibility of
food allergy. When symptoms wax and wane but evolve gradually and
are more chronic in duration, a closer look at whether the timing and
progression of symptoms correlate with exposure to a seasonal aeroallergen is warranted.
Aeroallergens, such as pollens and fungal spores, are prominent
causes of allergic disease. The concentrations of these allergens in outdoor air fluctuate seasonally. Correlating symptoms with seasonal pollination patterns of geographically relevant plants and trees along with
information provided by local pollen counts can aid in identifying the
allergen. Throughout most of the United States, trees pollinate in the
early spring, grasses pollinate in the late spring and early summer, and
weeds pollinate in late summer through the fall. The presence of fungal spores in the atmosphere follows a seasonal pattern in the northern United States, with spore counts rising with the onset of warmer
weather and peaking in late summer months, only to recede again with
the first frost through the winter. In warmer regions of the southern
United States, fungal spores and grass pollens may cause symptoms on
a perennial basis.
Rather than experiencing seasonal symptoms, some patients suffer allergic symptoms year-­round. In these patients, sensitization to
perennial allergens usually found indoors, such as dust mites, animal

dander, cockroaches, and fungi, warrants consideration. Species of
certain fungi, such as Aspergillus and Penicillium, are found indoors,
whereas Alternaria is found in both indoor and outdoor environments.
Cockroach and rodent allergens are often problematic in urban environments. Patients sensitive to perennial allergens often also become
sensitized to seasonal allergens and experience baseline symptoms
year-­round with worsening during the pollen seasons.
The age of the patient is an important consideration in identifying
potential allergens. Infants and young children are often first sensitized
to allergens that are in their environment on a continuous basis, such
as dust mites, animal dander, and fungi. Sensitization to seasonal allergens usually takes several seasons of exposure to develop and is thus
unlikely to be a significant trigger of symptoms in infants and toddlers.
Food allergies are more common in infants and young children,
resulting primarily in cutaneous, gastrointestinal, and, less frequently,
respiratory and cardiovascular symptoms. Symptoms of immediate or
IgE-­mediated hypersensitivity food reactions typically develop within
minutes to 2 hours after ingestion of the offending food. Symptoms
of non–IgE-­mediated food allergies are often delayed or chronic (see
Chapter 192).
Complete information from previous evaluations and prior treatments for allergic disease should be reviewed, including impact of
changes in local environment (e.g., home vs school), response to medications, elimination diets, and duration and impact of allergen immunotherapy (if applicable). Improvement in symptoms with medications
or avoidance strategies used to treat allergic disease provides additional
evidence for an allergic process.
A thorough environmental survey should be performed, focusing
on potential sources of allergen and/or irritant exposure, particularly
when respiratory symptoms (upper/lower) are reported. The age and
type of the dwelling, how it is heated and cooled, the use of humidifiers
or air filtration units, and any history of water damage should be noted.
Forced air heating may stir up dust mite, fungi, and animal allergens.
The irritant effects of wood-­burning stoves, fireplaces, and kerosene
heaters may provoke respiratory symptoms. Increased humidity or
water damage in the home is often associated with greater exposure
to dust mites and fungi. Carpeting serves as a reservoir for dust mites,
fungi, and animal dander. The number of domestic pets and their
movements about the house should be ascertained. Special attention
should be focused on the bedroom, where a child spends a significant
proportion of time. The age and type of bedding, the use of dust mite
covers on pillows and mattresses, the number of stuffed animals, type
of window treatments, and the accessibility of pets to the room should
be reviewed. The number of smokers living in the home, and what and
where they smoke is useful information. Activities that might result
in exposure to allergens or respiratory irritants such as paint fumes,
cleansers, sawdust, or glues should be identified. Similar information
should be obtained in other environments where the child spends long
periods, such as a relative’s home or school setting.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

In patients with asthma, spirometry should be performed. If respiratory distress is observed, pulse oximetry should be performed.
The child presenting with a chief complaint of rhinitis or rhinoconjunctivitis should be observed for mouth breathing, paroxysms of
sneezing, sniffing/snorting, throat clearing, and rubbing of the nose
and eyes (representing pruritus; see Chapter 184). Infants should be
observed during feeding for nasal obstruction severe enough to interfere with feeding or for more obvious signs of aspiration or gastroesophageal reflux. The frequency and nature of coughing that occurs
during the interview and any positional change in coughing or wheezing should be noted. Children with asthma should be observed for
congested or wet cough, tachypnea at rest, retractions, and audible
wheezes, which may worsen with crying. Patients with atopic dermatitis should be monitored for repetitive scratching and the extent of skin
involvement.
Because children with severe asthma as well as those receiving
chronic or frequent oral corticosteroids may experience growth suppression, an accurate height should be plotted at regular intervals. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 183 u Diagnosis of Allergic Disease
use of inhaled glucocorticoids in prepubertal children is associated
with a small initial decrease in attained height (1 cm) that may persist as a reduction in adult height. Poor weight gain in a child with
chronic chest symptoms should prompt consideration of cystic fibrosis. Anthropometric measures are also important to monitor in those
on restricted diets because of multiple food allergies or eosinophilic
esophagitis. Blood pressure should be measured to evaluate for steroid-­
induced hypertension. The patient with acute asthma may present with
pulsus paradoxus, defined as a drop in systolic blood pressure during
inspiration >10 mm Hg. Moderate to severe airway obstruction is indicated by a decrease of >20 mm Hg. An increased heart rate may be the
result of an asthma flare or the use of a β-­agonist or decongestant. Fever
is not caused by allergy alone and should prompt consideration of an
infectious process, which may exacerbate asthma.
Parents are often concerned about blue-­gray to purple discolorations
beneath their child’s lower eyelids, which can be attributed to venous
stasis and are referred to as allergic shiners (Fig. 183.1). They are found
in up to 60% of allergic patients and almost 40% of patients without
allergic disease. Thus “shiners” may suggest, but are not diagnostic of,
allergic disease. In contrast, the Dennie-­Morgan folds (Dennie lines)
are a feature of atopy (see Fig. 183.1). These are prominent infraorbital
skin folds that extend in an arc from the inner canthus beneath and
parallel to the lower lid margin.
In patients with allergic conjunctivitis, involvement of the eyes is
typically bilateral (see Chapter 188). Examination of the conjunctiva
reveals varying degrees of lacrimation, conjunctival injection, and
edema. In severe cases, periorbital edema involving primarily the lower
eyelids or chemosis (conjunctival edema that is gelatinous in appearance) may be observed. The classic discharge associated with allergic
conjunctivitis is usually described as “stringy” or “ropy.” In children
with vernal conjunctivitis, a more severe, chronic phenotype, examination of the tarsal conjunctiva may reveal cobblestoning. Keratoconus,
or protrusion of the cornea, may occur in patients with vernal conjunctivitis or periorbital atopic dermatitis as a result of repeated trauma
produced by persistent rubbing of the eyes. Children treated with high-­
dose or chronic corticosteroids are at risk for development of posterior
subcapsular cataracts.

The external ear should be examined for eczematous changes in
patients with atopic dermatitis, including the postauricular area and
base of the earlobe. Because otitis media with effusion is common
in children with allergic rhinitis, pneumatic otoscopy should be performed to evaluate for the presence of fluid in the middle ear and to
exclude infection.
Examination of the nose in allergic patients may reveal the presence of a nasal crease. Nasal patency should be assessed, and the nose
examined for structural abnormalities affecting nasal airflow, such as
septal deviation, turbinate hypertrophy, and nasal polyps. Decrease
or absence of the sense of smell should raise concern about chronic
sinusitis or nasal polyps. Nasal polyps in children should raise concerns of cystic fibrosis. The nasal mucosa in allergic rhinitis is classically described as pale to purple compared with the beefy-­red mucosa
of patients with nonallergic rhinitis. Allergic nasal secretions are typically thin and clear. Purulent secretions suggest another cause of rhinitis. The frontal and maxillary sinuses should be palpated to identify
tenderness to pressure that might be associated with acute sinusitis.
Examination of the lips may reveal cheilitis caused by drying of
the lips from continuous mouth breathing or repeated licking of the
lips in an attempt to replenish moisture and relieve discomfort (lip
licker’s dermatitis). Tonsillar and adenoidal hypertrophy along with
a history of impressive snoring raises the possibility of obstructive
sleep apnea. The posterior pharynx should be examined for the presence of postnasal drip and posterior pharyngeal lymphoid hyperplasia
(“cobblestoning”).
Chest findings in asthmatic children vary significantly and may
depend on disease duration, severity, and activity. In a child with well-­
controlled asthma, the chest should appear entirely normal on examination between asthma exacerbations. Examination of the same child
during an acute episode of asthma may reveal hyperinflation, tachypnea, use of accessory muscles (retractions), wheezing, and decreased
air exchange with a prolonged expiratory time. Tachycardia may be
caused by the asthma exacerbation or accompanied by jitteriness after
treatment with β-­agonists. Decreased airflow or rhonchi and wheezes
over the right chest may be noted in children with mucus plugging
and right middle lobe atelectasis. The presence of cyanosis indicates
severe respiratory compromise. Unilateral wheezing after an episode
of coughing and choking in a small child without a history of previous
respiratory illness suggests foreign body aspiration. Wheezing limited
to the larynx in association with inspiratory stridor may be seen in
older children and adolescents with vocal cord dysfunction. Digital
clubbing is rarely seen in patients with uncomplicated asthma and
should prompt further evaluation to rule out other potential chronic
diagnoses, such as cystic fibrosis.
The skin of the allergic patient should be examined for evidence of
urticaria/angioedema or atopic dermatitis (see Chapters 189 and 186).
Xerosis, or dry skin, is the most common skin abnormality of allergic
children. Keratosis pilaris, often found on facial cheeks and extensor
surfaces of the upper arms and thighs, is a benign condition characterized by skin-­colored or slightly pink papules caused by keratin plugs
lodged in the openings of hair follicles. Examination of the skin of the
palms and soles may reveal thickened skin and exaggerated palmar and
plantar creases (hyperlinearity) in children with moderate to severe
atopic dermatitis.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
In Vitro Tests

Fig. 183.1 Bilateral Dennie-­
Morgan folds. Several linear wrinkles

beneath the lower eyelashes (arrow) associated with bilateral allergic
shiners: dark circles beneath the lower eyelid (arrowheads). (From Blanc
S, Bourrier T, Albertini M, et al. Dennie-­Morgan fold plus dark circles:
suspect atopy at first sight. J Pediatr. 2015;166:1541.)

1375

Allergic diseases are often associated with increased numbers of eosinophils circulating in the peripheral blood and invading the tissues and
secretions of target organs. Eosinophilia, defined as the presence of >500
eosinophils/μL in peripheral blood, is the most common hematologic
abnormality of allergic patients. Seasonal increases in the number of circulating eosinophils may be observed in sensitized patients after exposure to
allergens such as tree, grass, and weed pollens. The number of circulating
eosinophils can be suppressed by certain infections and systemic corticosteroids. In certain pathologic conditions, such as drug reactions, eosinophilic pneumonias, and eosinophilic esophagitis, significantly increased
numbers of eosinophils may be present in the target organ in the absence

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1376 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 183.1  Differential Diagnosis of Childhood Eosinophilia
PHYSIOLOGIC
Prematurity
Infants receiving hyperalimentation
Hereditary
INFECTIOUS
Parasitic (with tissue-­invasive helminths, e.g., trichinosis,
strongyloidiasis, pneumocystosis, filariasis, cysticercosis, cutaneous
and visceral larva migrans, echinococcosis)
Bacterial (brucellosis, tularemia, cat-­scratch disease,
Chlamydia)
Fungal (histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis)
Mycobacterial (tuberculosis, leprosy)
Viral (HIV-­1, HTLV-­1, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, Epstein-­Barr
virus)
PULMONARY
Allergic (rhinitis, asthma)
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-­Strauss
syndrome)
Loeffler syndrome
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Eosinophilic pneumonia (chronic, acute)
Pulmonary interstitial eosinophilia
DERMATOLOGIC
Atopic dermatitis
Pemphigus
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Infantile eosinophilic pustular folliculitis
Eosinophilic fasciitis (Schulman syndrome)
Eosinophilic cellulitis (Wells syndrome)
Kimura disease (angiolymphoid hyperplasia with
eosinophilia)

HEMATOLOGIC/ONCOLOGIC
Neoplasm (lung, gastrointestinal, uterine)
Leukemia/lymphoma
Myelofibrosis
Myeloproliferative (FIP1L1-­PDGFRA positive) hypereosinophilic
syndrome
Lymphatic hypereosinophilic syndrome
Systemic mastocytosis
IMMUNOLOGIC
T-­cell immunodeficiencies
Hyper-­IgE (Job) syndromes
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS)
Sarcoidosis
Graft-­versus-­host disease
Drug hypersensitivity including drug reaction with eosinophilia and
systemic symptoms (DRESS)
Postirradiation
Postsplenectomy
ENDOCRINE
Addison disease
Hypopituitarism
CARDIOVASCULAR
Loeffler disease (fibroplastic endocarditis)
Congenital heart disease
Hypersensitivity vasculitis
Eosinophilic myocarditis
GASTROINTESTINAL
Benign proctocolitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Eosinophilic gastrointestinal diseases (EGID)

FIP1L1-­PDGFRA, FIP1-­like 1–platelet-­derived growth factor receptor α; HTLV, human T-­lymphotropic virus 1.

of peripheral blood eosinophilia. Increased numbers of eosinophils are
observed in a wide variety of disorders in addition to allergy; eosinophil
counts >1,500 without an identifiable etiology should suggest one of the
two hypereosinophilic syndromes (Table 183.1; see Chapter 169).
Nasal and bronchial secretions may be examined for the presence of
eosinophils and neutrophils. The presence of eosinophils in the sputum
of patients with atopic asthma is frequently seen. An increased number
of eosinophils in a smear of nasal mucus with Hansel stain is a more sensitive indicator of nasal allergies than peripheral blood eosinophilia and
can aid in distinguishing allergic rhinitis from other causes of rhinitis.
An elevated IgE value is often found in the serum of allergic patients,
because IgE is the primary antibody associated with immediate hypersensitivity reactions. IgE values are measured in international units
(IU), with 1 IU equal to 2.4 ng of IgE. Serum IgE levels gradually rise
over the first years of life to peak in the teen years and decrease steadily
thereafter. Additional factors, such as genetic influences, gender, certain diseases, and exposure to cigarette smoke and allergens, also affect
serum IgE levels. Total serum IgE levels may increase 2-­to 4-­fold during and immediately after the pollen season and then gradually decline
until the next pollen season. Comparison of total IgE levels among
patients with allergic diseases reveals that those with atopic dermatitis
tend to have the highest levels, whereas patients with allergic asthma
generally have higher levels than those with allergic rhinitis. Although
average total IgE levels are higher in populations of allergic patients
than in comparable populations without allergic disease, the overlap
in levels is such that the diagnostic value of a total IgE level is poor.
Approximately half of patients with allergic disease have total IgE levels
in the normal range. However, measurement of total IgE is indicated
when the diagnosis of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is

suspected because total serum IgE concentration >1,000 ng/mL is a
criterion for diagnosis of this disorder (see Chapter 283.1). Total serum
IgE may also be elevated in several nonallergic diseases (Table 183.2).
The presence of IgE specific for a particular allergen can be documented in vivo by skin testing or in vitro by the measurement of
allergen-­specific IgE (sIgE) levels in the serum (Table 183.3). The
first test for documenting the presence of sIgE was called the radioallergosorbent test (RAST) because it used a radiolabeled anti-­IgE
antibody. RAST has been replaced by an improved generation of automated enzymatic sIgE immunoassays. These immunoassays typically
use solid-­phase supports to which allergens of an individual allergen
extract are bound. A small amount of the patient’s serum is incubated
with the allergen-­coated support. The allergen-­coated support bound
to the patient’s sIgE is then incubated with enzyme-­conjugated antihuman IgE. Incubation of this sIgE–antihuman IgE complex with a fluorescent substrate of the conjugated enzyme results in the generation of
fluorescence that is proportional to the amount of sIgE in the serum
sample. The amount of sIgE is calculated by interpolation from a standard calibration curve and reported in arbitrary mass units (kilo-­IU of
allergen-­specific antibody per unit volume of sample, kUA/L). Laboratory reports may specify classes, counts, or units, but quantification of
results in kUA/L is most useful. sIgE immunoassays are available for
foods, environmental allergens, insect venoms, natural rubber latex,
and a small number of β-­lactam drugs. The sensitivity and specificity of immunoassays for particular allergens vary widely from 30–95%.
These immunoassays are not diagnostic for allergy and should not be
used for allergy screening. Only targeted sIgE levels for specific antigens should be measured when there is a clinical indication to suspect
a specific allergy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 183 u Diagnosis of Allergic Disease
Table 183.2  Nonallergic Diseases Associated with Increased Serum IgE Concentrations
PARASITIC INFESTATIONS
Ascariasis
Capillariasis
Echinococcosis
Fascioliasis
Filariasis
Hookworm
Onchocerciasis
Malaria
Paragonimiasis
Schistosomiasis
Strongyloidiasis
Trichinosis
Visceral larva migrans

NEOPLASTIC DISEASES
Hodgkin disease
IgE myeloma
Bronchial carcinoma
OTHER DISEASES AND DISORDERS
Alopecia areata
Bone marrow transplantation
Burns
Cystic fibrosis
Dermatitis, chronic acral
Erythema nodosum, streptococcal infection
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Kawasaki disease
Liver disease
Medication related
Nephritis, drug-­induced interstitial
Nephrotic syndrome
Pemphigus, bullous
Polyarteritis nodosa, infantile
Primary pulmonary hemosiderosis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis

INFECTIONS
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Candidiasis, systemic
Coccidioidomycosis
Cytomegalovirus mononucleosis
HIV type 1 infections
Infectious mononucleosis (Epstein-­Barr virus)
Leprosy
Pertussis
Viral respiratory infections
IMMUNODEFICIENCY
Autosomal dominant hyper-­IgE syndrome (STAT3 variants)
Autosomal recessive hyper-­IgE syndrome (DOCK8, TYK2 variants)
IgA deficiency, selective
Nezelof syndrome (cellular immunodeficiency with immunoglobulins)
Thymic hypoplasia (DiGeorge anomaly)
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome

Table 183.3  Determination of Allergen-­Specific IgE by Skin Testing vs In Vitro Testing
VARIABLE

SKIN TEST*

sIgE ASSAY

Risk of allergic reaction

Yes (especially ID)

No

Relative sensitivity

High

High

Affected by antihistamines

Yes

No

Affected by corticosteroids

Usually not

No

Affected by extensive dermatitis or
dermatographism

Yes

No

Broad selection of antigens

Fewer

Yes

Immediate results

Yes

No

Expensive

No

Yes

Lability of allergens

Yes

No

Results evident to patient

Yes

No

*Skin testing may be the prick test or intradermal (ID) injection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1377

1378 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Component testing refers to diagnostic tests where sIgE is measured
to specific proteins that comprise allergens (e.g., Ara h 2 from peanut,
Bet v 1 from birch pollen), rather than to a mixture of the allergens
extracted from the source. Testing sIgE to component allergens may
add additional diagnostic value by differentiating immune responses
that are directed toward clinically relevant allergenic proteins.

In Vivo Tests

Allergen skin testing is the primary in vivo procedure for the diagnosis of allergic disease. Mast cells with sIgE antibodies attached to high-­
affinity receptors on their surface reside in the skin of allergic patients.
The introduction of minute amounts of an allergen into the skin of
the sensitized patient results in cross linking of IgE antibodies on the
mast cell surface, thereby triggering local mast cell activation. Once
activated, these mast cells release a variety of preformed and newly
generated mediators that act on surrounding tissues. Histamine is the
mediator most responsible for the immediate wheal and flare reactions observed in skin testing. Examination of the site of a positive skin
test result reveals a pruritic wheal surrounded by erythema. The time
course of these reactions is rapid in onset, reaching a peak within 10-­20
minutes and usually resolving over the next 30 minutes.
Skin testing is performed using the prick/puncture technique. With
this technique, a small drop of allergen is applied to the skin surface,
and a tiny amount is introduced into the epidermis by lightly pricking
or puncturing the outer layer of skin through the drop of extract with a
small needle or other device. When the skin-­prick test (SPT) result is
negative but the history suggestive, selective skin testing (for vaccines,
venom, drugs, and aeroallergens) using the intradermal technique
may be performed. This technique involves using a 26-­gauge needle
to inject 0.01-­0.02 mL of an allergen extract diluted 1,000-­to 10-­fold
into the dermis of the arm. Intradermal skin tests are not recommended
for use with food allergens because of the risk of triggering anaphylaxis.
Irritant rather than allergic reactions can occur with intradermal skin
testing if higher concentrations of extracts are used. Although skin-­
prick testing is less sensitive than intradermal skin testing, positive SPT
results tend to correlate better with clinical symptoms.
The number of skin tests performed should be individualized, with
the allergens suggested by the history. A positive and negative control
SPT, using histamine and saline, respectively, is performed with each
set of skin tests. A negative control is necessary to assess for dermatographism, in which reactions are caused merely by applying pressure to overly sensitive skin. A positive control is necessary to establish
the presence of a cutaneous response to histamine. Medications with
antihistaminic properties, in addition to adrenergic agents such as
ephedrine and epinephrine, suppress skin test responses and should be
avoided for appropriate intervals (approximately five half-­lives) before
skin testing. Prolonged courses of systemic corticosteroids may suppress cutaneous reactivity by decreasing the number of tissue mast cells
as well as their ability to release mediators.
Whether identified via serologic or skin testing, detection of sIgE
denotes a sensitized state (i.e., atopy or a tendency toward development of allergic disease) but is not equivalent to a clinically relevant
allergic diagnosis. Many children with positive tests have no clinical symptoms on exposure to the allergen. Increasingly strong test

results (higher serum sIgE results or larger SPT wheal sizes) generally correlate with increasing likelihood of clinical reactivity (but not
severity). Neither serologic testing nor skin testing for allergy is predictive of reaction severity or threshold of reactivity, and these tests
will be negative when the allergy is not IgE mediated, such as in food
protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome. The limitations of these test
modalities underscore the need for a detailed medical history that can
guide the selection and interpretation of test results. Large panels of
indiscriminately performed screening tests may provide misleading
information and are not recommended.
Both serum sIgE tests and SPT are sensitive and have similar diagnostic properties. The benefits of the serologic immunoassays are that
performance is not limited by the presence of skin disease (i.e., active
atopic dermatitis) or medication use (i.e., antihistamines). Advantages of skin testing are that they provide rapid results to the patient/
family during the clinic visit, do not require venipuncture, and are
less costly.
Under certain circumstances, provocation testing is performed to
examine the association between allergen exposure and the development of symptoms. The bronchial provocation test most frequently
performed clinically is the methacholine challenge, which causes
potent bronchoconstriction of asthmatic but not of normal airways; it
is performed to document the presence and degree of bronchial hyperreactivity in a patient with suspected asthma. After baseline spirometry
values are obtained, increasing concentrations of nebulized methacholine are inhaled until a drop occurs in lung function, specifically a 20%
decrease in FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in the first second of expiration), or the patient is able to tolerate the inhalation of a set concentration of methacholine, typically 25 mg/mL.
Oral food challenges are performed to determine whether a specific
food causes symptoms or whether a suspected food can be added to
the diet. Food challenges are performed when the history and results
of skin tests and immunoassays for sIgE are insufficient to clarify the
diagnosis of an allergy. These challenges may be performed in an open
single-­blind, double-­blind, or double-­blind placebo-­controlled manner and involve the ingestion of gradually increasing amounts of the
suspected food at set intervals until the patient either experiences a
reaction or tolerates a normal portion (i.e., one serving size) of the
food openly. Although the double-­blind placebo-­controlled food challenge is currently the gold standard test for diagnosing food allergy, it is
typically only performed in research studies due to the time and labor-­
intensive nature of this method. Because of the potential for significant
allergic reactions, oral food challenges should be performed only in an
appropriately equipped facility with personnel experienced in the performance of food challenges and the treatment of anaphylaxis, including cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is required to confirm the diagnosis of eosinophilic esophagitis. One or more biopsy specimens
from the proximal and distal esophagus must show eosinophil-­
predominant inflammation. With few exceptions, 15 eosinophils per
high-­power field (peak value) is considered a minimum threshold for
the diagnosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 183 u Diagnosis of Allergic Disease
Bibliography
Adkinson Jr NF, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al., eds. Middleton’s allergy: principles &
practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier/Saunders; 2019.
Cevhertas L, Ogulur I, Maurer DJ, et al. Advances and recent developments in asthma in 2020. Allergy. 2020;75(12):3124–3146.
Dykewicz MS, Wallace DV, Amrol DJ, et al. Rhinitis 2020. A practice parameter update. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;146(4):721–767.
Gonsalves NP, Aceves SS. Diagnosis and treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;145(1):1–7.
Hew M, Menzies-­
Gow A, Hull JH, et al. Systematic Assessment of Difficult-­
to-­
Treat Asthma: Principles and Perspectives. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract.
2020;8(7):2222–2233.

1378.e1

Khan DA, Banerji A, Blumenthal K et al. Drug allergy: A 2022 practice parameter
Update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2022;150(6)1333–1393.
Nowak-­Wegrzyn A, Berin MC, Mehr S. Food Protein-­Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020;8(1):24–35.
Rodrigues J, Kuruvilla ME, Vanijcharoenkarn K, Patel N, Hom MM, Wallace
DV. The spectrum of allergic ocular diseases. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.
2021;126(3):240–254.
Sicherer SH, Warren CM, Dant C, Gupta RS, Nadeau KC. Food Allergy from
Infancy Through Adulthood. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020;8(6):1854–
1864.
Worm M, Vieths S, Mahler V. An update on anaphylaxis and urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2022;150(6):1265–1278.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 184 u Allergic Rhinitis

Chapter 184

Allergic Rhinitis
Tamara T. Perry and Scott H. Sicherer
Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a common chronic disease affecting 20–30% of
children. AR is an inflammatory disorder of the nasal mucosa marked
by nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, and itching, often accompanied by
sneezing and conjunctival inflammation. Its recognition as a major
chronic respiratory disease of children derives from its high prevalence, detrimental effects on quality of life and school performance,
and comorbidities. Children with AR often have related conjunctivitis,
sinusitis, otitis media, serous otitis, hypertrophic tonsils and adenoids,
and eczema. Childhood AR is associated with a threefold increase in
risk for asthma at an older age. Over the past 50 years an upsurge in AR
has been observed throughout the world, with some symptom surveys
reporting incidence rates approaching 40%. Heritability of allergic conditions attests to genetic factors, but the increase stems from changes
in the environment, diet, and the microbiome. The symptoms may
appear in infancy, with the diagnosis generally established by the time
the child reaches age 6 years. The prevalence peaks late in childhood.
Risk factors include family history of atopy and serum IgE higher
than 100 IU/mL before age 6 years. Early life exposures and/or their
absence have a profound influence on the development of the allergic
phenotype. The risk increases in children who are exposed to tobacco
smoke prenatally, and above all before the infants reach 1 year, and
those with heavy exposure to indoor allergens. A critical period exists
early in infancy when the genetically susceptible child is at greatest risk
of sensitization. Delivery by cesarean section is associated with AR and
atopy in children with a parental history of asthma or allergies. This
association may be explained by the lack of exposure to the maternal
microbiota through fecal/vaginal flora during delivery.
Children between 2 and 3 years old who have elevated anticockroach
and antimouse IgE are at increased risk of wheezing, AR, and atopic dermatitis. The occurrence of three or more episodes of rhinorrhea in the
first year of life is associated with AR at age 7 years. Favorably, the exposure to dogs, cats, and endotoxin early in childhood protects against the
development of atopy. Prolonged breastfeeding, not necessarily exclusive, is beneficial. There is also a decreased risk of asthma, AR, and atopic
sensitization with early introduction to wheat, rye, oats, barley, fish, and
eggs. However, reduced diversity of the intestinal microbiota during
infancy is associated with increased risk of allergic disease at school age.

ETIOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION

Two factors necessary for expression of AR are sensitivity to an allergen and the presence of the allergen in the environment. AR classification as seasonal or perennial is giving way to the designations
intermittent and persistent. The two sets of terms are based on different suppositions, but inhalant allergens are the main cause of all
forms of AR irrespective of terminology. AR may also be categorized as
mild-­intermittent, moderate-­severe intermittent, mild-­persistent,
and moderate-­severe persistent (Fig. 184.1). The symptoms of intermittent AR occur on <4 days per week or for <4 consecutive weeks.
In persistent AR, symptoms occur on >4 days per week and/or for >4
consecutive weeks. The symptoms are considered mild when they are
not troublesome, the sleep is normal, there is no impairment in daily
activities, and there is no incapacity at work or school. Severe symptoms result in sleep disturbance and impairment in daily activities and
school performance.
In temperate climates, airborne pollen responsible for exacerbation of intermittent AR appear in distinct phases: trees pollinate in the
spring, grasses in the early summer, and weeds in the late summer. In
temperate climates, mold spores persist outdoors only in the summer,
but in warm climates they persist throughout the year. Symptoms of

1379

intermittent AR typically cease with the appearance of frost. Knowledge of the time of symptom occurrence, the regional patterns of pollination and mold sporulation, and the patient’s allergen-­specific IgE
(sIgE) is necessary to recognize the cause of intermittent AR. Persistent AR is most often associated with the indoor allergens: house dust
mites, animal danders, mice, and cockroaches. Cat and dog allergies
are of major importance in the United States. The allergens from saliva
and sebaceous secretions may remain airborne for a prolonged time.
The ubiquitous major cat allergen, Fel d 1, may be carried on cat owners’ clothing into such “cat-­free” settings as schools and hospitals.

PATHOGENESIS

The exposure of an atopic host to an allergen leads to the production
of sIgE, which is strongly associated with eczema throughout childhood and with asthma and rhinitis after age 4 years. The clinical reactions on reexposure to the allergen have been designated as early-­phase
and late-­phase allergic responses. Bridging of the IgE molecules on
the surface of mast cells by allergen initiates the early-­phase allergic
response, characterized by degranulation of mast cells and release of
preformed and newly generated inflammatory mediators, including
histamine, prostaglandin 2, and the cysteinyl leukotrienes. The late-­
phase allergic response appears 4-­8 hour following allergen exposure.
Inflammatory cells, including basophils, eosinophils, neutrophils, mast
cells, and mononuclear cells, infiltrate the nasal mucosa. Eosinophils
release proinflammatory mediators, including cysteinyl leukotrienes,
cationic proteins, eosinophil peroxidase, and major basic protein, and
serve as a source of interleukin (IL)-­3, IL-­5, granulocyte-­macrophage
colony-­stimulating factor, and IL-­13. Repeated intranasal introduction
of allergens causes “priming,” which is a more brisk response even with
a lesser provocation. Over the course of an allergy season, a multifold
increase in submucosal mast cells takes place. These cells, once thought
to have a role exclusively in the early-­phase allergic response, have an
important function in sustaining chronic allergic disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms of AR may be ignored or mistakenly attributed to a respiratory infection. Older children blow their noses, but younger children
tend to sniff and snort. Nasal itching brings on grimacing, twitching,
and picking of the nose that may result in epistaxis. Children with AR
often perform the allergic salute, an upward rubbing of the nose with
an open palm or extended index finger. This maneuver relieves itching
and briefly unblocks the nasal airway. It also gives rise to the nasal
crease, a horizontal skin fold over the bridge of the nose. The diagnosis
of AR is based on symptoms in the absence of an upper respiratory
tract infection and structural abnormalities. Typical complaints include
Intermittent symptoms
• 4 days/week
• or 4 weeks at a time

Persistent symptoms
• 4 days a week
• and/or  4 weeks at a time

Mild
• Normal sleep
• Normal daily activities
• Normal work and school
• No troublesome symptoms

Moderate-to-severe
One or more items
• Abnormal sleep
• Impairment of daily activities,
sport and leisure
• Difficulties caused at school
or work
• Troublesome symptoms

Fig. 184.1 Global Allergic Rhinitis and Its Impact on Asthma (ARIA)

classification of allergic rhinitis. Every box can be subclassified further
into seasonal or perennial on the basis of timing of symptoms or when
causative and allergen therapeutic factors are considered. For example,
a UK patient with grass pollen allergy might have moderate-­severe persistent seasonal rhinitis in June and July and may be suitable for specific
allergen immunotherapy. (From Scadding GK, Durham SR, Mirakian R,
et al. BASCI guidelines for the management of allergic and non-­allergic
rhinitis. Clin Exp Allergy. 2008;38:19–42.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1380 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
intermittent nasal congestion, itching, sneezing, clear rhinorrhea, and
conjunctival irritation. Symptoms increase with greater exposure to
the responsible allergen. The patients may lose their sense of smell and
taste, though this has also been noted as a symptom of mild COVID-­19
or other viral upper respiratory infections. Some experience headaches,
wheezing, and coughing. Preschoolers with chronic wheezing and rhinitis experience more severe wheezing than children without rhinitis.
Nasal congestion is often more severe at night, inducing mouth breathing and snoring, interfering with sleep, and rousing irritability.
Signs on physical examination include abnormalities of facial development, dental malocclusion, the allergic gape (continuous open-­
mouth breathing), chapped lips, allergic shiners (dark circles under
the eyes; see Fig. 183.1), and the transverse nasal crease. Conjunctival
edema, itching, tearing, and hyperemia are frequent findings. A nasal
exam performed with a source of light and a speculum may reveal clear
nasal secretions; edematous, boggy, and bluish mucus membranes with
little or no erythema; and swollen turbinates that may block the nasal
airway. It may be necessary to use a topical decongestant to perform
an adequate examination. Thick, purulent nasal secretions indicate the
presence of infection.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Evaluation of AR entails a thorough history, including details of the
patient’s environment and diet and a family history of allergic conditions (e.g., eczema, asthma, AR), physical examination, and laboratory evaluation. The history and laboratory findings provide clues
to the provoking factors. Symptoms such as sneezing, rhinorrhea,
nasal itching, and congestion and lab findings of elevated IgE, sIgE
antibodies, and positive allergy skin test results typify AR. Intermittent AR differs from persistent AR by history and skin test results.
Nonallergic rhinitides give rise to sporadic symptoms; their causes
are often unknown. Nonallergic inflammatory rhinitis with eosinophils imitates AR in presentation and response to treatment, but
without elevated IgE antibodies. Vasomotor rhinitis is characterized
by excessive responsiveness of the nasal mucosa to physical stimuli.
Other nonallergic conditions, such as infectious rhinitis, structural
problems (e.g., nasal polyps, septal deviation), rhinitis medicamentosa (caused by overuse of topical vasoconstrictors), hormonal
rhinitis associated with pregnancy or hypothyroidism, neoplasms,
vasculitides, and granulomatous disorders may mimic AR (Table
184.1 and Fig. 184.2). Occupational risks for rhinitis include exposure to allergens (grain dust, insects, latex, enzymes) and irritants
(wood dust, paint, solvents, smoke, cold air).

COMPLICATIONS

AR is associated with complications and comorbid conditions. Undertreated AR detracts from the quality of life, aggravates asthma, and
enhances its progression. Children with AR experience frustration
over their appearance. Allergic conjunctivitis, characterized by itching, redness, and swelling of the conjunctivae, has been reported in
at least 20% of the population and >70% of patients with AR, most
frequently in older children and young adults. The two conditions
share pathophysiologic mechanisms and epidemiologic characteristics (see Chapter 188). Chronic sinusitis is a common complication of
AR, sometimes associated with purulent infection, but most patients
have negative bacterial cultures despite marked mucosal thickening,
and sinus opacification. The inflammatory process is characterized by
marked eosinophilia.
Aspirin-­
exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD) is characterized by the presence of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis,
asthma, and aspirin sensitivity. The pathophysiology of AERD is not
fully understood and symptoms often respond poorly to therapy such
as leukotriene modifiers, intranasal or systemic steroids, and aspirin
desensitization. Surgical removal of nasal polyps is also a common
intervention; however, the rate of recurrence is high with frequent
regrowth of polyps. New biologic therapies are available for patients
with chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis and patients with
AERD may benefit from the addition of these new therapies.

Table 184.1  Causes of Rhinitis
ALLERGIC RHINITIS
Seasonal
Perennial
Perennial with seasonal exacerbations
NONALLERGIC RHINITIS
Structural/Mechanical Factors
Deviated septum/septal wall anomalies
Hypertrophic turbinates
Adenoidal hypertrophy
Foreign bodies
Nasal tumors
Benign
Malignant
Choanal atresia
CSF leakage
Infectious
Acute infections
Chronic infections
Congenital syphilis
Inflammatory/Immunologic
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Sarcoidosis
Midline granuloma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sjögren syndrome
Nasal polyposis
Physiologic
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Atrophic rhinitis
Hormonally induced
Hypothyroidism
Pregnancy
Oral contraceptives
Menstrual cycle
Exercise
Atrophic
Drug induced
Rhinitis medicamentosa
Oral contraceptives
Antihypertensive therapy
Aspirin
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Cocaine
Reflex induced
Gustatory rhinitis
Chemical or irritant induced
Posture reflexes
Nasal cycle
Environmental factors
Odors
Temperature (cold air)
Weather/barometric pressure
Occupational (irritants)
OTHER
Nonallergic rhinitis with eosinophilia syndrome
Perennial nonallergic rhinitis (vasomotor rhinitis)
Emotional factors
From Skoner DP. Allergic rhinitis: definition, epidemiology, pathophysiology, detection,
and diagnosis. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001;108(1 Suppl);108:S2–S8.

Rhinitis that coexists with asthma may be taken too lightly or completely overlooked. Up to 78% of patients with asthma have AR, and
38% of patients with AR have asthma. Aggravation of AR coincides
with exacerbation of asthma, and treatment of nasal inflammation
reduces bronchospasm, asthma-­related emergency department visits,
and hospitalizations. Postnasal drip associated with AR commonly
causes persistent or recurrent cough. Eustachian tube obstruction

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 184 u Allergic Rhinitis

1381

Rhinitis
Positive skin-prick
test and/or nasal
allergen challenge

Negative skin-prick
test and nasal
allergen challenge

Allergic

Nonallergic
Occupational
(allergic and nonallergic)

Infective

Acute rhinosinusitis

Noninfective

Chronic rhinosinusitis
Exclude predisposing
causes
• Cystic fibrosis
• Primary ciliary dyskinesia
• Immunodeficiency
• Immunopathology
• Polyps

Nonallergic rhinitis
with eosinophilia

Immunopathologic
findings

Consider aspirin,
entopy (local nasal IgE)

• Eosinophilic granulomatosis
with polyangiitis
• Granulomatosis with
polyangiitis
• Sarcoidosis
• Relapsing polychondritis
• Systemic lupus
erythematosus

Structural abnormalities

Hormonal

Drug-induced

Others

• Deviated septum
• Nasal valve dysfunction
• Nasal polyps
• Foreign body
• Adenoidal hypertrophy
• Choanal atresia
• Cerebrospinal fluid leak
• Nasal or CNS tumors

• Pregnancy
• Menstrual cycle
• Puberty
• Hormone
replacement
therapy
• Acromegaly
• Hypothyroidism

• Oral contraceptive
• Rhinitis medicamentosa
• Antihypertensives
• Cocaine use
• Aspirin or NSAID

• Noninfective,
nonallergic rhinitis
• Neurogenic (gustatory,
emotional, cold-air
induced)
• Atrophic
• Gastroesophageal
reflux
• Idiopathic

Fig. 184.2 Diagnostic algorithm for rhinitis. Nasal allergen challenge is a research procedure and is not undertaken routinely. CNS, Central
nervous system; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug. (From Greiner AN, Hellings PW, Rotiroti G, Scadding GK. Allergic rhinitis. Lancet.
2011;378:2112–2120.)

and middle ear effusion are frequent complications. Chronic allergic
inflammation causes hypertrophy of adenoids and tonsils that may
be associated with eustachian tube obstruction, serous effusion, otitis
media, and obstructive sleep apnea. AR is linked to snoring in children.
The association between rhinitis and sleep abnormalities and subsequent daytime fatigue is well documented and may require multidisciplinary intervention.
The Pediatric Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire
(PRQLQ) is suitable for children 6-­12 years old, and the Adolescent
Rhinoconjunctivitis Quality of Life Questionnaire (ARQLQ) is appropriate for patients 12-­17 years old. Children with rhinitis have anxiety
and physical, social, and emotional issues that affect learning and the
ability to integrate with peers. The disorder contributes to headaches
and fatigue, limits daily activities, and interferes with sleep. There is
evidence of impaired cognitive functioning and learning that may be
exacerbated by the adverse effects of sedating medications. AR causes
an estimated 824,000 missed school days and 4,230,000 days of decline
in quality-­of-­life activities. Patients with AR report an impairment in
the activities of daily living similar to patients with moderate to severe
asthma. Some (but not many) patients improve during their teenage
years, only to develop symptoms again as young adults. Symptoms
often abate in the fifth decade of life.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Epicutaneous skin tests provide the best method for detection of sIgE,
with a positive predictive value (PPV) of 48.7% for epidemiologic diagnosis of AR. Skin tests are inexpensive and sensitive, and the risks and
discomfort are minimal. Responses to seasonal respiratory allergens
are rare before two seasons of exposure, and children <1 year old seldom display positive skin test responses to these allergens. To avoid
false-­negative results, montelukast should be withheld for 1 day, most

sedating antihistamine preparations for 3-­4 days, and nonsedating
antihistamines for 5-­7 days. Serum immunoassays for sIgE provide a
suitable alternative (PPV of 43.5%) for patients with dermatographism
or extensive dermatitis, those taking medications that interfere with
mast cell degranulation, others at high risk for anaphylaxis, and some
who cannot cooperate with the procedure. Presence of eosinophils in
the nasal smear supports the diagnosis of AR, and neutrophils suggest
infectious rhinitis. Eosinophilia and measurements of total serum IgE
concentrations have relatively low sensitivity.

TREATMENT

Guideline-­directed management has been shown to improve disease
control. Global Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA)
provides an evidence-­
based approach to treatment and includes
quality-­of-­life measures useful for the evaluation of symptoms and
the assessment of the response to therapy. Safe effective prevention
and relief of symptoms are the current goals of treatment. Specific
measures to limit indoor allergen exposure may reduce the risk of
sensitization and symptoms of allergic respiratory disease. Sealing
the patient’s mattress, pillow, and covers in allergen-­proof encasings
reduces the exposure to mite allergen. Bed linen and blankets should be
washed every week in hot water (>54.4°C [130°F]). The only effective
measure for avoiding animal allergens in the home is the removal of the
pet. Avoidance of pollen and outdoor molds can be accomplished by
staying in a controlled environment. Air conditioning allows for keeping windows and doors closed, reducing the pollen exposure. High-­
efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters lower the counts of airborne
mold spores.
Oral antihistamines help reduce sneezing, rhinorrhea, and ocular
symptoms. Administered as needed, antihistamines provide acceptable treatment for mild-­intermittent disease. Antihistamines have been

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1382 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 184.2  Oral Allergic Rhinitis Treatments (Prescription, Examples)
GENERIC/BRAND

STRENGTH

FORMULATIONS

DOSING

SECOND-­GENERATION ANTIHISTAMINES
Desloratadine
Clarinex Reditabs*

2.5 mg, 5 mg

Orally disintegrating tablet

Children 6-­11 mo of age: 1 mg
once daily

Clarinex Tablets

5 mg

Tabs

Children 12 mo to 5 yr: 1.25 mg
once daily

Clarinex Syrup

0.5 mg/mL

Syrup

Children 6-­11 yr: 2.5 mg once daily
Adults and adolescents ≥12 yr:
5 mg once daily

LEUKOTRIENE ANTAGONIST†
Montelukast
Singulair

10 mg

Tablets

6 mo to 5 yr: 4 mg daily

Singulair Chewables*

4 mg, 5 mg

Chewable tablets

6-­14 yr: 5 mg daily

Singulair Oral Granules

4 mg/packet

Oral granules

>14 yr: 10 mg daily

*Contains phenylalanine
†As advised by the FDA, montelukast should be used to treat allergic rhinitis only in patients who are not treated effectively with or cannot tolerate other alternative therapies.
Dosing recommendations taken in part from Kleinman K, McDaniel L, Molloy M for the Johns Hopkins Hospital. The Harriet Lane Handbook. 22nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

classified as first generation (relatively sedating) or second generation
(relatively nonsedating). Antihistamines usually are administered by
mouth but are also available for topical ophthalmic and intranasal use.
Both first-­and second-­generation antihistamines are available as nonprescription drugs. Second-­generation antihistamines are preferred
because they cause less sedation. Preparations containing pseudoephedrine, typically in combination with other agents, are used for
relief of nasal and sinus congestion and pressure and other symptoms
such as rhinorrhea, sneezing, lacrimation, itching eyes, oronasopharyngeal itching, and cough. These are not considered first-­line agents
and should be used with caution. Pseudoephedrine is available without prescription generally in fixed combination with other agents such
as first-­generation antihistamines (brompheniramine, chlorpheniramine, triprolidine), second-­generation antihistamines (desloratadine,
fexofenadine, loratadine), antipyretics (acetaminophen, ibuprofen),
antitussives (guaifenesin, dextromethorphan), and an anticholinergic
(methscopolamine). Pseudoephedrine is an oral vasoconstrictor distrusted for causing irritability and insomnia and for its association with
infant mortality. Because younger children (2-­3 years) are at increased
risk of overdosage and toxicity, some manufacturers of oral nonprescription cough and cold preparations have voluntarily revised their
product labeling to warn against the use of preparations containing
pseudoephedrine for children <4 years old. Pseudoephedrine is misused as a starting material for the synthesis of methamphetamine and
methcathinone. Tables 184.2, 184.3, and 184.4 provide examples of prescription, nonprescription, and combined oral agents, respectively, for
treatment of AR. Oral leukotriene receptor antagonists are not recommended for initial treatment of AR because of reduced efficacy compared to other agents and serious neuropsychiatric events that have
been reported with montelukast.
The anticholinergic nasal spray ipratropium bromide is effective for the treatment of serous rhinorrhea (Table 184.5). Intranasal
decongestants (oxymetazoline and phenylephrine) should be used
for <5 days and should not to be repeated more than once a month
to avoid rebound nasal congestion. Sodium cromoglycate (available
as nonprescription drug) is effective but requires frequent administration, every 4 hours. Leukotriene-­modifying agents have a modest
effect on rhinorrhea and nasal blockage (see Chapter 185 for additional indications and side effects). Nasal saline irrigation is a good
adjunctive option with all other treatments of AR. Patients with more
persistent, severe symptoms require intranasal corticosteroids, the

most effective therapy for AR, which may also be beneficial for concomitant allergic conjunctivitis (Table 184.6). These agents reduce
the symptoms of AR with eosinophilic inflammation, but not those
of rhinitis associated with neutrophils or free of inflammation. Beclomethasone, triamcinolone, and flunisolide are absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, as well as from the respiratory tract; budesonide,
fluticasone, mometasone, and ciclesonide offer greater topical activity with lower systemic exposure. More severely affected patients may
benefit from simultaneous treatment with oral antihistamines and
intranasal corticosteroids.
Allergen-­specific immunotherapy is a well-­defined treatment for
IgE-­mediated allergic disease. It may be administered by subcutaneous or sublingual routes. Sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT) has been
used successfully in Europe and South America and is now approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Allergy immunotherapy
(AIT) is an effective treatment for AR and allergic conjunctivitis. In
addition to reducing symptoms, it may change the course of allergic
disease and induce allergen-­specific immune tolerance. Immunotherapy should be considered for children in whom IgE-­mediated allergic
symptoms cannot be adequately controlled by avoidance and medication, especially in the presence of comorbid conditions. Immunotherapy for AR prevents the onset of asthma. Moreover, progress in
molecular characterization of allergens raises the possibility of defined
vaccines for allergen immunotherapy. Omalizumab (anti-­IgE antibody) is effective for difficult-­to-­control asthma and is likely to have
a beneficial effect on coexisting AR. Dupilumab (IL-­4 antagonist) is
approved in adults for the treatment of chronic rhinosinusitis with
nasal polyposis and has shown improvement in nasal symptoms scores
as well as improvements in lung function among patients with AERD.
Typically, treatment of AR with oral antihistamines and nasal corticosteroids provides sufficient relief for most patients with coexisting
allergic conjunctivitis. If it fails, additional therapies directed primarily at allergic conjunctivitis may be added (see Chapter 188). Intranasal
corticosteroids are of some value for the treatment of ocular symptoms,
but ophthalmic corticosteroids remain the most potent pharmacologic
agents for ocular allergy, although they carry the risk of adverse effects
such as delayed wound healing, secondary infection, elevated intraocular pressure, and formation of cataracts. Ophthalmic corticosteroids
are only suited for the treatment of allergic conjunctivitis that does not
respond to the medications previously discussed. Sound practice calls
for the assistance of an ophthalmologist.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 184 u Allergic Rhinitis

1383

Table 184.3  Oral Allergic Rhinitis Treatments (Nonprescription, Examples)
GENERIC/BRAND

STRENGTH

FORMULATIONS

DOSING

Chlor-­Trimeton
OTC

4 mg

Tablets

2-­5 yr: 1 mg every 4-­6 hr (max 6 mg/day)
6-­11 yr: 2 mg every 4-­6 hr (max 12 mg/day)

Chlor-­Trimeton Syrup
OTC

2 mg/5 mL

Syrup

>12 yr: 4 mg every 4-­6 hr (max 24 mg/day)

Children’s Zyrtec Allergy Syrup OTC

1 mg/mL

Syrup

6-11­ mo: 2.5 mg daily

Children’s Zyrtec
Chewable OTC

5 mg, 10 mg

Chewable tablets

12-­23 mo: initial 2.5 mg once daily; dosage
may be increased to 2.5 mg twice daily

Zyrtec Tablets OTC

5 mg, 10 mg

Tablets

2-­5 yr: 2.5 mg/day; may be increased to
max of 5 mg/day given either as a single
dose or divided into two doses

Zyrtec Liquid Gels OTC

10 mg

Liquid-­filled gels

≥6 yr: 5-­10 mg/day as a single dose or
divided into two doses

Levocetirizine
Xyzal

5 mg
0.5 mg/mL

Tablet
Oral solution

6 mo-­5 yr: 1.25 mg daily in the evening
6-­11 yr: 2.5 mg daily in the evening
≥12 yr: 5 mg daily in the evening

Clarinex

0.5 mg/mL

Oral solution

6-­11 mo: 1 mg daily
1-­5 yr: 1.25 mg daily
6-­11 yr: 2.5 mg daily

Clarinex

5 mg

Tablet

≥12 yr 5 mg daily

Fexofenadine HCl OTC

30 mg, 60 mg, 180 mg

Tablet

6-­11 yr: 30 mg twice daily
12-­adult: 60 mg twice daily; 180 mg daily

Children’s Allegra OTC
ODT*

30 mg

ODTs

6-­11 yr: 30 mg twice daily

Children’s Allegra Oral Suspension OTC

30 mg/5 mL

Suspension

>2-­11 yr: 30 mg every 12 hr

Allegra OTC

Tabs 30, 60, 180 mg

Tablet

>12 yr-­adult: 60 mg every 12 hr; 180 mg
daily

Children’s Claritin OTC

5 mg/5 mL

Syrup

2-­5 yr: 5 mg daily
6-­adult: 10 mg daily

Alavert OTC ODT*

10 mg
10 mg
10 mg
5 mg
1 mg/mL

ODTs
Tablets
Liquid-­filled caps
Chewable tablets
Syrup

2-­5 yr: 5 mg daily
>6 yr: 10 mg once daily or 5 mg twice daily

FIRST-­GENERATION H1 ANTAGONISTS
Chlorpheniramine maleate

SECOND-­GENERATION H1 ANTAGONISTS
Cetirizine

Desloratadine

Loratadine

*Contains phenylalanine.
ODT, Orally disintegrating tablet; OTC, over the counter.
Dosing recommendations taken in part from Kleinman K, McDaniel L, Molloy M for the Johns Hopkins Hospital. The Harriet Lane Handbook. 22nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

Table 184.4  Combined Antihistamine + Sympathomimetic (Examples)
GENERIC

STRENGTH

FORMULATIONS

DOSING

Chlorpheniramine maleate
Phenylephrine HCl
Sudafed Sinus & Allergy

4 mg
10 mg

Tablets

>12 yr: 1 tablet every 4 hr, not to
exceed 6 tablets per day

Cetirizine + pseudoephedrine
Zyrtec-­D 12 hour

5 mg cetirizine + 120 mg
pseudoephedrine

Extended-­release tablet

>12 yr: 1 tablet every 12 hr

Dosing recommendations taken in part from Kleinman K, McDaniel L, Molloy M for the Johns Hopkins Hospital. The Harriet Lane Handbook. 22nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1384 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 184.5  Miscellaneous Intranasal Sprays
INDICATIONS (I), MECHANISM(S) OF ACTION (M),
AND DOSING

DRUG

COMMENTS, CAUTIONS, ADVERSE EVENTS,
AND MONITORING

Ipratropium bromide

I: Symptomatic relief of rhinorrhea
M: Anticholinergic

Atrovent inhalation aerosol is contraindicated in
patients with hypersensitivity to soy lecithin
Safety and efficacy of use beyond 4 days in
patients with the common cold have not been
established
Adverse effects: Epistaxis, nasal dryness, nausea

Atrovent nasal spray (0.06%)

Colds (symptomatic relief of rhinorrhea):
5-­12 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril tid
≥12 yr and adults: 2 sprays in each nostril tid-­qid

Azelastine

I: Treatment of rhinorrhea, sneezing, and nasal pruritus
M: Antagonism of histamine H1 receptor

Astelin

6-­12 yr: 1 spray bid
>12 yr: 1-­2 sprays bid

Cromolyn sodium

I: AR
M: Inhibition of mast cell degranulation

NasalCrom

>2 yr: 1 spray tid-­qid; max 6 times daily

Oxymetazoline
Afrin
Nostrilla

I: Symptomatic relief of nasal mucosal congestion
M: Adrenergic agonist, vasoconstricting agent
0.05% solution: instill 2-­3 sprays into each nostril bid; therapy
should not exceed 3 days

Excessive dosage may cause profound CNS
depression
Use in excess of 3 days may result in severe
rebound nasal congestion
Do not repeat more than once a month
Use with caution in patients with hyperthyroidism,
heart disease, hypertension, or diabetes
Adverse effects: Hypertension, palpitations, reflex
bradycardia, nervousness, dizziness, insomnia,
headache, CNS depression, convulsions,
hallucinations, nausea, vomiting, mydriasis,
elevated intraocular pressure, blurred vision

Phenylephrine

I: Symptomatic relief of nasal mucosal congestion
M: Adrenergic, vasoconstricting agent

Neo-­Synephrine

2-­6 yr: 1 drop every 2-­4 hr of 0.125% solution as needed
Note: Therapy should not exceed 3 continuous days
6-­12 yr: 1-­2 sprays or 1-­2 drops every 4 hr of 0.25% solution as
needed
Note: Therapy should not exceed 3 continuous days
>12 yr: 1-­2 sprays or 1-­2 drops every 4 hr of 0.25% to 0.5%
solution as needed; 1% solution may be used in adults with
extreme nasal congestion
Note: Therapy should not exceed 3 continuous days

Use in excess of 3 days may result in severe
rebound nasal congestion
Do not repeat more than once a month
0.16% and 0.125% solutions are not commercially
available
Adverse effects: Reflex bradycardia, excitability,
headache, anxiety, dizziness

May cause drowsiness
Adverse effects: Headache, somnolence, bitter
taste

Not effective immediately; requires frequent
administration

bid, 2 times daily; CNS, central nervous system; tid, 3 times daily; qid, 4 times daily.

Table 184.6  Intranasal Inhaled Corticosteroids
INDICATIONS (I), MECHANISM(S) OF ACTION
(M), AND DOSING

DRUG
Beclomethasone
OTC

I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Beconase AQ (42 μg/spray)
Qnasl (80 μg/spray)
OTC

6-­12 yr: 1 spray in each nostril bid; may increase if
needed to 2 sprays in each nostril bid
>12 yr: 1 or 2 sprays in each nostril bid

Flunisolide
OTC

6-­14 yr: 1 spray in each nostril tid or 2 sprays in each
nostril bid; not to exceed 4 sprays/day in each
nostril
≥15 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril bid (morning and
evening); may increase to 2 sprays tid; maximum
dose: 8 sprays/day in each nostril (400 μg/day)

COMMENTS, CAUTIONS, ADVERSE EVENTS, AND
MONITORING
Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth
Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 184 u Allergic Rhinitis

1385

Table 184.6  Intranasal Inhaled Corticosteroids—cont’d
INDICATIONS (I), MECHANISM(S) OF ACTION
(M), AND DOSING

DRUG
Triamcinolone
Nasacort AQ (55 μg/spray)
OTC
Fluticasone propionate
(available as generic
preparation)
OTC

I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Flonase (50 μg/spray)
OTC

≥4 yr: 1-­2 sprays in each nostril qd

Fluticasone furoate
Veramyst (27.5 μg/spray)

2-­12 yr:
Initial dose: 1 spray (27.5 μg/spray) per nostril qd (55
μg/day)
Patients who do not show adequate response may
use 2 sprays per nostril qd (110 μg/day)
Once symptoms are controlled, dosage may be
reduced to 55 μg qd
Total daily dosage should not exceed 2 sprays in
each nostril (110 μg)/day
≥12 yr and adolescents:
Initial dose: 2 sprays (27.5 μg/spray) per nostril qd
(110 μg/day)
Once symptoms are controlled, dosage may be
reduced to 1 spray per nostril qd (55 μg/day)
Total daily dosage should not exceed 2 sprays in
each nostril (110 μg)/day

Mometasone

I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Nasonex (50 μg/spray)

2-­12 yr: 1 spray in each nostril qd
>12 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril qd

Budesonide
OTC

I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Rhinocort Aqua (32 μg/spray)
OTC

6-­12 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril qd
>12 yr: up to 4 sprays in each nostril qd (max dose)

Ciclesonide

I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Omnaris
Zetonna (50 μg/spray)

2-­12 yr: 1-­2 sprays in each nostril qd
>12 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril qd

Azelastine/fluticasone
(137 μg azelastine/50 μg
fluticasone)
Dymista

≥6 yr: 1 spray in each nostril bid

COMMENTS, CAUTIONS, ADVERSE EVENTS, AND
MONITORING
Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth

2-­6 yr: 1 spray in each nostril qd
6-­12 yr: 1-­2 sprays in each nostril qd
≥12 yr: 2 sprays in each nostril qd
I: AR
M: Antiinflammatory, immune modulator

Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Ritonavir significantly increases fluticasone serum
concentrations and may result in systemic corticosteroid
effects
Use fluticasone with caution in patients receiving
ketoconazole or other potent cytochrome P450 3A4
isoenzyme inhibitor
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth

Mometasone and its major metabolites are undetectable in
plasma after nasal administration of recommended doses
Preventive treatment of seasonal AR should begin 2-­4 wk
before pollen season
Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth
Shake container before use; blow nose; occlude one
nostril, administer dose to the other nostril
Adverse effects: Burning and irritation of nasal mucosa,
epistaxis
Monitor growth
Before initial use, gently shake, then prime the pump by
actuating 8 times
If the product is not used for 4 consecutive days, gently
shake and reprime with 1 spray or until a fine mist appears
Shake bottle gently before using
Blow nose to clear nostrils
Keep head tilted downward when spraying
Insert applicator tip 1/4 to 1/2 inch into nostril, keeping
bottle upright, and close off the other nostril
Breathe in through nose
While inhaling, press pump to release spray

OTC, Over the counter; AR, allergic rhinitis; qd, once daily; bid, 2 times daily; tid, 3 times daily.

PROGNOSIS

Therapy with nonsedating antihistamines and topical corticosteroids,
when taken appropriately, improves health-­related quality-­of-­life measures in patients with AR. The reported rates of remission among children are 10–23%. Pharmacotherapy that will target cells and cytokines

involved in inflammation and treat allergy as a systemic process is on the
horizon, and more selective targeting of drugs based on the development
of specific biomarkers and genetic profiling may soon be realized.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 184 u Allergic Rhinitis
Bibliography
Burks AW, Calderon MA, Casale T, et al. Update on allergy immunotherapy: American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology/European Academy of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology/PRACTALL consensus report. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2013;131:1288–1296.
Codispoti CD, Bernstein DI, Levin L, et al. Early-­life mold and tree sensitivity is associated with allergic eosinophilic rhinitis at 4 yr of age. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2015;114:193–198.e4.
Cox LS. Sublingual immunotherapy for allergic rhinitis—is 2-­year treatment sufficient for long-­term benefit? JAMA. 2017;317(6):591–593.
Dykewicz MS, Wallace DV, Amrol DJ, et al. Rhinitis 2020: A practice parameter update. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;146(4):721–767.
Federal Drug Administration. Singulair (montelukast) and all montelukast generics:
strengthened boxed warning – due to restricting use for allergic rhinitis. https://w
ww.fda.gov/safety/medical-­product-­safety-­information/singulair-­montelukast-­
and-­all-­montelukast-­generics-­strengthened-­boxed-­warning-­due-­restricting-­use.
Garcia-­Aymerich J, Benet M, Saeys Y, et al. Phenotyping asthma, rhinitis and eczema
in MeDALL population-­based birth cohorts: an allergic comorbidity cluster. Allergy. 2015;70:973–984.
Kim JM, Lin SY, Suarez-­Cuervo C, et al. Allergen-­specific immunotherapy for
pediatric asthma and rhinoconjunctivitis: a systematic review. Pediatrics.
2013;131(6):1155–1167.
Laidlaw TM, Mullol J, Fan C, et al. Dupilumab improves nasal polyp burden and
asthma control in patients with CRSwNP and AERD. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract. 2019;7:2462.

1385.e1

Lin SY, Erekosima N, Kim JM, et al. Sublingual immunotherapy for the treatment of allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and asthma: a systematic review. JAMA.
2013;309:1278–1288.
Patil VK, Kurukulaaratchy RJ, Venter C, et al. Changing prevalence of wheeze, rhinitis and allergic sensitisation in late childhood: Findings from 2 Isle of Wight birth
cohorts 12 yr apart. Clin Exp Allergy. 2015;45:1430–1438.
Roberts G, Xatzipsalti M, Borrego LM, et al. Paediatric rhinitis: position paper of the
European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. Allergy. 2013;68:1102–
1116.
Scadding GK. Optimal management of allergic rhinitis. Arch Dis Child. 2015;100:576–
582.
Schmitt J, Schwarz K, Stadler E, et al. Allergy immunotherapy for allergic rhinitis effectively prevents asthma: results from a large retrospective cohort study. J Allergy
Clin Immunol. 2015;136:1511–1516.
The Medical Letter. Allergic rhinitis. Med Lett Drugs Ther. 2017;59:71–80.
Valenta R, Campana R, Focke-­Tejkl M, et al. Vaccine development for allergen-­
specific immunotherapy based on recombinant allergens and synthetic allergen
peptides: lessons from the past and novel mechanisms of action for the future. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016;137:351–357.
Wallace DV, Dykewicz MS, Oppenheimer J, et al. Pharmacologic treatment of seasonal allergic rhinitis: synopsis of guidance from the 2017 joint task force on practice parameter. Ann Intern Med. 2017;167:876–881.
Westman M, Lupinek C, Bousquet J, et al. Early childhood IgE reactivity to
pathogenesis-­related class 10 proteins predicts allergic rhinitis in adolescence. J
Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015;135. 1199-­1206.e1–1199-­1206.e11.
Wheatly LM, Togias A. Allergic rhinitis. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(15):456–462.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1387
bronchiolitis in the first year of life is a significant predisposing factor
for asthma at age 5 years. This association implies that host features
affecting immunologic host defense, inflammation, and the extent of
airways injury from ubiquitous viral pathogens underlie susceptibility to recurrent wheezing in early childhood. Other airways exposures
can also exacerbate ongoing airways inflammation, increase disease
severity, and drive asthma persistence. Home allergen exposures in
sensitized individuals can initiate airways inflammation and hypersensitivity to other irritant exposures and are causally linked to disease
severity, exacerbations, and persistence. Consequently, eliminating
the offending allergen(s) can lead to resolution of asthma symptoms.
Environmental tobacco smoke and common air pollutants can aggravate airways inflammation and increase asthma severity. Cold, dry air;
hyperventilation from physical play or exercise; and strong odors can
trigger bronchoconstriction. Although many exposures that trigger
and aggravate asthma are well recognized, the causal environmental
features underlying the development of host susceptibilities to the various common airway exposures are not as well defined. Living in rural
or farming communities may be a protective environmental factor.

Parental asthma*
Allergy
• Atopic dermatitis (eczema)*
• Allergic rhinitis
• Food allergy
• Inhalant allergen sensitization*
• Food allergen sensitization
Severe lower respiratory tract infection
• Pneumonia
• Bronchiolitis requiring hospitalization
Wheezing apart from colds
Male sex
Low birthweight
Environmental tobacco smoke exposure
Reduced lung function at birth
Formula feeding rather than breastfeeding

EPIDEMIOLOGY

*Major risk factors.

Asthma is a common chronic disease, causing considerable morbidity.
In 2020 >7 million children (∼11% of U.S. children) had been diagnosed with asthma, with 70% of this group reporting current asthma.
Male gender and living in poverty are demographic risk factors for
having childhood asthma in the United States. About 13% of males
vs 9% of females have had asthma, and ∼15% of all children living in
poor families (family income less than poverty threshold) have asthma.
Childhood asthma is among the most common causes of childhood
emergency department (ED) visits, hospitalizations, and missed school
days. In the United States in 2019, childhood asthma accounted for
>750,000 ED visits, nearly 75,000 hospitalizations, and 178 deaths.
However, there are ethnic disparities in asthma outcomes, with nearly
three times more deaths as a result of asthma in Black non-­Hispanic vs
White non-­Hispanic children.
Worldwide, childhood asthma appears to be increasing in prevalence, despite considerable improvements in our management and
pharmacopeia to treat asthma. Although childhood asthma may have
plateaued in the United States after 2008, numerous studies conducted
in other countries have reported an increase in asthma prevalence of
approximately 50% per decade. Globally, childhood asthma prevalence varies widely in different locales. A study of childhood asthma
prevalence in 233 centers in 97 countries (International Study of
Asthma and Allergies in Childhood, Phase 3) found a wide range in
the prevalence of current wheeze in 6–7-­year-­old children (2.4–37.6%)
and 13–14-­year-­old children (0.8–32.6%). Asthma prevalence correlated well with reported allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and atopic eczema
prevalence. Childhood asthma seems more prevalent in modern metropolitan locales and more affluent nations, and is strongly linked with
other allergic conditions. In contrast, children living in rural areas of
developing countries and farming communities with domestic animals
are less likely to experience asthma and allergy.
Approximately 80% of all asthmatic patients report disease onset
before 6 years of age. However, of all young children who experience
recurrent wheezing, only a minority go on to have persistent asthma in
later childhood. Early childhood risk factors for persistent asthma have
been identified (Table 185.1) and have been described as major (parent
asthma, eczema, inhalant allergen sensitization) and minor (allergic
rhinitis, wheezing apart from colds, ≥4% peripheral blood eosinophils,
food allergen sensitization) risk factors. Allergen sensitization (allergy)
in young children with recurrent cough and/or wheeze is the strongest
identifiable factor for the persistence of childhood asthma.

Types of Childhood Asthma

There are two common types of childhood asthma based on different
natural courses: (1) recurrent wheezing in early childhood, primarily
triggered by common respiratory viral infections, that usually resolves
during the preschool/lower school years and (2) chronic asthma associated with allergy that persists into later childhood and often adulthood

Table 185.1  Early Childhood Risk Factors for Persistent
Asthma

(Table 185.2). School-­age children with mild to moderate persistent
asthma generally improve as teenagers. About 40% of these children,
most of whom have milder disease, will develop intermittent disease.
Inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) controller therapy for children with persistent asthma does not alter the likelihood of outgrowing asthma in later
childhood; however, reduced lung growth and progressive decline in
lung function can be features of persistent, problematic disease.
Asthma is also classified by disease severity (e.g., intermittent or
persistent [mild, moderate, or severe]) or control (e.g., well, not well,
or very poorly controlled), especially for asthma management purposes.
Because most children with asthma can be well controlled with conventional management guidelines, children with asthma can also be characterized according to treatment response and medication requirements as
(1) easy to control (well controlled with low levels of controller therapy);
(2) difficult to control (not as well controlled with multiple and/or high
levels of controller therapies); (3) exacerbators (despite being controlled,
continue to have severe exacerbations); and (4) refractory asthma (continue to have poorly controlled asthma despite multiple and high levels
of controller therapies; see Table 185.2). Different airways pathologic
processes, causing airways inflammation, AHR, and airways congestion
and blockage, are believed to underlie these different types of asthma.

PATHOGENESIS

Airflow obstruction in asthma is the result of numerous pathologic
processes. In the small airways, airflow is regulated by smooth muscle
encircling the airway lumen; bronchoconstriction of these bronchiolar
muscular bands restricts or blocks airflow. A cellular inflammatory infiltrate and exudates distinguished by eosinophils, but also including other
inflammatory cell types (neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes, mast
cells, basophils), can fill and obstruct the airways and induce epithelial
damage and desquamation into the airway’s lumen. T lymphocytes and
other immune cells that produce proallergic, proinflammatory cytokines
(interleukin [IL]-­4, IL-­5, IL-­13), and chemokines (eotaxins) mediate
this inflammatory process. Hypersensitivity or susceptibility to a variety
of provocative exposures or triggers (Table 185.3) can lead to airways
inflammation, AHR, edema, basement membrane thickening, subepithelial collagen deposition, smooth muscle and mucous gland hypertrophy, and mucus hypersecretion, which are all processes that contribute
to the clinical manifestations of asthma. Although most children with
asthma manifest this proallergic “type 2” immunity and inflammation,
other pathologic pathways can underlie asthma.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Asthma is characterized by repeated episodes of intermittent dry
coughing and expiratory wheezing. Older children and adults report

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1388 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.2  Asthma Patterns in Childhood, Based on
Natural History and Asthma Management
TRANSIENT NONATOPIC WHEEZING
Common in early preschool years
Recurrent cough/wheeze, primarily triggered by common respiratory
viral infections
Usually resolves during the preschool and lower school years,
without increased risk for asthma in later life
Reduced airflow at birth, suggestive of relatively narrow airways; AHR
near birth; improves by school age
PERSISTENT ATOPY-­ASSOCIATED ASTHMA
Begins in early preschool years
Associated with atopy in early preschool years
• Clinical (e.g., atopic dermatitis in infancy, allergic rhinitis, food allergy)
• Biologic (e.g., early inhalant allergen sensitization, increased
serum IgE, increased blood eosinophils)
• Highest risk for persistence into later childhood and adulthood
Lung function abnormalities
• Those with onset before 3 yr of age acquire reduced airflow by school
age
• Those with later onset of symptoms, or with later onset of allergen
sensitization, are less likely to experience airflow limitation in childhood

Table 185.3  Asthma Triggers
COMMON VIRAL INFECTIONS OF THE RESPIRATORY TRACT
AEROALLERGENS IN SENSITIZED ASTHMATIC PATIENTS
Indoor Allergens
• Animal dander
• Dust mites
• Cockroaches
• Molds
Seasonal Aeroallergens
• Pollens (trees, grasses, weeds)
• Seasonal molds
AIR POLLUTANTS
• Environmental tobacco smoke
• Ozone
• Nitrogen dioxide
• Sulfur dioxide
• Particulate matter
• Wood-­ or coal-­burning smoke
• Mycotoxins
• Endotoxin
• Dust

ASTHMA WITH DECLINING LUNG FUNCTION
Children with asthma with progressive increase in airflow limitation
Associated with hyperinflation in childhood, male gender

STRONG OR NOXIOUS ODORS OR FUMES
• Perfumes, hairsprays
• Cleaning agents

ASTHMA MANAGEMENT TYPES
(From national and international asthma management guidelines)

OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURES
• Farm and barn exposures
• Formaldehydes, cedar, paint fumes
• Rhinitis
• Sinusitis
• Gastroesophageal reflux

Severity Classification*
• Intrinsic disease severity while not taking asthma medications
Intermittent
Persistent
• Mild
• Moderate
• Severe
Control Classification*
• Clinical assessment while asthma being managed and treated
Well controlled
Not well controlled
Very poorly controlled
Management Patterns
• Easy-­to-­control: well controlled with low levels of daily controller
therapy
• Difficult-­to-­control: inadequately controlled with multiple and/or
high levels of controller therapies
• Frequent exacerbators: have severe exacerbations
• Refractory: continue to have poorly controlled asthma despite
multiple and high levels of controller therapies
*From National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3
(EPR3): Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma, NIH Pub No 07-­
4051, Bethesda, MD, 2007, US Department of Health and Human Services; National
Institutes of Health; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Health; National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute; National Asthma Education and Prevention Program.
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-­pro/guidelines/current/asthma-­guidelines/full-­report.
AHR, Airways hyperresponsiveness.

associated shortness of breath and chest congestion and tightness;
younger children may report intermittent, nonfocal chest pain.
Respiratory symptoms can be worse at night, associated with sleep,
especially during prolonged exacerbations triggered by respiratory
infections or inhalant allergens. Daytime symptoms, often linked with
physical activities (exercise-­induced) or play, are reported with greatest frequency in children. Other asthma symptoms in children can be
subtle and nonspecific, including self-­imposed limitation of physical
activities, general fatigue (possibly resulting from sleep disturbance),

DRUGS
• Aspirin and other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
• β-­Blocking agents
OTHER
• Cold dry air
• Exercise
• Crying, laughter, hyperventilation
• Comorbid conditions

and difficulty keeping up with peers in physical activities. Asking about
previous experience with asthma medications (bronchodilators and/or
corticosteroids) may provide a history of symptomatic improvement
with treatment that supports the diagnosis of asthma. Lack of improvement with bronchodilator and corticosteroid therapy is inconsistent
with underlying asthma and should prompt more vigorous consideration of asthma-­masquerading conditions.
Asthma symptoms can be triggered by numerous common events or
exposures: physical exertion and hyperventilation (laughing), cold or
dry air, and airways irritants (see Table 185.3). Exposures that induce
airways inflammation, such as infections with common respiratory
pathogens (rhinovirus, RSV, enterovirus, coronavirus, metapneumovirus, parainfluenza virus, influenza virus, adenovirus, Mycoplasma
pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae), and inhaled allergens in sensitized children, also increase AHR to dry, cold air and irritant exposures.
An environmental history is essential for optimal asthma management.
The presence of risk factors, such as a history of other allergic conditions (allergic rhinitis, allergic conjunctivitis, atopic dermatitis, food
allergies), parental asthma, and/or symptoms apart from colds, supports the diagnosis of asthma. During routine clinic visits, children
with asthma typically present without abnormal signs, emphasizing the
importance of the medical history in diagnosing asthma. Some may
exhibit a dry, persistent cough. The chest findings are often normal.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1389
Deeper breaths with forced exhalation can sometimes elicit otherwise
undetectable wheezing. In clinic, quick resolution (within 10 minutes)
or convincing improvement in symptoms and signs of asthma with
administration of an inhaled short-­acting β-­agonist (SABA; e.g., albuterol) is supportive of the diagnosis of asthma.
Asthma exacerbations can be classified by their severity based on symptoms, signs, and functional impairment (Table 185.4). Coughing and
shortness of breath are common. Expiratory wheezing and a prolonged
exhalation phase can usually be appreciated by auscultation. Decreased
breath sounds in some of the lung fields, commonly the right lower posterior lung field, are consistent with regional hypoventilation caused by
airways obstruction. Rhonchi and crackles (or rales) can sometimes be
heard, resulting from excess mucus production and inflammatory exudate
in the airways. The combination of segmental crackles and poor breath
sounds can indicate lung segmental atelectasis that is difficult to distinguish from bronchial pneumonia and can complicate acute asthma management. In severe exacerbations the greater extent of airways obstruction
causes labored breathing and respiratory distress, which manifests as inspiratory and expiratory wheezing, increased prolongation of exhalation,
poor air entry, suprasternal and intercostal retractions, nasal flaring, and
accessory respiratory muscle use. In extremis, airflow may be so limited
that wheezing cannot be heard (silent chest).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Many childhood respiratory conditions can present with symptoms and
signs like those of asthma (Table 185.5). Along with asthma, other common

causes of chronic, intermittent coughing include gastroesophageal reflux
(GER) and rhinosinusitis. Both GER and chronic sinusitis can be challenging to diagnose in children. Often, GER is clinically silent in children, and
children with chronic sinusitis do not report sinusitis-­specific symptoms,
such as localized sinus pressure and tenderness. In addition, both GER and
rhinosinusitis are often comorbid with childhood asthma and, if not specifically treated, may make asthma difficult to manage.
In early life, consideration of congenital and anatomic conditions is
essential. Chronic coughing and wheezing can indicate recurrent aspiration, tracheobronchomalacia (congenital anatomic abnormality of
airways), vascular ring/sling, foreign body aspiration, cystic fibrosis, or
bronchopulmonary dysplasia.
In older children and adolescents, vocal cord dysfunction (VCD)
can manifest as intermittent daytime wheezing, most often in the
setting of exercise (Table 185.6). The vocal cords involuntarily close
inappropriately during inspiration and sometimes exhalation, producing shortness of breath, coughing, throat tightness, and often audible
laryngeal wheezing and/or stridor. In most cases of VCD, spirometric lung function testing reveals truncated and inconsistent inspiratory and expiratory flow-­volume loops, a pattern that differs from the
reproducible pattern of airflow limitation in asthma that improves with
bronchodilators. VCD can coexist with asthma. Hypercarbia and severe
hypoxia are uncommon in uncomplicated VCD. Flexible rhinolaryngoscopy in the patient with symptomatic VCD can reveal paradoxical
vocal cord movements with anatomically normal vocal cords. Before
the diagnosis, patients with VCD are often treated unsuccessfully

Table 185.4  Formal Evaluation of Asthma Exacerbation Severity in the Urgent or Emergency Care Setting*
MILD

MODERATE

SEVERE

SUBSET: RESPIRATORY
ARREST IMMINENT

While at rest (infant: stops
feeding)
Sits upright
Words
Usually agitated

Extreme dyspnea
Anxiety
Upright, leaning forward
Unable to talk
Drowsy or confused

SYMPTOMS
Breathlessness

While walking

Talks in…
Alertness

Can lie down
Sentences
May be agitated

While at rest (infant: softer,
shorter cry, difficulty feeding)
Prefers sitting
Phrases
Usually agitated

Increased
Usually not

Increased
Commonly

Often >30 breaths/min
Usually

Moderate; often only
end-­expiratory
<100
Absent
<10 mm Hg

Loud; throughout
exhalation
100-­120
May be present
10-­25 mm Hg

Usually loud; throughout
inhalation and exhalation
>120
Often present
>25 mm Hg (adult)
20-­40 mm Hg (child)

Approx. 40–69% or
response lasts <2 hr
≥60 mm Hg (test not
usually necessary)

<40%

<42 mm Hg (test not
usually necessary)
90–95% (test not usually
necessary)

≥42 mm Hg; possible
respiratory failure
<90%

SIGNS
Respiratory rate†
Use of accessory muscles;
suprasternal retractions
Wheeze
Pulse rate (beats/min)‡
Pulsus paradoxus

FUNCTIONAL ASSESSMENT
Peak expiratory flow (value ≥70%
predicted or personal best)
Pao2 (breathing air)
Normal (test not usually
necessary)
and/or
Pco2
<42 mm Hg (test not
usually necessary)
Sao2 (breathing air) at sea
>95% (test not usually
level
necessary)

Paradoxical
thoracoabdominal
movement
Absence of wheeze
Bradycardia
Absence suggests
respiratory muscle
fatigue
<25%§

<60 mm Hg; possible
cyanosis

Hypoxia despite oxygen
therapy

Hypercapnia (hypoventilation) develops more readily in young children than in adults and adolescents.
*Notes:

• The presence of several parameters, but not necessarily all, indicates the general classification of the exacerbation.
• Many of these parameters have not been systematically studied, especially as they correlate with each other; thus they serve only as general guides.
• The emotional impact of asthma symptoms on the patient and family is variable but must be recognized and addressed and can affect approaches to treatment and follow-­up.

†Normal breathing rates in awake children by age: <2 mo, <60 breaths/min; 2-­12 mo, <50 breaths/min; 1-­5 yr, <40 breaths/min; 6-­8 yr, <30 breaths/min.
‡Normal pulse rates in children by age: 2-­12 mo, <160 beats/min; 1-­2 yr, <120 beats/min; 2-­8 yr, <110 beats/min.
§Peak expiratory flow testing may not be needed in very severe attacks.

Adapted from National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR3). Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma, NIH Pub No 07-­4051,
Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; National Institutes of Health; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; National Asthma Education and Prevention
Program: 2007. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-­pro/guidelines/current/asthma-­guidelines/full-­report.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1390 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.5  Differential Diagnosis of Childhood Asthma
UPPER RESPIRATORY TRACT CONDITIONS

PERIPHERAL AIRWAYS CONDITIONS
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (chronic lung disease of preterm infants)

Allergic rhinitis*
Chronic rhinitis*
Sinusitis*
Adenoidal or tonsillar hypertrophy
Nasal foreign body
LARGE/CENTRAL AIRWAYS CONDITIONS
Laryngotracheobronchomalacia*
Laryngotracheobronchitis (e.g., pertussis)*
Laryngeal web, cyst, or stenosis
Exercise-­induced laryngeal obstruction
Vocal cord dysfunction*
Vocal cord paralysis
Tracheoesophageal fistula
Vascular ring, sling, or external mass compressing on the airway (e.g.,
tumor)
Endobronchial or mediastinal tumor
Foreign body aspiration*
Chronic bronchitis from environmental tobacco smoke exposure*
Repaired tracheoesophageal fistula
Toxic inhalations

Viral bronchiolitis*
Gastroesophageal reflux*
Causes of bronchiectasis
• Cystic fibrosis
• Immunodeficiency
• Allergic bronchopulmonary mycoses (e.g., aspergillosis)
• Chronic aspiration
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Bronchiolitis obliterans
Interstitial lung diseases
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (acute or chronic)
Loeffler syndrome
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with angiitis
Eosinophilic pneumonia
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
Pulmonary hemosiderosis
Tuberculosis
Pneumonia
Pulmonary edema (e.g., congestive heart failure)
Pulmonary vascular congestions (congenital or acquired heart disease)
Vasculitis
Sarcoidosis
Visceral larva migrans
Medications associated with chronic cough
• Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors
• β-­Adrenergic antagonists
• Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors
• Daptomycin

*More common asthma masqueraders.

Table 185.6  Features Distinguishing Paradoxical Vocal Cord Motion Disorder from Asthma
FEATURE

PVCM

ASTHMA

Incidence
Age and sex
Triggers
History of allergy
Family history
Sensation of tightness
Inspiratory stridor
Sputum production
Nocturnal awakening with symptoms
Response to bronchodilators and steroids
Hypoxemia
Eosinophilia
Chest radiograph

Less common
Young, female
Usually exercise or emotional stress
Usually absent
Usually absent
Throat
More common, heard loudly over larynx
Rare
Rare
No response
Rare
Rare
Usually normal

Residual volume and total lung capacity
Flow volume loop
Bronchial provocation test
Laryngoscopy

Normal
Flattening of inspiratory loop
May be positive
Inspiratory adduction of the anterior two
thirds of vocal folds with posterior chink

More common
Any
Many triggers
May be present
May be present
Chest
Rare
Common
Common
Good response
Common
Common in allergic asthma
May show hyperinflation and
peribronchial thickening
May be increased
Obstructive pattern
Usually positive
Usually normal

PVCM, Paradoxical vocal cord motion.
Modified from Ibrahim WH, Gheriani HA, Almohamed AA, Raza T. Paradoxical vocal cord motion disorder: Past present and future. Post Grad Med J. 2007;83:164–172. Table 2, p 168.

with multiple different classes of asthma medications. This condition
can be well managed with specialized speech therapy training in the
relaxation and control of vocal cord movement. Furthermore, treatment of underlying causes of vocal cord irritability (e.g., high GER/
aspiration, allergic rhinitis, rhinosinusitis, asthma) can improve VCD.
During acute VCD exacerbations, relaxation breathing techniques in

conjunction with inhalation of heliox (a mixture of 70% helium and
30% oxygen) can relieve vocal cord spasm and VCD symptoms.
In some locales, hypersensitivity pneumonitis (farming communities,
homes of bird owners), pulmonary parasitic infestations (rural areas of developing countries), or tuberculosis may be causes of chronic coughing and/
or wheezing. Rare mimics of asthma in childhood are noted in Table 185.5.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1391
Chronic pulmonary diseases often produce clubbing (e.g., in cystic fibrosis), but clubbing is a very unusual finding in childhood asthma.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory tests such as blood eosinophil counts and allergen-­specific
IgE testing may be useful for ascertaining allergy, but are not diagnostic
for asthma itself. Lung function tests can help to confirm the diagnosis
of asthma and to determine disease severity.

criteria used to determine asthma severity and control in asthma management guidelines sponsored by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH)
and the Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA).
Such measures of airflow alone are not diagnostic of asthma, because
numerous other conditions can cause airflow limitation. In addition, approximately 50% of children with mild to moderate persistent
asthma will have normal spirometric values when well. Bronchodilator

Pulmonary Function Testing

Forced expiratory airflow measures are helpful in diagnosing and
monitoring asthma and in assessing efficacy of therapy. Lung function
testing is particularly helpful in children with asthma who are poor
perceivers of airflow obstruction, or when physical signs of asthma do
not occur until airflow obstruction is severe.
Many asthma guidelines promote spirometric measures of airflow and
lung volumes during forced expiratory maneuvers as standard for asthma
assessment. Spirometry is a helpful objective measure of airflow limitation
(Fig. 185.2). It is an essential assessment tool in children who are at risk
for severe asthma exacerbations and those who have poor perception of
asthma symptoms. Valid spirometric measures depend on a patient’s ability to properly perform a full, forceful, and prolonged expiratory maneuver,
usually feasible in children >4-­5 years old (with some younger exceptions).
In asthma, airways blockage results in reduced airflow with forced exhalation (see Fig. 185.2). Because asthmatic patients typically have hyperinflated lungs, forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) can be simply
adjusted for full expiratory lung volume (the forced vital capacity [FVC])
with an FEV1/FVC ratio, which is generally an FEV1/FVC ratio below the
lower limit of normal (Table 185.7). Normative values for these measures
of lung function have been determined for children by height, gender, and
age. Abnormally low FEV1 as a percentage of predicted norms is one of six

Table 185.7  Lung Function Abnormalities in Asthma
Spirometry (in clinic)*†:
Airflow limitation
• Low FEV1 (relative to percentage of predicted norms), although
many children with asthma have normal FEV1
• FEV1/FVC ratio below the lower limit of normal for age
Bronchodilator response (to inhaled β-­agonist) assesses reversibility
of airflow limitation
Reversibility is determined by an increase in either FEV1 >9–12% or
predicted FEV1 >10% after inhalation of a short-­acting β-­agonist
(SABA)‡
Exercise challenge
• Worsening in FEV1 ≥15%‡
Daily peak expiratory flow (PEF)* or FEV1 monitoring: day-­to-­day
and/or am-­to-­pm variation ≥20%‡
*PEF variability is insensitive, while being highly specific for asthma.
†Of note, >50% of children with mild to moderate asthma will have a normal FEV and
1
will not have a significant bronchodilator response.
‡Main criteria consistent with asthma.
FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 sec; FVC, forced vital capacity; ICS, inhaled
corticosteroid; ppb, parts per billion.

Peak flow
6
FVC
4
A
B

4
Expiratory flow
volume loop

C
2

D
E

0

100

50

Volume (L)

Flow (L/sec)

FEV1

3
Subject 2

2
1

0

1
2

4

Inspiratory flow
volume loop

2

3
4
Time (sec)

5

6

7

Subject 1: A non-asthmatic child
FEV1  3.4 (100% of predicted)
FVC  3.8 (100% of predicted)
FEV1/FVC  0.86

Vital capacity (%)

6

A

Subject 1

B

Subject 2: An asthmatic child
FEV1  2.1 (62% of predicted)
FVC  3.7 (97% of predicted)
FEV1/FVC  0.57

Fig. 185.2 Spirometry. A, Spirometric flow-­volume loops. Loop A is an expiratory flow-­volume loop of a nonasthmatic person without airflow limi-

tation. Loops B through E are expiratory flow-­volume loops in asthmatic patients with increasing degrees of airflow limitation (B is mild; E is severe).
Note the “scooped” or concave appearance of the asthmatic expiratory flow-­volume loops; with increasing obstruction, there is greater “scooping.”
B, Spirometric volume-­time curves. Subject 1 is a nonasthmatic person; subject 2 is an asthmatic patient. Note how the FEV1 and FVC lung volumes
are obtained. The FEV1 is the volume of air exhaled in the first second of a forced expiratory effort. The FVC is the total volume of air exhaled during
a forced expiratory effort, or forced vital capacity. Note that subject 2’s FEV1 and FEV1:FVC ratio are smaller than subject 1’s ratio, demonstrating
airflow limitation. Also, subject 2’s FVC is very close to what is expected.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1392 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.8  Interpretations of FeNO Test Results for Asthma Diagnosis in Nonsmoking Individuals Not Taking Corticosteroids
FeNO LEVEL
<25 PPB (<20 IN CHILDREN
AGE 5-­12 YR)

25-­50 PPB (20-­35 IN CHILDREN
AGE 5-­12 YR)

>50 PPB (>35 IN CHILDREN
AGE 5-­12 YR)

• Recent or current corticosteroid use
• Alternative diagnoses
• Phenotype less likely to benefit from ICS
• Noneosinophilic asthma
• COPD
• Bronchiectasis
• CF
• Vocal cord dysfunction
• Rhinosinusitis
• Smoking
• Obesity

• Evaluate in clinical context
• Consider other diagnoses
• Consider other factors influencing result
• Eosinophilic asthma less likely

• Eosinophilic airways inflammation likely
• Phenotype more likely to respond to ICS
• Allergic asthma
• Eosinophilic bronchitis

CF, Cystic fibrosis; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; FeNO, fractional exhaled nitric oxide; ICS, inhaled corticosteroid; ppb, parts per billion.
From NAEPPCC Expert Panel Working Group: 2020 Focused Updates to the Asthma Management Guidelines: A Report from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program
Coordinating Committee Expert Panel Working Group. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020;146(6):1217–1269. Table II.

response to an inhaled β-­agonist (e.g., albuterol) is greater in asthmatic
patients than nonasthmatic persons; an improvement in FEV1 ≥12% is
consistent with asthma. However, many children will not demonstrate
an improvement with bronchodilator when well. Bronchoprovocation
challenges can be helpful in diagnosing asthma. Asthmatic airways are
hyperresponsive and therefore more sensitive to inhaled methacholine,
mannitol, and cold or dry air. The degree of AHR to these exposures correlates to some extent with asthma severity and airways inflammation.
Although bronchoprovocation challenges are carefully dosed and monitored in an investigational setting, their use is rarely practical in general
practice. Exercise challenges (aerobic exertion or “running” for 6-­8 minutes) can help to identify children with exercise-­induced bronchospasm
(EIB). Although the airflow response of nonasthmatic persons to exercise is to increase functional lung volumes and improve FEV1 slightly
(5–10%), exercise often provokes airflow obstruction in persons with
inadequately treated asthma. Accordingly, in asthmatic patients, FEV1
typically decreases during or after exercise by >15% (see Table 185.7).
The onset of EIB usually begins within 5 minutes, reaching a peak at 15
minutes after vigorous exercise, and often spontaneously resolves within
30-­60 minutes. Studies of exercise challenges in school-­age children
typically identify an additional 5–10% with EIB and previously unrecognized asthma. There are two caveats regarding exercise challenges: (1)
treadmill challenges in the clinic are not completely reliable and can miss
exertional asthma that can be demonstrated on the playing field and (2)
exercise challenges can induce severe exacerbations in at-­risk patients.
Careful patient selection for both bronchoprovocation and exercise challenges and preparedness for severe asthma exacerbations are required.
Peak expiratory flow (PEF) monitoring devices provide simple
and inexpensive home-­use tools to measure airflow and can be helpful in some circumstances. Like spirometry in clinics, poor perceivers
of asthma may benefit by monitoring PEFs at home to assess their
airflow as an indicator of asthma control or problems. PEF devices
vary in the ability to detect airflow obstruction; they are less sensitive
and reliable than spirometry to detect airflow obstruction, such that,
in some patients, PEF values decline only when airflow obstruction
is severe. Therefore PEF monitoring should be started by measuring
morning and evening PEFs (best of three attempts) for several weeks
for patients to practice the technique, to determine diurnal variation
and a “personal best,” and to correlate PEF values with symptoms
(and ideally spirometry). Diurnal variation in PEF >20% is consistent
with asthma (see Table 185.7). If PEF monitoring is employed, morning measurements are preferable when peak flows are typically lower.

Exhaled Nitric Oxide

Fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) is a noninvasive measure of
allergic/eosinophilic airways inflammation measured in exhaled breath
(Table 185.8). FeNO can be used in children as young as 5 years to help
distinguish asthma from other airways diseases that are mediated by

nonallergic/noneosinophilic inflammation, such as GER, VCD, and cystic fibrosis. FeNO can substantiate the diagnosis of asthma in untreated
patients, complement the assessment of asthma control, predict response
to ICS and biologic therapy, assess adherence with ICS therapy, predict
loss of control with ICS tapering, and predict future asthma exacerbations. However, an elevated FeNO level alone is not diagnostic of asthma
and can be seen in children with allergic rhinitis without asthma.

Additional Tests to Consider

Other tests, such as allergy testing to assess sensitization to inhalant
allergens (skin testing or allergen specific IgE levels) and peripheral
blood total eosinophil counts, are markers of allergic “type 2” immunity and inflammation and can help with the management and prognosis of asthma. In a comprehensive U.S. study of 5–12-­year-­old asthmatic
children, the Childhood Asthma Management Program (CAMP), 88%
of patients had inhalant allergen sensitization according to results of
allergy skin-­prick testing.

Radiology

The findings of chest radiographs (posteroanterior and lateral views) in
children with asthma often appear to be normal, aside from subtle and
nonspecific findings of hyperinflation (e.g., flattening of the diaphragms)
and peribronchial thickening (Fig. 185.3). Chest radiographs can help
identify abnormalities that are hallmarks of asthma mimics (retained
foreign body, vascular rings, aspiration pneumonitis, hyperlucent lung
fields in bronchiolitis obliterans) and complications during asthma
exacerbations (atelectasis, pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax). Some
lung abnormalities can be better appreciated with high-­resolution, thin-­
section chest CT scans. Bronchiectasis, which is sometimes difficult to
appreciate on chest radiograph but is clearly seen on CT scan, implicates
an asthma mimic such as cystic fibrosis, allergic bronchopulmonary
mycoses (aspergillosis), ciliary dyskinesias, or immune deficiencies.

TREATMENT

National and international guidelines have been published to help
promote evidence-­
based asthma management. These include the
NIH-­sponsored National Asthma Education and Prevention Program
(NAEPP) Expert Panel Report 4 (EPR4), Guidelines for the Diagnosis
and Management of Asthma,* and The Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention (GINA), 2022.† NAEPP and GINA guidelines
are generally consistent in their management recommendations for
children with asthma, with some key differences that are noted in this
chapter.
The key components to optimal asthma management are specified (Fig. 185.4). Management of asthma should have the following
* https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/asthma-management-guidelines-2020-updates
† https://ginasthma.org/gina-reports/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1393

A

B

Fig. 185.3 Frontal (A) and lateral (B) radiographs of a 4-­year-­old with asthma show pulmonary hyperinflation, flattening of the diaphragms, and
minimal peribronchial thickening. No asthmatic complication is apparent.

Recurrent/chronic cough, wheeze, chest tightness and/or shortness of breath
• Symptoms
• Exacerbations
• Risk factors
Diagnosis
• Triggers
• Lung function
• Differential diagnosis
Asthma
Management
• Assessment and
monitoring

• Assess severity
• Monitor control
• Med adverse effects

• Education

• Key elements

• Control environmental factors
and co-morbid conditions

• Environmental controls
• Co-morbidities

• Medications

• Long-term controllers
• Quick relievers
• Assessment
• Management
• High-risk features
• Home asthma action plan

• Exacerbations

Optimal goal: Well controlled asthma
• Reduce impairment

• Prevent chronic symptoms
• Prevent sleep disturbance
• Infrequent SABA need
• Maintain (near) normal lung function
• Maintain normal activity

• Reduce risk

• Prevent exacerbations
• Reduce exacerbation severity/duration
• Prevent reduced lung growth
• No (minimal) adverse effects of therapy

Fig. 185.4 The key elements to optimal asthma management. SABA, Short-­acting β-­agonist.
components: (1) assessment and monitoring of disease activity, (2)
education to enhance patient and family knowledge and skills for self-­
management, (3) identification and management of precipitating factors and comorbid conditions that worsen asthma, and (4) appropriate
selection of medications to address the patient’s needs. The long-­term
goals of asthma management are to attain and maintain asthma control, to reduce risk of severe exacerbations, and to minimize impairment of daily activities.

Component 1: Regular Assessment and Monitoring

Regular assessment and monitoring are based on the concepts of
asthma severity, asthma control, and responsiveness to therapy.

Asthma severity is the intrinsic intensity of disease, and assessment is generally most accurate in patients not receiving controller
therapy. Therefore assessing asthma severity directs the initial level
of therapy. The two general categories are intermittent asthma and
persistent asthma, the latter being further subdivided into mild,
moderate, and severe. In contrast, asthma control is dynamic and
refers to the day-­to-­day variability of an asthmatic patient. In children receiving controller therapy, assessment of asthma control is
important in adjusting therapy and is categorized into three levels: well controlled, not well controlled, and very poorly controlled.
Responsiveness to therapy is the ease or difficulty with which
asthma control is attained by treatment.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1394 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Classification of asthma severity and control is based on the
domains of impairment and risk. These domains do not necessarily
correlate with each other and may respond differently to treatment.
Childhood asthma is often characterized by minimal day-­to-­day
impairment, with the potential for frequent, severe exacerbations
most often triggered by viral infections. The NIH and GINA guidelines have distinct criteria for three childhood age-­groups, 0-­4 years
(GINA 0-­5 years), 5-­11 years (GINA 6-­11 years), and ≥12 years,
for the evaluation of both severity (Table 185.9) and control (Table
185.10). The level of asthma severity or control is based on the most
severe impairment or risk category. In assessing asthma severity,
impairment consists of an assessment of the patient’s recent symptom frequency (daytime and nighttime, with subtle differences in
numeric cutoffs between the three age-­groups), SABA use for quick
relief, ability to engage in normal or desired activities, and airflow
compromise evaluated by spirometry in children ≥5 years. Risk refers
to the likelihood of developing severe asthma exacerbations. Of note,
even in the absence of frequent symptoms, persistent asthma can be
diagnosed and long-­term controller therapy initiated. For children
≥5 years, two exacerbations requiring oral corticosteroids (OCSs) in
1 year, and for infants and preschool-­age children who have risk factors for asthma (see earlier) and four or more episodes of wheezing
over the past year that lasted longer than 1 day and affected sleep, or
two or more exacerbations in 6 months requiring systemic corticosteroids, qualifies them as having persistent asthma.

Asthma management can be optimized through regular clinic
visits every 2-­6 weeks until good asthma control is achieved. For
children on controller medication therapy, management is tailored
to the child’s level of control. The NIH guidelines provide tables
for evaluating asthma control for the three age-­groups (see Table
185.10). In evaluation of asthma control, as in severity assessment,
impairment includes an assessment of the patient’s symptom frequency (daytime and nighttime), SABA use for quick relief, ability
to engage in normal or desired activities, and for older children,
airflow measurements. Validated asthma control questionnaires
such as the Asthma Control Test (ACT, for adults and children ≥12
years), the Childhood ACT (C-­ACT, for children 4-­11 years), and
the Test for Respiratory and Asthma Control in Kids (TRACK,
for children <4 years) can also be used to assess level of control. An
ACT score of ≥20 indicates a child with well-­controlled asthma, a
value of 16-­19 indicates not well-­controlled asthma, and ≤15 indicates very poorly controlled asthma. For the C-­ACT, a score ≥20
indicates well controlled, 13-­19 indicates not well controlled, and ≤12
indicates very poorly controlled. For the TRACK, a score of less than
80 points suggests that a child’s breathing problems might not be
controlled.
Assessment of risk, in addition to considering severity and frequency
of exacerbations requiring systemic corticosteroids, includes tracking
the lung growth of older children to identify those with reduced and/
or progressive loss of lung function, and monitoring adverse effects of

Table 185.9  Assessing Asthma Severity*
CLASSIFICATION OF ASTHMA SEVERITY
PERSISTENT
INTERMITTENT
COMPONENTS OF SEVERITY
Impairment
Daytime symptoms
Nighttime awakenings
Age 0-­4 yr
Age ≥5 yr
Short-­acting β2-­agonist use for
symptoms (not for EIB
prevention)
Interference with normal activity
Lung function
FEV1 % predicted, age ≥5 yr
FEV1/FVC ratio†:
Age 5-­11 yr
Age ≥12 yr

MODERATE

SEVERE

≤2 days/wk

>2 days/wk but not daily

Daily

Throughout the day

0
≤2×/mo
≤2 days/wk

1-­2×/mo
3-­4×/mo
>2 days/wk but not daily, and
not more than 1× on any day

3-­4×/mo
>1×/wk but not nightly
Daily

>1×/wk
Often 7×/wk
Several times per day

None

Minor limitation

Some limitation

Extreme limitation

Normal FEV1 between
exacerbations
>80% predicted

≥80% predicted

60–80% predicted

<60% predicted

>85%
Normal

>80%
Normal

75–80%
Reduced 5%

<75%
Reduced >5%

Risk
Exacerbations requiring systemic corticosteroids
Age 0-­4 yr
0-­1/yr (see notes)
Age ≥5 yr

MILD

0-­1/yr (see notes)

≥2 exacerbations in 6 mo requiring systemic CS
or
≥4 wheezing episodes/yr lasting >1 day and risk factors for persistent asthma
≥2/yr (see notes)
≥2/yr (see notes)
≥2/yr (see notes)

Consider severity and interval since last exacerbation.
Frequency and severity may fluctuate over time for patients in any severity category.
Relative annual risk of exacerbations may be related to FEV1.
*Notes:

• Level of severity is determined by both impairment and risk. Assess impairment domain by patient’s/caregiver’s recall of previous 2-­4 wk. Symptom assessment for longer
periods should reflect a global assessment, such as inquiring whether a patient’s asthma is better or worse since the last visit. Assign severity to the most severe category
in which any feature occurs.
• At present, there are inadequate data to correspond frequencies of exacerbations with different levels of asthma severity. For treatment purposes, patients who had ≥2
exacerbations requiring oral systemic corticosteroids in the past 6 mo, or ≥4 wheezing episodes in the past year, and who have risk factors for persistent asthma, may be
considered the same as patients who have persistent asthma, even in the absence of impairment levels consistent with persistent asthma.
†Normal FEV /FVC: 8-­19 yr, 85%; 20-­39 yr, 80%.
1

FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 sec; FVC, forced vital capacity; CS, corticosteroid; EIB, exercise-­induced bronchospasm.
Adapted from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR3). Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma—Summary Report
2007. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120(Suppl):S94–S138.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1395
Table 185.10  Assessing Asthma Control and Adjusting Therapy in Children*
CLASSIFICATION OF ASTHMA CONTROL
COMPONENTS OF CONTROL
Impairment
Symptoms

WELL CONTROLLED

NOT WELL CONTROLLED

VERY POORLY CONTROLLED

≤2 days/wk but not more than
once on each day

>2 days/wk or multiple times on
≤2 days/wk

Throughout the day

≤1×/mo
≤1×/mo
≤2×/mo
≤2 days/wk

>1×/mo
≥2×/mo
1-­3×/wk
>2 days/wk

>1×/wk
≥2×/wk
≥4×/wk
Several times per day

None

Some limitation

Extremely limited

>80% predicted or personal
best
>80%

60–80% predicted or personal
best
75–80%

<60% predicted or personal best

>80% predicted or personal
best

60–80% predicted or personal
best

<60% predicted or personal best

0
≤0.75
≥20

1-­2
≤1.5
16-­19

3-­4
N/A
≤15

Nighttime awakenings:
Age 0-­4 yr
Age 5-­11 yr
Age ≥12 yr
Short-­acting β2-­agonist use for
symptoms (not for EIB
pretreatment)
Interference with normal activity
Lung function:
Age 5-­11 yr:
FEV1 (% predicted or peak flow)
FEV1/FVC:
Age ≥12 yr:
FEV1 (% predicted or peak flow)

<75%

Validated questionnaires†:
Age ≥12 yr:
ATAQ
ACQ
ACT

Risk
Exacerbations requiring systemic corticosteroids:
Age 0-­4 yr
0-­1/yr
2-­3/yr
>3/yr
Age ≥5 yr
0-­1/yr
≥2/yr (see notes)
Consider severity and interval since last exacerbation.
Treatment-­related adverse effects
Medication side effects can vary in intensity from none to very troublesome and worrisome; the level
of intensity does not correlate to specific levels of control but should be considered in the overall
assessment of risk
Reduction in lung growth or
Evaluation requires long-­term follow-­up care
progressive loss of lung function
RECOMMENDED ACTION FOR TREATMENT
Maintain current step
Regular follow-­up every 1-­6 mo
to maintain control
Consider step down if well
controlled for at least 3 mo

Step up‡ (1 step) and reevaluate
in 2-­6 wk
If no clear benefit in 4-­6 wk,
consider alternative diagnoses
or adjusting therapy
For side effects, consider alternative options

Consider short course of oral
corticosteroids
Step up§ (1-­2 steps) and reevaluate
in 2 wk
If no clear benefit in 4-­6 wk,
consider alternative diagnoses
or adjusting therapy
For side effects, consider alternative
options

*Notes:

• The stepwise approach is meant to assist, not replace, the clinical decision-­making required to meet individual patient needs.
• The level of control is based on the most severe impairment or risk category. Assess impairment domain by caregiver’s recall of previous 2-­4 wk. Symptom assessment
for longer periods should reflect a global assessment, such as inquiring whether the patient’s asthma is better or worse since the last visit.
• At present, there are inadequate data to correspond frequencies of exacerbations with different levels of asthma control. In general, more frequent and intense
exacerbations (e.g., requiring urgent, unscheduled care, hospitalization, or intensive care unit admission) indicate poorer disease control. For treatment purposes, patients
who had ≥2 exacerbations requiring oral systemic corticosteroids in the past year may be considered the same as patients who have not well-­controlled asthma, even in
the absence of impairment levels consistent with not well-­controlled asthma.
†Validated questionnaires for the impairment domain (the questionnaires do not assess lung function or the risk domain) and definition of minimal important difference (MID) for

each:

• ATAQ, Asthma Therapy Assessment Questionnaire; MID = 1.0.
• ACQ, Asthma Control Questionnaire; MID = 0.5.
• ACT, Asthma Control Test; MID not determined.
‡ACQ values of 0.76-­1.40 are indeterminate regarding well-­controlled asthma.
§Before step-­up therapy: (1) review adherence to medications, inhaler technique, and environmental control and (2) if alternative treatment option was used in a step, discontinue it

and use preferred treatment for that step.
FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 sec; FVC, forced vital capacity; EIB, exercise-­induced bronchospasm; N/A, not available.
Adapted from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR 3). Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma—Summary Report
2007. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120(Suppl):S94–S138.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1396 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
medications. The degree of impairment and presence of risk are used
to determine the patient’s level of asthma control as well controlled, not
well controlled, or very poorly controlled. Children with well-­controlled
asthma have daytime symptoms ≤2 days/week and need a rescue bronchodilator ≤2 days/week, an FEV1 of >80% of predicted (and FEV1/
FVC ratio >80% for children 5-­11 years), no interference with normal
activity, and <2 exacerbations in the past year and an ACT score of
≥20. The impairment criteria vary slightly depending on age-­group.
Children whose status does not meet all the criteria of well-­controlled
asthma are determined to have either not well-­controlled or very poorly
controlled asthma, which is determined by the single criterion with the
poorest rating.
Two to four asthma checkups per year are recommended for reassessing and maintaining good asthma control. Lung function testing (spirometry) is recommended at least annually and more often if
asthma is poorly perceived, is inadequately controlled, and/or lung
function is abnormally low.

Component 2: Patient Education

Asthma education that focuses on home management and medication adherence is critical for optimal clinical care of children with
asthma (Table 185.11). Asthma education should consider sociocultural and ethnic factors and provide an open forum for concerns
about asthma and its treatment. Families should be active participants
in the development of treatment goals and selection of medications.
Self-­management skills should be reevaluated regularly (e.g., inhaler
medication technique).
During initial patient visits, a basic understanding of the pathogenesis of asthma (chronic inflammation and AHR underlying a
clinically intermittent presentation) can help children with asthma
and their parents understand the importance of recommendations
aimed at reducing airways inflammation to achieve and maintain
good asthma control. It is helpful to specify the expectations of good
asthma control resulting from optimal asthma management (see Fig.
184.4). Addressing concerns about potential adverse effects of asthma
pharmacotherapeutic agents, especially their risks relative to their
benefits, is essential in achieving long-­term adherence with asthma
pharmacotherapy and environmental control measures.
All children with asthma should benefit from a written Asthma Action
Plan (Fig. 185.5). This plan has two main components: (1) a daily “routine” management plan describing regular asthma medication use and
other measures to keep asthma under good control and (2) an action
plan to manage worsening asthma, describing indicators of impending exacerbations, identifying what medications to take, and specifying

Table 185.11  Key Elements of Productive Clinic Visits for
Asthma
Standardize assessment of asthma control (e.g., Asthma Control
Test, exacerbations in past 12 mo)
Specify goals of asthma management
Explain basic facts about asthma
• Contrast normal vs asthmatic airways
• Link airways inflammation, “twitchiness,” and bronchoconstriction
• Long-­term-­control and quick-­relief medications
• Address concerns about potential adverse effects of asthma
pharmacotherapy
Teach, demonstrate, and have patient show proper technique
• Inhaled medication use (spacer use with metered-­dose inhaler)
Investigate and manage factors that contribute to asthma severity
• Environmental exposures
• Comorbid conditions
Create written two-­part Asthma Action Plan (see Fig. 185.5)
• Daily management
• Action plan for asthma exacerbations
Regular follow-­up visits
• Twice yearly (more often if asthma not well controlled)
• Monitor lung function at least annually

when and how to contact the regular physician and/or obtain urgent/
emergency medical care.
Regular follow-­
up visits are recommended to help to maintain
optimal asthma control. Follow-­up visits provide the opportunity to
reassess asthma medication perceptions and delivery techniques. The
Asthma Action Plan can be revised as needed.

Adherence

Asthma is a chronic condition that is usually best managed with daily
controller medication. However, symptoms wax and wane and exacerbations may be infrequent. A natural tendency is to reduce or discontinue daily controller therapies once asthma symptoms improve.
As such, adherence to a daily controller regimen is frequently suboptimal; ICSs are underused 60% of the time. In one study, children with
asthma who required an OCS course for an asthma exacerbation had
used their daily controller ICS 15% of the time. Misconceptions about
controller medication time to onset, efficacy, and safety often underlie
poor adherence and can be addressed by asking about such concerns
at each visit.

Component 3: Control of Factors Contributing to
Poor Asthma Control

Controllable factors that can worsen asthma can be generally grouped
as (1) environmental exposures and (2) comorbid conditions (Table
185.12).

Eliminating and Reducing Problematic Environmental
Exposures

Steps should be taken to investigate and minimize exposures in asthmatic patients. These exposures include allergens as well as irritants
(e.g., smoke, pollutants, and other chemicals such as perfumes), in the
patient’s home or school. However, patients often cannot identify potential triggers. Allergy testing should be considered for all patients with
persistent asthma to identify allergens that may contribute to airway
inflammation, asthma symptoms, and exacerbations. For asthmatic
patients who are allergic to allergens in their homes and/or schools or
daycare centers, reducing or eliminating these indoor allergen exposures can reduce asthma symptoms, medication requirements, AHR,
severe exacerbations, and disease persistence. Common home, school,
and daycare allergen exposures include furred or feathered animals as
pets (cats, dogs, rodents, birds) or as pests (mice, rats, cockroaches),
and occult indoor allergens such as dust mites and molds.
Allergen mitigation strategies can be used in patients with allergy of
all ages and asthma severities, but these strategies should be tailored
to the individual. Multicomponent interventions are recommended
to control indoor allergens, because single component interventions
are often not effective. Examples of single component interventions
for dust mite allergy include (1) encasing bedding and pillows in
allergen-­impermeable covers, (2) washing bedding weekly in hot water
(>130°F), (3) removing wall-­to-­wall carpeting and upholstered furniture, or (4) reducing and maintaining indoor humidity <50%. In contrast, a multicomponent strategy for dust mite allergy might include
all of these measures. Integrated pest management strategies are also
recommended for patients exposed to cockroaches, mice, or rats in the
home who have sensitization to these allergens. Integrated pest management can also be used with other interventions to reduce exposures
to pest-­related allergens. Families should be educated that it can take
≥6 months for the levels of these indoor allergens to drop significantly
and for asthma control to improve after intervention. Allergen mitigation strategies are not recommended for patients with no allergy to
indoor allergens.
Tobacco, wood and coal smoke, dusts, strong odors, and noxious air
pollutants (e.g., nitrogen dioxide from inadequately vented gas stoves
and furnaces) can also aggravate asthma. These airway irritants should
be eliminated from or reduced in the homes, schools/daycare centers,
and automobiles/school transportation used by children with asthma.
Care providers can be strong influencers of smoking cessation by parents,
caregivers, and adolescent patients (see also Chapters 157.2 and 759.1).
Secondhand marijuana smoke contains many of the same chemicals and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1397

Fig. 185.5 Asthma action plan for home use. This plan has two main components: (1) a daily management plan to keep asthma in good control and

(2) an action plan to recognize and manage worsening asthma. (From U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health,
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH Pub No 07-­5251, April 2007. https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/asthma/treatment-­action-­plan.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1398 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.12  Control of Factors Contributing to Asthma
Severity
ELIMINATE OR REDUCE PROBLEMATIC ENVIRONMENTAL
EXPOSURES
Environmental tobacco smoke elimination or reduction in home and
automobiles
Allergen exposure elimination or reduction in sensitized asthmatic
patients
• Pets (cats, dogs, rodents, birds)
• Pests (mice, rats)
• Dust mites
• Cockroaches
• Molds
Other airway irritants
• Wood-­ or coal-­burning smoke
• Strong chemical odors and perfumes (e.g., household cleaners)
• Dusts
TREAT COMORBID CONDITIONS
Rhinitis
Sinusitis
Gastroesophageal reflux

particulates as tobacco smoke, and should also be avoided (see Chapter
759.2). Exposure to electronic cigarette aerosol may also aggravate asthma.
Annual influenza vaccination (both inactivated and live attenuated)
is safe in children with asthma and continues to be recommended for
all children with asthma to reduce the risk of severe complications,
although influenza is not responsible for the large majority of virus-­
induced asthma exacerbations experienced by children.

Identifying and Treating Comorbid Conditions

Rhinitis, sinusitis, GER, and obesity often accompany asthma and may
make the asthma difficult to treat. These conditions can also mimic
asthma symptoms and lead to misclassification of asthma severity and
control. Indeed, these conditions, along with asthma, are the most
common causes of chronic cough. Poor conditioning from obesity may
also be confused with asthma-­related dyspnea. Effective management
of these comorbid conditions may improve asthma symptoms, such
that less asthma medication is needed to achieve good asthma control.

Component 4: Principles of Asthma
Pharmacotherapy

The current version of NIH asthma guidelines (2020) provides treatment
recommendations that vary by level of asthma severity and age-­groups
(Table 185.13). There are six treatment steps. Patients at Treatment Step
1 have intermittent asthma. Children with mild persistent asthma are
at Treatment Step 2. Children with moderate persistent asthma can
be at Treatment Step 3 or 4. Children with severe persistent asthma
are at Treatment Steps 5 and 6. The goals of therapy are to achieve a
well-­controlled state by reducing the components of both impairment
(e.g., preventing or minimizing symptoms, infrequently needing quick-­
reliever medications, maintaining “normal” lung function and normal
activity levels) and risk (e.g., preventing recurrent exacerbations, reduced
lung growth, and medication adverse effects). The recommendations for
initial therapy are based on assessment of asthma severity, whereas level
of control determines any modifications of treatment in children who
are already using controller therapy. A major objective of this approach
is to identify and treat all “persistent” and inadequately controlled
asthma with anti-­
inflammatory controller medication. Treatment
Step 1 (intermittent asthma) management is simply the use of a SABA as
needed for symptoms and for pretreatment in those with EIB. For children <5 years with recurrent episodic wheeze in the setting of viral illness, a short course of daily high-­dose ICS may also be considered.
The preferred treatment for all patients with persistent asthma
includes an ICS-­containing therapy, as monotherapy or in combination

with adjunctive therapy. The type(s) and amount(s) of daily controller medications to be used are determined by the asthma severity and
control rating.
At Treatment Step 2 (mild persistent asthma), low-­dose daily ICS
therapy is the treatment of choice for all children. Common alternative
medications include a leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA) such as
montelukast.
At Treatment Step 3 (moderate persistent asthma), for school-­age
children, the preferred treatment has recently been modified to the
daily and as-­needed use of a low-­dose ICS/formoterol (a rapid onset,
long-­acting β2-­agonist [LABA]) combination inhaler, used twice daily
as both maintenance therapy and as-­needed reliever therapy (in place
of a separate SABA inhaler).
Single maintenance and reliever therapy (SMART) is a fundamental change from the conventional distinct daily controllers vs quick
reliever medications. Although SMART has been determined to be
effective in reducing asthma exacerbations relative to use of SABA as
a reliever (i.e., favorable benefit-­harm ratio), some current challenges
to implementation for providers and patients include ICS/formoterol
availability/affordability, FDA approval for use as a reliever therapy,
and asthma management and action plan reeducation for home and
school, including the appropriate use of SABA in asthma care (e.g.,
exercise pretreatment). A SABA/ICS combination inhaler (albuterol/
budesonide 90 mcg/80 mcg per actuation) is FDA approved for asneeded use as a quick reliever in adults ages 18 years and older (not
in children).
Common alternate choices for the treatment of school-­age children
at Treatment Step 3 include (1) medium-­dose ICS or (2) low-­dose
ICS used in combination with an inhaled LABA. In a study of children with uncontrolled asthma receiving low-­dose ICS, the addition of
LABA was more likely to provide improvement than either adding an
LTRA or increasing ICS dosage. However, some children had a good
response to medium-­dose ICS or the addition of an LTRA, justifying
them as step-­up controller therapy options. Thus if a child is not well
controlled with a given step 3 treatment, trials of the alternate treatment approaches should be considered before stepping up to step 4.
In patients 12 years and older with uncontrolled persistent asthma for
whom a LABA is not used, current guidelines recommend addition of
a LABA or a long-­acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA) to the ICS as a
step-­up approach. Adding a LAMA is not more efficacious than adding
a LABA, so LAMAs should not be selected over a LABA unless necessary. LAMAs also have a less favorable benefit-­harm profile and should
not be used in patients with a risk of urinary retention or glaucoma.
LAMAs can also be added to ICS/LABA combination therapy if the
patient remains symptomatic.
For young children (≤4 years) at Treatment Step 3, NAEPP guidelines recommend daily medium dose ICS, whereas GINA recommends
three co-­equal preferred options: (1) daily low-­dose ICS/LABA, (2)
daily low-­dose ICS + LTRA, or (3) daily medium-­dose ICS.
At Treatment Step 4 (moderate persistent asthma), the preferred
therapy for school-­age children is daily and as-­needed use of a
medium-­
dose ICS/formoterol combination inhaler, used twice
daily for maintenance and as needed for reliever therapy. Alternatives include daily medium-­dose ICS with either a LABA, LTRA, or
other controller (such as a LAMA in patients 12 years and older). For
preschool-­age children at Treatment Step 4, daily medium-­dose ICS/
LABA is recommended.
For children age ≥5 years with allergic asthma requiring Treatment
Steps 2-­4 care, subcutaneous allergen immunotherapy (SCIT) can be
considered. Current guidelines recommend SCIT as an adjunct treatment to standard pharmacotherapy in patients whose asthma can be
adequately controlled and managed at the initiation, buildup, and
maintenance phases of SCIT. Some requirements for effective and
safe SCIT include (1) allergen sensitization evaluation using either
immediate hypersensitivity skin testing or in vitro antigen-­specific
IgE antibody testing, and by a trained healthcare professional skilled
in proper testing and result interpretation; (2) before each SCIT injection, evaluation to ensure that asthma is well controlled because poorly
controlled asthma is a major risk factor for life-­threatening and fatal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1399
Table 185.13  Stepwise Approach for Managing Asthma in Children*
Age

Treatment

Intermittent
Asthma
Step 1

Preferred

0–4
years

PRN SABA
And
At the start of
RTI: Add short
course daily ICS

Alternative

Persistent Asthma
Step 2
Daily low-dose
ICS and
PRN SABA

Step 3

Step 4

Daily low-dose
ICS-LABA and
PRN SABA
Or
Daily low-dose
ICS + montelukast
or daily mediumdose ICS and
PRN SABA

Daily mediumdose ICS-LABA
and PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA and
PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA + oral
systemic
corticosteroids
and PRN SABA

Daily mediumdose ICS +
montelukast
and PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS + montelukast
and PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA +
montelukast +
oral systemic
corticosteroids
and PRN SABA

Daily montelukast
or Cromolyn and
PRN SABA

Step 5

Step 6

For children age 4 years only, see Step 3
and Step 4 for ages 5–11 years
Preferred

PRN SABA

5–11
years
Alternative

Daily low-dose
ICS and
PRN SABA

Daily and PRN
combination
low-dose ICSformoterol

Daily and PRN
combination
medium-dose
ICS-formoterol

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA and
PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA + oral
systemic
corticosteroids
and PRN SABA

Daily LTRA, or
Cromolyn, or
Nedocromil, or
Theophylline, and
PRN SABA

Daily medium-dose
ICS and PRN SABA
Or
Daily low-dose
ICS-LABA, or daily
low-dose ICS +
LTRA, or daily
low-dose ICS +
theophylline,
and PRN SABA

Daily mediumdose ICS-LABA
and PRN SABA
Or
Daily mediumdose ICS + LTRA,
or daily mediumdose ICS +
theophylline,
and PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS + LTRA or
daily high-dose
ICS + Theophylline,
and PRN SABA

Daily high-dose
ICS + LTRA +
oral systemic
corticosteroid or
daily high-dose
ICS + Theophylline
+ oral systemic
corticosteroid,
and PRN SABA

Steps 2–4: Conditionally recommend use of subcutaneous
immunotherapy as an adjunct treatment to standard
pharmacotherapy in individuals 5 years of age whose asthma is
controlled at the initiation, build up, and maintenance phases of
immunotherapy
Preferred
12+
years
Alternative

PRN SABA

Consider omalizumab

Daily low-dose ICS
and PRN SABA
Or
PRN concomitant
ICS and SABA

Daily and PRN
combination
low-dose
ICS-formoterol

Daily and PRN
combination
medium-dose
ICS-formoterol

Daily medium-high
dose ICS-LABA +
LAMA and PRN
SABA

Daily LTRA and
PRN SABA
Or
Cromolyn, or
Nedocromil, or
Theophylline, and
PRN SABA

Daily mediumdose ICS and
PRN SABA
Or
Daily low-dose
ICS-LABA, or
Daily low-dose
ICS + LAMA, or
daily low-dose
ICS + LTRA, or
daily low-dose
ICS + theophylline,
and PRN SABA

Daily mediumdose ICS or daily
medium-dose
ICS + LAMA, and
PRN SABA
Or
Daily mediumdose ICS + LTRA,
or daily mediumdose ICS +
theophylline, and
PRN SABA

Daily medium-high
dose ICS-LABA or
daily high-dose
ICS + LTRA, and
PRN SABA

Steps 2–4: Conditionally recommend use of subcutaneous allergen
immunotherapy as an adjunct treatment to standard
pharmacotherapy in individuals 5 years of age whose asthma is
controlled at the initiation, build up, and maintenance phases of
immunotherapy

Daily high-dose
ICS-LABA + oral
systemic
corticosteroids
and PRN SABA

Consider adding asthma biologics
(e.g., anti-IgE, anti-IL5, anti-IL5R,
anti-IL4/IL13R, anti-TSLP)

Assess control
• First check adherence, inhaler technique, environmental factors, and comorbid conditions.
• Step up if needed, reassess in 4–6 weeks
• Step down if possible (if asthma is well controlled for at least 3 consecutive months)
Consult with asthma specialist if Step 3 or higher is required for those 0–4 years of age (and consider consultation at Step 2)
or if Step 4 is required for those 5+ years of age (and consider consultation at Step 3).
Control assessment is a key element of asthma care. This involves both impairment and risk. Use of objective measures,
self-reported control, and health care utilization are complementary and should be employed on an ongoing basis,
depending on the individual’s clinical situation.
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

1400 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.13  Stepwise Approach for Managing Asthma in Children*—cont’d
*Notes:
• The stepwise approach is meant to assist, not replace, the clinical decision-­making required to meet individual patient needs.
• If alternative treatment is used and response is inadequate, discontinue it and use the preferred treatment before stepping up.
• If clear benefit is not observed within 4-­6 wk and patient/family medication technique and adherence are satisfactory, consider adjusting therapy or alternative diagnosis.
• Studies on children age 0-­4 yr are limited.
• Clinicians who administer allergen immunotherapy or biologic therapy should be prepared and equipped to identify and treat anaphylaxis that may occur.
• Theophylline is a less desirable alternative because of the need to monitor serum concentration levels. The 2016 GINA guidelines do not recommend the use of theophylline as a
controller medication and in IV forms to treat status asthmaticus due to its severe adverse effects profile.
†Alphabetical order is used when more than 1 treatment option is listed within either preferred or alternative therapy.
ICS, Inhaled corticosteroid; LABA, inhaled long-acting β2-agonist; LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonist; OCS, oral corticosteroid; prn, as needed; SABA, inhaled short-acting β2-agonist.
Adapted from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR3): Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma --summary report
2007, J Allergy Clin Immunol 120(Suppl):S94-S138, 2007 and 2020 Focused Updates to Asthma Management Guidelines: A Report from the National Asthma Education and
Prevention Program Coordinating Committee Expert Panel Working Group.

allergic reactions from SCIT; and (3) being well prepared to respond
to systemic allergic/anaphylactic reactions to SCIT injections. Patients
with allergic asthma may also benefit from improvements in comorbid
allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis, which could additionally improve
quality of life. SCIT efficacy with regard to asthma medication use and
exacerbations is not clear. SCIT is not recommended in patients with
severe asthma given the potential for systemic reactions of potentially
great severity. Sublingual immunotherapy is not currently recommended based on available data.
At Treatment Steps 5 and 6 (severe persistent asthma), all children should receive daily high-­dose ICS plus LABA as the preferred
approach; alternative secondary controllers to LABA include LTRA
or LAMA. Long-­term administration of OCSs as controller therapy
may be effective but is rarely required and should be avoided whenever possible due to potential for significant corticosteroid side effects.
In addition, biologics should be considered in children with specific
asthma phenotypes: (1) omalizumab can be used in children ≥6 years
old with severe allergic asthma; (2) mepolizumab (≥6 years), dupilumab
(≥6 years), and benralizumab (≥12 years) can be used in children with
severe eosinophilic asthma; and (3) tezepelumab (≥12 years) can be used
in children with severe asthma. A rescue course of systemic corticosteroids may be necessary at any step for very poorly controlled asthma.

Adjusting Asthma Pharmacotherapy

By determining the lowest number or dose of daily controller medications that can maintain good control, the potential for medication
adverse effects is reduced. Asthma controller therapy can be stepped
down after good asthma control has been achieved and maintained
for at least 3 months. Stopping ICS controller therapy should be given
careful consideration in children with a history of exacerbations. For
example, in children with a history of fall seasonal asthma exacerbations and whose asthma becomes well controlled in the summer, ICS
may be reduced but not completely discontinued. Regular follow-­up is
still emphasized because the variability of asthma’s course is well recognized. When asthma is not well controlled, adherence, inhaler technique, and comorbidities should be considered first before increasing
controller treatment. If increased treatment is required, the recommendation is to step up by one level and closely monitor for clinical
improvement. For a child with very poorly controlled asthma, the recommendations are to consider a short course of prednisone and/or to
increase therapy by two step levels, with reevaluation in 2 weeks.

Referral to Asthma Specialist

Referral to an asthma specialist for consultation or co-­management is
recommended if there are difficulties in achieving or maintaining good
asthma control. For children ≤4 years, referral is recommended if the
patient requires at least Treatment Step 3 care, and should be considered if the patient requires Treatment Step 2 care. For children ≥5 years,
consultation with a specialist is recommended if the patient requires
Treatment Step 4 care or higher, and should be considered if Treatment
Step 3 is required. Referral is also recommended if allergen immunotherapy (AIT) or biologic therapy is being considered.

Long-­Term Controller Medications

All levels of persistent asthma should be treated with an ICS-­containing
therapy to reduce airway inflammation, improve long-­term control, and
reduce exacerbation risk (see Table 185.13). Other long-­term controller medications include LABAs, leukotriene modifiers, LAMAs, SCIT,
cromolyn, sustained-­release theophylline, and tiotropium in adolescents.
Omalizumab and mepolizumab are approved by the FDA for use as an
add-­on therapy in children ≥6 years who have severe allergic asthma or
eosinophilic asthma, respectively, that remains difficult to control. For
adolescents 12 years and older, benralizumab is approved by the FDA for
severe asthma with an eosinophilic phenotype. Dupilumab is approved
by the FDA for moderate to severe asthma with an eosinophilic phenotype for children 6 years and older. Tezepelumab is approved by the FDA
for severe asthma in adolescents 12 years and older (see Tables 185.13
and 185.14).

Inhaled Corticosteroids

ICS therapy serves as the cornerstone of therapy in persistent asthma,
as it improves lung function; reduces asthma symptoms, AHR, and
use of “rescue” medications; improves quality of life; and most importantly reduces exacerbations, the need for systemic corticosteroids,
urgent care visits, and hospitalizations. Epidemiologic studies have also
shown that ICS therapy in adults substantially lowers the risk of death
attributable to asthma if used regularly. Because ICS therapy frequently
achieves all the goals of asthma management, it is viewed as first-­line
treatment for persistent asthma. The selection of the initial ICS dose is
based on the determination of disease severity.
Seven ICSs are approved by the FDA for use in children. The NIH
and GINA guidelines provide equivalence classifications (Table 185.15),
although direct comparisons of efficacy and safety outcomes are lacking. ICSs are available in metered-­dose inhalers (MDIs) using hydrofluoroalkane (HFA) as their propellant, in dry powder inhalers (DPIs),
or in suspension for nebulization. Fluticasone propionate, fluticasone furoate, mometasone furoate, ciclesonide, and to a lesser extent
budesonide are considered “second-­generation” ICSs, in that they have
greater antiinflammatory potency and less systemic bioavailability.
Even though ICSs are very effective in most patients, there has been
some reluctance to treat children with ICSs due to parental and occasionally physician concerns regarding their potential for adverse effects
with chronic use. The most serious adverse effects that occur with long-­
term systemic corticosteroid therapy have not been seen or have only
rarely been reported in children receiving ICSs in recommended doses.
The risk of adverse effects from ICS therapy is related to the dose and
frequency of administration (Table 185.16). High doses (≥1,000 μg/day
in children) and frequent administration (4 times per day) are more
likely to have both local and systemic adverse effects. Children who
receive maintenance therapy with higher ICS doses are also likely to
require frequent systemic corticosteroid courses for asthma exacerbations, further increasing their risk of corticosteroid adverse effects.
The most common ICS adverse effects are local: oral candidiasis
(thrush) and dysphonia (hoarse voice). Thrush results from propellant-­
induced mucosal irritation and local immunosuppression, and dysphonia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1401
Table 185.14  Usual Dosages for Long-­Term Control Medications
AGE
MEDICATION

0-­4 YR

≥12 YR

5-­11 YR

INHALED CORTICOSTEROID MONOTHERAPIES (SEE TABLE 185.13)
Inhaled Corticosteroid/Long-­Acting β-­Agonist (ICS/LABA) Combination Therapies:
Fluticasone/salmeterol (Advair):
N/A
DPI: 100, 250, or 500 μg/50 μg

HFA: 45 μg/21 μg, 115 μg/21 μg,
230 μg/21 μg
Budesonide/formoterol
(Symbicort):
HFA: 80 μg/4.5 μg, 160 μg/4.5 μg
Mometasone/formoterol (Dulera):
HFA: 100 μg/5 μg, 200 μg/5 μg

1 inhalation bid; dose depends on
level of severity or control (the
100/50 dosage is indicated in
children ≥4 yr)
N/A

2 inhalations bid; dose depends on
level of severity or control
2 inhalations bid; dose depends on
level of severity or control
2 inhalations bid; dose depends on
level of severity or control

Leukotriene Receptor Antagonists:
Montelukast (Singulair):
4 mg qhs (1-­5 yr)
4 or 5 mg chewable tablet
4 mg granule packets
10 mg tablet
Black box warning
(see text)
Zafirlukast (Accolate):
N/A
10 mg or 20 mg tablet
Biologic Therapies:
Omalizumab (anti-­IgE; Xolair):
SC injection, 150 mg

1 inhalation bid; dose depends on
level of severity or control

N/A

5 mg qhs (6-­14 yr)

10 mg qhs (indicated in children
≥15 yr)

10 mg bid (7-­11 yr)

40 mg daily (20 mg tablet bid)

75-­375 mg SC q 2-­4 wk, depending
on body weight and pretreatment
serum IgE level
100 mg SC q 4 wk

Mepolizumab (anti–IL-­5; Nucala):
SC injection, 100 mg
Benralizumab (anti–IL-­5 Rα;
Fasenra)
SC injection, 30 mg
Dupilumab (anti–IL-­4 Rα; Dupixent)
SC injection, 200 mg, 300 mg

N/A

75-­375 mg SC q 2-­4 wk (6-­11 yr),
depending on body weight and
pretreatment serum IgE level
40 mg SC q 4 wk (6-­11 yr)

N/A

N/A

30 mg SC q 4 wk × 3 doses, then 30
mg SC q 8 wk

N/A

400 mg or 600 mg SC starting dose,
then 200 or 300 mg SC q 2 wk

Tezepelumab (anti-TSLP; Tezspire)
SC injection, 210 mg

N/A

15 to <30 kg:100 mg q 2 wk or 300
mg q 4 wk
≥30 kg: 200 mg q2 wk
N/A

210 mg SC q 4 wk

bid, Two times daily; DPI, dry powder inhaler; HFA, hydrofluoroalkane; IL, interleukin; q, every; qhs, every night; SC, subcutaneous(ly).

is the result of vocal cord myopathy. These effects are dose dependent
and are most common in individuals receiving high-­dose ICS or OCS
therapy. The incidence of these local effects can be greatly minimized by
using a spacer with an MDI with the ICS, because spacers reduce oropharyngeal deposition of the drug and propellant. Mouth rinsing using a
“swish and spit” technique after ICS use is also recommended.
The potential for growth suppression and osteoporosis with long-­
term ICS use had been an unanswered concern. A long-­term, prospective NIH-­
sponsored study (CAMP) followed the growth and
bone mineral density (BMD) of >1,000 children (age 6-­12 years at
entry) with mild to moderate asthma until they reached adulthood
and found slight growth suppression and osteopenia in some children
who received long-­term ICS therapy. A small (1.1 cm), limited (1 year)
growth suppressive effect was noted in children receiving budesonide,
200 μg twice daily, after 5 years of therapy. Height was then followed
until all children had reached adulthood (mean age 25 years). Those
who received ICS therapy remained approximately 1 cm shorter than
those who received placebo. Thus children treated with long-­term
low-­dose ICS therapy may be about 1 cm shorter than expected as an
adult, which is of little clinical significance. BMD was no different in
those receiving budesonide vs placebo during the duration of the study,
whereas a follow-­up study after a mean of 7 years found a slight dose-­
dependent effect of ICS therapy on bone mineral accretion only among
males. A much greater effect on BMD was observed with increasing

numbers of OCS bursts for acute asthma, as well as an increase in risk
for osteopenia, which was again limited to males. These findings were
with use of low-­dose budesonide; higher ICS doses, especially of agents
with increased potency, are likely to have a greater potential for adverse
effects. Thus osteoporosis screening and prevention measures are
recommended for patients receiving higher ICS doses, because these
patients are also likely to require systemic courses for exacerbations
(see Table 185.16).

Systemic Corticosteroids

The development of second-­generation ICSs, especially when used in
combination with a LABA in a single device, along with the addition of
biologics, have allowed almost all children with asthma to achieve and
maintain good control without need for maintenance OCS therapy. Thus
short courses of OCSs are used primarily to treat asthma exacerbations
and, very rarely, as maintenance therapy in children with very severe disease. In these patients, every attempt should be made to exclude comorbid
conditions and to keep the OCS dose at ≤20 mg every other day. Doses
exceeding this amount are associated with numerous adverse effects (see
Chapter 615). To determine the need for continued OCS therapy, tapering of the OCS dose over several weeks should be attempted, with close
monitoring of the patient’s symptoms and lung function.
Prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, and dexamethasone are rapidly and completely absorbed, with peak plasma

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1402 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.15  Estimated Comparative Inhaled Corticosteroid Doses
GLUCOCORTICOID

LOW DAILY DOSE

MEDIUM DAILY DOSE

HIGH DAILY DOSE

Beclomethasone (Qvar)
MDI: 40 or 80 μg
(Approved for children ≥5 yr)

80-­160 μg

160-­320 μg

>320 μg

Budesonide (Pulmicort Flexhaler)
DPI: 90, 180 μg
(Approved for children ≥6 yr)

200 μg

200-­400 μg

>400 μg

Budesonide suspension for nebulization
(Generic and Pulmicort Respules)
0.25 mg, 0.5 mg, 1 mg
(Approved for children 1-­8 yr)

0.5 mg

1.0 mg

2.0 mg

Ciclesonide (Alvesco)
MDI: 80, 160 μg
(Approved for children ≥12 yr)

80 μg

80-­160 μg

160 μg

Flunisolide (Aerospan)
MDI: 80 μg/puff
(Approved for children ≥6 yr)

80 μg

80-­160 μg

160 μg

Fluticasone propionate (Flovent, Flovent
Diskus)
MDI: 44, 110, 220 μg
DPI: 50, 100, 250 μg
(44 and 50 μg approved for children ≥4 yr)

88-­176 μg
100-­200 μg

176-­440 μg
200-­500 μg

>440 μg
>500 μg

Fluticasone furoate (Arnuity Ellipta)
DPI: 100, 200 μg
(Approved for children ≥12 yr)

100 μg

100-­200 μg

200 μg

Mometasone Furoate (Asmanex, Asmanex
Twisthaler)
MDI: 100, 200 μg
DPI: 110, 220 μg
(Approved for children ≥4 yr)

110 μg
100 μg

110 μg
100 μg

110 μg
100 μg

DPI, Dry powder inhaler; MDI, metered-­dose inhaler.
Adapted from National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel Report 3 (EPR3). Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma—Summary Report 2007.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007;120(Suppl):S94–S138.

concentrations occurring within 1-­2 hours. Prednisone is an inactive prodrug that requires biotransformation via first-­pass hepatic
metabolism to prednisolone, its active form. For asthma exacerbations in children, oral dexamethasone is also commonly used given
its long half-­life of 36-­54 hours and association with less vomiting
when compared with oral prednisone. These corticosteroids are
metabolized in the liver into inactive compounds, with the rate of
metabolism influenced by drug interactions and disease states. Anticonvulsants (phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine) increase
the metabolism of prednisolone, methylprednisolone, and dexamethasone, with methylprednisolone most significantly affected.
Rifampin also enhances the clearance of corticosteroids and can
result in diminished therapeutic effect. Other medications (ketoconazole, oral contraceptives) can significantly delay corticosteroid
metabolism. Some macrolide antibiotics, such as erythromycin and
clarithromycin, delay the clearance of only methylprednisolone.
Long-­term OCS therapy can cause numerous adverse effects over
time (see Chapter 617). Some occur immediately (metabolic effects),
whereas others can develop insidiously over several months to years
(growth suppression, osteoporosis, cataracts). Most adverse effects
occur in a cumulative dose-­and duration-­dependent manner. Children
who require routine or frequent short courses of OCSs, especially with
concurrent high-­dose ICSs and often intranasal corticosteroids, should
receive corticosteroid adverse effects screening (see Table 185.16) and
osteoporosis preventive measures (see Chapter 749).

Long-­Acting Inhaled β-­Agonists

Although considered daily controller medications, LABAs (salmeterol,
formoterol) are not intended for use as monotherapy for persistent asthma
because they can increase the risk for serious asthma exacerbations (ICU
admission, endotracheal intubation) and asthma-­related deaths when

used without an ICS. The likely mechanism involves the ability of LABAs
to “mask” worsening asthma inflammation and asthma severity, leading
to a delay in seeking urgent care and increased risk of a life-­threatening
exacerbation. Although both salmeterol and formoterol have a prolonged
duration of effect (≥12 hours), salmeterol has a prolonged onset of effect
(60 minutes), whereas formoterol’s onset of effect is rapid (5-­10 minutes)
after administration. Given their long duration of action, LABAs are well
suited for patients with nocturnal asthma and for individuals who require
frequent use of SABA inhalations during the day to prevent EIB, but only
in combination with ICSs. The FDA recommends that once a patient is
well controlled on combination ICS/LABA therapy, the LABA component
should be discontinued while continuing treatment with the ICS, although
many patients experience disease worsening on LABA discontinuation.

Combination ICS/LABA Therapy

Combination ICS/LABA therapy is recommended for patients
who are suboptimally controlled with ICS therapy alone and those
with moderate or severe persistent asthma. In most patients who
are inadequately controlled with ICS alone, combination ICS/LABA
therapy is superior to add-­on therapy with either an LTRA or LAMA
or doubling the ICS dose. Benefits include improvement in baseline
lung function, less need for rescue SABA therapy, improved quality of
life, and fewer asthma exacerbations. A large study found that in children inadequately controlled with low-­dose ICS therapy, combination
low-­dose fluticasone/salmeterol (100 μg/21 μg) twice daily was almost
twice as likely to be effective as other step-­up regimens, including
fluticasone (250 μg) twice daily or low-­dose fluticasone (100 μg twice
daily) plus montelukast once daily, with the greatest improvement in
reducing exacerbations requiring prednisone and study withdrawals
due to poorly controlled asthma. In addition, combination fluticasone/
salmeterol was as likely to be effective as medium-­dose fluticasone and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1403
Table 185.16  Risk Assessment for Corticosteroid Adverse Effects
CONDITIONS

RECOMMENDATIONS

Low risk

(≤1 risk factor*)
Low-­to medium-­dose ICS (see Table 185.13)

Monitor blood pressure and weight with each physician visit
Measure height annually (stadiometry); monitor periodically for declining
growth rate and pubertal developmental delay
Encourage regular physical exercise
Ensure adequate dietary calcium and vitamin D with additional supplements
for daily calcium if needed.
Avoid smoking and alcohol
Ensure TSH status if patient has history of thyroid abnormality

Medium risk

(If >1 risk factor,* consider evaluating as high
risk)
High-­dose ICS (see Table 185.13)
At least four courses of OCS per year

As above, plus:
Yearly ophthalmologic evaluations to monitor for cataracts or glaucoma
Baseline bone densitometry (DEXA scan)
Consider patient at increased risk for adrenal insufficiency, especially with
physiologic stressors (e.g., surgery, accident, significant illness)

High risk

Chronic systemic corticosteroids (>7.5 mg daily
or equivalent for >1 mo)
≥7 OCS burst treatments per year
Very-­high-­dose ICS (e.g., fluticasone
propionate ≥800 μg/day)

As above, plus:
DEXA scan: if DEXA z score ≤1.0, recommend close monitoring (every 12
mo)
Consider referral to a bone or endocrine specialist
Bone age assessment
Complete blood count
Serum calcium, phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase determinations
Urine calcium and creatinine measurements
Measurements of testosterone in males, estradiol in amenorrheic
premenopausal women, vitamin D (25-­OH and 1,25-­OH vitamin D),
parathyroid hormone, and osteocalcin
Urine telopeptides for those receiving long-­term systemic or frequent OCS
treatment
Assume adrenal insufficiency for physiologic stressors (e.g., surgery,
accident, significant illness)

*Risk factors for osteoporosis: presence of other chronic illness(es), medications (corticosteroids, anticonvulsants, heparin, diuretics), low body weight, family history of osteoporosis,
significant fracture history disproportionate to trauma, recurrent falls, impaired vision, low dietary calcium and vitamin D intake, and lifestyle factors (decreased physical activity,
smoking, alcohol intake).
DEXA, Dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry; ICS, inhaled corticosteroid; OCS, oral corticosteroid; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone.

was superior to combination fluticasone/montelukast therapy in Black
children, arguing against the notion that Black children are more prone
to serious asthma exacerbations than White children when treated with
combination ICS/LABA therapy.
Despite their efficacy and widespread use, the long-­term safety of
LABAs, even when used in combination with ICS in a single inhaler,
has been questioned. To address this concern of rare, severe asthma-­
related events with LABA/ICS use, large randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) compared the safety of combination ICS/LABA vs ICS monotherapy. Two studies of >23,000 adults and adolescents ≥12 years old
with various levels of asthma severity were randomized to receive ICS
(low or medium dose) monotherapy vs equivalent ICS/LABA (fluticasone vs fluticasone/salmeterol; budesonide vs budesonide/formoterol)
over 26 weeks to determine whether small but significant differences
might occur in asthma hospitalization, intubation, or death attributable to ICS/LABA. No intubations or asthma deaths occurred during the study, and no differences in asthma hospitalizations between
treatment groups were observed. The similar pediatric study enrolled
>6,000 children age 4-­11 years with various levels of asthma severity
to receive either fluticasone (low or medium dose) or equivalent fluticasone/salmeterol dose over 26 weeks, with similar findings of no significant differences in severe asthma-­related events between treatment
groups. These results strongly suggest that the use of combination ICS/
LABA products in children and adults with moderate to severe persistent
asthma is both effective and safe.

Leukotriene-­Modifying Agents

Leukotrienes are potent proinflammatory mediators that can induce
bronchospasm, mucus secretion, and airways edema. LTRAs have
bronchodilator and targeted antiinflammatory properties and reduce
exercise-­, aspirin-­, and allergen-­induced bronchoconstriction. LTRAs
may be an alternative treatment for mild persistent asthma and as an
add-­on medication with ICS for moderate persistent asthma. Two
LTRAs with FDA-­
approved use in children are montelukast and

zafirlukast. Both medications improve asthma symptoms, decrease
the need for rescue β-­agonist use, and modestly improve lung function. Montelukast is approved for use in children ≥1 year of age and
is administered once daily, whereas zafirlukast is approved in children
≥5 years and is given twice daily. LTRAs are less effective than ICSs in
patients with mild persistent asthma (e.g., ICSs improve baseline lung
function 5–15%, whereas LTRAs improve lung function 2.5–7.5%). The
FDA has identified serious behavior and mood-­related changes in some
patients treated with montelukast and suggests that the benefits of montelukast may not outweigh the risks in some patients, particularly when
the symptoms of disease may be mild and adequately treated with other
medicines. When initially prescribing montelukast, a precaution is to
inform the child and family that, if mood changes are noted after starting
montelukast, they should discontinue its use and contact their physician.

Long-­Acting Inhaled Anticholinergics

Tiotropium is a LAMA (24-­hour duration of action) that is approved
by the FDA for use in children with asthma ≥6 years old. In studies in
children and adolescents with moderate persistent asthma, tiotropium
improved lung function as an add-­on therapy to ICS. Adding a LAMA
is not more efficacious than adding a LABA, so LAMAs should not be
selected over a LABA unless necessary. LAMAs can also be added to
ICS/LABA combination therapy if the patient remains symptomatic.

Allergen Immunotherapy

AIT involves administering gradually increasing doses of allergens to a
person with allergic disease to reduce or eliminate the patient’s allergic
response to those allergens, including allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and
asthma. Conventional AIT is given subcutaneously (SCIT) under the
direction of an experienced allergist. The goal of SCIT is to increase
the dose of allergen extract administered to reach a therapeutic maintenance dose of each major allergen, in a manner that minimizes the
likelihood of systemic allergic reactions. Allergen extracts are formulated for each patient based on documented allergen sensitizations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1404 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
and problematic exposures. Maintenance doses are generally given
monthly, to complete a 3–5-­year course. A meta-­analysis of 20 trials
examining the effects of SCIT on allergic asthma revealed significant
improvement with fewer symptoms, improved lung function, less need
for medication, and AHR reduction.
Although AIT is regarded as safe, the potential for anaphylaxis
always exists when patients receive extracts containing allergens to
which they are sensitized. Local transient allergic reactions at the
injection site are common. Systemic allergic reactions can also occur
with SCIT, with fatal anaphylaxis occurring in approximately 1 per
2 million injections. Because of the risks of systemic allergic reactions to SCIT, standard precautions include administering SCIT in
medical settings where a physician with access to emergency equipment and medications required for the treatment of anaphylaxis is
available (see Chapter 190). Patients should be observed in the office
for 30 minutes after each injection because most systemic reactions
to SCIT begin within this time frame. SCIT should never be given at
home or by untrained personnel. Because of the complexities and risks
of administration, SCIT should only be administered by an experienced allergist. SCIT is not recommended for patients with severe
and uncontrolled asthma.
AIT should be discontinued in patients who have not shown
improvement after 1 year of receiving maintenance doses of an appropriate allergen extract(s), or who have a serious systemic allergic or
adverse reaction.

Biologic Therapies

Biologic therapies are genetically engineered proteins derived from
human genes and designed to inhibit specific immune mediators of
disease. Several are approved by the FDA as add-­on controller therapies (i.e., in addition to conventional controller therapies) for severe
asthma in adults and children.
Omalizumab (Anti-­
IgE Antibody). Omalizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody (mAb) that binds IgE and prevents its
binding to the high-­affinity IgE receptor on mast cells and basophils, thereby blocking IgE-­
mediated allergic responses and
inflammation. It is approved by the FDA for patients >6 years old
with severe allergic asthma who continue to have inadequate disease control despite treatment with high-­dose ICS and/or OCS.
Omalizumab is given every 2-­4 weeks subcutaneously, with the
dosage based on body weight and serum IgE levels. Omalizumab
can improve asthma control while allowing ICS and/or OCS dose
reduction. Omalizumab has been studied in inner-­city children
with exacerbation-­prone asthma. When added to guideline-­based
controller management, omalizumab reduced exacerbations (50%),
particularly those that peak in the spring and fall seasons. A follow­up prospective preseasonal treatment study confirmed the effect
on fall seasonal exacerbations and demonstrated how omalizumab
restores antiviral (interferon [IFN]-­α) immune responses to rhinovirus (the most common infectious trigger of exacerbations)
that are impaired by IgE-­mediated mechanisms. Omalizumab is
generally well tolerated, although local injection site reactions can
occur. Hypersensitivity reactions (including anaphylaxis) have been
reported following approximately 0.1% of injections. As a result,
omalizumab has an FDA black box warning of potentially serious
and life-­threatening anaphylactic adverse reactions, and an epinephrine autoinjector should be available to all patients receiving
omalizumab.
Mepolizumab and Reslizumab (Anti–IL-­5 Antibodies). Mepolizumab, an anti–IL-­5 mAb that blocks IL-­5-­mediated eosinophilopoiesis, reduces severe asthma exacerbations and lowers sputum
and blood eosinophils while allowing for a significant reduction in
OCS dose in adults and adolescents with severe exacerbation-­prone
eosinophilic asthma. It is administered subcutaneously every 4
weeks and is approved by the FDA for severe eosinophilic asthmatic
children ≥6 years old. Reslizumab, another anti–IL-­5 mAb therapeutic, is administered intravenously and is approved by the FDA
for severe asthmatics ≥18 years old (i.e., not currently approved for
use in children).

Benralizumab (Anti–IL-­5Ra Antibody). Benralizumab is also an
mAb that binds to the IL-­5 receptor α subunit, resulting in apoptosis
of eosinophils and basophils. Benralizumab is approved for patients
≥12 years old with severe eosinophilic asthma with a suggested absolute blood eosinophil count of at least 300 cells/μL. Benralizumab is
administered subcutaneously every 4 weeks for three doses followed
by every 8-­week dosing.
Dupilumab (Anti–IL-­4 Receptor α Antibody). Dupilumab, an
anti–IL-­4 receptor α human mAb that inhibits both IL-­4 and IL-­13
production (both cytokines share the same IL-­4 receptor α chain)
and atopic immune responses, reduces exacerbations and symptoms and improves lung function in moderate to severe asthmatic
patients with an eosinophilic phenotype. Dupilumab is administered subcutaneously every 2 weeks and is approved by the FDA for
patients ≥6 years old with moderate to severe eosinophilic asthma.
It is suggested that patients have an absolute eosinophil count of
at least 150 cells/μL or an exhaled nitric oxide level of at least 25
parts per billion (ppb). In meta-­analysis, dupilumab was associated
with significant reductions of the annualized rate of severe asthma
exacerbations and OCS use and a statistical improvement in lung
function.
Tezepelumab (Anti-Thymic Stromal Lymphopoietin [TSLP]
Antibody). Tezepelumab, an anti-TSLP human mAb, binds and

blocks TSLP’s inflammatory actions, reduces asthma exacerbations and
symptoms, and improves lung function. Tezepelumab is administered
subcutaneously every 4 weeks and is approved by the FDA for patients
≥12 years old with severe asthma.

Quick-­Reliever Medications

Quick-­reliever or “rescue” medications (SABAs, inhaled anticholinergics, and short-­course systemic corticosteroids) are used in the management of acute asthma symptoms (Table 185.17).

Short-­Acting Inhaled β-­Agonists

Given their rapid onset of action, effectiveness, and 4–6-­
hour
duration of action, SABAs (albuterol, levalbuterol, terbutaline,
pirbuterol) are the drugs of choice for acute asthma symptoms
(“rescue” medication) and for preventing EIB. β-­Adrenergic agonists cause bronchodilation by inducing airway smooth muscle
relaxation, reducing vascular permeability and airways edema, and
improving mucociliary clearance. Levalbuterol, the R-­isomer of albuterol, is associated with less tachycardia and tremor, which can be
bothersome to some asthmatic patients. Overuse of β-­agonists is
associated with an increased risk of death or near-­death episodes
from asthma. This is a major concern for some patients with asthma
who rely on the frequent use of SABAs as a “quick fix” for their
asthma, rather than using controller medications in a preventive
manner. It is helpful to monitor the frequency of SABA use, in that
use of one or more MDIs per month or three or more MDIs per
year (200 inhalations per MDI) indicates inadequate asthma control and necessitates improving other aspects of asthma therapy and
management. Of note, a SABA/ICS combination inhaler (albuterol/
budesonide 90 mcg/80 mcg per actuation) has recently been FDA
approved for as-needed use as a quick reliever in adults ages 18
years and older (not in children).

Anticholinergic Agents

As bronchodilators, the anticholinergic agents (e.g., ipratropium
bromide) are less potent than the β-­agonists. Inhaled ipratropium is
used primarily in the treatment of acute severe asthma. When used
in combination with albuterol, ipratropium can improve lung function
and reduce the rate of hospitalization in children who present to the
ED with acute asthma. Ipratropium has few central nervous system
adverse effects and is available in both MDI and nebulizer formulations. Although widely used in all children with asthma exacerbations,
it is approved by the FDA for use in children >12 years old. A combination ipratropium/albuterol product is also available in both nebulized
and mist formulations.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1405
Table 185.17  Management of Asthma Exacerbation (Status Asthmaticus)
RISK ASSESSMENT ON ADMISSION
Focused history

Clinical assessment

Risk factors for asthma morbidity and death

Onset of current exacerbation
Frequency and severity of daytime and nighttime symptoms and activity limitation
Frequency of rescue bronchodilator use
Current medications and allergies
Potential triggers
History of systemic steroid courses, emergency department visits, hospitalization, intubation, or
life-­threatening episodes
Physical examination findings: vital signs, breathlessness, air movement, use of accessory
muscles, retractions, anxiety level, alteration in mental status
Pulse oximetry
Lung function (defer in patients with moderate to severe distress or history of labile disease)
See Table 185.18

TREATMENT
DRUG AND TRADE NAME
Oxygen (mask or nasal cannula)
Inhaled short-­acting β-­agonists

Albuterol nebulizer solution (5 mg/
mL concentrate; 2.5 mg/3 mL,
1.25 mg/3 mL, 0.63 mg/3 mL)
Albuterol MDI (90 μg/puff)
Levalbuterol (Xopenex) nebulizer
solution (1.25 mg/0.5 mL
concentrate; 0.31 mg/3 mL,
0.63 mg/3 mL, 1.25 mg/3 mL)
Systemic corticosteroids

Prednisone: 1, 2.5, 5, 10, 20, 50 mg
tablets
Methylprednisolone (Medrol): 2, 4, 8,
16, 24, 32 mg tablets
Prednisolone: 5 mg tablets; 5 mg/5
mL and 15 mg/5 mL solution
Depo-­Medrol (IM); Solu-­Medrol (IV)
Dexamethasone: 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2, 4,
6 mg tablets; 0.5 mg/5 mL, 1 mg/mL
Intensol solution
Anticholinergics
Ipratropium
Atrovent (nebulizer solution
0.5 mg/2.5 mL; MDI 18 μg/inhalation)
Ipratropium with albuterol
DuoNeb nebulizer solution (0.5 mg
ipra­tropium + 2.5 mg albuterol/3 mL
vial)
Injectable sympathomimetic epinephrine

MECHANISMS OF ACTION AND DOSING

CAUTIONS AND ADVERSE EFFECTS

Treats hypoxia

Monitor pulse oximetry to maintain O2
saturation >92%
Cardiorespiratory monitoring
Bronchodilator
During exacerbations, frequent or continuous
doses can cause pulmonary vasodilation, V̇/Q̇
mismatch, and hypoxemia
Adverse effects: palpitations, tachycardia,
arrhythmias, tremor, hypoxemia
Nebulizer: 0.15 mg/kg (minimum 2.5 mg) as often
Nebulizer: when giving concentrated forms,
as every 20 min for 3 doses as needed, then 0.15-­ dilute with saline to 3 mL total nebulized
0.3 mg/kg up to 10 mg every 1-­4 hr as needed, or
volume.
up to 0.5 mg/kg/hr by
continuous nebulization
2-­8 puffs up to every 20 min for 3 doses as
For MDI: use spacer/holding chamber
needed, then every 1-­4 hr as needed
0.075 mg/kg (minimum 1.25 mg) every 20 min for 3 Levalbuterol 0.63 mg is equivalent to 1.25 mg
doses, then 0.075-­0.15 mg/kg up to 5 mg every
of standard albuterol for both efficacy and
1-­4 hr as needed, or 0.25 mg/kg/hr by continuside effects
ous nebulization
Antiinflammatory
If patient has been exposed to chickenpox or
measles, consider passive immunoglobulin
prophylaxis; also, risk of complications with
herpes simplex and tuberculosis
For daily dosing, 8 am administration minimizes
adrenal suppression
Children may benefit from dosage tapering if
course exceeds 7 days
Adverse effects monitoring: frequent therapy
bursts risk numerous corticosteroid adverse
effects (see Chapter 615); see Table 185.14
for adverse effects screening recommendations
Short course oral “burst” for exacerbation:
1-­2 mg/kg/day divided qd or bid for 3-­7 days
(maximum 40 mg/day)

0.5-­1 mg/kg every 6-­12 hr for 48 hr, then 1-­2 mg/kg/
day qd or bid
Short course oral “burst” for exacerbation: 0.6 mg/
kg, maximum 16 mg; can be repeated next day
Mucolytic/bronchodilator

Should not be used as first-­line therapy; added
to β2-­agonist therapy

Nebulizer: 0.5 mg q6-­8h (tid-­qid) as needed
MDI: 2 puffs qid
1 vial by nebulizer qid

Nebulizer: may mix ipratropium with albuterol

Bronchodilator

For extreme circumstances (e.g., impending
respiratory failure despite high-­dose inhaled
SABA, respiratory failure)

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1406 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 185.17  Management of Asthma Exacerbation (Status Asthmaticus)—cont’d
Adrenalin 1 mg/mL (1:1000)
EpiPen autoinjection device (0.3 mg;
EpiPen Jr 0.15 mg)

IM: 0.01 mg/kg (max dose 0.5 mg); may repeat
after 15-­30 min

Terbutaline

Continuous IV infusion (terbutaline only): 2-­10 μg/kg
loading dose, followed by 0.1-­0.4 μg/kg/min
Titrate in 0.1-­0.2 μg/kg/min increments every
30 min, depending on clinical response.

Brethine 1 mg/mL

Terbutaline is β-­agonist–selective relative to
epinephrine
Monitoring with continuous infusion:
cardiorespiratory monitor, pulse oximetry,
blood pressure, serum potassium
Adverse effects: tremor, tachycardia, palpitations,
arrhythmia, hypertension, headaches,
nervousness, nausea, vomiting, hypoxemia

Other medications
Magnesium sulfate
RISK ASSESSMENT FOR DISCHARGE
Medical stability

Home supervision
Asthma education

25-75 mg/kg over 20 min
Max 2 gm

Flushing, headache, hypotension (rare)

Discharge home if there has been sustained
improvement in symptoms and bronchodilator
treatments are at least 3 hr apart, physical findings
are normal, PEF >70% of predicted or personal
best, and oxygen saturation >92% when
breathing room air
Capability to administer intervention and to
observe and respond appropriately to clinical
deterioration
See Table 185.10

IM, Intramuscular; IV, intravenous; MDI, metered-­dose inhaler; PEF, peak expiratory flow; SABA, short-­acting β-­agonist; V̇/Q̇ , ventilation/perfusion; bid, 2 times daily; tid, 3 times daily;
qid, 4 times daily; qd, every day.

Delivery Devices and Inhalation Technique

Inhaled medications are delivered in aerosolized form in an MDI,
as a DPI formulation, or in a suspension form delivered via a nebulizer. Spacer devices, recommended for the administration of
all MDI medications, are simple and inexpensive tools that (1)
decrease the coordination required to use MDIs, especially in
young children; (2) improve the delivery of inhaled drug to the
lower airways; and (3) minimize the risk of drug and propellant-­
mediated oropharyngeal adverse effects (dysphonia and thrush).
Optimal inhalation technique for each puff of MDI-­delivered medication is a slow (5-­second) inhalation, then a 5–10-­second breath
hold. No waiting time is required between puffs of medication.
Preschool-­age children cannot perform this inhalation technique.
As a result, MDI medications in this age-­group are delivered with a
spacer and mask, using a different technique: Each puff is administered with regular breathing for about 30 seconds or 5-­10 breaths;
a tight seal must be maintained; and talking, coughing, or crying
will blow the medication out of the spacer. This technique will not
deliver as much medication per puff as the optimal MDI technique
used by older children and adults.
DPI devices (e.g., Diskus, Flexhaler, Autohaler, Twisthaler, Aerolizer,
Ellipta) are popular because of their simplicity of use, although adequate
inspiratory flow is needed. DPIs are breath-­actuated devices (the drug
comes out only as it is breathed in), and spacers are not needed. Mouth
rinsing is recommended after ICS use to remove ICS deposited on the
oral mucosa and reduce the swallowed ICS and the risk of thrush.
Nebulizers are the mainstay of aerosol treatment for infants and
young children. An advantage of using nebulizers is the simple technique required of relaxed breathing. The preferential nasal breathing,
small airways, low tidal volume, and high respiratory rate of infants
greatly increase the difficulty of inhaled drug therapy targeting the
lung airways. Disadvantages of nebulizers include the need for a
power source, inconvenience in that treatments take a significantly
longer time, are more expensive, and have the potential for bacterial
contamination.

Asthma Exacerbations and Their Management

Asthma exacerbations are acute or subacute episodes of progressively
worsening symptoms and airflow obstruction. Airflow obstruction during exacerbations can become extensive, resulting in life-­threatening
respiratory insufficiency. Often, asthma exacerbations worsen during
sleep (between midnight and 8 am), when airways inflammation and
hyperresponsiveness are at their peak. Importantly, SABAs, which are
first-­line therapy for asthma symptoms and exacerbations, increase
pulmonary blood flow through obstructed, unoxygenated areas of the
lungs with increasing dosage and frequency. When airways obstruction is not resolved with SABA use, ventilation/perfusion mismatching
can cause hypoxemia, which can perpetuate bronchoconstriction and
further worsen the condition. Severe, progressive asthma exacerbations need to be managed in a medical setting, with administration
of supplemental oxygen as first-­line therapy and close monitoring
for potential worsening. Complications that can occur during severe
exacerbations include atelectasis (common) and air leaks in the chest
(pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax; rare).
A severe exacerbation of asthma that does not improve with standard therapy is termed status asthmaticus. Immediate management
of an asthma exacerbation involves a rapid evaluation of the severity of
obstruction and assessment of risk for further clinical deterioration (Fig.
185.6; see Tables 185.4 and 185.17). For most patients, exacerbations
improve with frequent bronchodilator treatments and a course of systemic (oral or intravenous) corticosteroid. However, the optimal management of a child with an asthma exacerbation should include a more
comprehensive assessment of the events leading up to the exacerbation
and the underlying disease severity. Indeed, the frequency and severity
of asthma exacerbations help define the severity of a patient’s asthma.
Whereas most children who experience life-­threatening asthma episodes
have moderate to severe asthma by other criteria, some children with
asthma appear to have mild disease except when they have severe, even
near-­fatal exacerbations. The biologic, environmental, economic, and
psychosocial risk factors associated with asthma morbidity and death
can further guide this assessment (Table 185.18).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1407
Follow this plan for After Hours patients only. Nurse may decide not to follow this home management plan if:
• Parent does not seem comfortable with or capable of following plan
• Nurse is not comfortable with this plan, based on situation and judgment
• Nurse’s time does not allow for callbacks
In all cases, tell parent to call 9-1-1 if signs of respiratory distress occur during the episode
NOTE: If action plan has already been attempted without success, go to “RED ZONE — poor response” or
“YELLOW ZONE — incomplete response” as symptoms indicate.
Assess symptoms/peak flow

YELLOW ZONE
Mild-to-moderate exacerbation
PEF 50–80% predicted or personal best
or
Signs and symptoms
• Coughing, shortness of breath or chest
tightness (correlate imperfectly with severity
of exacerbation), or
• Unable to sleep at night due to asthma, or
• Decreased ability to perform usual activities
• With or without wheezing

RED ZONE
Severe exacerbation
PEF  50% predicted or personal best or
Signs and symptoms
• Very hard time breathing; constant coughing
• Trouble walking or talking due to asthma (unable to
complete sentences; only using 2- to 3-word phrases)
• Nails blue
• Suprasternal or supraclavicular retractions
• Albuterol not relieving symptoms within 10–15 minutes
• With or without wheezing

Instructions to patient
Inhaled short-acting β2-agonist:
• 2–4 puffs of inhaler or nebulizer treatment every 20 minutes up to 3 times in 1 hour
• Assess asthma symptoms and/or peak flow 15–20 minutes after each treatment
• Nurse to call family after 1 hour
• If patient worsens during treatment, have parent call back immediately or call 9-1-1

GREEN ZONE — Good response
Mild exacerbation
PEF  80% predicted or personal
best
or
Signs and symptoms
• No wheezing, shortness of breath,
cough or chest tightness, and
• Response to β2-agonist
sustained for 4 hours

YELLOW ZONE — Incomplete
response
Moderate exacerbation PEF
50–80% predicted or personal best
or
Signs and symptoms
• Persistent wheezing, shortness of
breath, cough or chest tightness

RED ZONE — Poor response
Severe exacerbation
PEF  50% predicted or personal best
or
Signs and symptoms
• Marked wheezing, shortness of breath,
cough, or chest tightness
• Distress is severe and nonresponsive
• Response to β2-agonist last
 2 hours
Instructions to patient
• Proceed to ED, or call ambulance or
9-1-1 and repeat treatment while
waiting

Instructions to patient
• May continue 2–4 puffs (or
nebulizer) β2-agonist every
3–4 hours for 24–28 hours prn
• For patients on inhaled steroids,
double dose for 7–10 days
• Contact PCP within 48 hours
for instructions

Instructions to patient
• Take 2–4 puffs (or nebulizer) β2agonist every 2–4 hours for 24–48
hours prn
• Add oral steroid*
(see contraindications below)
• Contact PCP urgently
(within 24 hours) for instructions

Instructions to patient
IMMEDIATELY:
• Take 4-6 puffs (or nebulizer) β2agonist
• Start oral steroids* if available (see
contraindications below)
• Instruct parent to call back in 5
minutes after treatment finished
• If still in RED ZONE proceed
to ED, or call ambulance or 9-1-1
and repeat treatment while waiting
• If in YELLOW ZONE, move to
YELLOW ZONE protocol (top left box)

Documentation faxed or given to PCP within 24 hours; phone or verbal contact
sooner as indicated.
* Ask patient about preexisting conditions that may be contraindications to oral
steroids (including type 1 diabetes, active chicken pox, chicken pox exposure or
varicella vaccine within 21 days, MMR within 14 days). If so, nurse to contact PCP
before initiating steroids. Oral steroid dosages: Child: 2 mg/kg/day, maximum
60 mg/day, for 5 days.
Date:
Signature

Fig. 185.6 Algorithm for treatment of acute asthma symptoms. ED, Emergency department; PCP, primary care physician; PEF, peak expiratory
flow. (Courtesy BJC Healthcare/Washington University School of Medicine, Community Asthma Program, January 2000.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1408 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Asthma exacerbations characteristically vary among individuals but
tend to be similar in the same patient. Severe asthma exacerbations,
resulting in respiratory distress, hypoxia, hospitalization, and respiratory failure, are the best predictors of future life-­threatening exacerbations or a fatal asthma episode. In addition to distinguishing such
high-­risk children, some experience exacerbations that develop over
days, with airflow obstruction resulting from progressive inflammation, epithelial sloughing, and cast impaction of small airways. When
such a process is extreme, respiratory failure because of fatigue can
ensue, necessitating mechanical ventilation for numerous days. In contrast, some children experience abrupt-­onset exacerbations that may
result from extreme AHR and physiologic susceptibility to airways closure. Such exacerbations, when extreme, are asphyxial in nature, often
occur outside medical settings, are initially associated with very high
arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2) levels, and tend to
require only brief periods of supportive ventilation. Recognizing the
characteristic differences in asthma exacerbations is important for
optimizing their early management.

Home Management of Asthma Exacerbations

Families of all children with asthma should have a written Asthma
Action Plan (see Fig. 185.5) to guide their recognition and management of exacerbations, along with the necessary education, medications,
and tools to manage them. Early recognition of asthma exacerbations
to intensify treatment early can often prevent further worsening and
keep exacerbations from becoming severe. The NIH guidelines recommend immediate treatment with “rescue” medication (inhaled SABA,
2-­4 puffs, up to 3 times every 20 minutes in 1 hour). A good response is

Table 185.18  Risk Factors for Asthma Morbidity and
Mortality
BIOLOGIC
Previous severe asthma exacerbation (intensive care unit admission,
intubation for asthma)
Sudden asphyxia episodes (respiratory failure, arrest)
Two or more hospitalizations for asthma in past year
Three or more emergency department visits for asthma in past year
Increasing and large diurnal variation in peak flows
Use of >2 canisters of short-­acting β-­agonists per month
Poor response to systemic corticosteroid therapy
Male sex
Low birthweight
Non-White
Sensitivity to Alternaria
ENVIRONMENTAL
Allergen exposure
Environmental tobacco smoke exposure
Air pollution exposure
Urban environment
ECONOMIC AND PSYCHOSOCIAL
Poverty
Crowding
Mother <20 yr old
Mother with less than high school education
Inadequate medical care
Inaccessible
Unaffordable
No regular medical care (only emergency)
Lack of written Asthma Action Plan
No care sought for chronic asthma symptoms
Delay in care of asthma exacerbations
Inadequate hospital care for asthma exacerbation
Psychopathology in the parent or child
Poor perception of asthma symptoms or severity
Alcohol or substance abuse

characterized by resolution of symptoms within 1 hour and no further
symptoms over the next 4 hours. The child’s physician should be contacted for follow-­up, especially if bronchodilators are required repeatedly
over the next 24-­48 hours. If the child has an incomplete response to
initial treatment with rescue medication, a short course of OCS therapy
(for example, prednisone, 1-­2 mg/kg/day [not to exceed 40 mg/day] for
4 days) should be instituted, in addition to inhaled β-­agonist therapy.
The physician should also be contacted for further instructions. Immediate medical attention should be sought for severe exacerbations, persistent signs of respiratory distress, lack of expected response or sustained
improvement after initial treatment, further deterioration, or high-­risk
factors for asthma morbidity or mortality (e.g., previous history of severe
exacerbations). For patients with severe asthma and/or a history of life-­
threatening episodes, especially if abrupt in onset, an epinephrine autoinjector and perhaps portable oxygen at home can be considered. Use of
either of these extreme measures for home management of asthma exacerbations would be an indication to call 911 for emergency support services.

Emergency Department Management of Asthma
Exacerbations

In the ED, the primary goals of asthma management include correction
of hypoxemia, rapid improvement of airflow obstruction, and prevention of progression or recurrence of symptoms. Interventions are based
on clinical severity on arrival, response to initial therapy, and presence
of risk factors associated with asthma morbidity and mortality (see
Table 185.18). Indicators of a severe exacerbation include breathlessness, dyspnea, retractions, accessory muscle use, tachypnea or labored
breathing, cyanosis, mental status changes, a silent chest with poor air
exchange, and severe airflow limitation (PEF or FEV1 value <50% of
personal best or predicted values). Initial treatment includes supplemental oxygen, inhaled β-­agonist therapy every 20 minutes for 1 hour,
and, if necessary, oral, injectable or IV systemic corticosteroids (see
Tables 185.4 and 185.17, and Fig. 185.6). Inhaled ipratropium may be
added to the β-­agonist treatment, especially if no significant response
is seen with the first inhaled β-­agonist treatment. In the ED, single oral,
IV, or intramuscular (IM) dose dexamethasone (0.6 mg/kg, maximum
16 mg) is an effective alternative to prednisone and with a lower incidence of emesis. A second dose of dexamethasone can be given the
next day whether discharged or admitted to the hospital. An IM injection of epinephrine or other β-­agonist may be administered in severe
cases. Oxygen should be administered and continued for at least 20
minutes after SABA administration to compensate for possible ventilation/perfusion abnormalities caused by SABAs.
Close monitoring of clinical status, hydration, and oxygenation are
essential elements of immediate management. A poor response to intensified treatment in the first hour suggests that the exacerbation will not
remit quickly. The patient may be discharged home if there is sustained
improvement in symptoms, normal physical findings, PEF >70% of predicted or personal best, and oxygen saturation >92% while the patient is
breathing room air for 4 hours. Discharge medications include administration of an inhaled β-­agonist up to every 3-­4 hours plus a short course
of an OCS. Optimizing controller therapy before discharge is also recommended. The addition of ICS to a course of OCS in the ED setting
reduces the risk of exacerbation recurrence over the subsequent month.

Hospital Management of Asthma Exacerbations

For patients with severe exacerbations that do not adequately improve
within 1-­2 hours of intensive treatment, observation and/or admission
to the hospital, at least overnight, is likely to be needed. Other indications for hospital admission include high-­risk features for asthma morbidity or death (see Table 185.18). Admission to an ICU is indicated for
patients with severe respiratory distress, poor response to therapy, and
concern for potential respiratory failure and arrest.
Supplemental oxygen, frequent or continuous administration of an
inhaled bronchodilator, and systemic corticosteroid therapy are the
conventional interventions for children admitted to the hospital for
status asthmaticus (see Table 185.17). Supplemental oxygen is administered because many children hospitalized with acute asthma have or
will eventually have hypoxemia, especially at night and with increasing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 185 u Childhood Asthma 1409
SABA administration. SABAs can be delivered frequently (every 20
minutes to 1 hour) or continuously (at 5-­15 mg/hr). When administered continuously, significant systemic absorption of β-­agonist occurs,
and thus continuous nebulization can obviate the need for IV β-­agonist
therapy. Adverse effects of frequently administered β-­agonist therapy
include tremor, irritability, tachycardia, and hypokalemia; lactic acidosis is an uncommon complication. Patients requiring frequent or
continuous nebulized β-­agonist therapy should have ongoing cardiac
monitoring. Because frequent β-­agonist therapy can cause ventilation/
perfusion mismatch and hypoxemia, oximetry is also indicated. Inhaled
ipratropium is often added to albuterol every 6 hours if patients do not
show a remarkable improvement, although there is little evidence to
support its use in hospitalized children receiving aggressive inhaled β-­
agonist therapy and systemic corticosteroids. In addition to its potential
to provide a synergistic effect with a β-­agonist agent in relieving severe
bronchospasm, ipratropium may be beneficial in patients who have
mucus hypersecretion or who are receiving β blockers.
Short-­course systemic corticosteroid therapy is recommended for
use in moderate to severe asthma exacerbations to hasten recovery and
prevent recurrence of symptoms. Studies in children hospitalized with
acute asthma have found corticosteroids administered orally to be as
effective as IV corticosteroids. Accordingly, OCS therapy can often be
used, although children with sustained respiratory distress and those
unable to tolerate oral preparations or liquids are obvious candidates
for IV corticosteroid therapy.
Patients with persistent severe dyspnea and high-­
flow oxygen
requirements require additional evaluation, such as complete blood
count, arterial blood gases, serum electrolytes, and chest radiograph,
to monitor for respiratory insufficiency, comorbidities, infection,
and dehydration. Hydration status monitoring is especially important in infants and young children, whose increased respiratory rate
(insensible losses) and decreased oral intake put them at higher risk
for dehydration. Further complicating this situation is the association
of increased antidiuretic hormone secretion with status asthmaticus.
Administration of fluids at or slightly below maintenance fluid requirements is recommended. Chest physical therapy, incentive spirometry,
and mucolytics are not recommended during asthma exacerbations
because they can trigger severe bronchoconstriction.
Despite intensive therapy, some asthmatic children remain critically ill
and at risk for respiratory failure, intubation, and mechanical ventilation.
Complications (e.g., air leaks) related to asthma exacerbations increase
with intubation and assisted ventilation, so every effort should be made
to relieve bronchospasm and prevent respiratory failure. Several therapies,
including parenteral β-­agonists, magnesium sulfate (25-­75 mg/kg, maximum dose 2.5 g, given intravenously over 20 minutes), and inhaled heliox
(helium and oxygen mixture) have demonstrated some benefit as adjunctive therapies in patients with severe status asthmaticus. Administration of
magnesium sulfate requires monitoring of serum levels and cardiovascular
status. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (e.g., continuous positive
airway pressure [CPAP] or biphasic positive airway pressure [BiPAP])
might improve severe asthma exacerbations through a variety of mechanisms. Their use in the care of children with severe persistent asthma
exacerbations has increased in efforts to avert mechanical ventilation,
even though evidence supporting the intervention has been considered
weak, and current NAEPP and GINA guidelines do not recommend the
intervention. Parenteral (SC, IM, or IV) epinephrine or terbutaline sulfate
may be effective in patients with life-­threatening obstruction that is not
responding to high doses of inhaled β-­agonists, because inhaled medication may not reach the lower airway in such patients.
Rarely, a severe asthma exacerbation in a child results in respiratory
failure, and intubation and mechanical ventilation become necessary.
Mechanical ventilation in severe asthma exacerbations requires the
careful balance of enough pressure to overcome airways obstruction
while reducing hyperinflation, air trapping, and the likelihood of barotrauma (pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum; see Chapter 461). To
minimize the likelihood of such complications, mechanical ventilation
should be anticipated, and asthmatic children at risk for the development
of respiratory failure should be managed in a pediatric ICU. Elective tracheal intubation with rapid-­induction sedatives and paralytic agents is

safer than emergency intubation. Mechanical ventilation aims to achieve
adequate oxygenation while tolerating mild to moderate hypercapnia
(Pco2 50-­70 mm Hg) to minimize barotrauma. As measures to relieve
mucus plugs, chest percussion and airways lavage are not recommended
because they can induce further bronchospasm. One must consider the
nature of asthma exacerbations leading to respiratory failure; those of
rapid or abrupt onset tend to resolve quickly (hours to 2 days), whereas
those that progress gradually to respiratory failure can require days to
weeks of mechanical ventilation. Such prolonged cases are further complicated by corticosteroid-­induced myopathy, which can lead to severe
muscle weakness requiring prolonged rehabilitation.
In children, management of severe exacerbations in medical centers
is usually successful, even when extreme measures are required. Consequently, asthma deaths in children rarely occur in medical centers;
most occur at home or in community settings before lifesaving medical care can be administered. This point highlights the importance of
home and community management of asthma exacerbations, early
intervention measures to keep exacerbations from becoming severe,
and steps to reduce asthma severity. A follow-­up appointment within
1-­2 weeks of a child’s discharge from the hospital after resolution of an
asthma exacerbation should be used to monitor clinical improvement
and to reinforce key educational elements, including action plans and
controller medications.

Special Management Circumstances
Management of Infants and Young Children

Recurrent wheezing episodes in preschool-­age children are common,
occurring in as much as one-­third of this population. Of these, most
improve and even become asymptomatic during the prepubescent
school-­age years, whereas others have lifelong persistent asthma. All
require management of their recurrent wheezing problems. The NIH
guidelines recommend risk assessment to identify preschool-­age children who are likely to have persistent asthma. One implication of this
recommendation is that these at-­risk children may be candidates for
conventional asthma management, including daily controller therapy
and early intervention with exacerbations (see Tables 185.9, 185.10,
185.13, and 185.14). For young children with recurrent episodic
wheeze in the setting of viral illness, a short course of daily high-­
dose ICS may also be considered. For young children with a history
of moderate to severe exacerbations, nebulized budesonide is approved
by the FDA, and its use as a controller medication could prevent subsequent exacerbations.
Using aerosol therapy in infants and young children with asthma
presents unique challenges. There are two delivery systems for inhaled
medications for this age-­group: the nebulizer and the MDI with spacer/
holding chamber and face mask. Multiple studies demonstrate the
effectiveness of both nebulized albuterol in acute episodes and nebulized budesonide in the treatment of recurrent wheezing in infants and
young children. In such young children, inhaled medications administered via MDI with spacer and face mask may be acceptable, although
perhaps not preferred because of limited published information and
lack of FDA approval for children <4 years of age.

Asthma Management During Surgery

Patients with asthma are at risk from disease-­related complications
from surgery, such as bronchoconstriction and asthma exacerbation,
atelectasis, impaired coughing, respiratory infection, and latex exposure, which may induce asthma complications in patients with latex
allergy. All patients with asthma should be evaluated before surgery,
and those who are inadequately controlled should allow time for intensified treatment to improve asthma stability before surgery, if possible.
A systemic corticosteroid course may be indicated for the patient who
is having symptoms and/or FEV1 or PEF values <80% of the patient’s
personal best. In addition, patients who have received >2 weeks of systemic corticosteroid and/or moderate-­to high-­dose ICS therapy may
be at risk for intraoperative adrenal insufficiency. For these patients,
anesthesia services should be alerted to provide “stress” replacement
doses of systemic corticosteroid for the surgical procedure and possibly
the postoperative period.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1410 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
ETIOLOGY

PROGNOSIS

Recurrent coughing and wheezing occur in 35% of preschool-­age
children. Of these, approximately one third continue to have persistent asthma into later childhood, and approximately two thirds
improve on their own through their teen years. Concomitant atopic
disorders (such as allergen sensitization or atopic dermatitis) are associated with greater likelihood of disease persistence. Asthma severity
by ages 7-­10 years is predictive of asthma persistence in adulthood.
Children with moderate to severe asthma and with lower lung function measures are likely to have persistent asthma as adults. Children
with milder asthma and normal lung function are likely to improve
over time, with some becoming periodically asthmatic (disease-­free
for months to years).

PREVENTION

Although chronic airways inflammation may result in pathologic
remodeling of lung airways, conventional antiinflammatory interventions—the cornerstone of asthma control—do not help children outgrow their asthma. Although controller medications reduce asthma
morbidities, most children with moderate to severe asthma continue
to have symptoms into young adulthood. Investigations into the environmental and lifestyle factors responsible for the lower prevalence of
childhood asthma in rural areas and farming communities suggest that
early immunomodulatory intervention might prevent asthma development. A hygiene hypothesis purports that naturally occurring microbial exposures in early life might drive early immune development
away from allergic sensitization, persistent airways inflammation, and
remodeling through early microbiome and innate immune development. If these natural microbial exposures truly have an asthma-­
protective effect, without significant adverse health consequences,
these findings may foster new strategies for asthma prevention.
Several nonpharmacologic measures with numerous positive health
attributes—avoidance of environmental tobacco smoke (beginning
prenatally), prolonged breastfeeding (>4 months), an active lifestyle,
and a healthy diet—might reduce the likelihood of asthma development. Care providers can be strong influencers of smoking cessation
by parents, caregivers, and adolescent patients (see Chapters 157.2 and
759.1). Immunizations are not considered to increase the likelihood of
development of asthma; therefore all standard childhood immunizations are recommended for children with asthma, including varicella,
SARS-­CoV-­2, and annual influenza vaccines.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 186

Atopic Dermatitis
(Atopic Eczema)
Donald Y.M. Leung and Scott H. Sicherer
Atopic dermatitis (AD), or eczema, is the most common chronic
relapsing skin disease seen in infancy and childhood. It affects 10–30%
of children worldwide and frequently occurs in families with other
atopic diseases. Infants with AD are predisposed to the development of
food allergy, allergic rhinitis, and asthma later in childhood, a process
called the atopic march.

AD is a complex genetic disorder that results in a defective skin barrier,
reduced skin innate immune responses, and primarily type 2 adaptive
immune responses to environmental allergens and microbes that lead
to chronic skin inflammation.

PATHOLOGY

Acute AD skin lesions are characterized by spongiosis, or marked
intercellular edema, of the epidermis. In AD, dendritic antigen-­
presenting cells (APCs) in the epidermis, such as Langerhans cells,
exhibit surface-­bound IgE molecules with cell processes that reach
into the upper epidermis to sense allergens and pathogens. These
APCs play an important role in cutaneous responses to type 2 immune
responses (see Chapter 182). There is marked perivascular T-­cell and
inflammatory monocyte-­macrophage infiltration in acute AD lesions.
Chronic, lichenified AD is characterized by a hyperplastic epidermis
with hyperkeratosis and minimal spongiosis. There are predominantly
IgE-­bearing Langerhans cells in the epidermis, and macrophages in the
dermal mononuclear cell infiltrate. Mast cell and eosinophil numbers
are increased, contributing to skin inflammation.

PATHOGENESIS

AD is associated with multiple phenotypes and endotypes that have
overlapping clinical presentations. Atopic eczema is associated with
IgE-­mediated sensitization (at onset or during the course of eczema)
and occurs in 70–80% of patients with AD. Nonatopic eczema is not
associated with IgE-­mediated sensitization and is seen in 20–30% of
patients with AD. Both forms of AD are associated with eosinophilia.
In atopic eczema, circulating T cells expressing the skin homing receptor cutaneous lymphocyte-­associated antigen produce increased levels of T-­helper type 2 (Th2) cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-­4 and
IL-­13, which induce isotype switching to IgE synthesis. Another type 2
cytokine, IL-­5, plays an important role in eosinophil development and
IL-­31 is a key itch cytokine (Fig. 186.1). Nonatopic eczema is associated
with lower IL-­4 and IL-­13 but increased IL-­17 and IL-­23 production
than in atopic eczema. Age has also been found to affect the immune
profile in AD.
Compared with the skin of healthy individuals, both unaffected
skin and acute skin lesions of patients with AD have an increased
number of cells expressing IL-­4, IL-­13, and IL-­31. Chronic AD skin
lesions, by contrast, have fewer cells that express IL-­4 and IL-­13,
but they have more cells that express IL-­5, granulocyte-­macrophage
colony-­stimulating factor, IL-­12, and interferon (IFN)-­γ than acute
AD lesions. Despite increased type 1 and type 17 immune responses
in chronic AD, IL-­4 and IL-­13 as well as other type 2 cytokines (e.g.,
thymic stromal lymphopoietin [TSLP], IL-­31, IL-­33) predominate and
reflect increased numbers of type 2 innate lymphoid cells and Th2 cells.
The infiltration of IL-­22–expressing T cells correlates with severity of
AD, blocks keratinocyte differentiation, and induces epidermal hyperplasia. The importance of IL-­4 and IL-­13 in driving severe persistent
AD has been validated by multiple clinical trials now demonstrating
that biologics blocking IL-­4 and IL-­13 action lead to clinical improvement in moderate to severe AD.
In healthy people, the skin acts as a protective barrier against external irritants, moisture loss, and infection. Proper function of the skin
depends on adequate moisture and lipid content, functional immune
responses, and structural integrity. Severely dry skin is a hallmark of AD.
This results from compromise of the epidermal barrier, which leads to
excess transepidermal water loss, allergen penetration, and microbial
colonization. Filaggrin, a structural protein in the epidermis, and its
breakdown products are critical to skin barrier function, including
moisturization of the skin. Genetic pathogenic variants in the filaggrin
gene (FLG) family have been identified in patients with ichthyosis vulgaris (dry skin, palmar hyperlinearity) and in up to 50% of patients
with severe AD. FLG pathogenic variant is strongly associated with the
development of food allergy and eczema herpeticum. Nonetheless, up
to 60% of carriers of an FLG pathogenic variant do not develop atopic
diseases. Cytokines found in allergic inflammation, such as IL-­4, IL-­13,
IL-­22, and IL-­25, and tumor necrosis factor, can also reduce filaggrin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1410 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
ETIOLOGY

PROGNOSIS

Recurrent coughing and wheezing occur in 35% of preschool-­age
children. Of these, approximately one third continue to have persistent asthma into later childhood, and approximately two thirds
improve on their own through their teen years. Concomitant atopic
disorders (such as allergen sensitization or atopic dermatitis) are associated with greater likelihood of disease persistence. Asthma severity
by ages 7-­10 years is predictive of asthma persistence in adulthood.
Children with moderate to severe asthma and with lower lung function measures are likely to have persistent asthma as adults. Children
with milder asthma and normal lung function are likely to improve
over time, with some becoming periodically asthmatic (disease-­free
for months to years).

PREVENTION

Although chronic airways inflammation may result in pathologic
remodeling of lung airways, conventional antiinflammatory interventions—the cornerstone of asthma control—do not help children outgrow their asthma. Although controller medications reduce asthma
morbidities, most children with moderate to severe asthma continue
to have symptoms into young adulthood. Investigations into the environmental and lifestyle factors responsible for the lower prevalence of
childhood asthma in rural areas and farming communities suggest that
early immunomodulatory intervention might prevent asthma development. A hygiene hypothesis purports that naturally occurring microbial exposures in early life might drive early immune development
away from allergic sensitization, persistent airways inflammation, and
remodeling through early microbiome and innate immune development. If these natural microbial exposures truly have an asthma-­
protective effect, without significant adverse health consequences,
these findings may foster new strategies for asthma prevention.
Several nonpharmacologic measures with numerous positive health
attributes—avoidance of environmental tobacco smoke (beginning
prenatally), prolonged breastfeeding (>4 months), an active lifestyle,
and a healthy diet—might reduce the likelihood of asthma development. Care providers can be strong influencers of smoking cessation
by parents, caregivers, and adolescent patients (see Chapters 157.2 and
759.1). Immunizations are not considered to increase the likelihood of
development of asthma; therefore all standard childhood immunizations are recommended for children with asthma, including varicella,
SARS-­CoV-­2, and annual influenza vaccines.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 186

Atopic Dermatitis
(Atopic Eczema)
Donald Y.M. Leung and Scott H. Sicherer
Atopic dermatitis (AD), or eczema, is the most common chronic
relapsing skin disease seen in infancy and childhood. It affects 10–30%
of children worldwide and frequently occurs in families with other
atopic diseases. Infants with AD are predisposed to the development of
food allergy, allergic rhinitis, and asthma later in childhood, a process
called the atopic march.

AD is a complex genetic disorder that results in a defective skin barrier,
reduced skin innate immune responses, and primarily type 2 adaptive
immune responses to environmental allergens and microbes that lead
to chronic skin inflammation.

PATHOLOGY

Acute AD skin lesions are characterized by spongiosis, or marked
intercellular edema, of the epidermis. In AD, dendritic antigen-­
presenting cells (APCs) in the epidermis, such as Langerhans cells,
exhibit surface-­bound IgE molecules with cell processes that reach
into the upper epidermis to sense allergens and pathogens. These
APCs play an important role in cutaneous responses to type 2 immune
responses (see Chapter 182). There is marked perivascular T-­cell and
inflammatory monocyte-­macrophage infiltration in acute AD lesions.
Chronic, lichenified AD is characterized by a hyperplastic epidermis
with hyperkeratosis and minimal spongiosis. There are predominantly
IgE-­bearing Langerhans cells in the epidermis, and macrophages in the
dermal mononuclear cell infiltrate. Mast cell and eosinophil numbers
are increased, contributing to skin inflammation.

PATHOGENESIS

AD is associated with multiple phenotypes and endotypes that have
overlapping clinical presentations. Atopic eczema is associated with
IgE-­mediated sensitization (at onset or during the course of eczema)
and occurs in 70–80% of patients with AD. Nonatopic eczema is not
associated with IgE-­mediated sensitization and is seen in 20–30% of
patients with AD. Both forms of AD are associated with eosinophilia.
In atopic eczema, circulating T cells expressing the skin homing receptor cutaneous lymphocyte-­associated antigen produce increased levels of T-­helper type 2 (Th2) cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-­4 and
IL-­13, which induce isotype switching to IgE synthesis. Another type 2
cytokine, IL-­5, plays an important role in eosinophil development and
IL-­31 is a key itch cytokine (Fig. 186.1). Nonatopic eczema is associated
with lower IL-­4 and IL-­13 but increased IL-­17 and IL-­23 production
than in atopic eczema. Age has also been found to affect the immune
profile in AD.
Compared with the skin of healthy individuals, both unaffected
skin and acute skin lesions of patients with AD have an increased
number of cells expressing IL-­4, IL-­13, and IL-­31. Chronic AD skin
lesions, by contrast, have fewer cells that express IL-­4 and IL-­13,
but they have more cells that express IL-­5, granulocyte-­macrophage
colony-­stimulating factor, IL-­12, and interferon (IFN)-­γ than acute
AD lesions. Despite increased type 1 and type 17 immune responses
in chronic AD, IL-­4 and IL-­13 as well as other type 2 cytokines (e.g.,
thymic stromal lymphopoietin [TSLP], IL-­31, IL-­33) predominate and
reflect increased numbers of type 2 innate lymphoid cells and Th2 cells.
The infiltration of IL-­22–expressing T cells correlates with severity of
AD, blocks keratinocyte differentiation, and induces epidermal hyperplasia. The importance of IL-­4 and IL-­13 in driving severe persistent
AD has been validated by multiple clinical trials now demonstrating
that biologics blocking IL-­4 and IL-­13 action lead to clinical improvement in moderate to severe AD.
In healthy people, the skin acts as a protective barrier against external irritants, moisture loss, and infection. Proper function of the skin
depends on adequate moisture and lipid content, functional immune
responses, and structural integrity. Severely dry skin is a hallmark of AD.
This results from compromise of the epidermal barrier, which leads to
excess transepidermal water loss, allergen penetration, and microbial
colonization. Filaggrin, a structural protein in the epidermis, and its
breakdown products are critical to skin barrier function, including
moisturization of the skin. Genetic pathogenic variants in the filaggrin
gene (FLG) family have been identified in patients with ichthyosis vulgaris (dry skin, palmar hyperlinearity) and in up to 50% of patients
with severe AD. FLG pathogenic variant is strongly associated with the
development of food allergy and eczema herpeticum. Nonetheless, up
to 60% of carriers of an FLG pathogenic variant do not develop atopic
diseases. Cytokines found in allergic inflammation, such as IL-­4, IL-­13,
IL-­22, and IL-­25, and tumor necrosis factor, can also reduce filaggrin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 186 u Atopic Dermatitis (Atopic Eczema) 1411
Non-lesional

Acute

Allergens

Itch

Epidermis

Keratinocyte

Scratch
Sensory neuron

*

Disrupted
barrier

Chronic

*

LC
Dermis

Barrier disruption
↓Differentiation
↓Filaggrin
↓Loricrin
↓Involucrin

Microbiome
(S aureus)

Lichenification

↑Cytokines
↑Chemokines

Barrier inhibition

DC
↑Epidermal
hyperplasia

IL-4 IL-13

↑Th1 products

AD-DC
IL-4
Th0
Th2

ThO

IL-4

*
*

Th2
↑PDE4 activity in T cells
leads to ↑ in cytokine mediators

B cell

Th22

IL-4

Lymph node

AD-DC
Basophil

Blood vessel

IgE

Mast cell

Th0

Th1

Eosinophil

Fig. 186.1 Pathogenic pathways and immunologic targets in atopic dermatitis (AD). Skin barrier defects in nonlesional atopic dermatitis leads

to penetration by allergens, which encounter antigen-­presenting Langerhans cells (LCs) in the epidermis and dendritic cells (DCs) in the dermis,
resulting in immune activation and inflammatory cell recruitment. Elevated T-­helper type 2 (Th2) cell counts in the acute state leads to increased
secretion of cytokines, especially interleukin (IL)-­4 and IL-­13, which disrupt the skin barrier by decreasing expression of barrier proteins (i.e., filaggrin,
loricrin, and involucrin). In addition, Th2 cytokines recruit eosinophils and basophils to lesional sites, and increase B-­cell IgE production. Eosinophils,
basophils, and activated IgE-­bound mast cells release proinflammatory mediators, further potentiating pathogenesis. Th2 cytokines also impair antimicrobial peptide responses to pathogens which, in combination with barrier disruption, increases the risk of colonization and barrier penetration by
allergens and pathogens (i.e., Staphylococcus aureus). Chronic atopic dermatitis results in a skewed Th1 response, leading to further inflammation
and immune activation. Processes mediated by Janus kinase (JAK) receptors are marked with a green asterisk. PDE4, phosphodiesterase-­4. (From
Vahharia PP, Silverberg JI. New and emerging therapies for paediatric atopic dermatitis. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2019;3:343–352.)

and other epidermal proteins and lipids. AD patients are at increased
risk of bacterial, viral, and fungal infection related to impairment of
innate immunity, disturbances in the microbiome, skin epithelial dysfunction, and overexpression of polarized immune pathways, which
dampen host antimicrobial responses. Patients with the combination
of AD and food allergy have significantly lower levels of filaggrin and
increased type 2 immune activation than patients with AD only.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

AD typically begins in infancy. Approximately 50% of patients experience symptoms in the first year of life, and an additional 30% are diagnosed between 1 and 5 years of age. Intense pruritus, especially at night,
and cutaneous reactivity are the cardinal features of AD. Scratching
and excoriation cause increased skin inflammation that contributes to
the development of more pronounced eczematous skin lesions. Foods
(cow’s milk, egg, peanut, tree nuts, soy, wheat, fish, shellfish), aeroallergens (pollen, grass, animal dander, dust mites), infection (Staphylococcus aureus, herpes simplex, coxsackievirus, molluscum), reduced
humidity, excessive sweating, and irritants (wool, acrylic, soaps, toiletries, fragrances, detergents) can trigger pruritus and scratching.
Acute AD skin lesions are intensely pruritic with erythematous
papules (Figs. 186.2 and 186.3). Subacute dermatitis manifests as erythematous, excoriated, scaling papules. In contrast, chronic AD is characterized by lichenification (Fig. 186.4), or thickening of the skin with
accentuated surface markings, and fibrotic papules. In chronic AD, all

three types of skin reactions may coexist in the same individual. Most
patients with AD have dry, lackluster skin regardless of their stage of
illness. Skin reaction pattern and distribution vary with the patient’s
age and disease activity. AD is generally more acute in infancy and
involves the face, scalp, and extensor surfaces of the extremities. The
diaper area is usually spared. Older children and children with chronic
AD have lichenification and localization of the rash to the flexural folds
of the extremities. AD can go into remission as the patient grows older;
however, many children with AD have persistent eczema as an adult
(see Fig. 186.2C).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

There are no specific laboratory tests to diagnose AD. Many patients
have peripheral blood eosinophilia, increased serum IgE levels, and
T cells expressing type 2 cytokines. Serum IgE measurement or skin-­
prick testing can identify the allergens (foods, inhalant/microbial allergens) to which patients are sensitized. The diagnosis of clinical allergy
to these allergens requires confirmation by history and environmental
challenges.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

AD is diagnosed on the basis of three major features: pruritus, an
eczematous dermatitis that fits into a typical pattern of skin inflammation, and a chronic or chronically relapsing course (Table 186.1).
Associated features, such as a family history of asthma, hay fever, food

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1412 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

A

B

C
Fig. 186.2 Typical clinical appearance and locations of atopic dermatitis at different ages. A, In infants, atopic dermatitis is generally acute, with
lesions mainly on the face and the extensor surfaces of the limbs. The trunk might be affected, but the napkin area is typically spared. B, From age
1-­2 years onward, polymorphous manifestations with different types of skin lesions are seen, particularly in flexural folds. C, Adolescents and adults
often present lichenified and excoriated plaques at flexures, wrists, ankles, and eyelids; in the head and neck type, the upper trunk, shoulders, and
scalp are involved. Adults might have only chronic hand eczema or present with prurigo-­like lesions. (From Weidinger S, Novak N. Atopic dermatitis.
Lancet. 2016;387:1111.)

allergy, elevated IgE, and immediate skin test reactivity, reinforce the
diagnosis of AD.
Many inflammatory skin diseases, immunodeficiencies, skin
malignancies, genetic disorders, infectious diseases, and infestations share symptoms with AD and should be considered and
excluded before a diagnosis of AD is established (Tables 186.2 and
186.3). Severe combined immunodeficiency (see Chapter 165.1)
should be considered for infants presenting in the first year of life
with diarrhea, failure to thrive, generalized scaling rash, and recurrent cutaneous and/or systemic infection. Histiocytosis should be
excluded in any infant with AD and failure to thrive (see Chapter
556). Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, an X-­linked recessive disorder
associated with thrombocytopenia, immune defects, and recurrent
severe bacterial infections, is characterized by a rash almost indistinguishable from that in AD (see Chapter 165.4). One of the hyper-­
IgE syndromes is characterized by markedly elevated serum IgE
values, recurrent deep-­seated bacterial infections, chronic dermatitis, and refractory dermatophytosis. Many of these patients have
disease as a result of autosomal dominant STAT3 pathogenic variants. In contrast, some patients with hyper-­IgE syndrome present
with increased susceptibility to viral infections and an autosomal
recessive pattern of disease inheritance. These patients may have
a dedicator of cytokinesis 8 gene (DOCK8) pathogenic variants.
This diagnosis should be considered in young children with severe
eczema, food allergy, and disseminated skin viral infections.

Adolescents who present with an eczematous dermatitis but no history of childhood eczema, respiratory allergy, or atopic family history
may have allergic contact dermatitis. A contact allergen may be the
problem in any patient whose AD does not respond to appropriate
therapy. Sensitizing chemicals, such as parabens and lanolin, can be
irritants for patients with AD and are commonly found as vehicles in
therapeutic topical agents. Topical glucocorticoid contact allergy has
been reported in patients with chronic dermatitis receiving topical corticosteroid therapy. Eczematous dermatitis has also been reported with
HIV infection as well as with a variety of infestations such as scabies.
Other conditions that can be confused with AD include psoriasis, ichthyosis, and seborrheic dermatitis.

TREATMENT

The treatment of AD requires a systematic, multifaceted approach that
incorporates skin moisturization, topical antiinflammatory therapy,
identification and elimination of flare factors (Table 186.4), and, if necessary, systemic therapy (Fig. 186.5). Assessment of the severity also
helps direct therapy (Table 186.5; see Fig. 186.5).

Cutaneous Hydration

Because patients with AD have impaired skin barrier function from
reduced filaggrin and skin lipid levels, they present with diffuse, abnormally dry skin, or xerosis. Moisturizers are first-­line therapy. Lukewarm soaking baths or showers for 15-­20 minutes followed by the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 186 u Atopic Dermatitis (Atopic Eczema) 1413
Table 186.1  Clinical Features of Atopic Dermatitis
MAJOR FEATURES
Pruritus
Facial and extensor eczema in infants and children
Flexural eczema in adolescents
Chronic or relapsing dermatitis
Personal or family history of atopic disease
ASSOCIATED FEATURES
Xerosis
Cutaneous infections (Staphylococcus aureus, group A streptococcus,
herpes simplex, coxsackievirus, vaccinia, molluscum, warts)
Nonspecific dermatitis of the hands or feet
Ichthyosis, palmar hyperlinearity, keratosis pilaris
Nipple eczema
White dermatographism and delayed blanch response
Anterior subcapsular cataracts, keratoconus
Elevated serum IgE levels
Positive results of immediate-­type allergy skin tests
Early age at onset
Dennie lines (Dennie-­Morgan infraorbital folds)
Facial erythema or pallor
Course influenced by environmental and/or emotional factors
Lichenification
Perioral, periauricular sites
Prurigo

Fig. 186.3 Crusted lesions of atopic dermatitis on the face. (From
Eichenfield LF, Friedan IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001. p 242.)

therapy. Wet dressing therapy can be complicated by maceration and
secondary infection and should be closely monitored by a physician.

Topical Corticosteroids

Fig. 186.4 Lichenification of the popliteal fossa from chronic rubbing

of the skin in atopic dermatitis. (From Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli JG.
Color Textbook of Pediatric Dermatology. 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby;
1996. p 33.)

application of an occlusive emollient to retain moisture provide symptomatic relief. Hydrophilic ointments of varying degrees of viscosity
can be used according to the patient’s preference. Occlusive ointments
are sometimes not well tolerated because of interference with the function of the eccrine sweat ducts and may induce the development of
folliculitis. In these patients, less occlusive agents should be used. Several prescription (classified as a medical device) “therapeutic moisturizers” or “barrier creams” are available, containing components such
as ceramides and filaggrin acid metabolites intended to improve skin
barrier function. There are minimal data demonstrating their efficacy
over standard emollients.
Hydration by baths or wet dressings promotes transepidermal penetration of topical glucocorticoids. Dressings may also serve as effective barriers against persistent scratching, in turn promoting healing of
excoriated lesions. Wet dressings are recommended for use on severely
affected or chronically involved areas of dermatitis refractory to skin
care. It is critical that wet dressing therapy be followed by topical
emollient application to avoid potential drying and fissuring from the

Topical corticosteroids are the cornerstone of antiinflammatory treatment for acute exacerbations of AD. Patients should be carefully
instructed on their use of topical glucocorticoids to avoid potential
adverse effects. There are seven classes of topical glucocorticoids,
ranked according to their potency, as determined by vasoconstrictor assays (Table 186.6). Because of their potential adverse effects, the
ultra-­high-­potency glucocorticoids should not be used on the face or
intertriginous areas and should be used only for very short periods on
the trunk and extremities. Mid-­potency glucocorticoids can be used
for longer periods to treat chronic AD involving the trunk and extremities. Long-­term control can be maintained with twice-­weekly applications of topical fluticasone or mometasone to areas that have healed
but are prone to relapse, once control of AD is achieved after a daily
regimen of topical corticosteroids. Compared with creams, ointments
have a greater potential to occlude the epidermis, resulting in enhanced
systemic absorption.
Adverse effects of topical glucocorticoids can be divided into local
adverse effects and systemic adverse effects, the latter resulting from
suppression of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­adrenal axis. Local adverse
effects include the development of striae and skin atrophy. Systemic
adverse effects are related to the potency of the topical corticosteroid,
site of application, occlusiveness of the preparation, percentage of the
body surface area covered, and length of use. The potential for adrenal
suppression from potent topical corticosteroids is greatest in infants
and young children with severe AD requiring intensive therapy.

Topical Calcineurin Inhibitors

The nonsteroidal topical calcineurin inhibitors are effective in reducing
AD skin inflammation. Pimecrolimus cream 1% (Elidel) is indicated
for mild to moderate AD. Tacrolimus ointment 0.1% and 0.03% (Protopic) is indicated for moderate to severe AD. Both are approved for
short-­term or intermittent long-­term treatment of AD in patients ≥2
years whose disease is unresponsive to or who are intolerant of other
conventional therapies or for whom these therapies are inadvisable

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1414 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 186.2  Differential Diagnosis of Atopic Dermatitis
MAIN AGE GROUP AFFECTED

FREQUENCY*

OTHER TYPES OF DERMATITIS
Seborrheic dermatitis

Infants

Common

Seborrheic dermatitis

Adults

Common

Nummular dermatitis

Children and adults

Common

Irritant contact dermatitis

Children and adults

Common

Allergic contact dermatitis

Children and adults

Common

Lichen simplex chronicus

Adults

Uncommon

Asteatotic eczema

Adults

Common

INFECTIOUS SKIN DISEASES
Dermatophyte infection

Children and adults

Common

Impetigo

Children

Common

Scabies

Children

Common†

HIV

Children and adults

Uncommon

CONGENITAL IMMUNODEFICIENCIES (SEE TABLE 186.3)
KERATINIZATION DISORDERS
Ichthyosis vulgaris
Infants and adults

NUTRITIONAL DEFICIENCY–METABOLIC DISORDERS
Zinc deficiency (acrodermatitis
Children
enteropathica)

CHARACTERISTICS AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Salmon-­red greasy scaly lesions, often on the scalp
(cradle cap) and napkin area; generally presents in
the first 6 wk of life; typically clears within weeks
Erythematous patches with yellow, white, or grayish
scales in seborrheic areas, particularly the scalp,
central face, and anterior chest
Coin-­shaped scaly patches, mostly on legs and
buttocks; usually no itch
Acute to chronic eczematous lesions, mostly confined
to the site of exposure; history of locally applied
irritants is a risk factor; might coexist with AD
Eczematous rash with maximum expression at sites of
direct exposure but might spread; history of locally
applied irritants is a risk factor; might coexist with AD
One or more localized, circumscribed, lichenified
plaques that result from repetitive scratching or
rubbing because of intense itch
Scaly, fissured patches of dermatitis overlying dry
skin, most often on lower legs
One or more demarcated scaly plaques with central
clearing and slightly raised reddened edge;
variable itch
Demarcated erythematous patches with blisters or
honey-­yellow crusting
Itchy superficial burrows and pustules on palms and
soles, between fingers, and on genitalia; might
produce secondary eczematous changes
Seborrhea-­like rash

Uncommon

Dry skin with fine scaling, particularly on the lower
abdomen and extensor areas; perifollicular skin
roughening; palmar hyperlinearity; full form
(i.e., 2 FLG pathogenic variants) is uncommon;
often coexists with AD

Uncommon

Erythematous scaly patches and plaques, most often
around the mouth and anus; rare congenital form
accompanied by diarrhea and alopecia
Scaly periorofacial dermatitis, alopecia, conjunctivitis,
lethargy, hypotonia
Scaly crusted epidermis, desquamation, sun-­exposed
areas, diarrhea

Biotin deficiency (nutritional or
biotinidase deficiency)
Pellagra (niacin deficiency)

Infants

Uncommon

All ages

Uncommon

Kwashiorkor

Infants and children

Phenylketonuria

Infants

Geographic
dependent
Uncommon

Flaky scaly dermatitis, swollen limbs with cracked
peeling patches
Eczematous rash, hypopigmentation, blonde hair,
developmental delay

NEOPLASTIC DISEASE
Cutaneous T-­cell lymphoma

Adults

Uncommon

Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Infants

Uncommon

Erythematous pink-­brown macules and plaques
with a fine scale; poorly responsive to topical
corticosteroids; variable itch (in early stages)
Scaly and purpuric dermatosis, hepatosplenomegaly,
cytopenias

*Common = approximately 1 in 10 to 1 in 100; uncommon = 1 in 100 to 1 in 1,000; rare = 1 in 1,000 to 1 in 10,000; very rare = <1 in 10,000.
†Especially in developing countries.
AD, Atopic dermatitis; FLG, filaggrin gene.

because of potential risks. Topical calcineurin inhibitors may be better
than topical corticosteroids in the treatment of patients whose AD is
poorly responsive to topical steroids, patients with steroid phobia, and
those with face and neck dermatitis, in whom ineffective, low-­potency
topical corticosteroids are typically used because of fears of steroid-­
induced skin atrophy.

Phosphodiesterase Inhibitor

Crisaborole (Eucrisa) is an approved nonsteroidal topical antiinflammatory phosphodiesterase-­
4 (PDE-­
4) inhibitor indicated for the
treatment of mild to moderate AD of children 3 months or older. It
may be used as an alternative to topical corticosteroids or calcineurin
inhibitors.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 186 u Atopic Dermatitis (Atopic Eczema) 1415
Table 186.3  Features of Primary Immunodeficiencies Associated with Eczematous Dermatitis
DISEASE

GENE

INHERITANCE

CLINICAL FEATURES

LAB ABNORMALITIES

AD-­HIES

STAT3

AD, less commonly
sporadic

Cold abscesses
Recurrent sinopulmonary infections
Mucocutaneous candidiasis
Coarse facies
Minimal trauma fractures
Scoliosis
Joint hyperextensibility
Retained primary teeth
Coronary artery tortuosity or dilation
Lymphoma

High IgE (>2,000 IU/μL)
Eosinophilia

DOCK8
deficiency

DOCK8

AR

Severe mucocutaneous viral infections
Mucocutaneous candidiasis
Atopic features (asthma, allergies)
Squamous cell carcinoma
Lymphoma

High IgE
Eosinophilia
With or without decreased IgM

PGM3
deficiency

PGM3

AR

Neurologic abnormalities
Leukocytoclastic vasculitis
Atopic features (asthma, allergies)
Sinopulmonary infections
Mucocutaneous viral infections

High IgE
Eosinophilia

WAS

WASP

XLR

Hepatosplenomegaly
Lymphadenopathy
Atopic diathesis
Autoimmune conditions (especially hemolytic
anemia)
Lymphoreticular malignancies

Thrombocytopenia (<80,000/μL)
Low mean platelet volume
Eosinophilia is common
Lymphopenia
Low IgM, variable IgG

SCID

Variable,
depends on
type

XLR and AR most
common

Recurrent, severe infections
Failure to thrive
Persistent diarrhea
Recalcitrant oral candidiasis
Omenn syndrome: lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly, erythroderma

Lymphopenia common
Variable patterns of reduced
lymphocyte subsets (T, B, natural
killer cells)
Omenn syndrome: high
lymphocytes, eosinophilia, high IgE

IPEX

FOXP3

XLR

Severe diarrhea (autoimmune enteropathy)
Various autoimmune endocrinopathies
(especially diabetes mellitus, thyroiditis)
Food allergies

High IgE
Eosinophilia
Various autoantibodies

Netherton
syndrome

SPINK5

AR

Hair shaft abnormalities
Erythroderma
Ichthyosis linearis circumflexa
Food allergies
Recurrent gastroenteritis
Neonatal hypernatremic dehydration
Upper and lower respiratory infections

High IgE
Eosinophilia

AD, Autosomal dominant; AD-­HIES, autosomal-­dominant hyper-­IgE syndrome; AR, autosomal recessive; DOCK8, dedicator of cytokinesis 8 gene; IPEX, immune dysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked syndrome; PGM3, phosphoglucomutase 3; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; WAS, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome; XLR, X-­linked recessive.
From Kliegman RM, Bordini BJ, eds. Undiagnosed and rare diseases in children. Pediatr Clin N Amer. 2017;64(1):41–42.

Tar Preparations

Coal tar preparations have antipruritic and antiinflammatory effects
on the skin; however, their antiinflammatory effects are usually not as
pronounced as those of topical glucocorticoids or calcineurin inhibitors. Therefore topical tar preparations are not a preferred approach
for management of AD. Tar shampoos can be particularly beneficial
for scalp dermatitis. Adverse effects associated with tar preparations
include skin irritation, folliculitis, and photosensitivity.

Antihistamines

Systemic antihistamines act primarily by blocking the histamine H1
receptors in the dermis, thereby reducing histamine-­induced pruritus.
Histamine is only one of many mediators that induce pruritus of the
skin, so patients may derive minimal benefit from antihistaminic therapy. Because pruritus is usually worse at night, sedating antihistamines
(hydroxyzine, diphenhydramine) may offer an advantage with their
soporific side effects when used at bedtime. Doxepin hydrochloride has
both tricyclic antidepressant and H1-­and H2-­receptor blocking effects.

Short-­term use of a sedative to allow adequate rest may be appropriate
in cases of severe nocturnal pruritus. Studies of nonsedating antihistamines have shown variable effectiveness in controlling pruritus in AD,
although they may be useful in the small subset of patients with AD
and concomitant urticaria. For children, melatonin may be effective in
promoting sleep because production is deficient in AD.

Systemic Corticosteroids

Systemic corticosteroids are rarely indicated in the treatment of chronic
AD. The dramatic clinical improvement that may occur with systemic
corticosteroids is frequently associated with a severe rebound flare of AD
after therapy discontinuation. Short courses of oral corticosteroids may be
appropriate for an acute exacerbation of AD while other treatment measures are being instituted in parallel. If a short course of oral corticosteroids is given, as during an asthma exacerbation, it is important to taper
the dosage and begin intensified skin care, particularly with topical corticosteroids, and frequent bathing, followed by application of emollients or
proactive topical corticosteroids, to prevent rebound flaring of AD.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1416 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 186.4  Counseling and Aggravating Factors for
Patients with Atopic Dermatitis
Maintain cool temperature in bedroom, and avoid too many bed
covers.
Increase emollient use with cold weather.
Avoid exposure to herpes sores; urgent visit if flare of unusual
aspect.
Clothing: Avoid skin contact with irritating fibers (wool, large-­fiber
textiles).
Do not use tight and too-­warm clothing to avoid excessive
sweating.
New, nonirritating clothing designed for AD children is being
evaluated.
Tobacco: Avoid exposure.
Vaccines: Normal schedule in noninvolved skin, including
egg-­allergic patients (see text).
Sun exposure: No specific restriction.
Usually helpful because of improvement of epidermal barrier.
Encourage summer holidays in altitude or at beach resorts.
Physical exercise, sports: No restriction.
If sweating induces flares of AD, progressive adaptation to
exercise.
Shower and emollients after swimming pool.
Food allergens:
Maintain breastfeeding exclusively to 4-­6 mo if possible.
Consider evaluation for early introduction of allergens (see
Chapter 192).
Otherwise normal diet, unless an allergy workup has proved the
need to exclude a specific food.
Indoor aeroallergens: House dust mites.
Use adequate ventilation of housing; keep the rooms well aerated
even in winter.
Avoid wall-­to-­wall carpeting.
Remove dust with a wet sponge.
Vacuum floors and upholstery with an adequately filtered cleaner
once a week.
Avoid soft toys in bed (cradle), except washable ones.
Wash bedsheets at a temperature higher than 55°C (131°F) every
10 days.
Use bed and pillow encasings made of Gore-­Tex or similar material.
Furred pets: Advise to avoid. If allergy is demonstrated, be firm on
avoidance measures, such as pet removal.
Pollen: Close windows during peak pollen season on warm and dry
weather days and restrict, if possible, time outdoors.
Windows may be open at night and early in the morning or during
rainy weather.
Avoid exposure to risk situations (lawn mowing).
Use pollen filters in motor vehicles.
Clothes and pets can vectorize aeroallergens, including pollen.
Adapted from Darsow U, Wollenberg A, Simon D, et al. ETFAD/EADV Eczema Task
Force 2009 position paper on diagnosis and treatment of atopic dermatitis. J Eur Acad
Dermatol Venereol. 2010;24:321.

Dupilumab

A monoclonal antibody that binds to the IL-­4 receptor α subunit, dupilumab (Dupixent) inhibits the signaling of IL-­4 and IL-­13, cytokines
associated with AD. In children with moderate to severe AD not controlled by standard topical therapy, dupilumab reduces pruritus and
improves skin clearing. Dupilumab is approved for children 6 years or
older. Lebrikizumab, an IgG4 monoclonal antibody that targets IL-13,
has shown efficacy in adolescents and adults with moderate to severe
atopic dermatitis.

Phototherapy

Natural sunlight is often beneficial to patients with AD as long as
sunburn and excessive sweating are avoided. Many phototherapy
modalities are effective for AD, including ultraviolet A-­
1, ultraviolet B, narrow-­band ultraviolet B, and psoralen plus ultraviolet A.

Patient presents with
an eczematous
pruritic dermatitis

Patient meets diagnostic
criteria for AD?
No

Yes

Is AD
severe?

Consider other
conditions as per
differential
diagnosis?

No
Yes
• Identification and elimination of exacerbating factors
(irritants, proven allergens)
• Addressing psychosocial aspects/quality-of-life issues
• Education
• Hydration
• Moisturizers
• Topical corticosteroids (low to mid potency)
• Topical calcineurin inhibitors*
• Topical PDE4 inhibitor
• Anti-infective therapy
• Anti-pruritic therapy
• Written care plan

Management
successful?

Yes

Periodic follow-up
• Review treatment plan
• Consider maintenance
therapy with topical
immunomodulators

No

No

Reassess: Is
diagnosis of
AD correct?

Yes

Consultation with AD specialist
• Intensification of treatment
measures discussed above
• Consider
Culture and sensitivity of skin
lesion
(R/o MRSA)
Wet wrap therapy
Dupilumab**
Hospitalization
UV light therapy
Systemic immunosuppressives
Possibly oral or topical JAK
inhibitors

Fig. 186.5 Approach to the patient with atopic dermatitis (AD). *Per

boxed warning: second-­line, intermittent therapy for patients ≥2 years
of age. **Approved for patients ≥12 years of age with moderate to
severe AD. JAK, Janus kinase; MRSA; methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus; PDE, phosphodiesterase; UV, ultraviolet. (Modified from
Boguniewicz M, Fonacier L, Leung DYM. Atopic dermatitis and allergic
contact dermatitis. In Hershey GKK, Sheikh A, O’Hehir RE, Holgate ST,
eds. Allergy Essentials. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022. Fig 11.5.)

Phototherapy is generally reserved for patients in whom standard
treatments fail. Maintenance treatments are usually required for phototherapy to be effective. Short-­term adverse effects with phototherapy
include erythema, skin pain, pruritus, and pigmentation. Long-­term
adverse effects include predisposition to cutaneous malignancies.

Cyclosporine

Cyclosporine is a potent immunosuppressive drug that acts primarily on
T cells by suppressing cytokine gene transcription and has been shown
to be effective in the control of severe AD. Cyclosporine forms a complex
with an intracellular protein, cyclophilin, and this complex in turn inhibits calcineurin, a phosphatase required for activation of nuclear factor of
activated T cells (NFAT), a transcription factor necessary for cytokine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 186 u Atopic Dermatitis (Atopic Eczema) 1417
Table 186.5  Categorization of Physical Severity of Atopic
Eczema
Clear: Normal skin, with no evidence of atopic eczema
Mild: Areas of dry skin, infrequent itching (with or without small areas
of redness)
Moderate: Areas of dry skin, frequent itching, redness (with or without
excoriation and localized skin thickening)
Severe: Widespread areas of dry skin, incessant itching, redness (with
or without excoriation, extensive skin thickening, bleeding, oozing,
cracking, and alteration of pigmentation)
From Lewis-­Jones S, Mugglestone MA, Guideline Development Group. Management
of atopic eczema in children aged up to 12 years: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ.
2007;335:1263–1264.

gene transcription. Cyclosporine (5 mg/kg/day) for short-­term and long-­
term (1 year) use has been beneficial for children with severe, refractory
AD. Possible adverse effects include renal impairment and hypertension.

Janus Kinase Inhibitors

Oral and topical Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors have demonstrated
rapid improvement in adults and older children with severe AD.
These inhibitors also have potential side effects including infections (tuberculosis), malignancy (cutaneous lymphoma), and
headaches. Topical therapy is effective and has fewer side effects.
Clinical trials are in progress to address the efficacy and safely of
JAK inhibitors.

Antimetabolites

Mycophenolate mofetil is a purine biosynthesis inhibitor used as an
immunosuppressant in organ transplantation that has been used for
treatment of refractory AD. Aside from immunosuppression, herpes
simplex retinitis and dose-­related bone marrow suppression have been
reported with its use. Of note, not all patients benefit from treatment.
Therefore mycophenolate mofetil should be discontinued if the disease
does not respond within 4-­8 weeks.
Methotrexate is an antimetabolite with potent inhibitory
effects on inflammatory cytokine synthesis and cell chemotaxis.
Methotrexate has been used for patients with recalcitrant AD.
In AD, dosing is more frequent than the weekly dosing used for
psoriasis.
Azathioprine is a purine analog with antiinflammatory and antiproliferative effects that has been used for severe AD. Myelosuppression
is a significant adverse effect, and thiopurine methyltransferase levels
may identify individuals at risk.
Before any of these drugs are used, patients should be referred to
an AD specialist who is familiar with treatment of severe AD to weigh
relative benefits of alternative therapies.

Unproven Therapies

Other therapies may be considered in patients with refractory AD.

Interferon-­γ

IFN-­γ is known to suppress Th2-­cell function. Several studies, including a multicenter, double-­
blind, placebo-­
controlled trial and several open trials, have demonstrated that treatment with recombinant
human IFN-­γ results in clinical improvement of AD. Reduction in
clinical severity of AD correlated with the ability of IFN-­γ to decrease
total circulating eosinophil counts. Influenza-­like symptoms are common side effects during the treatment course.

Omalizumab

Treatment of patients who have severe AD and elevated serum IgE
values with monoclonal anti-­IgE may be considered in those with
allergen-­induced flares of AD. However, there have been no published
double-­blind, placebo-­controlled trials supporting omalizumab as a
preferred therapy for moderate to severe AD. Most reports show inconsistent responses to anti-­IgE.

Table 186.6  Selected Topical Corticosteroid Preparations*
GROUP 1
Clobetasol propionate (Temovate) 0.05% ointment/cream
Betamethasone dipropionate (Diprolene) 0.05% ointment/lotion/gel
Fluocinonide (Vanos) 0.1% cream
GROUP 2
Mometasone furoate (Elocon) 0.1% ointment
Halcinonide (Halog) 0.1% cream
Fluocinonide (Lidex) 0.05% ointment/cream
Desoximetasone (Topicort) 0.25% ointment/cream
Betamethasone dipropionate (Diprolene) 0.05% cream
GROUP 3
Fluticasone propionate (Cutivate) 0.005% ointment
Halcinonide (Halog) 0.1% ointment
Betamethasone valerate (Valisone) 0.1% ointment
GROUP 4
Mometasone furoate (Elocon) 0.1% cream
Triamcinolone acetonide (Kenalog) 0.1% ointment/cream
Fluocinolone acetonide (Synalar) 0.025% ointment
GROUP 5
Fluocinolone acetonide (Synalar) 0.025% cream
Hydrocortisone valerate (Westcort) 0.2% ointment
GROUP 6
Desonide (DesOwen) 05% ointment/cream/lotion
Alclometasone dipropionate (Aclovate) 0.05% ointment/cream
GROUP 7
Hydrocortisone (Hytone) 2.5%, 1%, 0.5% ointment/cream/lotion
*Representative corticosteroids are listed by group from 1 (superpotent) through 7
(least potent).
Adapted from Stoughton RB. Vasoconstrictor assay-­specific applications. In: Malbach
HI, Surber C, eds. Topical Corticosteroids. Basel, Switzerland: Karger; 1992. p 42–53.

Allergen Immunotherapy

In contrast to its acceptance for treatment of allergic rhinitis and
extrinsic asthma, immunotherapy with aeroallergens in the treatment
of AD is controversial. There are reports of both disease exacerbation
and improvement. Studies suggest that specific immunotherapy in
patients with AD sensitized to dust mite allergen showed improvement in severity of skin disease, as well as reduction in topical corticosteroid use.

Probiotics

Perinatal administration of the probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus
strain GG has been shown to reduce the incidence of AD in at-­risk
children during the first 2 years of life. The treatment response has been
found to be more pronounced in patients with positive skin-­prick test
results and elevated IgE values. Other studies have not demonstrated
a benefit.

Chinese Herbal Medications

Several placebo-­
controlled clinical trials have suggested that
patients with severe AD may benefit from treatment with traditional
Chinese herbal therapy. The patients had significantly reduced skin
disease and decreased pruritus. The beneficial response of Chinese
herbal therapy is often temporary, and effectiveness may wear off
despite continued treatment. The possibility of hepatic toxicity, cardiac side effects, or idiosyncratic reactions remains a concern. The
specific ingredients of the herbs also remain to be elucidated, and
some preparations have been found to be contaminated with corticosteroids. At present, Chinese herbal therapy for AD is considered
investigational.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1418 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Vitamin D

Vitamin D deficiency often accompanies severe AD. Vitamin D
enhances skin barrier function, reduces corticosteroid requirements to
control inflammation, and augments skin antimicrobial function. Several small clinical studies suggest vitamin D can enhance antimicrobial peptide expression in the skin and reduce severity of skin disease,
especially in patients with low baseline vitamin D, as during winter,
when exacerbation of AD often occurs. Patients with AD might benefit
from supplementation with vitamin D, particularly if they have a documented low level or low vitamin D intake.

AVOIDING TRIGGERS

It is essential to identify and eliminate triggering factors for AD, both
during the period of acute symptoms and on a long-­term basis to prevent recurrences (see Table 186.4).

Irritants

Patients with AD have a low threshold response to irritants that trigger
their itch-­scratch cycle. Soaps or detergents, chemicals, smoke, abrasive clothing, and exposure to extremes of temperature and humidity
are common triggers. Patients with AD should use soaps with minimal
defatting properties and a neutral pH. New clothing should be laundered before wearing to decrease levels of formaldehyde and other
chemicals. Residual laundry detergent in clothing may trigger the itch-­
scratch cycle; using a liquid rather than powder detergent and adding a
second rinse cycle facilitates removal of the detergent.
Every attempt should be made to allow children with AD to be
as normally active as possible. A sport such as swimming may be
better tolerated than others that involve intense perspiration, physical contact, or heavy clothing and equipment. Rinsing off chlorine
immediately and lubricating the skin after swimming are important. Although ultraviolet light may be beneficial to some patients
with AD, high sun protection factor (SPF) sunscreens should be
used to avoid sunburn.

Foods

Food allergy is comorbid in approximately 40% of infants and young
children with moderate to severe AD (see Chapter 192). Undiagnosed
food allergies in patients with AD may induce eczematous dermatitis
in some patients and urticarial reactions, wheezing, or nasal congestion in others. Increased severity of AD symptoms and younger age
correlate directly with the presence of food allergy. Removal of food
allergens from the diet may lead to clinical improvement but also carries a risk of the patient developing immediate type allergic reactions
to the food allergen removed.
Potential allergens can be identified by a careful history and performing selective skin-­
prick tests or in vitro blood testing for

A

allergen-­specific IgE. Negative skin and blood test results for allergen-­
specific IgE have a high predictive value for excluding suspected allergens. Positive results of skin or blood tests using foods often do not
correlate with clinical symptoms and should be confirmed with controlled food challenges and elimination diets. Extensive elimination
diets, which can be nutritionally deficient, are rarely required. Even
with multiple positive skin test results, the majority of patients react to
fewer than three foods under controlled challenge conditions.

Aeroallergens

In older children, AD flares can occur after intranasal or epicutaneous
exposure to aeroallergens such as fungi, animal dander, grass, and ragweed pollen. Avoiding aeroallergens, particularly dust mites, can result
in clinical improvement of AD. Avoidance measures for dust mite–
allergic patients include using dust mite–proof encasings on pillows,
mattresses, and box springs; washing bedding in hot water weekly;
removing bedroom carpeting; and decreasing indoor humidity levels
with air conditioning.

Infections

Patients with AD have increased susceptibility to bacterial, viral, and
fungal skin infections. Antistaphylococcal antibiotics are very helpful for treating patients who are heavily colonized or infected with
S. aureus. Erythromycin and azithromycin are usually beneficial
for patients who are not colonized with a resistant S. aureus strain;
a first-­
generation cephalosporin (cephalexin) is recommended for
macrolide-­resistant S. aureus. Topical mupirocin is useful in the treatment of localized impetiginous lesions, with systemic clindamycin or
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole needed for methicillin-­
resistant S.
aureus (MRSA). Cytokine-­mediated skin inflammation contributes to
skin colonization with S. aureus. This finding supports the importance
of combining effective antiinflammatory therapy with antibiotics for
treating moderate to severe AD to avoid the need for repeated courses
of antibiotics, which can lead to the emergence of antibiotic-­resistant
strains of S. aureus. Dilute bleach baths (½ cup of bleach in 40 gallons
of water) twice weekly may be also considered to reduce S. aureus colonization. In one randomized trial, the group who received the bleach
baths plus intranasal mupirocin (5 days/month) had significantly
decreased severity of AD at 1 and 3 months compared with placebo.
Patients rinse off after the soaking. Bleach baths may not only reduce S.
aureus abundance on the skin but also have antiinflammatory effects.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) can provoke recurrent dermatitis and
may be misdiagnosed as S. aureus infection (Fig. 186.6). The presence
of punched-­out erosions, vesicles, and infected skin lesions that fail
to respond to oral antibiotics suggests HSV infection, which can be
diagnosed by a Giemsa-­stained Tzanck smear of cells scraped from the
vesicle base or by viral polymerase chain reaction or culture. Topical

B

Fig. 186.6 Eczema herpeticum infection in a patient with atopic dermatitis. Numerous punched-­out vesicles and erosions involving the face (A)
and extremities (B). (From Papulosquamous eruptions. In Cohen BA, ed. Pediatric Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2013. pp 68–103.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 187 u Insect Allergy
corticosteroids should be temporarily discontinued if HSV infection is
suspected. Reports of life-­threatening dissemination of HSV infections
in patients with AD who have widespread disease mandate antiviral
treatment. Persons with AD are also susceptible to eczema vaccinatum, which is similar in appearance to eczema herpeticum and historically follows smallpox (vaccinia virus) vaccination.
Cutaneous warts, coxsackievirus, and molluscum contagiosum are
additional viral infections affecting children with AD.
Dermatophyte infections can also contribute to exacerbation of AD.
Patients with AD have been found to have a greater susceptibility to
Trichophyton rubrum fungal infections than nonatopic controls. There
has been particular interest in the role of Malassezia furfur (formerly
known as Pityrosporum ovale) in AD because it is a lipophilic yeast
commonly present in the seborrheic areas of the skin. IgE antibodies
against M. furfur have been found in patients with head and neck dermatitis. A reduction of AD severity has been observed in these patients
after treatment with antifungal agents.

COMPLICATIONS

Exfoliative dermatitis may develop in patients with extensive skin involvement. It is associated with generalized redness, scaling, weeping, crusting,
systemic toxicity, lymphadenopathy, and fever and is usually caused by
superinfection (e.g., with toxin-­producing S. aureus or HSV infection) or
inappropriate therapy. In some cases the withdrawal of systemic glucocorticoids used to control severe AD precipitates exfoliative erythroderma.
Eyelid dermatitis and chronic blepharitis may result in visual impairment from corneal scarring. Atopic keratoconjunctivitis is usually
bilateral and can have disabling symptoms that include itching, burning,
tearing, and copious mucoid discharge. Vernal conjunctivitis is associated
with papillary hypertrophy or cobblestoning of the upper eyelid conjunctiva. It typically occurs in younger patients and has a marked seasonal incidence with spring exacerbations. Keratoconus is a conical deformity of the
cornea believed to result from chronic rubbing of the eyes in patients with
AD. Cataracts may be a primary manifestation of AD or from extensive
use of systemic and topical glucocorticoids, particularly around the eyes.

PROGNOSIS

AD generally tends to be more severe and persistent in young children,
particularly if they have homozygous null pathogenic variants in their filaggrin genes. Periods of remission occur more frequently as patients grow
older. Spontaneous resolution of AD has been reported to occur after age
5 years in 40–60% of patients affected during infancy, particularly for mild
disease. Earlier studies suggested that approximately 84% of children outgrow their AD by adolescence; however, later studies reported that AD
resolves in approximately 20% of children monitored from infancy until
adolescence and becomes less severe in 65%. Of those adolescents treated
for mild dermatitis, >50% may experience a relapse of disease as adults,
which frequently manifests as hand dermatitis, especially if daily activities
require repeated hand wetting. Predictive factors of a poor prognosis for
AD include widespread AD in childhood, FLG null pathogenic variants,
concomitant allergic rhinitis and asthma, family history of AD in parents
or siblings, early age at onset of AD, being an only child, and very high
serum IgE levels.

PREVENTION

Breastfeeding may be beneficial. Probiotics and prebiotics may also reduce
the incidence or severity of AD, but this approach is unproven. If an infant
with AD is diagnosed with food allergy, the breastfeeding mother may
need to eliminate the implicated food allergen from her diet. For infants
with severe eczema, introduction of infant-­safe forms of peanut as early as
4-­6 months, after other solids are tolerated, is recommended after consultation with the child’s pediatrician and/or allergist for allergy testing. This
approach may prevent peanut allergy (see Chapter 192). Identification and
elimination of triggering factors are the mainstay for prevention of flares as
well as for the long-­term treatment of AD.
Emollient therapy applied to the whole body for the first few months
of life may enhance the cutaneous barrier and reduce the risk of eczema.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1419

Chapter 187

Insect Allergy
Julie Wang and Scott H. Sicherer
Allergic responses to stinging or, more rarely, biting insects vary from
localized cutaneous reactions to systemic anaphylaxis. Allergic reactions caused by inhalation of airborne particles of insect origin result
in acute and chronic respiratory symptoms of seasonal or perennial
rhinitis, conjunctivitis, and asthma.

ETIOLOGY

Most reactions to stinging and biting insects, such as those induced
by wasps, mosquitoes, flies, and fleas, are limited to a primary lesion
isolated to the area of the sting or bite and do not represent an allergic response. Occasionally, insect stings or bites induce pronounced
localized reactions or systemic reactions that may be based on immediate or delayed hypersensitivity reactions. Systemic allergic responses
to insects are usually attributed to IgE antibody–mediated responses,
which are caused primarily by stings from venomous insects of the
order Hymenoptera and more rarely from ticks, spiders, scorpions,
and Triatoma (kissing bug). Members of the order Hymenoptera
include apids (honeybee, bumblebee), vespids (yellow jacket, wasp,
hornet), and formicids (fire and harvester ants) (Fig. 187.1). Among
winged stinging insects, yellow jackets are the most notorious for stinging because they are aggressive and ground dwelling, and they linger
near activities involving food. Hornets nest in trees, whereas wasps
build honeycomb nests in dark areas such as under porches; both
are aggressive if disturbed. Honeybees are less aggressive and nest in
tree hollows; unlike the stings of other flying Hymenoptera, honeybee
stings almost always leave a barbed stinger with venom sac.
In the United States, fire ants are found in the Southeast, living in
large mounds of soil. When disturbed, the ants attack in large numbers,
anchor themselves to the skin by their mandibles, and sting multiple
times in a circular pattern. Sterile pseudopustules form at the sting
sites. Systemic reactions to stinging insects occur in 0.4–0.8% of children and 3% of adults and account for approximately 40 deaths each
year in the United States.
Although reactions to insect bites are common, IgE-­mediated reactions are infrequently reported and anaphylaxis is rare. The Triatoma
(kissing bug) bite causes an erythematous plaque that is painless. Mosquito bites generally result in local reactions that are pruritic. Large,

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 187.1 Representative venomous Hymenoptera. A, Hornet

(Vespula maculata). B, Wasp (Chlorion ichneumerea). C, Yellowjacket
(Vespula maculiforma). D, Honeybee (Apis mellifera). E, Fire ant (Solenopsis invicta). F, Bumblebee (Bombus species). (From Erickson TB,
Marquez A. Arthropod envenomation and parasitism. In: Auerbach PS,
Cushing TA, Harris NS, eds. Auerbach’s Wilderness Medicine. 7th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig 41-­1, p 937.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1420 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
local reactions to mosquito bites can occur in some young children;
this is known as skeeter syndrome and is often misdiagnosed as cellulitis. The tabanid species (horsefly, deerfly), typically found in rural
and suburban areas, are large flies that induce painful bites.
IgE antibody–mediated allergic responses to airborne particulate
matter carrying insect emanations contribute to seasonal and perennial symptoms affecting the upper and lower airways. Seasonal allergy
is attributed to exposures to a variety of insects, particularly aquatic
insects such as the caddis fly and midge, or lake fly, at a time when larvae pupate and adult flies are airborne. Perennial allergy is attributed
to sensitization to insects such as cockroaches and ladybugs, as well
as house dust mite, which is phylogenetically related to spiders rather
than insects and has eight rather than six legs.

PATHOGENESIS

Hymenoptera venoms contain numerous components with toxic and
pharmacologic activity and with allergenic potential. These constituents include vasoactive substances such as histamine, acetylcholine,
and kinins; enzymes such as phospholipase and hyaluronidase; apamin;
melittin; and formic acid. The majority of patients who experience systemic reactions after Hymenoptera stings have IgE-­mediated sensitivity
to antigenic substances in the venom. Some venom allergens are homologous among members of the Hymenoptera order; others are family
specific. There is substantial cross reactivity among vespid venoms, but
these venom allergies are distinct from honeybee venom allergies.
Localized skin responses to biting insects are caused primarily by
vasoactive or irritant materials derived from insect saliva; they rarely
occur from IgE-­associated responses. Systemic IgE-­mediated allergic
reactions to salivary proteins of biting insects such as mosquitoes are
reported but uncommon.
A variety of proteins derived from insects can become airborne and
induce IgE-­mediated respiratory responses, causing inhalant allergies.
The primary allergen from the caddis fly is a hemocyanin-­like protein,
and that from the midge fly is derived from hemoglobin. Allergens
from the cockroach are the best studied and are derived from cockroach saliva, secretions, fecal material, and debris from skin casts.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Clinical reactions to stinging venomous insects are categorized as
local, large local, generalized cutaneous, systemic, toxic, and delayed/
late. Simple local reactions involve limited swelling and pain and generally last <24 hours. Large local reactions develop over hours and
days, involve swelling of extensive areas (>10 cm) that are contiguous with the sting site, and may last for days. Generalized cutaneous
reactions typically progress within minutes and include cutaneous
symptoms of urticaria, angioedema, and pruritus beyond the site of
the sting. Systemic reactions are identical to anaphylaxis from other
triggers and may include symptoms of generalized urticaria, laryngeal
edema, bronchospasm, and hypotension. A subset of patients with
hypotension and persistently elevated (once recovered) tryptase levels may have mast cell activation syndrome (see Chapter 190). Stings
from numerous insects at once may result in toxic reactions of fever,
malaise, emesis, and nausea because of the chemical properties of the
venom in large doses. Serum sickness, nephrotic syndrome, vasculitis, neuritis, or encephalopathy may occur as delayed/late reactions to
stinging insects.
Insect bites are usually urticarial but may be papular or vesicular.
Papular urticaria affecting the lower extremities in children is usually caused by multiple bites. Occasionally, individuals have large, local
reactions. IgE antibody–associated immediate-­and late-­phase allergic
responses to mosquito bites sometimes mimic cellulitis.
Inhalant allergy caused by insects results in clinical disease similar to
that induced by other inhalant allergens such as pollens. Depending on
individual sensitivity and exposure, reactions may result in seasonal or
perennial rhinitis, conjunctivitis, or asthma.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of allergy from stinging and biting insects is generally
evident from the history of exposure, typical symptoms, and physical
findings. The diagnosis of Hymenoptera allergy rests in part on the
identification of venom-­specific IgE by skin-­prick testing or in vitro
testing. The primary reasons to pursue testing are to confirm reactivity
when venom immunotherapy (VIT) is being considered or when it is
clinically necessary to confirm venom hypersensitivity as a cause of a
reaction. Venoms of five Hymenoptera (honeybee, yellow jacket, yellow hornet, white-­faced hornet, and wasp), as well as the jack jumper
ant in Australia and whole body extract of fire ant, are available for
skin testing. Although skin tests are considered to be the most sensitive
modality for detection of venom-­specific IgE, additional evaluation
with an in vitro serum assay for venom-­specific IgE is recommended
if skin test results are negative in the presence of a convincing history
of a severe systemic reaction. In vitro tests have a 20% incidence of
both false-­positive and false-­negative results, so it is not appropriate
to exclude venom hypersensitivity based on this test alone. If initial
skin-­prick and in vitro test results are negative in the context of a convincing history of a severe reaction, repeat testing is recommended
before concluding that allergy is unlikely. Skin tests are usually accurate
within 1 week of a sting reaction, but occasionally a refractory period
is observed that warrants retesting after 4-­6 weeks if the initial results
are negative.
An elevated basal tryptase level is associated with more severe reactions to venom stings. Therefore basal tryptase should be measured if
there is a history of severe reaction to a sting, hypotensive reaction,
lack of urticaria in a systemic sting reaction, or negative venom IgE
in a patient who has a history of systemic reaction to a sting. As many
as 40% of skin test–positive patients may not experience anaphylaxis
on sting challenge, so testing without an appropriate clinical history is
potentially misleading.
The diagnosis of inhalant insect allergy may be evident from a history of typical symptoms. A chronic respiratory symptom during long-­
term exposure, as may occur with cockroach allergy, is less amenable
to identification by history alone. Skin-­prick or in vitro immunoassay
tests for specific IgE to the insect are used to confirm inhalant insect
allergy. Allergy tests may be particularly warranted for potential cockroach allergy in patients with persistent asthma and known cockroach
exposure.

TREATMENT

For local cutaneous reactions caused by insect stings and bites, treatment with cold compresses, topical medications to relieve itching, and
occasionally a systemic antihistamine and oral analgesic are appropriate. Stingers should be removed promptly by scraping, with caution not
to squeeze the venom sac because doing so could inject more venom.
Sting sites rarely become infected, possibly because of the antibacterial actions of venom constituents. Vesicles left by fire ant stings that
are scratched open should be cleansed to prevent secondary infection.
Anaphylactic reactions after a Hymenoptera sting are treated the
same as anaphylaxis from any cause; epinephrine is the drug of choice.
Adjunctive treatment includes antihistamines, corticosteroids, intravenous fluids, oxygen, and transport to the emergency department (see
Chapter 190). Referral to an allergist-­immunologist should be considered for patients who have experienced a generalized cutaneous or systemic reaction to an insect sting, who need education about avoidance
and emergency treatment, who may be candidates for VIT, or who have
a condition that may complicate management of anaphylaxis (e.g., use
of β blockers).

Venom Immunotherapy

Hymenoptera VIT is highly effective (95–97%) in decreasing the risk
for severe anaphylaxis. The selection of patients for VIT depends
on several factors (Table 187.1). Individuals with local reactions,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 187 u Insect Allergy

1421

Table 187.1  Risk of Systemic Reaction in Untreated Patients with History of Sting Anaphylaxis and/or Positive Venom Skin
Test Results
ORIGINAL STING REACTION

RISK OF SYSTEMIC REACTION

SEVERITY

AGE

ANY SYSTEMIC (%)

ANAPHYLAXIS (%)

No reaction

Adult

5-15

<3

Large local

All

4-10

<

Cutaneous systemic

All

10

<3

Anaphylaxis

Child

40

30

Adult

60

40

From Golden DBK: Insect allergy. In Burks AW, Holgate ST, O’Hehir RE, et al., eds. Middleton’s Allergy Principles and Practice, ed 9, vol 2, Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2020, Table 76.2, p. 1253.

regardless of age, are not at increased risk for severe systemic reactions
on a subsequent sting and are not candidates for VIT. The risk of a
systemic reaction for those who experienced a large, local reaction is
approximately 7%; testing or VIT is usually not recommended, and
prescription of self-­injectable epinephrine is considered optional but
usually not necessary. There is growing evidence that VIT can reduce
the size and duration of large, local reactions, and therefore VIT may
be considered for those with frequent or unavoidable large, local
reactions. Those who experience severe systemic reactions, such as
airway involvement or hypotension, and who have specific IgE to
venom allergens, should receive immunotherapy. Immunotherapy
against winged Hymenoptera is generally not required when stings
have caused only generalized urticaria or angioedema, because the risk
for a systemic reaction after a subsequent sting is approximately 10%
and the chance of a more severe reaction is <3%. VIT may be considered if there are potential high-­risk cofactors such as comorbid cardiovascular disease or use of specific cardiovascular medications (e.g.,
angiotensin-­converting enzyme [ACE] inhibitors, β blockers), elevated
basal tryptase level, or high likelihood of future stings. VIT is usually
not indicated if there is no evidence of IgE to venom.
The incidence of adverse effects in the course of treatment is not
trivial in adults; 50% experience large, local reactions, and about 10%
experience systemic reactions. The incidence of both local and systemic reactions is much lower in children. Patients treated with honeybee venom are at higher risk for systemic reactions to VIT than those
receiving treatment with vespid venom. Individuals with mast cell disorders are at increased risk for severe anaphylaxis and more frequent
systemic reactions with VIT; thus some experts recommend basal
tryptase level for risk assessment purposes.
It is uncertain how long immunotherapy with Hymenoptera venom
should continue. In general, treatment duration of 3-­5 years is recommended because >80% of adults who have received 5 years of therapy
tolerate challenge stings without systemic reactions for 5-­10 years after
completion of treatment. Long-­term responses to treatment are even
better for children. Follow-­up over a mean of 18 years of children with
moderate to severe insect sting reactions who received VIT for a mean
of 3-­5 years and were stung again showed a reaction rate of only 5%;
untreated children experienced a reaction rate of 32%. Whereas duration of therapy with VIT may be individualized, it is clear that a significant number of untreated children retain their allergy. Extended
or lifelong treatment may be considered for those who have had life-­
threatening anaphylaxis with insect stings or severe reaction during
VIT, those with honeybee allergy, and those with occupational exposures to Hymenoptera. Lifelong VIT should also be considered for

patients with mast cell disorders because they have a higher rate of
failure of VIT and relapse when VIT is discontinued.
Less is known about the natural history of fire ant hypersensitivity
and efficacy of immunotherapy for this allergy. The criteria for starting immunotherapy are similar to those for hypersensitivities to other
Hymenoptera, but there is stronger consideration to treat patients who
have only cutaneous systemic reactions with VIT. Only whole body fire
ant extract is commercially available for diagnostic skin testing and
immunotherapy.

Inhalant Allergy

The symptoms of inhalant allergy caused by insects are managed as for
other causes of seasonal or perennial rhinitis (see Chapter 184), conjunctivitis (see Chapter 188), and asthma (see Chapter 185).

PREVENTION

Avoidance of stings and bites is essential. To reduce the risk of stings,
sensitized individuals should have known or suspected nests near the
home removed by trained professionals, should wear gloves when gardening, should wear long pants and shoes with socks when walking in
the grass or through fields, and should avoid or be cautious about eating or drinking outdoors. Typical insect repellents do not guard against
Hymenoptera.
Individuals who are at high risk for future severe reactions to Hymenoptera stings should have immediate access to self-­injectable epinephrine. High-­risk individuals include those who have a history of
severe reactions or have elevated basal tryptase level. Adults responsible for allergic children and older patients who can self-­treat must
be carefully taught the indications and technique of administration for
this medication. Particular attention is necessary for children in out-­
of-­home daycare centers, at school, or attending camps, to ensure that
an emergency action plan is in place. The individual at risk for anaphylaxis from an insect sting should also wear medical identification
jewelry indicating the allergy.
Avoidance of the insect is the preferred management of inhalant
allergy. This can prove difficult, particularly for those living in apartments, where eradication of cockroaches may be problematic. Immunotherapy for dust mites is effective and should be considered in
conjunction with avoidance measures. In contrast, there is limited data
regarding the efficacy of cockroach immunotherapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1422 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

Chapter 188

Ocular Allergies
Leonard Bielory, Brett P. Bielory, and
Scott H. Sicherer
The ocular surface of the eye, the conjunctiva, is the most immunologically active tissue of the external eye. The conjunctiva is a
common target of allergic disorders because of its marked vascularity and direct contact with allergens in the environment. Ocular
allergies can occur as isolated target organ disease or more often in
conjunction with nasal allergies. Ocular symptoms can significantly
affect quality of life.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Allergic eye diseases represent a spectrum of conditions that require
allergic sensitization and range from acute (seasonal) progressing
to the perennial and then to the more chronic forms and potentially
sight-­
threatening forms, vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis
(Table 188.1).

Allergic Conjunctivitis

Allergic conjunctivitis is the most common hypersensitivity response
of the eye, affecting approximately 25% of the general population and
30% of children with atopy. It is caused by direct exposure of the mucosal surfaces of the eye to environmental allergens. Patients complain of

variable ocular itching, rather than pain, with increased tearing. Clinical signs include bilateral injected conjunctivae with vascular congestion that may progress to chemosis, or conjunctival swelling, and a
watery discharge (Fig. 188.1).
Allergic conjunctivitis occurs in a seasonal or, less frequently,
perennial form. Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis is typically associated with allergic rhinitis (see Chapter 184) and is most commonly triggered by pollens. Major pollen groups in the temperate
zones include trees (late winter to early spring), grasses (late spring
to early summer), and weeds (late summer to early fall), but seasons vary significantly in different parts of the United States. Mold
spores can also cause seasonal allergy symptoms, principally in the
summer and fall. Seasonal allergy symptoms may be aggravated by
coincident exposure to perennial allergens. Perennial allergic conjunctivitis is triggered by allergens such as animal danders or dust
mites that are present throughout the year. Symptoms are usually
less severe than with seasonal allergic conjunctivitis. Because pollens and soil molds may be present intermittently by season, and
exposure to allergens such as furred animals may be perennial, classification as intermittent (symptoms present <4 days/week or for <4
weeks) and persistent (symptoms present >4 days/week and for >4
weeks) has been proposed.

Vernal Keratoconjunctivitis

Vernal keratoconjunctivitis is a severe bilateral chronic inflammatory process of the upper tarsal conjunctival surface that occurs in two
forms, limbal or palpebral. It may threaten eyesight if there is corneal
involvement. Vernal keratoconjunctivitis is only associated with positive
cutaneous allergic reactivities in 50% of cases, although it occurs most
frequently in children with seasonal allergies, asthma, or atopic dermatitis. Vernal keratoconjunctivitis affects males twice as often as females

Table 188.1  Allergic Diseases of the Eye
DISEASE

CLINICAL PARAMETERS

SIGNS/SYMPTOMS

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Seasonal allergic conjunctivitis
(SAC)

• Sensitized individuals
• Both females and males
• Bilateral involvement
• Seasonal allergens
• Self-­limiting

• Ocular itching
• Tearing (watery discharge)
• Chemosis, redness
• Often associated with rhinitis
• Not sight threatening

• Infective conjunctivitis
• Preservative toxicity
• Medicamentosa
• Dry eye
• PAC/AKC/VKC

Perennial allergic conjunctivitis
(PAC)

• Sensitized individuals
• Both females and males
• Bilateral involvement
• Year-­round allergens
• Self-­limiting

• Ocular itching
• Tearing (watery discharge)
• Chemosis, redness
• Often associated with rhinitis
• Not sight threatening

• Infective conjunctivitis
• Preservative toxicity
• Medicamentosa
• Dry eye
• SAC/AKC/VKC

Atopic keratoconjunctivitis
(AKC)

• Sensitized individuals
• Peak incidence 20-­50 years of age
• Both females and males
• Bilateral involvement
• Seasonal/perennial allergens
• Atopic dermatitis
• Chronic symptoms

• Severe ocular itching
• Red flaking periocular skin
• Mucoid discharge, photophobia
• Corneal erosions
• Scarring of conjunctiva
• Cataract (anterior subcapsular)
• Sight threatening

• Contact dermatitis
• Infective conjunctivitis
• Blepharitis
• Pemphigoid
• VKC/SAC/PAC/GPC

Vernal keratoconjunctivitis
(VKC)

• Some sensitized individuals
• Peak incidence 3-­20 years of age
• Males predominate 3:1
• Bilateral involvement
• Warm, dry climate
• Seasonal/perennial allergens
• Chronic symptoms

• Severe ocular itching
• Severe photophobia
• Thick, ropy discharge
• Cobblestone papillae
• Corneal ulceration and scarring
• Sight threatening

• Infective conjunctivitis
• Blepharitis
• AKC/SAC/PAC/GPC

Giant papillary conjunctivitis
(GPC)

• Sensitization not necessary
• Both females and males
• Bilateral involvement
• Prosthetic exposure
• Occurs anytime
• Chronic symptoms

• Mild ocular itching
• Mild mucoid discharge
• Giant papillae
• Contact lens intolerance
• Foreign body sensation
• Protein buildup on contact lens
• Not sight threatening

• Infective conjunctivitis
• Preservative toxicity
• SAC/PAC/AKC/VKC

From Barney NP. Allergic and immunologic diseases of the eye. In: Burks AW, Holgate ST, O’Hehir RE, et al., eds. Middleton’s Allergy: Principles and Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2020: Table 38.1, p. 607)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 188 u Ocular Allergies

1423

Fig. 188.3 Horner-­Trantas dots. Classic appearance of small white-­
Fig. 188.1 Allergic conjunctivitis. Arrow indicates area of chemosis in
the conjunctivitis. (From Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al.,
eds. Middleton’s Allergy: Principles & Practice. 8th ed. St Louis: Elsevier,
2014: p. 619.)

yellow chalky concretions with collections of degenerated epithelial
cells and eosinophils around the corneal limbus (arrows). (From Cheng
J, Jiang L, Morrow NC, et al. Recognition of atopic keratoconjunctivitis
during treatment with dupilumab for atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2021;85(1):265–267. Fig 1.)

Fig. 188.2 Vernal keratoconjunctivitis. Cobblestone papillae and
ropey discharge are seen on the underside (tarsal conjunctiva) of the
upper eyelid. (From Adkinson NF Jr, Bochner BS, Burks AW, et al., eds.
Middleton’s Allergy: Principles & Practice. 8th ed. St Louis: Elsevier,
2014: p. 627.)

Fig. 188.4 Corneal shield ulcer classic depiction of sterile plaques

containing fibrin and mucous that accumulate into macro-­
erosions
forming a shield ulcer. (From LaMattina K, Thompson L. Pediatric conjunctivitis. Dis Mon. 2014;60(6):231–238. Fig 6.)

and is more common in the Mediterranean basin and in persons of Asian
and African descent. It affects primarily children in temperate areas, with
exacerbations in the spring and summer, but can occur throughout the
year. Symptoms include intense ocular itching exacerbated by exposure
to irritants, light, or perspiration. In addition, patients may complain of
severe photophobia due to corneal involvement, foreign body sensation,
and lacrimation. Giant papillae occur predominantly on the upper tarsal
plate and are typically described as cobblestoning (Fig. 188.2). Other signs
include a stringy or thick, ropey discharge, cobblestone papillae, transient yellow-­white points at the corneal limbus (Trantas dots) (Fig. 188.3)
and conjunctiva (Horner points), corneal “shield” ulcers (Fig. 188.4), and
Dennie lines (Dennie-­Morgan folds), which are prominent symmetric
skin folds that extend in an arc from the inner canthus beneath and parallel to the lower lid margin. Children with vernal keratoconjunctivitis
have measurably longer eyelashes, which may represent a reaction to
ocular inflammation.

threaten eyesight if there is corneal involvement. Almost all patients
have atopic dermatitis, and a significant number have asthma.
Atopic keratoconjunctivitis rarely presents before late adolescence.
Symptoms include severe bilateral ocular itching, burning, photophobia, and tearing with a mucoid discharge that are much more
severe than in allergic conjunctivitis and persist throughout the
year. The bulbar conjunctiva is injected and chemotic; cataracts may
occur. Trantas dots at the corneal limbus or giant papillae typically
found in inferior palpebral conjunctiva may also be present. Eyelid
eczema can extend to the periorbital skin and cheeks with erythema
and thick, dry scaling. Secondary staphylococcal blepharitis is common because of eyelid induration and maceration. Chronic eye rubbing associated with vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis can lead
to keratoconus, a noninflammatory cone-­shaped corneal ectasia.
This may lead to corneal thinning and perforation.

Atopic Keratoconjunctivitis

Giant Papillary Conjunctivitis

Atopic keratoconjunctivitis is a chronic inflammatory ocular disorder most often involving the lower tarsal conjunctiva. It may

Giant papillary conjunctivitis is not associated with IgE sensitization, but has been linked to chronic exposure to foreign bodies, such

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1424 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
as contact lenses (both hard and soft), ocular prostheses, and sutures.
Symptoms and signs include mild bilateral ocular itching, tearing, a
foreign body sensation, and excessive ocular discomfort with mild
mucoid discharge with white or clear exudate on awakening, which
may become thick and stringy. Trantas dots, limbal infiltration, bulbar
conjunctival hyperemia, and edema may develop.

Contact Allergy

Contact allergy typically involves the eyelids but can also involve the
conjunctivae. It is frequently associated with increased exposure to
topical medications, contact lens solutions, and preservatives.

DIAGNOSIS

Nonallergic conjunctivitis can be viral, bacterial, or chlamydial in origin. It is typically unilateral, but can be bilateral with symptoms initially
developing in one eye (see Chapter 666). Symptoms include stinging or
burning rather than itching and often a foreign body sensation. Ocular
discharge can be watery, mucoid, or purulent. Masqueraders of ocular allergy also include nasolacrimal duct obstruction, foreign body,
blepharoconjunctivitis, dry eye, uveitis, and trauma.

Dry Eye

Dry eye conditions are being increasingly recognized as a concomitant
and comorbid condition in children directly correlated with increased
use of computers and gaming and mobile devices that are associated

with decreased blinking time and increased evaporative tear film
dysfunction.

TREATMENT

Primary treatment of ocular allergies includes avoidance of allergens,
cold compresses, and lubrication. Secondary treatment regimens
include the use of oral or topical antihistamines and, if necessary, topical decongestants, mast cell stabilizers, and antiinflammatory agents
(Table 188.2). Drugs with dual antihistamine and mast cell–blocking
activities provide the most advantageous approach in treating allergic
conjunctivitis, with both fast-­acting symptomatic relief and disease-­
modifying action. Children often complain of stinging or burning with
use of topical ophthalmic preparations and usually prefer oral antihistamines for allergic conjunctivitis. It is important not to contaminate
topical ocular medications by allowing the applicator tip to contact
the eye or eyelid. Using refrigerated medications may decrease some
of the discomfort associated with their use. Topical decongestants act
as vasoconstrictors, reducing erythema, vascular congestion, and eyelid edema, but do not diminish the allergic response. Adverse effects
of topical vasoconstrictors include burning or stinging and rebound
hyperemia or conjunctivitis medicamentosa with chronic use. Combined use of an antihistamine and a vasoconstrictor is more effective
than use of either agent alone. Use of topical nasal corticosteroids for
allergic rhinoconjunctivitis decreases ocular symptoms, presumably
through a nasoocular reflex.

Table 188.2  Topical Ophthalmic Medications for Allergic Conjunctivitis
DRUG AND TRADE NAMES

MECHANISM OF ACTION AND DOSING

Azelastine hydrochloride, 0.05%
Optivar

Antihistamine
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt bid

Not for treatment of contact lens–related irritation; the
preservative may be absorbed by soft contact lenses
Wait at least 10 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses

Emedastine difumarate, 0.05%
Emadine

Antihistamine
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt qid

Soft contact lenses should not be worn if the eye is red
Wait at least 10 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses

Levocabastine hydrochloride, 0.05%
Livostin

Antihistamine
Children ≥12 yr: 1 gtt bid-­qid up to 2 wk

Not for use in patients wearing soft contact lenses during
treatment

Pheniramine maleate

Antihistamine/vasoconstrictor

Avoid prolonged use (>3-­4 days) to avoid rebound symptoms
Not for use with contact lenses

Naphazoline hydrochloride, 0.3%

Children >6 yr: 1-­2 gtt qid

Avoid prolonged use (>3-­4 days) to avoid rebound symptoms
Not for use with contact lenses

Cromolyn sodium, 4%
Crolom, Opticrom

Mast cell stabilizer
Children >4 yr: 1-­2 gtt q4-­6h

Can be used to treat giant papillary conjunctivitis and vernal
keratitis
Not for use with contact lenses

Lodoxamide tromethamine, 0.1%
Alomide

Mast cell stabilizer
Children ≥2 yr: 1-­2 gtt qid up to 3 mo

Can be used to treat vernal keratoconjunctivitis
Not for use in patients wearing soft contact lenses during
treatment

Nedocromil sodium, 2% Alocril

Mast cell stabilizer
Children ≥3 yr: 1-­2 gtt bid

Avoid wearing contact lenses while exhibiting the signs and
symptoms of allergic conjunctivitis

Pemirolast potassium, 0.1%
Alamast

Mast cell stabilizer
Children >3 yr: 1-­2 gtt qid

Not for treatment of contact lens–related irritation; the
preservative may be absorbed by soft contact lenses
Wait at least 10 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses

Epinastine hydrochloride, 0.05%
Elestat

Antihistamine/mast cell stabilizer
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt bid

Contact lenses should be removed before use
Wait at least 15 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses
Not for the treatment of contact lens irritation

0.025%
Naphcon-­A, Opcon-­A

COMMENTS, CAUTIONS AND ADVERSE EVENTS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 188 u Ocular Allergies

1425

Table 188.2  Topical Ophthalmic Medications for Allergic Conjunctivitis—cont’d
DRUG AND TRADE NAMES

MECHANISM OF ACTION AND DOSING

COMMENTS, CAUTIONS AND ADVERSE EVENTS

Ketotifen fumarate, 0.025%
Zaditor

Antihistamine/mast cell stabilizer
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt bid q8-­12h

Not for treatment of contact lens–related irritation; the
preservative may be absorbed by soft contact lenses
Wait at least 10 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses

Olopatadine hydrochloride, 0.1%,
0.2%, 0.7%
Patanol, Pataday, Pazeo

Antihistamine/mast cell stabilizer
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt bid (8 hr apart)
Children ≥2 yr: 1 gtt qd

Not for treatment of contact lens–related irritation; the
preservative may be absorbed by soft contact lenses
Wait at least 10 min after administration before inserting
soft contact lenses

Alcaftadine, 0.25%
Lastacaft

Antihistamine/mast cell stabilizer
Children >2 yr: 1 gtt bid q8-­12h

Contact lenses should be removed before application; may
be inserted after 10 min
Not for the treatment of contact lens irritation

Bepotastine besilate, 1.5%
Bepreve

Antihistamine/mast cell stabilizer
Children >2 yr: 1 gtt bid q8-­12h

Contact lenses should be removed before application; may
be inserted after 10 min
Not for the treatment of contact lens irritation

Cetirizine, 0.24%
Zerviate

Antihistamine
Children >2 yr: 1 gtt bid

Contains lubricant hydrocellulose, preservative free unit
doses

Ketorolac tromethamine, 0.5%
Acular

NSAID
Children ≥3 yr: 1 gtt qid

Avoid with aspirin or NSAID sensitivity
Use ocular product with caution in patients with complicated
ocular surgeries, corneal denervation or epithelial defects,
ocular surface diseases (e.g., dry eye syndrome), repeated
ocular surgeries within a short period, diabetes mellitus,
or rheumatoid arthritis; these patients may be at risk for
corneal adverse events that may be sight threatening
Do not use while wearing contact lenses

Fluorometholone, 0.1%, 0.25%
suspension and 0.1% ointment
FML, FML Forte, Flarex

Fluorinated corticosteroid
Children ≥2 yr: 1 gtt into conjunctival sac of
affected eye(s) bid-­qid
During initial 24-­48 hr, dosage may be
increased to 1 gtt q4h
Ointment (∼1.3 cm in length) into
conjunctival sac of affected eye(s) 1-­3
times daily
May be applied q4h during initial 24-­48 hr
of therapy.

If improvement does not occur after 2 days, patient should
be reevaluated
Patient should remove soft contact lenses before
administering (contains benzalkonium chloride) and delay
reinsertion of lenses for ≥15 min after administration
Close monitoring for development of glaucoma and
cataracts

Cyclosporine ophthalmic solution,
01.%
Verkazia

Immunomodulation
Children >3 yr:1 gtt qid

Unpreserved single dose units
Approved for treatment of vernal keratoconjunctivitis

loteprednol, 0.5%
Lotemax, Alrex

Steroid, antiinflammatory
Children >2 yr:1-2 gtt qid

Lowest steroid associated with cataract formation or
increase in intraocular pressure
Comes in suspension and gel formulations

NSAID, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; bid, 2 times daily; gtt, drops; qid, 4 times daily; q4-­6h, every 4-­6 hr; qd, every day.

Tertiary treatment of ocular allergy includes topical (or rarely oral)
corticosteroids and should be conducted in conjunction with an ophthalmologist. Local administration of topical corticosteroids may be associated
with increased intraocular pressure, viral infections, and cataract formation. Other immunomodulatory medications, such as topical tacrolimus
or topical cyclosporine, are used as steroid-­sparing agents. Allergen immunotherapy is very effective in seasonal and perennial allergic conjunctivitis,
especially when associated with rhinitis, and can decrease the need for oral
or topical medications to control allergy symptoms.

Because vernal and atopic keratoconjunctivitis can be associated with
visual morbidity, if these diagnoses are suspected, the patient should be
referred to an ophthalmologist. Symptoms that should prompt referral
to an ophthalmologist include unilateral red eye with pain, photophobia,
change in vision, refractory dry eyes, or corneal abnormality.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1426 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

Chapter 189

Urticaria (Hives) and
Angioedema
David A. Khan, Aleena Banerji, and
Scott H. Sicherer
Urticaria affects 20% of individuals at some point in their life. Episodes
of hives that last for <6 weeks are considered acute, whereas those that
occur on most days of the week for >6 weeks are designated chronic.
The distinction is important, because the causes and mechanisms of
urticaria formation and the therapeutic approaches are different in
each instance.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Urticaria is defined as the presence of wheals (hives), angioedema,
or both. Acute urticaria is often caused by an allergic IgE–mediated
reaction (Table 189.1). This form of urticaria is a self-­limited process
that occurs when an allergen activates mast cells in the skin. Common
causes of acute generalized urticaria include foods, drugs (particularly
antibiotics), and stinging-­insect venoms. If an allergen (latex, animal
dander) penetrates the skin locally, hives often can develop at the site
of exposure. Acute urticaria can also result from non–IgE-­mediated
stimulation of mast cells, caused by viral infections, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and opiates. The diagnosis of chronic
urticaria is established when lesions occur on most days of the week
for >6 weeks (Tables 189.2 and 189.3). In about half the cases, chronic
urticaria is accompanied by angioedema. In 20% of chronic urticaria
patients, angioedema occurs without wheals. Acute angioedema without wheals is often a result of allergy, but recurrent isolated angioedema
raises the possibility of other diagnoses.
A typical hive is an erythematous, pruritic, raised wheal that blanches
with pressure, is transient, and resolves without residual lesions, unless
the area was intensely scratched. In contrast, urticaria associated with

systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), or other vasculitides in which a
skin biopsy reveals a small-­vessel vasculitis, often have distinguishing
clinical features. Lesions that burn more than itch, last >24 hours, do
not blanch, blister, heal with scarring, or that are associated with bleeding into the skin (purpura) suggest urticarial vasculitis, which is a rare
condition in children. Atypical aspects of the gross appearance of the
hives or associated systemic symptoms should heighten concern that
the urticaria or angioedema may be the manifestation of a systemic
disease process (Table 189.4).

INDUCIBLE URTICARIA

Inducible urticaria and angioedema (previously referred to as physical
urticaria) share the common property of being induced by an environmental stimulus, such as a change in temperature or direct stimulation of
the skin with pressure, stroking, vibration, or light (Table 189.5; see also
Table 189.2). In contrast to chronic spontaneous urticaria (CSU), the
wheals of inducible urticaria are more short-­lived, often lasting <1 hour.

Cold-­Dependent Disorders

Cold urticaria is characterized by the development of localized pruritus, erythema, and urticaria/angioedema after exposure to a cold
stimulus. Total body exposure, as seen with swimming in cold water,
can cause anaphylaxis, resulting in hypotension, loss of consciousness,
and even death if not promptly treated. The diagnosis is most easily
confirmed by challenge testing by holding an ice cube in place on the
patient’s skin for 5 minutes. In patients with cold urticaria, a urticarial
lesion develops about 10 minutes after removal of the ice cube and on
rewarming of the chilled skin. Most cases of acquired cold urticaria
are idiopathic. Cold urticaria is rarely associated with the presence
of cryoproteins such as cold agglutinins, cryoglobulins, cryofibrinogen, and the Donath-­Landsteiner antibody seen in secondary syphilis
(paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria). Multiple subtypes of atypical cold
urticaria with a negative ice cube test have also been reported. Cold
Table 189.2  Etiology of Chronic Urticaria
Spontaneous/autoimmune

Approximately 30% of chronic urticaria
cases are inducible urticaria, and
60–70% are spontaneous; of the
spontaneous cases approximately
20–60% have autoantibodies (see text)

Inducible

Dermographism
Cholinergic urticaria
Cold urticaria (see Table 189.6)
Delayed pressure urticaria
Solar urticaria
Vibratory urticaria
Aquagenic urticaria

Autoimmune diseases

Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Thyroid disease (Graves, Hashimoto)
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Urticarial vasculitis

Autoinflammatory/periodic
fever syndromes

See Tables 189.3 and 189.6.

Neoplastic

Lymphoma
Mastocytosis
Leukemia

Angioedema

Hereditary angioedema
Acquired angioedema
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme
inhibitors

Table 189.1  Etiology of Acute Urticaria
Foods

Egg, milk, wheat, peanuts, tree nuts,
soy, shellfish, fish, direct mast cell
degranulation

Medications

Suspect all medications, even
nonprescription or homeopathic

Insect stings

Hymenoptera (honeybee, yellow jacket,
hornets, wasp, fire ants), biting insects
(papular urticaria)

Infections

Bacterial (streptococcal pharyngitis,
Mycoplasma, sinusitis); Viral (hepatitis,
mononucleosis [Epstein-­Barr virus],
coxsackieviruses A and B); Parasitic
(Ascaris, Ancylostoma, Echinococcus,
Fasciola, Filaria, Schistosoma,
Strongyloides, Toxocara, Trichinella);
Fungal (dermatophytes, Candida)

Contact allergy

Latex, pollen, animal saliva, nettle plants,
caterpillars

Transfusion reactions

Blood, blood products, or intravenous
immune globulin administration

From Lasley MV, Kennedy MS, Altman LC. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Altman LC,
Becker JW, Williams PV, eds. Allergy in Primary Care. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000:
p. 232.

Modified from Lasley MV, Kennedy MS, Altman LC. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Altman LC,
Becker JW, Williams PV, eds. Allergy in Primary Care. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000:
p. 234.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 189 u Urticaria (Hives) and Angioedema

1427

Table 189.3  Febrile Autoinflammatory Diseases Causing Urticaria in Children
GENE
(PROTEIN)

DISEASE

INHERITANCE

ATTACK
LENGTH

TIMING OF
ONSET

CUTANEOUS
FEATURES

EXTRACUTANEOUS
CLINICAL FEATURES

FCAS

NLRP3
(cryopyrin)

AD

Brief; minutes
to 3 days

Neonatal or
infantile

Cold-­induced
pseudourticaria

Arthralgia
Conjunctivitis
Headache

Muckle-­Wells
syndrome

NLRP3
(cryopyrin)

AD

1-­3 days

Neonatal, infantile,
childhood (can
be later)

Widespread
pseudourticaria

Arthralgia/arthritis
Sensorineural hearing loss
Conjunctivitis/episcleritis
Headache
Amyloidosis

Neonatal-­onset
multisystem
inflammatory
disease (aka
chronic infantile
neurologic
cutaneous
articular
syndrome)

NLRP3
(cryopyrin)

AD

Continuous
flares

Neonatal or
infantile

Widespread
pseudo-urticaria

Deforming osteoarthropathy,
epiphyseal overgrowth
Sensorineural hearing loss
Dysmorphic facies
Chronic aseptic meningitis,
headaches, papilledema,
seizures
Conjunctivitis/uveitis, optic
atrophy
Growth retardation
Developmental delay
Amyloidosis

HIDS

MVK
AR
(mevalonate
kinase)

3-­7 days

Infancy (<2 yr)

Intermittent
morbilliform or
urticarial rash
Aphthous mucosal
ulcers
Erythema nodosum

Arthralgia/arthritis
Cervical lymphadenopathy
Severe abdominal pain
Diarrhea/vomiting
Headache
Elevated IgD and IgA antibody
levels
Elevated urine mevalonic acid
during attacks

Tumor necrosis
factor receptor–
associated
periodic
syndrome

TNFRSF1A
(TNFR1)

AD

>7 days

Childhood

Intermittent migratory
erythematous macules
and edematous
plaques overlying
areas of myalgia,
often on limbs
Periorbital edema

Migratory myalgia
Conjunctivitis
Serositis
Amyloidosis

Systemic-­onset
juvenile idiopathic
arthritis (SoJIA)

Polygenic

Varies

Daily
(quotidian)

Peak onset at
1-­6 yr

Nonfixed
erythematous rash;
may be urticarial
With or without
dermographism
With or without
periorbital edema

Polyarthritis
Myalgia
Hepatosplenomegaly
Lymphadenopathy
Serositis

PLAID

PLCG2

AD

N/A

Infancy

Urticaria induced by
evaporative cooling
Ulcers in cold-­
exposed areas

Allergies
Autoimmune disease
Recurrent sinopulmonary
infections
Elevated IgE antibody levels
Decreased IgA and IgM
antibody levels
Often elevated antinuclear
antibody titers

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; HIDS, hyperimmunoglobulinemia D syndrome; FCAS, familial cold-­induced autoinflammatory syndrome; N/A, not available;
PLAID, PLCG2-­associated antibody deficiency and immune dysregulation.
From Youseff MJ, Chiu YE. Eczema and urticaria as manifestations of undiagnosed and rare diseases. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2017;64:39–56. Table 2, pp. 49–50.

urticaria must be distinguished from the familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (see later, Diagnosis) (Table 189.6; see also Table 189.3
and Chapter 204). Because 20% of pediatric patients with cold urticaria
may experience anaphylaxis, counseling on risks of anaphylaxis and
prescribing epinephrine autoinjectors should be considered.

Cholinergic Urticaria

Cholinergic urticaria is characterized by the onset of small, punctate
pruritic wheals surrounded by a prominent erythematous flare and

associated with exercise, hot showers, emotional stress, and sweating. Once the patient cools down, the rash usually subsides in 30-­60
minutes. Occasionally, symptoms of more generalized cholinergic
stimulation, such as lacrimation, wheezing, salivation, and syncope,
are observed. These symptoms are mediated by cholinergic nerve
fibers that innervate the musculature via parasympathetic neurons
and innervate the sweat glands by cholinergic fibers that travel with
the sympathetic nerves. Elevated plasma histamine values parallel the
onset of urticaria triggered by changes in body temperature.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1428 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 189.4  Distinguishing Features Between Urticaria
and Systemic Urticarial Syndromes
COMMON URTICARIA

URTICARIAL SYNDROMES
(≥1 OF FOLLOWING)

Only typical wheals:

Atypical “wheals”:

Erythematous edematous lesions

Infiltrated plaques

Transient (<24-­36 hr)

Persistent (>24-­36 hr)

Asymmetric distribution

Symmetric distribution

Resolution without signs

Resolution with signs (hypo/
hyperpigmentation, bruising,
or scarring)

No associated different
elementary lesions (papules,
vesicles, purpura, crustae)

Associated different elementary
lesions (papules, vesicles,
purpura, scaling, crustae)

Pruritic (rarely stinging/burning)

Not pruritic; rather painful or
burning

Possibly associated with
angioedema

Usually no associated
angioedema

No associated systemic
symptoms

Often associated with systemic
symptoms (fever, malaise,
arthralgia, abdominal pain,
weight loss, acral circulatory
abnormalities, neurologic signs

From Peroni A, Colato C, Zanoni G, Girolomoni G. Urticarial lesions: if not urticaria,
what else? The differential diagnosis of urticaria. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;62(4):559.

Symptomatic Dermographism

Symptomatic dermographism (also called dermatographism or urticaria factitia) may occur as an isolated disorder or may accompany
chronic urticaria or other inducible urticarias. It can be diagnosed by
observing the skin after stroking it with a tongue depressor. In patients
with dermographism, a linear response occurs secondary to reflex
vasoconstriction, followed by pruritus, erythema, and a linear wheal
caused by secondary dilation of the vessel and extravasation of plasma.
Symptomatic dermographism is distinct from the more common “simple dermographism,” affecting 4% of the population, whereas whealing
but no itch occurs with stroking the skin.

Delayed Pressure Urticaria

Delayed pressure urticaria differs from other inducible urticaria in that
symptoms typically occur 4-­6 hours after pressure has been applied.
Some patients may complain of swelling, with or without pruritus,
secondary to pressure, without hives. Other lesions are predominantly
wheals and may or may not be associated with significant swelling.
When wheals are present, an infiltrative skin lesion is seen, characterized by a perivascular mononuclear cell infiltrate and dermal edema
similar to that seen in CSU. Symptoms occur at sites of tight clothing; foot swelling is common after walking; and buttock swelling may
be prominent after sitting for a few hours. This condition can coexist
with CSU or can occur separately. The diagnosis is confirmed by challenge testing, most commonly via the “sand bag test.” This test can be
performed by using 15 lb of weights attached to a strap applied to the
shoulder, thigh, or forearm for 15 minutes and observing the site over
the next 24 hours for evidence of hives or edema.

Solar Urticaria

Solar urticaria is a rare disorder in which urticaria develops within
minutes of direct sun exposure. Typically, pruritus occurs first, in
approximately 30 seconds, followed by edema confined to the light-­
exposed area and surrounded by a prominent erythematous zone. The
lesions usually disappear within 1-­3 hours after cessation of sun exposure. When large areas of the body are exposed, systemic symptoms
may occur, including hypotension and wheezing. Solar urticaria has

been classified into six types, depending on the wavelength of light that
induces skin lesions and the ability or inability to transfer the disorder
passively with serum IgE.

Aquagenic Urticaria

Patients with aquagenic urticaria demonstrate small wheals after contact with water, regardless of its temperature, and are thereby distinguishable from patients with cold urticaria or cholinergic urticaria.
Direct application of a compress of water to the skin is used to test
for the presence of aquagenic urticaria. Rarely, chlorine or other trace
contaminants may be responsible for the reaction.

CHRONIC SPONTANEOUS URTICARIA

CSU is the most common form of chronic urticaria and is associated
with normal routine laboratory values and no evidence of systemic disease. CSU differs from allergen-­induced skin reactions and from physically induced urticaria in that histologic studies reveal cellular infiltrate
predominantly around small venules. Skin examination reveals infiltrative hives with palpably elevated borders, sometimes varying greatly
in size and shape but generally rounded.
Biopsy of a typical lesion reveals nonnecrotizing, perivascular,
mononuclear cellular infiltration. Varying histopathologic processes
can occur in the skin and manifest as urticaria. Patients with urticarial vasculitis can have urticaria and/or angioedema. Biopsy of these
lesions in patients who may present with urticaria, arthralgias, myalgias, an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and in some
cases hypocomplementemia as manifestations of urticarial vasculitis
can reveal fibrinoid necrosis with a predominantly neutrophilic infiltrate. Although urticarial vasculitis lesions are typically less blanchable,
the lesions may be clinically indistinguishable from those seen in the
more typical, nonvasculitic cases.
The immunopathogenesis of CSU is not entirely clear; however, mast
cell activation is thought to have a key role. A key activating receptor in
mast cells is the high-­affinity IgE receptor (FcεRI). Two theories suggest that autoimmune factors may lead to FcεRI activation. In type 1
autoimmunity (aka autoallergy), patients have IgE autoantibodies to
self-­antigens such as thyroperoxidase or interleukin (IL)-­24, which can
cross link the IgE autoantibodies leading to mast cell activation and
urticaria. In type II autoimmunity, patients have autoantibodies (IgG,
IgM, IGA) directed against FcεRI or IgE itself, which can similarly lead
to mast cell activation. Direct measurement of these autoantibodies is
limited to research studies with no clear clinical utility at present. However, the autoallergy theory is an attractive explanation for the effectiveness of anti-­IgE therapies like omalizumab.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of both acute and chronic urticaria is primarily clinical
and requires that the clinician be aware of the various forms of urticaria
(wheals and angioedema).
Hives are transient, pruritic, erythematous, raised wheals that may
become tense and painful. The lesions may coalesce and form polymorphous, serpiginous, or annular lesions (Figs. 189.1 and 189.2).
Individual lesions usually last minutes to several hours and rarely more
than 24 hours. The lesions often disappear, only to reappear at another
site. Angioedema involves the deeper subcutaneous tissues in locations such as the eyelids, lips, tongue, genitals, dorsum of the hands or
feet, and in the case of hereditary angioedema (HAE), the wall of the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract (see Chapter 189.1).
Viral infections, drugs, and foods are the most common identifiable
causes of acute urticaria in children. Allergy skin testing for foods can
be helpful in identifying a cause of acute urticaria, but only when supported by historical evidence. The role of an offending food can then
be proved by elimination and food challenge, when needed. In the
absence of information implicating an ingestant cause, skin testing for
foods and implementation of elimination diets are generally not useful for either acute or chronic urticaria. Patients with delayed urticaria
3-­6 hours after a meal consisting of mammalian meat should be evaluated for IgE to galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose (“alpha-­gal”), a carbohydrate
allergen. Alpha-­gal has been identified as a trigger in this circumstance,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 189.5  Comparison of the Physical Urticarias
RELATIVE
FREQUENCY

PRECIPITANT

Symptomatic
dermographism

Most frequent

Stroking skin

Minutes

2-­3 hr

Irregular
pruritic
attacks

None

Stroke skin

Passive transfer, IgE,
histamine, possible
role of adenosine
triphosphate, substance
P, possible direct
pharmacologic
mechanism

Continual
antihistamines

Delayed
dermographism

Rare

Stroking skin

30 min to 8 hr

<48 hr

Burning, deep
swelling

None

Stroke skin,
observe early
and late

Unknown

Avoidance of
precipitants

Pressure urticaria Frequent

Pressure

3-­12 hr

8-­24 hr

Diffuse, tender
swelling

Flulike
symptoms

Apply weight

Unknown

Avoidance of
precipitants; if
severe, omalizumab

Solar urticaria

Frequent

Various
wavelengths of
light

2-­5 min

15 min to
3 hr

Pruritic wheals

Wheezing,
dizziness,
syncope

Phototest

Passive transfer, reverse
passive transfer, IgE,
possible histamine

Avoidance of
precipitants;
antihistamines,
sunscreens,
antimalarials

Familial cold
urticaria

Rare

Change in skin
temperature

30 min to 3 hr

<48 hr

Burning wheals

Tremor;
headache;
arthralgia;
fever

Expose skin to
cold air

Unknown

Avoidance of
precipitants

Essential
acquired cold
urticaria

Frequent

Cold contact

2-­5 min

1-­2 hr

Pruritic wheals

Wheezing,
syncope,
drowning

Apply ice-­filled
Passive transfer, reverse
copper beaker
passive transfer, IgE
to arm, immerse
(IgM), histamine;
vasculitis can be
induced

Cyproheptadine
hydrochloride, other
antihistamines;
desensitization;
avoidance of
precipitants

Heat urticaria

Rare

Heat contact

2-­5 min (rarely
delayed)

1 hr

Pruritic wheals

None

Apply hot
water–filled
cylinder to
arm

Possibly histamine;
possibly complement

Antihistamines,
desensitization;
avoidance of
precipitants

Cholinergic
urticaria

Very frequent

General
overheating of
body

2-­20 min

30 min to
1 hr

Papular, pruritic
wheals

Syncope;
diarrhea;
vomiting,
salivation;
headaches

Bathe in hot
water; exercise
until
perspiring,
inject
methacholine
chloride

Passive transfer;
possible
immunoglobulin;
product of sweat gland
stimulation; histamine,
reduced protease

Application of cold
water or ice to skin;
antihistamines;
omalizumab

Aquagenic
urticaria

Rare

Water contact

Several
minutes

30-­45 min

Papular, pruritic
wheals

None reported

Apply water
compresses to
skin

Unknown

Avoidance of
precipitants;
antihistamine;
application of inert
oil

Vibratory
angioedema

Very rare

Vibrating against
skin

2-­5 min

1 hr

Angioedema

None reported

Apply vibration
to forearm

Unknown

Avoidance of
precipitants

URTICARIA

TIME OF
ONSET

DURATION

LOCAL
SYMPTOMS

SYSTEMIC
SYMPTOMS

TESTS

TREATMENT

Chapter 189 u Urticaria (Hives) and Angioedema

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1429

Ig, Immunoglobulin.
From Lee AD, Jorizzo JL. Urticaria. In: Callen JP, Jorizzo JL, Bolognia JL, et al., eds. Dermatological Signs of Internal Disease. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2009: p. 59, Table 6.4.

MECHANISM

1430 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 189.6  Hereditary Diseases with Cold-­Induced Urticaria
EPISODIC SYMPTOMS
CAPS

FCAS

SUSTAINED/PROGRESSIVE SYMPTOMS

Urticarial rash, arthralgia, myalgia, chills, fever, swelling of
extremities
Urticarial rash, arthralgia, chills, fever
Fever

Renal amyloidosis

NAPS12 (FCAS2)

Fever, arthralgia, myalgia, urticaria, abdominal pain,
aphthous ulcers, lymphadenopathy

Sensorineural deafness

PLAID (FCAS3)

Urticaria induced by evaporative cooling, sinopulmonary
infections

Serum low IgM and IgA levels; high IgE levels; decreased
B and NK cells; granulomata; antinuclear antibodies

MWS
CINCA

Sensorineural deafness, renal amyloidosis
Rash, arthritis, chronic meningitis, visual defect, deafness,
growth retardation, renal amyloidosis

CAPS, Cryopyrin-­associated periodic syndromes; FCAS, familial cold-­induced autoinflammatory syndrome; MWS, Muckle-­Wells syndrome; CINCA, chronic infantile neurologic
cutaneous articular syndrome; NAPS, NLRP-­12–associated periodic syndrome; PLAID, PLCG2-­associated antibody deficiency and immune dysregulation; NK, natural killer; Ig,
immunoglobulin.
From Kanazawa N. Hereditary disorders presenting with urticaria. Immunol Allergy Clin N Amer. 2014;34:169–179. Table 4, p. 176.

Fig. 189.1 Polycyclic lesions of urticaria associated with prostaglandin E2 infusion. (From Eichenfield LF, Friedan IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of
Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001: p. 300.)

Fig. 189.2 Annular urticaria of unknown etiology. (From Eichenfield

LF, Friedan IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook of Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001: p. 301.)

with sensitization linked to tick bites in specific geographic regions,
such as the mid-­Atlantic area of the United States. Skin testing for aeroallergens is not indicated unless there is a concern about contact urticaria (animal dander or grass pollen).
Autoimmune diseases are very rare causes of chronic urticaria or
angioedema. Clinically available tests marketed for chronic urticaria
such as basophil activation tests (used as surrogates for detecting type
2 autoantibodies) are generally not recommended. The differential
diagnosis of chronic urticaria includes atopic or contact dermatitis, cutaneous or systemic mastocytosis, complement-­mediated mast
cell degranulation as may occur with circulating immune complexes,

malignancies, mixed connective tissue diseases, and cutaneous blistering disorders (e.g., bullous pemphigoid; see Table 189.2). Routine laboratory testing in chronic urticaria in the absence of other
history has not been found to be cost-­effective as it rarely changes
management. Urticaria guidelines recommend either no testing or
limited laboratory testing such as a complete blood cell count with
differential and ESR or CRP. Further studies are warranted if the
patient has fever, arthralgias, or elevated ESR (Table 189.7; see also
Table 189.4). HAE is potentially life-­threatening, usually associated
with deficient C1 inhibitor (C1-­INH) activity, and the most important familial form of angioedema (see Chapter 189.1), but it is not
associated with typical urticaria. In patients with eosinophilia, stools
should be obtained for ova and parasite testing, because infection
with helminthic parasites has been associated with urticaria. A rare
syndrome of episodic (approximately 3-­to 4-­week intervals) angioedema less often with urticaria, weight gain, and occasionally fever
with associated hypereosinophilia has been described in both adults
and children.
Skin biopsy for diagnosis of possible urticarial vasculitis is recommended for urticarial lesions that persist at the same location for
>24 hours, those with pigmented or purpuric components, and those
that burn more than itch. Collagen vascular diseases such as SLE may
manifest urticarial vasculitis as a presenting feature. The skin biopsy in
urticarial vasculitis typically shows endothelial cell swelling of postcapillary venules with necrosis of the vessel wall, perivenular neutrophil
infiltrate, diapedesis of red blood cells, and fibrin deposition associated
with deposition of immune complexes.
Mastocytosis is characterized by mast cell hyperplasia in the
bone marrow, liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and skin. Clinical effects
of mast cell activation are common, including pruritus, flushing,
urtication, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. The diagnosis is
confirmed by a bone marrow biopsy showing increased numbers
of spindle-­shaped mast cells that express CD2 and CD25. Maculopapular cutaneous mastocytosis (aka urticaria pigmentosa) is the
most common skin manifestation of mastocytosis and may occur as
an isolated skin finding. It appears as small, yellow-­tan to reddish
brown macules or raised papules that urticate on scratching (Darier
sign). This sign can be masked by antihistamines. The diagnosis is
confirmed by a skin biopsy that shows increased numbers of dermal
mast cells.
Inducible urticaria should be considered in any patient with chronic
urticaria and a suggestive history (see Tables 189.2 and 189.5). Papular
“urticaria” often occurs in small children, generally on the extremities,
but the lesions are more persistent than true urticaria. It manifests as
grouped or linear, highly pruritic wheals or papules mainly on exposed
skin at the sites of insect bites.
Exercise-­induced anaphylaxis manifests as varying combinations of pruritus, urticaria, angioedema, wheezing, or hypotension
after exercise (see Chapter 190). Cholinergic urticaria is differentiated by positive results of heat challenge tests and the rare occurrence

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 189 u Urticaria (Hives) and Angioedema
Table 189.7  Diagnostic Testing for Urticaria and
Angioedema
DIAGNOSIS

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING

Chronic spontaneous
urticaria

No testing required for diagnosis

Food and drug
reactions

Elimination of offending agent, skin
testing, and challenge with suspected
foods

Autoimmune urticaria

Autologous serum skin test; antithyroid
antibodies

Thyroiditis

Thyroid-­stimulating hormone; antithyroid
antibodies

Infections

Appropriate cultures or serology

Collagen vascular
Skin biopsy, CH50, C1q, C4, immunofluodiseases and cutaneous
rescence of tissues, antinuclear antibodvasculitis
ies, cryoglobulins
Cold urticaria

Ice cube test usually positive but may be
negative in familial autoinflammatory
disorders

Solar urticaria

Exposure to defined wavelengths of light,
red blood cell protoporphyrin, fecal
protoporphyrin, and coproporphyrin

Dermographism

Stroking with narrow object (e.g., tongue
blade)

Pressure urticaria

Application of pressure for defined time
and intensity

Vibratory urticaria

Vibration for 4 min

Aquagenic urticaria

Challenge with tap water at various
temperatures

Urticaria pigmentosa

Skin biopsy, test for dermographism

Hereditary angioedema

C4, C1-­INH testing by protein and function

Familial cold
autoinflammatory
syndrome

Genetic testing for NALP3 pathogenic
variants

of anaphylactic shock. The combination of ingestion of various food
allergens and postprandial exercise has been associated with urticaria/
angioedema and anaphylaxis. In patients with this combination disorder, the offending food or exercise alone does not produce the reaction.
Muckle-­Wells syndrome and familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome are rare, autosomal dominantly inherited conditions associated with recurrent urticaria-­like lesions. Muckle-­Wells syndrome is
characterized by arthritis and joint pain that usually appears in adolescence. It is associated with progressive nerve deafness, recurrent fever,
elevated ESR (see Tables 189.3 and 189.6), hypergammaglobulinemia,
renal amyloidosis, and a poor prognosis. Familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome is characterized by a cold-­induced rash that has urticarial features but is rarely pruritic. Cold exposure leads to additional
symptoms such as conjunctivitis, sweating, headache, and nausea.

Treatment

Acute urticaria is a self-­limited illness requiring little treatment other than
antihistamines and avoidance of any identified trigger. Hydroxyzine and
diphenhydramine are sedating but are effective and frequently used for
treatment of urticaria. Loratadine, fexofenadine, and cetirizine are also
effective and are preferable because of reduced sedation (Table 189.8).
Epinephrine 1:1,000, 0.01 mg/kg (maximum 0.5 mg) intramuscularly,
usually provides rapid relief of acute, severe urticaria/angioedema but is
seldom required. A short course of oral corticosteroids may be given for
more severe episodes of urticaria and angioedema that are unresponsive
to antihistamines.

1431

Table 189.8  Treatment of Urticaria and Angioedema
CLASS/DRUG

DOSE

FREQUENCY

ANTIHISTAMINES, TYPE H1 (SECOND GENERATION)
Fexofenadine
6-­11 yr: 30 mg
Twice daily
>12 yr: 60 mg
Adult: 180 mg
Once daily
Loratadine
2-­5 yr: 5 mg
Once daily
>6 yr: 10 mg
Desloratadine
6-­11 mo: 1 mg
Once daily
12 mo-­5 yr: 1.25 mg
6-­11 yr: 2.5 mg
>12 yr: 5 mg
Cetirizine
6-­23 mo: 2.5 mg
Once daily
2-­6 yr: 2.5-­5 mg
>6 yr: 5-­10 mg
>12 yr: 10 mg
Once daily
Levocetirizine
6 mo-­5 yr: 1.25 mg
Once daily
6-­11 yr: 2.5 mg
Once daily
>12 yr: 5 mg
Once daily
ANTIHISTAMINES, TYPE H2
Cimetidine
Infants: 10-­20 mg/kg/day
Children: 20-­40 mg/kg/day
Ranitidine
1 mo-­16 yr: 5-­10 mg/kg/day
Famotidine
3-­12 mo: 1 mg/kg/day
1-­16 yr: 1-­2 mg/kg/day
LEUKOTRIENE PATHWAY MODIFIERS
Montelukast
12 mo-­5 yr: 4 mg
6-­14 yr: 5 mg
>14 yr: 10 mg
Zafirlukast
5-­11 yr: 10 mg
IMMUNOMODULATORY DRUGS
Omalizumab (anti
>11 yr: 300 mg
IgE)
Cyclosporine
1-­4 mg/kg/day

Divided q6-­12h
Divided q12h
Divided q12h

Once daily

Twice daily
Every 28 days
Divided q12h*

*Monitor blood pressure and serum creatinine, potassium, and magnesium levels
monthly.

The best treatment of inducible urticaria is avoidance of the stimulus;
however, for some conditions like cholinergic urticaria, this can be very
difficult. Antihistamines with appropriate updosing, should be tried in
all inducible urticarias but may not be effective in many patients.
Management of chronic urticaria through dietary manipulation
is not recommended by U.S. guidelines. The mainstay of therapy for
chronic urticaria is the use of nonsedating or low-­sedating H1 antihistamines. In those patients not showing response to standard doses,
increasing the dose up to fourfold the recommended dose is recommended; however, studies on the safety and efficacy of this approach
in children are lacking. The addition of H2 antihistamines and/or
leukotriene receptor antagonists (e.g., montelukast) is controversial.
These medications are generally benign but evidence supporting their
efficacy is weak. For chronic urticaria patients that are not well controlled, brief courses of oral corticosteroids may be considered, but
long-­term corticosteroid use is not recommended. The monoclonal
antibody omalizumab (anti-­IgE) is approved by the US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of chronic urticaria
in children 12 years and older. Other agents that have been used for
chronic urticaria but are not approved by the FDA include cyclosporine, tacrolimus, mycophenolate, dapsone, hydroxychloroquine,
sulfasalazine, and azathioprine. Ultraviolet light therapy may also be
beneficial in refractory cases. Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitors
have demonstrated efficacy in treating chronic spontaneous urticaria
and have a rapid onset of action with few side effects.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1432 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
THE DIAGNOSIS OF C1-INH DEFICIENCY

189.1 Hereditary Angioedema

Asymptomatic pediatric patient
with positive family history of C1-INH-HAE

Aleena Banerji, David A. Khan, and Scott H. Sicherer

ETIOLOGY, PATHOGENESIS, CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS, AND DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH

HAE (types 1 and 2) is an inherited autosomal dominant genetic disease caused by low functional levels of the plasma protein C1-­INH.
Patients typically report unpredictable episodic attacks of angioedema
or deep localized swelling, most often on a hand or foot, that begin during childhood or adolescence. Cutaneous nonpitting and nonpruritic
edema not associated with urticaria is the most common symptom.
The swelling usually becomes more severe over about several hours and
then resolves over 2-­5 days when left untreated. However, the duration of attacks can be quite variable. In some patients, attacks are preceded by the development of a rash, erythema marginatum, that is
erythematous, not raised, and not pruritic. A second major symptom
complex noted by patients is attacks of severe abdominal pain caused
by edema of the mucosa of any portion of the GI tract. The intensity of
the pain can approximate that of an acute abdomen, often resulting in
unnecessary surgery, including appendectomy. Either constipation or
diarrhea during these attacks can be noted. The GI edema generally
follows the same time course to resolution as the cutaneous attacks.
Patients may have a prodrome, a tightness or tingling in the area that
will swell, usually lasting several hours, followed by the development
of angioedema.
Laryngeal edema, the most worrisome complication of HAE, can
cause complete respiratory obstruction with a high risk of mortality when untreated. Although life-­threatening attacks are infrequent,
more than half of patients with HAE experience laryngeal involvement
at some time during their lives. Laryngeal edema can be triggered by
local trauma but can also occur spontaneously without any identifiable trigger. The clinical condition may deteriorate rapidly, progressing
through mild discomfort to complete airway obstruction over hours.
Soft tissue edema can be readily seen when the disease involves the
throat and uvula. If this edema progresses to difficulty swallowing
secretions or a change in the tone of the voice, the patient may require
emergency intubation or even tracheostomy to ensure an adequate
airway. As symptoms are bradykinin mediated, patients with HAE
typically do not respond well to treatment with epinephrine, antihistamines, or glucocorticoids.
In most cases the cause of the attack is unknown, but in some
patients, trauma, infections or emotional stress clearly precipitates
attacks. Drugs such as estrogen or angiotensin-­converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors that inhibit the degradation of bradykinin make the
disease strikingly worse. In some females, menstruation can be associated with an increase in attacks. The frequency of attacks varies greatly
among affected individuals and at different times in the same individual. Some individuals experience weekly episodes, whereas others may
go years between attacks. Episodes can start at any age.
C1-­INH is a member of the serpin family of proteases, similar to
α-­antitrypsin, antithrombin III, and angiotensinogen. These proteins
stoichiometrically inactivate their target proteases by forming stable,
1:1 complexes with the protein to be inhibited. Synthesized primarily
by hepatocytes, C1-­INH is also synthesized by monocytes. The regulation of the protein production is not completely understood, but it
is believed that androgens may stimulate C1-­INH synthesis, because
patients with the disorder respond clinically to androgen therapy with
elevated serum C1-­INH levels. C1-­INH deficiency is an autosomal
dominant disease, with as many as 25% of patients giving no family
history. Because all C1-­INH–deficient patients are heterozygous for
this gene variation, it is believed that half the normal level of C1-­INH
is not sufficient to prevent attacks. Figure 189.3 shows the diagnostic
approach.
Although named for its action on the first component of complement (C1 esterase), C1-­INH also inhibits components of the fibrinolytic, clotting, and kinin pathways. Specifically, C1-­INH inactivates
plasmin-­activated Hageman factor (factor XII), activated factor XI,

If a pathogenic variant
has been detected in
the family, and the test
is available then
Consider genetic
testing before
12 mo of age

Neonate

Infant

Umbilical cord blood
C1-INH functional
& antigenic levels,
C4

Peripheral blood
C1-INH functional
& antigenic levels,
C4

Repeat after
1 year of age

Complete after
12 mo of age

Until C1-INH-HAE diagnosis is
ruled out with testing performed
after one year of age, the pediatric
patient should be considered to
have inherited C1-INH deficiency.

A
THE DIAGNOSIS OF PEDIATRIC C1-INH-HAE
Pediatric patient with angioedema of unknown etiology
Positive/negative family history

C1-INH functional and antigenic
level, C4
Positive screen*

Negative screen

Perform initial testing on
peripheral blood after
12 mo of age

C1-INH-HAE excluded

Consider DNA analysis

B

*Normal C1-INH antigen but
low C1-INH activity confirms
HAE2
Angioedema with acquired
C1-INH deficiency is also
excluded, but HAE with normal
C1-INH function, which is very
rare in pediatric patients, is not
ruled out

Fig. 189.3 A, Diagnosis of C1-­INH deficiency in families with known

C1-­INH hereditary angioedema (HAE). B, Diagnosis of C1-­INH HAE in
pediatric patients with angioedema of unknown etiology. (From Farkas H, Martinez-­
Saguer I, Bork K, et al. International consensus on
the diagnosis and management of pediatric patients with hereditary
angioedema with C1 inhibitor deficiency. Eur J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2017;72:300–313. Fig. 1, p. 304.)

plasma thromboplastin antecedent, and kallikrein. Within the complement system, C1-­INH blocks the activation of C1 and the rest of the
classical complement pathway by binding to C1r and C1s. Without
adequate C1-­INH, unchecked activation of C1 causes cleavage of C4
and C2, the proteins following in the complement cascade. Levels of
C3 are normal. C1-­INH also inhibits serine proteases associated with
activation of the lectin activation pathway. The major factor responsible for the edema formation is bradykinin, an important nonapeptide
mediator that can induce leakage of postcapillary venules. Bradykinin is derived from cleavage of the circulating protein high molecular
weight kininogen by the plasma enzyme kallikrein.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 189 u Urticaria (Hives) and Angioedema
Two major genetic types of C1-­INH deficiency are described that
result in essentially the same phenotypic expression. The C1-­INH gene
is located on chromosome 11 in the p11-­q13 region. The inheritance
is autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance. Persons inheriting the variant gene can have a clinical spectrum ranging from asymptomatic to severely affected. Type 1 HAE is the most common form,
accounting for approximately 80–85% of cases. Synthesis of C1-­INH
is blocked at the site of the faulty allele, or the protein is not secreted
normally because of faulty protein processing, but secretion occurs at
the normal allele. The result is secretion of the normal protein, yielding
quantitative serum concentrations of C1-­INH approximately 20–40%
of normal. Type 2 HAE accounts for approximately 15–20% of cases.
Pathogenic variants of one of the amino acids near the active site of the
inhibitor lead to synthesis of nonfunctional C1-­INH protein and again
less than half of the normal functioning protein. Patients with type 2
HAE have either normal or increased concentrations of the protein but
low values in assays of C1-­INH function.
A clinical syndrome resembling HAE termed HAE with normal
C1-­INH has been described that more commonly affects females, with
a tendency to cause fewer abdominal attacks and more upper airway
attacks. In this condition, no abnormalities of complement or of C1-­
INH have been described. A small number of affected patients have
been found to have a gain-­of-­function abnormality of clotting factor
XII, but the fundamental cause of this syndrome is still unknown.
Additional pathogenic variants including ANGPT1 (angiopoietin­1), PLG (plasminogen), KNG1 (kininogen), MYOF (myoferlin), and
HS3ST6 (heparan sulfate-­glucosamine 3-­O-­sulfotransferase 6) have
been identified. Acquired C1-­INH is associated with low levels of C4,
C1-­INH, and C1q (Table 189.9).

1433

TREATMENT

Treatment of HAE is aimed at use of on-­demand treatment when an
attack starts along with long-­term prophylaxis to prevent attacks. Short-­
term prophylaxis is used prior to a known trigger such as a surgical
or dental procedure. The medical management of HAE has improved
significantly in recent years with the availability of several new safe
and effective therapies approved by the FDA in the United States. To
provide optimal care and restore a normal quality of life, treatment of
patients with HAE needs to be individualized based on patient-­specific
factors including patient preference and access to emergency care.
Options for long-­term prophylaxis in patients with HAE include
an intravenous formulation of plasma-­derived C1-­INH concentrate
(Cinryze) given twice a week. Cinryze was FDA approved in 2008 for
adolescents and adults. The half-­life of this plasma protein is relatively
short, about 40 hours, and the approved regimen is 1,000 units twice a
week. In 2017, a subcutaneous C1-­INH concentrate formulation given
twice a week was approved for long-­term prophylaxis in adolescents
and adults. Lanadelumab, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits plasma
kallikrein, given subcutaneously once every 2-­4 weeks, along with
berotralstat, an oral once a day pill, which inhibits plasma kallikrein,
are the newest treatment options available for long-­term prophylaxis
in patients with HAE (see Table 189.10). Garadacimab, a fully human
recombinant monoclonal antibody targeting activated factor XII, has
shown efficacy as a prophylactic agent.
Androgens, like the gonadotropin inhibitor danazol, were previously used more frequently for long-­term prophylaxis to prevent
attacks. Weak androgens have many side effects that preclude their use
in some patients. Their use in children is problematic because of the
possibility of premature closure of the epiphyses, and these agents are

Table 189.9  Complement Evaluation of Patients with Recurrent Angioedema
C4

C1-­INH LEVEL

C1-­INH FUNCTION

C1q

Idiopathic angioedema

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Type 1 HAE

Low

Low

Low

Normal

Type 2 HAE

Low

Normal

Low

Normal

HAE-­nlC1-­INH

Normal

Normal

Normal

Normal

Acquired C1-­INH deficiency

Low

Low

Low

Low

Urticarial vasculitis

Low or normal

Normal

Normal

Low or normal

C1-­INH, C1 inhibitor; HAE-­nlC1-­INH, hereditary angioedema with normal C1-­INH; nl, normal.
From Joshi SR, Khan DA. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:
Table 39.3, p. 338.

Table 189.10  Long-­Term Prophylactic Treatment Options for Patients with Hereditary Angioedema in the United States
DATE OF FDA
APPROVAL IN US

MECHANISM OF ACTION

ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

Intravenous plasma-­derived
C1-­INH

2008

Replacing missing protein

Intravenous

Dependent on plasma supply
Extensive clinical experience

Subcutaneous plasma-­
derived C1-­INH

2017

Replacing missing protein

Subcutaneous

Dependent on plasma supply
Improved steady-­state C1-­INH levels

Lanadelumab

2018

Plasma kallikrein inhibitor

Subcutaneous

Unknown safety in pregnancy
Infrequent dosing every 2-­4 wk

Berotralstat

2020

Plasma kallikrein inhibitor

Oral

Unknown safety in pregnancy
Once a day pill

Attenuated androgens

1976

Increases circulating levels
of C1-­INH protein

Oral

Significant adverse effects
Contraindicated in pregnancy,
lactation and children

Antifibrinolytics

1986

Reduces complement
activation and C1-­INH
protein consumption

Oral

Significant adverse effects
Inferior efficacy compared with other
agents

DRUG

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1434 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 189.11  On-­Demand Treatment Options for Patients with Hereditary Angioedema in the United States
DATE OF FDA
APPROVAL IN US

DRUG

MECHANISM OF ACTION

ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

Intravenous plasma-­derived
C1-­INH

2009

Replacing missing protein

Intravenous

Dependent on plasma supply
Extensive clinical experience

Recombinant
C1-­INH

2014

Replacing missing protein

Intravenous

No human virus risk
Scalable supply

Ecallantide

2009

Plasma kallikrein inhibitor

Subcutaneous

No infectious risk
3–4% risk of anaphylaxis
Requires administration by a
healthcare provider

Icatibant

2011

B2 bradykinin receptor antagonist

Subcutaneous

No infectious risk
Stable at room temperature
Local injection reactions

not used in pregnant women. The fibrinolysis inhibitor ε-­aminocaproic
acid (EACA) is also effective in preventing attacks and has been used
in children, but its use is attenuated by the development of severe
fatigue and muscle weakness over time. A cyclized analog of EACA,
tranexamic acid, has been used extensively in Europe; because of side
effects and increased availability of other novel treatment options, it
has been used less extensively in the United States. Tranexamic acid
is believed to be more effective than EACA and has lower toxicity,
but there have been few direct studies. Its mechanism of action is not
clearly defined, and not all patients respond to this agent.
There are four on-­demand treatment options FDA approved in the
United States for patients with HAE. The first, approved in 2009, is a
purified C1-­inhibitor product (Berinert) that is administered as 20 U/
kg intravenously. It was approved for the treatment of attacks. In 2009
the FDA approved a kallikrein inhibitor, ecallantide, given subcutaneously, for acute treatment in patients age 16 years and older. This
60–amino acid peptide causes anaphylaxis rarely and is approved only
for administration by medical personnel. In 2010 a bradykinin type
2 receptor antagonist, icatibant, was approved for acute treatment in
patients age 18 years and older. An intravenous recombinant C1-­INH
product has been FDA approved in 2014 for treatment of acute attacks
(and in Europe) in adolescents and adults (see Table 189.11). All treatments are most effective when given early in an attack and begin to
have a noticeable effect about 1-­4 hours after treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 190

Anaphylaxis
Hugh A. Sampson, Julie Wang, and
Scott H. Sicherer
Anaphylaxis is a serious allergic reaction that is rapid in onset and
may cause death. Anaphylaxis in children, particularly infants, may be
underdiagnosed. Anaphylaxis occurs when there is a sudden release
of potent, biologically active mediators from mast cells and basophils,
leading to cutaneous (urticaria, angioedema, flushing), respiratory
(bronchospasm, laryngeal edema), cardiovascular (hypotension, dysrhythmias, myocardial ischemia), and gastrointestinal (GI; nausea, colicky abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea) symptoms (Table 190.1 and
Fig. 190.1).

Table 190.1  Clinical Criteria for Diagnosing Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is highly likely when any one of the following three
criteria is fulfilled:
1.	Acute onset of an illness (minutes to several hours) with
involvement of the skin, mucosal tissue, or both (e.g., generalized
urticaria, itching or flushing, swollen lips-­tongue-­uvula)
And at least one of the following:
A.	Respiratory compromise (e.g., dyspnea, wheeze-­
bronchospasm, stridor, hypoxemia)
B.	Reduced blood pressure or associated symptoms of end-­
organ dysfunction (e.g., hypotonia [collapse], syncope,
incontinence)
OR
2.	Two or more of the following that occur rapidly after exposure
to a likely allergen (or other trigger) for that patient (minutes to
several hours)
A.	Involvement of the skin/mucosal tissue (e.g., generalized
urticaria, itch-­flush, swollen lips-­tongue-­uvula)
B.	Respiratory compromise (e.g., dyspnea, wheeze or
bronchospasm, stridor, reduced peak expiratory flow, hypoxemia)
C.	Reduced blood pressure or associated symptoms (e.g.,
hypotonia [collapse], syncope, incontinence)
D.	Persistent gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., crampy abdominal
pain, vomiting)
OR
3.	Reduced blood pressure after exposure to a known allergen or
other trigger for that patient (minutes to hours).
A.	Infants and children: low systolic blood pressure (age-­specific)
or greater than 30% decrease in systolic blood pressure
B.	Adults: systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mm Hg or
greater than 30% decrease from that person’s baseline
From Sampson HA, Muñoz-Furlong A, Campbell RL, et al. Second symposium on the
definition and management of anaphylaxis: summary report–Second National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Disease/Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis Network symposium.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2006;117(2):391-7.

ETIOLOGY

The most common causes of anaphylaxis in children are different for
hospital and community settings. Anaphylaxis occurring in the hospital
results primarily from allergic reactions to medications and latex. Food
allergy is the most common cause of anaphylaxis occurring outside the
hospital, accounting for about half the anaphylactic reactions reported
in pediatric surveys from the United States, Italy, and South Australia
(Table 190.2). Peanut allergy is an important cause of food-­induced anaphylaxis, accounting for the majority of fatal and near-­fatal reactions. In
the hospital, latex is a particular problem for children undergoing multiple operations, such as patients with spina bifida and urologic disorders, and has prompted many hospitals to switch to latex-­free products.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 190 u Anaphylaxis

1435

ANAPHYLAXIS PATHOGENESIS

Immunologic
IgE/Fc RI

Immunologic
other

• Food
• Insect stings/bites
• Medications (e.g. β-lactam
antibiotics)
• Other (e.g. latex)

• Complement cascade activation
• Coagulation pathway activation

Mast cells

Histamine

Skin
• Itching
• Flushing
• Hives
• Angioedema

Tryptase

Direct mast
cell activation

Carboxypeptidase A

• Cough
• Dyspnea
• Hoarseness
• Stridor
• Wheeze

Basophils

Chymase

PAF

GI

Respiratory

• Exercise
• Cold
• Medications (e.g. opioids)
• Other

Prostaglandins

Leukotrienes

CVS

• Vomiting
• Diarrhea
• Abdominal pain

• Dizziness
• Hypotension
• Shock
• Incontinence
• Angina
• Arrhythmia

Other

CNS
• Headache

Fig. 190.1 Summary of the pathogenesis of anaphylaxis. See text for details about mechanisms, triggers, key cells, and mediators. Two or more

target organ systems are typically involved in anaphylaxis. CNS, Central nervous system; CVS, cardiovascular system; GI, gastrointestinal; PAF,
platelet-­activating factor. (From Leung DYM, Szefler SJ, Bonilla FA Akdis CA, Sampson HA, eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: p. 525.)

Table 190.2  Anaphylaxis Triggers in the Community*
ALLERGEN TRIGGERS (IgE-­DEPENDENT IMMUNOLOGIC
MECHANISM)*
Foods (e.g., peanut, tree nuts, shellfish, fish, milk, egg, wheat, soy,
sesame, meat [galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose])
Food additives (e.g., spices, colorants, vegetable gums,
contaminants)
Stinging insects: Hymenoptera species (e.g., bees, yellow jackets,
wasps, hornets, fire ants)
Medications (e.g., β-­lactam antibiotics, ibuprofen)
Biologic agents (e.g., monoclonal antibodies [infliximab, omalizumab]
and allergens [challenge tests, specific immunotherapy])
Natural rubber latex
Vaccines
Inhalants (rare) (e.g., horse or hamster dander, grass pollen)

OTHER IMMUNE MECHANISMS (IgE INDEPENDENT)
IgG mediated (infliximab, high molecular weight dextrans)
Immune aggregates (IVIG)
Drugs (aspirin, NSAID, opiates, contrast material, ethylene oxide/
dialysis tubing)
Complement activation
Physical factors (e.g., exercise,† cold, heat, sunlight/ultraviolet
radiation)
Ethanol
Idiopathic*

*In the pediatric population, some anaphylaxis triggers, such as hormones (progesterone), seminal fluid, and occupational allergens, are uncommon, as is idiopathic anaphylaxis.
†Exercise with or without a co-­trigger, such as a food or medication, cold air, or cold water.

IVIG, Intravenous immunoglobulin; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug.
Adapted from Leung DYM, Sampson HA, Geha RS, et al. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010. p. 652.

Patients with latex allergy may also experience food-­allergic reactions
from homologous proteins in foods such as bananas, kiwi, avocado,
chestnut, and passion fruit. Anaphylaxis to galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose
has been reported 3-­6 hours after eating red meat (see Chapter 189).
Anaphylaxis may be idiopathic and in some of these patients related to
mast cell activation syndrome (Fig. 190.2; see Chapter 700.1) or familial
hypertryptasemia. Exercise-­induced anaphylaxis has been associated
with the combination of certain foods and exercise. Ingestion of the food
without exercise does not produce allergic symptoms or anaphylaxis.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The overall annual incidence of anaphylaxis in the United States is
estimated at 42 cases per 100,000 person-­years, totaling >150,000
cases per year. Food allergens are the most common trigger in children, with an incidence rate of approximately 20 per 100,000 person-­
years. An Australian parental survey found that 0.59% of children
3-­17 years of age had experienced at least one anaphylactic event.
Having asthma and the severity of asthma are important anaphylaxis risk factors (Table 190.3). In addition, patients with systemic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1436 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Idiopathic anaphylaxis

MCAS clinical criterion

Acute onset of symptoms with
involvement of organs as below

Acute onset of symptoms with concurrent involvement
of minimum 2 of the 5 organ systems as below

Skin and/or mucosa
• Flushing
• Pruritus
• Hives
• Angioedema

Skin and/or mucosa
• Flushing
• Pruritus
• Hives
• Angioedema

Gastrointestinal
• Vomiting
• Abdominal cramps
• Diarrhea

And either
Respiratory
• Dyspnea
• Wheezing
• Stridor
• Hypoxia

Respiratory

Nasoocular
• Nasal congestion
• Nasal pruritus
• Sneezing
• Rhinorrhea

• Dyspnea
• Wheezing
• Stridor
• Hypoxia

Or
Cardiovascular
• Hypotonia
• Syncope
• Collapse
• Incontinence

Cardiovascular
• Hypotonia
• Syncope
• Collapse
• Incontinence

Fig. 190.2 The criteria of idiopathic anaphylaxis versus mast cell activation syndrome. Note that when there is no likely cause of the reactions, if
the onset of illness is acute, a diagnosis of idiopathic anaphylaxis can only be made when either reduced blood pressure (or its symptoms such as
syncope) and/or respiratory compromise are present accompanied by the involvement of the skin mucosal tissue symptoms. (From Gulen T, Akin C.
Idiopathic anaphylaxis: A perplexing diagnostic challenge for allergists. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep. 2021;21[2]:11. Fig. 1.)

mastocytosis or monoclonal mast cell–activating syndrome are at
increased risk for anaphylaxis, as are patients with an elevated baseline serum tryptase level.

PATHOGENESIS

Principal pathologic features in fatal anaphylaxis include acute bronchial obstruction with pulmonary hyperinflation, pulmonary edema,
intraalveolar hemorrhaging, visceral congestion, laryngeal edema, and
urticaria and angioedema. Acute hypotension is attributed to vasomotor dilation and cardiac dysrhythmias.
Most cases of anaphylaxis are believed to be the result of activation of
mast cells and basophils via cell-­bound allergen-­specific IgE molecules
(see Fig. 190.1). Patients initially must be exposed to the responsible
allergen to generate allergen-­specific IgE antibodies. In many cases the
child and the parent are unaware of the initial exposure, which may be
from passage of food proteins in maternal breast milk or exposure to
inflamed skin (e.g., eczematous lesions). When the child is reexposed
to the sensitizing allergen, mast cells and basophils, and possibly other
cells such as macrophages, release a variety of mediators (histamine,
tryptase) and cytokines that can produce allergic symptoms in any or
all target organs. Anaphylaxis may also be caused by mechanisms other
than IgE-­mediated reactions, including direct release of mediators
from mast cells by medications and physical factors (opiates, exercise,
cold), disturbances of leukotriene metabolism (aspirin and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs), immune aggregates and complement
activation (blood products), probable complement activation (radiocontrast dyes, dialysis membranes), and IgG-­mediated reactions (high
molecular weight dextran, chimeric or humanized monoclonal antibodies) (see Table 190.2).
Idiopathic anaphylaxis (IA) is a diagnosis of exclusion when no
inciting agent is identified, and other disorders have been excluded
(see Chapter 700.1). Symptoms are similar to IgE-­mediated causes
of anaphylaxis; episodes often recur (see Fig. 190.2). IA may be
secondary to mast cell activation syndrome with bone marrow

expansion of mast cells exhibiting a D816V KIT pathologic variant
or aberrant mast cell clonality on flow cytometry expressing CD117,
CD2, or CD25 markers. Associated features of IA-­associated mast
cell activation syndrome include insect (venom) sting anaphylaxis with hypotension and persistent (once recovered) elevations
of tryptase at times associated with autosomal dominant familial
hypertryptasemia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The onset of symptoms may vary depending on the cause of the
reaction. Reactions from ingested allergens (foods, medications) are
delayed in onset (minutes to 2 hours) compared with those from
injected allergens (insect sting, medications) and tend to have more
GI symptoms. Initial symptoms may include any of the following constellation of symptoms: pruritus about the mouth and face; flushing,
urticaria and angioedema, and oral or cutaneous pruritus; a sensation
of warmth, weakness, and apprehension (sense of doom); tightness
in the throat, dry staccato cough and hoarseness, periocular pruritus, nasal congestion, sneezing, dyspnea, deep cough and wheezing;
nausea, abdominal cramping, and vomiting, especially with ingested
allergens; uterine contractions (manifesting as lower back pain); and
faintness and loss of consciousness in severe cases. Some degree of
obstructive laryngeal edema is typically encountered with severe reactions. Cutaneous symptoms may be absent in up to 10% of cases, and
the acute onset of severe bronchospasm in a previously well person
with asthma should suggest the diagnosis of anaphylaxis. Sudden
collapse in the absence of cutaneous symptoms should also raise suspicion of vasovagal collapse, myocardial infarction, aspiration, pulmonary embolism, or seizure disorder. Laryngeal edema, especially
with abdominal pain, may also be a result of hereditary angioedema
(see Chapter 189.1). Symptoms in infants may not be easy to identify. Infants may manifest nonspecific symptoms such as sudden crying, fussiness, flushing, dysphonia, drooling, vomiting, and becoming
quiet or drowsy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 190 u Anaphylaxis
Table 190.3  Patient Risk Factors for Anaphylaxis

Table 190.4  Differential Diagnosis of Anaphylaxis

AGE-­RELATED FACTORS
Infants: anaphylaxis can be difficult to recognize, especially if the first
episode; patients cannot describe symptoms
Adolescents and young adults: increased risk-­taking behaviors, such
as failure to avoid known triggers and to carry an epinephrine
autoinjector consistently
Pregnancy: risk of iatrogenic anaphylaxis, as from β-­lactam
antibiotics to prevent neonatal group B streptococcal infection,
agents used perioperatively during caesarean sections, and natural
rubber latex
Older people: increased risk of death because of concomitant
disease and drugs

Anaphylaxis to exogenously administered agents
Physical factors
Exercise
Cold, heat, sunlight
Idiopathic

CONCOMITANT DISEASES
Asthma and other chronic respiratory diseases
Cardiovascular diseases
Systemic mastocytosis or monoclonal mast cell–activating syndrome
Allergic rhinitis and eczema*
Depression, cognitive dysfunction, substance misuse
DRUGS
NSAIDs
β-­Adrenergic blockers†
Mast cell destabilizers
ACE inhibitors†
Sedatives, antidepressants, narcotics, recreational drugs, and alcohol
may decrease the patient’s ability to recognize triggers and
symptoms.
Caffeine
FACTORS THAT MAY INCREASE RISK FOR ANAPHYLAXIS OR
MAKE IT MORE DIFFICULT TO TREAT
Age
Asthma
Eczema
Drugs
Alcohol
Other cofactors such as exercise, infection, menses
*Atopic diseases are a risk factor for anaphylaxis triggered by food, latex, and exercise,
but not for anaphylaxis triggered by most drugs or by insect stings.
†Those taking β-­blockers may not respond optimally to epinephrine treatment and may
need glucagon, a polypeptide with non–catecholamine-­dependent inotropic and
chronotropic cardiac effects, atropine for persistent bradycardia, or ipratropium for
persistent bronchospasm.
ACE, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
Adapted from Lieberman P, Nicklas RA, Randolph C, et al. Anaphylaxis—a practice
parameter update 2015. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2015;115(5):341–384. Table I-­9.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory studies may indicate the presence of IgE antibodies to a
suspected causative agent, but this result is not definitive. Plasma
histamine is elevated for a brief period but is unstable and difficult
to measure in a clinical setting. Plasma tryptase is more stable and
remains elevated for several hours but often is not elevated, especially
in food-­induced anaphylactic reactions. Plasma tryptase may also be
elevated with chronic renal disease, eosinophilic GI disorders, parasitic
infections, Gaucher disease, and mast cell activation syndrome or as a
familial trait.

DIAGNOSIS

A National Institutes of Health (NIH)–sponsored expert panel has
recommended an approach to the diagnosis of anaphylaxis (see Table
190.1). The differential diagnosis includes other forms of shock (hemorrhagic, cardiogenic, septic), vasopressor reactions, including flushing syndromes (e.g., carcinoid syndrome), ingestion of monosodium
glutamate, scombroidosis, and hereditary angioedema (Table 190.4).

1437

VASODEPRESSOR (VASOVAGAL) RESPONSES
Flushing syndromes
Carcinoid, pheochromocytoma, medullary carcinoma of the thyroid
Menopause
Side effects of chlorpropamide, alcohol, calcium channel blockers
Autonomic epilepsy
FOOD-­ASSOCIATED SYNDROMES
Scombroidosis
Sulfites
Monosodium glutamate (MSG)
OTHER FORMS OF SHOCK
Cardiogenic
Septic
Vascular
EXCESS ENDOGENOUS PRODUCTION OF HISTAMINE
SYNDROMES
Mast cell activation syndrome
Systemic mastocytosis
Cutaneous mastocytosis
Mast cell leukemia
Acute promyelocytic leukemia
NONORGANIC DISEASE
Panic attacks
Munchausen stridor
Vocal cord dysfunction
Undifferentiated somatoform anaphylaxis
MISCELLANEOUS
Acute urticaria with or without angioedema
Hereditary angioedema
Idiopathic angioedema
Neurologic (seizure, stroke)
Red man syndrome (vancomycin)
Capillary leak syndrome
From Dreskin SC, Stitt JM. Anaphylaxis. In: Burks AW, Holgate ST, O’Hehir RE, et al.,
eds. Middleton’s Allergy: Principles and Practice. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020:
Box 75.6, p. 1237.

In addition, panic attack, vocal cord dysfunction, pheochromocytoma,
and vancomycin-­induced flushing should be considered.

TREATMENT

Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency requiring aggressive management
with intramuscular (IM, first line) or intravenous (IV) epinephrine.
Oral (PO), IM, or IV H1 and H2 antihistamine antagonists, oxygen, IV fluids, inhaled β-­agonists, and corticosteroids are adjunctive
medications that may be used (Table 190.5 and Fig. 190.3). The initial
assessment should ensure an adequate airway with effective respiration, circulation, and perfusion. Epinephrine is the most important
medication, and there should be no delay in its administration. Epinephrine should be given by the IM route to the lateral thigh (1:1000
dilution, 0.01 mg/kg; maximum 0.5 mg). Children weighing 25 kg or
more should receive 0.3 mg IM, with many recommending 0.5 mg IM
for older adolescents. The IM dose can be repeated at intervals of 5-­15
minutes if symptoms persist or worsen. If there is no response to multiple doses of epinephrine, IV epinephrine using the 1:10,000 dilution

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1438 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 190.5  Management of a Patient with Anaphylaxis
MECHANISM(S) OF
­EFFECT

TREATMENT

DOSAGE(S)

PATIENT EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT (DEPENDENT ON SEVERITY OF SYMPTOMS)
Epinephrine (adrenaline)
α1-­, β1-­, β2-­Adrenergic
0.01 mg/kg, up to 0.3 mg IM in lateral thigh
effects
(0.5 mg autoinjectors are not available in
the United States)
Epinephrine autoinjector:
0.1 mg for 7.5-­13 kg
0.15 mg for <25 kg
0.3 mg for 25 kg or more
A second dose may be given in 5 min if
symptoms worsen or do not improve
Cetirizine (liquid)
Antihistamine (competitive Cetirizine liquid: 5 mg/5 mL
of H1 receptor)
0.25 mg/kg, up to 10 mg PO
Alternative: DiphenhyAntihistamine (competitive 1.25 mg/kg up to 50 mg PO or IM
dramine
of H1 receptor)
Transport to an emergency facility
EMERGENCY PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT (DEPENDENT ON SEVERITY OF SYMPTOMS)
Epinephrine (adrenaline)
α1-­, β1-­, β2-­Adrenergic
0.01 mg/kg, up to 0.5 mg IM in lateral thigh
effects
Epinephrine autoinjector:
0.1 mg for 7.5-­13 kg
0.15 mg for <25 kg
0.3 mg for 25 kg or more
0.01 mL/kg/dose of 1:1,000 (vial) solution, up
to 0.5 mL IM
May repeat every 10-­15 min
For severe hypotension: 0.01 mL/kg/dose of
1:10,000 slow IV push

COMMENTS; ADVERSE REACTIONS
Tachycardia, hypertension, nervousness,
headache, nausea, irritability, tremor

Hypotension, tachycardia, somnolence
Hypotension, tachycardia, somnolence,
paradoxical excitement

Tachycardia, hypertension, nervousness,
headache, nausea, irritability, tremor

Supplemental oxygen and airway management
Volume Expanders
Crystalloids (normal
saline or Ringer lactate)

30 mL/kg in first hour

Colloids (hydroxyethyl
starch)
Antihistamines
Cetirizine (liquid)

10 mL/kg rapidly followed by slow infusion

Antihistamine (competitive
of H1 receptor)
Antihistamine (competitive
of H1 receptor)
Antihistamine (competitive
of H2 receptor)
Antihistamine (competitive
of H2 receptor)

Cetirizine liquid: 5 mg/5 mL
0.25 mg/kg, up to 10 mg PO
1.25 mg/kg, up to 50 mg PO, IM, or IV

Corticosteroids
Methylprednisolone

Antiinflammatory

Prednisone

Antiinflammatory

Solu-­Medrol (IV): 1-­2 mg/kg, up to 125 mg IV
Depo-­Medrol (IM): 1 mg/kg, up to 80 mg IM
1 mg/kg up, to 75 mg PO

Nebulized albuterol

β-­Agonist

0.83 mg/mL (3 mL) via mask with O2

Alternative:
Diphenhydramine
Ranitidine
Alternative: Cimetidine

1 mg/kg, up to 50 mg IV
Should be administered slowly
4 mg/kg, up to 200 mg IV
Should be administered slowly

Rate titrated against BP response
If tolerated, place patient supine with
legs raised
Rate titrated against BP response
If tolerated, place patient supine with
legs raised
Hypotension, tachycardia, somnolence
Hypotension, tachycardia, somnolence,
paradoxical excitement
Headache, mental confusion
Headache, mental confusion

Hypertension, edema, nervousness,
agitation
Hypertension, edema, nervousness,
agitation
Palpitations, nervousness, CNS
stimulation, tachycardia; use to
supplement epinephrine when
bronchospasm appears unresponsive;
may repeat

Preventive Treatment
Prescription for epinephrine autoinjector and antihistamine
Provide written plan outlining patient emergency management (may download form from http://www.aap.org or http://www.foodallergy.org;
English and Spanish versions available)
Follow-­up evaluation to determine/confirm etiology
Immunotherapy for insect sting allergy
Patient Education
Instruction on avoidance of causative agent
Information on recognizing early signs of anaphylaxis
Stress early treatment of allergic symptoms to avoid systemic anaphylaxis
Encourage wearing medical identification jewelry
BP, Blood pressure; CNS, central nervous system; IM, Intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; PO, orally; qd, every day.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 190 u Anaphylaxis

1439

Anaphylaxis preparedness
Patient presents with possible/probable acute anaphylaxis

NO

Initial assessment supports potential anaphylaxis?
e.g., non-localized urticaria after immunotherapy

Consider other diagnosis

YES
Immediate intervention

Subsequent emergency care that may be necessary
depending on response to epinephrine:
Consider:

• Assess airway, breathing,
circulation, mentation
• Inject epinephrine and
reevaluate for repeat
injection if necessary
• Supine position (if
cardiovascular
involvement suspected)

Good
clinical
response?

• Call 911 and request assistance
• Recumbent position with elevation of
lower extremity
• Establish airway
• O2
• Repeat epinephrine injection if indicated
• IV fluids if hypotensive; rapid volume
expansion
• Consider inhaled bronchodilators if
wheezing
• H1 and H2 antihistamines
• Corticosteroids

NO

YES

• Observation
Length and setting of observation
must be individualized
• Provide epinephrine autoinjector
prescription

NO IMPROVEMENT

YES

Good
NO
clinical
response?

Consultation with
allergistimmunologist

Call 911 if not already done
Consider:
• Epinephrine intravenous infusion
• Other intravenous vasopressors
• Consider glucagon

Cardiopulmonary arrest during anaphylaxis:
• CPR and ACLS measures
• Prolonged resuscitation efforts encouraged
(if necessary)
• Consider:
• High-dose epinephrine
• Rapid volume expansion
• Atropine for asystole or pulseless electrical
activity
• Transport to emergency dept. or ICU

Fig. 190.3 Algorithm for treatment of anaphylactic event in outpatient setting. ACLS, Advance cardiac life support; CPR, cardiopulmonary resusci-

tation; ICU, intensive care unit; IV, intravenous. (From Lieberman P, Nicklas RA, Oppenheimer J, et al. The diagnosis and management of anaphylaxis
practice parameter: 2010 update. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010;126:477–480 e471-­442.)

may be needed. If IV access is not readily available, epinephrine can be
administered via the endotracheal or intraosseous routes.
For refractory hypotension, other vasopressors may be needed. Anaphylaxis refractory to repeated doses of epinephrine in a patient receiving β-­adrenergic blockers has anecdotally been treated with glucagon.
The patient should be placed in a supine position when there is concern
for hemodynamic compromise. Fluids are also important in patients
with shock. Other drugs (antihistamines, glucocorticosteroids) have a
secondary role in the management of anaphylaxis.

Patients may experience biphasic anaphylaxis, which occurs when
anaphylactic symptoms recur after apparent resolution. The mechanism of this phenomenon is unknown, but more severe initial presentation and the need for more than one dose of epinephrine to treat
initial symptoms are risk factors for biphasic anaphylaxis. Treatment
with antihistamines or corticosteroids do not provide clear benefit for prevention of biphasic reactions. Extended observation after
resolution of initial anaphylaxis symptoms should be considered
for patients with risk factors for biphasic anaphylaxis. At discharge,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1440 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 190.6  Considerations with Epinephrine Injection for Anaphylaxis
WHY HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS FAIL TO INJECT
EPINEPHRINE PROMPTLY
• Lack of recognition of anaphylaxis symptoms; failure to diagnose
anaphylaxis
• Episode appears mild, or there is a history of previous mild
episode(s)*
• Inappropriate concern about transient mild pharmacologic effects
of epinephrine (e.g., tremor)
• Lack of awareness that serious adverse effects are almost always
attributable to epinephrine overdose or IV administration, especially
IV bolus, rapid IV infusion, or IV infusion of a 1:1,000 epinephrine
solution instead of an appropriately diluted solution (1:10,000
concentration)
WHY PATIENTS AND CAREGIVERS FAIL TO INJECT EPINEPHRINE
PROMPTLY
• Lack of recognition of anaphylaxis symptoms; failure to diagnose
anaphylaxis
• Episode appears mild, or there is a history of previous mild
episode(s)*
• H1 antihistamine or asthma puffer is used initially instead, relieving
early warning signs such as itch or cough, respectively
• Prescription for epinephrine autoinjectors (EAIs) is not provided by
physician
• Prescription for EAIs is provided but not filled at pharmacy (e.g.,
not affordable)
• Patients do not carry EAIs consistently (due to size and bulk, or
“don’t think they’ll need it”)
• Patients and caregivers are afraid to use EAIs (concern about
making an error when giving the injection or about a bad outcome)

• Patients and caregivers are concerned about injury from EAIs
• Competence in using EAIs is associated with regular allergy clinic
visits; it decreases as time elapses from first EAI instruction; regular
retraining is needed
• Difficulty in understanding how to use EAIs (15% of mothers with no
EAI experience could not fire an EAI immediately after a one-­on-­one
demonstration)
• Errors in EAI use can occur despite education, possibly related to
the design of some EAIs
WHY PATIENTS OCCASIONALLY FAIL TO RESPOND TO
EPINEPHRINE INJECTION
• Delayed recognition of anaphylaxis symptoms; delayed diagnosis
• Error in diagnosis: problem being treated (e.g., foreign body
inhalation) is not anaphylaxis
• Rapid progression of anaphylaxis†
Epinephrine†:
• Injected too late; dose too low on mg/kg basis; dose too low
because epinephrine solution has degraded (e.g., past the
expiration date, stored in a hot place)
• Injection route or site not optimal; dose took too long to be
absorbed
• Patient suddenly sits up or walks or runs, leading to the empty
ventricle syndrome
• Concurrent use of certain medications (e.g., β-­adrenergic
blockers)

*Subsequent anaphylaxis episodes can be more severe, less severe, or similar in severity.
†Median times to respiratory or cardiac arrest are 5 min in iatrogenic anaphylaxis, 15 min in stinging-­insect venom anaphylaxis, and 30 min in food anaphylaxis; however, regardless of
the trigger, respiratory or cardiac arrest can occur within 1 min in anaphylaxis.
Adapted from Leung DYM, Szefler SJ, Bonilla FA Akdis CA, Sampson HA, eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: p. 531.

referrals should be made to appropriate specialists for further evaluation and follow-­up.

PREVENTION

For patients experiencing anaphylactic reactions, the triggering agent
should be avoided, and education regarding early recognition of anaphylactic symptoms and administration of emergency medications
should be provided. Patients with food allergies must be educated in
allergen avoidance, including active reading of food ingredient labels
and knowledge of potential contamination and high-­risk situations.
Any child with food allergy and a history of asthma and a peanut, tree
nut, fish, or shellfish allergy or a previous systemic reaction should be
given an epinephrine autoinjector. The expert panel also indicates that
epinephrine autoinjectors should be considered for any patient with
IgE-­mediated food allergy. In addition, liquid cetirizine (or alternatively,
diphenhydramine) and a written emergency plan should also be provided in case of accidental ingestion or allergic reaction. A form can be
downloaded from the American Academy of Pediatrics (www.aap.org)
or Food Allergy Research & Education (www.foodallergy.org).
In cases of food-­associated exercise-­induced anaphylaxis, children
must not exercise within 2-­4 hours of ingesting the triggering food;
children with exercise-­induced anaphylaxis should exercise with a

friend, learn to recognize the early signs of anaphylaxis (sensation of
warmth, facial pruritus), and stop exercising and seek help immediately if symptoms develop. Foods associated with exercise-­induced
anaphylaxis include wheat, vegeas, nuts, fruits, and shellfish.
Children experiencing a systemic anaphylactic reaction, including respiratory symptoms, to an insect sting should be evaluated and
treated with immunotherapy, which is >90% protective. Reactions to
medications can be reduced and minimized by using oral medications
instead of injected forms and avoiding cross-­reacting medications.
Low-­osmolarity radiocontrast dyes and pretreatment can be used in
patients with suspected reactions to previous radiocontrast dye. Nonlatex gloves and materials should be used in children undergoing multiple operations.
Any child at risk for anaphylaxis should receive emergency medications (including epinephrine autoinjector), education on identification of signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis and proper administration
of medications (Table 190.6), and a written emergency plan in case of
accidental exposure. They should be encouraged to wear medical identification jewelry.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 191 u Serum Sickness

Chapter 191

Serum Sickness
Anna H. Nowak-­Wegrzyn and
Scott H. Sicherer
Serum sickness is a systemic, immune complex–mediated hypersensitivity vasculitis classically attributed to the therapeutic administration
of foreign serum proteins or other medications (Table 191.1).

ETIOLOGY

Immune complexes involving heterologous (animal) serum proteins and
complement activation are important pathogenic mechanisms in serum
sickness. Antibody therapies derived from the horse, sheep, or rabbit are
available for treatment of envenomation by the black widow spider and a
variety of snakes, for treatment of botulism, and for immunosuppression
(antithymocyte globulin [ATG]). The availability of alternative medical
therapies, modified or bioengineered antibodies, and biologics of human
origin have supplanted the use of nonhuman antisera, reducing the risk
of serum sickness. However, rabbit-­generated ATGs, which target human
T cells, continue to be widely used as immunosuppressive agents during
treatment of kidney allograft recipients; serum sickness is associated with a
late graft loss in kidney transplant recipients. A serum sickness–like reaction may be attributed to drug allergy, triggered by antibiotics (particularly cefaclor, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, anticonvulsants, prolonged
high-­dose intravenous penicillin G), infections (streptococcal infections,
hepatitis B), or rabies vaccine. In contrast to a true serum sickness, serum
Table 191.1  Proteins and Medications That Cause Serum
Sickness*
PROTEINS FROM OTHER SPECIES
Antibotulinum globulin
Antithymocyte globulin
Antitetanus toxoid
Antivenin (Crotalidae) polyvalent (horse serum based)
Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab (ovine serum based)
Antirabies globulin
Infliximab
Rituximab
Etanercept
Omalizumab
Adalimumab
Natalizumab
Anti-­HIV antibodies ([PE]HRG214)
Hymenoptera stings
Streptokinase
H1N1 influenza vaccine
Rabies vaccine

1441

sickness–like reactions do not exhibit the immune complexes, hypocomplementemia, vasculitis, and renal lesions that are seen in serum sickness
reactions.

PATHOGENESIS

Serum sickness is a classic example of a type III hypersensitivity reaction
caused by antigen-­antibody complexes. In the rabbit model using bovine
serum albumin as the antigen, symptoms develop with the appearance of
antibody against the injected antigen. As free antigen concentration falls
and antibody production increases over days, antigen-­antibody complexes
of various sizes develop in a manner analogous to a precipitin curve.
Whereas small complexes usually circulate harmlessly and large complexes are cleared by the reticuloendothelial system, intermediate-­sized
complexes that develop at the point of slight antigen excess may deposit in
blood vessel walls and tissues. There the immune microprecipitates induce
vascular (leukocytoclastic vasculitis with immune complex deposition)
and tissue damage through activation of complement and granulocytes.
Complement activation (C3a, C5a) promotes chemotaxis and adherence of neutrophils to the site of immune complex deposition. The processes of immune complex deposition and of neutrophil accumulation
may be facilitated by increased vascular permeability, because of the release
of vasoactive amines from tissue mast cells. Mast cells may be activated by
binding of antigen to IgE or through contact with anaphylatoxins (C3a).
Tissue injury results from the liberation of proteolytic enzymes and oxygen
radicals from the neutrophils.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The symptoms of serum sickness generally begin 7-­12 days after injection
of the foreign material, but may appear as late as 3 weeks afterward. The
onset of symptoms may be accelerated if there has been earlier exposure or
previous allergic reaction to the same antigen. A few days before the onset
of generalized symptoms, the site of injection may become edematous
and erythematous. Symptoms usually include fever, malaise, and rashes.
Urticaria and morbilliform rashes are the predominant types of skin eruptions (Fig. 191.1). In a prospective study of serum sickness induced by
administration of equine ATG, an initial rash was noted in most patients.
It began as a thin, serpiginous band of erythema along the sides of the
hands, fingers, feet, and toes at the junction of the palmar or plantar skin
with the skin of the dorsolateral surface. In most patients the band of erythema was replaced by petechiae or purpura, presumably because of low
platelet counts or local damage to small blood vessels. Additional symptoms include edema, myalgia, lymphadenopathy, symmetric arthralgia or
arthritis involving multiple joints, and gastrointestinal complaints, including pain, nausea, diarrhea, and melena. Symptoms typically resolve within
2 weeks of removal of the offending agent, although in unusual cases,
symptoms can persist for as long as 2-­3 months. Carditis, glomerulonephritis, Guillain-­Barré syndrome, and peripheral neuritis are rare complications. Serum sickness–like reactions from drugs are characterized
by fever, pruritus, urticaria, and arthralgias that usually begin 1-­3 weeks
after drug exposure. The urticarial skin eruption becomes increasingly

DRUGS
Antibiotics
Cefaclor
Penicillins
Trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole
Minocycline
Meropenem
Neurologic
Bupropion
Carbamazepine
Phenytoin
Sulfonamides
Barbiturates
*Based on review of the most current literature. Other medications that are not listed
might also cause serum sickness.
Adapted from Aceves SS. Serum sickness. In: Burg FD, Ingelfinger JR, Polin RA, Gershon
AA, eds. Current Pediatric Therapy. 18th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2006: p. 1138.

Fig. 191.1 Serum sickness–like reaction (SSLR). Note the swollen
hand and large urticarial wheals in this girl with SSLR and arthralgias.
(From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: p. 476.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1442 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
erythematous as the reaction progresses and can evolve into dusky centers
with round plaques. Serum sickness and serum sickness–like reactions are
more likely to occur with higher doses and intermittent exposures of culprit antigens.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of serum sickness and serum sickness–like reactions includes viral illnesses with exanthems, hypersensitivity vasculitis,
Kawasaki disease, acute rheumatic fever, acute meningococcal or gonococcal infection, endocarditis, systemic-­onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis
(Still disease), Lyme disease, hepatitis, autoinflammatory syndromes, acute
annular urticaria (urticaria multiforme), Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, drug
reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), and erythema multiforme (see Chapters 193 and 686.2).

DIAGNOSIS

In most patients the diagnosis of serum sickness is made clinically based
on the characteristic pattern of acute or subacute onset of a rash, fever,
and severe arthralgia and myalgia disproportionate to the degree of swelling, occurring after exposure to a potential culprit. Patients who appear
moderately or severely ill, or who are not taking a medication that can be
readily identified as the culprit, should be evaluated with the following
laboratory tests:
•	Complete blood count and differential: Thrombocytopenia is often
present.
•	Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-­reactive protein: ESR is
usually elevated.
•	Urinalysis: Mild proteinuria, hemoglobinuria, and microscopic hematuria may be seen.
•	Serum chemistries: Including blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and
liver function tests.
•	Complement studies, including CH50, C3, and C4: Serum complement levels (C3 and C4) are generally decreased and reach a nadir at
about day 10. C3a anaphylatoxin may be increased.
•	Testing for specific infectious diseases: If indicated by the history or
physical examination.
•	Appropriate viral or bacterial cultures: If an infection is suspected.
Skin biopsies are not usually necessary for confirming the diagnosis, because the findings are variable and not specific for serum sickness. Direct immunofluorescence studies of skin lesions often reveal
immune deposits of IgM, IgA, IgE, or C3.

TREATMENT

There are no evidence-­based guidelines or controlled trials on which to
base therapy recommendations. Treatment is primarily supportive, consisting of discontinuation of the offending agent, antihistamines for pruritus, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and analgesics for low-­grade
fever and mild arthralgia. When the symptoms are especially severe, for
example, fever >38.5°C (101.3°F), severe arthralgia or myalgia, or renal
dysfunction, systemic corticosteroids can be used. Prednisone (1-­2 mg/
kg/day; maximum 60 mg/day) for 1-­2 weeks is usually sufficient. Once
the offending agent is discontinued and depending on its half-­life, symptoms resolve spontaneously in 1-­4 weeks. Symptoms lasting longer suggest
another diagnosis.

PREVENTION

The primary mode of prevention of serum sickness is to seek alternative
therapies. In some cases, non–animal-­derived formulations may be available (human-­derived botulinum immune globulin). Other alternatives are
partially digested antibodies of animal origin and engineered (humanized)
antibodies. The potential of these therapies to elicit serum sickness–like
disease appears low. When only animal-­derived antitoxin/antivenom is
available, skin tests should be performed before administration of serum,
but this procedure indicates the risk only of anaphylaxis, not of serum sickness. For patients who have evidence of anaphylactic sensitivity to horse
serum, a risk/benefit assessment must be made to determine the need
to proceed with treatment. If needed, the serum can usually be successfully administered by a process of rapid desensitization using protocols of
gradual administration outlined by the manufacturers. Serum sickness is
not prevented by desensitization or by pretreatment with corticosteroids.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 192

Food Allergy and Adverse
Reactions to Foods
Anna H. Nowak-­Wegrzyn, Hugh A. Sampson,
Amanda L. Cox, and Scott H. Sicherer
Adverse reactions to foods consist of any untoward reaction following the ingestion of a food or food additive and are classically divided
into food intolerances and food allergies. Food intolerances are nonimmunologic physiologic responses and can include metabolic, toxic,
pharmacologic, or other mechanisms. Food allergies are adverse
immunologic responses and can be IgE mediated, non–IgE mediated, or mixed (Tables 192.1 and 192.2). Food allergies appear to have
increased over the past 3 decades, primarily in westernized/industrialized countries. Worldwide, estimates of food allergy prevalence range
from 1–11% with regional variations. The vast majority of food allergies are due to peanut, tree nuts, seeds, milk, egg, soy, wheat, fish, and
Table 192.1

Adverse Food Reactions

FOOD INTOLERANCE (NON–IMMUNE SYSTEM MEDIATED,
NONTOXIC, NONINFECTIOUS)
Host Factors
Enzyme deficiencies—lactase (primary or secondary), sucrase/
isomaltase, hereditary fructose intolerance, galactosemia, alcohol
dehydrogenase deficiency
Gastrointestinal disorders—inflammatory bowel disease, irritable
bowel syndrome, pseudoobstruction, colic
Idiosyncratic reactions—caffeine in soft drinks (“hyperactivity”)
Psychologic—food phobias, obsessive/compulsive disorder
Migraines (rare)
Food Factors (Toxic or Infectious or Pharmacologic)
Infectious organisms—Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus,
Clostridium perfringens, Shigella, botulism, Salmonella, Yersinia,
Campylobacter
Toxins—histamine (scombroid poisoning), saxitoxin (shellfish)
Pharmacologic agents—caffeine, theobromine (chocolate, tea),
tryptamine (tomatoes), tyramine (cheese), benzoic acid in citrus
fruits (perioral flare)
Contaminants—heavy metals, pesticides, antibiotics
FOOD ALLERGY
IgE Mediated
Cutaneous—urticaria, angioedema, morbilliform rashes, flushing,
contact urticarial
Gastrointestinal—oral allergy syndrome, gastrointestinal anaphylaxis
Respiratory—acute rhinoconjunctivitis, bronchospasm
Generalized—anaphylactic shock, exercise-­induced anaphylaxis
Mixed IgE Mediated and Non–IgE Mediated
Cutaneous—atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis
Gastrointestinal—allergic eosinophilic esophagitis and gastroenteritis
Respiratory—asthma
Non–IgE Mediated
Cutaneous—contact dermatitis, dermatitis herpetiformis (celiac
disease)
Gastrointestinal—food protein–induced enterocolitis, proctocolitis,
and enteropathy syndromes, celiac disease
Respiratory—food-­induced pulmonary hemosiderosis (Heiner
syndrome)
Unclassified
IgE, Immunoglobulin E.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 192 u Food Allergy and Adverse Reactions to Foods 1443
shellfish, with regional variations in prevalence. It has been estimated
that 8–11% of children have food allergy, with 2.4% having multiple
food allergies. Up to 6% of children experience food allergic reactions
in the first 3 years of life, including approximately 2.5% with cow’s milk
allergy, 2% with egg allergy, and 2–3% with peanut allergy. Most children “outgrow” milk and egg allergies, with approximately 50% doing
so by school-­age. In contrast, 80–90% of children with peanut, tree nut,
or seafood allergy retain their allergy for life (Table 192.3).

Table 192.2  Differential Diagnosis of Adverse Food
Reactions
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS (WITH VOMITING AND/OR
DIARRHEA)
Structural abnormalities (pyloric stenosis, Hirschsprung disease,
reflux)
Enzyme deficiencies (primary or secondary)
Disaccharidase deficiency—lactase, fructase, sucrase-­isomaltase
Galactosemia
Malignancy with obstruction
Other: pancreatic insufficiency (cystic fibrosis), peptic disease
CONTAMINANTS AND ADDITIVES
Flavorings and preservatives—rarely cause symptoms
Sodium metabisulfite, monosodium glutamate, nitrites
Dyes and colorings—very rarely cause symptoms (urticaria, eczema)
Tartrazine
Toxins
Bacterial, fungal (aflatoxin), fish related (scombroid, ciguatera)
Infectious organisms
Bacteria (Salmonella, Escherichia coli, Shigella)
Virus (rotavirus, enterovirus)
Parasites (Giardia, Akis simplex [in fish])
Accidental contaminants
Heavy metals, pesticides
Pharmacologic agents
Caffeine, glycosidal alkaloid solanine (potato spuds), histamine
(fish), serotonin (banana, tomato), tryptamine (tomato), tyramine
(cheese)
PSYCHOLOGIC REACTIONS
Food phobias

Table 192.3

GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISK FACTORS

Allergic sensitization and food allergy development is influenced by
genetics, environment, and genome-­environment interactions (possible epigenetic effects). Family and twin studies show that family
history confers a 2-­to 10-­fold increased risk, depending on the
study setting, population, specific food, and diagnostic test. Candidate gene studies suggest that genetic variants in the HLA-­D Q
locus (HLA-­D QB1*02 and DQB1*06:03P), filaggrin, interleukin
(IL)-­10, STAT6, and FOXP3 genes are associated with food allergy,
although the results are inconsistent across different populations.
In a genome-­wide association study, differential methylation at the
HLA-­DR and -­D Q regions was associated with food allergy. Epigenetic studies implicate DNA methylation effects on IL-­4, -­5 and -­10,
and interferon (IFN)-­γ genes and in the mitogen-­activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathway.
Many environmental factors have been observed to influence
the development of food allergy. Skin exposure to foods in the setting of infantile eczema, characterized by impaired skin barrier
and inflammation, can lead to sensitization and allergy. Decreased
microbial exposure (“hygiene hypothesis”), decreased microbiome
diversity, and the specific makeup of microbial communities in the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, airway, and skin, influence allergic conditions, including food allergy (see Chapter 182). Additional environmental factors that may be associated with increased risk of food
allergy include reduced diversity of the diet, delayed introduction of
allergenic foods, vitamin D deficiency, and other factors.

PATHOGENESIS

Food intolerances are the result of a variety of nonimmunologic
mechanisms, whereas food allergy is predominantly caused by IgE-­
mediated and cell-­mediated immune mechanisms. In food allergy,
normal physiologic oral tolerance of food, which is induced largely
by regulatory T cells (Tregs) and the microbiome of the gut mucosa,
breaks down. Susceptible individuals exposed to certain allergens
generate food-­specific IgE antibodies that bind to Fcε receptors on
mast cells, basophils, macrophages, and dendritic cells, resulting in
allergic sensitization. When food allergens penetrate mucosal barriers and reach cell-­bound IgE antibodies, mediators are released
that induce vasodilation, smooth muscle contraction, and mucus
secretion, which result in symptoms of immediate hypersensitivity (allergy). Activated mast cells, basophils, and macrophages may
release several cytokines that attract and activate other cells, such
as eosinophils and lymphocytes, leading to prolonged inflammation. During acute IgE-­mediated reactions, mast cell and basophil

Natural History of Food Allergy

FOOD

USUAL AGE AT ONSET OF ALLERGY

USUAL AGE AT RESOLUTION

Hen’s egg white

0-­1 yr

7 yr (75% of cases resolve)*

Cow’s milk

0-­1 yr

5 yr (76% of cases resolve)*

Peanut

1-­2 yr

Persistent (20% of cases resolve)

Tree nuts

1-­2 yr; in adults, onset occurs after cross reactivity to birch pollen

Persistent (9% of cases resolve)

Fish

Late childhood and adulthood

Persistent†

Shellfish (crustacean)

Adulthood (in 60% of patients with this allergy)

Persistent

Wheat*

6-­24 mo

5 yr (80% of cases resolve)

Soybean*

6-­24 mo

2 yr (67% of cases resolve)

Kiwi

Any age

Unknown

Apple, carrot, and peach‡

Late childhood and adulthood

Unknown

*Studies suggest that resolution may occur at a later age, especially in children with multiple food allergies and lifetime peak food-­specific IgE >50 kUA/L.

†Fish allergy that is acquired in childhood can resolve.

‡Allergy to fresh apples, carrots, and peaches (oral allergy syndrome) is typically caused by heat-­labile proteins. Fresh fruit causes oral pruritus, but cooked fruit is tolerated. There is

generally no risk of anaphylaxis, although in rare cases, allergies to cross-­reactive lipid transfer protein can cause anaphylaxis after ingestion of fruits (e.g., peach) and vegetables.
Adapted from Lack G. Food allergy. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1252–1260.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1444 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
degranulation elicits symptoms that can affect the skin (urticaria,
angioedema, flushing, pruritus), GI tract (oral pruritus, angioedema, nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea), respiratory tract (nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, nasal pruritus, sneezing,
laryngeal edema, dyspnea, wheezing), and cardiovascular system
(dysrhythmias, hypotension, loss of consciousness). In non-­IgE
food allergies, lymphocytes, primarily food allergen–specific T
cells, secrete excessive amounts of various cytokines that lead to
a “delayed,” more chronic inflammatory process affecting the skin
(pruritus, erythematous rash), GI tract (failure to thrive, early
satiety, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea), and respiratory tract
(food-­induced pulmonary hemosiderosis). Mixed IgE and cellular
responses to food allergens can also lead to chronic disorders, such
as atopic dermatitis, asthma, eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE), and
eosinophilic gastroenteritis.
Children who develop IgE-­mediated food allergies may be sensitized by food allergens penetrating the inflamed skin barrier, e.g.,
eczema, or GI barrier (referred to as class 1 food allergens), or by
food allergens that are partially homologous to plant pollens penetrating the respiratory tract (referred to as class 2 food allergens).
Any food may serve as a class 1 food allergen, but egg, milk, peanuts, tree nuts, seeds, fish, soy, and wheat account for 90% of food
allergies during childhood. Many of the major allergenic proteins of
these foods have been characterized. There is variable but significant cross reactivity with other proteins within an individual food
group. Exposure and sensitization to these proteins often occur
very early in life. Class 2 food allergens are typically vegetable, fruit,
or nut proteins that are partially homologous to pollen proteins.
With the development of seasonal allergic rhinitis from birch/oak,
grass, ragweed, or mugwort weed pollens, subsequent ingestion of
certain nuts, uncooked fruits, or vegetables provokes the pollen-­
food allergy syndrome (also called oral allergy syndrome). Intermittent ingestion of allergenic foods may lead to acute symptoms
such as urticaria or anaphylaxis, whereas prolonged exposure may
lead to poor control of chronic disorders such as atopic dermatitis
and asthma. Cell-­mediated sensitivity typically develops to class 1
allergens.
The galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose (alpha-­gal) syndrome is an IgE-­
mediated allergy to a carbohydrate allergen, and manifests as delayed
allergic reactions 2-­6 hours after ingestion of mammalian meats (pork,
beef, lamb, venison) and rarely gelatin or milk. Sensitization occurs
after multiple tick bites, in particular by the lone star tick (Amblyomma
americanum). This unique form of food allergy is seen more often in
teenagers and adults.

Table 192.4  Symptoms of Food-­Induced Allergic
Reactions
TARGET
ORGAN

Gastrointestinal Manifestations

GI food allergies are often the first form of allergy to affect infants
and young children and typically manifest as irritability, vomiting
or “spitting-­up,” diarrhea, and poor weight gain. Cell-­mediated
hypersensitivities without IgE involvement predominate, making
standard allergy tests such as skin-­prick tests and in vitro tests for
food-­specific IgE antibodies of little diagnostic value. The non–
IgE-­
mediated GI food-­
allergic disorders food protein–induced
enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES), food protein–induced allergic
proctocolitis (FPIAP), and eosinophilic GI disorders are discussed
in Chapter 192.1.
Pollen-­food allergy syndrome (oral allergy syndrome) is an
IgE-­mediated hypersensitivity to certain uncooked or unprocessed
plant-­based foods that occurs in many older children who have
pollen-­induced allergic rhinitis. Symptoms are usually confined to

DELAYED
SYMPTOMS

Cutaneous

Erythema
Pruritus
Urticaria
Morbilliform eruption
Angioedema

Erythema
Flushing
Pruritus
Morbilliform eruption
Angioedema
Eczematous rash

Ocular

Pruritus
Conjunctival erythema
Tearing
Periorbital edema

Pruritus
Conjunctival erythema
Tearing
Periorbital edema

Upper
respiratory

Nasal congestion
Pruritus
Rhinorrhea
Sneezing
Laryngeal edema
Hoarseness
Dry staccato cough

Lower
respiratory

Cough
Chest tightness
Dyspnea
Wheezing
Intercostal retractions
Accessory muscle use

Gastrointestinal
(oral)

Angioedema of the lips,
tongue, or palate
Oral pruritus
Tongue swelling

Gastrointestinal
(lower)

Nausea
Colicky abdominal pain
Reflux
Vomiting
Diarrhea

Cardiovascular

Tachycardia (occasionally
bradycardia in
anaphylaxis)
Hypotension
Dizziness
Fainting
Loss of consciousness

Other

Uterine contractions
Sense of “impending
doom”

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

From a clinical and diagnostic standpoint, it is most useful to
subdivide food hypersensitivity disorders according to the predominant target organ (Table 192.4) and immune mechanism (see
Table 192.1).

IMMEDIATE
SYMPTOMS

Cough
Dyspnea
Wheezing

Nausea
Abdominal pain
Reflux
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Hematochezia
Irritability and food
refusal with weight
loss (young children)

From Boyce JA, Assa’ad A, Burks AW, et al. Guideline for the diagnosis and
management of food allergy in the United States: report of the NIAID-­sponsored
expert panel. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010;126(6):S1–S58. Table IV, p. S19.

the oropharynx and consist of the rapid onset of oral pruritus; tingling and angioedema of the lips, tongue, palate, and throat; and
occasionally a sensation of pruritus in the ears and tightness in
the throat. Symptoms are generally short-­lived and are caused by
local mast cell activation following contact with fresh raw fruit and
vegetable proteins that cross react with birch tree pollen (including
but not limited to apple, carrot, potato, celery, hazelnuts, peanuts,
kiwi, cherry, pear), grass pollen (potato, tomato, watermelon, kiwi),

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 192 u Food Allergy and Adverse Reactions to Foods 1445
mugwort weed pollen (celery, fennel, mustard, peach), and ragweed
pollen (banana, melons such as watermelon and cantaloupe).
Acute GI allergy generally manifests as acute abdominal pain, vomiting, or diarrhea that accompanies IgE-­mediated allergic symptoms in
other target organs.

Skin Manifestations

Cutaneous food allergies are also common in infants and young
children.
Atopic dermatitis is a form of eczema that generally begins in early
infancy and is characterized by pruritus, a chronic relapsing course,
and association with asthma and allergic rhinitis (see Chapter 186).
Although not often apparent from history, at least 30% of children with
moderate to severe atopic dermatitis have IgE-­mediated food allergies.
The younger the child and the more severe the eczema, the more likely
food allergy is playing a pathogenic role in the disorder. Atopic dermatitis is a risk factor for the development of food allergy rather than a
result of food allergy.
Acute urticaria and angioedema are among the most common
symptoms of food allergic reactions (see Chapter 189). The onset
of symptoms may be very rapid, within minutes after ingestion of
the responsible allergen. Symptoms result from activation of IgE-­
bearing mast cells by food allergens that are absorbed and circulated
rapidly throughout the body. Foods most commonly implicated in
children include egg, milk, peanuts, and tree nuts, although reactions to various seeds (sesame, sunflower, poppy) and fruits (kiwi)
are becoming more common. Chronic urticaria and angioedema
are very rarely caused by food allergies. Contact urticaria may
occur in the perioral region of infants and young children, especially in those with eczema, when otherwise tolerated food causes
small, self-­resolving hives on direct skin contact while eating. In
the absence of any other symptoms, food exclusion is not generally
needed and the rash could be avoided by wiping the face during
feeding or using a barrier ointment (such as petroleum jelly) in the
perioral area before feeding.
Perioral dermatitis is a contact dermatitis often caused by substances in toothpaste, gums, lipstick, or medications. Perioral flushing
is often noted in infants fed citrus fruits and may be caused by benzoic
acid in the food. It may also occur in nursing infants. In both situations
the effect is benign. Flushing may also be caused by auriculotemporal nerve (Frey) syndrome (familial, forceps delivery), which resolves
spontaneously.

Respiratory Manifestations

Respiratory food allergies are uncommon as isolated symptoms.
Although many parents believe nasal congestion in infants to be
caused by milk allergy, studies show this not to be the case. Food-­
induced rhinoconjunctivitis symptoms typically accompany allergic symptoms in other target organs, such as skin, and consist of
typical allergic rhinitis symptoms (periocular pruritus and tearing,
nasal congestion and pruritus, sneezing, rhinorrhea). Wheezing
occurs in approximately 25% of IgE-­mediated food allergic reactions, but only 10% of asthmatic patients have food-­induced respiratory symptoms.

Anaphylaxis

Anaphylaxis (see Chapter 190) is defined as a serious, multisystem allergic reaction that is rapid in onset and potentially fatal.
Food allergic reactions are the most common cause of anaphylaxis
seen in U.S. hospital emergency departments. Fatal food-­induced
anaphylaxis is rare, with death affecting 0.03-­0.3 per million per
year. In addition to the rapid onset of cutaneous, respiratory, and
GI symptoms, patients with anaphylaxis may demonstrate cardiovascular symptoms, including hypotension, vascular collapse, and
cardiac dysrhythmias, which are presumably caused by massive

mast cell–mediator release. Food-­dependent exercise-­induced
anaphylaxis is a special form of acute IgE-­mediated food allergy in
which moderate intensity exercise performed within a few hours of
ingestion of a particular food, most commonly wheat or shellfish,
results in anaphylaxis but when ingested without exercise, there is
no allergic reaction.

DIAGNOSIS

A thorough medical history is necessary to determine whether a
patient’s symptomatology represents an adverse food reaction (see
Table 192.2), whether it is an intolerance or food allergic reaction,
and, if the latter, whether it is likely to be an IgE-­mediated or a
cell-­mediated response (Fig. 192.1). An understanding of the basic
pathophysiology and clinical presentations of different adverse
food reactions is essential and if allergy is suspected, referral to
an allergist-­immunologist is recommended. The following facts
should be established: (1) the food suspected of provoking the reaction and the quantity ingested, (2) the interval between ingestion
and the development of symptoms, because most reactions occur
within minutes to 2 hours of ingestion, (3) the types of symptoms
elicited by the ingestion, which may suggest the pathophysiology
of the adverse reaction, (4) whether ingesting the suspected food
produced similar symptoms on other occasions because reproducibility is expected, (5) whether other inciting factors, such as exercise, are necessary, and (6) time interval since last reaction to the
food because evaluation for potential resolution of the allergy may
be warranted.
Skin-­prick tests and in vitro laboratory tests are useful for demonstrating IgE sensitization, defined as presence of food-­specific IgE
antibodies. Sensitization alone is not diagnostic of a food allergy.
In general, increasingly higher serum food-­specific IgE levels or
increasingly large skin-­test wheal size (especially >8 mm diameter)
indicate a higher chance of clinical allergy. A negative serum food-­
specific IgE test or skin test result virtually excludes an IgE-­mediated
form of food allergy. In limited studies, serum food-­specific IgE levels ≥15 kUA/L for milk (≥5 kUA/L for children ≤1 year), ≥7 kUA/L
for egg (≥2 kUA/L for children <2 years), and ≥14 kUA/L for peanut
are associated with a >95% likelihood of clinical reactivity to these
foods in children with suspected allergy. Evaluation of IgE-­binding
to specific digestion-­resistant allergens that trigger reactions or
labile proteins unlikely to cause significant reactions in a food,
termed molecular or component-­resolved diagnostic (CRD) testing, can provide additional clinically relevant information. Identification of sensitization to digestion-­resistant proteins (components)
in the foods correlates with a greater chance of systemic allergic
reactions. Examples of tests for digestion-­resistant proteins include
Ara h 1, 2, 3, and 6 for peanut; Jug r 1 and Jug r 3 for walnut; Ana
o 3 for cashew; Ber e 1 for Brazil nut; and Cor a 9 and Cor a 14 for
hazelnut. Ara h 8 in peanut is a labile, birch pollen–related protein
generally not associated with significant allergic reactions, and isolated sensitization to this component is typically associated with no
or only mild oral reactions.
Importantly, most children with positive serum food-­specific IgE
or skin test responses do not react when the food is ingested. It is
therefore crucial to avoid indiscriminate testing (i.e., sending panels of food tests). In the absence of a clear history of reactivity to
a food and evidence of food-­specific IgE antibodies, definitive
studies must be performed before recommendations are made for
avoidance or the use of highly restrictive diets that may be nutritionally deficient, logistically impractical, disruptive to the family,
expensive, and/or a potential source of future feeding disorders.
IgE-­mediated food allergic reactions are generally very food specific, so the use of broad exclusionary diets, such as avoidance of all
legumes, cereal grains, or animal products, is not warranted (Table
192.5). When the earlier diagnostic modalities are not definitive,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1446 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
History, physical

Consistent with
cell-mediated
food allergy

Consistent with
intolerance, or
other non-immune
disorders

Confirm alternative
diagnosis
May require
additional tests
(e.g., breath
hydrogen, stool
culture, dietary
elimination and
rechallenge)

Moderate/severe
atopic dermatitis,
eosinophilic
gastroenteropathies
(biopsy-proven)

Consider:
confirmatory
diagnostic tests
(endoscopy,
serology for
coeliac, etc.).
Consider IgE
testing to verify
pathophysiology.

IgE antibody screening
to suspected foods to
establish potential
triggers for elimination,
otherwise devise
elimination based
upon epidemiological
variables

Trial
elimination
diet

Trial
elimination
diet

Resolution?

Resolution?

Yes

Yes

No
Reconsider
diagnosis,
foods involved

Oral food
challenges

Consistent with
IgE-dependent
disorders

Test for IgE
antibody reactive
to suspect foods
Positive

Negative

Convincing
history of
anaphylaxis
to isolated
ingestion
and/or
diagnostic
test value

Food tested
is likely to be
tolerated,
but if history
suspicious,
consider
retesting and
supervised
oral food
challenge

Yes

No

No
Reconsider
diagnosis,
foods involved

Consider oral
food challenges
if unclear cause

Oral food challenges
(deferred for foods with
diagnostic values)

Positive

Negative

Positive

Negative

Avoid
food(s)

Add food
back

Avoid
food(s)

Add food
back

Positive

Avoid
food(s)

Negative

Add food
back

Periodic reassessment based on natural history of allergy in the particular
disorder, the food(s) involved, and age of patient.

Fig. 192.1 Algorithm for diagnosis of food allergy. (From Sicherer SH. Food allergy. Lancet. 2002;360:701–710.)

Table 192.5

Clinical Implications of Cross-­Reactive Proteins in IgE-­Mediated Allergy

FOOD FAMILY

RISK OF ALLERGY TO ≥1 MEMBER
(%; APPROXIMATE)

Legumes

5–50

FEATURE(S)
If allergic to peanut, 5-20% likelihood of allergy to other legumes
(lupine, green bean, green pea, soy)
If allergic to chickpea (garbanzo bean), >50% likelihood of allergy to
lentil and/or pea.

Tree nuts (e.g., almond, cashew,
hazelnut, walnut, Brazil)

15–33

Reactions are often severe

Fish

50

Reactions can be severe

Shellfish (crustaceans)

75 (other crustaceans)
50 (mollusks)

Reactions can be severe

Grains

20

Wheat shows cross-reactivity with barley and rye

Mammalian milks

90

Cow’s milk is highly cross reactive to goat’s or sheep’s milk (92%) but
not with mare’s milk (4%)

Rosaceae (pitted fruits)

55

Risk of reactions to >3 related foods is very low (<10%); symptoms are
usually mild (pollen food allergy syndrome)

Modified from Sicherer SH. Food allergy. Lancet. 2002;360:701–710.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 192 u Food Allergy and Adverse Reactions to Foods 1447
which is a common scenario, oral food challenges (OFCs), observed
incremental feedings of a food performed under physician supervision, are useful in ruling out or confirming the presence or resolution of a food allergy. Allergists experienced in dealing with food
allergic reactions and able to treat anaphylaxis should perform food
challenges.
There are no laboratory studies to help identify foods that are
already in the diet but may be responsible for non–IgE and cell-­
mediated food reactions. Consequently, elimination diets followed
by OFCs are the only way to establish the diagnosis. This approach
may be recommended for atopic dermatitis, eosinophilic GI diseases, and some forms of contact dermatitis. Before a food challenge is initiated, the suspected food should be eliminated from the
diet for 10-­14 days for IgE-­mediated food allergy and up to 8 weeks
for some cell-­mediated disorders, such as EoE (see Chapter 192.1).
Some children with cell-­mediated reactions to cow’s milk do not
tolerate hydrolysate formulas and must receive amino acid–derived
formulas. If symptoms remain unchanged despite appropriate elimination diets, it is unlikely that food allergy is responsible for the
child’s disorder.

TREATMENT

Appropriate identification and elimination of foods responsible for
food hypersensitivity reactions are the most established and validated management strategies for food allergies. Complete elimination of common foods (milk, egg, soy, wheat, rice, chicken, fish,
peanut, nuts) is very difficult because of their widespread use in
a variety of processed foods. The lay organizations Food Allergy
Research and Education (FARE; www.foodallergy.org) and the
Asthma & Allergy Foundation of America (Kids with Food Allergies Division; www.kidswithfoodallergies.org/recipes-­diet.aspx)
provide excellent information to help parents deal with both the
practical and emotional issues surrounding these diets. Egg allergy
is not a contraindication for vaccination with measles, mumps,
rubella, or influenza vaccines, but remains a concern for the yellow
fever vaccine where referral to an allergist is recommended.
Children at risk of food-­induced anaphylaxis should be given
self-­injectable epinephrine and a written emergency plan in case of
accidental ingestion (see Chapter 190). Because many food allergies
resolve, children should be reevaluated periodically by an allergist
to determine whether they have lost their clinical reactivity. A number of clinical trials are evaluating the efficacy of oral, sublingual,
and epicutaneous (patch) immunotherapy for the treatment of IgE-­
mediated food allergies. Immunotherapy is not typically curative
but aims to provide temporary “desensitization,” or an increase in
the threshold of a food that can be consumed without triggering an
allergic reaction. Success depends on continuous treatment exposure. An FDA-­approved peanut oral immunotherapy (OIT) agent
is commercially available for use in children. Combining OIT with
anti-­IgE treatment (omalizumab) or other biologic agents is under
study and may improve safety or efficacy compared to OIT alone.
Furthermore, extensively heated milk or egg in baked products are
tolerated by the majority of milk and egg–allergic children. Regular
ingestion of baked products with milk and egg may accelerate resolution of milk and egg allergy.

PREVENTION

It was once thought that avoidance of allergenic foods and delayed
introduction to the diet would prevent allergy, but the opposite is
probably true; delayed introduction of these foods may increase the
risk of allergy, especially in children with atopic dermatitis. A trial
of early introduction of dietary peanut randomized 640 infants age
4-­11 months with severe eczema, egg allergy, or both to consume
or avoid peanut until the age 60 months. The early introduction of
peanut dramatically decreased the development of peanut allergy
among children at high risk for this allergy. A theory behind this
approach is that early oral introduction of peanut induces oral tolerance that precedes the potential sensitization to peanut that can

occur with environmental exposure to peanut via the inflamed,
disrupted skin barrier seen in infants with eczema. Infants with
severe eczema or egg allergy in the first 4-­6 months of life might
benefit from evaluation by an allergist or physician trained in management of allergic diseases to diagnose any food allergy and assist
in promptly implementing appropriate early peanut introduction.
For this high-­risk group, the clinician can perform an observed
peanut challenge for those with evidence of a positive peanut skin
test response or serum peanut-­specific IgE >0.35 kUA/L to determine whether they are clinically reactive before initiating at-­home
introduction of infant-­safe forms of peanut. Additional details for
the early introduction of peanut are available from the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID).* Analyses of
several early introduction studies have shown that early egg introduction may be associated with reduced egg allergy, while review of
data for other allergenic foods is not conclusive. There is however
no evidence that delaying the introduction of typically allergenic
foods prevents food allergy or other allergic diseases.
There is no compelling evidence to support the practice of
restricting the maternal diet during pregnancy or while breastfeeding, or for delaying introduction of various allergenic foods to
infants from atopic families. Exclusive breastfeeding for the first
4-­6 months of life is strongly encouraged but has not been shown
to reduce the development of food allergies. Potentially allergenic
foods (eggs, milk, wheat, soy, peanut/tree nut products, fish) should
be introduced and maintained in the diet in infant-­appropriate
forms after this period of exclusive breastfeeding and may prevent
the development of allergies later in life. Recent meta-­analyses have
not supported the use of hydrolyzed infant formulas in cases where
breastfeeding cannot be continued for 4-­6 months or after weaning
to prevent eczema or food allergies in high-­risk families. Modulation of the microbiome with probiotics has been an area of interest, where it may affect oral tolerance induction; however, specific
interventions have not been proven effective. Probiotic supplements in the third trimester and to the newborn infant may reduce
the incidence and severity of eczema, but have not demonstrated
effects on food allergy prevention. Other potential influences on
the infant/child microbiome are currently being studied, including
mode of delivery (vaginal vs C-­section), diet diversity, vitamin D
supplementation, and household pet exposure. With the recognition that infantile eczema increases the risk of allergic sensitization and food allergy, attention has also focused on early skin care
and aggressive treatment of infantile eczema as potential preventive measures. Because some skin preparations contain peanut or
nut oils, which may sensitize young infants, especially those with
cutaneous inflammation, such preparations should be avoided.
Table 192.6 summarizes approaches to food allergy prevention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.
Table 192.6

Approaches to Prevention of Food Allergy

RECOMMENDED
Infant-­safe forms of peanut, egg introduced around age 6 mo, not
before 4 mo
Other allergens may be introduced around this time as well
Allergy testing before introduction not usually needed (see text)
Infants with severe eczema or egg allergy may benefit from
evaluation for early peanut introduction at 4-­6 mo
Diverse infant diet
UNPROVEN/NOT RECOMMENDED
Hydrolyzed formulas
Maternal allergen avoidance during pregnancy or lactation
Purposeful delay in introducing allergens to infants
* https://www.niaid.nih.gov/diseases-­conditions/guidelines-­clinicians-­and-­patients-­food-­
allergy..

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1448 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

192.1 Non-­IgE Gastrointestinal Food Allergy
Disorders
Anna H. Nowak-­Wegrzyn, Hugh A. Sampson,
Amanda L. Cox, and Scott H. Sicherer

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

GI food allergies are often the first form of allergy to affect infants
and young children, and typically manifest as chronic irritability,
vomiting or “spitting-­up,” diarrhea, and poor weight gain. Cell-­
mediated hypersensitivities without IgE involvement (non-­
IgE)
predominate, making standard allergy tests such as skin-­prick tests
and in vitro tests for food-­specific IgE antibodies of little diagnostic
value (Table 192.7).
FPIES is a non-­IgE, cell-­mediated food allergy that can have dramatic
GI symptoms and in its severe form is considered an allergic emergency.
FPIES can present as acute or chronic phenotypes (Fig. 192.2).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Prevalence: The prevalence of FPIES ranges between 0.34% and
0.7% of infants in Israel and Spain; in a population-­based survey,
physician-­diagnosed FPIES was reported in 0.51% (95% confidence
interval [CI]; 0.420.62) of U.S. children.
Food triggers: Globally, cow’s milk is the most common trigger of
FPIES, although in countries with higher rates of breastfeeding
rather than formula feeding, complementary foods introduced
into infants’ diets early are also reported. Commonly reported
triggers include soy, oat, rice, vegetables (avocado, sweet potato),
fruits (banana), egg, fish, chicken, turkey, peanut, tree nuts, and
fish. Most infants (50–75%) react to one food; however, about
10–15% report more than three food triggers.
Pathophysiology: FPIES is characterized by a strong inflammatory response with significant elevation of CRP, neutrophils, and
platelets. There is evidence of innate immune compartment activation (monocytes, neutrophils) along with the pan-­activation
of T lymphocytes and significant elevation in levels of various
cytokines and chemokines in the peripheral blood, including IL-­
17A, IL-­22, IL-­17C, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, and a
preferential activation of nonconventional T-­cell populations,
including γδT cells.
Clinical manifestations: FPIES typically manifests in the first year of life
in an acute form as projectile, repetitive vomiting within 1-­4 hours of
food ingestion, frequently accompanied by lethargy, pallor (or dusky
appearance), and low muscle tone; in a smaller subset, vomiting is
followed by watery diarrhea in 5-­10 hours (see Fig. 192.2). Prolonged
ingestion of the causal allergen may result in abdominal distention,
bloody diarrhea, anemia, and failure to thrive, referred to as chronic
FPIES. Acute FPIES is considered to be an allergic emergency because
hypotension occurs in approximately 5–10% of patients after allergen
ingestion, which initially may be attributed to sepsis.
Diagnosis: Acute FPIES is diagnosed based on the recognition of a
constellation of symptoms, (Table 192.8; see Fig. 192.2) and allergy
tests detecting food-­specific IgE are typically negative. OFCs are
rarely required for the confirmation of the initial diagnosis, but are
utilized for evaluating resolution of FPIES. Chronic FPIES is diagnosed based on the chronic GI symptoms that resolve within days to
weeks following elimination of the allergen and recur acutely within
1-­2 hours following a subsequent feeding.
Differential diagnosis: The differential diagnosis includes GI infections (viral, bacterial), sepsis, necrotizing enterocolitis, metabolic
disorders that induce emesis and lethargy (hyperammonemias,
organic acidemias, congenital adrenal hyperplasia), very early onset inflammatory bowel disease and other immune enteropathies

(IPEX), gastroesophageal reflux (GER) disease, ileus, anatomical
small bowel obstruction, celiac disease, anaphylaxis, cyclic vomiting
syndrome, poisoning, pyloric stenosis, seizures, and primary immunodeficiencies.
Emergency management: Severe FPIES reactions are considered
allergic emergencies due to the risk of hypotension (in extreme
cases, hypovolemic shock), dehydration, and metabolic derangements including acidemia and methemoglobinemia (Fig. 192.3).
Acute management entails vigorous intravenous hydration. Additional therapies include intravenous or intramuscular ondansetron as an antiemetic, and a single dose of steroid (e.g., methylprednisolone) may be administered due to a strong inflammatory
response. Mild to moderate reactions can be managed with oral
rehydration and oral ondansetron. Epinephrine autoinjectors
and oral antihistamines are not prescribed for home management; however, vasopressors may be used for treatment of shock
in the medical setting.
Dietary management: Breastfeeding mothers rarely need to restrict
the foods that trigger symptoms in an infant following direct
feeding, unless the infant exhibits symptoms of acute or chronic
FPIES during breast milk feeding or has impaired growth. Hypoallergenic infant formulas (extensively hydrolyzed or amino
acid) are recommended in non-­breastfed infants to avoid cow’s
milk and soy. Timely introduction of solids is important for nutrition and for the development of oromotor skills. Following
acute FPIES reactions to a solid food, foods from an unrelated
food group can be chosen for introduction. Tolerance to one
food from a food group usually indicates a favorable likelihood
of tolerance to the related foods. Table 192.9 discusses practical
guidelines for dietary management of FPIES.
Monitoring for resolution: The natural history of infantile FPIES is
favorable, with the majority becoming tolerant by 3-­5 years of age;
persistent FPIES is rare. FPIES to fish and shellfish may start in
older children and in adults; the natural history of adult FPIES is
unknown. Reintroduction of foods that have caused FPIES is usually
done during a physician-­supervised OFC. Timing of reintroduction
varies based on the nutritional and social importance of the foods;
usually attempts are done 6-­24 months following the most recent
FPIES reaction to the offending food. FPIES induced by cow’s milk
may (∼10%) evolve into IgE-­mediated food allergy.
Comorbidities: FPIES is associated with an increased risk of IgE-­
mediated food allergy to other foods, atopic dermatitis, allergic rhinitis, asthma, and EoE.
FPIAP presents in the first few months of life as blood-­streaked
stools in otherwise healthy infants that are breastfed and/or formula-­
fed (see Table 192.7). Blood loss is typically mild, but can occasionally
result in anemia. The most commonly implicated dietary triggers are
cow’s milk and soy proteins, followed by egg; their elimination, either
by maternal dietary restriction if breastfeeding or by use of hypoallergenic formulas, leads to symptom and gross blood resolution within
48-­72 hours in most infants. FPIAP is diagnosed clinically based on the
presence of blood in the stool; sigmoidoscopy with biopsy, confirming an eosinophilic inflammatory response, is no longer done in routine practice for diagnosis of FPIAP. Blood in the infant’s stool can be
attributed to multiple causes other than food allergy (see Table 192.7).
Therefore diagnosis based on clinical observation carries the risk of
overdiagnosis (especially when FPIAP is diagnosed based on detection
of microscopic blood in stool) and unnecessary dietary restrictions
resulting in delayed introduction of foods and an associated increased
risk of developing IgE sensitization. Therefore, considering benign,
nonspecific nature of the symptoms and favorable natural history, in
cases of mild to moderate FPIAP, many authorities recommend a trial
of the culprit food 2-­3 months following symptom resolution to determine whether the infant has “outgrown” the sensitivity.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 192 u Food Allergy and Adverse Reactions to Foods 1449
Table 192.7

Food Protein–Induced Gastrointestinal Syndromes
FPIAP

1 day to 1 year, later for fish
and shellfish

1 day to 6 months

Dependent on age
Infant to adolescent
of exposure to
antigen, cow’s milk
and soy up to 2 yr

Cow’s milk, soy

Cow’s milk, soy

Egg

Wheat, egg

40% both cow’s milk
and soy

Rare

Common

>50% exclusive
breastfeeding

Formula

Formula

ATOPIC BACKGROUND
Family history of atopy
40–70%
Personal history of atopy 30%

25%
22%

Unknown
22%

∼50% (often history of EoE)
∼50%

SYMPTOMS
Emesis

Projectile, repetitive,
severe
Severe in chronic FPIES
Occasionally severe
Acute, severe
15%
Moderate
Infection: viral, bacterial
Necrotizing enterocolitis,
GI obstruction (ileus,
pyloric stenosis, Meckel
diverticulum);
gastro­esophageal reflux
disease; very early onset
inflammatory bowel
disease, seizure disorder,
metabolic disorder, cardiac
disease, anaphylaxis

No

Intermittent

Intermittent

No
Moderate
No
No
No
Rectal fissure,
bleeding disorder,
vit K deficiency,
GI infection
e.g., Shigella,
inflammatory
bowel disease

Moderate
Rare
Moderate
No
Moderate
Celiac disease,
primary
immunodeficiency,
inflammatory
bowel disease

Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
No
Moderate
Gastroesophageal reflux disease,
recurrent vomiting due to other
causes, parasitic and fungal
infections, congenital rings, Crohn
disease, periarteritis, allergic vasculitis,
connective tissue diseases, bullous
pemphigoid, pemphigoid vegetans,
graft-­versus-­host disease, achalasia,
drug hypersensitivity, celiac disease,
vasculitis, carcinoma, hypereosinophilic
syndrome

LABORATORY FINDINGS
Anemia
Hypoalbuminemia
Methemoglobinemia

Moderate
Acute
May be present

Mild
Rare
No

Moderate
Moderate
No

Mild-­moderate
Mild-­severe
No

ALLERGY EVALUATION
Food skin-­prick test
Serum food allergen IgE
Total IgE
Peripheral blood eosinophilia

Majority negative†
Majority negative†
Normal
No

Negative
Negative
Negative
Occasional

Negative
Negative
Normal
No

Positive in ∼50%
Positive in ∼50%
Normal to elevated
Present in <50%

BIOPSY FINDINGS
Colitis
Lymph nodular hyperplasia
Eosinophils

Prominent
No
Prominent

Focal
Common
Prominent

No
No
Few

May be present
Yes
Prominent; also neutrophilic infiltrates,
papillary elongation, and basal zone
hyperplasia
Vomiting and diarrhea in hours to days

Age at onset

FOOD PROTEINS IMPLICATED
Most common
Cow’s milk, egg, oat, rice
Less common
Multiple food
hypersensitivities

Feeding at the time of
onset

Diarrhea
Bloody stools
Edema
Shock
Failure to thrive
Differential diagnosis

Food challenge
Treatment

Soy, chicken, turkey, fish,
pea, peanut, avocado,
sweet potato
>50% both cow’s milk and
soy if younger than 6 mo;
40–50% react to more
than one grain, 30% react
to more than one fish
Formula

FPE

EOSINOPHILIC
GASTROENTEROPATHIES*

FPIES

Emesis in 1-­4 hr; diarrhea in Rectal bleeding in
Vomiting, diarrhea,
5-­8 hr (in a subset)
6-­72 hr
or both in 40-­72 hr
Protein elimination, 80%
Protein elimination,
Protein elimination,
respond to casein
symptoms clear in
symptoms clear in
hydrolysate and symptoms
3 days with casein
1-­3 wk; rechallenge
clear in 3-­10 days;
hydrolysate; resume/
and biopsy in 1-­2 yr
rechallenge under
continue
supervision in 0.5-­2 yr
breastfeeding on
maternal
antigen-­restricted
diet; reintroduce at
home after 9-­12 mo
of age

Cow’s milk, wheat, egg white, soy,
peanut, seafood
Meats, corn, rice, fruits, vegetables,
legumes

Protein elimination, good response to
casein hydrolysate, excellent (>90%)
response to elemental diet;
symptoms clear in 2-­3 wk, excellent
acute response to oral steroids but with
high rate of relapse following
discontinuation; in EoE 30–50%
response to proton pump inhibitors,
70% to swallowed corticosteroids;
rechallenge by introducing food at
home and biopsy in 1-­2 yr

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

1450 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 192.7

Food Protein–Induced Gastrointestinal Syndromes—cont’d

Natural history
Reintroduction of the food

EOSINOPHILIC
GASTROENTEROPATHIES*

FPIES

FPIAP

FPE

Cow’s milk: 60% resolved
by 2 yr
Soy: 25% resolved by 2 yr
Supervised food challenge

Resolved by 9-­12 mo

Most cases resolve
in 2-­3 yr

Typically a prolonged, relapsing course

At home, gradually
advancing from
1 oz to full feedings
over 2 wk

Home, gradually
advancing

Home, gradually advancing

*Eosinophilic gastroenteropathies encompass esophagitis, gastritis, and gastroenterocolitis.
†If positive, may be a risk factor for persistent disease, referred to as “atypical” FPIES.
FPIES, Food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome; FPIAP, food protein–induced allergic proctocolitis; FPE, food protein–induced enteropathy; GI, gastrointestinal; EoE,
eosinophilic esophagitis.

For acute FPIES: At any age

Chronic FPIES: Usually in infancy

Major criterion:
Is there repetitive vomiting 1–4 hours after
ingestion of suspect food
+
absence of respiratory or cutaneous
(urticaria, pruritus, angioedema)
symptoms?

Is there intermittent and
progressive watery diarrhea and
progressive vomiting with regular
ingestion of the suspect food?*

No

No

Yes
Consider
other
causes

Yes

No

After strict avoidance of
suspect food, did symptoms
improve within several days?
Yes

Minor criteria: Are ≥3 present?
• 2nd episode after same suspect food
• Repetitive vomiting 1–4 h after other food
• Extreme lethargy
• Marked pallor
• Hypotension
With any
• Hypothermia
suspected
• Diarrhea within 24 h
reaction
• Need for ED visit
• Need for IV fluids

Has the patient ingested a
serving of the suspect food
after period of avoidance of
at least several weeks?

No

No
Consider
supervised
OFC†

Yes

Yes
Meets criteria for
Acute FPIES‡

No

Is/was ingestion followed 1–4 h
later by acute FPIES symptoms?
Yes
Meets criteria for
Chronic FPIES ‡

Fig. 192.2 Diagnostic algorithm for food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES). ED, Emergency department; IV, intravenous; OFC,

oral food challenge. *Chronic FPIES is described almost exclusively with cow’s milk or soy in young infants. †Without a confirmatory OFC or other
ingestion with emesis onset in 1-­4 hours, diagnosis of chronic FPIES is presumptive. ‡Based on Nowak-­Węgrzyn A, Chehade M, Groetch ME,
et al. International consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome: Executive summary—
Workgroup Report of the Adverse Reactions to Foods Committee, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2017;139:1111–1126. (From Sicherer SH, Nowak-­Węgrzyn A. Enterocolitis, proctocolitis, and enteropathies. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB,
et al., eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig. 33.2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 192 u Food Allergy and Adverse Reactions to Foods 1451
Table 192.8  	 FPIES Diagnostic Criteria
ACUTE FPIES*
MAJOR CRITERIA (BOTH
MUST BE MET), PLUS
• Vomiting 1-­4 hr after suspect
food ingestion
• Absence of immediate, IgE-­
mediated allergic symptoms
(hives, itching, swelling,
wheezing, cough)

CHRONIC FPIES†
SYMPTOMS AND SEVERITY
Milder (lower doses with
intermittent ingestion):

• Intermittent vomiting and/or
diarrhea
• Growth faltering
• No dehydration or metabolic
acidosis

Severe (higher doses with chronic
ingestion):
• Intermittent but progressive
vomiting and watery diarrhea
(occasionally with blood)
• Poor weight gain or failure to
thrive
• Possible dehydration and
metabolic acidosis, anemia,
hypoproteinemia, neutrophilia,
thrombocytosis

MINOR CRITERIA (≥3
OCCURRING WITH EPISODE)
• ≥2 episodes with same food
• One episode with a different
food
• Lethargy
• Pallor
• Need for ER visit
• Need for IV fluid support
• Diarrhea within 24 hr (usually
5-­10 hr)
• Hypotension
• Hypothermia
CRITERIA
• Resolution of symptoms
within days to weeks after
elimination of offending
food(s)
• Acute recurrence of
symptoms (vomiting in 1-­4
hr, diarrhea in <24 hr, usually
5-­10 hr) when the food is
reintroduced, following a
period of elimination
• Confirmatory OFC required
for conclusive diagnosis;
if OFC not performed
diagnosis remains
presumptive

*Major criterion must be met (both) plus at least three minor criteria.
†General criteria because of paucity of available data.

FPIES, Food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome; ER, emergency room; IV,
intravenous; OFC, oral food challenge.
Adapted from Nowak-­Węgrzyn A, Chehade M, Groetch ME, et al. International
consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food protein-­induced
enterocolitis syndrome: Executive summary-­Workgroup Report of the Adverse
Reactions to Foods Committee, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology.
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017;139(4):1111–1126.e4.

Food protein–induced enteropathy (FPE) often manifests in the
first several months of life as diarrhea, often with steatorrhea and poor
weight gain (see Table 192.7). Symptoms include protracted diarrhea,
vomiting in up to 65% of cases, failure to thrive, abdominal distention,
early satiety, and malabsorption. Anemia, edema, and hypoproteinemia
occur occasionally. Cow’s milk sensitivity is the most common cause
of FPE in young infants, but it has also been associated with sensitivity
to soy, egg, wheat, rice, chicken, and fish in older children. Celiac disease, the most severe form of FPE, occurs in about 1 per 100 of the U.S.
population, although it may be “silent” in many patients (see Chapter
384). The classic form is characterized by extensive loss of absorptive
villi and hyperplasia of the crypts, leading to malabsorption, chronic
diarrhea, steatorrhea, abdominal distention, flatulence, and weight loss
or failure to thrive. Oral ulcers and other extraintestinal symptoms secondary to malabsorption may occur. Genetically susceptible individuals (HLA-­DQ2 or HLA-­DQ8) demonstrate a cell-­mediated response
to tissue transglutaminase deamidated gliadin (a fraction of gluten),
which is found in wheat, rye, and barley.
EoE may present from infancy through adolescence, more frequently
in boys (see Chapter 370). EoE is a cell-­mediated disorder, which is
often associated with IgE-­mediated food allergies in infants and young
children, and manifests as chronic GER, intermittent emesis, food
refusal, abdominal pain, dysphagia, food impaction, irritability, sleep
disturbance, and failure to respond to conventional GER medications.
EoE is a clinicopathologic diagnosis. The diagnosis is confirmed when
15 eosinophils per high-­power field are seen on esophageal biopsies.
Treatment is possible with elimination of dietary allergens but management with medications is typically included (see Chapter 370).
Eosinophilic gastritis and gastroenteritis are additional eosinophilic
GI disorders that are far less common and can occur at any age. Eosinophilic gastritis often presents with nausea and abdominal pain or
bloating, while eosinophilic enteritis may also present with nausea,
abdominal pain or bloating with additional diarrhea, anemia, or protein loss. Eosinophilic colitis may present with loose stool or blood
in stool associated with abdominal cramping/pain. More than 50% of
patients with these disorders are atopic; however, food-­induced IgE-­
mediated reactions have been implicated only in a minority of patients.
Generalized edema secondary to hypoalbuminemia may occur in
some infants with marked protein-­losing enteropathy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1452 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders

Outside medical
facility

3. Avoid suspect foods;
address nutrition and development

1. Manage acute reactions*

2. Prepare for reactions

Current reaction with ≥3 episodes of
emesis; OR moderate/severe
lethargy; OR history of severe reaction

1. Educate parent on reaction
management
2. Provide emergency letter
explaining FPIES and basics of
emergency care at medical facility**

Present

Infant (or
restricted diet)?

Nutrition
consultation

Attempt oral
rehydration
at home

Cow’s milk
(or soy)
FPIES?

Provide plan
for dietary
advancement

Mild:
1. Attempt oral rehydration
2. Age 6 mo, consider IM
ondansetron*
3. Monitor for resolution
4–6 h from reaction onset

Offer alternatives:
• Encourage breastfeeding
• eHF, some require AAF
• And/or supervised OFC
to soy (or cow milk)

4. Offer interval food
challenges

>12–18 months from last
reaction,*** AND/OR
patient/family interested in
adding food to diet?
Yes

Absent

Seek
immediate
medical attention

Consider testing for
sIgE sensitization

At medical facility
• >3 episodes of emesis
• OR any lethargy

Absent

Present

Evidence of sIgE
sensitization?
Yes

Modify based on individual circumstances*
Any of the below also present?
• Severe lethargy
• Hypotonia
• Ashen/cyanotic appearance

Absent

Moderate:
1. Age 6 mo, administer
ondansetron IM*
2. Consider placing IV access,
and administering 20 mL/kg
NS bolus**

Start first
(low risk)
Lamb, fortified
quinoa or millet
cereal

Broccoli,
Squash, carrot,
cauliflower,
white potato
parsnip, pumpkin

Sweet potato

Vegetables

Berries, plum,
watermelon,
peach

Apple, pear,
orange

Banana

Fruits

Green bean,
peanut, legumes
other than green
pea

Green pea, soy

Legumes

Other

• Monitor vital signs
• Transfer to ED/ICU for persistent or severe hypotension, extreme
lethargy, shock, or respiratory distress
• Monitor for resolution 4–6 h from onset
• Discharge if back to baseline, tolerating oral fluids, and >4–6 h
have elapsed since reaction onset
*0.15 mg/kg/dose; maximum, 16 mg
AAF, amino acid–based formula
ED, emergency department
FPIES, food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome
ICU, intensive care unit
IM, intramuscular
IV, intravenous

Wait for
guidance
(high risk)

High iron
foods

Present

Severe:
1. Place IV access, administer
NS bolus 20 mL/kg, repeat
as needed
2. Age >6 mo, administer
ondansetron IV
3. Consider methylprednisolone
IV 1 mg/kg
4. Monitor and correct acidemia,
electrolyte abnormalities,
methemoglobinemia

Introduce next
(moderate risk)

Tree nut and
seed butters

Beef, fortified
Fortified infant
grits/corn, wheat, rice and oat
or barley cereal
cereal

No

May predict more
protracted course;
risk of sIgE mediated
symptoms

Consider supervised OFC,
informed by and modified
based on:
- Understanding of typical
age of resolution
- Past reaction severity
- Family preference
- Prognostic value of sIgE
sensitization if present
- Risks of OFC procedure in
atypical FPIES with +sIgE:
Provide incremental dosing
to account for the
possibility of immediate
reactions

Cow’s milk,
poultry, egg, fish

Foods should be offered in age-appropriate forms and textures.
4–6 months (AAP) or at 6 months (WHO): Begin with thin purees,
choosing iron-rich foods first, and gradually advancing to thicker
8 months: Bite-and-dissolve textures and soft cooked foods
12 months: Modified (chopped/softened) foods from family table

mo, months
NS, normal saline
OFC, oral food challenge
sIgE, specific immunoglobulin E
WHO, World Health Organization

** Template may be downloaded at https://www.fpies.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/IFPIES-ER-Letter-2018.pdf
*** Interval can be modified at the discretion of the treating physician.

Fig. 192.3 Treatment algorithm for food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES). *Modified from Nowak-­Wegrzyn A, Chehade M, Gro-

etch ME, et al. International consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome: Executive
summary—Workgroup Report of the Adverse Reactions to Foods Committee, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2017;139:1111–1126. **Template may be downloaded at https://www.fpies.org/wp-­content/uploads/2018/08/IFPIES-­ER-­Letter-­2018.pdf.
***Interval can be modified at the discretion of the treating physician. (From Sicherer SH, Nowak-­Węgrzyn A. Enterocolitis, proctocolitis, and enteropathies. In: Leung DYM, Akdis CA, Bacharier LB, et al., eds. Pediatric Allergy Principles and Practice. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig. 33.3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 193 u Adverse and Allergic Reactions to Drugs
Table 192.9

1453

Empiric Guidelines for Selecting Weaning Foods in Infants with FPIES

AGES AND STAGESa,b
4-­6 MO (AS PER AAP, CON)
If developmentally appropriate and safe
and nutritious foods are available
• Begin with smooth, thin, purees and
progress to thicker purees
• Choose foods that are high in iron
• Add vegetables and fruits
6 MO (AS PER WHO)
Complementary feeding should begin
no later than 6 mo of age
• In the breastfed infant, high-­iron
foods or supplemental iron (1 mg/kg/
day) is suggested by 6 mo of age
• Continue to expand variety of fruits,
vegetables, legumes, grains, meats
and other foods as tolerated
8 MO OF AGE OR WHEN
DEVELOPMENTALLY APPROPRIATE
• Offer soft-­cooked and bite-­and-­
dissolve textures from around 8 mo of
age or as tolerated by infant
12 MO OF AGE OR WHEN
DEVELOPMENTALLY APPROPRIATE
• Offer modified tolerated foods from
the family table, chopped meats, soft
cooked vegetables, grains, and fruits

LOWER RISK FOODS*

MODERATE RISK FOODS*

HIGHER RISK FOODS†

VEGETABLES
Broccoli, cauliflower, parsnip,
turnip, pumpkin, kale

Squash, carrot, white potato,
green bean (legume)

Blueberries, strawberries, plum,
watermelon, peach

Apple, pear, orange

Sweet potato, green pea
(legume)

FRUITS
Avocado, banana

HIGH-­IRON FOODS
Lamb, beef, pork, fortified
quinoa cereal, millet,
amaranth

Fortified grits and corn cereal,
wheat (whole wheat and
fortified), fortified barley cereal

Fortified, infant rice and oat
cereals.

OTHER
Tree nuts and seed butters*
(sesame, sunflower, etc.)
*Thinned with water or infant
puree for appropriate infant
texture and to prevent choking

Peanut, other legumes (other
than green pea)

Milk, soy, poultry, egg, fish,
shellfish

*Risk assessment is based on the clinical experience and the published reports of FPIES triggers.
†This is not an exhaustive list and feeding should not be limited to this list of lower and moderate risk foods. Many other foods are appropriate for infant feeding. One may consider

delaying the introduction of higher risk foods until there is a nutritional need for the food, the infant already has a diverse diet, or other lower and moderate risk foods are tolerated.
aExclusive breastfeeding until 4-­6 mo of age and continuing breastfeeding through the first year of life or longer as long as mutually desired by both mother and child.
bIf an infant tolerates a variety of early foods, subsequent introduction may be more liberal. Additionally, tolerance to one food in a food group (green pea) is considered as a

favorable prognostic indicator for tolerance of other foods from the same group (legumes).
AAP, CON, American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Nutrition; WHO, World Health Organization.
Adapted from Nowak-­Wegrzyn A, Chehade M, Groetch ME, et al. International consensus guidelines for the diagnosis and management of food protein–induced enterocolitis
syndrome: Executive Summary—Workgroup Report of the Adverse Reactions to Foods Committee, American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2017;139(4):1111–1126.e4

Chapter 193

Adverse and Allergic
Reactions to Drugs
Roland Solensky and Scott H. Sicherer
Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) can be divided into predictable
(type A) and unpredictable (type B) reactions. Predictable drug
reactions, including drug toxicity, drug interactions, and adverse
effects, are dose dependent, are related to known pharmacologic
actions of the drug, and occur in patients without any unique susceptibility. Unpredictable drug reactions are generally dose independent, often are not related to the pharmacologic actions of the
drug, and occur in patients who are genetically or otherwise predisposed. These include idiosyncratic reactions, allergic (hypersensitivity) reactions, and pseudoallergic reactions. Allergic reactions
are immune-­mediated and require prior sensitization. They manifest as signs and symptoms characteristic of an underlying allergic
mechanism (Table 193.1). Anaphylaxis is due to production of drug-­
specific IgE antibodies, and delayed cutaneous reactions are due to
drug-­specific T cells. Pseudoallergic reactions resemble allergic

reactions but are caused by non–IgE-­mediated release of mediators from mast cells and basophils, such as vancomycin-­induced
flushing. Drug-­
independent cross-­
reactive antigens can induce
sensitization manifesting as drug allergy. Patients with cetuximab-­
induced anaphylaxis have IgE antibodies in pretreatment samples
specific for galactose-­α-­1,3-­galactose. This antigen is present on the
antigen-­binding portion of the cetuximab heavy chain and is similar
to structures in the ABO blood group. Sensitization to galactose-­α-­
1,3-­galactose may occur from tick bites caused by cross-­reactive tick
salivary antigens.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of ADRs in the general as well as pediatric populations
remains unknown, although data from hospitalized patients show it to
be 6.7%, with a 0.32% incidence of fatal ADRs. Databases such as the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) MedWatch program (https:
//www.fda.gov/safety/medwatch-­fda-­safety-­information-­and-­adverse-­
event-­reporting-­program) likely suffer from underreporting. Cutaneous reactions are the most common form of ADRs, with ampicillin,
amoxicillin, penicillin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/
SMX) being the most frequently implicated drugs (Tables 193.2 and
193.3). Although the majority of ADRs do not appear to be allergic in
nature, 6–10% can be attributed to an allergic or immunologic mechanism. Importantly, given the high probability of recurrence of allergic
reactions, these reactions should be preventable, and information technology–based interventions may be especially useful to reduce risk of
re-­exposure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1454 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Table 193.1  Classification of Drug Allergies
TYPE OF IMMUNE
RESPONSE

TYPE

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS

TYPICAL CHRONOLOGY OF THE
REACTION

1

IgE

Mast cell and basophil
degranulation

Anaphylactic shock
Angioedema
Urticaria
Bronchospasm

Within 1-­6 hr after the last intake of the drug

2

IgG and complement

IgG and complement-­
dependent cytotoxicity

Cytopenia

5-­15 days after the start of the eliciting drug

3

IgM or IgG and
complement or FcR

Deposition of immune
complexes

Serum sickness
Urticaria
Vasculitis

7-­8 days for serum sickness/urticaria
7-­21 days after the start of the eliciting drug
for vasculitis

4a

Th1 (IFN-­γ)

Monocytic inflammation

Eczema

1-­21 days after the start of the eliciting drug

4b

Th2 (IL-­4 and IL-­5)

Eosinophilic inflammation

Maculopapular exanthem,
DRESS

1 to several days after the start of the
eliciting drug for MPE
2-­6 wk after the start of the eliciting drug for
DRESS

4c

Cytotoxic T cells
(perforin, granzyme B,
FASL)

Keratinocyte death
mediated by CD4 or
CD8

Maculopapular exanthem,
SJS/TEN, pustular
exanthem

1-­2 days after the start of the eliciting drug
for fixed drug eruption
4-­28 days after the start of the eliciting drug
for SJS/TEN

4d

T cells (IL-­8/CXCL8)

Neutrophilic inflammation

Acute generalized
exanthematous pustulosis

Typically 1-­2 days after the start of the
eliciting drug (but could be longer)

CXCL8, C-­X-­C motif chemokine ligand 8; DRESS, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; FASL, FAS ligand; FcR, Fc receptor; IFN-­γ , interferon gamma; IgE,
immunoglobulin E; IL, interleukin; MPE, malignant pleural effusion; SJS , Stevens-­Johnson syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis; Th1, Th2, T-­helper cell type 1 and type 2.
From Demoly P, Adkinson NF, Brockow K, et al. International Consensus on drug allergy. Allergy. 2014;69(4):420–437.

Table 193.2  Heterogeneity of Drug-­Induced Allergic Reactions
ORGAN-­SPECIFIC REACTIONS

CLINICAL FEATURES

EXAMPLES OF CAUSATIVE AGENTS
Allopurinol, aminopenicillins, cephalosporins,
antiepileptic agents, antibacterial
sulfonamides
β-­Lactam antibiotics
Platinum agents

Cutaneous lupus

Diffuse fine macules and papules evolve over days after
drug initiation
Delayed-­type hypersensitivity
Onset within minutes of drug initiation
Potential for anaphylaxis
Usually IgE mediated
Hyperpigmented plaques
Recur at same skin or mucosal site
Acneiform
Acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP)
Tense blisters
Flaccid blisters
Fever, erosive stomatitis, ocular involvement, purpuric macules
on face and trunk with <10% epidermal detachment
Similar features as SJS but >30% epidermal detachment
Mortality as high as 50%
Erythematous/scaly plaques in photodistribution

Hematologic
Hepatic

Hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, granulocytopenia
Hepatitis, cholestatic jaundice

Pulmonary
Renal

Pneumonitis, fibrosis
Interstitial nephritis, membranous glomerulonephritis

CUTANEOUS
Exanthems
Urticaria, angioedema
Fixed drug eruption
Pustules
Bullous
SJS
TEN

MULTIORGAN REACTIONS
Anaphylaxis
DRESS
Serum sickness
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis

Urticaria/angioedema, bronchospasm, gastrointestinal
symptoms, hypotension
IgE-­and non–IgE-­dependent reactions
Cutaneous eruption, fever, eosinophilia, hepatic dysfunction,
lymphadenopathy
Urticaria, arthralgias, fever
Arthralgias, myalgias, fever, malaise
Cutaneous or visceral vasculitis

Tetracycline, sulfonamides, NSAIDs,
carbamazepine
Acneiform: corticosteroids, sirolimus
AGEP: antibiotics, calcium-­channel blockers
Furosemide, vancomycin
Captopril, penicillamine
Antibacterial sulfonamides, anticonvulsants,
oxicam NSAIDs, allopurinol
Same as SJS
Hydrochlorothiazide, calcium channel blockers,
ACEIs
Penicillins, quinine, sulfonamides
Para-­aminosalicylic acid, sulfonamides,
phenothiazines
Nitrofurantoin, bleomycin, methotrexate
Penicillin, sulfonamides, gold, penicillamine,
allopurinol
β-­Lactam antibiotics, platins
Anticonvulsants, sulfonamides, minocycline,
allopurinol
Heterologous antibodies, infliximab
Hydralazine, procainamide, isoniazid
Hydralazine, penicillamine, propylthiouracil

ACEI, Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitor; DRESS, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; SJS, Stevens-­Johnson
syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Adapted from Khan DA, Solensky R. Drug allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010;125:S126–S137. Table 1, p. S127.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 193 u Adverse and Allergic Reactions to Drugs
Table 193.3  Delayed Hypersensitivity Drug Rashes by
Category
MACULOPAPULAR EXANTHEMS: ANY DRUG CAN PRODUCE A
RASH SEVERAL DAYS INTO THE COURSE
Allopurinol
Antibiotics: penicillins, ampicillin, sulfonamides
Antiepileptics: phenytoin, phenobarbital
Antihypertensives: thiazide diuretics, calcium channel blockers
Radiocontrast material
Gold salts
Hypoglycemic drugs
Meprobamate
Phenothiazines
Quinine
DRUG REACTION WITH EOSINOPHILIA AND SYSTEMIC
SYMPTOMS (DRESS)
Anticonvulsants: phenytoin, phenobarbital, valproate, lamotrigine,
carbamazepine
Antibiotics: sulfonamides, minocycline, dapsone, ampicillin,
ethambutol, isoniazid, linezolid, metronidazole, rifampin,
streptomycin, vancomycin
Allopurinol
NSAIDs: celecoxib, ibuprofen, diclofenac
Phenothiazines
STEVENS-­JOHNSON SYNDROME/TOXIC EPIDERMAL
NECROLYSIS
Sulfonamides, phenytoin, barbiturates, carbamazepine, allopurinol,
amikacin, phenothiazines, acetazolamide, gold, nitrofurantoin,
pentazocine, tetracycline, quinidine
ACUTE GENERALIZED EXANTHEMATOUS PUSTULOSIS
Antibiotics: penicillins, macrolides, cephalosporins, clindamycin,
imipenem, fluoroquinolones, isoniazid, vancomycin, minocycline,
doxycycline, linezolid, gentamicin, sulfonamides
Antimalarials: chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine
Antifungals: terbinafine, nystatin, amphotericin B, fluconazole,
itraconazole
Anticonvulsants: carbamazepine
Calcium-­channel blockers
Furosemide, thiazides
Systemic corticosteroids
Protease inhibitors
COLLAGEN VASCULAR OR LUPUS-­LIKE REACTIONS
Procainamide, hydralazine, phenytoin, penicillamine, trimethadione,
methyldopa, carbamazepine, griseofulvin, nalidixic acid, oral
contraceptives, propranolol
ERYTHEMA NODOSUM
Oral contraceptives, penicillins, sulfonamides, diuretics, gold, clonidine,
propranolol, opiates
FIXED DRUG REACTIONS
Phenolphthalein, barbiturates, gold, sulfonamides, penicillins,
tetracycline, quinolones, carbamazepine, NSAIDs
Note: See Chapter 686 and Table 686.5.
NSAID, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug.
Adapted from Duvic M. Urticaria, drug hypersensitivity rashes, nodules and tumors, and
atrophic diseases. In: Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine. 25th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 440.3.

PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Immunologically mediated ADRs have been classified according
to the Gell and Coombs classification: immediate hypersensitivity
reactions (type I), cytotoxic antibody reactions (type II), immune
complex reactions (type III), and delayed-­type hypersensitivity
reactions (type IV) (see Table 193.1). Immediate hypersensitivity
reactions occur when a drug or drug metabolite interacts with preformed drug-­specific IgE antibodies that are bound to the surfaces
of tissue mast cells and/or circulating basophils. The cross linking of adjacent receptor-­bound IgE by antigen causes the release

1455

of preformed and newly synthesized mediators, such as histamine
and leukotrienes, that contribute to the clinical development of
urticaria, bronchospasm, or anaphylaxis. Cytotoxic antibody reactions involve IgG or IgM antibodies that recognize drug antigen
on the cell membrane. In the presence of serum complement, the
antibody-­coated cell is either cleared by the monocyte-­macrophage
system or is destroyed. Examples are drug-­induced hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia. Immune complex reactions are caused
by soluble complexes of drug or metabolite in slight antigen excess
with IgG or IgM antibodies. The immune complex is deposited in
blood vessel walls and causes injury by activating the complement
cascade, as seen in serum sickness. Clinical manifestations include
fever, urticaria, rash, lymphadenopathy, and arthralgias. Symptoms
typically appear 1-­3 weeks into the course of the offending drug and
persist for days to weeks after the drug is discontinued. Delayed-­
type hypersensitivity reactions are mediated by cellular immune
mechanisms. They are subdivided into four categories involving
activation and recruitment of monocytes (type IVa), eosinophils
(type IVb), CD4+ or CD8+ T cells (type IVc), and neutrophils (type
IVd). Examples include drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) and Stevens-­Johnson syndrome (SJS) (see Chapter
686.2). Not all allergic drug reactions can be easily classified using
the Gell and Coombs system.
Non–IgE-­mediated immediate-­type reactions mimic Gell and
Coombs type I reactions, with indistinguishable symptoms and
signs. The most common drugs associated with these reactions
are vancomycin, fluoroquinolones, and opiates, which cause nonspecific mast cell degranulation via interaction with the surface
receptor MrgprX2. Because these reactions do not require prior
sensitization (unlike IgE-­mediated reactions), they may occur with
first exposure.
The pharmacologic interaction with immune receptors concept (p-­i
concept) is another type of drug hypersensitivity classification. In this
scheme, a drug binds noncovalently to a T-­cell receptor, which leads to
an immune response through interaction with a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) receptor. In this scenario, no sensitization (i.e.,
previous exposure) is required because there is direct stimulation of
memory and effector T cells analogous to the concept of superantigens.
Although the various mechanistic schemes of drug-­induced allergic
reactions are useful, not all drug allergic reactions can be categorized
using these various classification systems.

Stevens-­Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal
Necrolysis

Blistering mucocutaneous disorders induced by drugs encompass a
spectrum of reactions, including SJS and toxic epidermal necrolysis
(TEN; see Chapters 686.2, 695.2 and 695.3). Although their pathophysiology remains incompletely understood, HLA associations
including HLA-­
B*1502 with carbamazepine-­
induced TEN have
been recognized, and the pathogenic roles of drug-­specific cytotoxic T cells and granulysin have been reported. SJS is defined as
the epidermal detachment of <10%, TEN is >30% detachment,
and overlap syndrome is 10–30% detachment. The features of SJS
include confluent purpuric macules on face and trunk and severe,
explosive mucosal erosions, usually at more than one mucosal surface, accompanied by fever and constitutional symptoms. Ocular
involvement may be particularly severe, and the liver, kidneys, and
lungs may also be involved. TEN, which appears to be related to
keratinocyte apoptosis, manifests as widespread areas of confluent erythema followed by epidermal necrosis and detachment with
severe mucosal involvement. Skin biopsy differentiates subepidermal cleavage characteristic of TEN from intraepidermal cleavage
characteristic of the scalded-­skin syndrome induced by staphylococcal toxins. The risks of infection and mortality remain high, but
improved outcomes have been demonstrated by immediate withdrawal of the implicated drug, early transfer to a burn unit, and
aggressive supportive care. Additional management is reviewed in
Chapter 695.3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1456 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
Drug Reaction with Eosinophilia and Systemic
Symptoms

DRESS (i.e., drug-­induced hypersensitivity syndrome) is a potentially
life-­threatening reaction that has been described primarily with anticonvulsants, although many other medications have been implicated
(see Tables 193.2 and 193.3; see Chapter 686.2). It is likely less common
in children compared with adults. DRESS is characterized by fever,
maculopapular rash, facial edema, eosinophilia, generalized lymphadenopathy, and potentially life-­threatening damage of one or more
organs, usually hepatic or renal. Onset is delayed, usually 2-­8 weeks
after initiation of the medication. It has been associated with reactivation of human herpesvirus 6. Treatment is withdrawal of the medication, systemic steroids, and supportive care, but symptoms can worsen
or persist for weeks to months after the drug has been discontinued.

Drug Metabolism and Adverse Reactions

Most drugs and their metabolites are not immunologically detectable until they have become covalently attached to a macromolecule.
This multivalent hapten-­protein complex forms a new immunogenic
epitope that can elicit T-­and B-­lymphocyte responses. Penicillins are
highly reactive with proteins and can directly haptenate protein carriers, without prior metabolism, possibly accounting for the higher frequency of immune-­mediated hypersensitivity reactions with this class
of antibiotics.
Incomplete or delayed metabolism of some drugs can give rise to
toxic metabolites. Hydroxylamine, a reactive metabolite produced by
cytochrome P450 oxidative metabolism, may mediate adverse reactions to sulfonamides. Patients who are slow acetylators appear to be at
increased risk. In addition, cutaneous reactions in patients with AIDS
treated with TMP/SMX, rifampin, and other drugs may be caused by
glutathione deficiency resulting in toxic metabolites. Serum sickness–
like reactions due to cefaclor may result from an inherited propensity
for hepatic biotransformation of drugs into toxic or immunogenic
metabolites.

Risk Factors for Hypersensitivity Reactions

Risk factors for ADRs include prior exposure, previous reactions, age
(20-­49 years), route of administration (parenteral or topical), dose
(high), and dosing schedule (intermittent), and genetic predisposition. Atopy does not appear to predispose patients to allergic reactions
to low molecular weight compounds, but asthmatics who experience
allergic reactions are likely at increased risk of more serious reactions,
analogous to food-­allergic patients. Atopic patients also appear to be
at greater risk for pseudoallergic reactions induced by radiocontrast
media (RCM). Pharmacogenomics has an important role in identifying individuals at risk for certain drug reactions.

DIAGNOSIS

Skin testing is the most rapid and sensitive method of demonstrating the presence of IgE antibodies to a specific allergen. It can be
performed with high molecular weight compounds, such as foreign
antisera, hormones, enzymes, and toxoids. Reliable skin testing can
also be performed with penicillin, but not with most other antibiotics. Most immunologically mediated ADRs are caused by metabolites rather than by parent compounds, and the metabolites for most
drugs other than penicillin have not been defined. In addition, many
metabolites are unstable or must combine with larger proteins to be
useful for diagnosis. Testing with nonstandardized reagents requires
caution in interpretation of both positive and negative results, because
some drugs can induce nonspecific irritant reactions. Whereas a wheal
and flare reaction is suggestive of drug-­specific IgE antibodies, a negative skin test result does not exclude the presence of such antibodies
because the relevant immunogen may not have been used as the testing
reagent.
In vitro tests (radioallergosorbent test or enzyme-­linked immunoassay) for IgE-­mediated penicillin allergy have lower sensitivity
and comparable specificity compared with skin testing. The positive
and negative predictive values (NPVs) of skin testing for antibiotics
other than penicillin are not well established. Nevertheless, positive

immediate hypersensitivity skin test responses using nonirritant concentrations of nonpenicillin antibiotics may be interpreted as a presumptive risk of an immediate reaction to such agents.
Results of direct and indirect Coombs tests are often positive in
drug-­induced hemolytic anemia. Assays for specific IgG and IgM have
been shown to correlate with a drug reaction in immune cytopenia,
but in most other reactions, such assays are not diagnostic. In general,
many more patients express humoral or T-­cell immune responses to
drug determinants than express clinical disease. Serum tryptase is
elevated with systemic mast cell degranulation and can be seen with
drug-­associated reactions such as anaphylaxis; however, not all patients
with well-­defined anaphylaxis show increased serum tryptase levels.
Patch testing is the most reliable technique for diagnosis of contact
dermatitis caused by topically applied drugs. Graded drug challenge
is an incremental (usually two-­step) administration of a drug under
medical supervision and is used in patients who are deemed unlikely
to be allergic to the drug. Unlike desensitization, there is no attempt to
modify the underlying immune response. Patients who pass a graded
challenge are proven to not be allergic to the drug.

TREATMENT

Drug desensitization alters the immune response to a medication and
allows allergic patients to receive it safely. However, the induced tolerance is temporary and if treatment is interrupted, hypersensitivity returns, and patients are again at risk of reacting to the drug. Drug
desensitization has classically been used for IgE-­mediated allergy, such
as penicillin, but the procedure has been successfully applied to immediate non–IgE-­mediated reactions, such as taxanes. Rapid desensitization
is indicated in patients who are either proven or are strongly suspected
to have an immediate-­type drug allergy and for whom an alternate drug
is not available or appropriate. The procedure warrants close monitoring
and preparedness to treat possible anaphylaxis. Depending on the clinical stability of the patient and the severity of the previous reaction (or
symptoms during a previous desensitization), it may be performed in
outpatient or inpatient settings. Premedications are used for non–IgE-­
mediated hypersensitivity (such as taxanes and biologic agents), but
not for IgE-­mediated allergy (such as antibiotics). Desensitization can
be performed via parenteral or oral routes. The starting dose is typically
1/10,000 of the full dose, and the dose is doubled every 15 minutes until
the full dose is reached. Desensitization has a very high success rate and
breakthrough allergic reactions occur about 20–30% of the time, but
they are usually mild and do not necessitate aborting the procedure.

Penicillin Allergy

Penicillin allergy is self-­reported by approximately 10% of patients, but
following evaluation, about 95% of these individuals are shown to not
be allergic and able to tolerate penicillins. This incongruity is due to
the reaction being the result of the underlying infection (or interaction between the infectious agent and the antibiotic), mislabeling a predictable reaction as allergic, and the waning of penicillin-­specific IgE.
Being labeled as penicillin allergic is not benign, because patients are
more likely to be treated with less effective, more toxic, or more expensive antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones, vancomycin, later generation
cephalosporins, and clindamycin. This prescribing practice compromises optimal medical care and increases costs. Penicillin “allergy”
has been associated with increased antimicrobial resistance (such as
vancomycin-­resistant Enterococcus and methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus), increased Clostridium difficile colitis, increased surgical
site infections, prolonged length of hospital stays, increased intensive
care admissions, increased hospital readmissions, and increased mortality. Removal of the penicillin allergy label leads to improved antibiotic selection with decreased use of broad-­spectrum antibiotics and
decreased healthcare utilization (fewer outpatient visits, fewer emergency department [ED] visits, and fewer hospital days). Therefore a
proactive effort should be made to de-­label penicillin allergy whenever possible. Ideally, this is done electively such as when patients are
well and not in immediate need of antibiotic treatment. De-­labeling of
penicillin allergy is endorsed by the CDC, allergy/immunology, and
infectious disease societies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 193 u Adverse and Allergic Reactions to Drugs
The penicillin β-­lactam ring opens to form various reactive intermediates, which then interact with self-­proteins to stimulate immune
reactions. Penicillin skin test reagents are based on the immunochemistry, and they are broadly grouped into major and minor allergenic
determinants. (Table 193.4) The positive predictive value of penicillin
skin testing is ∼80% for immediate type reactions. Alternatively, 95% or
more of penicillin skin test–negative patients tolerate these antibiotics.
The major determinant (penicilloyl-­polylysine [PPL]) should always
be used for skin testing, but there is controversy regarding the relative
importance of various minor determinants (penicillin G, penicilloate,
penilloate and ampicillin/amoxicillin) and what effect this has on the
NPV. Although PPL is commercially available in the United States as
Pre-­Pen, the minor determinants are not. Penicillin G and IV ampicillin can be diluted and used off-­label for skin testing, but penicilloate
and penilloate require synthesis; therefore they are more difficult to
obtain.
Patients who are positive on penicillin skin testing should avoid
penicillins but consider being reevaluated at a later time, because
penicillin allergy wanes and resolves in most (but not all) individuals. If administration of penicillin is deemed necessary, desensitization
can be performed. Skin test–negative patients should ideally undergo
an amoxicillin challenge, to unequivocally prove lack of allergy. This
alleviates the fear and reluctance on the part of the patient, patient’s
family, or future prescribing clinicians to treat with penicillins. Additionally, effort should be made to remove the penicillin allergy label in
all electronic medical systems (hospitals, clinics, private offices, pharmacies, etc.).
The traditional approach to de-­label penicillin allergy has been
to first perform penicillin skin testing in all patients with suggestive
penicillin allergy histories and then challenge with amoxicillin (if skin
testing is negative). However, in recent years several publications have
challenged this standard, particularly in the pediatric population, by
instead directly challenging “low-­risk” patients with amoxicillin (without preceding skin testing). Patients deemed appropriate for direct

Table 193.4  Penicillin Skin Test Reagents
REAGENT*

CONCENTRATION USED FOR
SKIN TESTING

Penicilloyl-­polylysine (PPL)

6 × 10−5 M

Penicillin G

10,000 units/mL

Penicilloate

0.01 M

Penilloate

0.01 M

Ampicillin/amoxicillin

3-­25 mg/mL

*PPL is the major allergenic determinant; all the other reagents are minor determinants.

1457

amoxicillin challenge are those with maculopapular and urticaria
eruptions, without other respiratory, cardiovascular, oropharyngeal
symptoms, angioedema, and vesicular or exfoliative eruptions. Using
this strategy, the rate of observed reactions ranged from 5% to 10%
and were no more severe than the historical reactions. For comparison,
up to 7% of children (without a previous history of allergy) treated
with aminopenicillins develop cutaneous eruptions. The cause of these
rashes is presumed to be the underlying infection (typically viral) or
an interaction between the infectious agent and the antibiotic. The
best characterized example is patients with Epstein-­Barr infection,
almost 100% of whom develop a nonpruritic morbilliform rash when
treated with ampicillin. Pediatric patients who undergo direct amoxicillin challenge should be observed in a clinical setting for at least 1
hour, with preparedness to treat potential allergic reactions including
anaphylaxis.
Resensitization is the redevelopment of penicillin allergy after initial
resolution. Resensitization after oral treatment with penicillins is rare
in both pediatric and adult patients, including after repeated courses,
and comparable to the rate of sensitization. Therefore repeat penicillin skin testing is not indicated in patients with a history of penicillin
allergy who have tolerated one or more courses of oral penicillin. Data
on resensitization after parenteral treatment with penicillins is more
limited, but routine repeat penicillin skin testing is likely not necessary in patients with a history of penicillin allergy who have tolerated
one or more courses of parenteral penicillin. Consideration may be
given to retesting individuals with recent or particularly severe previous reactions.

β-­Lactam Cross Reactivity

Penicillins, cephalosporins, carbapenems, and aztreonam share a common β-­lactam ring and hence the potential for allergic cross reactivity. Additionally, some penicillins and cephalosporins share identical
R group side chains, and these are another source of potential allergic
cross reactivity (Table 193.5). Combining published reports of patients
proven to be allergic via positive penicillin skin testing and then challenged with cephalosporins, only about 2% experienced allergic reactions. This is similar to the incident rate of new drug reactions to
structurally dissimilar medications in patients with prior drug allergies
(because patients with a history of drug allergy are more likely to react
to structurally unrelated drugs). If cephalosporin skin testing (using
nonirritating concentrations) is performed in penicillin skin test–positive subjects before challenging with cephalosporins, the reaction rate
decreased to 0%.
In general, the preferred approach to patients with a history of penicillin allergy is to electively de-­label the allergy because this greatly
simplifies all future β-­
lactam administration recommendations by
allowing treatment with any β-­lactam antibiotics. Given that less than
5% of patients with an unverified penicillin allergy are truly allergic and
2% of those who are allergic cross react with cephalosporins, the chance

Table 193.5  Groups of β-­Lactam Antibiotics That Share Identical Side Chains*
IDENTICAL R1-­GROUP SIDE CHAINS
Amoxicillin
Cefadroxil
Cefprozil
Cefatrizine

Ampicillin
Cefaclor
Cephalexin
Cephradine
Cephaloglycin
Loracarbef

IDENTICAL R2-­GROUP SIDE CHAINS
Cephalexin
Cefotaxime
Cefadroxil
Cephalothin
Cephradine
Cephaloglycin
Cephapirin

Ceftriaxone
Cefotaxime
Cefpodoxime
Cefditoren
Ceftizoxime
Cefmenoxime

Cefoxitin
Cephaloridine
Cephalothin

Cefamandole
Cefonicid

Ceftazidime
Aztreonam

Cefuroxime
Cefoxitin

Cefotetan
Cefamandole
Cefmetazole
Cefpiramide

Cefaclor
Loracarbef

Ceftibuten
Ceftizoxime

*Each column represents a group with identical side chains.
From Solensky R, Khan DA. Drug allergy: an updated practice parameter. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2010;105:273e1–273e78. Tables 16, 17, p. 273e49.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1458 Part XIII u Allergic Disorders
of a cephalosporin reaction is extremely low at approximately 0.1% (5%
× 2% = 0.1%). Therefore most experts and guidelines recommend that for
patients with a history of nonanaphylactic penicillin allergy, cephalosporins may be administered without prior testing or additional precautions.
In patients with a history of penicillin anaphylaxis (or those positive
on penicillin skin testing), cephalosporin graded challenge is preferred
because the chance of reaction is still very low.
There are rare patients who have selective IgE-­mediated allergy
to aminopenicillins but tolerate penicillin VK and penicillin G. The
allergic determinant is an R-­group side chain, rather than the core
β-­lactam portion of the molecule. In these patients, the positive
challenge rate to cephalosporins sharing identical side group chains
(such as ampicillin/cephalexin or amoxicillin/cefadroxil; see Table
193.5) is higher, or about 16%. Therefore, in such patients, administration of cephalosporins with identical side group chains should
be avoided, given via two-­step graded challenge or desensitization,
whereas treatment with other cephalosporins does not require a
more cautious approach.
The data on allergic cross reactivity between penicillins and carbapenems mirror the discussion on penicillin/cephalosporin cross
reactivity. Patients with unconfirmed penicillin allergy treated with
carbapenems showed a higher reaction rate compared to patients
without a history of penicillin allergy. In studies of penicillin skin
test–positive patients challenged with carbapenems, none of 680
reacted; four carbapenem skin test–positive patients were not challenged. Therefore it is recommended that patients with a history of
penicillin allergy may receive carbapenems in usual fashion or via
two-­step graded challenge.
Aztreonam is the only monobactam and the only β-­lactam antibiotic
that contains a monocyclic ring structure, in contrast to the bicyclic
core of other β-­lactams. In vitro, skin testing and challenge studies
have demonstrated no evidence of allergic cross reactivity between
penicillins and aztreonam, including no positive aztreonam challenges
in penicillin skin test–positive patients. Therefore patients with a history of penicillin allergy may receive aztreonam in the usual fashion. The only β-­lactam that shows cross reactivity with aztreonam is
ceftazidime, because these two antibiotics share an identical R-­group
side chain. Hence, patients allergic to aztreonam or ceftazidime should
avoid the other antibiotic.

Sulfonamides

The most common type of reaction to sulfonamide antibiotics is a
maculopapular eruption that occurs about a week into treatment. The
incidence of immediate reactions, such as urticaria/angioedema or
anaphylaxis, is rare and less frequent than with β-­lactam antibiotics.
On the other hand, sulfonamides are the most common antibiotic to
cause severe cutaneous delayed reactions (SCARs), such as SJS, TEN,
and DRESS. Hypersensitivity reactions to sulfonamides occur with
greater frequency in HIV-­infected individuals. For patients with history of typical delayed maculopapular rashes, both graded one- or
two-­step challenge and desensitization protocols have been shown to
be effective in HIV-­positive and non–HIV-­positive patients. Because
the success rate of graded challenge and desensitization appears comparable, it is not clear that the various desensitization protocols truly
modify the immune response. These regimens are not intended for
individuals with a history of SJS or TEN. There is no evidence of allergic cross reactivity between sulfonamide antibiotics and nonantibiotic
sulfonamides (such as celecoxib, thiazides, furosemide, acetazolamide,
sumatriptan, and others).

Macrolides

Macrolides cause allergic reactions less frequently than penicillins,
cephalosporins, or sulfonamides. The most common reactions are
delayed onset maculopapular eruptions and urticaria, and they occur
in about 1% of patients. IgE-­
mediated reactions are uncommon,
limited to case series, and anaphylactic reactions are extremely rare.
When pediatric patients with convincing histories of allergic reactions
undergo formal evaluation, less than 10% are confirmed to be allergic. Skin testing with a nonirritating concentration of macrolides may

provide useful information in those patients with immediate reaction
histories. However, in patients with an anticipated clinical need for
macrolides, graded challenge without preceding testing is used most
commonly, given the high likelihood of success and rare nature of
anaphylaxis.

Antiretroviral Agents

There are several categories of antiretroviral drugs to treat HIV (reverse
transcriptase inhibitors, protease inhibitors, entry inhibitors, and integrase inhibitors) and all have been implicated in hypersensitivity reactions, which usually present as delayed onset and range from mild
self-­limited maculopapular eruptions to life-­threatening SJS/TEN or
DRESS. Hypersensitivity to abacavir is a well-­recognized, multiorgan,
potentially life-­threatening reaction that occurs in HIV-­infected children and adults. Rechallenge is strictly contraindicated, because subsequent reactions may be more rapid and severe than the initial reaction.
Importantly, these reactions have been associated with the presence of
the MHC class I allele HLA-­B*5701, and HLA testing has shown very
high sensitivity and NPV. Therefore genetic screening for HLA-­B*5701
is part of guideline-­based therapy when abacavir is initially prescribed.

Chemotherapeutic Agents

Hypersensitivity reactions to chemotherapeutic drugs have been
described, most notably to platinum agents and taxanes. The clinical pattern of immediate reactivity to platinum agents, along with
skin test findings, is consistent with an IgE-­mediated mechanism.
Hence reactions occur after patients tolerated several previous treatments. In contrast, immediate reactions to paclitaxel and docetaxel
usually occur with first exposure and the risk lessens with repeated
exposure. They are believed to be due to emulsifying agents such
as Cremophor-­EL, which result in complement activation and generation of anaphylatoxins. Rapid desensitization (most typically a
12-­step protocol) is effective for both IgE and non–IgE-­mediated
type reactions.

Biologics

An increasing number of biologic agents have become available for the
treatment of autoimmune, allergic, cardiovascular, infectious, and neoplastic diseases. Their use may be associated with a variety of ADRs,
including hypersensitivity reactions. Given the occurrence of anaphylaxis, including cases with delayed onset and protracted progression in
spontaneous postmarketing adverse event reports, the FDA issued a
black box warning regarding risk of anaphylaxis and need for patient
monitoring with use of omalizumab (see Chapter 185).

Vaccines

Anaphylactic reactions to vaccines are very rare, occurring at a rate
of approximately one event per million administrations, and they
may be due to various vaccine components such as antibiotics, preservatives, stabilizers, virus-­inactivating compounds, residual animal proteins, and latex. Measles mumps rubella (MMR) vaccine has
been shown to be safe in egg-­allergic patients (although rare reactions to gelatin or neomycin can occur). Egg-­allergic patients are not
at higher risk of reacting to both inactivated and live influenza vaccine than those without egg allergy. Skin testing with the influenza
vaccine is no longer recommended for egg-­allergic patients but may
be helpful if allergy to the vaccine itself is suspected. The American
Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (AAAAI)/American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology (ACAAI) Joint
Task Force on Practice Parameters recommend that “Influenza vaccines should be administered to individuals with egg allergy of any
severity, just as they would be to individuals without egg allergy.”
The incidence of anaphylactic reactions following mRNA COVID­19 vaccines may be higher (2.5-­4.7 events per million). However,
following evaluation by allergists/immunologists, most patients
reporting immediate-­type reactions to the first vaccine dose are
able to tolerate the second dose, arguing against an IgE-­mediated
mechanism. Therefore the true rate of anaphylaxis is likely lower.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 193 u Adverse and Allergic Reactions to Drugs
It is uncertain whether patients with underlying atopic conditions
or other allergies are at increased risk of reacting to these vaccines. Although polyethylene glycol (PEG) (a component of mRNA
COVID vaccines) has been proposed to be a possible culprit, there
is limited evidence for the relationship.

1459

in glucose control is attained. Insulin skin testing and desensitization
are required if insulin treatment is subsequently interrupted for >24-­48
hours.

Radiocontrast Media

In North America, perioperative anaphylaxis is most frequently due
to antibiotics, whereas in European series, neuromuscular blockers
are the most common culprit. Other potential causes include induction agents, opioids, colloids and plasma expanders, chlorhexidine,
sugammadex, and latex. The mechanism responsible may be IgE-­
mediated or non–IgE-­mediated. Previous surgeries are a risk factor
for IgE-­mediated reactions because they require prior sensitization.
Patients who have experienced perioperative anaphylaxis should
be screened for possible mast cell disease. Skin testing with agents
known to cause IgE-­mediated reactions is useful and can help prevent recurrent reactions during subsequent surgeries. Sometimes,
despite a thorough evaluation, an underlying cause for perioperative anaphylaxis is not detected.

Immediate type allergic reactions to RCM may occur after intravascular administration, and during myelograms or retrograde pyelograms.
The pathogenic mechanism has classically been thought to be non–
IgE-­mediated mast cell activation (anaphylactoid). However, there is
growing evidence that some immediate reactions are IgE mediated.
This may be because use of older high-­osmolar RCM agents has been
replaced by low-­and iso-­osmolar agents. One approach to patients
with previous RCM reactions who require another diagnostic study
is to choose an alternate agent and premedicate with prednisone and
diphenhydramine. Another approach is to perform skin testing with
the culprit and alternate RCM agents, with the results guiding the
choice of treatment. The latter method appears to be more useful when
the historical reactions are severe (i.e., anaphylactic). There is no evidence that seafood or iodine allergy is associated with or predisposes
to RCM reactions.

Local Anesthetics

Aspirin and Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs

Perioperative Agents

ADRs associated with local anesthetic agents are primarily nonallergic and include vasovagal, psychomotor, sympathetic stimulation, and
toxic reactions. IgE-­mediated reactions are exceedingly rare. Patients
with suspected local anesthetic allergy should be referred to an allergist/immunologist for skin testing followed by a graded challenge. This
procedure invariably finds a local anesthetic the patient is able to tolerate, in the rare individuals who are allergic to one of these agents.
Although local anesthetics can be broadly grouped into esters (group
I) and amides (group II), allergic cross reactivity within these groups is
only relevant for delayed Gell and Coombs type IV reactions, not type
I reactions.

Insulin

Insulin use has been associated with a spectrum of ADRs, including local and systemic IgE-­mediated reactions, hemolytic anemia,
serum sickness reactions, and delayed-­type hypersensitivity. In general, human insulin is less allergenic than porcine insulin, which is
less allergenic than bovine insulin, but for individual patients, porcine or bovine insulin may be the least allergenic. Patients treated
with nonhuman insulin have had systemic reactions to recombinant human insulin even on the first exposure. More than 50% of
patients who receive insulin develop antibodies against the insulin
preparation, although there may not be any clinical manifestations.
Local cutaneous reactions usually do not require treatment and
resolve with continued insulin administration, possibly because of
IgG-­blocking antibodies. More severe local reactions can be treated
with antihistamines or by splitting the insulin dose between separate administration sites. Local reactions to the protamine component of neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin may be avoided by
switching to lente insulin. Immediate-­type reactions to insulin,
including urticaria and anaphylactic shock, are unusual and almost
always occur after reinstitution of insulin therapy in sensitized
patients.
Insulin therapy should not be interrupted if a systemic reaction to
insulin occurs, and continued insulin therapy is essential. Skin testing may identify a less antigenic insulin preparation. The dose following a systemic reaction is usually reduced to one-­third, and successive
doses are increased in 2-­to 5-­unit increments until the dose resulting

Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and other NSAIDs have been associated
with several types of allergic reactions. Reactions that are caused by
modifying effects on arachidonic acid metabolism, namely respiratory
reactions (in patients with underlying aspirin-­exacerbated respiratory
disease [AERD]) and urticarial reactions (in patients with underlying
chronic idiopathic urticaria), show cross reactivity with other NSAIDs,
as one would expect. Patients with AERD and aspirin-­sensitive patients
with chronic idiopathic urticaria tolerate drugs that selectively block
the cyclooxygenase-­2 (COX-­2) enzyme, such as celecoxib. On the
other hand, acute urticarial or anaphylactic reactions in otherwise normal individuals are medication specific. There are no skin or in vitro
tests to identify patients allergic to ASA or other NSAIDs.
Except for respiratory reactions in asthmatics, there are no data on
the incidences of reactions to ASA/NSAIDs in children; however, clinical experience suggests that it is much lower than in adults. Furthermore, only 20% of children reporting NSAID allergy are confirmed to
be allergic when challenged. The incidence of AERD in children with
asthma has been investigated in six prospective studies, the rate varied
from 0% to 28%, and there was a trend for more respiratory reactions
in adolescents compared with younger children. Overall, the data indicate that ASA sensitivity in asthmatic children under the age of 10 is
rare and increases thereafter.
Patients with AERD whose nasal disease or asthma is poorly controlled with use of medications are candidates for ASA desensitization.
This procedure, unlike antibiotic or chemotherapy desensitization,
involves administration of the drug to cautiously induce a respiratory reaction (rather than prevent it), following which patients enter
a refractory phase that can be maintained with continued administration of ASA. Long-­term studies of adults maintained on chronic ASA
desensitization demonstrated improved clinical outcomes for both
upper and lower respiratory diseases. ASA desensitization is rarely
performed in children because severe, poorly controlled AERD is
encountered very infrequently in the pediatric population, and aspirin
is not routinely recommended for children because of the risk of Reyes
syndrome.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

