Behavioral and Psychiatric
Disorders
Chapter 32

Psychosocial Assessment
and Psychiatric Diagnostic
Evaluation
Heather J. Walter
It is estimated that 20% of children living in the United States experience a mental illness in a given year; mental illness is more prevalent
than leukemia, diabetes, and AIDS combined. More money is spent
on mental disorders than on any other childhood illness, including
asthma, trauma, and infectious diseases. Although nearly one in five
youths suffers from a psychiatric disorder, 75–85% do not receive
specialty mental health services; rather most services are delivered in
nonspecialty sectors (primary care, schools, child welfare, juvenile justice), where mental health expertise may be limited. Untreated or inadequately treated psychiatric disorders persist over decades, become
increasingly intractable to treatment, impair adherence to medical
treatment regimens, and incur progressively greater social, educational, and economic consequences over time.

AIMS OF PSYCHOSOCIAL ASSESSMENT IN THE
PEDIATRIC SETTING

A psychosocial assessment in the pediatric setting should determine
whether there are signs and symptoms of cognitive, developmental,
emotional, behavioral, or social difficulties and characterize those signs
and symptoms sufficiently to determine their appropriate management.
The focus of the assessment varies with the nature of the presenting
problem and the clinical setting. Under emergency circumstances, the
focus may be limited to an assessment of “dangerousness to self or others” for the purpose of determining the safest level of care. In routine
circumstances (well-­child visits), the focus may be broader, involving a
screen for symptoms, distress, and functional impairment in the major
psychosocial domains. The challenge for the pediatric practitioner will
be to determine as accurately as possible whether the presenting signs
and symptoms are likely to meet criteria for a psychiatric disorder and
whether the severity and complexity of the disorder suggest referral to
a mental health specialist or management in the primary care setting.

PRESENTING PROBLEMS

Infants may come to clinical attention because of problems with eating
and/or sleep regulation, concerns about failure to gain weight, poor
social responsiveness, limited vocalization, apathy or disinterest, and
response to strangers that is excessively fearful or overly familiar. Psychiatric disorders most commonly diagnosed during this period are
rumination and reactive attachment disorders.
Toddlers are assessed for concerns about sleep problems, language delay, motor hyperactivity, extreme misbehavior, extreme
shyness, inflexible adherence to routines, difficulty separating from
parents, struggles over toilet training, dietary issues, and testing limits. Developmental delays and more subtle physiologic, sensory, and
motor processing problems can be presented as concerns. Problems
with “goodness of fit” between the child’s temperament and the parents’ expectations can create relationship difficulties that also require
assessment (see Chapter 19). Mental health disorders most commonly

PART

III

diagnosed during this period are developmental delays, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and reactive attachment disorders.
Presenting problems in preschoolers include elimination difficulties, sibling jealousy, difficulty forming friendships, self-­destructive
impulsiveness, multiple fears, nightmares, refusal to follow directions,
rigidity, somatization, speech that is difficult to understand, and temper tantrums. Mental health disorders most commonly diagnosed in
this period are ASD, communication, oppositional, attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity (ADHD), anxiety (separation, selective mutism), reactive
attachment, and sleep disorders.
Older children are brought to clinical attention because of concerns
about angry or sad mood, bed-­wetting, overactivity, impulsiveness,
distractibility, learning problems, arguing, defiance, nightmares, school
refusal, bullying or being bullied, worries and fears, somatization, communication problems, tics, and withdrawal or isolation. Mental health
disorders most commonly diagnosed during this period are ADHD,
oppositional, anxiety (phobias), elimination, somatic symptom, specific learning, and tic disorders.
Adolescents are assessed for concerns about the family situation,
experimentation with sexuality and drugs, delinquency and gang
involvement, friendship patterns, issues of independence, identity
formation, self-­esteem, and morality. Mental health disorders most
often diagnosed during this period are anxiety (panic, social anxiety),
depressive, bipolar, psychotic, obsessive-­compulsive, impulse control,
conduct, substance-­related, and eating disorders.

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE PSYCHOSOCIAL
INTERVIEW

Psychosocial interviewing in the context of a routine pediatric visit
requires adequate time and privacy. The purpose of this line of inquiry
should be explained to the child and parents (“to make sure things are
going OK at home, at school, and with friends”), along with the limits
of confidentiality. Thereafter, the first goal of the interview is to build
rapport with both the child and the parents (see Chapters 18 and 34 for
further discussion of strategies for engaging families).
With the parents, this rapport is grounded in respect for the parents’
knowledge of their child, their role as the central influence in their child’s
life, and their desire to make a better life for their child. Parents often feel
anxious or guilty because they believe that problems a child is experiencing
imply that their parenting skills are inadequate. Parents’ experiences of
their own childhood influence the meaning a parent places on a child’s
feelings and behavior. A good working alliance allows mutual discovery
of the past as it is active in the present and permits potential distortions
to be modified more readily. Developmentally appropriate overtures can
facilitate rapport with the child. Examples include playing peek-­a-­boo
with an infant, racing toy cars with a preschooler, commenting on sports
with a child who is wearing a baseball cap, and discussing music with a
teenager who is wearing a rock band T-­shirt.
After an overture with the child, it is helpful to begin with family-­
centered interviewing, in which the parent is invited to present any
psychosocial concerns (learning, feelings, behavior, peer relationships)
about the child. With adolescent patients, it is important to conduct a
separate interview to give the adolescent an opportunity to confirm or
refute the parent’s presentation and to present the problem from his or
her perspective. Following the family’s undirected presentation of the
primary problem, it is important to shift to direct questioning to clarify
the duration, frequency, and severity of symptoms, associated distress
or functional impairment, and the developmental and environmental
context in which the symptoms occur.
Because of the high degree of comorbidity of psychosocial problems in children, after eliciting the presenting problem, the pediatric
practitioner should then briefly screen for problems in all the major

216
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 32 u Psychosocial Assessment and Psychiatric Diagnostic Evaluation
Table 32.1  Mental Health Action Signs
•	Feeling very sad or withdrawn for more than 2 weeks
•	Seriously trying to harm or kill yourself, or making plans to do so
•	Sudden overwhelming fear for no reason, sometimes with a racing
heart or fast breathing
•	Involvement in many fights, using a weapon, or wanting to badly
hurt others
•	Severe out-­of-­control behavior that can hurt yourself or others
•	Not eating, throwing up, or using laxatives to make yourself lose
weight
•	Intense worries or fears that get in the way of your daily activities
•	Extreme difficulty in concentrating or staying still that puts you in
physical danger or causes school failure
•	Repeated use of drugs or alcohol
•	Severe mood swings that cause problems in relationships
•	Drastic changes in your behavior or personality
From The Action Signs Project. Center for the Advancement of Children’s Mental
Health at Columbia University.

developmentally appropriate categories of cognitive, developmental,
emotional, behavioral, and social disturbance, including problems
with mood, anxiety, attention, behavior, substance use, eating, elimination, social relatedness, language, and learning. This can be preceded
by a transition statement such as, “Now I’d like to ask about some other
issues that I discuss with all parents and kids. Have there been any
problems with attention, learning, behavior, sad mood…” etc.
A useful guide for this area of inquiry is provided by the 11 Action
Signs (Table 32.1), designed to give frontline clinicians the tools
needed to recognize early symptoms of mental disorders. Functional
impairment can be assessed by inquiring about symptoms and function
in the major life domains, including home and family, school, peers,
and community. These domains are included in the HEADSS (Home,
Education, Activities, Drugs, Sexuality, Suicide/Depression) Interview
Guide, often used in the screening of adolescents (Table 32.2).
The nature and severity of the presenting problem(s) can be further characterized through a standardized self-­, parent-­, or teacher-­
informant symptom rating scale; Table 32.3 lists selected scales in
the public domain. A rating scale is a type of measure that provides a
relatively rapid assessment of a specific construct with an easily derived
numerical score that is readily interpreted. The use of symptom rating
scales can ensure efficient, systematic coverage of relevant symptoms,
quantify symptom severity, and document a baseline against which
treatment effects can be measured. Functional impairment also can be
assessed with self-­and other-­reported rating scales.
Clinical experience and methodologic studies suggest that parents
and teachers are more likely than the child to report externalizing
problems (disruptive, impulsive, overactive, or antisocial behavior).
Children may be more likely to report anxious or depressive feelings, including suicidal thoughts and acts, of which the parents may
be unaware. Discrepancies across informants are common and can
shed light on whether the symptoms are pervasive or contextual.
Although concerns have been raised about children’s competence as
self-­reporters (because of limitations in linguistic skills, self-­reflection,
emotional awareness, ability to monitor behavior, thoughts, and feelings, tendency toward social desirability), children and adolescents can
both be reliable and valid self-­reporters.
Pediatric practitioners are encouraged to become familiar with the
psychometric characteristics and appropriate use of at least one general (broad-­band) psychosocial screening instrument, such as the
Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ)* or the Pediatric Symptom Checklist (PSC)† to identify potential mental health problems. If
the clinical interview or broad-­band symptom rating scale suggests
difficulties in one or more specific symptom areas, the clinician can
follow with a psychometrically sound, corresponding narrow-­band
* http://www.sdqinfo.org/py/sdqinfo/b0.py.
† http://www.brightfutures.org/mentalhealth/pdf/professionals/ped_sympton_chklst.pdf.

217

Table 32.2  HEADSS Screening Interview for Taking a
Rapid Psychosocial History
PARENT INTERVIEW
Home
•	How well does the family get along with each other?
Education
•	How well does your child do in school?
Activities
•	What does your child like to do?
•	Does your child do anything that has you really concerned?
•	How does your child get along with peers?
Drugs
•	Has your child used drugs or alcohol?
Sexuality
•	Are there any issues regarding sexuality or sexual activity that are
of concern to you?
Suicide/Depression
•	Has your child ever been treated for an emotional problem?
•	Has your child ever intentionally tried to hurt him/herself or made
threats to others?
ADOLESCENT INTERVIEW
Home
•	How do you get along with your parents?
Education
•	How do you like school and your teachers?
•	How well do you do in school?
Activities
•	Do you have a best friend or group of good friends?
•	What do you like to do?
Drugs
•	Have you used drugs or alcohol?
Sexuality
•	Are there any issues regarding sexuality or sexual activity that are
of concern to you?
Suicide/Depression
•	Everyone feels sad or angry some of the time. How about you?
•	Did you ever feel so upset that you wished you were not alive or
so angry you wanted to hurt someone else badly?
HEADSS, Home, Education, Activities, Drugs, Sexuality, Suicide/Depression.
From Cohen E, MacKenzie RG, Yates GL. HEADSS, a psychosocial risk assessment
instrument: implications for designing effective intervention programs for runaway
youth. J Adolesc Health. 1991;12:539–544.

instrument, such as the Vanderbilt ADHD Diagnostic Rating Scale or
Swanson Nolan and Pelham (SNAP)-­IV-­26 for attention and behavior problems; the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale
for Children (CES-­DC), Mood and Feelings Questionnaire (MFQ), or
Patient Health Questionnaire-­9 (PHQ-­9) for depression; or the Screen
for Child Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders (SCARED) or the Generalized Anxiety Disorder-­7 (GAD-­7) for anxiety.
Children and adolescents scoring above focused symptom rating
scale cutpoints in most cases should undergo a mental health assessment, because scores above cutpoints are highly correlated with clinically significant psychiatric disorders. Youths scoring just below or only
slightly above cutpoints may be appropriate for preventive intervention
(anticipatory guidance) in the pediatric primary care setting. Youths
scoring moderately above cutpoints for disorders commonly presenting in pediatric primary care (e.g., anxiety, depression, ADHD) may be
appropriate for treatment in primary care. Youths scoring greatly above
cutpoints for anxiety, depression, and ADHD, or youths presenting
with symptoms of psychiatric disorders nearly always characterized by
severity and complexity (e.g., bipolar, psychotic, obsessive-­compulsive,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

218 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 32.3  Selected List of Mental Health Rating Scales in the Public Domain
INSTRUMENTS

FOR AGES
(YR)

INFORMANT: NUMBER
OF ITEMS

TIME TO
COMPLETE (MIN)

4-­18

Parent: 35, 17
Youth: 35, 17

5-­10

4-­18

Parent, Teacher, Child: 25

5

8-­18

Parent, Child: 41

5

https://www.pediatricbipolar.pitt.edu/resour
ces/instruments

12-­18

Youth: 7

1

https://www.phqscreeners.com

6-­12

10

6-­18

Parent: 55
Teacher: 43
Parent and Teacher: 26

https://www.nichq.org/resource/nichq-­
vanderbilt-­assessment-­scales
http://www.shared-­care.ca/files/Scoring_for_
SNAP_IV_Guide_26-­item.pdf

16-­30 mo

Parent: 23

5-­10

https://mchatscreen.com

6-­18

Child: 20

5

https://www.brightfutures.org/mentalhealth/
pdf/professionals/bridges/ces_dc.pdf

7-­18

Parent: 34
Child: 33
9

<5

https://devepi.duhs.duke.edu/measures/t
he-­mood-­and-­feelings-­questionnaire-­mfq/
https://www.phqscreeners.com

BROAD-­BAND/GENERALIZED
Pediatric Symptom Checklist
(PSC)
Strengths and Difficulties
Questionnaire (SDQ)
NARROW-­BAND/FOCUSED
Anxiety
Self-­Report for Childhood
Anxiety Related Emotional
Disorders (SCARED)
Generalized Anxiety Disorder-­7
(GAD-­7)
Attention and Behavior
Vanderbilt ADHD Diagnostic
Rating Scale
Swanson Nolan and Pelham
(SNAP)-­IV 26
Autism
Modified Checklist for Autism in
Toddlers (M-­CHAT)
Depression
Center for Epidemiological
Studies Depression Scale for
Children (CES-­DC)
Mood and Feelings
Questionnaire (MFQ)
Patient Health Questionnaire–9
(PHQ-­9)

12/13+

5

<5

AVAILABLE AT
https://www.massgeneral.org/psychiatry/tre
atments-­and-­services/pediatric-­symptom-­
checklist
https://www.sdqinfo.org

ADHD, Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

posttraumatic stress, eating) may be most appropriate for treatment in
specialty care.
The safety of the child in the context of the home and community is of paramount importance. The interview should sensitively
assess whether the child has been exposed to any frightening events,
including abuse, neglect, bullying, marital discord, or domestic or
community violence; whether the child shows any indication of
dangerousness to self or others or a severely altered mental status
(psychosis, intoxication, delirium, rage, hopelessness); or whether
the child (if age appropriate) has been involved in any risky behavior, including running away, staying out without permission, truancy, gang involvement, experimentation with substances, and
unprotected sexual encounters. The interview also should assess the
capacity of the parents to adequately provide for the child’s physical, emotional, and social needs or whether parental capacity has
been diminished by psychiatric disorder, family dysfunction, or the
sequelae of disadvantaged socioeconomic status. Any indications of
threats to the child’s safety should be immediately followed by thorough assessment and protective action.

DIAGNOSIS

There is variability in the level of confidence pediatric practitioners perceive in diagnosing mental health problems in children and
adolescents in accordance with Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM) criteria. Pediatric practitioners who have
familiarity with psychiatric diagnostic criteria may feel confident
diagnosing certain disorders, particularly the more common neurodevelopmental, elimination, and eating disorders (ADHD, anxiety,
autism spectrum, tics, enuresis, encopresis, anorexia). The disorders about which some pediatric practitioners might have less diagnostic confidence include the disruptive/impulse control/conduct,

anxiety, depressive, bipolar, psychotic, obsessive-­
compulsive,
trauma-­related, somatic symptom, and substance-­related disorders.
Pediatric practitioners may prefer to use the “unspecified” diagnosis option in the context of diagnostic uncertainty until clarification
is achieved, often through consultation with or referral to a mental
health clinician.
While focusing on the specific psychiatric manifestations and
their appropriate treatment, the practitioner must also take into
consideration secondary etiologies (systemic illnesses, substance
and medication use [Tables 32.4 and 32.5]) producing psychiatric
symptoms. Disease-­specific therapy combined with psychopharmacology is often necessary when a systemic disorder is identified.

PSYCHIATRIC DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION

The objectives of the psychiatric diagnostic evaluation of the child and
adolescent, generally conducted by a behavioral health specialist, are to
determine whether psychopathology or developmental risk is present and if so, to establish an explanatory formulation and a differential diagnosis, and to determine whether treatment is indicated and,
if so, to develop a treatment plan and facilitate the parents’ and child’s
involvement in the plan. The aims of the diagnostic evaluation are to
clarify the reasons for the referral, to obtain an accurate accounting of
the child’s developmental functioning and the nature and extent of the
child’s psychosocial difficulties, functional impairment, and subjective
distress, and to identify potential individual, family, or environmental
factors that might account for, influence, or ameliorate these difficulties. The issues relevant to diagnosis and treatment planning can span
genetic, constitutional, and temperamental factors, individual psychodynamics, cognitive, language, and social skills, family patterns of
interaction and child-­rearing practices, and community, school, and
socioeconomic influences.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 32 u Psychosocial Assessment and Psychiatric Diagnostic Evaluation

219

Table 32.4  Medical (Secondary) and Psychiatric (Primary) Causes of Psychosis and/or Depression
CATEGORY

DISORDERS

CATEGORY

DISORDERS

Psychiatric

Schizophrenia
Schizoaffective
Schizophreniform
Brief psychotic
Major depression
Bipolar
Postpartum

Inherited metabolic (cont’d)
Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal
encephalopathy (MNGIE)
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis
Homocystinuria
Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency
Phenylketonuria

Head trauma

Traumatic brain injury
Subdural hematoma

Syndromes

Infectious

Viral infections/encephalitides (HIV infection/
encephalopathy, herpes encephalitis, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus, COVID-­19)
Lyme disease
Cerebral malaria
Endocarditis
Neurosyphilis
Whipple disease

Williams
Prader-­Willi
Marfan
Fragile X
Deletion 22q11.2
Rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic
dysfunction, hypoventilation, autonomic
dysregulation (ROHHAD)
Klinefelter

Epilepsy

Inflammatory

Autoimmune encephalitis: NMDAR, limbic, others
(see Table 32.5)
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sjögren syndrome
Hashimoto encephalopathy (steroid-­responsive
encephalopathy associated with autoimmune
thyroiditis [SREAT])
Sydenham chorea
Sarcoidosis
Celiac disease

Ictal
Interictal
Postictal
Postepilepsy surgery
Lafora progressive myoclonic epilepsy
Complex partial (temporal lobe)

Substance
induced
(medications)

Analgesics
Acyclovir
Androgens (anabolic steroids)
Antiarrhythmics
Anticonvulsants
Anticholinergics
Antihypertensives
Antineoplastic agents
β-­Blocking agents
Cefepime
Clarithromycin
Cyclosporine
Dextromethorphan
Dopamine agonists
Ketamine
Fluoroquinolones
Metronidazole
Sulfamethoxazole-­trimethoprim
Oral contraceptives
Sedatives/hypnotics
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
(serotonin syndrome)
Steroids

Substance
induced

Alcohol
Amphetamines
Cocaine
LSD
Marijuana and synthetic cannabinoids
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, Ecstasy)
Phencyclidine
Mescaline
Psilocybins (mushrooms)

Drug withdrawal
syndromes

Alcohol
Barbiturates
Benzodiazepines
Amphetamines
SSRIs

Toxins

Heavy metals: lead, mercury, arsenic
Carbon monoxide
Inhalants
Organophosphates
St. John’s wort

Other

Normal-­pressure hydrocephalus
Ionizing radiation
Decompression sickness
Narcolepsy

Neoplastic

Primary or secondary cerebral neoplasm
Paraneoplastic encephalitis: ovarian teratoma-­
associated autoimmune encephalitis
Systemic neoplasm
Pheochromocytoma

Endocrine or
acquired
metabolic

Hepatic encephalopathy
Uremic encephalopathy
Hypo/hyperparathyroidism
Hypo/hyperthyroidism
Addison disease
Cushing disease
Vitamin deficiency: vitamin B12, folate, niacin,
vitamin C, thiamine
Gastric bypass–associated nutritional deficiencies
Hypoglycemia
Hyponatremia

Vascular

Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
(CADASIL)
Other vasculitis syndromes
Stroke

Degenerative

Idiopathic basal ganglia calcifications, Fahr disease
Neuroacanthocytosis
Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation
(NBIA)
Tuberous sclerosis
Huntington disease
Corticobasal ganglionic degeneration
Multisystem atrophy, striatonigral degeneration,
olivopontocerebellar atrophy

Demyelinating,
dysmyelinating

Multiple sclerosis
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Metachromatic leukodystrophy

Inherited
metabolic

Wilson disease
Posterior horn syndrome
Tay-­Sachs disease (adult onset)
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Niemann-­Pick disease type C
Acute intermittent porphyria
Mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis,
and stroke-­like episodes (MELAS)

From Byrne R, Elsner G, Beattie A. Emotional and behavioral symptoms. In Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D (eds): Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis: Common
Diseases and their Mimics, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023. Table 31.4, p. 514–515.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

220 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 32.5  Antigenic Targets in Autoimmune Encephalitis with Associated Psychiatric Features
COMMONLY
TARGETED
ANTIGENS

ANTIGEN
DESCRIPTION
OR EPITOPE

MAIN ENCEPHALOPATHY
SYNDROME AND
PSYCHIATRIC FEATURES

OTHER ASSOCIATED
NEUROLOGIC DISORDERS

MAIN PSYCHIATRIC
FEATURES
Anxiety, agitation, bizarre
behavior, catatonia,
delusional or paranoid
thoughts, and visual or
auditory hallucinations; also
movement disorder, seizures,
autonomic instability

NMDAR

Ligand-­gated ion
channel

Encephalopathy (frequently
extralimbic manifestation)

Post–herpes simplex
encephalitis relapse with
chorea; pediatric dyskinetic
encephalitis lethargica;
idiopathic epilepsy;
immunotherapy-­responsive
dementia

LGI1

VGKC-­associated and
AMPAR-­associated
secreted molecule

Limbic encephalitis with or
without faciobrachial
dystonic seizures;
prominent hyponatremia

Morvan syndrome,
Confusion, hallucinations,
neuromyotonia, epilepsy,
depression
REM sleep behavior disorder;
rarely isolated movement
disorder (parkinsonism,
dystonia, chorea)

CASPR2

VGKC-­associated
adhesion molecule

Morvan syndrome: peripheral
nerve hyperexcitability,
autonomic instability,
encephalopathy

Limbic encephalitis,
neuromyotonia, epilepsy;
rarely isolated movement
disorder (chorea, myoclonus)

Confusion, hallucinations,
agitation, delusions

AMPAR

Ligand-­gated ion
channel

Limbic encephalitis

NA

Personality change,
psychosis, apathy, agitation,
confabulation

GABAAR

Ligand-­gated ion
channel

Limbic encephalitis with
refractory seizures

Varied presentations

Confusion, anxiety,
affective changes
(including depression),
hallucinations, catatonia

GABABR

Ligand-­gated ion
channel

Limbic encephalitis with
refractory status epilepticus

Opsoclonus-­myoclonus;
cerebellar ataxia; PERM

Psychosis, agitation, catatonia

Hu

Intracellular RNA-­binding
protein

Limbic encephalitis or limbic
encephalomyelitis occurring
with small cell lung cancer

Painful sensory neuropathy;
cerebellar ataxia

Confusion, depression, less
commonly hallucinations

Ma2

Intracellular protein
involved in mRNA
processing or
biogenesis

Limbic encephalitis
occurring with testicular
germ cell tumors; REM
sleep disorder is common;
frequent short-­term
memory problems

Visual dysfunction, gait
disturbance, hypokinesia

Confusion and anxiety,
including obsessions and
compulsions

D2R

Metabotropic receptor

So-­called basal ganglia
encephalitis with
prominent movement
disorder (i.e., dystonia,
parkinsonism, chorea, tics)

Sydenham chorea, PANDAS

Agitation, depression,
psychosis, emotional lability

DPPX

Auxiliary subunit of Kv4.2
potassium channels

Limbic encephalitis with
enteropathy

PERM

Amnesia, delirium, psychosis,
depression

MGluR5

Metabotropic glutamate
receptor

So-­called Ophelia
syndrome: limbic
encephalitis in association
with
Hodgkin lymphoma

Paraneoplastic limbic
encephalitis without
lymphoma, or
nonparaneoplastic
limbic encephalitis;
immunotherapy-­responsive
prosopagnosia

Depression, anxiety,
delusions, visual and
auditory hallucinations,
personality change,
anterograde amnesia

GFAP

Intracellular (cytosolic)
glial intermediate
filament protein

Corticosteroid-­responsive
meningoencephalitis
or encephalitis, with or
without myelitis; presents
with subacute onset
of memory loss and
confusion

NA

Occurred in 29% in one study
but not described in detail;
psychosis and behavioral
changes reported

AMPAR, α-­Amino-­3-­hydroxy-­5-­methyl-­4-­isoxazolepropionic acid receptor; CASPR2, contactin-­associated protein-­like 2; D2R, dopamine receptor D2; DPPX, dipeptidyl-­peptidase-­like
protein-­6; GABAAR, γ-­aminobutyric acid type A receptor; GABABR, γ-­aminobutyric acid type B receptor; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; LGI1, leucine-­rich glioma-­inactivated 1;
MGluR5, metabotropic glutamate receptor 5; NA, not applicable; NMDAR, N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate receptor; PANDAS, pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated
with streptococcal infections; PERM, progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus; REM, rapid eye movement; VGKC, voltage-­gated potassium channel.
Modified from Pollak TA, Lennox BR, Muller S, et al. Autoimmune psychosis: an international consensus on an approach to the diagnosis and management of psychosis of suspected
autoimmune origin. Lancet Psychiatry. 2020;7(1):93–108.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 32 u Psychosocial Assessment and Psychiatric Diagnostic Evaluation
The focus of the evaluation is developmental; it seeks to
describe the child’s functioning in various realms and to assess the
child’s adaptation in these areas relative to that expected for the
child’s age and phase of development. The developmental perspective extends beyond current difficulties to vulnerabilities that can
affect future development and as such are important targets for
preventive intervention. Vulnerabilities may include subthreshold
or subsyndromal difficulties that, especially when manifold, often
are accompanied by significant distress or impairment and as such
are important as potential harbingers of future problems.
Throughout the assessment, the clinician focuses on identifying a realistic balance of vulnerabilities and strengths in the child,
in the parents, and in the parent–child interactions. From this
strength-­based approach, over time a hopeful family narrative is
co-­constructed to frame the child’s current developmental progress
and predict the child’s ongoing progress within the scope of current
risk and protective factors.
As described earlier a psychiatric assessment conducted by a
pediatric primary care practitioner generally will be a brief psychosocial assessment focused on obtaining sufficient information
to triage the case to the appropriate level of care. A brief assessment can comprise both administration of a focused (narrow-­band)
symptom rating scale to assess symptom severity and a focused
clinical interview. The focused clinical interview can comprise four
dimensions: history (onset, duration, response to prior treatment,
family history), severity (as derived from the focused rating scale
and verbal query about the degree of distress and/or impairment
associated with the symptom[s]), complexity (brief review of psychiatric comorbidities and medical or social complexities), and
safety (ascertainment of imminent and substantial risk of harm).
With this information, the pediatrician can provisionally diagnose
the case and triage the case to primary care (for preventive intervention or treatment of mild to moderate presentations of common
disorders [e.g., ADHD, anxiety, depression]), or to specialty behavioral healthcare (for severe presentations of these disorders or for
other psychiatric disorders nearly always characterized by severity
and complexity).
In the specialty care setting, although the scope of the evaluation
will vary with the clinical setting (e.g., emergency room vs medical
floor vs psychiatric clinic), a comprehensive psychiatric diagnostic evaluation typically has 12 major components:
u Presenting problem(s) and the context in which they occur
u Review of psychiatric symptoms
u History of psychiatric treatment
u Medical history
u Developmental history
u Educational history
u Family history
u Mental status examination
u Biopsychosocial clinical formulation
u DSM, Fifth Edition (DSM-­5) diagnosis
u Risk assessment
u Treatment plan
For infants and young children, the presenting problem and historical information is derived from parents and other informants.
As children mature, they become increasingly important contributors to the information base, and they become the primary
source of information in later adolescence. Information relevant to
formulation and differential diagnosis is derived in multiple ways,
including directive and nondirective questioning, interactive play,
and observation of the child alone and together with the caregiver(s).
The explication of the presenting problem(s) includes information about onset, duration, frequency, setting, and severity of
symptoms, associated distress and/or functional impairment, and
predisposing, precipitating, perpetuating, and ameliorating contextual factors. The symptom review assesses potential comorbidity in
the major domains of child and adolescent psychopathology. The


221

history of psychiatric treatment includes gathering information
about prior emergency mental health assessments, psychiatric hospitalizations, day treatment, psychotherapy, pharmacotherapy, and
nontraditional treatments.
The medical history includes information about the source of
primary care, the frequency of health supervision, past and current
medical illnesses and treatments, and the youth and family’s history
of adherence to medical treatment. A systematic review of organ or
functional systems facilitates the identification of abnormalities that
require investigation or monitoring by the pediatric practitioner, as
well as the identification of cautionary factors related to the prescription of psychotropic medication. The developmental history includes
information about the circumstances of conception, pregnancy, or
adoption, pre-­, peri-­, or postnatal insults, attachment and temperament, cognitive, motor, linguistic, emotional, social, and moral development, health habits, sexuality, substance use (as age appropriate),
coping and defensive structure, future orientation, and perceived
strengths. The educational history includes schools attended, typical grades, attendance, behavior, classroom accommodations, special
education services, disciplinary actions, social relationships, extracurricular activities, and barriers to learning. The family history assesses
family composition, sociodemographic and neighborhood characteristics, domiciliary arrangements, parenting capacities, family function,
medical/psychiatric histories of family members, and cultural/religious
affiliations.
The mental status examination assesses appearance, relatedness,
cognition, communication, mood, affective expression, behavior,
memory, orientation, and perception.
The comprehensive psychiatric evaluation culminates in a biopsychosocial formulation, diagnosis, and risk assessment. The biopsychosocial formulation is derived from an assessment of vulnerabilities
and strengths in the biologic, psychologic, and social domains and
serves to identify targets for intervention and treatment. In the biologic domain, major vulnerabilities include a family history of psychiatric disorder as well as a personal history of pre-­, peri-­, or postnatal
insults, cognitive or linguistic impairments, chronic physical illness,
and a difficult temperament. In the psychologic domain, major vulnerabilities include failure to achieve developmental tasks, unresolved unconscious conflicts, and maladaptive coping and defensive
styles. In the social domain, major vulnerabilities include parental
incapacity, unskilled parenting, family dysfunction, social isolation,
inadequate school setting, absence of supportive community structures, and sociodemographic disadvantage. Major strengths include
cognitive and linguistic capability, physical health and vigor, stable,
moderate temperamental characteristics, and stable supportive parenting, family, peer, and community structures. The biopsychosocial
formulation can be organized to reflect predisposing, precipitating,
perpetuating, and protective (ameliorating) factors (the “4 Ps”) influencing the development of the observed psychopathology.
The diagnosis is made in accordance with the nomenclature in
DSM-­5. This nomenclature categorizes cross-­sectional phenomenology into discrete clinical syndromes and seeks to improve
diagnostic accuracy at the expense of theories of causation. By
DSM-­5 convention, if diagnostic criteria are met, the diagnosis is
given (except where hierarchical rules apply); consequently, psychiatric comorbidity is a common occurrence. The risk assessment
includes a careful assessment of risk status, including suicidality,
homicidality, assaultiveness, self-­injuriousness, acute mental status
changes, and involvement in risky behavior or situations.
The comprehensive psychiatric diagnostic evaluation culminates in a treatment plan that brings the broad array of targeted
interventions to the service of the child. Diagnoses drive the choice
of evidence-­
based psychotherapeutic and psychopharmacologic
treatments. The formulation drives the selection of interventions
targeted at biologic, psychologic, and social vulnerabilities and
strengths. Many of these treatments and interventions are described
in the succeeding chapters.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

222 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN THE DIAGNOSTIC
EVALUATION OF INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN

Evaluation of infants and young children with challenging behaviors
includes the domains of physiology, temperament, language and motor
development, affective behavior, social behavior, and communication.
Although much of the information in these domains will be derived from
parent report, much also can be gleaned from nonverbal behavior and
observation of the parent–child interaction. Observations should include
predominant affective tone of parent and child (positive, negative, apathetic), involvement in the situation (curiosity, disinterest), social responsiveness (mutuality of gaze, auditory responsiveness), and reactions to
transitions (including separation).
A screen for maternal depression* is critical at this stage, as is an assessment of the mother’s (or other caregiver’s) ability to respond rapidly on a
contingent basis to the child’s expressed needs, regulate the child’s rapid
shifts of emotion and behavior, and provide a stimulus shelter to prevent
the child from being overwhelmed.
Standardized screening instruments (Ages and Stages Questionnaires,
Brief Infant-­Toddler Social & Emotional Assessment, Early Childhood
Screening Assessment, Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, Parents’ Evaluation of Developmental Status, and Survey of Well-­being of
Young Children) designed for this age-­group can be helpful in systematizing the evaluation. In addition, the Infant, Toddler and Preschool Mental
Status Exam (ITP-­MSE) is a reference tool that describes how traditional
categories of the mental status examination can be adapted to observations of young children. Additional categories, including sensory and state
regulation, have been added that reflect important areas of development
in young children.
Diagnostic systems that are more age appropriate than DSM-­5 have
been developed for infants and young children. These systems include
the Research Diagnostic Criteria–Preschool Age (RDC-­PA) and Zero
to Three Diagnostic Classification of Mental Health and Developmental Disorders of Infancy and Early Childhood-­Revised (DC: 0-­3R). The
DC: 0-­3R includes a relationship classification that assesses the range
of interactional adaptation in each parent–child relationship and regulation disorders of sensory processing that identify a range of constitutionally and maturationally based sensory reactivity patterns, motor
patterns, and behavior patterns that together can dysregulate a child
internally and impact the child’s interactions with caregivers.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

* See http://www.medicalhomeportal.org/clinical-­practice/screening-­and-­prevention/maternal-­
depression for several examples.

Chapter 33

Psychopharmacology
David R. DeMaso and Heather J. Walter
Psychopharmacology is the first-­line treatment for several child and
adolescent mental health disorders (e.g., attention-­deficit/hyperactivity [ADHD], schizophrenia spectrum, and bipolar disorders) and is
used adjunctively with psychosocial treatments for other disorders (or
comorbid conditions), including anxiety, depressive, autism spectrum,
trauma-­related, and obsessive-­compulsive disorders. Before prescribing
a psychotropic medication, primary care practitioners (PCPs) should
review full prescribing information for each medication (in package
inserts or at reliable websites such as the National Institutes of Health
DailyMed*) to obtain complete and up-­to-­date information about indications, contraindications, warnings, interactions, and precautions.
* https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/index.cfm.

It is helpful for PCPs to be guided by principles for effective use of
psychotropic medications in their medication assessment and management (Table 33.1). These principles involve a series of interconnected
steps, including conducting a focused behavioral health assessment,
establishing target symptom(s) and appropriate level of care, deciding
on a medication and a monitoring plan, obtaining treatment assent/
consent, and implementing treatment. In following this approach,
PCPs are well positioned to provide safe and effective first-­line psychopharmacology for common mental health conditions (e.g., ADHD,
anxiety, depression) with moderate symptom presentations. Severe/
complex presentations likely are better served through consultation
with and/or referral to a behavioral health specialist.
Questions remain about the quality of the evidence supporting the
use of many psychotropic medications in children and adolescents. In
general, cognitive, emotional, and behavioral symptoms are targets for
medication treatment when (1) there is no or insufficient response to
available evidence-­based psychosocial interventions, (2) the patient’s
symptoms are severe and the patient is experiencing significant distress
or functional impairment, and/or (3) the patient’s symptoms convey
significant risk of harm. Common target symptoms include agitation, aggression, anxiety, depression, mania, hyperactivity, inattention,
impulsivity, obsessions, compulsions, and psychosis (Table 33.2). All
these symptoms can be quantitatively measured with standardized rating scales to establish baseline symptom severity and facilitate “treating
to target.”

STIMULANTS AND OTHER ADHD MEDICATIONS

Stimulants are sympathomimetic drugs that act both in the central nervous system (CNS) and peripherally by enhancing dopaminergic and
noradrenergic transmission (Table 33.3). Strong evidence (approximate effect size 1.00, large) exists for the effectiveness of these medications for the treatment of ADHD (Chapter 50); stimulants also are
effective for the management of aggression. In some cases, stimulants
have been used as monotherapy for fatigue or malaise associated with
chronic physical illnesses.
No major differences in efficacy or tolerability have been found
between different classes of stimulants, and no consistent patient profile identifies those who will respond preferentially to one class over
another. The most common (generally dose-­dependent) side effects
of stimulants include headache, stomachache, appetite suppression,
weight loss, blood pressure (BP) and heart rate increases, and delayed
sleep onset. Less common side effects include irritability (more prominent in younger children), aggression, social withdrawal, and rarely,
hallucinations (visual or tactile).
Stimulants have been associated with elevations in mean BP (<5 mm
Hg) and pulse (<10 beats/min); a subset of individuals (5–10%) may
have greater increases. The rate of sudden death in pediatric patients
taking stimulants is comparable to children in the general population;
the hazard ratio for serious cardiovascular (CV) events is 0.75 (although
up to a twofold increase in risk could not be ruled out). Moreover, a
case series analysis of children with a CV incident and treatment with
methylphenidate demonstrated an increased risk of arrhythmia (incidence rate ratio, 1.61) that was highest in the presence of congenital
heart disease. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommends that stimulants should be avoided in the presence of structural
cardiac abnormalities (e.g., postoperative tetralogy of Fallot, coronary
artery abnormalities, subaortic stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy) and patient symptoms (syncope, palpitations, arrhythmias) or
family history (e.g., unexplained sudden death) suggestive of CV disease. In these circumstances, cardiology consultation is recommended
before prescribing. Routine electrocardiograms (ECGs) are not recommended in the absence of cardiac risk factors.
The α-­adrenergic agents clonidine and guanfacine are presynaptic adrenergic agonists that appear to stimulate inhibitory presynaptic
autoreceptors in the CNS (see Table 33.3). The extended release formulations of both agents have FDA approval for ADHD. The extended-­
release formulation of guanfacine has strong evidence (approximate
effect size 0.80, large) for the monotherapy of ADHD. Extended-­
release guanfacine also has moderate evidence for effective treatment

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 33 u Psychopharmacology

223

Table 33.1  Principles for Effective Use of Psychotropic Medications
• Identify potential target symptoms using broad mental health screening instruments (e.g., Pediatric Symptom Checklist [PSC-­17])
• Conduct focused behavioral health (BH) assessment to establish target symptoms and appropriate level of care

• F
 ocused symptom rating scales, e.g.,
• Patient Health Questionnaire-­9 (PHQ-­9)
• Mood and Feelings Questionnaire (MFQ)
• Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED)
• Generalized Anxiety Disorder-­7 (GAD-­7)
• Vanderbilt ADHD Diagnostic Rating Scales
• Swanson Nolan and Pelham-­IV-­26 (SNAP-­IV-­26)
• Focused clinical interview to determine symptom history, severity (from focused rating scale score), complexity (psychiatric comorbidities, medical or
psychosocial complexity), and safety (imminent risk of substantial harm)
• If insufficient information is available to render a precise diagnosis for a symptom cluster, consider applying Unspecified Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders-­5 (DSM-­5) psychiatric diagnosis
• Rule out alternative explanations (medical, medication, substance, or developmental “masqueraders”) for target symptoms (may require specialty referral)

• Establish appropriate level of care based upon findings from focused BH assessment

• S
 ubclinical to mild presentation: triage to brief preventive intervention (e.g., anticipatory guidance)
• Moderate presentation: triage to primary care for basic psychopharmacology and/or brief psychosocial intervention
• Severe presentation: triage to specialty behavioral healthcare for comprehensive diagnostic evaluation, advanced psychopharmacology, and/or specialized
psychotherapy

• Rule out relative or absolute contraindications to medication use, e.g.,
•
•
•
•

 edical conditions
M
Drug interactions
Inability to monitor (e.g., unreliable parent/guardian, patient residing out of town)
Concern about drug diversion in the context of substance abuse or antisocial behavior

• Counsel about factors potentially contributing to symptom presentation or affecting response to medication
• Inadequate nutrition, physical activity, sleep, recreation, stress management; substance use

• Consider response to previous medication trials
• Favorable and adverse effects

• Develop comprehensive treatment plan as indicated
• P
 sychotherapy and/or medication
• Home and/or school interventions

• Obtain informed consent from parent/guardian and assent from patient
•
•
•
•
•

 ature of the condition needing treatment
N
Nature and purpose of proposed treatment and the probability that it will succeed
Risks and benefits of the proposed treatment
Alternatives to the proposed treatment, and their attendant risks and benefits
Prognosis with and without the proposed treatment

• Select evidence-­based medication and prescribe an adequate dose for an adequate duration; whenever possible, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-­approved medications for the given indication should be prioritized
• T
 itrate to effective tolerated dose within established dosage range
• Consider the period of time needed for each medication to achieve maximum effect
• “Start low, go slow”

• Explain details of medication management
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

 ame of medication
N
When to administer
Who should administer (e.g., parent, older teen)
How to administer (e.g., with food, swallowed whole)
Time to onset
Duration of action
How to store medication
Review of side effects and what to do if each should occur
How response to medication will be monitored (e.g., focused symptom rating scales, height/weight, pulse/blood pressure, side effect checks)
Special safety instructions (e.g., suicidal thoughts, severe agitation)
What the next step will be if medication is ineffective or not tolerated
How long medication likely will need to be taken if effective
Consider providing parent with standardized Medication Guide, such as those found at https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/index.cfm

• Monitor medication compliance and physical/laboratory parameters as indicated
• Monitor response to treatment
• P
 eriodic readministration of focused symptom rating scale(s); adjust
dose as indicated to achieve remission

• Taper and discontinue ineffective medication before substituting
alternative medication, or have clear rationale for using medication combinations
• Plan for medication discontinuation after symptom-­free and high-­functioning interval

of ADHD with comorbid oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), favorably affecting both symptom clusters, as well as for the treatment of
agitation in autism.
Sedation, somnolence, headache, abdominal pain, hypotension, bradycardia, cardiac conduction abnormalities, dry mouth, depression,
and confusion are potential side effects of clonidine and guanfacine.
Abrupt withdrawal can result in rebound hypertension; overdose can
result in bradycardia and hypotension leading to hospitalization or
death.

Atomoxetine is a selective inhibitor of presynaptic norepinephrine
reuptake that increases dopamine and norepinephrine in the prefrontal
cortex (see Table 33.3). It is less effective for the treatment of ADHD
(approximate effect size 0.60, medium) than stimulants, but atomoxetine
has a longer duration of action (approximately 24 hours). Atomoxetine
can have an onset of action within 1-­2 weeks of starting treatment,
but there is an incrementally increasing response for up to 4-­6 weeks
or longer. Common side effects include nausea, headache, abdominal
pain, insomnia, somnolence, erectile dysfunction, irritability, fatigue,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

224 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 33.2  Target Symptom Approach to
Psychopharmacologic Management
TARGET SYMPTOM

MEDICATION CONSIDERATIONS

Aggression

Stimulant
α-­Agonist
Antipsychotic (only if aggression is
severe or dangerous)

Agitation

Antipsychotic (only if agitation is severe
or dangerous)
Anxiolytic

Anxiety

Antidepressant
Anxiolytic (only for acute situational anxiety)

Depression

Antidepressant

Hyperactivity, inattention,
impulsivity

Stimulant
α-­Agonist
Selective norepinephrine reuptake
inhibitor

Mania

Antipsychotic
Lithium

Obsessions, compulsions

Antidepressant

Psychosis

Antipsychotic

Tics

α-­Agonist
Antipsychotic (only if tics are severe/
disabling)

Adapted from Shaw RJ, DeMaso DR. Clinical Manual of Pediatric Consultation-­Liaison
Psychiatry. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, 2020: 443.

decreased appetite, weight loss, and dizziness, along with nonclinical
increases in heart rate and BP. Potential serious neuropsychiatric reactions include psychosis, mania, panic attacks, aggressive behavior,
depression, seizures, and suicidal thinking. Atomoxetine carries an FDA
warning regarding the risk of suicidal thinking and the need to monitor
this closely. Atomoxetine also has been associated with rare hepatotoxicity and should be discontinued in patients with jaundice or laboratory
evidence of liver injury, and should not be restarted. Because of the risk
of sudden death, atomoxetine generally should be avoided in youth with
known serious structural cardiac abnormalities, cardiomyopathy, heart
rhythm abnormalities, or other serious cardiac problems.
Viloxazine is a second selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor
that was approved for ADHD by the FDA in 2021. It has once daily dosing, reaches steady state by day 2, and has a similar side effect profile to
atomoxetine (including FDA warnings on suicidality and increases in
heart rate and blood pressure).

ANTIDEPRESSANTS

Antidepressant drugs act on presynaptic and postsynaptic receptors
affecting the release and reuptake of brain neurotransmitters, including
norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine (Table 33.4). There is moderate evidence for the effectiveness of antidepressant medications in
the treatment of anxiety and obsessive-­compulsive disorders (approximate effect size 0.70, medium) and weaker evidence for the treatment
of depressive disorders (approximate effect size 0.30, small). Suicidal
thoughts have been reported during treatment with all antidepressants.
The overall risk difference of suicidal thoughts/behaviors across randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of all antidepressants and all indications has been reported as 0.7%, corresponding to a number needed to
harm of 143. All antidepressants carry an FDA warning for suicidality;
careful monitoring is recommended during the initial stages of treatment and following dose adjustments.
The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) fluoxetine outperforms all other antidepressants (both SSRI and non-­SSRI) studied
and is the only SSRI separating from placebo in studies of depressed
preadolescents. Side effects to SSRIs generally manifest in the first few
weeks of treatment, and many will resolve with time. More common

side effects include nausea, irritability, insomnia, appetite changes,
weight loss/gain, headaches, dry mouth, dizziness, bruxism, diaphoresis, tremors, akathisia, and restlessness. A small proportion of youth
taking SSRIs, particularly younger children, develop behavioral activation (motor or mental restlessness, increased impulsivity, disinhibited behavior, talkativeness, insomnia) that can be confused with
mania, but the activation symptoms typically resolve when the dose
is decreased or the medication discontinued. Because the likelihood
of activation events has been associated with higher antidepressant
plasma levels, slow up-­titration and close monitoring (particularly in
younger children) is warranted and underscores the importance of
educating parents/guardians and patients in advance about this potential side effect.
Sexual side effects are common, including decreased libido, anorgasmia, and erectile dysfunction. There is an increased risk of bleeding,
especially when used with aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs).
SSRIs can be associated with abnormal heart rhythms, and citalopram causes dose-­dependent QT interval prolongation, contraindicating doses >40 mg/day. Patients with diabetes may experience
hypoglycemia during SSRI treatment and hyperglycemia on discontinuation. Discontinuation symptoms (e.g., dysphoric mood, irritability,
agitation, dizziness, sensory disturbances, anxiety, confusion, headache, lethargy, emotional lability, insomnia, hypomania) are common
with short-­acting SSRIs (sertraline, citalopram, escitalopram), leading
to a recommendation for divided doses if these medications are used at
higher doses and graduated reduction if discontinued.
Serotonin syndrome results from excessive agonism of the CNS and
peripheral nervous system serotonergic receptors and can be caused by
prescribing multiple serotonergic medications concomitantly (Chapter 94). Symptoms can arise within 24-­48 hours and are characterized
by mental status changes (confusion, agitation, anxiety), neuromuscular hyperactivity (tremors, clonus, hyperreflexia, muscle rigidity),
and autonomic hyperactivity (hypertension, tachycardia, arrhythmias,
tachypnea, diaphoresis, shivering, vomiting, diarrhea). Advanced
symptoms include fever, seizures, arrhythmias, and unconsciousness,
which can lead to fatalities. Treatment is hospital based and includes
discontinuation of all serotonergic agents and supportive care with continuous cardiac monitoring. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)
play a role in most cases of serotonin syndrome and should be avoided
in combination with any other serotonergic drug, including another
MAOI. Moreover, caution should be exercised when combining two or
more non-­MAOI serotonergic drugs, including antidepressants, opioids and other pain medications, stimulants, cough/cold/allergy medications, and other over-­the-­counter products. Caution entails starting
the second non-­MAOI serotonergic drug at a low dose, increasing the
dose slowly, and monitoring for symptoms, especially in the first 24-­48
hours after dosage changes. Adolescents should be informed that certain recreational drugs (e.g., dextromethorphan, “ecstasy”) are highly
serotonergic and can cause serious interactions with antidepressants.
The non-­SSRI antidepressants include duloxetine, venlafaxine,
bupropion, and mirtazapine (see Table 33.4). These medications all
lack rigorous evidence to support their effectiveness in children and
adolescents and as such should not be considered first-­line options.
Duloxetine and venlafaxine are serotonin-­norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). Duloxetine has FDA approval for treatment
of generalized anxiety disorder in children and adolescents but typically is not as effective for anxiety as the SSRIs. Studies of duloxetine
for depression in youth have been negative. There is some evidence in
adults that duloxetine can be useful for fibromyalgia and chronic musculoskeletal pain, an effect that has also been observed in children and
adolescents. Common side effects of duloxetine include nausea, diarrhea, decreased weight, and dizziness. Increases in heart rate and BP
have been noted; BP should be monitored at each visit and with each
dosage change. In addition, there have been reports of hepatic failure,
sometimes fatal; duloxetine should be discontinued and not resumed
in patients who develop jaundice or other evidence of liver dysfunction. Duloxetine also has been associated with severe skin reactions
(erythema multiforme and Stevens-­Johnson syndrome).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 33 u Psychopharmacology

225

Table 33.3  Select Medications for Attention-­Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Symptoms
GENERIC [BRAND]
(HOW SUPPLIED)
DURATION OF ACTION

FDA
APPROVED
(AGE RANGE
IN YEARS)

SUGGESTED DAILY
STARTING DOSE (MG)

TARGET SYMPTOMS

USUAL DAILY THERAPEUTIC
DOSAGE RANGE (MG)*

Methylphenidate
[Concerta] (18, 27, 36, 54
mg caps)
12 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

18

Age 6-­12: 18-­54;
Age >12: 18-­72

Dexmethylphenidate
[Focalin XR]† (5, 10, 15, 20
mg caps)
10-­12 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

5

5-­30

Serdexmethylphenidate/
dexmethylphenidate
[Azstarys]† (26.1 mg/5.2
mg, 39.2 mg/7.8 mg,
52.3 mg/10.4 mg)
12 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

26.1 /5.2

26.1 /5.2-52.3/10.4

Methylphenidate
suspension, extended
release [Quillivant XR]
(25 mg/5 mL)
12 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

10

10-­60

Dextroamphetamine/
amphetamine [Adderall
XR]† (5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30
mg caps)
12 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

2.5-­5

5-­30

Lisdexamfetamine
[Vyvanse]† (10, 20, 30, 40,
50, 60, 70 mg caps; 10,
20, 30, 40, 50, 60 mg
chewable tabs)
12-­14 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

10

10-­70

Amphetamine suspension
extended release
[Dyanavel XR] (2.5/mL)
13 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

2.5-­5

2.5-­20

Methylphenidate
[Metadate CD]† (10, 20,
30, 40, 60 mg caps)
8 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

10

10-­60

Methylphenidate [Ritalin
LA]† (10, 20, 30, 40 mg
caps)
8 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

10

10-­60

Dextroamphetamine
[Dexedrine Spansule]† (5,
10, 15 mg spansules)
6-­8 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

5

5-40

Dexmethylphenidate
[Focalin] (2.5, 5, 10 mg
tabs)
4-­5 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

2.5-­5

5-­20

Methylphenidate [Ritalin]
(5, 10, 20 mg tabs)
4 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

2.5-­5

5-­60

Methylphenidate
[Methylin] (5 mg/5 mL, 10
mg/5 mL)
4 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

2.5-­5

5-­60

Dextroamphetamine/
amphetamine [Adderall]
(5, 10, 15, 20, 30 mg tabs)
4-­5 hr

ADHD (3+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

Age 3-­5: 2.5
Age ≥6: 5

Age 6-­12: 5-­30;
Age >12: 5-­40

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

226 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 33.3  Select Medications for Attention-­Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Symptoms—cont’d
GENERIC [BRAND]
(HOW SUPPLIED)
DURATION OF ACTION

FDA
APPROVED
(AGE RANGE
IN YEARS)

SUGGESTED DAILY
STARTING DOSE (MG)

TARGET SYMPTOMS

USUAL DAILY THERAPEUTIC
DOSAGE RANGE (MG)*

Dextroamphetamine
[Dexedrine] (5, 10, 15, mg
caps)
4 hr

ADHD (3+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

Age 3-­5: 2.5
Age ≥6: 5

5-­40

Atomoxetine [Strattera]†
(10, 18, 25, 40, 60, 80, 100
mg caps)
24 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

<70 kg: 0.5 mg/kg/day
>70 kg: 40

<70 kg: 0.5-­1.2 mg/kg/day
>70 kg: 40-­100

Viloxazine [Qelbree]† (100,
150, 200 mg ER caps)
24 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

Age 6-­11: 100
Age ≥12: 200

Age 6-­11:
100-­400
Age ≥11:
200-­400

Clonidine [Kapvay] (0.1 mg
tabs)
12 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

0.05

25-40kg: 0.05-0.2
41-45kg: 0.05-0.3
>45kg: 0.05-0.4

Guanfacine [Intuniv] (1, 2,
3, 4 mg tabs)
24 hr

ADHD (6+)

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

1

25-40kg: 1-2
41-45kg: 1-3
>45kg: 1-4

Clonidine [Catapres] (0.1,
0.2, 0.3 mg tabs)
4 hr

None

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

0.05

25-­40 kg: 0.05-­0.2
41-­45 kg: 0.05-­0.3
>45 kg: 0.05-­0.4

Guanfacine [Tenex] (1, 2
mg tabs)
6 hr

None

Inattention
Hyperactivity
Impulsivity

0.5

25-­40 kg: 0.5-­2 mg
41-­45 kg: 0.5-­3 mg
>45 kg: 0.5-­4 mg

*Doses shown in table may exceed maximum recommended dose for some children.
†Capsule contents may be sprinkled on soft food.
ADHD, Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

Bupropion, a norepinephrine-­
dopamine reuptake inhibitor
(NDRI), appears to have an indirect mixed-­agonist effect on norepinephrine and dopamine transmission. No rigorous studies of bupropion for anxiety or depression have been conducted with children or
adolescents, although some evidence suggests that bupropion may be
effective for smoking cessation and ADHD in youth. Common side
effects include irritability, nausea, anorexia, headache, and insomnia.
Dose-­related seizures (0.1% risk at 300 mg/day and 0.4% risk at 400
mg/day) have occurred with bupropion, so it is contraindicated in
those with epilepsy, eating disorders, or at risk for seizures.
Venlafaxine has only negative trials for the treatment of depression
in children and adolescents but does have some favorable evidence for
the treatment of anxiety. Side effects are similar to SSRIs, including
hypertension, irritability, insomnia, headaches, anorexia, nervousness,
and dizziness, and dropout rates are high in clinical trials of venlafaxine. BP should be monitored at each visit and with each dosage change.
Discontinuation symptoms are more pronounced with venlafaxine
than the other non-­SSRI antidepressants. In addition, suicidal thinking
and agitation may be more common with venlafaxine than with other
antidepressants, requiring close monitoring. In light of the substantial
adverse effects, venlafaxine likely should be considered to be a third-­
line medication.
Mirtazapine is both a noradrenergic and a specific serotonergic
antidepressant. Mirtazapine has only negative trials for the treatment of depression in youth and has no rigorous evidence of effectiveness for any other child or adolescent psychiatric disorder.
Mirtazapine is associated with a risk for substantial weight gain and,
more rarely, hypotension, elevated liver enzymes, agranulocytosis,
and QT prolongation. Although its sedating properties have led to
its adjunctive use for insomnia in adults with depressive/anxiety
disorders, there is no evidence for use of mirtazapine in childhood
sleep disorders.

The tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) have mixed mechanisms of
action; for example, clomipramine is primarily serotonergic, and imipramine is both noradrenergic and serotonergic. With the advent of the
SSRIs, the lack of efficacy studies, particularly in depression, and more
serious side effects, the use of TCAs in children and adolescents has
substantially declined. Clomipramine has been used in the treatment of
obsessive-­compulsive disorder (see Table 33.4). TCAs also have been
used for neuropathic pain. TCAs cause both blood pressure and heart
rate increases and are class I antiarrhythmics with quinidine-like properties that are potentially fatal in overdose. Anticholinergic symptoms
(e.g., dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation) are the most common
side effects.
Anxiolytic agents, including lorazepam, clonazepam, and hydroxyzine, have been effectively used for the short-­term relief of the symptoms of acute anxiety (see Table 33.4). They are less effective as chronic
(>4 months) anxiolytic medications, particularly when used as monotherapy. Chronic use carries a significant risk of physical and psychologic dependence.

ANTIPSYCHOTICS

Based on their mechanism of action, antipsychotic medications can
be divided into first-­generation (blocking dopamine D2 receptors) and
second-­
generation (mixed dopaminergic and serotonergic antagonists) agents (Table 33.5).
The second-­
generation antipsychotics (SGAs) have relatively
strong antagonistic interactions with 5-­HT2 receptors and perhaps
more variable activity at central adrenergic, cholinergic, and histaminic sites, which might account for the varying side effects, particularly metabolic, noted among these agents. The SGAs have moderate
evidence for the treatment of agitation in autism and for the treatment
of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and aggression. Haloperidol is a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 33 u Psychopharmacology

227

Table 33.4  Select Medications for Depression and Anxiety in Children and Adolescents

GENERIC [BRAND]
(HOW SUPPLIED)

FDA
APPROVED
(AGE RANGE
IN YEARS)

TARGET SYMPTOMS

SUGGESTED DAILY
STARTING DOSE (MG)

USUAL DAILY THERAPEUTIC
DOSAGE RANGE (MG)*

Citalopram [Celexa]
(10, 20, 40 mg tabs)

None

Depression
Anxiety
Obsessions
Compulsions

Age 6-12: 10
Age 13-17: 20

10-­40

Escitalopram [Lexapro]
(5, 10, 20 mg tabs)

Depression
(12-­17)
Anxiety
(7-17)

Depression
Anxiety
Obsessions
Compulsions

10

5-­20

Fluoxetine [Prozac]
(10, 20, 40, 60 mg tabs)

Depression
(8-­17)
OCD
(7-­17)

Depression
Anxiety
Obsessions
Compulsions

Age 6-­12: 10
Age 13-­17: 20

Depression: 10-­20
Anxiety, OCD: 10-­60

Sertraline [Zoloft]
(25, 50, 100 mg tabs)

OCD
(6-­17)

Depression
Anxiety
Obsessions
Compulsions

Age 6-­12: 12.5-­25
Age 13-­17: 25-­50

25-200

Duloxetine [Cymbalta]
(20, 30, 60 mg tabs)

Anxiety
(7-­17)

Depression
Anxiety

30

30-­60

Venlafaxine [Effexor XR]
(37.5, 75, 150 mg caps)

None

Depression
Anxiety

37.5

37.5-­225

Bupropion [Wellbutrin XL]
(150, 300 mg tabs)

None

Depression

150

150-­300

Mirtazapine [Remeron]
(15, 30, 45 mg tabs)

None

Depression

7.5

7.5-­45

Clomipramine [Anafranil]
(25, 50, 75 mg caps)

OCD
(10-­17)

Obsessions
Compulsions

25

25-­200

Lorazepam [Ativan] (0.5, 1,
2 mg tabs)

None

Acute anxiety

0.5

0.5-­2

Clonazepam [Klonopin]
(0.5, 1, 2 mg tabs)

None

Panic

0.5

0.5-­1

Hydroxyzine [Vistaril]
(25, 50 mg caps)

Anxiety

Acute anxiety

Age <12: 12.5-25
Age >12: 25-50

Age <12: 25-50
Age >12: 50-100

*Doses shown in table may exceed maximum recommended dose for some children.

high-­potency first-­generation antipsychotic that is most commonly
used in treatment of agitation and schizophrenia.
The antipsychotic agents have significant side effects, including
sedation, extrapyramidal symptoms, hyperprolactinemia, anticholinergic, seizures, orthostasis, CV effects, weight gain, hyperlipidemia, metabolic syndrome, glucose abnormalities, hematologic
effects (e.g., leukopenia, neutropenia), and elevated liver transaminases (Table 33.6). They have an FDA warning for increased risk
of diabetes. Youth appear to be more sensitive to sedation, extrapyramidal side effects (except akathisia), withdrawal dyskinesia,
prolactin abnormalities, weight gain, hepatotoxicity, and metabolic
abnormalities. The development of diabetes or tardive dyskinesia
appears less prevalent than in adults, although this may be a function of short follow-­up periods because these side effects may not
emerge until adulthood.
The management of adverse effects should be proactive with baseline assessment and ongoing monitoring (Table 33.7). Abnormal
movements (dystonia, akathisia, tardive dyskinesia) need periodic
assessment using a standardized instrument such as the Abnormal
Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS). The need for antiparkinsonian
agents may be a consideration, particularly for patients at risk for
acute dystonia or who have a previous history of dystonic reactions.
CV effects include prolongation of the QTc interval, tachycardia,

orthostatic hypertension, and pericarditis. In patients with a personal or family history of cardiac abnormalities, including syncope,
palpitations, arrhythmias, or sudden unexplained death, a baseline
ECG with subsequent monitoring should be considered, along with
cardiology consultation before prescribing. Alternative pharmacology should be considered if the resting heart rate exceeds 130
beats/min, or the PR, QRS, and QTc exceed 200, 120, and 460 msec,
respectively.
The cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes metabolize the antipsychotics and as such necessitate that the PCP and psychiatrist are alert for
potential drug-­drug interactions that may impact the serum levels
of all patient medications. CYP3A4 is mainly relevant to lurasidone,
quetiapine, olanzapine, and haloperidol, whereas CYP2D6 predominately clears aripiprazole and risperidone. Asenapine is metabolized by
CYP1A2 as well as direct glucuronidation by UGT1A4. Because <10%
of paliperidone undergoes CYP first-­pass metabolism, there is a lower
likelihood of drug-­drug interactions.
Primary prevention strategies to manage weight and metabolic dysfunction include educating the youth and family about healthy lifestyle
behaviors and selecting an agent that has the lowest likelihood of
impacting metabolic status. Secondary strategies would include
intensifying healthy lifestyle instructions, consideration of switching agents, and a weight loss treatment program. Consideration

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

228 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 33.5  Select Medications for Psychosis, Mania, Irritability, Agitation, Aggression, and Tourette Disorder in Children and
Adolescents

GENERIC (BRAND)

FDA APPROVED
(AGE RANGE IN
YEARS)

SUGGESTED DAILY
STARTING DOSE

TARGET SYMPTOMS

USUAL DAILY THERAPEUTIC
DOSAGE RANGE (MG)*

Aripiprazole [Abilify]

Bipolar (10-­17)
Schizophrenia (13-­17)
Irritability in autism
(6-­17)
Tourette (6-­17)

Mania
Psychosis
Irritability
Aggression
Agitation
Vocal/motor tics

Bipolar, schizophrenia: 2
Autism: 2
Tourette: 2

Bipolar, schizophrenia: 10-­30
Autism: 5-­15
Tourette: 5-­20

Olanzapine
[Zyprexa]
Available in
dissolvable and IM
prep

Bipolar (13-­17)
Schizophrenia (13-­17)

Mania
Psychosis
Agitation

2.5

2.5-­20

Quetiapine
[Seroquel]

Bipolar (10-­17)
Schizophrenia (13-­17)

Mania
Psychosis
Agitation

25 mg bid

Bipolar: 400-­600
Schizophrenia: 400-­800

Risperidone
[Risperdal]
Available in liquid
and dissolvable
prep

Bipolar (10-­17)
Schizophrenia (13-­17)
Irritability in autism
(5-­17)

Mania
Psychosis
Irritability
Aggression
Agitation

Bipolar, schizophrenia: 0.5
Autism:
<20 kg: 0.25
≥20 kg: 0.5

Bipolar, schizophrenia: 1-­6
Autism: 0.5-­3

Paliperidone
[Invega]
Available in IM prep

Schizophrenia (12-­17)

Psychosis

3

<51 kg: 3-­6
≥51 kg: 3-­12

Lurasidone [Latuda]

Schizophrenia (13-­17)
Depressive episodes
with Bipolar (13-­17)

Psychosis

Schizophrenia: 40
Bipolar: 20

Schizophrenia: 40-­80
Bipolar: 20-­80

Asenapine [Saphris]

Bipolar (10-­17)

Mania
Psychosis

2.5 twice daily

5-­20

Haloperidol [Haldol]
Available in liquid
and IM prep

Psychosis
Severe behavioral
disorders
Agitation (3-­17)
Tourette disorder

Mania
Psychosis
Irritability
Aggression
Agitation
Vocal/motor tics

0.05 mg/kg/day

0.05-­0.15 mg/kg/day

Lithium carbonate
Available in liquid
prep

Bipolar (12-­17)

Mania

Acute mania: 1800 mg/day
Target level: 1.0-­1.5 mEq/L

Long-­term control: 900-­1200 mg/day
Target level: 0.6-­1.2 mEq/L

*Doses shown in table may exceed maximum recommended dose for some children.

of weight management interventions and increased monitoring of
blood glucose and lipid levels should be implemented if weight gain
exceeds the 90th percentile of body mass index (BMI) for age, or
a change of 5 BMI units in youth who were obese at the initiation
of treatment. Tertiary strategies, where diabetes, hypertension, obesity, or another metabolic abnormality has occurred, require more
intensive weight reduction interventions, changing medication,
and consultation with a medical subspecialist. Metformin has been
found to be an effective treatment for antipsychotic-induced weight
gain in children with autism spectrum disorder. Extrapyramidal
adverse effects are generally dose- and titration rate–dependent and
may respond to dose or titration rate reductions. More disabling
effects may benefit from adjunctive treatment (e.g., anticholinergics,
antihistamines).
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome is a rare, potentially fatal
reaction that can occur during antipsychotic therapy (see Chapter
94). The syndrome generally manifests with fever, muscle rigidity,
autonomic instability, and delirium. It is associated with elevated
serum creatine phosphokinase levels, a metabolic acidosis, and high
end-­tidal CO2 excretion. It has been estimated to occur in 0.2–1%
of patients treated with dopamine-­blocking agents. Malnutrition

and dehydration in the context of an organic brain syndrome and
simultaneous treatment with lithium and antipsychotic agents (particularly haloperidol) can increase the risk. Mortality rates may be
as high as 20–30% as a result of dehydration, aspiration, kidney failure, and respiratory collapse. Differential diagnosis of neuroleptic
malignant syndrome includes infections, heat stroke, malignant
hyperthermia, lethal catatonia, agitated delirium, thyrotoxicosis, serotonin syndrome, drug withdrawal, and anticholinergic or
amphetamine, ecstasy, and salicylate toxicity.

MOOD STABILIZERS

Because of their limited evidence of effectiveness and concerns about
safety, mood-­stabilizing medications (see Table 33.5) have limited use
in the treatment of child and adolescent psychiatric disorders. For the
treatment of bipolar mania in adolescents, antipsychotics are considered first-­line therapy.
Of the mood stabilizers, lithium alone has rigorous support for
the treatment of bipolar mania. Lithium’s mechanism of action is
not well understood; proposed theories relate to neurotransmission,
endocrine effects, circadian rhythm, and cellular processes. Common side effects include polyuria and polydipsia, hypothyroidism,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 33 u Psychopharmacology

229

Table 33.6  Relative Side Effects for Select Antipsychotic Medications
ADVERSE EFFECT

ARIPIPRAZOLE OLANZAPINE
[ABILIFY]
[ZYPREXA]

QUETIAPINE
[SEROQUEL]

RISPERIDONE PALIPERIDONE LURASIDONE
[RISPERDAL]
[INVEGA]
[LATUDA]

HALOPERIDOL
[HALDOL]

Akathisia

++

++

+

++

++

++

+++

Parkinsonism

+

++

+

++

++

++

+++

Dystonia

+

+

+

++

++

++

+++

Tardive
dyskinesia

+

+

+

++

++

++

+++

Hyperprolactinemia

+

++

+

+++

+++

+

+++

Anticholinergic

+

++

+/++

++

+

+

+

Seizures

+

++

++

+

+

+

+

Orthostasis

+

++

++

++

++

+

+

QT interval

+

++

+

+

+

+

++

Weight gain

+

+++

++

++

++

+

+

Hyperlipidemia

+

+++

++

+++

++

++

+

Glucose
abnormalities

+

+++

++

++

+

+

+

Sedation

+

++

++

+

+

++

+

+= Seldom; ++ = sometimes; +++ = often.
Adapted from Keepers GA, Fochtmann LJ, Anzia JM, et al. The American Psychiatric Association Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients With Schizophrenia. Am J
Psychiatry. 2020;177(9):868–872.

Table 33.7  Metabolic Monitoring Parameters Based on ADA/APA Consensus Guidelines
BASELINE

WEEK 4

WEEK 8

WEEK 12

EVERY 3 MO
THEREAFTER

ANNUALLY

Medical history*

X

X

Body mass index

X

Waist
circumference

X

X

X

Blood pressure

X

X

X

Fasting glucose
and Hemoglobin
A1c

X

X

X

Fasting lipid panel

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

*Personal/family history of obesity, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease.
From American Diabetes Association. American Psychiatric Association; American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists; North American Association for the Study of Obesity.
Consensus development conference on antipsychotic drugs and obesity and diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2004;27(2):596–601.

hyperparathyroidism, weight gain, nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, acne, and CNS symptoms (sedation, tremor, somnolence,
memory impairment). Periodic monitoring of lithium levels along
with thyroid and renal function is needed. Lithium serum levels of
0.8-­1.2 mEq/L are targeted for acute episodes, and levels of 0.6-­0.9
mEq/L are targeted for maintenance therapy. Acute overdose (level
>1.5 mEq/L) manifests with neurologic symptoms (e.g., tremor,
ataxia, nystagmus, hyperreflexia, myoclonus, slurred speech,
delirium, coma, seizures) and altered renal function. Toxicity is
enhanced when dehydrated or with drugs that affect renal function,
such as NSAIDs or angiotensin-­converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome has been reported in patients
concurrently taking antipsychotic drugs and lithium.

MEDICATION USE IN PHYSICAL ILLNESS

There are special considerations in the use of psychotropic medications
with physically ill children. Between 80% and 95% of most psychotropic
medications are protein bound; the exceptions are lithium (0%), methylphenidate (10–30%), and venlafaxine (25–30%). As a result, psychotropic levels may be directly affected because albumin binding is reduced
in many physical illnesses. Metabolism is primarily through the liver and
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, with excretion via the kidney. Therefore dosages
may need to be adjusted in children with hepatic or renal impairment.

Hepatic Disease

In general, it is necessary to use lower doses of medications for
patients with hepatic disease. Initial dosing of medications should

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

230 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
be reduced, and titration should proceed slowly. In acute hepatitis,
there is generally no need to modify dosing because metabolism is
only minimally altered. In chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis, hepatocytes are destroyed, and doses may need to be modified.
In steady-­state situations, changes in protein binding can result
in elevated unbound medication, resulting in increased drug action
even in the presence of normal serum drug concentrations. Albumin and α1 glycoproteins produced in the liver may be reduced
with infectious and inflammatory hepatic disease, whereas surgery,
trauma, and cirrhosis may result in elevated protein levels. Because
it is often difficult to predict changes in protein binding, it is
important to maintain attention to the clinical effects of psychotropic medications and not rely exclusively on serum drug
concentrations.
Medications with high baseline rates of liver clearance (e.g., haloperidol, sertraline, venlafaxine) are significantly affected by hepatic disease. For drugs that have significant hepatic metabolism, intravenous
(IV) administration may be preferred because parenteral administration avoids first-­pass liver metabolic effects, and the dosing and action
of parenteral medications are similar to those in patients with normal
hepatic function.

Gastrointestinal Disease

GI disease primary affects drug absorption. Examples that impact
absorption include conditions affecting GI motility, surgical alterations
of the GI tract, short bowel syndrome, or celiac disease. Any condition
that diverts blood away from the GI tract (e.g., congestive heart failure,
shock) may also reduce absorption.
Psychotropic medications have the potential to cause GI side effects.
Medications with anticholinergic side effects can slow GI motility,
affecting absorption and causing constipation. SSRIs increase gastric
motility and can cause diarrhea. SSRIs can increase the risk of GI bleeding, especially when administered with NSAIDs. Extended-­release or
controlled-­release preparations of medications can reduce GI side
effects, particularly where gastric distress is related to rapid increases
in plasma drug concentrations. Using extended-­release medication
preparations may reduce these side effects.

Renal Disease

In general, initial dosages of medication should be reduced or dosing intervals lengthened in renal failure. The rule of two thirds is
that dosages should be reduced by one third of the normal dosage
for a patient with renal insufficiency. However, most psychotropic
medications, with the exceptions of lithium and gabapentin, do
not require significant dosing adjustments in kidney failure. It is
important to monitor serum concentrations in renal insufficiency,
particularly for medications with a narrow therapeutic index.
Cyclosporine can elevate serum lithium levels by decreasing lithium
excretion. Although TCAs have been largely supplanted by SSRIs,
patients with kidney failure and those on dialysis appear to be more
sensitive to their side effects, possibly because of the accumulation
of hydroxylated tricyclic metabolites.
Because most psychotropic medications are highly protein bound,
they are not significantly cleared by dialysis. Lithium is essentially
completely removed by dialysis, and the common practice is to administer lithium after dialysis. Patients on dialysis often have significant
fluid shifts and are at risk for dehydration, with neuroleptic malignant
syndrome more likely in these situations.

Cardiac Disease

Antipsychotics, TCAs, and citalopram (>40 mg/day) can lead to
prolongation of the QTc interval, with increased risk of ventricular
tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation, particularly in patients with

structural heart disease. Patients with a baseline QTc interval of >440
msec should be particularly considered at risk. The normal QTc value
in children is 400 msec (±25-­30 msec). A QTc value that exceeds 2
standard deviations (SDs; >450-­460 msec) is considered too long
and may be associated with increased mortality. An increase in the
QTc from a baseline of >60 msec is also associated with increased
mortality.
There is increased risk of morbidity and mortality in patients
with preexisting cardiac conduction problems. Patients with Wolff-­
Parkinson-­White syndrome who have a short PR interval (<0.12
sec) and widened QRS interval associated with paroxysmal tachycardia are at high risk for life-­threatening ventricular tachycardia
that may be exacerbated by the use of antipsychotics, TCAs, and
citalopram.

Respiratory Disease

Anxiolytic agents can increase the risk of respiratory suppression in
patients with pulmonary disease. SSRIs are the first-­line medications
to consider in treating disabling anxiety. Possible airway compromise
caused by acute laryngospasm should be considered when dopamine-­
blocking antipsychotic agents are used.

Neurologic Disease

Psychotropic medications can be used safely with epilepsy following
consideration of potential interactions among the medication, the
seizure disorder, and the anticonvulsant. Any behavioral toxicity of
anticonvulsants used either alone or in combination should be considered before proceeding with psychotropic treatment. Simplification of
combination anticonvulsant therapy or a change to another agent can
result in a reduction of behavioral or emotional symptoms and obviate
the need for psychotropic intervention. Clomipramine and bupropion
possess significant seizure-­inducing properties and should be avoided
when the risk of seizures is present.

Principles for Psychotropic Prescribing in Primary
Care

In the context of a severe and prolonged shortage of child and
adolescent psychiatrists (CAPs), PCPs are increasingly managing
behavioral health conditions in primary care. The principles for
effective use of psychotropic medications outlined in the beginning of this chapter can be used by PCPs to guide their medication assessment and management (see Table 33.1). This approach
emphasizes baseline assessment with standardized symptom rating scales to identify target symptoms and their level of severity,
prioritizing FDA-­approved medications for the target symptom
and patient age range, adherence to recommendations regarding therapeutic dosage ranges, using a follow-­up symptom rating
scale assessment to monitor medication response, continuing the
medication trial for sufficient duration, and switching to an alternative FDA-­approved medication if the first medication trial is
ineffective.
PCPs can access support for psychotropic prescribing through the
development of collaborative relationships with CAPs who can provide timely consultation for questions/advice; interim management
until stable; and ongoing care for patients with severe, complex,
unsafe, or treatment-­
refractory conditions. Ideally, consultation
with a CAP should occur if one is considering using psychotropic
medications with very young children, multiple psychotropic medications, medication doses outside of therapeutic range, or non–
FDA-­approved medications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 34 u Psychotherapy

Chapter 34

Psychotherapy
Erica H. Lee, Keneisha R. Sinclair-­McBride,
David R. DeMaso, and Heather J. Walter
PSYCHOTHERAPY

Psychotherapy is the first-­line treatment for many child and adolescent psychiatric disorders (e.g., posttraumatic stress disorder [PTSD],
depression, anxiety, behavior, substance-­
related) because for these
disorders, psychotherapy produces outcomes greater than or equal
to pharmacotherapy, with less risk of harm. Even with disorders (e.g.,
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD]) for which medication is typically the first-­line treatment,
adjunctive psychotherapy can convey additional benefit.
Psychotherapy is moderately effective in reducing psychiatric symptomatology and achieving remission of illness. In a 2017 multilevel
meta-­analysis of almost 500 randomized trials over 5 decades, there
was a 63% probability that a youth receiving psychotherapy fared better than a youth in a control condition. Effects varied across multiple
moderators. The mean posttreatment and follow-­up effect sizes were
highest for anxiety, followed by behavior/conduct, ADHD, and depression, and lowest for multiple concurrent comorbidities. Effect sizes varied according to outcome measure informant, with youth and parents
generally reporting larger effects than teachers.
A variety of psychotherapeutic modalities have been developed, with
varying levels of effectiveness (Table 34.1). Differences between therapeutic approaches may be less pronounced in practice than in theory.
The quality of the therapist-­patient alliance is consistently one of the
most important predictors of treatment outcome. A positive working
relationship, expecting change to occur, facing problems assertively,
increasing mastery, and attributing change to the participation in the
therapy have all been associated with effective therapy, irrespective of
the specific psychotherapeutic modality.
All psychotherapy interventions involve a series of interconnected
steps, including performing an assessment, constructing working diagnoses and an explanatory formulation, deciding on treatment and a monitoring plan, obtaining treatment assent/consent, implementing treatment,
terminating treatment, and following for symptom recurrence. Psychotherapists ideally develop a treatment plan by combining evidence-­based
therapies with clinical judgment and patient/family preference to collaboratively arrive at a specific intervention plan for the individual patient.

Behavior Therapy

Behavior therapy is based on both classic (Pavlovian) and operant
(Skinnerian) conditioning. Both approaches address the antecedent
stimuli and consequent outcomes of problematic thoughts or behaviors. The treatment begins with a behavioral assessment along with a
functional analysis of the setting, immediately preceding events, and
real-­world outcomes of the behavior to identify the settings in which
the behavior occurs and/or the reason the child engages in the behavior.
Often the function of problematic behavior is to gain access to attention or a tangible item the child wants or to avoid a task or stressful
situation. The goal is to teach the child a more adaptive response using
tools such as positive and negative reinforcement; social and tangible
rewards; response cost/consequences; shaping, modeling, and prompting; systematic desensitization; and aversive conditioning.
Behavior therapy has shown particular effectiveness with oppositional behavior, obsessive-­compulsive, autism spectrum disorder, and
substance use disorders, and ADHD.

Cognitive-­Behavioral Therapy

Cognitive-­behavioral therapy (CBT) is based on social and cognitive
learning theories and extends behavior therapy to address the influence

231

of cognitive processes on behavior. CBT is a short-­term, problem-­and
goal-­oriented treatment centered on correcting problematic patterns in
thinking and behavior that lead to emotional difficulties and functional
impairments. The CBT therapist seeks to help the patient identify and
change cognitive distortions (e.g., learned helplessness, irrational
fears); identify and incrementally approach aversive situations; and
identify and practice distress-­
reducing behavior. Self-­monitoring
(daily thought records), self-­instruction (brief sentences asserting
thoughts that are comforting and adaptive), and self-­reinforcement
(rewarding oneself for adaptive behaviors) are key tools used to facilitate achievement of the CBT goals.
CBT has good-­
quality evidence for the treatment of anxiety,
obsessive-­compulsive disorder (OCD), behavior disorders, substance
abuse, and insomnia, and fair evidence for the treatment of depression. For many childhood psychiatric disorders, CBT alone provides
outcomes comparable to psychotropic medication alone, and the combination of both may convey additional benefit in symptom and harm
reduction. Modified versions of CBT have shown applicability to the
treatment of other disorders.

Trauma-­Focused Cognitive-­Behavioral Therapy

Trauma-­focused cognitive-­behavioral therapy (TF-­CBT) is designed to
process and master the psychologic, behavioral, and physiologic consequences of a specific traumatic experience. It involves a combination of education about the broad effects of trauma exposure; teaching
effective relaxation, affective modulation, and cognitive coping and
processing skills; creating a trauma narrative to foster understanding;
mastering trauma reminders; enhancing future safety and development; and teaching parents how to support youth with trauma exposure. TF-­CBT is considered the first-­line treatment for PTSD.

Dialectical Behavioral Therapy

Dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT) is a modality targeted at emotional and behavioral dysregulation by synthesizing or integrating the
seemingly opposite strategies of acceptance and change. Dialectic conflicts (wanting to die vs wanting to live) often exist in the same patient.
The four skills modules—mindfulness (the practice of being fully
aware and present in the moment), distress tolerance (how to tolerate emotional pain), interpersonal effectiveness (how to maintain
self-­respect and effective communication in relationships with others), and emotion regulation (how to manage complex emotions)—
are balanced in terms of acceptance and change. The treatment
targets, in order of priority within a given session, are life-­threatening
behaviors, such as suicidal and self-­injurious behaviors or communications; therapy-­interfering behaviors, such as coming late to sessions,
canceling appointments, and being uncollaborative in working toward
treatment goals; quality-­of-­life behaviors, including relationship and
occupational problems and financial crises; and skills acquisition to
help patients achieve their goals. DBT has good-­quality evidence for
self-­injurious thoughts and behaviors and has shown promise for the
treatment of bipolar disorder and other manifestations of emotional-­
behavioral dysregulation.

Interpersonal Psychotherapy

Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) focuses on resolving interpersonal
difficulties that lead to psychologic distress and maladaptive behaviors.
Patients are viewed as having strengths and vulnerabilities that determine the manner in which they cope with or respond to an interpersonal crisis (stressor). The main goals of IPT include expanding social
support, decreasing interpersonal stress, enhancing the processing of
emotions, and improving social functioning within significant relationships. The interpersonal inventory, a detailed review of the patient’s
significant relationships, both current and past, with their emotional
valence, leads to a formulation linking the interpersonal situations to
the emotional/behavior symptoms. Various techniques (linking emotions/behaviors to interpersonal events, communication and problem-­
solving training, perspective-­taking, role adaptation) are utilized to
resolve interpersonal difficulties. IPT is a well-­established treatment
for adolescent depression.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

232 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 34.1  Effective Psychotherapies for Specific Behavioral Health Disorders
DISORDER

PROBABLY EFFICACIOUS†

WELL-­ESTABLISHED*

Anorexia

Family therapy: behavioral

Family therapy: systemic
Individual psychodynamic psychotherapy

Anxiety, children under 8

Family-­based CBT

Group parent CBT ± group child CBT

Anxiety

CBT ± parent component ± medication

Family psychoeducation
Parent/child CBT
Relaxation, assertiveness training

Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity

BPT
Behavioral classroom management
Behavioral peer interventions
Organization (executive function)
training

Combined training interventions

Autism

Individual, comprehensive ABA
Teacher-­implemented focused
ABA + DSP

Individual, focused (communication) ABA ± DSP
Focused DSP parent training

Behavior, child

Group BPT
Individual BPT with child component

Modifications of Group BPT‡
Individual BPT alone or with other modifications
Self-­directed parent behavior therapy
Group child behavior therapy ± teacher training
Individual child behavior therapy ± parent component
Group/individual child-­centered play therapy

Behavior, adolescent

Behavioral therapy + CBT + family
therapy

CBT

Bipolar

Family skill building + psychoeducation

DBT

Depression, child

None

None

Depression, adolescent

Individual/group CBT
Individual IPT

Group IPT

Obsessive-­compulsive

Family-­focused CBT

Individual CBT

Posttraumatic stress

Individual/group trauma-­focused CBT ±
parent component

Group CBT + parent component
EMDR

Substance use

Individual/group/family CBT ± MET
Family-­based treatment, ecologic ±
CBT ± MET

Family-­based treatment, behavioral
Motivational interviewing/MET
Family-­based treatment, ecologic + contingency management
Family-­based treatment, behavioral, ecologic, contingency
management + MET
MET + CBT + contingency management

Self-­injurious thoughts and
behaviors

DBT-­adolescents (deliberate self-­harm,
suicidal ideation)

DBT—adolescents (nonsuicidal self-­injury, suicide attempt)
Individual/family CBT (suicide attempt)
Family therapy (suicide attempt)
Interpersonal therapy—adolescents (suicidal ideation)
Individual psychodynamic therapy (deliberate self-­harm)
Parent training (self-­injurious thoughts and behaviors (suicidal and
nonsuicidal)

*Two or more consistent randomized controlled trials demonstrating superiority of treatment over control groups; conducted by independent investigators working at different
research settings.
†Same as in the previous footnote, but lacking independent investigator criterion.
‡Modifications of Group Behavioral Parent Training that are probably efficacious include adding child components or family problem-­solving strategies
CBT, Cognitive-­behavioral therapy; BPT, behavioral parent training; ABA, applied behavioral analysis; DSP, developmental social-­pragmatic; DBT, dialectical behavioral therapy; IPT,
interpersonal psychotherapy; EMDR, eye movement desensitization and reprocessing; MET, motivational enhancement treatment.
Adapted from Society of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology. Concerns, symptoms and disorders. https://effectivechildtherapy.org/concerns-­symptoms-­disorders/. Accessed
July 13, 2021.
Criteria derived from Southam-­Gerow MA, Prinstein MJ. Evidence base updates: The evolution of the evaluation of psychological treatments for children and adolescents. J Clin
Child Adol Psychol. 2014;43(1):1–6.

Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

At the core of psychodynamic psychotherapy lies a dynamic interaction between different dimensions of the mind, conscious and unconscious. This approach is based on the belief that much of one’s mental
activity occurs outside one’s awareness. The patient is often unaware of
internal conflicts because threatening or painful emotions, impulses,
and memories are repressed to avoid experiencing psychologic pain.
Behavior is then controlled by what the patient does not know about
himself or herself. Therapy objectives are to increase self-­understanding
and acceptance of painful conflicting feelings, and to develop realistic

relationships between self and others. A fundamental difference of this
modality is its nondirective approach to allow a patient’s characteristic patterns of thinking and behavior to emerge over time. The relationship between the patient and the therapist can play a key role in
identifying these patterns, as they are recapitulated in the therapeutic
environment. The therapist can then analyze and interpret the manifest
pattern so that self-­understanding and a corrective emotional experience can be fostered.
Psychodynamic psychotherapy has shown applicability for the
treatment of self-­injurious thoughts and behaviors as well as anxiety,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 34 u Psychotherapy
depression, and maladaptive aspects of personality. Brief, time-­limited
psychodynamic psychotherapy can be appropriate for youth who are in
acute situational distress. Long-­term therapy can be appropriate when
the biologic or social factors destabilizing the child’s adaptation and
development are chronic, or the psychologic difficulties are complex,
or if entrenched conflicts and developmental interferences are present.

Supportive Psychotherapy

Supportive psychotherapy aims to minimize levels of emotional distress
through the provision of individual and contextual support. The goal is
to reduce symptoms, and treatment is focused on the “here and now.”
The therapist is active and helpful in providing the patient with symptomatic relief by helping the patient to contain and manage anxiety,
sadness, and anger. The therapist provides support and encouragement
(“coaching”) to bolster a patient’s existing coping mechanisms, facilitates problem solving, and provides social and instrumental support
for ameliorating or lessening contextual precipitants. CBT-­informed
techniques are often combined with supportive psychotherapy. Probably the most common psychotherapy employed by therapists, supportive psychotherapy has shown comparable results to CBT in a number
of research studies, particularly those targeting depression.

Family Therapy

The core premise in family therapy is that dysfunctional family interaction patterns precipitate and/or perpetuate an individual’s emotional
or behavioral difficulties. Family dysfunction can take a variety of
forms, including enmeshment, disengagement, role-­reversal or confusion, and maladaptive communication patterns. Family therapy begins
with an assessment of the family system, including observing patterns
of interaction; assessing family beliefs and the meanings attached to
behaviors; defining social and cultural contexts; exploring the presenting problem in the context of individual and family development;
assessing the family’s style of dealing with problems; and identifying
family strengths and weaknesses.
Family therapy techniques are drawn from two major theoretical
models: structural and behavioral. Structural family therapy develops
structures believed to foster well-­functioning families, including clear
and flexible boundaries between individuals, well-­defined roles, and an
appropriate balance between closeness and independence. Behavioral
family therapy focuses on behavioral sequences that occur in daily life
and attempts to interrupt unhelpful behavioral patterns and strengthen
positive behavioral patterns through effective communication and
problem solving.
Family therapy has shown established applicability in anorexia nervosa, behavior problems, and substance use and may be a promising
treatment for depression and bipolar disorder.

Parenting Interventions

See Chapters 20 and 42 for more details.
Parenting interventions seek to improve both the parent–child relationship and parenting skills using the principles of behavior therapy
previously described. These interventions can be provided in individual
or group therapy formats. Core relationship recommendations include
spending quality time with the child to foster a strong parent–child
bond, increasing positive verbal interaction, showing physical affection, and engaging in child-­directed play. Core parenting skills include
increasing reinforcement of positive behaviors; decreasing reinforcement of negative behaviors; ignoring merely annoying behaviors;
applying logical consequences for dangerous/destructive behaviors;
and making parental responses predictable, contingent, and immediate. Parenting interventions have shown applicability for behavior disorders and ADHD.

Common Elements of Evidence-­Based
Psychotherapies

A major challenge for the practitioner is selecting the “right intervention” for the “right person” in the “right setting,” and delivering the
intervention in the “right way” (to meet the needs of patients and
families). This challenge has led to an interest in identifying common

233

practice elements across efficacious evidence-­based therapies that
could be “matched” in a flexible way to patients of a certain age, gender,
and race/ethnicity who have certain psychiatric disorders. Table 34.2
provides the major practice elements for three of the most common
child and adolescent psychiatric disorders: anxiety, depression, and
disruptive behaviors. These practice elements, when made available to
patients with psychiatric disorders in a system of care, are estimated
to be relevant to approximately two thirds of the patients. Six of the
practice elements—psychoeducation of the parent, problem-­solving
skills, relaxation skills, self-­monitoring, cognitive/coping skills, and
psychoeducation of the child—are applicable to all three disorders
and as such could be considered “core competencies” for both mental
health specialists as well as primary care practitioners (PCPs) interested in delivering brief psychotherapeutic interventions in the context of anticipatory guidance (see Discussion of Common Factors in
Chapter 18).
Psychoeducation is the education of the parent and child about the
cause, course, prognosis, and treatment of the disorder. Problem solving includes techniques, discussions, or activities designed to bring
about solutions to targeted problems, with the intention of imparting
skills for how to approach and solve future problems in a similar manner. Relaxation includes techniques designed to create and maintain
the physiologic relaxation response. Self-­monitoring is the repeated
measurement of a target emotional or behavioral metric by the child
or parent to establish goals for treatment and monitor progress toward
mastery. Cognitive/coping skills consist of techniques designed to alter
interpretations of events through examination of the child’s reported
thoughts, accompanied by exercises designed to test the validity of the
reported thoughts.

Modular Therapy Packages

Of considerable importance to day-­to-­day clinical work is the manner
in which common therapy practice elements are selected, sequenced,
repeated, or selectively applied. This coordination of psychotherapeutic elements is particularly relevant for patients presenting with
multiple concurrent psychiatric disorders whose primary concern may
shift between sessions. The Modular Approach to Therapy for Children
(MATCH) is a multi-­disorder intervention system that incorporates
treatment procedures (practice elements) and treatment logic (coordination) corresponding to efficacious interventions for childhood
anxiety, depression, traumatic stress, and behavior problems, with
modifications to allow the system to operate as a single protocol. Compared with standard manualized treatments for individual disorders
and with usual care, the modular package outperformed both comparators on multiple clinical and service outcome measures when assessed
over a 2-­year period, although additional, independently derived evidence is needed to determine the conditions under which it is most
effective and categorize this treatment approach as well established.

Treatment Engagement Interventions

Treatment engagement is conceptualized as a multidimensional
construct targeting cognitive, attendance, and adherence domains.
Research has identified several key factors addressing these domains
that are associated with treatment engagement: accessibility promotion, psychoeducation about services, appointment reminders, assessment of treatment barriers, patient assessment, setting of positive
expectations, modeling, homework assignments, rapport building,
cultural acknowledgement, and goal setting (Table 34.3). To promote
treatment engagement, the first 10 of these factors can be addressed by
the PCP and the medical home team as soon as a mental health problem is identified that would benefit from treatment (see Chapter 18 for
further discussion).

Psychotherapy in the Medical Home

Recognizing that up to one half of visits to PCPs involve a mental
health problem and that an estimated one fifth of pediatric patients
have a functionally impairing psychiatric disorder, in the context of
limited access to specialty mental health services in community or
hospital settings a number of models have been developed to deliver

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

234 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 34.2  Practice Elements in Interventions for Three Common Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Disorders
ANXIETY DISORDERS

DEPRESSION

DISRUPTIVE BEHAVIOR

Directed play

X

Limit setting

X

Time-­out

X

Cost response

X

Activity scheduling

X

Maintenance

X

Skill building

X

Social skills training

X

Therapist praise/rewards

X

X
X

Natural and logical consequences

X

X

Communication skills

X

X

Assertiveness training

X

Parent monitoring

X

Modeling

X

Ignoring

X

Parent praise

X

Problem solving

X

Parent coping

X

Psychoeducation, parent

X

X

X

Relaxation

X

X

X

Tangible rewards

X

Self-­monitoring

X

X

X

Cognitive/coping

X

X

X

Psychoeducation, child

X

X

X

Exposure

X

X

X
X
X

X
X

X

Adapted from Chorpita BF, Daleiden EL, Weisz JR. Identifying and selecting the common elements of evidence based interventions: a distillation and matching model. Ment Health
Serv Res. 2005;7(1):5–20.

psychotherapy in primary care. Two prominent models, both originally developed for adult populations, are collaborative care and primary care behavioral health.
Collaborative care, which spans a spectrum ranging from coordinated to co-­located to integrated, provides mental healthcare for
patients through a collaboration between mental health specialists
and PCPs. In integrated collaborative care, patients’ mental health
problems are managed in the medical home setting by an interdisciplinary care team of PCPs, mental health clinicians, and care
coordinators supported by a consulting psychiatrist. The PCP is
the “team captain”; the mental health clinician maintains a population registry, provides brief, focused psychosocial interventions,
and monitors treatment response; the care coordinator facilitates
external referrals; and the consulting psychiatrist provides input
regarding evidence-­
based psychiatric diagnosis and treatment.
The four critical elements of integrated collaborative care are that
it is team-­driven, population-­focused, measurement-­guided, and
evidence-­based. These elements guide a treatment approach in
which the patient perceives a seamless integration of medical and
mental healthcare.
In children and adolescents, randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
have shown that integrated collaborative care for child behavior problems, adolescent depression, and adolescent substance use is associated with more favorable treatment adherence, symptom reduction,

disorder remission, and consumer satisfaction outcomes than usual
care, with or without specialty referral. In a meta-­analysis of collaborative care RCTs, larger effects were observed for treatment trials targeting diagnoses and elevated symptoms relative to prevention trials and
for mental health diagnoses relative to substance-­related diagnosis, as
well as for integrated models relative to other types of collaborative
mental healthcare.
Primary care behavioral health employs a mental health clinician (psychologist, social worker, mental health counselor) in the
primary care setting to provide focused assessment of patients
with mental health, health behavior, and substance use problems,
and short-­term therapy as well as health/mental health promotion and prevention interventions. Mental health clinicians typically collaborate with PCPs to develop treatment plans, monitor
patient progress, and flexibly provide care to meet patients’ changing needs. The model uses a “wide net” approach aimed at serving
the entire primary care population, with emphasis on brief, focused
interventions.
The results of brief interventions, particularly applicable to the
fast-­paced medical home setting, are encouraging. Interventions
lasting only one session, particularly those utilizing CBT techniques,
can be effective for mild presentations of multiple child psychiatric
disorders, particularly anxiety and behavior problems in children
(vs adolescents). These interventions can greatly expand capacity to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 35 u Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
Table 34.3  Selected Psychotherapy Engagement Elements

Chapter 35

ELEMENT

Somatic Symptom and
Related Disorders

DEFINITION

Accessibility promotion

Any strategy used to make services
convenient and accessible to
proactively encourage and increase
participation in treatment; e.g., hiring
a co-­located therapist or referring to a
local community-­based therapist with
whom the practice has an ongoing
collaborative relationship

Psychoeducation about
services

Provision of information about services
or the service delivery system; e.g.,
type of therapy being recommended,
information about the therapist,
session frequency and duration

Appointment reminders

Providing information about the day,
time, and location of the therapy office
for the initial appointment via mail,
text, phone, email, etc., to increase
session attendance

Assessment of treatment
barriers

Discussion to elicit and identify barriers
that hinder participation in treatment;
e.g., transportation, scheduling,
childcare, previous experiences with
therapy, stigma

Assessment

Measurement of the patient’s strengths/
needs through a variety of methods;
e.g., mental health screening
instruments, interviews, recorded reviews
during which the referring practitioner
can motivate treatment engagement

Modeling

Demonstration of a desired behavior to
promote imitation and performance of
that behavior by client

Expectation setting

Instillation of hope regarding the efficacy
of therapy and the patient’s ability to
participate successfully in treatment

Homework assignment

Therapeutic tasks given to the patient to
complete outside the therapy session
to reinforce or facilitate knowledge
or skills that are consistent with the
treatment plan

Goal setting

Selection of a therapeutic goal for the
purpose of making a plan to achieve
that goal

Rapport building

Strategies used to strengthen the
relationship between therapist and patient

Cultural acknowledgment

Exploration of an individual’s culture;
e.g., race/ethnicity, age, sexual
orientation, gender identity

Adapted from Lindsey MA, Brandt NE, Becker KD, et al. Identifying the common
elements of treatment engagement interventions in children’s mental health services.
Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev. 2014;17(3):283–298; Becker KD, Lee BR, Daleiden EL,
Lindsey M, Brandt NE, Chorpita BF. The common elements of engagement in children’s
mental health services: which elements for which outcomes?. J Clin Child Adolesc
Psychol. 2015;44(1):30–43; and Becker KD, Boustani M, Gellatly R, Chorpita BF. Forty
Years of Engagement Research in Children’s Mental Health Services: Multidimensional
Measurement and Practice Elements. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. 2018;47(1):1–23.

provide mental health support to those patients with emerging mild
mental health problems, with the goal of preventing escalation into
full-­blown psychiatric disorders if problems are left untreated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

235

David R. DeMaso

Medically unexplained physical symptoms are common in children
and adolescents. Although frequently chronic and disabling, these
symptoms do not often result in referrals for mental health assessment and treatment (see Chapter 212). The Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-­5) somatic symptom and related disorders (SSRDs) are those conditions in which
the physical symptoms are unexplained or for which the patient’s
response to the underlying medical condition is disproportionate and
debilitating.
The SSRDs include somatic symptom disorder (Table 35.1), conversion disorder (Table 35.2), factitious disorders (Table 35.3), illness
anxiety disorder (Table 35.4), and other specified/unspecified somatic
symptom disorders (Table 35.5), as well as psychologic factors affecting other medical conditions (Table 35.6). With the exception of illness
anxiety disorder (with high level of anxiety about health in the absence
of significant somatic symptoms) and psychologic factors affecting
other medical conditions (with psychologic and/or behavioral factors
adversely affect a pediatric condition), SSRDs are classified on the basis
of physical symptoms associated with clinically significant distress
and impairment, with or without the presence of a diagnosed medical
condition.
Most patients with SSRDs are seen by primary care practitioners or
by pediatric subspecialists, who may make specialty-­specific diagnoses
such as visceral hyperalgesia, chronic fatigue syndrome, psychogenic
syncope, or noncardiac chest pain. Even within psychiatry, SSRDs are
variously referred to as functional or psychosomatic disorders or as
medically unexplained symptoms. The nosologic heterogeneity across
the pediatric subspecialties contributes to the varying diagnostic
labels. There is a significant overlap in the symptoms and presentation
of patients with somatic symptoms who have received different diagnoses from different specialties. Moreover, SSRDs share similarities

Table 35.1  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Somatic
Symptom Disorder
A.	One or more somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in
significant disruption of daily life.
B.	Excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic
symptoms or associated health concerns, as manifested by at
least one of the following:
1.	Disproportionate and persistent thoughts about the
seriousness of one’s symptoms.
2.	Persistent high level of anxiety about health and symptoms.
3.	Excessive time and energy devoted to these symptoms or
health concerns.
C.	Although any one somatic symptom may not be continuously
present, the state of being symptomatic is persistent (typically
>6 mo).
Specify if:
With predominant pain (previously known as “pain disorder” in DSM
IV-­TR): for individuals whose somatic symptoms predominantly
involve pain.
Persistent: A persistent course is characterized by severe symptoms,
marked impairment, and long duration (>6 mo).
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p 311.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

236 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 35.2  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Conversion
Disorder or Functional Neurologic Symptom
Disorder
A.	One or more symptoms of altered voluntary motor or sensory
function.
B.	Clinical findings provide evidence of incompatibility between the
symptom and recognized neurologic or medical conditions.
C.	The symptom is not better explained by another medical or
mental disorder.
D.	The symptom causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning or
warrants medical evaluation.
Specify symptom type: weakness or paralysis, abnormal movements,
swallowing symptoms, speech symptom, attacks/seizures,
anesthesia/sensory loss, special sensory symptom (e.g., visual,
olfactory, hearing), or mixed symptoms.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p 318.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Table 35.3  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Factitious
Disorders
FACTITIOUS DISORDER IMPOSED ON SELF
A.	Falsification of physical or psychologic signs or symptoms, or
induction of injury or disease, associated with identified deception.
B.	The individual presents himself or herself to others as ill, impaired,
or injured.
C.	The deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious
external rewards.
D.	The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder,
such as delusional disorder or another psychotic disorder.
Specify if: single episode or recurrent episodes.
FACTITIOUS DISORDER IMPOSED ON ANOTHER (PREVIOUSLY
“FACTITIOUS DISORDER BY PROXY”)
A.	Falsification of physical or psychologic signs or symptoms,
or induction of injury or disease, in another, associated with
identified deception.
B.	The individual presents another individual (victim) to others as ill,
impaired, or injured.
C.	The deceptive behavior is evident even in the absence of obvious
external rewards.
D.	The behavior is not better explained by another mental disorder,
such as delusional disorder or another psychotic disorder.
Note: The perpetrator, not the victim, receives this diagnosis.
Specify if: single episode or recurrent episodes.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p 324.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Table 35.4  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Illness Anxiety
Disorder
A.	Preoccupation with having or acquiring a serious illness.
B.	Somatic symptoms are not present, or, if present, are only mild
in intensity. If another medical condition is present or there is a
high risk for developing a medical condition (e.g., strong family
history is present), the preoccupation is clearly excessive or
disproportionate.
C.	There is a high level of anxiety about health, and the individual is
easily alarmed about personal health status.
D.	The individual performs excessive health-­related behaviors (e.g.,
repeatedly checks his or her body for signs of illness) or exhibits
maladaptive avoidance (e.g., avoids doctor appointments and
hospitals).
E.	Illness preoccupation has been present for at least 6 months, but
the specific illness that is feared may change over that time.
F.	The illness-­related preoccupation is not better explained by
another mental disorder.
Specify whether: care-­seeking type or care-­avoidant type.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p 315.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Table 35.5  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Other Specified/
Unspecified Somatic Symptom and Related
Disorders
OTHER SPECIFIED
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms
characteristic of a somatic symptom and related disorder that
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate
but do not meet full criteria for any of the disorders in the somatic
symptom and related disorders diagnostic class.
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other
specified” designation include the following:
1.	Brief somatic symptom disorder: duration of symptoms is <6 mo.
2.	Brief illness anxiety disorder: duration of symptoms is <6 mo.
3.	Illness anxiety disorder without excessive health-­related
behaviors: Criterion D for illness anxiety disorder is not met (see
Table 35.4).
4.	Pseudocyesis: a false belief of being pregnant that is associated
with objective signs and reported symptoms of pregnancy.
UNSPECIFIED
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms
characteristic of a somatic symptom and related disorder that
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning
predominate but do not meet criteria for any of the other disorders
in the somatic symptom and related disorders diagnostic class.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p 327.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

in etiology, pathophysiology, neurobiology, psychologic mechanisms,
patient characteristics, and management and treatment response,
which is indicative of a single spectrum of somatic disorders.
It is helpful for all healthcare providers to avoid the dichotomy of
approaching illness using a medical model in which diseases are considered physically or psychologically based. In contrast, a developmental biopsychosocial continuum of disease better characterizes these
illnesses as occurring across a spectrum ranging from a predominantly
biologic to a predominantly psychosocial etiology. Indeed, there is a
neurobiologic component to the related functional neurologic disorders, especially related to pain symptoms (see Chapters 212 and 389).

SOMATIZATION

The term somatization is defined as a pattern of seeking medical help
for physical symptoms that cannot be fully explained by pathophysiologic mechanisms but are nevertheless attributed to physical disease by the sufferer. It has been described as the propensity to express

psychologic distress through somatic complaints. It is thought to occur
universally in young children (but occurs in every age group) who have
not yet developed the cognitive and a linguistic skill needed to comprehend and communicate their feelings.
Between 10% and 30% of children worldwide experience physical
symptoms that are seemingly unexplained by a physical illness, with
recurrent somatic complaints generally falling into cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, pain, and pseudoneurologic symptom clusters (Chapter
212). The prevalence of somatization is roughly equal among school-­
age males and females with a rise in adolescence, at which point somatic
complaints in females are five times greater than those in males. Youth
with a history of somatization are more likely to experience emotional/
behavioral difficulties, be absent from school, and perform poorly
academically. There are high rates of anxiety and depressive disorders
in youth with SSRDs. Youth with conversion disorder, specifically

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 35 u Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
Table 35.6  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Psychologic
Factors Affecting Other Medical Conditions
A.	A medical symptom or condition (other than a mental disorder) is
present.
B.	Psychologic or behavioral factors adversely affect the medical
condition in one of the following ways:
1.	The factors have influenced the course of the medical
condition, as shown by a close temporal association between
the psychologic factors and the development or exacerbation
of, or delayed recovery from, the medical condition.
2.	The factors interfere with the treatment of the medical
condition (e.g., poor adherence).
3.	The factors constitute additional well-­established health risks
for the individual.
4.	The factors influence the underlying pathophysiology, precipitating
or exacerbating symptoms or necessitating medical attention.
C.	The psychologic and behavioral factors in Criterion B are not
better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., panic disorder,
major depressive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder).
Specify if: mild, moderate, severe, or extreme.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p 322.
­Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

nonepileptic seizures, have increased rates of comorbid psychopathology including internalizing disorders and posttraumatic stress disorders. Somatization is common in cultures that accept physical illness
but not psychologic symptoms as a reason for disability.

RISK FACTORS FOR SOMATIZATION

Genetic and biologic factors, stressful life events, personality traits and
coping styles, cognitive and learning difficulties, learned complaints,
family factors, and sociocultural background are potential risk factors
that have been associated with pediatric somatization.

Genetic and Biologic Factors

Somatization clusters in families with increased rates in first-­degree
relatives of patients with SSRDs. The concordance rates for somatization approximate 29% in monozygotic twin studies. Genetic factors
have been hypothesized to contribute to the development of personality traits that may predispose to somatization when combined with
environmental factors. Neuroimaging studies have found neuronal
areas (premotor and supplementary motor cortexes, the middle frontal
gyrus, the anterior cingulate cortex, the insula, and the posterior cingulate cortex) to differ between patients with SSRDs.

Stressful Life Events

Stressful life events, including childhood trauma, physical/sexual
abuse, bullying, and exposure to natural disasters have all been associated with somatization. Youth with SSRDs have shown high rates of
comorbid anxiety, suicidal histories, family psychiatric histories, bullying, learning difficulties, and significant life events.

Personality Traits and Coping Styles

Somatization has been postulated to occur in patients who are unable
to verbalize emotional distress and instead use physical symptoms
as a means of expression. Physical symptoms have been called a
form of body language for children who have difficulty expressing
emotions verbally. Examples include individuals who have difficulties with disclosing traumatic events and high-­achieving children
who cannot admit they are under too much pressure. Alexithymia
has been used to describe individuals with somatic concerns who
do not have a verbal vocabulary to describe their feelings. Somatic
complaints have also been linked to somatosensory amplification,
which is the tendency to experience normal somatic sensations
as “intense, noxious and disturbing.” When present, patients are
hypervigilant to their own bodily sensations, overreact to these sensations, and interpret them as indicating physical illness.

237

Cognitive and Learning Difficulties

Children with difficulties learning and using academic skills, particularly in the context of high parental expectations, are associated with
increased rates of somatization. Compared with unaffected siblings,
youth with “functional” neurologic disorders have been found to score
lower on tests of full-­scale IQ, vocabulary level, and mathematics as
well as to have more learning difficulties. Between 40% and 60% of
patients with psychogenic nonepileptic seizures are reported to have
learning and subtle language problems.

Learned Complaints

In operant conditioning learning, attention and sympathy from others
and/or decrease in responsibilities (secondary gain) can reinforce somatic
complaints. If somatic symptoms are reinforced (i.e., increased parental
attention and/or avoidance of unpleasant school pressures) early in the
course of an SSRD the likelihood increases that the somatic complaints
will become more ingrained and less amenable to change. Social learning
theory suggests that somatic symptoms may be a result of “modeling” or
“observational learning” within the family. Family members with similar
physical complaints (symptom model) are commonly found in SSRDs.

Family Factors

In family systems theory, somatization can serve the function of drawing attention away from other areas of tension with a family. It has
been suggested that children in families with significant conflict may
develop somatic complaints as a mechanism to avoid any emotional
expression that may exacerbate family conflict.

Sociocultural Background

SSRDs have been reported to be more common in rural areas and
among individuals of lower socioeconomic status. Spells or visions are
common aspects of culturally sanctioned religious and healing rituals,
and falling down with loss or alteration in consciousness is a feature in
a variety of culture-­specific syndromes.

ASSESSMENT

The diagnosis of SSRD must be based on the presence of somatic
symptoms that are distressing and/or result in significant impairment
of daily life. These somatic symptoms must be accompanied by excessive thoughts, feelings, and behaviors related to these symptoms and/
or associated health concerns. SSRDs are not diagnoses of exclusion;
the mere absence of a medical explanation is insufficient to make the
diagnosis.
The assessment of suspected SSRDs should include an assessment
of biologic, psychologic, social, and developmental realms, both
separately and in relation to each other. A collaborative healthcare
approach between pediatric practitioners and mental health clinicians
is indicated to ensure that all realms are considered in the assessment
of medically unexplained physical symptoms (Table 35.7)

Medical Assessment

A comprehensive medical workup to rule out serious physical illness is
necessary, but must be carefully balanced with efforts to avoid unnecessary and potentially harmful tests and procedures. Certain medical
conditions are notoriously overlooked and should be carefully considered as part of the diagnostic workup for problematic somatic symptoms (Table 35.8).
The presence of a medical condition does not exclude the possibility of
somatization playing an important role in the presentation. Somatic symptoms early in a disease course that can be directly attributed to a specific
physical illness (e.g., acute respiratory illness) may evolve into psychologically based symptoms, particularly in situations where the patient may
experience benefit from adopting the sick role. Symptoms may not follow known physiologic principles or anatomic patterns and may respond
to suggestion or placebo. Physical findings may occur secondary to the
effects of the SSRD, especially when chronic or severe (e.g., deconditioning, disuse atrophy from prolonged immobilization, nutritional deficiency,
gastroparesis and constipation from chronic poor oral intake).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

238 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 35.7  Key Elements to Consider in the Psychiatric
Assessment of Somatic Symptoms and Related
Disorders in Children and Adolescents

Table 35.8  Selected Medical Conditions to Consider in the
Differential Diagnosis of Youth Presenting with
Disabling Somatic Symptoms

MEDICAL FINDINGS SUGGESTIVE OF SSRDS
⦁	Absence of findings despite thorough medical workup
⦁	Lack of electrical evidence on video-­electroencephalographic
monitoring
⦁	Inconsistent findings on examination
⦁	Sensory changes inconsistent with anatomic distribution (e.g.,
splitting at the midline, loss of sensation of entire face but not
scalp, discrepancy between pain and temperature sensation,
absence of Romberg sign)
⦁	Absence of functional impairment despite claims of profound
weakness (e.g., impairment of fine motor function on testing,
yet able to dress and undress)
⦁	Face-­hand test (deflecting falling arm from face)
⦁ Hoover sign (patient pushes down with “paretic” leg when
attempting to raise unaffected leg and fails to press down with
unaffected leg when raising “paretic” leg)
⦁	Astasia-­abasia (staggering gait, momentarily balancing, but
never actually falling)
⦁ Dragging a “weak” leg as though it were a totally lifeless
object instead of circumduction of the leg
⦁	Psychogenic deafness responding to unexpected words or noises
⦁	Tunnel vision
⦁	Movement disorder with normal concurrent electroencephalogram
⦁	Symptoms suggestive of conversion seizures (see Table 634.3).
⦁	Increased symptoms in the presence of family or medical staff
⦁	Periods of normal function when distracted
⦁	Temporal relationship between onset of symptom and
psychosocial stressor

AIDS
Acquired myopathies
Acute intermittent porphyria
Angina
Autoinflammatory (recurrent
fever) syndromes
Basal ganglia disease
Brain tumors
Cardiac arrhythmias
Chronic systemic infections
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Fabry disease
Gaucher disease
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Hereditary neuropathies
Hereditary angioedema

PSYCHIATRIC FINDINGS SUGGESTIVE OF SSRDS
⦁	Excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors related to the somatic
symptoms or associated health concerns
⦁	Co-­occurring psychiatric disorder
⦁	Learning difficulties and academic failure
⦁	Stressful life events (including childhood trauma and bullying)
⦁	Symptom model(s)
FAMILY BELIEFS REGARDING SOMATIC SYMPTOMS
⦁	Belief in a single undiagnosed primary medical cause
⦁	Investment in further medical workup
⦁	Fear about serious medical illness
⦁	Belief in the role of environmental triggers
⦁	Belief in the role of psychologic factors
⦁	Beliefs regarding symptom management
⦁	Awareness of nonpharmacologic approaches
⦁	Belief that the child should rest and be excused from usual
responsibilities
FAMILY MEDICAL HISTORY
⦁	Family history of unexplained somatic symptoms
⦁	Pattern of reinforcement of illness behavior in the family
IMPACT OF SOMATIC SYMPTOMS
⦁	Emotional (e.g., depression/anxiety vs la belle indifférence)
⦁	Family (e.g., disruption of work schedule, impact on marital
relationship, impact on distraction from family conflict)
⦁	Social and peer relationships
⦁	Academic (e.g., absenteeism, placement in home teaching)
REINFORCEMENT OF SOMATIC SYMPTOMS
⦁	Reinforcement by parents
⦁	Medical journals and diaries of symptoms kept by parents
⦁	Parent home from work
⦁	Increased attention from family/friends
⦁	Increased attention from medical providers
⦁	Avoidance of school, social, or athletic stressor
SSRD, Somatic symptoms and related disorder.
From Shaw RJ, DeMaso DR. Clinical Manual of Pediatric Consultation-­Liaison Psychiatry.
American Psychiatric Press; 2020:250–252.

Hyperparathyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Lyme disease
Migraine headaches
Mitochondrial disorders
Multiple sclerosis
Myasthenia gravis
Narcolepsy
Optic neuritis
Periodic paralysis
Postural orthostatic hypertension
syndrome
Polymyositis
Seizure disorders
Small fiber neuropathy
Superior mesenteric artery syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus

Modified from Shaw RJ, DeMaso DR. Clinical Manual of Pediatric Consultation-­Liaison
Psychiatry. American Psychiatric Press; 2020:248.

Psychosocial Assessment

If somatization is suspected, a mental health consultation should be
included early in the diagnostic workup. This can be a difficult step for
many families given their belief that there is a medical cause for their
child’s problem. A common response is for the family to react adversely
and think that their child’s symptoms are not being taken seriously. It is
helpful for the pediatric practitioner to frame the consultation as a routine
part of the medical workup as well as an opportunity to assess the level of
stress connected with the current physical symptoms. The practitioner can
communicate that the mental health consultation will be used to gain a
more complete understanding of the origins of their child’s distress, what
perpetuates it, and which treatments are likely to be most effective.
The mental health assessment should include a careful assessment of
psychosocial stressors, comorbid depression or anxiety disorders, individual and family histories of somatization, the presence of a model
of illness behavior, and evidence of secondary gain resulting from the
symptoms. The assessment should provide the pediatric practitioner(s)
with a biopsychosocial explanation of the child’s symptoms (diagnosis
and formulation), which will inform the development of a comprehensive biopsychosocial management plan.

Differential Diagnoses

The primary differential diagnosis is between an SSRD and a physical
illness. Importantly, however, these disorders are not mutually exclusive and often coexist. Depressive and anxiety disorders frequently
include the presence of physical symptoms, which tend to remit with
treatment of the primary depressive or anxiety symptoms, and which
appear distinct from physical complaints seen in SSRDs. Distinguishing features of other physical complaint disorders are noted in Table
35.9. Chronic pain syndromes may be caused by fibromyalgia and
small fiber autonomic neuropathy and complex regional pain syndrome (see Chapter 211).

MANAGEMENT

Effective management of SSRDs begins with the development of a positive working relationship between the patient, family, pediatric practitioner, and mental health clinician based on a shared understanding
of the diagnosis, formulation, and a management plan that generally
incorporates a number of different treatment modalities.
The formulation of the problem is the crucial first step. Patients and
their families routinely present with the belief that their symptoms
are caused by a medical illness alone. This view needs to be reframed
from this narrow medical model view to a comprehensive biopsychosocial understanding. With the completion of medical and psychosocial assessments, a joint meeting of the pediatric practitioner(s) and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 35 u Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders

239

Table 35.9  Features of Conditions Characterized by Patient’s Physical Complaints
CONVERSION DISORDER
FUNCTIONAL NEUROLOGIC
DISORDER

ILLNESS ANXIETY DISORDER

SOMATIC SYMPTOM DISORDER

Presenting
complaint

Primary concern is the development of a
serious illness—does not require specific
symptoms

Primary concern is a specific symptom;
generally presents with a more
specific physical complaint
There are no objective physical
findings other than those related to
deconditioning

Presents with new-­onset neurologic
or physical symptom; patient may
or may not be concerned about
this new symptom

Medical correlation
to complaint

Generally present with more vague
complaints than a specific symptom; not
usually explained by medical workup
In the presence of a known disease, the
complaint does not correlate to the
natural history of the disorder in severity,
duration, or dysfunction

Patient can have a medical explanation
for their symptom; however, the
worry about the seriousness of the
symptom is disproportionate or
excessive

Physical and neurologic findings
do not correlate with patient’s
presentation
Neurologic manifestations involve
aspects of CNS where voluntary
control is exercised

Course of disease

Often associated with other anxiety
disorders; can be chronic

Chronic; rarely remits

Generally acute onset; can recur
with same or different presenting
symptom(s)

CNS, Central nervous system
Modified from Byrne R, Elsner G, Beattie A. Emotional and behavioral symptoms. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis:
Common Diseases and their Mimics. 2nd ed. Elsevier; 2023:Table 31.14, p. 530.

mental health clinician (as well as any involved pediatric specialists)
should be arranged to reach and ensure a consensus on the diagnosis
and treatment plan and facilitate adequate and consistent communication among all providers.
The next step is an “informing conference or meeting” that
includes both the managing pediatric practitioner and the family. It
is important in this meeting that this practitioner present the medical
and psychosocial findings together to the patient and the family in a
supportive and nonjudgmental manner. If patients and their families
believe that the practitioner understands and empathizes with the
degree of distress the somatic symptoms have produced, then they
are more likely to be active participants in treatment. Depending on
the comfort and expertise of the pediatric practitioner and the severity of the SSRD, the mental health clinician may or may not elect to
attend this meeting.
After complete medical investigations yield no unifying results,
labeling the symptoms as “psychiatric” may be problematic because it
can shift the search for the cause onto family functioning, resulting in
children and parents feeling blamed for the symptoms. The goal is to
avoid such labeling and instead help the family move toward an understanding of the mind-­body connection and to shift their approach from
searching for the cause of the symptoms to increasing child functioning.
Providing mind-­body examples, such as facial flushing when embarrassed, hand shaking when frightened, or phantom limb pain, will help
the patient and family understand how the brain may produce physical
symptoms.

Treatment

With child and family acceptance of a biopsychosocial understanding,
an integrated medical and psychosocial treatment approach focused on
the development and implementation a treatment plan to improve the
patient’s functioning, and not a continued search for a cause of the presenting symptoms, can be implemented. It is helpful to establish realistic goals that emphasize improvements in functioning rather than the
illusion that the symptoms can be completely removed. Those patients
with mild-­moderate presentations can be treated effectively in the primary or specialty pediatric care setting with appropriate mental health
follow-­up, whereas those with severe presentations and high complexity are better managed in the psychiatry specialty care setting.

Role of the Pediatric Practitioner

The pediatric practitioner serves an important role in providing ongoing
monitoring and treatment for possible physical illness in addition to the

recommended mental health interventions. Frequent, brief, and ongoing
pediatric visits can be scheduled as a means of helping avoid unnecessary medical investigations and procedures. This arrangement permits
the patient to receive attention from their pediatric practitioner without
having to develop somatic symptoms. Furthermore it may reassure the
family that the team is continuing to monitor for symptoms that would
require further evaluation and helps ensure that any further medical
evaluation is directed by a clinician knowledgeable about the previous
symptoms and evaluations. It is generally more helpful for the practitioner to attend to a patient’s anxiety in relation to their physical symptoms
rather than the symptoms themselves. This approach has been shown to
reduce overall healthcare utilization and to improve patient satisfaction.

Using Rehabilitation Approach

A rehabilitative approach acknowledges the reality of the symptoms,
emphasizes the necessary involvement of mind and body in the recovery
process, and shifts the focus from “cure” to “return to normal functioning” while allowing youth to “save face” through the promotion of physical recovery as the primary goal. A rehabilitative approach includes the
use of intensive physical and occupational therapy that emphasizes the
recovery of function. This approach can be combined with a behavioral
modification program, with incentives for improvements in functioning,
while removing secondary gain for illness behavior.
In severely disabled patients, it may be preferable to recommend
admission to an inpatient medical-­psychiatric treatment program that
specializes in SSRDs. Another useful option to consider is that of day
treatment or partial hospitalization programs. Multidisciplinary inpatient rehabilitation programs have much to offer these patients because
they are designed to support both physical and psychologic recovery.
Families are generally reassured that multidisciplinary staff can continue to monitor physical symptoms, thus ensuring that any missed
diagnoses will be recognized quickly.
Youth with a high level of impairment often miss a significant
amount of school. Communication with the school is often crucial
in coordinating a successful reintegration. In addition to discussions
with the school guidance counselor and/or nurse, a letter for the school
providing education and recommended approaches for the patient’s
symptoms can be beneficial. These interventions can be formalized by
having the school work with the family to develop either a 504 plan
for accommodations needed in regular education settings, or an individualized educational plan (IEP) if the child needs special education
services. Ongoing communication between the school and the pediatric practitioner for monitoring of further symptoms is recommended.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

240 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Psychotherapy and Psychopharmacology

Meta-­analyses have shown that psychologic treatments improve symptom load, disability, and school attendance in youth suffering from
various somatic symptoms including functional abdominal symptoms,
fatigue, tension-­type headache, and musculoskeletal pain. Cognitive-­
behavioral therapy (CBT) interventions modify symptom experience and restore central nervous system abnormalities associated with
functional impairment. CBT techniques (e.g., relaxation training,
biofeedback, hypnosis) can be used to teach patients the control they
can have over certain physiologic processes, such as autonomic system
activity. Cognitive restructuring is effective in addressing and altering
dysfunctional thoughts regarding symptoms and their implications for
functioning. Treatments that encourage active coping strategies and
emotional expression and modulation are helpful in reducing symptoms and improving functioning. Modifying parental response patterns that are overprotective and potentially reinforcing (e.g., allowing
the child to sleep late or to stay home from school in response to symptoms) help to decrease disability.
Psychopharmacologic treatment may be considered when psychiatric comorbidities are present, specifically, depressive and anxiety
disorders. A combination of pharmacotherapy, physical therapy, and
psychologic interventions in multicomponent management programs
has been shown to be effective.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 36

Rumination and Pica
Chase B. Samsel, Heather J. Walter, and
David R. DeMaso

particularly when the regurgitation is associated with restricted food
intake (which may be designed to avoid regurgitation in front of others). They may attempt to hide the regurgitation behavior or avoid
eating among others.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Originally thought of as a disorder predominantly seen in infants
and those with intellectual disability, rumination disorder has also
been recognized in healthy individuals across the life span and can
be overlooked in adolescents. In otherwise healthy children, rumination disorder typically appears in the first year of life, generally
between ages 3 and 12 months. The disorder can have an episodic
course or can occur continuously until treatment is initiated. In
infants the disorder frequently remits spontaneously but can be
protracted with problematic and even life-­threatening malnutrition. Additional complications related to the secondary effects of
malnutrition include growth delay and negative effects on development and learning potential.

ETIOLOGY AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Risk factors for rumination disorder in infants and young children
include a disturbed relationship with primary caregivers, lack of
an appropriately stimulating environment, neglect, stressful life
situations, learned behavior reinforced by pleasurable sensations,
distraction from negative emotions, and inadvertent reinforcement (attention) from primary caregivers. Risk factors for rumination disorder in adolescents include similar early childhood factors
along with female gender and comorbid anxiety and depression. The
differential diagnosis includes congenital gastrointestinal system
anomalies, pyloric stenosis, Sandifer syndrome, gastroparesis, hiatal
hernia, increased intracranial pressure, diencephalic tumors, adrenal
insufficiency, and inborn errors of metabolism. Older children and
adults with anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa may also engage in
regurgitation because of concerns about weight gain. The diagnosis of
rumination disorder is appropriate only when the severity of the disturbance exceeds that routinely associated with a concurrent physical
illness or mental disorder.

TREATMENT

36.1 Rumination Disorder
Chase B. Samsel, Heather J. Walter, and
David R. DeMaso
Rumination disorder is the repeated regurgitation of food, in which
the regurgitated food may be rechewed, reswallowed, or spit out,
for a period of at least 1 month following a period of normal functioning. Regurgitation is typically frequent and daily; it does not
occur during sleep. It is not caused by an associated gastrointestinal
illness or other medical conditions (e.g., gastroesophageal reflux,
pyloric stenosis). It does not occur exclusively during the course of
anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge-­eating disorder, or avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder. If the symptoms occur in the
context of an intellectual or other neurodevelopmental disorder, the
symptoms must be sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical
attention.
Weight loss and failure to make expected weight are common features in infants with rumination disorder. Infants may display a characteristic position of straining and arching the back with the head
held back while making sucking movements with their tongue. In
infants and older individuals with intellectual disability, the rumination behavior may appear to have a self-­soothing or self-­stimulating
function. Malnutrition may occur in older children and adults,

The first step in treatment begins with a behavioral analysis to determine whether the disorder serves a self-­stimulation purpose and/or is
socially motivated. The behavior may begin as self-­stimulation, but it
subsequently becomes reinforced and maintained by the social attention given to the behavior. The central focus of behavioral treatment
is to reinforce correct eating behavior while minimizing attention to
rumination. Diaphragmatic breathing and postprandial gum chewing,
when used as a competing response, have been shown to be helpful.
Aversive conditioning techniques (e.g., withdrawal of positive attention, introducing bitter/sour flavors when regurgitating) are considered when a child’s health is jeopardized but can be more reasonable
and useful in adolescents. Additional techniques shown to be useful in
adolescents include reswallowing all regurgitation, use of paradoxical
intention, and guided progressive food trials.
Successful behavioral treatment requires the child’s primary
caregivers to be involved in the intervention. The caretakers need
education and counseling on responding adaptively to the child’s
behavior as well as altering any maladaptive responses. No current
evidence supports a psychopharmacologic intervention for rumination disorder. In more severe or intractable cases (e.g., severe dehydration, malnutrition), an intensive integrated medical-­behavioral
treatment program on a medical or medical-­psychiatric unit may
be necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 37 u Motor Disorders and Habits

36.2 Pica
Chase B. Samsel, Heather J. Walter, and
David R. DeMaso
Pica involves the persistent eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances (e.g., paper, soap, plaster, charcoal, clay, wool, ashes, paint,
earth) over a period of at least 1 month. The eating behavior is inappropriate to the developmental level (e.g., the normal mouthing and
tasting of objects in infants and toddlers), and therefore a minimum
age of 2 years is suggested. The eating behavior is not part of a culturally supported or socially normative practice. A diagnosis of pica
may be assigned in the presence of any other feeding and eating
disorder.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Pica can occur throughout life but occurs most frequently in childhood. It is more common in those with intellectual disability and
autism spectrum disorders, and to a lesser degree in obsessive-­
compulsive and schizophrenic disorders. The prevalence of pica is
unclear, although it appears to increase with the severity of an intellectual disability. It usually remits in childhood but can continue
into adolescence and adulthood. Geophagia (eating earth) is associated with pregnancy and is not seen as abnormal in some cultures
(e.g., rural or preindustrial societies in parts of Africa and India).
Children with pica are at increased risk for lead poisoning, iron-­
deficiency anemia, mechanical bowel problems, intestinal obstruction, intestinal perforations, dental injury, and parasitic infections.
Pica can be fatal based on substances ingested.

241

Chapter 37

Motor Disorders and
Habits
Jung Won Kim, Heather J. Walter, and
David R. DeMaso
Motor disorders are interrelated sets of psychiatric symptoms characterized by abnormal motor movements and associated phenomena. In
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(DSM-­5), they include tic, stereotypic movement, and developmental
coordination disorders. Tic disorders (Tourette, persistent motor or
vocal tic, provisional tic, other specified/unspecified tic) and stereotypic movement disorders (SMDs) are addressed in this chapter. Habits present as repetitive and often problematic motor behaviors (e.g.,
thumb sucking, nail biting, teeth grinding). When the problems cause
significant distress or impairment they are discussed as body-­focused
repetitive behavior disorder in the Obsessive Compulsive and Related
Disorders section of DSM-­5.

37.1 Tic Disorders
Jung Won Kim, Heather J. Walter, and
David R. DeMaso

TREATMENT

Tourette disorder (TD), persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder (PTD), and provisional tic disorders are characterized by involuntary, rapid, repetitive, and single or multiple motor and/or vocal/
phonic tics that wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for
>1 year since the first tic onset (<1 year for provisional tic disorder)
(Table 37.1). PTD is differentiated from TD in that PTD is limited to
either motor or vocal tics (not both), whereas TD has both motor and
vocal tics at some point in the illness (although not necessarily concurrently). The tic disorders are hierarchical in order (i.e., TD followed by
PTD followed by provisional tic disorder), such that once a tic disorder
at one level of the hierarchy is diagnosed, a lower-­hierarchy diagnosis
cannot be made. Other specified/unspecified tic disorders are presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a tic disorder that cause
significant distress or impairment predominate but do not meet the full
criteria for a tic or other neurodevelopmental disorder.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for
Bibliography.

Tics are sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movements or
vocalizations. Simple motor tics (e.g., eye blinking, neck jerking, shoulder shrugging, extension of the extremities) are fast, brief movements
involving one or a few muscle groups. Complex motor tics involve
sequentially and/or simultaneously produced, relatively coordinated
movements that can seem purposeful (e.g., brushing back one’s hair
bangs, tapping the foot, imitating someone else’s movement [echopraxia], or making a sexual or obscene gesture [copropraxia]). Simple
vocal tics (e.g., throat clearing, sniffing, coughing) are solitary, meaningless sounds and noises. Complex vocal tics involve recognizable
word or utterances (e.g., partial words [syllables], words out of context,
obscenities or slurs [coprolalia], repeating one’s own sounds or words
[palilalia], or repeating the last heard word or phrase [echolalia]).

ETIOLOGY AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Numerous etiologies have been proposed but not proved, ranging
from psychosocial causes to physical ones. They include nutritional
deficiencies (e.g., iron, zinc, calcium), low socioeconomic factors
(e.g., lead paint exposure), child abuse and neglect, family disorganization (e.g., poor supervision), mental disorder, learned behavior,
underlying (but undetermined) biochemical disorder, and cultural
and familial factors. The differential diagnosis includes anorexia
nervosa, factitious disorder, and nonsuicidal self-­injury. A separate diagnosis of pica should be made only if the eating behavior
is sufficiently severe enough to warrant additional clinical
attention.

Combined behavioral, social, and medical approaches are generally indicated for pica. Assessment for neglect and family supervision combined with psychiatric assessment for concurrent mental
disorders and developmental delay are important in developing an
effective intervention strategy for pica. Behavioral interventions,
particularly applied behavioral analysis in patients with intellectual
disability or autism spectrum disorders, are increasingly found to
be helpful. The sequelae related to an ingested item can require specific treatment (e.g., lead toxicity, iron-­deficiency anemia, parasitic
infestation). Ingestion of hair can require medical or surgical intervention for a gastric bezoar.

DESCRIPTION

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

242 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 37.1  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Tic Disorders
TOURETTE DISORDER
A.	Both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics have been
present at some time during the illness, although not necessarily
concurrently.
B.	The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for >1
year since first tic onset.
C.	Onset is before age 18 years.
D.	The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of
a substance (e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g.,
Huntington disease, postviral encephalitis).
PERSISTENT (CHRONIC) MOTOR OR VOCAL TIC DISORDER
A.	Single or multiple motor or vocal tics have been present during
the illness, but not both motor and vocal.
B.	The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for >1
year since first tic onset.
C.	Onset is before age 18 years.
D.	The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of
a substance (e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g.,
Huntington disease, postviral encephalitis).
E.	Criteria have never been met for Tourette disorder.
Specify if:
With motor tics only
With vocal tics only
PROVISIONAL TIC DISORDER
A.	Single or multiple motor and/or vocal tics.
B.	The tics have been present for <1 year since first tic onset.
C.	Onset is before age 18 years.
D.	The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of
a substance (e.g., cocaine) or another medical condition (e.g.,
Huntington disease, postviral encephalitis).
E.	Criteria have never been met for Tourette disorder or persistent
(chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder.
Note: A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movement or vocalization.
Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 5th ed. p 81. Copyright ©2013. American Psychiatric Association. All Rights
Reserved.

Sensory phenomena (premonitory urges) that precede and trigger
the urge to tic have been described. Individuals with tics can suppress
them for varying periods of time, particularly when external demands
exert their influence, when deeply engaged in a focused task or activity,
or during sleep. Tics are often suggestible and are worsened by anxiety, excitement, or exhaustion. Parents have described increasing frequency of tics at the end of the day.

CLINICAL COURSE

Onset of tics is typically between ages 4 and 6 years. The frequency
of tics tends to wax and wane with peak tic severity between ages 10
and 12 years and marked attenuation of tic severity in most individuals
(65%) by age 18-­20 years. A small percentage will have worsening tics
into adulthood. New onset of tics in adulthood is very rare and most
often is associated with exposure to drugs or insults to the central nervous system. Tics manifest similarly in all age groups, with changes in
affected muscle groups and vocalizations that occur over time. Some
individuals may have tic-­free periods of weeks to months.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Prevalence rates for all tics range from 6–18% for males and 3–11%
for females, with the rate of TD alone estimated as 0.8%. In general,
PTD/TD has a male preponderance with a gender ratio varying from
2:1 to 4:1.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis includes other repetitive movements of
childhood (Table 37.2). Tics may be difficult to differentiate from stereotypies. Although stereotypies may resemble tics, stereotypies are

typically rhythmic movements and do not demonstrate the change
in body location or movement type over time that is typical of tics.
Compulsions may be difficult to differentiate from tics when tics have
premonitory urges. Tics should be differentiated from a variety of
developmental and benign movement disorders (e.g., benign paroxysmal torticollis, Sandifer syndrome, benign jitteriness of newborns,
shuddering attacks). Although tics may present in various neurologic
illnesses (e.g., Wilson disease, neuroacanthocytosis, Huntington syndrome, various frontal-­subcortical brain lesions), it is rare for tics to be
the only manifestation of these disorders (Table 37.3).
Individuals presenting with tics in the context of declining motor
or cognitive function should be referred for neurologic assessment.
Substances/medications that are reported to worsen tics include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), lamotrigine, and cocaine. If
tics develop in close temporal relationship to the use of a substance or
medication and then remit when use of the substance is discontinued,
a causal relationship is possible. Stimulants do not commonly increase
tics.

COMORBIDITIES

Comorbid psychiatric disorders are common, often with both patient
and family viewing the accompanying condition as more problematic than the tics. There is a bidirectional association between PTD/
TD (especially TD) and obsessive-­compulsive disorder (OCD), with
20–60% of TD patients meeting OCD criteria and 20–40% of OCD
patients reporting tics (Fig. 37.1). Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) occurs in approximately 50% of all childhood PTD/
TD, but estimates in clinically referred patients suggest much higher
rates (60–80%). PTD/TD is often accompanied by behavior problems,
including poor frustration tolerance, temper outbursts, and oppositionality. Learning disabilities have been found in >20% of these
patients. Concurrent anxiety and depression have also been observed.
Some patients with PTD/TD will display symptoms of autism spectrum disorder (ASD); careful assessment is required to determine
which disorder is primary.

ETIOLOGY

Tics are proposed to be the result of dysfunctional corticostriatal-­
thalamocortical motor pathways in the basal ganglia, striatum, and
frontal lobes associated with abnormalities in the dopamine, serotonin,
and norepinephrine neurotransmitter systems. Male predominance in
PTD/TD may be attributable to influences of sex hormones on the neurodevelopment of these motor pathways, as reflected by the effects of
antiandrogens in the treatment of TD.
Family studies suggest a 10-­100–fold increased risk of PTD/TD
among first-­degree relatives compared to rates in the general population. Twin studies also support a genetic link, with approximately 80%
of monozygotic twins and 30% of dizygotic twins showing concordance
for PTD/TD. Candidate-­gene association and nonparametric linkage
studies have not identified specific susceptibility genes for PTD/TD.
Autoimmune-­
mediated mechanisms have been hypothesized as
having a potential etiologic role in some tic disorders. The pediatric
autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococcal infection (PANDAS) designation describes cases of acute childhood onset of OCD and/or tics following a streptococcal infection.
Pediatric acute-­onset neuropsychiatric syndrome (PANS) describes a
subtype of acute childhood-­onset OCD (tics are not a required feature) in which a link to a prior streptococcal infection is not evident,
suggesting that other infectious agents may be responsible. In addition
to a diagnosis of OCD and tics, children with PANS/PANDAS may
potentially have separation anxiety, nightmares, personality change,
oppositional behaviors, and deterioration in math skills and handwriting. Although some studies suggest a prior history of infections may
increase the risk for developing tic disorder, this remains controversial.
Premorbid stress has been hypothesized to act as a sensitizing agent
in the pathogenesis of TD among susceptible individuals by affecting
stress-­responsive biologic systems such as the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­
adrenal axis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 37 u Motor Disorders and Habits

243

Table 37.2  Repetitive Movements of Childhood
MOVEMENT

DESCRIPTION

TYPICAL DISORDERS WHERE PRESENT

Tics

Sudden rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic, stereotyped,
vocalization or motor movement

Transient tics, Tourette disorder, persistent tic disorder

Dystonia

Involuntary, sustained, or intermittent muscle contractions
that cause twisting and repetitive movements, abnormal
postures, or both

DYT1 gene, Wilson disease, myoclonic dystonia, extra­
pyramidal symptoms caused by dopamine-­blocking
agents

Chorea

Involuntary, random, quick, jerking movements, most often
of the proximal extremities, that flow from joint to joint.
Movements are abrupt, nonrepetitive, and arrhythmic and
have variable frequency and intensity

Sydenham chorea, Huntington chorea

Stereotypies

Stereotyped, rhythmic, repetitive movements or patterns of
speech, with lack of variation over time

Autism, stereotypic movement disorder, intellectual
disability

Compulsions

A repetitive, excessive, meaningless activity or mental
exercise that a person performs in an attempt to avoid
distress or worry

Obsessive-­compulsive disorder, anorexia, body dysmorphic
disorder, trichotillomania, excoriation disorder

Myoclonus

Shocklike involuntary muscle jerk that may affect a single
body region, one side of the body, or the entire body; may
occur as a single jerk or repetitive jerks

Hiccups, hypnic jerks, Lennox-­Gastaut syndrome, juvenile
myoclonic epilepsy, mitochondrial encephalopathies,
metabolic disorders

Akathisia

Unpleasant sensations of “inner” restlessness, often prompting
movements in an effort to reduce the sensations

Extrapyramidal adverse effects from dopamine-­blocking
agents; anxiety

Volitional behaviors

Behavior that may be impulsive or caused by boredom, such
as tapping peers or making sounds (animal noises)

Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder, oppositional
defiant disorder, sensory integration disorders

Adapted from Murphy TK, Lewin AB, Storch EA, Stock S. American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP) Committee on Quality Issues (CQI). Practice parameter for
the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with tic disorders. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2013;52(12):1341–1359.

SEQUELAE

Many individuals with mild to moderate tics express minimal to no
distress or functional impairment and may even be unaware of their
tics. Even individuals with moderate to severe tics can experience
minimal functional impairment, but psychologic distress may occur.
Infrequently, the presence of tics can lead to social isolation, social
victimization, inability to work or attend school, or impaired quality
of life. TD/PTD is associated with increased risk of suicide. Suicidal
behavior should be monitored, particularly in those with persistent
tics, history of suicide attempts, and psychiatric comorbidities.

SCREENING

Pediatric practitioners should routinely screen for unusual movements
(e.g., sudden twitches or jerks, eye blinking, neck twisting, muscle tightening, shoulder shrugging, or involuntary gestures) or vocalizations
(e.g., utter involuntary sounds, like grunts, yelps, squeaks, or throat
clears). Often families are unaware that frequent sniffing, coughing, or
blinking may be indicative of tics, attributing these behaviors to medical problems (e.g., allergies, visual problems). A careful assessment of
the timing, triggers, and specific characteristics may differentiate tics
from other medical problems. If differentiation is difficult, a referral to
a pediatric specialist in the affected system is warranted.

ASSESSMENT

If the screening suggests the presence of a tic disorder, a more comprehensive evaluation should ensue, including the age of onset,
types of tics, tic frequency, alleviating and aggravating factors, and
a family history of tics. Parent rating scales specific for tics (e.g., the
Motor Tic, Obsessions and Compulsions, Vocal Tic Evaluation Survey
[MOVES] and Autism-­Tics, ADHD and other Comorbidities inventory (A-­TAC) can supplement the assessment. For clinician-­rated tic
severity, the most comprehensive, reliable, and valid instrument is
the Yale Global Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS), though its relatively long
administration makes routine use in clinical practice problematic

(https://candapediatricmedicalhomes.files.wordpress.com/2017/02/
yale-­global-­tic-­severity-­scale.pdf).
A medical workup should be considered for new-­onset tics, particularly for presentations characterized by sudden onset, atypicality, or mental status abnormalities. Basic laboratory measures
(hemogram, renal/hepatic function panel, thyroid panel, and ferritin, along with urine drug screen for adolescents) should be considered. For new, sudden onset, or severe symptom exacerbation,
pediatric practitioners may assess for concurrent acute infection
(e.g., culture, rapid viral tests). Electroencephalography and brain
imaging are not routinely recommended for isolated tics and should
be reserved for patients with other neurologic findings that might
suggest an autoimmune encephalitis syndrome (limbic encephalitis). Comorbid psychiatric disorders (e.g., OCD, ADHD, ASD)
should be investigated.

TREATMENT

The decision to treat tics is made with the child and family based on the
level of impairment and distress caused by the tics. If tics are mild in
severity, the pediatric practitioner can provide the family with education, often with no need for further intervention.
Patient and family education should include common symptom
presentations, implications of concurrent conditions, course and prognosis, and treatment options (including no treatment). The patient’s
typical exacerbating and alleviating factors should be outlined. Pediatric practitioners can also direct the patient and family to informational websites, including the Tourette Association of America
(www.tourette.org).
Almost 75% of children with TD/PTD receive some form of classroom accommodation (e.g., directions to ignore tics and permission
to leave the room as needed). The accommodations may need to be
formalized in an individualized education plan (IEP) if a child needs
special education services or a 504 plan if the child just needs accommodations in the regular classroom.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

244 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 37.3  Etiology of Tics
PRIMARY CAUSES
Sporadic
Transient motor or phonic (<1 year), chronic motor or phonic tics
(>1 year), adult-­onset recurrent) tics, Tourette disorder, primary
dystonia
Inherited
Tourette disorder, Huntington disease, primary dystonia,
neuroacanthocytosis syndromes, neurodegeneration with brain
iron accumulation (type 1) (pantothenate kinase associated
neurodegeneration), tuberous sclerosis, Wilson disease, Duchenne
muscular dystrophy

Obsessivecompulsive
disorder

Attentiondeficit/
hyperactivity
disorder

SECONDARY CAUSES
Infections
Encephalitis, Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease, neurosyphilis, Sydenham
chorea, PANS
Drugs
Amphetamines, methylphenidate, levodopa, cocaine, carbamazepine,
phenytoin, phenobarbital, lamotrigine, antipsychotics, and other
dopamine receptor-­blocking drugs
Toxins
Carbon monoxide, wasp venom
Developmental
Static encephalopathy, intellectual disability syndromes, chromosomal
abnormalities, autistic spectrum disorders
Chromosomal Disorders
Down syndrome, Klinefelter syndrome, XYY karyotype, fragile X,
triple X, and 9p mosaicism, partial trisomy 16, 9p monosomy,
citrullinemia, Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Other Causes
Head trauma, stroke, cardiopulmonary bypass with hypothermia,
neurocutaneous syndromes, schizophrenia, neurodegenerative
diseases
RELATED DISORDERS
⦁	Stereotypies/habits/mannerisms
⦁	Self-­injurious behaviors
⦁	Motor restlessness
⦁	Akathisia
⦁	Compulsions
⦁	Hyperekplexia
⦁	Jumping Frenchman (startle response)
PANS, Pediatric acute neuropsychiatric syndrome.
Modified from Jankovic J. Differential diagnosis and etiology of tics. In: Cohen
DJ, Goetz, CG, Jankovic J, eds. Tourette Syndrome. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2001:Table 2.2, p. 18.

Referral to a behavioral treatment specialist should be considered
when tics are distressing or functionally impairing. The behavioral
interventions with the strongest empirical support are habit reversal
therapy (HRT) and comprehensive behavioral intervention for tics
(CBIT). The basic components of HRT include premonitory urge
awareness training and building a competing response to the urge to
tic (Table 37.4). Based on HRT, CBIT additionally includes relaxation
training and a functional intervention designed to mitigate against
tic-­generating situations. A course of HRT/CBIT treatment typically
takes several months or 8-­10 sessions. CBIT has been found to reduce
significantly the severity of tics compared to education and supportive
therapy.
Medications should be considered when the tics are causing severe
impairment in the quality of life or when psychiatric comorbidities
are present. The only U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–
approved medications to treat TD in children and adolescents are

Depression

Impulse control
disorders

Tourette disorder plus
Pure Tourette disorder

Fig. 37.1 Schematic representation of the behavioral spectrum in

Tourette disorder. The size of each area is proportional to the estimated
prevalence of the symptoms; the background color intensity is proportional to the complexity of the clinical presentation. (From Cavanna AE,
Seri S. Tourette’s syndrome. BMJ. 2013;347:f4964.)

two first-­generation antipsychotics (haloperidol, pimozide) and one
second-­generation antipsychotic (aripiprazole). α-­Agonists (clonidine,
guanfacine) are also considered as first-­line agents because of their
more favorable side effect profile compared with the antipsychotic
medications (see Chapter 33).
Youths with tic disorders may benefit from SSRIs for the treatment of comorbid obsessive-­
compulsive, anxiety, or depressive
disorders. Augmentation of SSRIs with an atypical antipsychotic
has been a consideration in patients with concurrent tic disorders
and OCD responding poorly to an SSRI alone. The presence of
tics does not preclude the use of stimulants to address comorbid
ADHD. Treatment of tics and comorbid ADHD with a combination of α-­agonists and stimulants (e.g., clonidine with methylphenidate) decreases tics. Close clinical monitoring is required for
possible exacerbation of tics during stimulant treatment. Anger and
rage outbursts are common particularly among youth with severe
tics (up to 80% in clinically referred samples). Behavioral therapies
(cognitive-­behavioral therapy [CBT], parent management training;
see Chapter 34) that address anger management may be useful.
A systematic review indicated high confidence of efficacy for
CBIT; moderate confidence for medications, such as haloperidol,
risperidone, aripiprazole, clonidine; and low confidence for medications, such as ziprasidone, guanfacine, and topiramate. No evidence exists to differentiate the effectiveness of HRT/CBIT alone vs
combined with pharmacotherapy as tic disorder treatment options.
There is no rigorous scientific evidence to support the use of deep
brain stimulation, repetitive magnetic stimulation, or dietary supplements in the treatment of TD or PTD.
In severe presentations, pediatric practitioners should consider
seeking consultations from and/or making referrals to pediatric tic
disorder specialists (i.e., behavioral psychologist, pediatric neurologist, developmental-­behavioral pediatrician, or child and adolescent psychiatrist) in determining a treatment regimen.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 37 u Motor Disorders and Habits

37.2 Stereotypic Movement Disorder
Jung Won Kim, Heather J. Walter, and David R. DeMaso
Stereotypic movement disorder (SMD) is defined in DSM-­5 as a
neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by repetitive, seemingly
driven, and apparently purposeless motor behavior (stereotypy) that
interferes with social, academic, or other activities and may result
in self-­injury. The onset of SMD is the early developmental period
(often before age 3 years), and the symptoms are not attributable to
the physiologic effects of a substance or neurologic condition and
are not better explained by another neurodevelopmental or mental disorder. The disorder is considered mild if symptoms are easily
suppressed by sensory stimulation or distraction, and severe if continuous monitoring and protective measures are required to prevent
serious injury, with moderate falling between mild and severe.

DESCRIPTION

Examples of stereotypic movements include hand shaking or waving, body rocking, head banging, self-­biting, and hitting one’s own
body. The presentation depends on the nature of the stereotypic
movement and level of the child’s awareness of the behavior. Among
typically developing children, the repetitive movements may be
stopped when attention is directed to the movements or when
the child is distracted from performing them. Among youth with
intellectual disability, the behaviors may be less responsive to such
efforts. Each individual presents with their own uniquely patterned
behavior. Stereotypic movements may occur many times during a
day, lasting a few seconds to several minutes or longer. The behaviors may occur in multiple contexts, including when the individual
is excited, stressed, fatigued, or bored.

CLINICAL COURSE

Stereotypic movements typically begin before age 3 years. In those who
develop complex motor stereotypies, the great majority exhibit these
symptoms before 24 months. In most typically developing youth, these
movements resolve over time. Among those with intellectual disability,
the stereotyped behaviors may persist for years, although the pattern
may change over time.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Simple stereotypic movements are common in typically developing young children. Some children may bang their head on their
mattress as they are falling asleep or may sit and rock when bored
or overstimulated. Self-­injurious habits, such as self-­biting or head
banging, can occur in up to 25% of typically developing toddlers
(often during tantrums), but they are almost invariably associated
with developmental delay in youth older than 5 years. Complex stereotypic movements are much less common (approximately 3–4%).
Between 4% and 16% of patients with intellectual disability engage
in stereotypic movements.

COMORBIDITY

Stereotypic movements are a common manifestation of a variety of
neurogenetic disorders, such as Lesch-­Nyhan, Rett, fragile X, Cornelia
de Lange, and Smith-­Magenis syndromes.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

According to DSM-­5, stereotypic movements must be differentiated
from normal development, ASDs, tic disorders, OCDs, and other
neurologic/medical conditions. Simple stereotypic movements
occurring in the context of typical development usually resolve with
age. Stereotypic movements may be a presenting symptom of ASD,
but SMD does not include the deficits in the social communication
characteristic of ASD. When ASD is present, SMD is diagnosed only

245

when there is self-­injury or when the stereotypic behaviors are sufficiently severe to become a focus of treatment. Typically, SMD has
an earlier age of onset than the tic disorders. SMD is distinguished
from OCD by the absence of obsessions as well as the nature of
the repetitive behaviors, which in OCD are purposeful (e.g., in
response to obsessions). The diagnosis of stereotypic movements
requires the exclusion of mannerisms, paroxysmal dyskinesias, and
benign hereditary chorea. A neurologic history and examination
are required to assess features suggestive of other disorders, such as
myoclonus, dystonia, and chorea.

ETIOLOGY

There is a possible evolutionary link between repetitive abnormal
grooming-­like behaviors and early human experience with adversity. Brain regions implicated in this model (e.g., amygdala, hippocampus) are those involved in navigating human experience
through unpredictable, anxiety-­provoked emotional states, as well
as regions (e.g., nucleus accumbens) related to pleasure and reward
seeking. The latter involves the hypothesis that individuals experience some level of gratification from performing the stereotypic
behavior.
Social isolation with insufficient stimulation (e.g., severe neglect)
is a risk factor for self-­stimulation that may progress into stereotypies, particularly repetitive rocking or spinning. Environmental
stress may trigger stereotypic behaviors. Repetitive self-­injurious
behavior may be a behavioral phenotype in neurogenetic syndromes
(e.g., Lesch-­Nyhan, Rett, and Cornelia de Lange syndromes). Lower
cognitive functioning is also linked to greater risk of stereotypic
behaviors.

TREATMENT

The initial approach to mild stereotypy is for the primary caretakers to ignore the undesired behavior, encourage substitute behavior,
and not convey worry to their child. These behaviors may disappear
with time and elimination of attention in young children. However, in children with intellectual disability or ASDs, stereotypies
may be more refractory to treatment than in typically developing
children and may necessitate referral to a behavioral psychologist,
developmental-­behavioral pediatrician, or child and adolescent psychiatrist for behavioral and/or psychopharmacologic management.
The pediatric practitioner should consider and rule out neglect of
the child, which can be associated with repetitive rocking, spinning,
or other stereotypic movements.
Behavior therapy is the mainstay of treatment, using a variety of
strategies, including habit reversal, relaxation training, self-­monitoring,
contingency management, competing responses, and negative practice.
The environment should also be modified to reduce risk of injury to
those engaging in self-­injurious behavior.
Atypical antipsychotic medications may be helpful in reducing stereotypic movements in youth with ASD. Patients with anxiety and
obsessive-­compulsive behaviors treated with SSRIs may show improvement in their stereotypic movements.

HABITS

Habits involve an action or pattern of behavior that is repeated
often. Habits are common in childhood and range from usually
benign and transient behaviors (e.g., thumb sucking, nail biting)
to more problematic (e.g., trichotillomania, bruxism). In DSM-­5,
habits are not included as a diagnostic category because they are not
viewed as disorders causing clinically significant distress or impairment in functioning. When they do cause distress or impairment
or are associated with repeated attempts by the individual to stop
the behavior they are discussed as body-­focused repetitive behavior
disorder. HRT has been effective as a first-­line treatment approach
(see Table 37.4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

246 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 37.4  Components of Habit Reversal Training
INCREASE INDIVIDUAL’S AWARENESS OF HABIT
Response description—have individual describe behavior to therapist
in detail while reenacting the behavior and looking in a mirror.
Response detection—inform individual of each occurrence of the
behavior until each occurrence is detected without assistance.
Early warning—have individual practice identifying earliest signs of
the target behavior.
Situation awareness—have individual describe all situations in which
the target behavior is likely to occur.
TEACH COMPETING RESPONSE TO HABIT
The competing response must result in isometric contraction of
muscles involved in the habit, be capable of being maintained for
3 min, and be socially inconspicuous and compatible with normal
ongoing activities but incompatible with the habit (e.g., clenching
one’s fist, grasping and clenching an object). For vocal tics and
stuttering, deep relaxed breathing with a slight exhale before
speech has been used as the competing response.
SUSTAIN COMPLIANCE
Habit inconvenience review—have individual review in detail all
problems associated with target behavior.
Social support procedure—family members and friends provide high
levels of praise when a habit-­free period is noted.
Public display—individual demonstrates to others that he or she
can control the target behavior in situations in which the behavior
occurred in the past.
FACILITATE GENERALIZATION—SYMBOLIC REHEARSAL
PROCEDURE
For each situation identified in situation awareness procedure,
individual imagines himself or herself beginning the target behavior
but stopping and engaging in the competing response.
From Carey WB, Crocker AC, Coleman WL, et al., eds. Developmental-­Behavioral
Pediatrics. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2009:639.

Thumb Sucking

Thumb sucking is common in infancy and occurring in as many as
25% of children age 2 years and 15% of children age 5 years. Thumb
sucking beyond 5 years of age may be associated with sequelae (e.g.,
paronychia, anterior open bite). As with other rhythmic patterns of
behavior, thumb sucking is self-­soothing. Basic behavioral management, including encouraging parents to ignore thumb sucking and
instead focus on praising the child for substitute behaviors, is often
an effective treatment. Simple reminders and reinforcers can also
be considered; giving the child a sticker or other reward for each
block of time that they do not thumb suck. In rare cases, mechanical devices placed on the thumb or in the mouth to prevent thumb
sucking or noxious agents (bitter salves) placed on the thumb may
be part of the treatment plan.

Bruxism

Bruxism or teeth grinding is common (5–30% of children), can begin
in the first 5 years of life, and may be associated with daytime anxiety.
Persistent bruxism can manifest as muscular or temporomandibular
joint pain. Untreated bruxism can cause problems with dental occlusion. Helping the child find ways to reduce anxiety might relieve the
problem; bedtime can be made more relaxing by reading or talking
with the child and allowing the child to discuss fears. Praise and other
emotional support are useful. Persistent bruxism requires referral to a
dentist given the risk for dental occlusion.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 38

Anxiety Disorders,
Obsessive-­Compulsive
Disorder, and Post­
traumatic Stress Disorder
Rosa K. Kim
Anxiety is not necessarily pathologic, is seen across the life span, and
can be adaptive (e.g., the anxiety one might feel during life-­threatening
situations). It has both a cognitive-­behavioral component, expressed in
worrying and wariness, and a physiologic component, mediated by the
autonomic nervous system. Anxiety is characterized as pathologic (e.g.,
a disorder) when it becomes disabling, interferes with social interactions, or derails normal development.
Anxiety disorders are some of the most common psychiatric disorders in childhood. The point prevalence worldwide is nearly 7%, and
the estimated lifetime prevalence in the United States is approximately
20–30%. Anxiety disorders are often comorbid with other psychiatric
and medical disorders, and they can have physical manifestations, such
as weight loss, palpitations, tremors, muscle cramps, paresthesias, hyperreflexia, and abdominal distress (Table 38.1). Although onset can be
acute, the course is generally chronic with periods of fluctuating severity.
The potential consequences of untreated anxiety include impairments
in social, educational, and overall functioning. Because anxiety is both
a normal phenomenon and, when highly activated, strongly associated
with impairment, the clinician is tasked with differentiating between
normal anxiety and abnormal anxiety across development (Fig. 38.1).
The median age of onset is 11 years. However, there are known periods of typical onset during specific developmental phases for both normal and pathologic anxiety. Normal stranger anxiety begins around
7-­9 months of age. Preschoolers typically have specific fears related to
the dark, animals, and imaginary situations. Separation anxiety can
occur during the preschool years. Although most school-­aged children
abandon the imaginary fears of early childhood, some replace them
with fears of bodily harm or other worries, reaching the level of a specific phobia (Table 38.2). Some characteristics of obsessive-­compulsive
disorder (OCD) can be considered typical in early school-­ages, but
OCD often has its onset in the mid–school-­aged years (Table 38.3).
Social anxiety occurs in later grade-­school ages and early adolescence
(Table 38.4) as the value of peer relationships increases. Generalized
anxiety, panic, and agoraphobia tend to occur during the teen and
young adult years (Tables 38.5 to 38.7).
Genetic or temperamental factors contribute more to the development of some anxiety disorders, whereas environmental factors are
closely linked to the cause of others. Specifically, behavioral inhibition
(sensitivity to novel stimuli) appears to be a heritable tendency and is
linked with social phobia, generalized anxiety, and selective mutism.
OCD and other disorders associated with OCD-­like behaviors, such as
Tourette syndrome and other tic disorders, tend to have high genetic
risk as well (see Chapter 37.1). Environmental factors, such as parent–
infant attachment and exposure to trauma, contribute more to separation anxiety disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
(Table 38.8). Parental anxiety disorder is associated with an increased
risk of anxiety disorder in offspring.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 38 u Anxiety Disorders, Obsessive-­Compulsive Disorder, and Post­traumatic Stress Disorder

247

Table 38.1  Mental and Somatic Disorders that are Frequently Comorbid or Difficult to Distinguish in Anxiety Disorder
EXAMPLES OF OVERLAPPING
SYMPTOMS
MENTAL DISORDERS
Major depressive
disorder

Fatigue, anxiety, worry, or agitation

Bipolar disorder

Agitation, irritability, or racing
thoughts

Obsessive-­compulsive
disorder*

Extreme worry or inability to relax

Posttraumatic stress
disorder*

Avoidance, hyperarousal, or
anxiety-­laden intrusive memories

Health anxiety*
(hypochondriasis)
Substance use (e.g.,
illicit drugs, alcohol,
or benzodiazepines)
disorder

Anxiety or worry from bodily
responses
Tremor, sweating, palpitations, or
panic attacks (during withdrawal
or in some cases intoxication)

SOMATIC DISORDERS
Cardiac disease
Thyroid disease (e.g.,
hyperthyroidism)
Respiratory disease
(e.g., asthma)
Pheochromocytoma or
other disorders that
result in sudden blood
pressure increase
Epilepsy

KEY CLINICAL INSIGHTS TO RECOGNIZE
Major depressive disorder is the highest comorbidity in anxiety disorder and
associated with higher severity, suicidality, disability and chronicity; clinicians
must comprehensively assess because major depressive disorder comorbidity
requires more intensive pharmacologic treatment and a different form of
psychotherapy treatment (e.g., cognitive-­behavioral therapy for depression
rather than for anxiety disorder)
Anxiety is often present in bipolar disorder and is associated with rapid
cycling; targeting anxiety could aid in mood stabilization; bipolar disorder
requires focus on mood stabilization and considerate use of medication, which
could induce mania (especially antidepressants)
People who have obsessive-­compulsive disorder engage in ritualistic,
repetitive behavior to deal with their fears, which is absent in anxiety disorder;
these people often realize that their behavior is irrational and inappropriate
The intense experience of anxiety in posttraumatic stress disorder is specifically
in response to a psychologic trauma (e.g., abuse, war, or accident); specific
psychotherapies focused on the trauma associated with the posttraumatic
stress disorder should be used
Anxiety is specifically related to preoccupation with having or acquiring a
serious, undiagnosed medical illness
When suspected, clinicians should conduct a psychiatric interview of substance
use disorders, with potential breath, urine, or plasma drug screening;
comorbidity of alcohol or benzodiazepine abuse with anxiety disorder is
considerable

Chest pain or palpitations (which is
also common in panic disorder)
Palpitations, tremor, panic attacks,
or persistent anxiety
Shortness of breath

Clinical evaluation, including electrocardiogram, assessment of plasma troponin
concentration, or Holter monitoring
Laboratory assessment of plasma thyroid-­stimulating hormone

Panic attacks or bodily sensations

Blood pressure monitoring over 24 hr or hormone assessment (e.g., in blood or
urine)

Anxiety symptoms as part of aura
or start of seizure

Clinical evaluation or neurologic referral when the causes of symptoms are
unclear

Clinical evaluation with a pulmonary function test

*In previous classifications of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders and International Classification of Diseases, these disorders were included in the classification
of anxiety disorders. In current classifications (e.g., the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders and the 11th edition of the International
Classification of Diseases), they are integrated in different classifications.
From Penninx BWJH, Pine DS, Holmes EA, Reif A. Anxiety disorders. Lancet. 2021;397:914–926:Table 2, p. 917.

Fear of negative evaluation

Dying and death of others

Normative fears

Separation

Stranger
shyness

0

Infancy and
toddlerhood

Thunder, lightning, fire,
water, darkness, nightmares,
animals, imaginary
creatures

3

Childhood

School anxiety,
performance anxiety

Germs, getting ill, natural
disasters, traumatic events,
harm to self or others

Peer rejection

School age

Adolescence

6

12

Age (years)

Fig. 38.1 Normative fears throughout childhood and adolescence. (From Craske MG, Stein MB. Anxiety. Lancet. 2016;388[10063]:3048–3059.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

248 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 38.2  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Specific Phobia
A.	Marked fear or anxiety about a specific object or situation (e.g.,
flying, heights, animals, receiving an injection, seeing blood).
Note: In children, the fear or anxiety may be expressed by crying,
tantrums, freezing, or clinging.
B.	The phobic object or situation almost always provokes immediate
fear or anxiety.
C.	The phobic object or situation is actively avoided or endured with
intense fear or anxiety.
D.	The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger
posed by the specific object or situation and to the sociocultural
context.
E.	The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6
mo or more.
F.	The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.
G.	The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of
another mental disorder, including fear, anxiety, and avoidance
or situations associated with panic-­like symptoms or other
incapacitating symptoms (as in agoraphobia); objects or situations
related to obsessions (as in obsessive-­compulsive disorder);
remainders of traumatic events (as in posttraumatic stress disorder);
separation from home or attachment figures (as in separation
anxiety disorder); or social situations (as in social anxiety disorder).
Specify if:
Code based on the phobic stimulus:
Animal (e.g., spiders, insects, dogs).
Natural environment (e.g., heights, storms, water).
Blood-­injection-­injury (e.g., needles, invasive medical procedures).
Situational (e.g., airplanes, elevators, enclosed places).
Other (e.g., situations that may lead to choking or vomiting; in
children, e.g., loud sounds or costumed characters).
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp 197–198.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Table 38.4  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Social Anxiety
Disorder (Social Phobia)
A.	Marked fear or anxiety about one or more social situations in
which the individual is exposed to possible scrutiny by others.
Examples include social interactions (e.g., having a conversation,
meeting unfamiliar people), being observed (e.g., eating or drinking),
and performing in front of others (e.g., giving a speech).
B.	The individual fears that he or she will act in a way or show anxiety
symptoms that will be negatively evaluated (i.e., will be humiliating
or embarrassing; will lead to rejection or offend others).
C.	The social situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety.
Note: In children, the fear or anxiety may be expressed by crying, tantrums,
freezing, clinging, shrinking, or failing to speak in social situations.
D.	The social situations are avoided or endured with intense fear or
anxiety.
E.	The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual threat posed
by the social situation and to the sociocultural context.
F.	The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6
mo or more.
G.	The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.
H.	The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not attributable to the
physiologic effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a
medication) or another medical condition.
I.	The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the
symptoms of another mental disorder, such as panic disorder,
body dysmorphic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder.
J.	If another medical condition (e.g., Parkinson disease, obesity,
disfigurement from burns or injury) is present, the anxiety or
avoidance is clearly unrelated or is excessive.
Specify if:
Performance only: If the fear is restricted to speaking or performing
in public.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp 202-­203.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Table 38.3  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Obsessive-­Compulsive Disorder
A.	Presence of obsessions, compulsions, or both:
Obsessions are defined by (1) and (2):
1.	Recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced, at some time during the disturbance, as intrusive and unwanted,
and that in most individuals cause marked anxiety or distress.
2.	The individual attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts, urges, or images, or to neutralize them with some other thought or action
(i.e., by performing a compulsion).
Compulsions are defined by (1) and (2):
1.	Repetitive behaviors (e.g., handwashing, ordering, checking) or mental acts (e.g., praying, counting, repeating words silently) that the
individual feels driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly.
2.	The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or distress, or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however,
these behaviors or mental acts are not connected in a realistic way with what they are designed to neutralize or prevent, or are clearly excessive.
B.	The obsessions or compulsions are time-­consuming (e.g., take more than 1 hr/day) or cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C.	The obsessive-­compulsive symptoms are not attributable to the physiologic effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or
another medical condition.
D.	The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder (e.g., excessive worries, as in generalized anxiety disorder;
preoccupation with appearance, as in body dysmorphic disorder; difficulty discarding or parting with possessions, as in hoarding disorder;
hair pulling, as in trichotillomania [hair-­pulling disorder]; skin picking, as in excoriation [skin-­picking] disorder; stereotypies, as in stereotypic
movement disorder; ritualized eating disorder, as in eating disorders; preoccupation with substances or gambling, as in substance-­related and
addictive disorders; preoccupation with having an illness, as in illness anxiety disorder; sexual urges or fantasies, as in paraphilic disorders;
impulses, as in disruptive, impulse-­control, and conduct disorders; guilty ruminations, as in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders; or repetitive patterns of behavior, as in autism spectrum disorder).
Specify if:
With good or fair insight: The individual recognizes that obsessive-­compulsive disorder beliefs are definitely or probably not true or that they
may or may not be true.
With poor insight: The individual thinks obsessive-­compulsive disorder beliefs are probably true.
With absent insight/delusional beliefs: The individual is completely convinced that obsessive-­compulsive disorder beliefs are true.
Specify if:
Tic-­related: The individual has a current or past history of a tic disorder.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p 237. Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 38 u Anxiety Disorders, Obsessive-­Compulsive Disorder, and Post­traumatic Stress Disorder
Table 38.5  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Generalized
Anxiety Disorder
A.	Excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive expectation), occurring
more days than not for at least 6 mo, about a number of events or
activities (such as work or school performance).
B.	The individual finds it difficult to control the worry.
C.	The anxiety and worry are associated with three (or more) of the
following six symptoms (with at least some symptoms having
been present for more days than not for the past 6 mo):
Note: Only one item is required in children.
1.	Restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge.
2.	Being easily fatigued.
3.	Difficulty concentrating or mind going blank.
4.	Irritability.
5.	Muscle tension.
6.	Sleep disturbance (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or
restless, unsatisfying sleep).
D.	The anxiety, worry, or physical symptoms cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.
E.	The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or other medical
condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
F.	The disturbance is not better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., anxiety or worry about having panic attacks in
panic disorder, negative evaluation in social anxiety disorder
[social phobia], contamination or other obsessions in obsessive-­
compulsive disorder, separation from attachment figures in
separation anxiety disorder, remainders of traumatic events in
posttraumatic stress disorder, gaining weight in anorexia nervosa,
physical complaints in somatic symptom disorder, perceived
appearance flaws in body dysmorphic disorder, having a serious
illness in illness anxiety disorder, or the content of delusional
beliefs in schizophrenia or delusional disorder).
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p 222.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

ASSESSMENT

There is no recommendation for routine screening of children and
adolescents for anxiety disorders. Freely available general screening
instruments such as the Pediatric Symptom Checklist and Strengths
and Difficulties Questionnaire can be used to identify anxiety concerns
in primary care and school settings. Rating scales can be used to support diagnosis and to follow response to treatment, but they are not
diagnostic on their own. Commonly used anxiety rating scales include
the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders (SCARED),
the Spence Children’s Anxiety Scale (SCAS), the Preschool Anxiety
Scale, the Generalized Anxiety Disorder-­7 (GAD-­7), and the Patient
Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS)
Pediatric Short Form-­Anxiety-­8a.
Symptoms of anxiety are typically identified through the clinical
interview by asking questions about “worries,” “fears,” and “stress” or
by the patient and family’s spontaneous report. The interview must be
developmentally sensitive, and further discussions with the family may
reveal environmental reinforcements, including the caregiver’s parenting style and enabling of avoidance behaviors.
Because some degree of anxiety is considered normal, it is important to clarify when the symptom severity reaches the point of being
pathologic and to differentiate between the subtypes (Table 38.9). The
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(DSM-­5) has specific criteria for each type of anxiety with requirements for frequency, duration, and extent of functional impairment.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS AND COMORBIDITIES

In addition to determining whether diagnostic criteria are met for
a specific anxiety disorder, it is also crucial to rule out alternative
explanations. The differential diagnosis includes numerous medical

249

Table 38.6  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Panic Disorder
A.	Recurrent unexpected panic attacks. A panic attack is an abrupt
surge of intense fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak
within minutes, and during which time four (or more) of the
following symptoms occur:
Note: The abrupt surge can occur from a calm state or an anxious
state.
1.	Palpitations, pounding heart, or accelerated heart rate.
2.	Sweating.
3.	Trembling or shaking.
4.	Sensations of shortness of breath or smothering.
5.	Feelings of choking.
6.	Chest pain or discomfort.
7.	Nausea or abdominal distress.
8.	Feeling dizzy, unsteady, light-­headed, or faint.
9.	Chills or heart sensations.
10.	Paresthesias (numbness or tingling sensations).
11.	Derealizations (feeling or unreality) or depersonalization
(being detached from oneself).
12. Fear of losing control or “going crazy.”
13.	Fear of dying.
Note: Culture-­specific symptoms (e.g., tinnitus, neck soreness,
headache, uncontrollable screaming or crying) may be seen. Such
symptoms should not count as one of the four required symptoms.
B.	At least one of the attacks has been followed by 1 mo (or more) of
one or both of the following:
1.	Persistent concern or worry about additional panic attacks or
their consequences (e.g., losing control, having a heart attack,
“going crazy”).
2.	A significant maladaptive change in behavior related to the
attacks (e.g., behaviors designed to avoid having panic attacks,
such as avoidance of exercise or unfamiliar situations).
C.	The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical
condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism, cardiopulmonary disorders).
D.	The disturbance is not better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., the panic attacks do not occur only in response to
feared social situations, as in social anxiety disorder; in response
to circumscribed phobic objects or situations, as in specific
phobia; in response to obsessions, as in obsessive-­compulsive
disorder; or in response to reminders of traumatic events, as in
posttraumatic stress disorder; or in response to separation from
attachment figures, as in separation anxiety disorder).
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp 208-­209.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association..

conditions and medication-­induced anxiety (Table 38.10). Anxiety disorders also frequently occur with not just other anxiety subtypes but
also other psychiatric comorbidities, notably depression and substance
use disorders (Table 38.11; see Table 38.1).

TREATMENT OF ANXIETY
Cognitive-­Behavioral Therapy (CBT)

Cognitive-­behavioral therapy (CBT) is a therapy that targets the cognitions, behaviors, and physiologic symptoms of anxiety, with a particular focus on the interconnections between the three. Its framework
typically involves homework assignments for practicing the skills in
real-­life environments. The goal is to achieve functional improvement
within approximately 18 sessions. Because it is a skills-­based treatment,
CBT is thought to be a durable treatment, an important consideration
when treating children and adolescents. It is specifically recommended
to patients 6-­18 years old with social anxiety, generalized anxiety, separation anxiety, specific phobia, and panic disorder.
Specialized training and experience are paramount to the effective
delivery of this treatment modality, and it is worth taking the time to
ensure that patients identify therapists with the training and experience
to provide rigorous CBT. CBT typically should incorporate graduated
exposure, in which stepwise mastery of a hierarchy of fearful stimuli
results in desensitization.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

250 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 38.7  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Agoraphobia
A.	Marked fear or anxiety about two (or more) of the following five situations:
1.	Using public transportation (e.g., automobiles, buses, trains, ships, planes).
2.	Being in open spaces (e.g., parking lots, marketplaces, bridges).
3.	Being in enclosed places (e.g., shops, theaters, cinemas).
4.	Standing in line or being in a crowd.
5.	Being outside of the home alone.
B.	The individual fears or avoids these situations because of thoughts that escape might be difficult or help might not be available in the event of
a developing panic-­like symptoms or other incapacitating or embarrassing symptoms (e.g., fear or falling in the elderly, fear of incontinence).
C.	The agoraphobic situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety.
D.	The agoraphobic situations are actively avoided, require the presence of a companion, or are endured with intense fear or anxiety.
E.	The fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the agoraphobic situations and to the sociocultural context.
F.	The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting for 6 mo or more.
G.	The fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important area of
functioning.
H.	If another medical condition (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, Parkinson disease) is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly
excessive.
I.	The fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the symptoms or another mental disorder—for example, the symptoms are
not confined to specific phobia or situational type; do not involve only social situations (as in social anxiety disorder); and are not related
exclusively to obsessions (as in obsessive-­compulsive disorder), reminders or traumatic events (as in posttraumatic stress disorder), or fear of
separation (as in separation anxiety disorder).
Note: Agoraphobia is diagnosed irrespective of the presence of panic disorder. If an individual’s presentation meets criteria for panic disorder
and agoraphobia, both diagnoses should be assigned.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp 217-­218. Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Table 38.8  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER
Note: The following criteria apply to adults, adolescents, and children older than 6 yr. For children 6 yr and younger, see corresponding criteria
below.
A.	Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one (or more) of the following ways:
1.	Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2.	Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others.
3.	Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a close family member or close friend. In cases of actual or threatened death of a family
member or friend, the event(s) must have been violent or accidental.
4.	Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the traumatic event(s) (e.g., first responders collecting human remains;
police officers repeatedly exposed to details of child abuse).
Note: Criterion A4 does not apply to exposure through electronic media, television, movies, or pictures, unless this exposure is work related.
B.	Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s)
occurred:
1.	Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic event(s).
Note: In children older than 6 yr, repetitive play may occur in which themes or aspects of the traumatic event(s) are expressed.
2.	Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or effect of the dream are related to the traumatic event(s).
Note: In children, there may be frightening dreams without recognizable content.
3.	Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may
occur on a continuum, with the more extreme expression being a complete loss or awareness of present surroundings.)
Note: In children, trauma-­specific reenactment may occur in play.
4.	Intense or prolonged psychologic distress at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic
event(s).
5.	Marked physiologic reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
C.	Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by one or
both of the following:
1.	Avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
2.	Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places, conversations, activities, objects, situations) that arouse distressing
memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
D.	Negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s)
occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of the following:
1.	Inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event(s) (typically due to dissociative amnesia and not to other factors such as
head injury, alcohol, or drugs).
2. Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others, or the world (e.g., “I am bad,” “No one can be
trusted,” “The world is completely dangerous,” “My whole nervous system is permanently ruined”).
3.	Persistent, distorted cognitions about the cause or consequences of the traumatic event(s) that lead the individual to blame himself/herself
or others.
4.	Persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame).
5.	Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 38 u Anxiety Disorders, Obsessive-­Compulsive Disorder, and Post­traumatic Stress Disorder

251

Family therapy is often needed as an adjunct to CBT. Its focus is to
skills, address parental anxiety, and foster adaptive coping within the
Table 38.8
 DSM-­
5 Diagnostic
Criteria
for and
Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder—cont’d
improve
relationships,
strengthen
problem-­
solving
communication
family unit. School-­directed interventions can also be an important
6.	Feelings of detachment or estrangement from others.
7.	Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability to experience happiness, satisfaction, or loving feelings).
E.	Marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s)
occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of the following:
1.	Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically expressed by verbal or physical aggression toward people or
objects.
2.	Reckless or self-­destructive behavior.
3.	Hypervigilance.
4.	Exaggerated startle response.
5.	Problems with concentration.
6.	Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep).
F.	Duration of the disturbance (Criteria B, C, D, and E) is more than 1 mo.
G.	The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
H.	The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a substance (e.g., medication, alcohol) or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
With dissociative symptoms: The individual’s symptoms meet the criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder, and in addition, in response to the
stressor, the individual experiences persistent or recurrent symptoms of either of the following:
1.	
Depersonalization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of feeling detached from, and as if one were an outside observer of, one’s mental
processes or body (e.g., feeling as though one were in a dream; feeling a sense of unreality of self or body or of time moving slowly).
2.	
Derealization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of unreality of surroundings (e.g., the world around the individual is experienced as
unreal, dreamlike, distant, or distorted).
Note: To use this subtype, the dissociative symptoms must not be attributable to the physiologic effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts, behavior
during alcohol intoxication) or another medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).
Specify if:
With delayed expression: If the full diagnostic criteria are not met until at least 6 mo after the event (although the onset and expression of some
symptoms may be immediate).
POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER FOR CHILDREN 6 YEARS AND YOUNGER
A.	In children 6 yr and younger, exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one (or more) of the following ways:
1.	Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2.	Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others, especially primary caregivers.
Note: Witnessing does not include events that are only in electronic media, television, movies, or pictures.
3.	Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a parent or caregiving figure.
B.	Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s)
occurred:
1.	Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic event(s).
Note: Spontaneous and intrusive memories may not necessarily appear distressing and may be expressed as play reenactment.
2.	Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or effect of the dream is related to the traumatic event(s).
Note: It may not be possible to ascertain that the frightening content is related to the traumatic event.
3.	Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the child feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur
on a continuum, with the most extreme expression being a complete loss of awareness of present surroundings.) Such trauma-­specific
reenactment may occur in play.
4.	Intense or prolonged psychologic distress at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic
event(s).
C.	One (or more) of the following symptoms, representing either persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s) or
negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with the traumatic event(s), must be present, beginning after the event(s) or worsening
after the event(s):
PERSISTENT AVOIDANCE OF STIMULI
1.	Avoidance of or efforts to avoid activities, places, or physical reminders that arouse recollections or the traumatic event(s).
2.	Avoidance of or efforts to avoid people, conversations, or interpersonal situations around recollections of the traumatic event(s).
NEGATIVE ALTERATIONS IN COGNITIONS
3.	Substantially increased frequency of negative emotional states (e.g., fear, guilt, sadness, shame, confusion).
4.	Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities, including constriction of play.
5.	Socially withdrawn behavior.
6.	Persistent reduction in expression of positive emotions.
D.	Alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as
evidenced by two (or more) of the following:
1.	Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation), typically expressed as verbal and physical aggression toward people or
objects (including extreme temper tantrums).
2.	Hypervigilance.
3.	Exaggerated startle response.
4.	Problems with concentration.
5.	Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep or restless sleep).
E.	The duration of the disturbance is more than 1 mo.
F.	The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in relationships with parents, siblings, peers, or other caregivers or with
school behavior.
G.	The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a substance (e.g., medication or alcohol) or another medical condition.
Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

252 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 38.8  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder—cont’d
Specify whether:
With dissociative symptoms: The individual’s symptoms meet the criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder, and the individual experiences
persistent or recurrent symptoms of either of the following:
1.	
Depersonalization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of feeling detached from, and as if one were an outside observer of, one’s mental
processes or body (e.g., feeling as though one were in a dream; feeling a sense of unreality of self or body or of time moving slowly).
2.	
Derealization: Persistent or recurrent experiences of unreality of surroundings (e.g., the world around the individual is experienced as
unreal, dreamlike, distant, or distorted).
Note: To use this subtype, the dissociative symptoms must not be attributable to the physiologic effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts, behavior
during alcohol intoxication) or another medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).
Specify if:
With delayed expression: If the full diagnostic criteria are not met until at least 6 mo after the event (although the onset and expression of some
symptoms may be immediate).
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp 271-­274. Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Table 38.9  Core Diagnostic Features and Characteristics for Anxiety Disorders
SOCIAL
ANXIETY
DISORDER

SEPARATION
ANXIETY

SPECIFIC
PHOBIA

Core
emotions or
cognitions

Consistent
failure to speak
in situations
for which
there is an
expectation to
speak, despite
language
competence

Unrealistic,
persistent
fear or
anxiety about
separation
from, or
loss of,
attachment
figure, or
adverse
events
occurring to
them

Marked,
excessive,
and
unreasonable
fear or
anxiety of
circumscribed
objects or
situations
(e.g., animals,
natural
forces, blood
injection, or
places)

Marked,
excessive,
and
unreasonable
fear or
anxiety of
scrutiny or
negative
judgement by
other people

Marked,
excessive, and
concerning
fear of leaving
home, entering
closed or open
public places,
crowds, or
transportation

Recurrent,
unexpected
panic attacks
with sustained
mental (e.g.,
fear, fear of
losing control,
or feeling of
alienation)
manifestations

Marked,
uncontrollable,
and anxious
worry and fears
about everyday
events and
problems

Physical
symptoms

No physical
symptoms

Nightmares
and
symptoms of
distress

No physical
symptoms

Blushing, fear
of vomiting,
urgency
or fear of
micturition or
defecation

No physical
symptoms

Multiple
symptoms
(e.g.,
palpitations,
dyspnea,
diaphoresis,
chest pain,
dizziness,
paresthesia, or
nausea)

Restlessness,
fatigue,
irritability,
difficulty
concentrating,
muscle
tension, sleep
disturbance,
or autonomic
arousal

Behavior

Disturbance
interferes with
(educational)
achievement
or social
communication

Reluctance
to leave
attachment
figure;
disturbance
impairs
social,
school, or
other
functioning

Avoidance of
circumscribed
objects or
situations;
disturbance
impairs social,
school, work,
or other
functioning

Avoidance
of social
interactions
and
situations;
disturbance
impairs
social, school,
work, or other
functioning

Avoidance of
fear-­inducing
situations;
disturbance
impairs social,
school, work,
or other
functioning

Changed
behavior in
maladaptive
ways related
to the attacks;
disturbance
impairs social,
school, work
or other
functioning

Disturbance
impairs social,
school, work,
or other
functioning

Required
symptom
duration

>1 month
(beyond first
school month)

>1 mo
(childhood;
4-­18 yr);
>6 months
(adulthood;
18 yr or
older)

>6 mo

>6 mo

>6 mo

>1 mo

>6 mo

Median age
of onset

Childhood (<5
yr)

Childhood
(around 6 yr)

Childhood
(around 8 yr)

Early
adolescence
(around 13 yr)

Late
adolescence
(around 20 yr)

Adulthood
(around 25 yr)

Adulthood
(around 30 yr)

AGORAPHOBIA

PANIC
DISORDER

GENERALIZED
ANXIETY
DISORDER

SELECTIVE
MUTISM

For OCD see Table 38.3; for PTSD see Table 38.8.
Characteristics and features for anxiety disorders were based on criteria from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fifth Edition) and International Classification
of Diseases (11th Edition).
From Penninx BWJH, Pine DS, Holmes EA, Reif A. Anxiety disorders. Lancet. 2021;397:914–926. Table 1, p. 915.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 38 u Anxiety Disorders, Obsessive-­Compulsive Disorder, and Post­traumatic Stress Disorder

253

Table 38.10  Differential Diagnosis of Anxiety Disorders
GENERAL

PSYCHIATRIC

MEDICAL

Shyness

Substance use (including caffeine)
Substance use withdrawal
Body dysmorphic disorder
ADHD (distractibility, restlessness)
ASD (social withdrawal, social skills deficits, distractibility)
MDD (distractibility, insomnia, somatic symptoms)
Bipolar disorder
Delusional disorder
Learning disorders (worry about school performance)
ODD (refusal to do activity)

Antihistamines
Bronchodilators
Nasal decongestants
Steroids
Dietary supplements
Stimulants
Hyperthyroidism
Allergic reactions
Asthma
Cardiac conditions
Autoimmune encephalitis
Chronic pain
Headaches
CNS disease
Diabetes
Dysmenorrhea
Lead intoxication
Hypoglycemia
Hypoxia
Pheochromocytoma
Mast cell disorders
Carcinoid syndrome
Hereditary angioedema
Systemic lupus erythematosus

Table 38.11  Psychiatry and Medical Comorbidities of
­Anxiety
PSYCHIATRIC

MEDICAL

Depression
ADHD
Bipolar disorder
Eating disorder
Learning disorder
Language disorder
Substance-­related disorders

Somatic symptoms
Headaches
GI disorders
Asthma
Allergies

All of the SSRIs carry a “black box” warning for suicidal thinking and
behavior through age 24 years, and this specific risk must be discussed
with the patient and caregiver and documented before initiation. Other
potential adverse effects include behavioral activation, hypomanic or
manic symptoms, and serotonin syndrome (see Chapter 33).

Combination Treatment

The combination of CBT and an SSRI is generally thought to be better
than either treatment alone for moderate to severe anxiety. It is important to continue recommending CBT even after the decision has been
made to start pharmacologic treatment.

Serotonin-­Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors
component of treatment, and specific plans for anxiety management can
be included in a child’s 504 plan or individualized education plan (IEP).
The therapy with the most evidence for PTSD is a subtype of CBT
called trauma-­focused CBT (TF-­CBT). Given that standard anxiety
medications are less effective in PTSD, it is particularly crucial that
clinicians refer these patients to trauma-­focused therapy. In TF-­CBT,
the therapist amplifies stress management techniques in preparation
for exposure-­based interventions with the goal of achieving mastery
over trauma triggers. In small adult trials, ketamine-­or 3,4-­methyl
enedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA)-­assisted therapy have shown
benefit. There is insufficient evidence to currently recommend either
therapy.

Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) as a class are effective in
treating anxiety. The available options include citalopram, escitalopram,
fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine, sertraline, and vilazodone. Despite
randomized clinical trials (RCTs) providing support for the safety and
effectiveness of this medication class, no specific SSRIs are U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)–approved for anxiety in children. SSRIs are
generally well tolerated, with the most common side effects involving
xerostomia, gastrointestinal upset, headache, somnolence or insomnia,
dizziness, fatigue, and changes in appetite (see Chapter 33).
RCTs in children and adolescents with PTSD found no significant difference between SSRI and placebo. SSRIs may be considered in pediatric
patients with PTSD who have comorbid conditions responsive to SSRIs,
including depression, affective numbing, and anxiety (see Table 33.5).

Duloxetine is a serotonin-­norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI)
and has an FDA indication for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder in children ages 7-­17. However, it is still considered a second-­line
treatment as SSRIs tend to be more effective. The other SNRI options
are venlafaxine and desvenlafaxine. Potential side effects of duloxetine include xerostomia, diaphoresis, abdominal discomfort, gastrointestinal distress, headache, tremor, sedation or insomnia, decreased
appetite, and weight loss. Of note, it is less likely to cause behavioral
activation than the SSRIs.

α-­Agonists

Clonidine and guanfacine are α-­agonists and may be helpful for PTSD
by targeting sleep disturbances like nightmares, persistent physiologic
arousal, and exaggerated startle response.

OBSESSIVE-­COMPULSIVE DISORDER AND
PEDIATRIC ACUTE-­ONSET NEUROPSYCHIATRIC
SYNDROME

Obsessive-­
compulsive symptoms can be effectively treated with
SSRIs (sertraline, fluoxetine). If the patient’s symptoms prove to be
treatment-­refractory to the standard options, then one might consider
fluvoxamine and/or clomipramine, which is a heterocyclic antidepressant. These are indicated when a patient has failed two or more SSRI
trials. Habit reversal training is an important nonpharmacologic treatment modality for OCD as well.
A proportion of abrupt-­onset OCD cases are attributed to an immune
response that targets the brain (pediatric acute-­onset neuropsychiatric
syndrome [PANS]). The immune response may be brought about by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

254 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 38.12  Diagnostic Criteria for Pediatric Acute-­Onset
Neuropsychiatric Syndrome
CRITERION 1
Abrupt, dramatic onset of obsessive-­compulsive disorder or severely
restricted food intake.
CRITERION 2
Concurrent presence of additional neuropsychiatric symptoms with
similarly severe and acute onset from at least two of the following
seven categories:
1.	Anxiety.
2.	Emotional lability or depression.
3.	Irritability, aggression, or severely oppositional behaviors.
4.	Behavioral (developmental) regression.
5.	Deterioration in school performance.
6.	Sensory or motor abnormalities.
7.	Somatic signs and symptoms, including sleep disturbances,
enuresis, or urinary frequency.
CRITERION 3
Symptoms are not better explained by a known neurologic or
medical disorder, such as Sydenham chorea, systemic lupus
erythematosus, Tourette disorder, autoimmune encephalitis, or
others. The diagnostic workup of patients with suspected PANS
must be comprehensive enough to rule out these and other relevant
disorders. The nature of the co-­occurring symptoms will dictate
the necessary assessments, which may include MRI scans, lumbar
puncture, electroencephalograms, or other diagnostic tests.
PANS, Pediatric acute-­onset neuropsychiatric syndrome.
Modified from Johnson M, Fernell E, Preda I, et al. Paediatric acute-­onset
neuropsychiatric syndrome in children and adolescents: an observational cohort study.
Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2019;3(3):175–180.

infections (commonly, but not exclusively, streptococcal infections) or
other mechanisms that activate the immune system.
There are no DSM-­5 diagnostic criteria for PANS. One suggested
approach to PANS diagnostic criteria is noted in Table 38.12. Of note
is the abrupt-­sudden onset of OCD, the presence of additional psychiatric disorders (e.g., anxiety, depression, emotional lability), and the
requirement to rule out other disorders like Sydenham chorea.
If PANS is suspected, a comprehensive evaluation is warranted
primarily to rule out neurologic and medical conditions (see Table
38.12). Children with an abrupt onset of psychiatric and neurologic findings should be evaluated with MRI, electroencephalogram (EEG), and blood plus cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) autoimmune
encephalitis antibody testing. Children with a sudden onset of only
psychiatric symptoms (OCD, tics, anxiety) do not require extensive testing except for testing for a group A streptococcus, unless
they have severe and disabling psychiatric features, The latter group
should be evaluated to rule out the disorders noted in Table 38.12.
Once diagnosed, clinicians should prioritize the target symptoms of
the individual patient and select treatments accordingly. The three
realms of PANS treatment are psychotherapeutic, antimicrobial,
and immunomodulatory. Because behavioral interventions take
time to work, psychiatric interventions should begin expeditiously
for symptomatic relief. Antibiotics may eliminate the underlying
source of neuroinflammation, and immunomodulatory options can
help treat immune system disturbances.

SPECIFIC PHOBIAS

Specific phobias may not typically require treatment with an SSRI
and may be better targeted with exposure response prevention therapies and with premedicating with a β blocker before an anticipated
exposure. The exception to this is needle phobia; premedication
with a β blocker is not indicated in this instance because of the risk
of exacerbating the vasovagal response. Physical maneuvers, such
as crossing the legs and tensing the muscles, may be effective in
needle phobia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 39

Mood Disorders
Colleen K. Manak and Rosa K. Kim
Mood disorders encompass several different entities on the spectrum
between depression and mania. Mood disorders are interrelated sets
of psychiatric symptoms characterized by a core deficit in emotional
self-­
regulation. Classically, the mood disorders have been divided
into depressive and bipolar disorders, representing the two emotional
polarities, dysphoric (“low”) and euphoric (“high”) mood. Mood disorders in children and adolescents are highly prevalent and are the most
common psychiatric illnesses seen after attention-­deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) and anxiety. Primary care is often their first point of
contact when seeking treatment.

39.1 Depressive Disorders
Colleen K. Manak and Rosa K. Kim
Depressive disorders include major depressive, persistent depressive,
disruptive mood dysregulation, other specified/unspecified depressive,
premenstrual dysphoric, and substance/medication-­
induced disorders, as well as depressive disorder caused by another medical condition (Fig. 39.1).

DESCRIPTION

Major depressive disorder (MDD) is characterized by a distinct
period of at least 2 weeks (an episode) in which there is a depressed or
irritable mood and/or loss of interest or pleasure in almost all activities that is present for most of the day, nearly every day (Table 39.1
and Fig. 39.2). Major depression is associated with characteristic vegetative and cognitive symptoms, including disturbances in appetite,
sleep, energy, and activity level; impaired concentration; thoughts
of worthlessness or guilt; and suicidal thoughts or actions. Major
depression is considered mild if few or no symptoms in excess of
those required to make the diagnosis are present, and the symptoms
are mildly distressing, manageable, and result in minor functional
impairment. Major depression is considered severe if symptoms substantially in excess of those required to make the diagnosis are present, and the symptoms are highly distressing, unmanageable, and
markedly impair function. Moderate major depression is intermediate in severity (Fig. 39.3).
Persistent depressive disorder is characterized by depressed or irritable mood for more days than not, for at least 1 year (in children and
adolescents). This chronic form of depression is associated with characteristic vegetative and cognitive symptoms; however, the cognitive
symptoms of persistent depression are less severe (e.g., low self-­esteem
rather than worthlessness, hopelessness rather than suicidality). Persistent depressive disorder is characterized as mild, moderate, or severe
(Table 39.2).
Overall, the clinical presentation of major and persistent depressive disorders in children and adolescents is similar to that in adults.
The prominence of the symptoms can change with age: irritability and
somatic complaints may be more common in children, and energy,
activity level, appetite, and sleep disturbances may be more common
in adolescents. Because of the cognitive and linguistic immaturity of
young children, symptoms of depression in that age group may be
more likely to be observed than self-­reported.
The core feature of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
(DMDD) is severe, persistent irritability evident most of the day,
nearly every day, for at least 12 months in multiple settings (at
home, at school, with peers). The irritable mood is interspersed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 39 u Mood Disorders

255

Are there symptoms of mania or hypomania
(abnormally elevated mood)?
Yes

No

Are criteria for mania met?
(Abnormally elevated mood of greater
than 1 week in duration, associated with
grandiosity, impulsivity, excessive
goal-directed activity, and decreased
need for sleep)
Yes

Are criteria for major depressive disorder met?
(At least 2 weeks of depressed mood or
irritability or loss of interest causing
significant impairment with at least five
of the following: change in appetite,
change in sleep, fatigue or loss of energy,
feelings of worthlessness or guilt, poor
concentration, psychomotor symptoms,
thoughts of suicide)

No

Bipolar I Disorder

Bipolar II Disorder
Substance-Induced
Mood Disorder
Cyclothymia

No

Yes
Major Depressive Disorder

Is there substance use?
Substance-Induced Mood Disorder
Are there significant disruptive behaviors?
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder (DMDD)
Was there a recent death?
Bereavement
Was there a precipitating event?
Adjustment Disorder

Fig. 39.1 Evaluation of mood disorders. (From Kliegman RM, Lye, PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. Elsevier,
2018; Fig, 27.2, p. 426.)

Table 39.1  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Major Depressive Episode
A.	Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present
during the same 2-wk period and represent a change from previous
functioning; at least one of the symptoms is either (1) depressed
mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
1.	Depressed most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by
either subjective report (e.g., feels sad, empty, hopeless) or
observation made by others (e.g., appears tearful).
Note: In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.
1.	Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all,
activities most of the day, nearly every day (as indicated by
either subjective account or observation).
2.	Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g.,
a change of more than 5% of body weight in a month), or
decrease or increase in appetite nearly every day.
Note: In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.
1.	Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
2.	Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day
(observable by others, not merely subjective feelings of
restlessness or being slowed down).
3.	Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.

4.	Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt
(which may be delusional) nearly every day (not merely
self-­reproach or guilt about being sick).
5.	Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness,
nearly every day (either by subjective account or as observed
by others).
6.	Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent
suicidal ideation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt
or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B.	The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C.	The episode is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance or to another medical condition.
Note: Criteria A-­C represent a major depressive episode.
D.	The occurrence of the major depressive episode is not better
explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform
disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified and unspecified
schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders.
E.	There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.

From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp. 125–126. Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

with frequent (≥3 times/week) and severe temper outbursts (verbal
rages, physical aggression; Table 39.3). This diagnosis is intended
to characterize more accurately the extreme irritability, which some
investigators had considered a developmental presentation of bipolar disorder, and to distinguish extreme irritability from the milder
presentations characteristic of oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)
and intermittent explosive disorder. Table 39.4 highlights some of
the similarities and differences between the various mood disorders
and also factors that distinguish mood disorders from grief experienced in response to loss.
Other specified/unspecified depressive disorder (subsyndromal
depressive disorder) applies to presentations in which symptoms
characteristic of a depressive disorder are present and cause clinically significant distress or functional impairment but do not meet
the full criteria for any of the disorders in this diagnostic class.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The current prevalence of depressive disorder in the United States among
3-­17 year olds is approximately 3.2%; the lifetime prevalence rates increase
to 4.9% for ages 6-­17 and to 12.8% for 12-­17 year olds. The male:female
ratio (excluding DMDD) is approximately 1:1 during childhood and
beginning in early adolescence rises to 1:1.5-­3.0 by adulthood.
Based on rates of chronic and severe persistent irritability, which is
the core feature of DMDD, the overall 6 month to 1 year prevalence
has been estimated in the 2–5% range. In three community samples,
the 3-month prevalence rate of DMDD ranged from 0.8–3.3%, with
the highest rates occurring in preschoolers (although Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition [DSM-­5] does not
permit this diagnosis until age 6 years). Approximately 5–10% of children and adolescents are estimated to have subsyndromal (unspecified) depression.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

256 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
ETIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS

Models of vulnerability to depressive disorders are grounded in genetic
and environmental pathways. Genetic studies have demonstrated the
heritability of depressive disorders, with monozygotic twin studies finding concordance rates of 40–65%. In families, both bottom-­up (children
to parents) and top-­down (parents to children) studies have shown
a two- to four–fold bidirectional increase in depression among first-­
degree relatives. Cerebral variations in structure and function (particularly serotonergic), the function of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­adrenal
axis, difficult temperament/personality (i.e., negative affectivity), and

Symptoms of depression (2 weeks)

SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
Screening

Depressed mood
Anhedonia

Feelings of worthlessness or guilt
Suicidal ideation, plan, or attempt

Fatigue or loss of energy

Sleep

or

Weight or appetite

or

Ability to think or concentrate,
or indecisiveness

Psychomotor retardation
or agitation

Cumulative functional impairment

ruminative, self-­devaluating cognitive style have been implicated as
components of biologic vulnerability. The great majority of depressive
disorders arise in youth with long-­standing psychosocial difficulties,
among the most predictive of which are physical/sexual abuse, neglect,
chronic illness, school difficulties (bullying, academic failure), social
isolation, family or marital disharmony, divorce/separation, parental
psychopathology, and domestic violence. Longitudinal studies demonstrate the greater importance of environmental influences in children
who become depressed than in adults who become depressed. Factors
shown to be protective against the development of depression include
better family function, a prosocial peer group, higher IQ, greater educational aspirations, a positive relationship with a caregiver, and closer
caregiver supervision, monitoring, and involvement.

Fundamental symptoms
Emotional symptoms
Neurovegetative symptoms
Neurocognitive symptoms

Fig. 39.2 Defining major depressive disorder. Key symptoms of Diag-

nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM)­5 for major depressive disorder. For a diagnosis of major depressive
disorder, the individual needs to present with five or more of any of
the symptoms nearly every day during the same 2-­week period, provided at least one of these symptoms is a fundamental one. The clinical
symptoms of major depressive disorder are usually accompanied by
functional impairment. The greater the number and severity of symptoms (as opposed to particular symptoms), the greater the probability
of the functional impairment they are likely to confer. The symptoms
of depression can be grouped into emotional, neurovegetative, and
neurocognitive domains. Importantly sleep, weight, and appetite are
usually diminished in depression but can also be increased, and suicidal ideation, plans, or an attempt should be documented whenever
depression is suspected. (From Malhi GS, Mann JJ. Depression. Lancet.
2018;392[10161]:2299–2312:Fig. 1, p. 2300.)

Adolescents presenting in the primary care setting should be queried,
along with their caregiver(s), about depressed mood as part of the routine clinical interview. A typical screening question would be, “Everyone feels sad or angry some of the time; how about you (or your teen)?”
The caregivers of younger children can be queried about overt signs of
depression, such as tearfulness, irritability, boredom, or social isolation. A number of standardized screening instruments widely used in
the primary care setting (e.g., Pediatric Symptom Checklist, Strengths
and Difficulties Questionnaire, Vanderbilt ADHD Diagnostic Rating
Scales) have items specific to sad mood and as such can be used to focus
the interview. Additionally, screening tools specific to depression, such
as the Patient Health Questionnaire-­9 (PHQ-­9) and Beck Depression
Inventory, can be utilized as part of routine screening (Table 39.5).
The role of universal depression screening using standardized
depression-­specific instruments is unclear. A Cochrane review found
that the use of depression screening in primary care has little or no
impact on the recognition, management, or outcome of depression.
Nonetheless, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends the universal use of depression screening instruments, but only
among adolescents and only when systems are in place to ensure adequate follow-­up. Targeted screening of known high-­risk groups (e.g.,
youth who are homeless, refugees, attracted to the same sex, involved
with child welfare or juvenile justice), or youth experiencing known
psychosocial adversities or self-­reporting a dysphoric mood, may be a
higher-­yield case-­finding strategy than universal screening.

Assessment

Youth (and/or their caregivers) presenting in the primary care setting
who self-­report, or respond affirmatively to queries about a distressing
life experience or a depressed or irritable mood should be offered the
opportunity to talk about the situation with the pediatric practitioner
(separately with the older youth). By engaging in active listening (e.g.,

Single episode
Recurrent episode
Rapid cycling
Illness pattern

Clinical features

Seasonal

Major depressive disorder specifiers

Full

Mild

Mixed features

Moderate

Atypical

Severe

Melancholic
Catatonic

Mood congruent

Psychotic

Mood incongruent

Severity

Remission status

Partial

Anxious distress

Onset

Early
Late
Postpartum

Mild
Moderate
Severe

Fig. 39.3 Major depressive disorder specifiers. Episodes of major depression can be described in greater depth by specifiers (outlined in Diagnos-

tic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition [DSM-­5]) that provide additional information regarding the pattern of the illness and its
clinical features. Specifiers can also indicate the severity of the episode, when it first emerged (onset), and whether it has remitted (status). For example, in clinical practice, a typical episode of depression can be described as suffering from a recurrence of depression that is moderately severe with
melancholic features and has partly remitted in response to initial treatment. (From Malhi GS, Mann JJ. Depression. Lancet. 2018;392[10161]:2299–
2312:Fig. 2, p. 2301.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 39 u Mood Disorders

257

Table 39.2  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Persistent
­Depressive Disorder

Table 39.3  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Disruptive Mood
Dysregulation Disorder

A.	Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as
indicated either by subjective account or observation by others,
for at least 2 yr.
Note: In children and adolescents, mood can be irritable and
duration must be at least 1 yr.
B.	Presence, while depressed, of two (or more) of the following:
1.	Poor appetite or overeating.
2.	Insomnia or hypersomnia.
3.	Low energy or fatigue.
4.	Low self-­esteem.
5.	Poor concentration or difficulty making decisions.
6.	Feelings of hopelessness.
C.	During the 2 yr period (1 yr for children or adolescents) of the
disturbance, the individual has never been without the symptoms
in Criteria A and B for more than 2 mo at a time.
D.	Criteria for a major depressive disorder may be continuously
present for 2 yr.
E.	There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode,
and criteria have never been met for cyclothymic disorder.
F.	The disturbance is not better explained by a persistent
schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or
other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorder.
G.	The symptoms are not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another
medical condition (e.g., hypothyroidism).
H.	The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: Because the criteria for a major depressive episode include
four symptoms that are absent from the symptom list for persistent
depressive disorder (dysthymia), a very limited number of individuals
will have depressive symptoms that have persisted longer than 2
yr but will not meet criteria for persistent depressive disorder. If
full criteria for a major depressive episode have been met at some
point during the current episode of illness, they should be given
a diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Otherwise, a diagnosis
of other specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive
disorder is warranted.

A.	Severe recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally (e.g.,
verbal rages) and/or behaviorally (e.g., physical aggression toward
people or property) that are grossly out of proportion in intensity
or duration to the situation or provocation.
B.	The temper outbursts are inconsistent with developmental level.
C.	The temper outbursts occur, on average, three or more times per
week.
D.	The mood between temper outbursts is persistently irritable or
angry most of the day, nearly every day, and is observable by
others (e.g., parents, teachers, peers).
E.	Criteria A-­D have been present for 12 or more months.
Throughout that time, the individual has not had a period lasting
3 or more consecutive months without all of the symptoms in
Criteria A-­D.
F.	Criteria A and D are present in at least two of three settings (i.e.,
at home, at school, with peers) and are severe in at least one of
these.
G.	The diagnosis should not be made for the first time before age 6
yr or after age 18 yr.
H.	By history or observation, the age at onset of Criteria A-­E is
before 10 yr.
I.	There has never been a distinct period lasting more than 1 day
during which the full symptom criteria, except duration, for a
manic or hypomanic episode have been met.
Note: Developmentally appropriate mood elevation, such as occurs
in the context of a highly positive event or its anticipation, should
not be considered as a symptom of mania or hypomania.
J.	The behaviors do not occur exclusively during an episode of
major depressive disorder and are not better explained by another
mental disorder (e.g., autism spectrum disorder, posttraumatic
stress disorder, separation anxiety disorder, persistent depressive
disorder [dysthymia]).
Note: The diagnosis cannot coexist with oppositional defiant
disorder, intermittent explosive disorder, or bipolar disorder,
though it can coexist with others, including major depressive
disorder, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct
disorder, and substance use disorders. Individuals whose
symptoms meet criteria for both disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder and oppositional defiant disorder should only be given
the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. If an
individual has ever experienced a manic or hypomanic episode,
the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should
not be assigned.
K.	The symptoms are not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance or to another medical or neurologic condition.

From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp. 168–169.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

“I hear how upset you have been feeling; tell me more about what happened to make you feel that way”), the clinician can begin to assess the
onset, duration, context, and severity of the symptoms and associated
dangerousness, distress, and functional impairment. In the absence of
acute dangerousness (e.g., suicidality, psychosis, substance abuse) and
significant distress or functional impairment, the pediatric practitioner
can schedule a follow-­up appointment within 1-­2 weeks to conduct a
depression assessment. At this follow-­up visit, to assist with decision-­
making about appropriate level of care, a depression-­specific screening
or standardized rating scale can be administered to assess symptom
severity (see Table 39.5), and additional risk factors can be explored.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

A number of psychiatric disorders, general medical conditions, and
medications can generate symptoms of depression or irritability and
must be distinguished from the depressive disorders. The psychiatric
disorders include autism spectrum disorder (ASD), ADHD, and bipolar, anxiety, trauma-­and stressor-­related, disruptive/impulse control/
conduct, and substance-­related disorders. Medical conditions include
neurologic disorders (including autoimmune encephalitis), endocrine
disorders (including hypothyroidism and Addison disease), infectious
diseases, tumors, anemia, uremia, failure to thrive, chronic fatigue disorder, and pain disorder. Medications include narcotics, chemotherapy
agents, β blockers, corticosteroids, and contraceptives. The diagnosis

From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p. 156.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

of a depressive disorder should be made after these and other potential
explanations for the observed symptoms have been ruled out.

COMORBIDITY

Major and persistent depressive disorders often co-­occur with other
psychiatric disorders. Depending on the setting and source of referral, 40–90% of youths with a depressive disorder have other psychiatric
disorders, and up to 50% have two or more comorbid diagnoses. The
most common comorbid diagnosis is an anxiety disorder and as such
may reflect a common diathesis; other common comorbidities include
ADHD and disruptive behavior, eating, and substance use disorders.
The development of depressive disorders can both lead to and follow
the development of comorbid disorders.
DMDD may occur with other psychiatric disorders, including other
depressive disorders, ADHD, conduct disorder, and substance use disorders. Because the symptoms of DMDD overlap in part with symptoms of bipolar disorder, ODD, and intermittent explosive disorder, by
DSM-­5 convention, hierarchical diagnostic rules apply. Thus bipolar
disorder takes precedence over DMDD if a manic/hypomanic episode

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

258 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 39.4  A Comparison of Features of Depression, Persistent Depressive Disorder, Disruptive Mood Dysregulation
Disorder, and Grief in Children with Developmental Considerations
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE
DISORDER

DISRUPTIVE MOOD
DYSREGULATION
DISORDER

PERSISTENT
DEPRESSIVE DISORDER

GRIEF

Core feature(s)

Sadness, irritability, anhedonia

Sadness, irritability,
anhedonia

Irritability and anger with
behavioral outbursts
(verbal, physical)

Sadness in response to the
loss/death of a loved one

Duration

2 weeks with symptoms nearly
every day

1 year with symptoms
more days than not

1 year with outbursts at
least three times/week

Ongoing, can continue/
recur indefinitely (e.g.,
around anniversaries,
birthdays, holidays)

Associated
symptoms

Changes in appetite, sleep,
energy and activity level;
impaired concentration;
hopelessness, worthlessness
and guilt; suicidal ideations/
actions

Changes in appetite, sleep,
energy and activity level;
impaired concentration;
hopelessness,
worthlessness and guilt;
suicidal ideations/actions

Persistent irritability
between episodes

Anger; guilt; regret;
anxiety; intrusive images;
overwhelmed; lonely

Age considerations

Younger children may be irritable and complain of somatic
symptoms

Cannot be diagnosed
before age 6 or after
age 18

Developmental level
and understanding of
death can influence grief
symptoms

Table 39.5  Depression-­Specific Rating Scales
NAME OF INSTRUMENT

INFORMANT(S)

AGE RANGE (YR)

ITEMS (NO.)

Beck Depression Inventory

Youth

13+

21

Beck Depression Inventory for Youth

Youth

7-­14

20

Center for Epidemiologic Studies-­Depression-­Children

Youth

6-­18

20

Children’s Depression Rating Scale-­Revised

Youth, Parent, Clinician

6-­18

47

Children’s Depression Inventory, Second Edition

Youth, Parent, Teacher

7-­17

28/17/12

Depression Self-­Rating Scale

Youth

7-­13

18

Mood and Feelings Questionnaire

Youth, Parent

7-­18

33-­34

Patient Health Questionnaire-­9

Youth

12/13+

9

Preschool Feelings Checklist

Parent

3-­5.6

20

PROMIS Emotional Distress-­Depressive Symptoms

Youth, Parent

8-17 (youth report) or
5-17 (parent report)

8/6

Reynolds Child Depression Scale

Youth

8-­13

30

Reynolds Adolescent Depression Scale, Second Edition

Youth

11-­20

30

has ever occurred, and DMDD takes precedence over ODD and intermittent explosive disorder if full criteria for DMDD are met.

TREATMENT

Treatment decisions should be guided by the understanding that
depression in youth is highly responsive to placebo (50–60%) or brief
nonspecific intervention (15–30%). The goal of treatment is remission,
defined as a period of at least 2 weeks with no or very few depressive
symptoms, and ultimately recovery, defined as a period of at least 2
months with no or very few depressive symptoms. Assessment of
remission and recovery can be aided using the depression-­specific
standardized rating scales, in which remission is defined as scores
below the scale-­specific clinical cut point.
For mild symptoms (manageable and not functionally impairing)
and in the absence of major risk factors (e.g., suicidality; psychosis;
substance use; history of depression, mania, or traumatic exposures;
parental psychopathology, particularly depression; severe family
dysfunction), guided self-­help (anticipatory guidance) with watchful waiting and scheduled follow-­up may suffice. Guided self-­help

can include provision of educational materials (e.g., pamphlets,
books, workbooks, apps, internet sites) that provide information
to the youth about coping adaptively with stressful situations, as
well as advice to caregivers about strengthening the caregiver–
child relationship and modifying triggering exposures (e.g., taking
action against bullying, increasing opportunities for social interaction and support, protecting child from exposure to marital discord). Additional self-­help activities that have shown promise in
improving mild depressive symptoms include behavioral activation
(e.g., physical exercise, social engagement, participation in a
hobby), mindfulness (e.g., yoga, meditation), and a regular sleep
schedule.
For youths who continue to have mild depression after a few weeks
of guided self-­help, supportive therapy by a mental health professional may be an appropriate subsequent step. For youths who have
not responded to approximately 4–8 weeks of supportive psychotherapy, or who from the outset exhibit moderate to severe, comorbid, or
recurrent depression or suicidality, or who have a history of mania,
traumatic exposures, or severe family dysfunction or psychopathology,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 39 u Mood Disorders
assessment and treatment by a child-­trained mental health clinician
should be obtained.
For moderate to severe depression, specific manualized psychotherapies, antidepressant medication, or a combination of both should be
considered. There is insufficient evidence on which to base definitive
conclusions about the relative effectiveness of these treatments.

Psychotherapies

Clinical trials of acute treatments have generated support for the efficacy of cognitive-­
behavioral therapy (CBT)/behavioral activation
therapy and interpersonal therapy as monotherapies in depressed
youth, but overall effect sizes are modest. CBT focuses on identifying
and correcting cognitive distortions that may lead to depressed mood
and teaches problem-­solving, behavior activation, social communication, and emotional regulation skills to combat depression. Interpersonal therapy focuses on enhancing interpersonal problem solving
and social communication to decrease interpersonal conflicts. Each of
these therapies typically involves 8-­12 weekly visits. Limited evidence
suggests that family therapy may be more effective than no treatment
in decreasing depression and improving family functioning. Manualized CBT treatment as well as alternative therapy modalities such as
play therapy are also available for younger children.

Pharmacologic Treatment

Two selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), fluoxetine and
escitalopram, are the only antidepressants approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of depression in
youth; fluoxetine alone is approved for preadolescents. Other SSRIs,
with the exception of paroxetine, which has been shown to be ineffective in children, are frequently used off-­label and may be considered for
use in depressed children and teens despite the lack of FDA approval.
There are several considerations to keep in mind when starting an
SSRI, including family history of response to SSRIs, comorbid medical
conditions, and other concurrent medications. Fluoxetine should be
given in the morning, given its propensity to be activating for some
patients; escitalopram is preferentially dosed in the evening as it can
be sedating. Sertraline has the advantage of a very wide dosing range,
which can be helpful when small dosing changes are preferred.
All SSRIs carry a “black box” warning for increased suicidal thinking
in patients under age 25 that must be discussed with all patients and
caregivers before starting an SSRI. The risk for this side effect is highest when initiating treatment and when making dose adjustments. All
SSRIs can cause akathisia, an uncomfortable feeling of internal restlessness; this side effect is more common in children than it is in adults.
Gastrointestinal upset and headaches are among the most common side
effects; they typically self-­resolve after a few weeks. However, they may
recur when dose increases are made. Education around the expected
course and resolution of these side effects can be helpful when providing informed consent and may lead to improved adherence in the early
phase of treatment. Sexual side effects of SSRIs, including decreased
libido and difficulty reaching orgasm, are also important considerations
and should be addressed with patients before treatment initiation.
If the first trial of an SSRI is unsuccessful, a trial of a second SSRI
should be considered. An adequate trial of an SSRI requires that a sufficient dose be achieved and that it be continued for a reasonable amount
of time. Given the length of time it takes for SSRIs to take full effect, an
adequate trial would be at least 6-­8 weeks at a target dose. Trials may
end early if patients experience intolerable side effects. For patients
who do not respond to two adequate trials of an SSRI, it is appropriate
to consider referral to a psychiatrist for further management.
Clinical severity, comorbidity, family conflict, low drug concentration, nonadherence, anhedonia, sleep difficulties, subsyndromal manic
symptoms, and child maltreatment have all been related to treatment
resistance. Approximately 50% of depressed youth failing to respond to
the first SSRI respond after switching to a second antidepressant plus
CBT, vs approximately 40% who respond to a second medication alone.
For youth with psychotic depression, augmenting the antidepressant
with an atypical antipsychotic medication should be considered, while
monitoring closely for side effects.

259

Because of the high rate of recurrence, successful treatment should
continue for 6-­12 months. The findings from one trial suggested that
the addition of relapse-­prevention CBT to ongoing medication management reduces the risk of relapse more than medication management
alone, even after the end of treatment. When treatment concludes, all
antidepressants (except possibly fluoxetine because of its long half-­life)
should be discontinued gradually to avoid withdrawal symptoms (gastrointestinal upset, disequilibrium, sleep disruption, flulike symptoms,
sensory disturbances). Patients with recurrent (two or more episodes),
chronic, or severe major depression may require treatment beyond 12
months.
Ketamine or esketamine, glutamatergic N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate
(NMDA) receptor antagonists have demonstrated efficacy in treating
treatment resistant depression in adults.
There are no rigorous studies evaluating the effectiveness of pharmacologic or psychosocial treatment approaches to persistent depressive disorder or DMDD. The aforementioned treatments for MDD may
prove helpful in persistent depressive disorder. In suspected cases of
DMDD, child and adolescent psychiatry consultation may be helpful
to clarify diagnosis and suggest treatment approaches.

LEVEL OF CARE

Most children and adolescents with mild to moderate depressive disorders can be safely and effectively treated as outpatients, provided that
a clinically appropriate schedule of visits can be maintained through
the phases of treatment. Inpatient treatment should be considered for
youth who present with a substantial risk of suicide, serious self-­harm,
or self-­neglect, or when the family is not able to provide an appropriate level of supervision or follow-­up with outpatient treatment recommendations, or when comprehensive assessment for diagnostic clarity
is needed. When considering inpatient admission for a young person
with depression, the benefits of inpatient treatment need to be balanced against potential detrimental effects, such as separation from
family and community support.

CLINICAL COURSE

Major depression may first appear at any age, but the likelihood of
onset greatly increases with puberty. Incidence appears to peak in the
20s. The median duration of a major depressive episode is about 5-­8
months for clinically referred youth and 3-­6 months for community
samples. The course is quite variable in that some individuals rarely
or never experience remission, whereas others experience many years
with few or no symptoms between episodes. Persistent depressive
disorder often has an early and insidious onset and, by definition, a
chronic course (average untreated duration in both clinical and community samples: 3.5 years).
Depressed children appear to be more likely to develop nondepressive psychiatric disorders in adulthood than depressive disorders.
However, depression in adolescents has a probability of recurrence
reaching 50–70% after 5 years. The persistence of even mild depressive symptoms during remission is a powerful predictor of recurrence;
other negative prognostic factors include more severe symptoms, longer time to remission, history of maltreatment, and comorbid psychiatric disorders. Up to 20% of depressed adolescents develop a bipolar
disorder; the risk is higher among adolescents who have a high genetic
risk for bipolar disorder, who have psychotic depression, or who have
had pharmacologically induced mania.

SEQUELAE

Approximately 60% of youths with MDD report thinking about suicide;
30% attempt suicide. Youths with depressive disorders are also at high
risk of substance abuse, impaired family and peer relationships, early
pregnancy, legal problems, educational and occupational underachievement, and poor adjustment to life stressors, including physical illness.
Children with DMDD have displayed elevated rates of social impairments, school suspension, and service use. Irritability in adolescence
has predicted the development of major depressive and dysthymic disorders and generalized anxiety disorder (but not bipolar disorder) 20
years later, as well as lower educational attainment and income.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

260 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
PREVENTION

Experimental trials have sought to demonstrate the effectiveness of
psychologic or educational strategies in preventing the onset of depressive disorders in children and adolescents. These programs generally
have provided information about the link between depressed mood,
thoughts, and behaviors, as well as training in skills intended to modify
these thoughts and behaviors. A Cochrane review found small effects
of these programs on depression symptoms when implemented universally vs no intervention, with selective programs targeted at high-­risk
groups performing better than universal programs; however, the effect
of prevention programs was null compared with attention controls.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

39.2 Bipolar Disorders
Colleen K. Manak and Rosa K. Kim
The bipolar and related disorders include bipolar I, bipolar II, cyclothymic, and other specified/unspecified bipolar and related disorders,
as well as bipolar and related disorder caused by another medical
condition.
A manic episode is characterized by a distinct period of at least 1
week in which there is an abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally and persistently increased goal-­
directed activity or energy that is present for most of the day, nearly
every day (or any duration if hospitalization is necessary). The episode
is associated with characteristic cognitive and behavioral symptoms,
including disturbances in self-­regard, speech, attention, thought, activity, impulsivity, and sleep (Table 39.6). To diagnose bipolar I disorder,
criteria must be met for at least one manic episode, and the episode
must not be better explained by a psychotic disorder. The manic episode may be preceded and may be followed by hypomanic or major
depressive episodes. Bipolar I disorder is rated as mild, moderate, or
severe in the same way as the depressive disorders.
To diagnose bipolar II disorder, criteria must be met for at least
one hypomanic episode and at least one major depressive episode. A
hypomanic episode is similar to a manic episode but is briefer (at
least 4 days) and less severe (causes less impairment in functioning,
is not associated with psychosis, and would not require hospitalization) (Table 39.7). In bipolar II disorder, there must never have been
a manic disorder, the episodes must not be better explained by a psychotic disorder, and the symptoms of depression or the unpredictability caused by frequent alternation between periods of depression
and hypomania must cause clinically significant distress or functional
impairment. Bipolar II disorder is also rated as mild, moderate, or
severe.
Cyclothymic disorder is characterized by a period of at least 1 year
(in children and adolescents) in which there are numerous periods
with hypomanic and depressive symptoms that do not meet criteria
for a hypomanic episode or a major depressive episode, respectively
(Table 39.8).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The lifetime prevalence of bipolar disorder I among adults in the
United States varies from 0.8–1.6%, and bipolar II carries a lifetime
prevalence of around 1.1%. Bipolar I disorder affects males and females
equally, whereas bipolar II disorder is more common in females. Lifetime rates of mania among youth have ranged from 0.1–1.7%. The
estimated annual number of U.S. office-­based visits of youth with a
diagnosis of bipolar disorder increased from 25 per 100,000 population
in 1994-­1995 to 1,003/100,000 in 2002-­2003. U.S. hospital discharge
diagnoses increased from 1.4 to 7.3/10,000 in 9-13-­year-­old children
and from 5.1 to 20.4 per 10,000 in 14-­19 year olds. These increases
were not found in U.K. diagnoses or hospital discharges, raising questions about whether bipolar disorder was being over-­diagnosed in the

Table 39.6  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for a Manic Episode
A.	A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated,
expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally and persistently
increased goal-­directed activity or energy, lasting at least 1 wk
and present most of the day, nearly every day (or any duration if
hospitalization is necessary).
B.	During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy
or activity, three (or more) of the following symptoms (four if the
mood is only irritable) are present to a significant degree and
represent a noticeable change from usual behavior:
1.	Inflated self-­esteem or grandiosity.
2.	Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hr of
sleep).
3.	More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4.	Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are
racing.
5.	Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or
irrelevant external stimuli), as reported or observed.
6.	Increase in goal-­directed activity (either socially, at work or
school, or sexually) or psychomotor agitation (i.e., purposeless
non–goal-­directed activity).
7.	Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential
for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained
buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or foolish business
investments).
C.	The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked
impairment in social or occupational functioning or to necessitate
hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others, or there are
psychotic features.
D.	The episode is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment)
or to another medical condition.
Note: A full manic episode that emerges during antidepressant
treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists
at a fully syndromal level beyond the physiologic effect of that
treatment is sufficient evidence for a manic episode and, therefore,
a bipolar I diagnosis.
Note: Criteria A-­D constitute a manic episode. At least one lifetime
manic episode is required for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p. 124.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

United States, with resultant increases in prescribing of antipsychotic
and mood-­stabilizing medications.

ETIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS

Twin studies suggest the heritability of bipolar disorder may be
60–90%; shared and unique environmental factors may account for
30–40% and 10–20%, respectively. Offspring of parents with bipolar
disorders are at high risk for early-­onset bipolar disorders as well as
anxiety and behavioral disorders and mood dysregulation. There is an
average 10-­fold increased risk among adult relatives of individuals with
bipolar disorder, with the magnitude of risk increasing with the degree
of kinship. Bipolar disorder and schizophrenia likely share a common
genetic origin, reflected in familial co-­aggregation of the two disorders.
Studies to date suggest key roles for the amygdala, anterior paralimbic cortices, and their connections in the emotional dysregulation of
bipolar disorder. Some of these abnormalities are apparent by adolescence, whereas others appear to progress over adolescence into young
adulthood.
Dysthymic (sad), cyclothymic (labile), or hyperthymic (irritable) temperaments may presage eventual bipolar disorder. Premorbid anxiety
and dysphoria also are common. Environmental factors such as irritable and negative parenting styles, physical and sexual abuse, poor
social support, and prenatal alcohol exposure may interact with genetic
vulnerability to produce early onset of bipolar illness as well as negative
prognostic indicators. Affective lability, in particular, has been associated with high levels of childhood trauma, and gradual sensitization to
stressors has been linked to episode recurrence.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 39 u Mood Disorders
SCREENING

Cardinal manic symptoms of elation, increased energy, and grandiosity
occurring in adolescents as a discrete episode representing an unequivocal and uncharacteristic change in functioning should alert pediatric practitioners to the possibility of bipolar disorder. High scores on
Table 39.7  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for a Hypomanic
Episode
A.	A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated,
expansive, or irritable mood and abnormally and persistently
increased goal-­directed activity or energy, lasting at least four
consecutive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
B.	During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy or
activity, three (or more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood
is only irritable) have persisted, represent a noticeable change from
usual behavior, and have been present to a significant degree:
1.	Inflated self-­esteem or grandiosity.
2.	Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hr of
sleep).
3.	More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4.	Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are
racing.
5.	Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or
irrelevant external stimuli), as reported or observed.
6.	Increase in goal-­directed activity (either socially, at work or
school, or sexually) or psychomotor agitation (i.e., purposeless
non–goal-­directed activity).
7.	Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential
for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained
buying sprees, sexual indiscretions, or foolish business
investments).
C.	The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in
functioning that is uncharacteristic of the individual when not
symptomatic.
D.	The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are
observable by others.
E.	The disturbance is not severe enough to cause marked
impairment in social or occupational functioning or to necessitate
hospitalization. If there are psychotic features, the episode is, by
definition, manic.
F.	The episode is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment)
or to another medical condition.
Note: A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant
treatment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists
at a fully syndromal level beyond the physiologic effect of that
treatment is sufficient evidence for a hypomanic episode diagnosis.
However, caution is indicated so that one or two symptoms
(particularly increased irritability, edginess, or agitation following
antidepressant use) are not taken as sufficient for diagnosis of a
hypomanic episode, nor necessarily indicative of a bipolar diathesis.
Note: Criteria A-­F constitute a hypomanic episode. Hypomanic
episodes are common in bipolar I disorder but are not required for
the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p. 124.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

261

parent-­completed versions of mania-­specific rating scales (e.g., General Behavior Inventory, Child Mania Rating Scale, Young Mania Rating
Scale) have been associated with increased likelihood of a bipolar diagnosis. However, screening tools for bipolar disorder have suboptimal
psychometric properties when applied to young people. Because of the
complexity of diagnosing and treating bipolar disorders, any suspected
cases should be referred to the specialty mental health setting for comprehensive assessment and treatment.

PRESENTATION

In adolescents, the clinical manifestations of mania are similar to those
in adults; psychosis (delusions, hallucinations) often is an associated
symptom (see Chapter 47). Mood in a manic episode is often described
as euphoric, excessively cheerful, high, or “feeling on top of the world.”
During the episode, the adolescent may engage in multiple new projects that are initiated with little knowledge of the topic and often at
unusual hours (middle of the night). Inflated self-­esteem is usually
present, ranging from uncritical self-­confidence to marked grandiosity,
and may reach delusional proportions. The adolescent may sleep little,
if at all, for days and still feel rested and full of energy. Speech can be
rapid, pressured, and loud and characterized by jokes, puns, amusing
irrelevancies, and theatricality. Frequently there is a “flight of ideas,”
evidenced by an almost continuous flow of accelerated speech, with
abrupt shifts from one topic to another. Distractibility is evidenced by
an inability to censor irrelevant extraneous stimuli, which often prevents an individual with mania from engaging in a rational conversation. The expansive mood, grandiosity, and poor judgment often lead
to reckless involvement in activities with high potential for personal
harm.
Controversy surrounds the applicability of the diagnostic criteria for
mania to prepubertal children. It may be developmentally normal for
children to be elated, expansive, grandiose, or talkative, reducing the
specificity of these symptoms to this disorder. In addition, the distractibility, overactivity, impulsivity, and irritability formerly ascribed to
bipolar disorder by some investigators may be better explained by a
diagnosis of ADHD, with or without comorbid ODD. The presentation
of severe and pervasive irritability formerly diagnosed as “bipolar disorder” may be better captured by the diagnosis of DMDD.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Numerous psychiatric disorders, general medical conditions, and
medications can generate manic-­like symptoms and must be distinguished from the bipolar and related disorders. The psychiatric disorders include ADHD, ODD, and intermittent explosive, posttraumatic
stress, depressive, anxiety, substance abuse, and borderline personality
disorders. Medical conditions include neurologic disorders, endocrine
disorders, infectious diseases, tumors, anemia, uremia, and vitamin
deficiencies. Medications include androgens, bronchodilators, cardiovascular medications, corticosteroids, chemotherapy agents, thyroid
preparations, and certain psychiatric medications (benzodiazepines,
antidepressants, stimulants). The diagnosis of a bipolar disorder should
be made after these other explanations for the observed symptoms
have been ruled out. Substance-­induced mood disorder should also be
considered and ruled out in patients presenting with mania.

Table 39.8  A Comparison of Bipolar I and II and Cyclothymia in Children and Adolescents
BIPOLAR I

BIPOLAR II

CYCLOTHYMIA

Core feature(s)

One manic episode

One hypomanic episode AND one
major depressive episode

Symptoms of hypomania and depression,
without meeting full criteria for a manic,
hypomanic or depressive episode

Duration

Mania: 7 days

Hypomania: 4 days
Depressive episode: 14 days

1 year

Associated symptoms

Depressive episodes, hypomanic
episodes, psychosis

Chronic disruption in mood patterns

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

262 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
For bipolar II disorder, the main differential is unipolar depression
(MDD) or cyclothymic disorder, which are ruled out by the lack of a
hypomanic episode and by not meeting full criteria for either a major
depressive or hypomanic episode, respectively.

COMORBIDITY

The most common simultaneous comorbidities (ADHD, ODD,
conduct disorder, anxiety) may be difficult to distinguish from
mania because of considerable symptom overlap. Substance use
also is a common comorbidity in adolescents, and presentations
that appear to be manic may remit when the substances of abuse
are discontinued.

TREATMENT
Pharmacologic Treatment

Medication is the primary treatment for mania (Table 39.9). Studies
have demonstrated the superiority of antipsychotics over mood stabilizers in the treatment of mania. Risperidone and olanzapine are the
most efficacious agents; quetiapine, risperidone, and olanzapine ranked
as the most tolerable agents. The choice of antipsychotic medication is
based on factors such as side effect profiles, comorbidities, adherence,
and positive response of a family member.
Among traditional mood stabilizers, only lithium is FDA approved
for the treatment of bipolar disorder from age 12 years; its efficacy
and tolerability compared to placebo has been demonstrated in randomized controlled trials (RCTs). There also is evidence that lithium
reduces the risk of suicide and total deaths in patients with both unipolar and bipolar depressive disorder.
Given the co-­occurrence of sleep disturbance with bipolar disorders,
the use of medications to help regulate sleep can have a significant benefit on mood and functioning. Medications to promote sleep, including benzodiazepines, benzodiazepine receptor agonists, and melatonin
receptor agonists have some evidence for the treatment of sleep in
bipolar disorder in adults. When treating children and adolescents, it
is important to monitor for paradoxical activation/disinhibition when
using benzodiazepines.
Medication trials should be systematic and their duration sufficient
(generally 6-­8 weeks) to determine effectiveness. Care should be taken
to avoid unnecessary polypharmacy, in part by discontinuing agents
that have not demonstrated significant benefit. Because these medications are associated with significant side effects, careful monitoring of
baseline and follow-­up indices is imperative (see Chapter 33).
The regimen needed to stabilize acute mania should be maintained
for 12-­24 months. Maintenance therapy is often needed for adolescents
with bipolar I disorder, and some patients need lifelong medication.
Any attempts to discontinue prophylactic medication should be done
gradually while closely monitoring the patient for relapse.
Antidepressants alone should not be prescribed for depressive symptoms in confirmed cases of bipolar I disorder because of the risk of
manic switch. For treatment of depression in bipolar II, antidepressant

Table 39.9  U.S. Food and Drug Administration–Approved
Treatments for Bipolar Disorder in Youth
MEDICATION

INDICATION (APPROVED
AGES)

Aripiprazole

Mania (10-­17 yr)

Asenapine

Mania/mixed episode (10-­17 yr)

Lithium

Acute mania/bipolar
maintenance (7-17 yr)

Lurasidone

Bipolar depression (10-­17 yr)

Olanzapine

Mania/mixed episode (13-­17 yr)

Quetiapine

Mania (10-­17 yr)

Risperidone

Mania/mixed episode (10-­17 yr)

medication may be used cautiously. Comorbid ADHD can be treated
with a stimulant once a mood stabilizer has been initiated.

Psychotherapies

Psychotherapy is a potentially important adjunctive treatment for
bipolar disorders. Therapies with some evidence of efficacy, primarily
as adjunctive to pharmacotherapy, include multifamily psychoeducational psychotherapy and family-­focused treatment, child and family–­
focused CBT, dialectical behavioral therapy, and interpersonal and
social rhythm therapy. Active components of these therapies include
family involvement and psychoeducation, along with self-­regulation,
cognitive restructuring, communication, problem-­solving, and emotion regulation skills. Factors that adversely influence response to therapy include high-­conflict families and sleep impairment, suggesting
the importance of targeting these factors in treatment. Sleep hygiene is
an important factor in the treatment of mania, and there is support for
the use of CBT in treating insomnia related to bipolar disorder. Ensuring patients get adequate rest will help with recovery and the prevention of future episodes of mania.

LEVEL OF CARE

Most youths with bipolar disorders can be safely and effectively treated
as outpatients, provided that an appropriate schedule of visits and laboratory monitoring can be maintained through the course of treatment.
Youths who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, or present an intentional danger to themselves or others typically require inpatient care.

Clinical Course and Prognosis

The mean age of onset of the first manic episode is approximately 18
years old for bipolar I disorder. Premorbid problems are common in
bipolar disorder, especially temperamental difficulties with mood and
behavioral regulation. Premorbid anxiety also is common. The early
course of adolescent-­onset bipolar I disorder appears to be more
chronic and refractory to treatment than adult-­onset bipolar disorder.
Comorbidity predicts functional impairment, and age at onset predicts duration of episodes. Sleep impairment and family conflict are
inversely related to favorable treatment response, suggesting important targets for treatment. The bipolar disorders are highly recurrent,
and 70–80% of bipolar I patients will have additional mood episodes.
Recurrent episodes can approximate 4 in 10 years, with the inter-­
episode interval shortening as the patient ages. Although the majority
of patients with bipolar I return to a fully functional level between episodes, approximately 30% continue to be symptomatic and functionally impaired between episodes.
The initial presentation of bipolar I disorder is often a major depressive episode. Switching from a depressive episode to a manic episode
by adulthood may occur in 10–20% of youth, both spontaneously and
during depression treatment. Factors that predict the eventual development of mania in depressed youth include a depressive episode
characterized by rapid onset, psychomotor retardation, and psychotic
features; a family history of affective disorders, especially bipolar disorder; and a history of mania or hypomania after antidepressant therapy.
The mean age of onset of bipolar II disorder is 20 years old. The illness most often begins with a depressive episode and is not recognized
as bipolar II disorder until a hypomanic episode occurs, in about 12%
of individuals with the initial diagnosis of major depression. Many
individuals experience several episodes of major depression before
experiencing the first recognized hypomanic episode. Anxiety, substance misuse, or eating disorders may also precede the onset of bipolar
II, complicating its detection. About 5–15% of individuals with bipolar
II disorder will ultimately develop a manic episode, which changes the
diagnosis to bipolar I disorder.
Depression in bipolar I or II usually has an earlier age of onset, more
frequent episodes of shorter duration, an abrupt onset and offset, is
linked to comorbid substance misuse, and is triggered by stressors.
Atypical symptoms such as hypersomnia, lability, and weight instability are also common in bipolar depression, reported in up to 90% of
cases vs 50% in unipolar depression. Psychosis, psychomotor retardation, and catatonia are also more characteristic of bipolar depression,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 40 u Suicide and Attempted Suicide

263

whereas somatic complaints are more frequent in unipolar depression.
A family history of mania is also a relevant discriminating factor.
Provision of clinical services is poor for youth with bipolar disorder. In one healthcare system study spanning 2-­year follow-­up after
diagnosis, despite complex drug regimens, medication appointments
were infrequent, averaging one visit every 2 months. More than 50%
of patients needed one or more hospitalizations, and almost half had
psychiatric emergency department visits. In a national study, 38% of
youths diagnosed with bipolar disorder had received no treatment
at all.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

SEQUELAE

More than 30% of 9th-­12th grade students in the United States felt so
sad or hopeless almost every day for 2 or more weeks in a row during the previous year that they stopped doing usual activities. During
that same period, 18.8% of the students reported that they had seriously considered attempting suicide, and 8.9% reported that they had
attempted suicide one or more times. A suicide attempt in the previous year that resulted in an injury, poisoning, or overdose that had to
be treated by a physician or nurse was reported by 2.5% of students.
Ingestion is the most common method of attempted suicide. The
15–19-­year-­old age-­group is the most likely to intentionally harm themselves by ingestion, receive treatment in the ED, and survive. Attempts are
more common in adolescent females than males and in Hispanic females
than their non-­Hispanic counterparts. LGBTQ+ and bullied youths also
have disproportionately high rates of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts
(see Chapter 154). Prior self-­harm (self-­injury) from poisoning, drowning,
firearms, fires, asphyxiation (hanging), and traffic injury are risk factors
for suicide. Repeated episodes of self-­harm are a higher risk factor than a
single episode (see Chapter 46). Attempters who have made prior suicide
attempts, who used a method other than ingestion, who have a plan, who
have no regret, and who still want to die are at increased risk for completed
suicide. Nonetheless, a significant number of children and adolescents
who have completed suicide had no previous attempts.

Bipolar disorder has one of the higher rates of suicide among mental health diagnoses, with a lifetime risk of suicide in individuals with
bipolar disorder estimated to be at least 15 times that of the general
population. Factors associated with suicide attempts include female
gender, young age at illness onset, depressive polarity of first illness
episode or current or most recent episode, comorbid anxiety disorder,
any comorbid substance use disorder, borderline personality disorder,
and first-­degree family history of suicide. In contrast, completed suicides are associated with male sex and a first-­degree family history of
suicide. Despite patients with bipolar disorder having normal or even
superior cognition before diagnosis, bipolar disorder has been associated with decrements in executive function and verbal memory. Youths
with bipolar disorder are also at high risk for substance abuse, antisocial behavior, impaired academic performance, impaired family and
peer relationships, and poor adjustment to life stressors.

PREVENTION

Although empirical support is sparse, one study demonstrated the
effectiveness of family-­focused treatment vs an educational control in
hastening and sustaining recovery from mood symptoms in a high-­
familial-­risk cohort of youths with subsyndromal symptoms of mania.
Family-­focused treatment is a manualized psychoeducational intervention designed to reduce family stress, conflict, and affective arousal
by enhancing communication and problem solving between youths
and their caregivers. Pharmacologic interventions for subsyndromal
mania have produced equivocal results.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 40

Suicide and Attempted
Suicide
Jennifer A. Zaspel and Rosa K. Kim
Youth suicide is a major public health concern. In 2021, suicide was the
second leading cause of death in adolescents and young adults (aged
10-­24 years) and the tenth leading cause of death for all ages. The rates
of emergency department (ED) visits for psychiatric chief complaints
have also increased over time, with a 2.5-­fold increase in suicide-­
related visits in adolescents. There are numerous genetic, psychiatric,
social, cultural, and environmental risk factors for suicidal behavior
(Fig. 40.1). There are also many protective factors and interventions
that can reduce rates of self-­injury and suicide. Knowledge of these risk
factors and protective factors may facilitate identification and treatment in youths at highest risk for intentional harm to themselves.

Suicide rates for children and adolescents have been increasing over
time, with the overall suicide rates increasing by 35% since 1999. It is
estimated that 46% of people who die by suicide were diagnosed with a
psychiatric condition at the time of their death. Linear trends in suicide
attempts from 2009–2019 have also increased and specifically among
certain demographic groups. A better understanding of which groups
are at risk for suicide and parasuicidal behavior can help pediatricians
identify and support those who are at risk (Table 40.1).

Suicidal Ideation and Attempts

Suicide Completions

In the United States, completed suicide is very rare before age 10.
Rates of completed suicide increase steadily across adolescence into
young adulthood, peaking in the early 20s. The male-­to-­female ratio
for completed suicide rises with age from 3:1 in children to approximately 4:1 in those aged 15-­24 and greater than 6:1 among those ages
20-­24. Although exact rates have changed over time, firearms, suffocation, and poisoning remain the most common methods of suicide
(Fig. 40.2).
For both male and female youth ages 15-­24, suicide rates remain
highest among Indigenous American and Indigenous Alaskan youth
and White youth relative to Black, Asian or Pacific Islander, and Hispanic youth. However, rates have been rising for both Black and Asian
or Pacific Islander youth, with the rates in Black males increasing
47% between 2013 and 2019 (12.2/100,000 to 17.9/100,000 individuals) and Asian or Pacific Islander males increasing 40% between 2013
and 2019 (12.0/100,000 to 16.8/100,000 individuals). Similar increases
have also been seen in female youth in these groups in this time, with
a rate increase of 59% among Black female youth (2.7 to 4.3/100,000)
and 42% among Asian or Pacific Islander (3.6 to 5.1/100,000). In 2021,
the combined (male and female, age 10-24) suicide rates among Indigenous youths increased ~16% (over 2018 rates); Increases were also
noted among Black youths (~36%) and Hispanic youths (~8%).

RISK FACTORS

Multiple risk factors predispose youth to suicide (see Fig. 40.1, Table
40.1). Dynamic risk factors are those that change over time and are
most amenable to risk mitigation through treatment, resources, and
support. Static risk factors are those that increase an individual’s risk of
suicide attempt and completion but are not amenable to direct intervention. They include genetic factors, demographic information, an
individual’s past psychiatric history, family psychiatric history, and
history of suicidal and parasuicidal behavior. The risk associated with
each factor varies, with the highest risk associated with a personal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

264 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Predisposition

Childhood

Adolescence

Adulthood

Older Adults

Genetic and epigenetic factors
Family history
Early-life adversity
Psychiatric disorders
Severe mental illness
Depression
Personality disorders
Substance misuse
Physical health problems
Lack of social support
Economic factors
Life events
Individual risk factors
Environmental risk factors

Effects of the media
Access to lethal means

history of a suicide attempt. Risk is also cumulative, with childhood
adversity leading to an increased lifetime risk of suicide.

Access to Firearms

Firearms are the most lethal method of suicide completion; the death
rate with respect to firearms is approximately 80–90%, whereas the
death rate is only 1.5–4% for drug overdoses. Firearms have long been
the most common method of completed suicide across all ages and
genders and have become the most common method of suicide completion for adolescent males (see Fig. 40.2). Limiting access to lethal
means, in particular firearms, reduces rates of completed suicide.

Suicide Contagion

Suicide attempts may also be precipitated by exposure to news of
another person’s suicide or by reading about or viewing a suicide portrayed in a romantic light in the media. Media coverage of suicide is
linked to fluctuating incidence rates of suicides, particularly among
adolescents. Glorification of suicide whether in news or in fictional
media has been associated with an increase in suicides. When media
coverage includes a detailed description of specific means used, the use
of that particular method may increase in the overall population.

Preexisting Psychiatric Illness

Approximately 90% of youths who complete suicide have a preexisting psychiatric illness, most often major depression. Among females,
chronic anxiety, especially panic disorder, also is associated with suicide attempts and completion. Among males, conduct disorder and
substance use confer increased risk. Comorbidity of a substance use
disorder, a depressive disorder, and/or conduct disorder are linked to
suicide by firearm. Schizophrenia spectrum disorders are linked to suicide attempts and completions (see Chapter 47.1).

Suicidal and Parasuicidal Behavior

History of a previous suicide attempt is recognized as the strongest predictive risk factor for future suicidal behavior. Individual definitions
of suicide attempts can vary; therefore parasuicidal behavior should
be explored when considering past attempts. Some patients may not
consider an aborted attempt or interrupted attempt an actual suicide
attempt, but these behaviors carry considerable risk, as do researching

Fig. 40.1 Risk factors for suicide
and the strength of the association throughout life. The strength
of the association between each
risk factor and suicide is indicated by the shading (darker shading indicates a stronger association). (From Fazel S, Runeson B.
Suicide [published correction
appears in. N Engl J Med. 2020
Mar 12;382:1078]; N Engl J Med.
2020;382:266–274:Fig. 1, p 267.)

suicide methods, preparatory acts, rehearsals, giving away possessions,
and making arrangements for responsibilities (e.g., finding someone
else to care for a pet or family member in their planned absence).
Nonsuicidal self-­injury (NSSI) is the direct and deliberate destruction of one’s own body tissue with the absence of intent to die (see Chapter 46). The most common self-­harm behavior is cutting or carving, but
other behaviors include scratching, burning, punching or hitting oneself, biting, and others. NSSI is common among adolescents, especially
females. Up to 47.4% of youth with a diagnosis of depression engage in
NSSI, and lifetime prevalence rates of NSSI are between 17% and 60%.
Although the intent of these behaviors may not be to cause death, they
are important to note, as they are strong predictors of future suicidality
if left untreated. Seventy percent of adolescents who engaged in NSSI
report a lifetime suicide attempt, and 55% reported multiple attempts.
Individuals who are most likely to engage in NSSI are those who have
a family member or close friend who have engaged in self-­harm and
those who believe that peers engage in self-­harm.

Protective Factors

Protective factors (Table 40.2) can provide a counterbalance for those
contemplating suicide. Internal protective factors are those that are
inherent to the individual. External protective factors are typically
dependent on relationships and interactions with others. Protective
factors, even if present, may not counteract significant acute risk.

ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION

All suicidal ideation (including planning) and suicide attempts should
be taken seriously and require a thorough assessment by a child-­trained
mental health clinician to evaluate the youth’s current state of mind,
ongoing risk of harm, and next best steps in treatment. Emergency
mental health assessment is needed for immediate threat to self (i.e.,
active suicidal ideation with plan and intent); urgent mental health
assessment (48-­72 hours) is needed for severe psychiatric symptoms,
significant change in overall functioning, and suicidal ideation without intent or plan. Routine mental health assessment is appropriate for
mild to moderate psychiatric symptoms without suicidal ideation.
Pediatric practitioners should expect the mental health clinician to
evaluate the presence and degree of suicidality and underlying risk factors. The reliability and validity of child interviewing are affected by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 40 u Suicide and Attempted Suicide
Table 40.1  Dynamic and Static Risk Factors for Suicide in
Children and Adolescents
DYNAMIC RISK FACTORS
Psychiatric symptoms

Anhedonia
Feelings of hopelessness,
helplessness, or worthlessness
Impulsivity
Insomnia
Command hallucinations
Agitation
Anxiety or panic
Poor coping

Changes in psychiatric
treatment

Recent discharge from a psychiatric
hospital
Change in treatment plan
Change in treatment team

Psychosocial stressors or
precipitants

Events that can cause humiliation,
shame, or despair (e.g., loss of
a relationship, death of a loved
one, housing insecurity, academic
problems, newly diagnosed medical
condition)
Ongoing medical illness
Substance intoxication
Family turmoil/chaos/conflict
Social isolation
Bullying or being bullied
Pending legal situation
Suicide in the community (contagion)

STATIC RISK FACTORS
Demographics

Age: 14-­25
Sex: male
Race: White, Indigenous American,
and Native Alaskan
LGBTQ+ identification

Preexisting and/or current
psychiatric illness

Mood disorder
Psychotic disorder
Substance abuse disorder
ADHD
Eating disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder
Cluster B personality traits/disorders
Conduct disorder or behaviors
(antisocial behavior, aggression)
History of trauma, abuse, or neglect

Past suicidal and
parasuicidal behavior

Previous suicide attempts
Aborted or interrupted suicide
attempts
Nonsuicidal self-­injury (self-­harm)
thoughts and/or action

Family history

Psychiatric illness
Psychiatric hospitalization
Suicide attempts and completions

ADHD, Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

children’s level of cognitive development as well as their understanding
of the relationship between their emotions and behavior. Confirmation of the youth’s suicidal behavior can be obtained from information
gathered by interviewing others who know the child or adolescent. A
discrepancy between patient and parent reports is not unusual, with
both children and adolescents more likely to disclose suicidal ideation
and suicidal actions than their parents.

Suicide Inquiry

In the mental health assessment, suicidal ideation is assessed by
explicit questions posed in a nonjudgmental, noncondescending,
matter-­of-­fact approach. The clinician should explore all aspects of

265

suicidal ideation (i.e., frequency, intensity), suicide plan, parasuicidal
behaviors like preparatory acts or writing notes, and intent associated
with their thoughts. The assessment of a suicide attempt should also
include a detailed exploration of the hours immediately preceding an
attempt to identify precipitants as well as the circumstances of the
attempt itself to better understand the patient’s intent and potential
lethality. It is important to recognize that suicidal ideation is dynamic
in nature and should be considered on an individual basis; a patient
should be compared to their own baseline when assessing for risk of
harm to self.

Children Under 12 Years

Although suicidal ideation and attempts are less frequent in children
under 12 than older teens and adults, they do occur. A developmental approach must be taken, as children vary in their understanding
of death, moral reasoning, and cognitive reasoning based on age and
whether they are following a typical developmental trajectory. A young
child may not recognize that their means are not lethal, but that fact
should not discount their intent.
Unlike adolescents, Black male children are most likely to complete
suicide, most often by hanging or strangulation. Children who are
at risk of suicide may be less likely to demonstrate classical symptoms of depression than teens and are more likely to attempt at home.
Children who die by suicide have higher rates of attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), emphasizing the importance of
impulsivity in suicide attempts. Relationship problems are the most
common precipitating circumstance, but the specific relationship differs along developmental lines. Younger adolescents are more likely
to have had relationship problems with peers or a significant other,
whereas children are more likely to have had relationship problems
with family.

Determining Risk

The calculation of the level of risk of harm to self is complex, requiring
a determination across a spectrum of risk. At the low end of the risk
spectrum are youth with thoughts of death or wanting to die but without suicidal thoughts, intent, or plan. Those with specific suicide plans,
preparatory acts or suicide rehearsals, low probability of being found
during an attempt, and clearly articulated intent are at the high end.
A history of suicide attempts, presently impaired judgment, and poor
social support further exacerbates the heightened risk. Among adolescents who consider self-­harm, those who carry out self-­injury are more
likely to have family or friends who have engaged in self-­harm. When
considering all aspects of a suicide risk assessment, positive responses
to a suicide inquiry carry more weight and concern than risk factors
alone.

Levels of Psychiatric Care

For youth who are an imminent danger to themselves (i.e., have active
thoughts of killing themselves with plan and intent), inpatient level of
psychiatric care is necessary to ensure safety, clarify diagnoses, and
plan comprehensive treatment. These patients can be hospitalized
voluntarily or involuntarily. It is helpful for the pediatric practitioner
to have an office protocol to follow in these situations. This protocol
should take into consideration state laws regarding involuntary hospitalization, transportation options, nearest emergency assessment site,
necessary forms for hospitalization, and available emergency mental
health consultants.
For those youth suitable for treatment in the outpatient setting
(e.g., suicidal ideation without plan or intent, intact mental status, few or no other risk factors for suicidality, willing and able to
participate in outpatient treatment; has caregivers able to provide
emotional support, supervision, safeguarding, and adherence to
follow-­up), an appointment should be scheduled within a few days
with a mental health clinician. Ideally, this appointment should be
scheduled before leaving the assessment venue. A procedure should
be in place to contact the family to encourage mental health follow­up and provide additional support or resources, if needed. Some

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

266 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders

100

100

80

80

Suicide deaths, %

Suicide deaths, %

Percentage of Suicide Deaths by Method Among Male and Female Adolescents Age 10 to 19 Years, 1999-2020

60
40
20
0

Method of suicide death
Asphyxiation
Firearm
Other

60
40
20

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

0

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year

Year

Male adolescents

Female adolescents

2020

Fig. 40.2 Percentage of suicide deaths by method among male and female adolescents, age 10 to 19 years, 1999-2020. Locally estimated scatterplot smoothing regression estimated percentages of suicide deaths by method with 95% CIs. Asphyxiation includes suicide deaths involving
hanging, strangulation, and suffocation; Firearm includes suicide deaths involving firearm use; and Other includes suicide deaths involving poisoning, drowning, fall, fire, and cuts. (Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Multiple cause of death: 1999-2020 request form. Updated
July 27, 2022. Accessed July 11, 2022. https://wonder.cdc.gov/wonder/help/mcd.html.)

Table 40.2  Protective Factors Against Suicide in Children
and Adolescents
PROTECTIVE FACTORS
Internal protective factors

Positive coping skills
Frustration tolerance
Religious faith
Fear of consequences of an attempt
(e.g., disfigurement, hospitalization,
effects on family/friends)
Future oriented thinking
Fear of lost opportunities

External protective factors

Responsibilities for others (e.g., other
children in the home, pets)
Positive therapeutic or mentoring
relationships (e.g., physician,
therapist, teacher, coach)
Social supports
Living with others

evidence suggests that quick and consistent follow-­up with a team
approach, including both primary care and mental health, can be
helpful in enhancing treatment plan engagement among patients
who are suicidal.

Safety Planning

Safety planning is a brief psychosocial intervention that has been
shown to reduce suicidal behavior and increase engagement in treatment. Safety plan development consists of working ideally with both
the patient and their caregivers to identify individual warning signs
and symptoms related to self-­harm and suicidal behavior, outlining
healthy coping skills and people or places that can provide distraction,
identifying loved ones and professionals who can be contacted during a crisis, and agreeing on ways to make the home environment safe
(e.g., removing firearms, locking up medications). Studies have repeatedly refuted the efficacy of safety or suicide contracts in mitigating risk
of completing suicide, and some have shown them to be harmful to the
therapeutic relationship.

Table 40.3  Warning Signs of Suicide
Seek help as soon as possible by contacting a mental health
professional or by calling the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline
at 1-­800-­273-­TALK if you or someone you know exhibits any of the
following signs:
⦁	Threatening to hurt or kill oneself or talking about wanting to hurt
or kill oneself.
⦁	Looking for ways to kill oneself by seeking access to firearms,
available pills, or other means.
⦁	Talking or writing about death, dying, or suicide when these
actions are out of the ordinary for the person.
⦁	Feeling hopeless.
⦁	Feeling rage or uncontrolled anger or seeking revenge.
⦁	Acting reckless or engaging in risky activities, seemingly without
thinking.
⦁ Feeling trapped, “like there’s no way out.”
⦁	Increasing alcohol or drug use.
⦁	Withdrawing from friends, family, and society.
⦁	Feeling anxious, agitated, or unable to sleep, or sleeping all the
time.
⦁	Experiencing dramatic mood changes.
⦁	Seeing no reason for living, or having no sense of purpose in life.
Developed by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). https://www.nimh.nih.gov/
health/publications/warning-signs-of-suicide

PREVENTION

The previously mentioned risk factors associated with suicide are
relatively common and individually not strong predictors of suicide. The assessment is complicated by patients who may attempt
to conceal their suicide thoughts and by those who express suicidal thoughts without serious intent. Suicide screening has been
challenging because most screening instruments have variable
sensitivity and specificity. In addition, the follow-­up mental health
evaluations for those who screen positive has been poor.
Prevention strategies in the pediatric medical home include
training staff to recognize and respond to the warning signs of suicide (Table 40.3), screening for and treating depression, educating

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 40 u Suicide and Attempted Suicide
patients/parents about warning signs for suicide, and restricting
access to lethal means. Pediatric practitioners should consider
counseling parents to remove firearms from the home entirely or
securely lock guns and ammunition in separate locations. Anecdotal evidence suggests youths frequently know where guns and
keys to gun cabinets are kept, even though parents may think they
do not. The same recommendation applies to restricting access to
potentially lethal prescription and nonprescription medications
(e.g., containers of >25 acetaminophen tablets) and alcohol. These
approaches emphasize the importance of restriction of access to
means of suicide to prevent self-­harm.

as

267

SCREENING AND EARLY TREATMENT

In 2022, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) concluded that there is insufficient evidence to recommend universal
suicide screening in the primary care setting for children and adolescents. The American Academy of Pediatrics does recommend
universal suicide screening for all children ≥12 years old. In addition, in 2018 the American Academy of Pediatrics and the USPFTS
(2022) recommended annual universal depression screening for
youths 12 and older, which often includes suicide screening as part
of validated tools. Pediatric practitioners should also consider suicide potential and the need for mental health assessment in the

NIMH TOOLKIT

Suicide Risk Screening Tool

l

.

Ask Suicide-Screening - uestions
Ask the patient:
1. In the past few weeks, have you wished you were dead?

Yes

 No

2. In the past few weeks, have you felt that you or your family
would be better off if you were dead?

Yes

 No

3. In the past week, have you been having thoughts
about killing yourself?

Yes

 No

4. Have you ever tried to kill yourself?

Yes

 No

If yes, how? _______________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
When? ___________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________
If the patient answers Yes to any of the above, ask the following acuity question:
5. Are you having thoughts of killing yourself right now?

Yes

 No

If yes, please describe: ______________________________________________________
Next steps:
•

If patient answers “No” to all questions 1 through 4, screening is complete (not necessary to ask question #5).
No intervention is necessary (*Note: Clinical judgment can always override a negative screen).

•

If patient answers “Yes” to any of questions 1 through 4, or refuses to answer, they are considered a
positive screen. Ask question #5 to assess acuity:

 “Yes” to question #5 = acute positive screen (imminent risk identified)

• Patient requires a STAT safety/full mental health evaluation.
Patient cannot leave until evaluated for safety.
• Keep patient in sight. Remove all dangerous objects from room. Alert physician or clinician
responsible for patient’s care.

 “No” to question #5 = non-acute positive screen (potential risk identified)

• Patient requires a brief suicide safety assessment to determine if a full mental health evaluation
is needed. Patient cannot leave until evaluated for safety.
• Alert physician or clinician responsible for patient’s care.

Provide resources to all patients

• 24/7 National Suicide Prevention Lifeline 1-800-273-TALK (8255) En Español: 1-888-628-9454
• 24/7 Crisis Text Line: Text “HOME” to 741-741
asQ Suicide Risk Screening Toolkit

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH (NIMH)

Fig. 40.3 Ask Suicide-­Screening Questions—Suicide Risk Screening Tool. (ASQ
Tool courtesy National Institute of Mental Health. National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland. Accessed at https:
//www.nimh.nih.gov/research/research-­
conducted-­at-­nimh/asq-­toolkit-­materials,
May 9, 2022.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

268 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 40.4  Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale Screener
1.	Have you wished you were dead or wished you could go to sleep and not wake up?
2.	Have you actually had any thoughts about killing yourself?
If “Yes” to 2, answer questions 3, 4, 5, and 6.
If “No” to 2, go directly to question 6.
3.	Have you thought about how you might do this?
4.	Have you had any intention of acting on these thoughts of killing yourself, as opposed to you having the thoughts but you definitely would not
act on them?
5.	Have you started to work out or worked out the details of how to kill yourself? Do you intend to carry out this plan?
6.	Have you done anything, started to do anything, or prepared to do anything to end your life?
RESPONSE PROTOCOL TO SCREENING (BASED ON LAST ITEM ANSWERED “YES”)
Item 1—Mental Health Referral at discharge
Item 2—Mental Health Referral at discharge
Item 3—Care Team Consultation (Psychiatric Nurse) and Patient Safety Monitor/Procedures
Item 4—Psychiatric Consultation and Patient Safety Monitor/Procedures
Item 5—Psychiatric Consultation and Patient Safety Monitor/Procedures
Item 6—If over 3 months ago, Mental Health Referral at discharge
If 3 months ago or less, Psychiatric Consultation and Patient Safety Monitor
From Posner K. Columbia Lighthouse Project. The Columbia-­Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-­SSRS) Screener–Recent. https://cssrs.columbia.edu/the-columbia-scale-c-ssrs/riskidentification/

context of concerning information elicited in child/parent psychosocial histories (e.g., HEADSS Psychosocial Risk Assessment;
see Chapter 32, Table 32.2), general screening measure scores out
of the normal range (e.g., Pediatric Symptom Checklist Internalizing Sub-­S cale; see Table 28.5), or self-­reported statements or
behaviors from patients and parents. The Ask Suicide-­S creening
Questionnaire (ASQ) is a validated four-­item measure shown in
the ED setting to have high sensitivity and negative predictive
value in identifying youth at risk for suicide ideation and behavior
(Fig. 40.3). Other common screening tools are the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-­S SRS) Screener (Table 40.4) and the
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-­2 /PHQ-­9 ). These scales have
also been used in the emergency room setting.
Through follow-­up office visits, pediatric practitioners can help
support and facilitate the implementation of psychotherapies that
target the specific psychiatric disorders and the emotional dysphoria or behavioral dysregulation that accompany suicidal ideation or
behavior. In conjunction with a child and adolescent psychiatrist,
psychotropic medications may be used as indicated to treat underlying psychiatric disorders. Both dialectical behavioral therapy
and cognitive behavioral therapy are effective in reducing harm
but must be combined with appropriate psychopharmacology of
an underlying disorder. Pediatric practitioners also can encourage
social connectedness to peers and to community organizations, as
well as promote help-­seeking (e.g., talking to a trusted adult when
distressed) and wellness behaviors. In the event of a completed suicide, pediatricians can offer support to the family, particularly by
monitoring for pathologic bereavement responses in siblings and
parents.

SCHOOL RESOURCES

Screening for suicide in schools is also fraught with problems related
to low specificity of screening instruments, paucity of referral sites, and
variable acceptability among school administrators. Gatekeeper (e.g.,
student support personnel) training appears effective in improving
skills among school personnel and is highly acceptable to administrators but has not been shown to prevent suicide. School curricula (e.g.,
Signs of Suicide) have shown some preventive potential by teaching
students to recognize the signs of depression and suicide in themselves
and others and providing them with specific action steps necessary for
responding to these signs. Peer helpers have not generally been shown
to be efficacious.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 41

Eating Disorders
Taylor B. Starr and Richard E. Kreipe
Eating disorders (EDs) are characterized by body dissatisfaction
related to overvaluation of a thin body ideal, associated with dysfunctional patterns of cognition and weight control behaviors that result
in significant biologic, psychologic, and social complications. EDs can
develop in individuals of any age, gender, sexual orientation, ethnicity,
or cultural background. Early intervention in EDs improves outcome.

DEFINITIONS

Anorexia nervosa (AN) involves significant overestimation of body
size and shape, with a relentless pursuit of thinness that, in the restrictive subtype, typically combines excessive dieting and compulsive
exercising. In the binge-­purge subtype, patients might intermittently
overeat and then attempt to rid themselves of calories by vomiting or
taking laxatives, still with a strong drive for thinness (Table 41.1).
Bulimia nervosa (BN) is characterized by episodes of eating large
amounts of food in a brief period, followed by compensatory vomiting,
laxative use, exercise, or fasting to rid the body of the effects of overeating in an effort to avoid obesity (Table 41.2).
Children and adolescents with EDs may not fulfill criteria for AN or
BN in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition (DSM-­5) and may fall into a subcategory of Other Specified
Feeding and Eating Disorders (OSFED). Youth with these subthreshold conditions merit close monitoring over time because they may be
early in the course of an illness.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID) involves limiting
food intake based on the subjective qualities of food (e.g., appearance,
color, smell, taste, texture or consistency), fear of adverse consequences
of eating (e.g., choking, gagging or vomiting), or lack of interest in eating, but without concern about body image, weight, shape, or size.
However, significant unintended weight loss or nutritional deficiencies
and problems with social interactions can occur as a result (Table 41.3).
Binge eating disorder (BED), in which binge eating is not followed
regularly by any compensatory behaviors (vomiting, laxatives), is a
stand-­alone category in DSM-­5 but shares many features with obesity
(see Chapter 65).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 41 u Eating Disorders
Table 41.1  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Anorexia
Nervosa
A.	Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements, leading to a
significantly low body weight in the context of age, sex,
developmental trajectory, and physical health. Significantly low
weight is defined as a weight that is less than minimally normal or,
for children and adolescents, less than that minimally expected.
B.	Intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent
behavior that interferes with weight gain, even though at a
significantly low weight.
C.	Disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is
experienced, undue influence of body weight or shape on self-­
evaluation, or persistent lack of recognition of the seriousness of
the current low body weight.
Specify whether:
Restricting type (ICD-­10-­CM code F50.01): During the last 3 mo, the
individual has not engaged in recurrent episodes of binge eating
or purging behavior (i.e., self-­induced vomiting or the misuse of
laxatives, diuretics, or enemas). This subtype describes presentations
in which weight loss is accomplished primarily through dieting,
fasting, and/or excessive exercise.
Binge-­eating/purging type (ICD-­10-­CM code F50.02): During the
last 3 mo, the individual has engaged in recurrent episodes of
binge eating or purging behavior (i.e., self-­induced vomiting or the
misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas).
Specify if:
In partial remission: After full criteria for anorexia nervosa were
previously met, Criterion A (low body weight) has not been met for
a sustained period, but either Criterion B (intense fear of gaining
weight or becoming fat or behavior that interferes with weight
gain) or Criterion C (disturbances in self-­perception of weight and
shape) is still met.
In full remission: After full criteria for anorexia nervosa were previously
met, none of the criteria has been met for a sustained period of
time.
Specify current severity:
The minimum level of severity is based, for adults, on current BMI
(see the following) or, for children and adolescents, on BMI percentile.
The ranges below are derived from World Health Organization
categories for thinness in adults; for children and adolescents,
corresponding BMI percentiles should be used. The level of
severity may be increased to reflect clinical symptoms, the degree
of functional disability, and the need for supervision.
Mild: BMI ≥17 kg/m2
Moderate: BMI 16-­16.99 kg/m2
Severe: BMI 15-­15.99 kg/m2
Extreme: BMI <15 kg/m2
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp. 338–339.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The classic presentation of AN is an early to middle adolescent female
of above-­
average intelligence and socioeconomic status who is a
conflict-­avoidant, risk-­aversive perfectionist and is struggling with disturbances of anxiety and/or mood. BN tends to emerge in later adolescence, sometimes evolving from AN, and is typified by impulsivity and
features of borderline personality disorder associated with depression
and mood swings. ARFID typically presents in late childhood, is more
common in males, and more often co-­occurs with anxiety disorders
and autism spectrum disorder. The 0.5–1% and 3–5% incidence rates
among younger and older adolescent females for AN and BN, respectively, probably reflect ascertainment bias in sampling and underdiagnosis in cases not fitting the common profile. The same may be true of

269

Table 41.2  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Bulimia Nervosa
A.	Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is
characterized by both of the following:
1.	Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2 hr
period), an amount of food that is definitely larger than what
most individuals would eat in a similar period of time under
similar circumstances.
2.	A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g.,
a feeling that one cannot stop eating or control what or how
much one is eating).
B. Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviors to prevent
weight gain, such as self-­induced vomiting; misuse of
laxatives, diuretics, or other medications; fasting; or excessive
exercise.
C. The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors
both occur, on average, at least once a week for 3 mo.
D. Self-­evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and
weight.
E. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes of
anorexia nervosa.
Specify if:
In partial remission: After full criteria for bulimia nervosa were
previously met, some, but not all, of the criteria have been met for
a sustained period of time.
In full remission: After full criteria for bulimia nervosa were previously
met, none of the criteria has been met for a sustained period of
time.
Specify current severity:
The minimum level of severity is based on the frequency of
inappropriate compensatory behaviors (see the following). The
level of severity may be increased to reflect other symptoms and
the degree of functional disability.
Mild: An average of 1-­3 episodes of inappropriate compensatory
behaviors per week.
Moderate: An average of 4-­7 episodes of inappropriate
compensatory behaviors per week.
Severe: An average of 8-­13 episodes of inappropriate compensatory
behaviors per week.
Extreme: An average of 14 or more episodes of inappropriate
compensatory behaviors per week.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p. 345.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

the significant gender disparity, in which female patients account for
approximately 85% of patients with diagnosed EDs.
No single factor causes the development of an ED; sociocultural
studies indicate a complex interplay of culture, ethnicity, gender, peers,
and family. The gender dimorphism is presumably related to females
having a stronger relationship between body image and self-­evaluation,
as well as the influence of the Western culture’s thin body ideal. Ethnicity appears to moderate the association between risk factors and
disordered eating, with African American and Caribbean females
reporting lower body dissatisfaction and less dieting than Hispanic
and non-­Hispanic White females. Because peer acceptance is central to
healthy adolescent growth and development, especially in early adolescence, when AN tends to have its initial prevalence peak, the potential
influence of peers on EDs is significant, as are the relationships among
peers, body image, and eating. Teasing by peers or by family members
(especially males) may be a contributing factor for overweight females.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

270 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 41.3  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Avoidant/
Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
A.	An eating or feeding disturbance (e.g., apparent lack of interest in
eating or food; avoidance based on the sensory characteristics of
food; concern about aversive consequences of eating) as manifested
by persistent failure to meet appropriate nutritional and/or energy
needs associated with one (or more) of the following:
1.	Significant weight loss (or failure to achieve expected weight
gain or faltering growth in children).
2.	Significant nutritional deficiency.
3.	Dependence on enteral feeding or oral nutritional
supplements.
4.	Marked interference with psychosocial functioning.
B.	The disturbance is not better explained by lack of available food
or by an associated culturally sanctioned practice.
C.	The eating disturbance does not occur exclusively during the
course of anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa, and there is no
evidence of a disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight
or shape is experienced.
D.	The eating disturbance is not attributable to a concurrent medical
condition or not better explained by another mental disorder.
When the eating disturbance occurs in the context of another
condition or disorder, the severity of the eating disturbance
exceeds that routinely associated with the condition or disorder
and warrants additional clinical attention.
Specify if:
In remission: After full criteria for avoidant/restrictive food intake
disorder were previously met, the criteria have not been met for a
sustained period of time.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p. 334.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Family influence in the development of EDs is even more complex
because of the interplay of environmental and genetic factors; shared
elements of the family environment and immutable genetic factors
account for approximately equal amounts of the variance in disordered
eating. There are associations between parents’ and children’s eating
behaviors; dieting and physical activity levels suggest parental reinforcement of body-­related societal messages. The influence of inherited
genetic factors on the emergence of EDs during adolescence is also significant, but not directly. Rather, the risk for developing an ED appears
to be mediated through a genetic predisposition to anxiety (see Chapter 38), depression (see Chapter 39), or obsessive-­compulsive traits that
may be modulated through the internal milieu of puberty. There is no
evidence to support the outdated notion that parents or family dynamics cause an ED; rather, the family dynamics may represent responses
to having a family member with a potentially life-­threatening condition. The supportive influence on recovery of parents as nurturing
caregivers cannot be overestimated.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The emergence of EDs coinciding with the processes of adolescence
(e.g., puberty, identity, autonomy, cognition) indicates the central
role of development. EDs may be viewed as a final common pathway, with a number of predisposing factors that increase the risk
of developing an ED, precipitating factors often related to developmental processes of adolescence triggering the emergence of the
ED, and perpetuating factors that cause an ED to persist. A history
of sexual trauma is more common in children with BN, and when
present with any ED makes recovery more difficult. EDs often begin
with dieting but gradually progress to unhealthy habits that lessen
the negative impact of associated psychosocial problems to which
the affected person is vulnerable because of premorbid biologic and
psychologic characteristics, family interactions, and social climate.
When persistent, the biologic effects of starvation and malnutrition
(e.g., true loss of appetite, hypothermia, gastric atony, amenorrhea,
sleep disturbance, fatigue, weakness, depression), combined with

the psychologic rewards of increased sense of mastery and reduced
emotional reactivity, actually maintain and reward pathologic ED
behaviors.
This positive reinforcement of behaviors and consequences, generally viewed by parents and others as negative, helps to explain why
persons with an ED characteristically deny that a problem exists and
resist treatment. With significantly low caloric intake, patients initially exhibit extreme irritability, but over time experience emotional
“numbness,” which reinforces continued caloric restriction. Although
noxious, purging can be reinforcing because of a reduction in anxiety triggered by overeating; purging also can result in short-­term, but
reinforcing, improvement in mood related to changes in neurotransmitters. In addition to an imbalance in neurotransmitters, most notably serotonin and dopamine, alterations in functional anatomy also
support the concept of EDs as brain disorders. The cause-­and-­effect
relationship in central nervous system (CNS) alterations in EDs is not
clear, nor is their reversibility.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Except for ARFID, in which weight loss is unintentional, a central feature of EDs is the overestimation of body size, shape, or parts (e.g.,
abdomen, thighs) leading to intentional weight control practices to
reduce weight (AN) or prevent weight gain (BN). Associated practices
include severe restriction of caloric intake and behaviors intended to
reduce the effect of calories ingested, such as compulsive exercising or
purging by inducing vomiting or taking laxatives. Eating and weight
loss habits commonly found in EDs can result in a wide range of energy
intake and output, the balance of which leads to a wide range in weight,
from extreme loss of weight in AN to fluctuation around a normal to
moderately high weight in BN. Reported eating and weight control
habits thus inform the initial primary care approach (Table 41.4).
Although weight control patterns guide the initial pediatric
approach, an assessment of common symptoms and findings on physical examination is essential to identify targets for intervention. When
reported symptoms of excessive weight loss (feeling tired and cold;
lacking energy; orthostasis; difficulty concentrating) are explicitly
linked by the clinician to their associated physical signs (hypothermia
with acrocyanosis and slow capillary refill; loss of muscle mass; bradycardia with orthostasis), it becomes more difficult for the patient to
deny that a problem exists. Furthermore, awareness that bothersome
symptoms can be eliminated by healthier eating and activity patterns
can increase a patient’s motivation to engage in treatment. Tables 41.5
and 41.6 detail common symptoms and signs that should be addressed
in a pediatric assessment of a suspected ED.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

In addition to identifying symptoms and signs that deserve targeted
intervention for patients who have an ED, a comprehensive history
and physical examination are required to rule out other conditions
in the differential diagnosis. Weight loss can occur in any condition
with increased catabolism (e.g., hyperthyroidism, malignancy, occult
chronic infection) or malabsorption (e.g., celiac disease) or in other
disorders (Addison disease, type 1 diabetes mellitus, stimulant abuse),
but these illnesses are generally associated with other findings and
are not usually associated with decreased caloric intake. Patients with
inflammatory bowel disease can reduce intake to minimize abdominal cramping; eating can cause abdominal discomfort and early satiety
in AN because of gastric atony associated with significant weight loss,
not malabsorption. Likewise, signs of weight loss in AN might include
hypothermia, acrocyanosis with slow capillary refill, and neutropenia
similar to some features of sepsis, but the overall picture in EDs is one
of relative cardiovascular stability compared with sepsis. Endocrinopathies are also in the differential of EDs. With BN, voracious appetite
in the face of weight loss might suggest diabetes mellitus, but blood
glucose levels are normal or low in EDs. Adrenal insufficiency mimics many physical symptoms and signs found in restrictive AN but is
associated with elevated potassium levels and hyperpigmentation. Thyroid disorders may be considered, because of changes in weight, but the
overall presentation of AN includes symptoms of both underactive and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 41 u Eating Disorders

271

Table 41.4  Eating and Weight Control Habits Commonly Found in Children and Adolescents with an Eating Disorder (ED)
PROMINENT FEATURE
HABIT

ANOREXIA NERVOSA

BULIMIA NERVOSA

Overall
intake

Inadequate energy (calories),
although volume of food and
beverages may be high because of
very low caloric density of intake as
a result of “diet” and nonfat choices

Food

CLINICAL COMMENTS REGARDING ED HABITS
ANOREXIA NERVOSA

BULIMIA NERVOSA

Variable, but calories normal
to high; intake in binges
is often “forbidden” food
or drink that differs from
intake at meals

Consistent inadequate
caloric intake leading to
wasting of the body is
an essential feature of
diagnosis

Inconsistent balance of
intake, exercise, and
vomiting, but severe
caloric restriction is
short-­lived

Counts and limits calories, especially
from fat; emphasis on “healthy
food choices” with reduced caloric
density
Monotonous, limited “good” food
choices, often leading to vegetarian
or vegan diet
Strong feelings of guilt after eating
more than planned leads to exercise
and renewed dieting

Aware of calories and fat,
but less regimented in
avoidance than AN
Frequent dieting
interspersed with
overeating, often
triggered by
depression, isolation, or
anger

Obsessive-­compulsive
attention to nutritional
data on food labels and
may have “logical”
reasons for food choices in
highly regimented pattern,
such as sports participation
or family history of lipid
disorder

Choices less structured,
with more frequent diets

Beverages

Water or other low-­or no-­calorie
drinks; nonfat milk

Variable, diet soda
common; may drink
alcohol to excess

Fluids often restricted to
avoid weight gain

Fluids ingested to aid
vomiting or replace
losses

Meals

Consistent schedule and structure to
meal plan
Reduced or eliminated caloric
content, often starting with
breakfast, then lunch, then dinner
Volume can increase with fresh fruits,
vegetables, and salads as primary
food sources

Meals less regimented
and planned than in AN;
more likely impulsive
and unregulated, often
eliminated following a
binge-­purge episode

Rigid adherence to “rules”
governing eating leads to
sense of control,
confidence, and mastery

Elimination of a meal
following a binge-­purge
only reinforces the drive
for binge later in the day

Snacks

Reduced or eliminated from meal
plan

Often avoided in meal
plans, but then impulsively
eaten

Snack foods removed early
because “unhealthy”

Snack “comfort foods” can
trigger a binge

Dieting

Initial habit that becomes progressively
restrictive, although often appearing
superficially “healthy”
Beliefs and “rules” about the
patient’s idiosyncratic nutritional
requirements and response to foods
are strongly held

Initial dieting gives way
to chaotic eating, often
interpreted by the patient
as evidence of being
“weak” or “lazy”

Distinguishing between
healthy meal planning with
reduced calories and
dieting in ED may be
difficult

Dieting tends to be
impulsive and short-­lived,
with “diets” often
resulting in unintended
weight gain

Binge eating

None in restrictive subtype, but an
essential feature in binge-­purge
subtype

Essential feature, often
secretive
Shame and guilt prominent
afterward

Often “subjective” (more
than planned but not
large)

Relieves emotional
distress, may be planned

Exercise

Characteristically obsessive-­
compulsive, ritualistic, and
progressive
May excel in dance, long-­distance
running

Less predictable
May be athletic, or may
avoid exercise entirely

May be difficult to distinguish
active thin vs ED

Males often use exercise
as means of “purging”

Vomiting

Characteristic of binge-­purge subtype
May chew, then spit out, rather than
swallow, food as a variant

Most common habit
intended to reduce effects
of overeating
Can occur after meal as well
as a binge

Physiologic and emotional
instability prominent

Strongly “addictive” and
self-­punishing, but does
not eliminate calories
ingested—many still
absorbed

Laxatives

If used, generally to relieve
constipation in restrictive subtype,
but as a cathartic in binge-­purge
subtype

Second most common habit
used to reduce or avoid
weight gain, often used
in increasing doses for
cathartic effect

Physiologic and emotional
instability prominent

Strongly “addictive,” self-­
punishing, but ineffective
means to reduce weight
(calories are absorbed
in small intestine, but
laxatives work in colon)

Diet pills

Very rare, if used; more common in
binge-­purge subtype

Used to either reduce
appetite or increase
metabolism

Use of diet pills implies
inability to control eating

Control over eating may
be sought by any means

AN, Anorexia nervosa; BN, bulimia nervosa.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

272 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 41.5  Symptoms Commonly Reported by Patients with an Eating Disorder (ED)
DIAGNOSIS

CLINICAL COMMENTS REGARDING ED
SYMPTOMS

SYMPTOMS

ANOREXIA NERVOSA

BULIMIA NERVOSA

Body image

Feels fat, even with extreme
emaciation, often with specific body
distortions (e.g., stomach, thighs);
strong drive for thinness, with self-­
efficacy closely tied to appraisal of
body shape, size, and/or weight

Variable body image distortion
and dissatisfaction, but drive
for thinness is less than desire
to avoid gaining weight

Challenging patient’s body image is both
ineffective and countertherapeutic clinically
Accepting patient’s expressed body image
but noting its discrepancy with symptoms
and signs reinforces concept that patient can
“feel” fat but also “be” too thin and unhealthy

Metabolism

Hypometabolic symptoms include
feeling cold, tired, and weak and
lacking energy
May be both bothersome and
reinforcing

Variable, depending on balance
of intake and output and
hydration

Symptoms are evidence of body’s “shutting
down” in an attempt to conserve calories with
an inadequate diet
Emphasizing reversibility of symptoms with
healthy eating and weight gain can motivate
patients to cooperate with treatment

Skin

Dry skin, delayed healing, easy
bruising, gooseflesh
Orange-­yellow skin on hands

No characteristic symptom;
self-­injurious behavior may
be seen

Skin lacks good blood flow and ability to heal in
low weight
Carotenemia with large intake of β-­carotene
foods; reversible

Hair

Lanugo-­type hair growth on face and
No characteristic symptom
upper body
Slow growth and increased loss of scalp
hair

Body hair growth conserves energy
Scalp hair loss can worsen during refeeding
“telogen effluvium” (resting hair is replaced by
growing hair)
Reversible with continued healthy eating

Eyes

No characteristic symptom

Subconjunctival hemorrhage

Caused by increased intrathoracic pressure
during vomiting

Teeth

No characteristic symptom

Erosion of dental enamel
Decay, fracture, and loss of
teeth

Intraoral stomach acid resulting from vomiting
etches dental enamel, exposing softer dental
elements

Salivary glands

No characteristic symptom

Enlargement (no to mild
tenderness)

Caused by chronic binge eating and induced
vomiting, with parotid enlargement more
prominent than submandibular; reversible

Heart

Dizziness, fainting in restrictive subtype
Palpitations more common in binge-­
purge subtype

Dizziness, fainting, palpitations

Dizziness and fainting due to postural ortho­
static tachycardia and dysregulation at
hypothalamic and cardiac level with weight
loss, as a result of hypovolemia with binge-­purge
Palpitations and arrhythmias often caused by
electrolyte disturbance
Symptoms reverse with weight gain and/or
cessation of binge-­purge

Abdomen

Early fullness and discomfort with
eating
Constipation
Perceives contour as “fat,” often
preferring well-­defined abdominal
musculature

Discomfort after a binge
Cramps and diarrhea with
laxative abuse

Weight loss is associated with reduced volume
and tone of GI tract musculature, especially
the stomach
Laxatives may be used to relieve constipation or
as a cathartic
Symptom reduction with healthy eating can take
weeks to occur

Extremities and
musculoskeletal

Cold, blue hands and feet

No characteristic symptoms
Self-­cutting or burning on wrists
or arms

Energy-­conserving low body temperature with
slow blood flow most notable peripherally
Quickly reversed with healthy eating

Nervous system

No characteristic symptom

No characteristic symptom

Neurologic symptoms suggest diagnosis other
than ED

Mental status

Depression, anxiety, obsessive-­
compulsive symptoms, alone or in
combination

Depression; PTSD; borderline
personality disorder traits

Underlying mood disturbances can worsen with
dysfunctional weight control practices and can
improve with healthy eating
AN patients might report emotional “numbness”
with starvation preferable to emotionality
associated with healthy eating

AN, Anorexia nervosa; ED, eating disorder; GI, gastrointestinal; PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 41 u Eating Disorders

273

Table 41.6  Signs Commonly Found in Patients with Eating Disorder Relative to Prominent Feature of Weight Control
PROMINENT FEATURE
PHYSICAL SIGN

CLINICAL COMMENTS RELATED TO ED
SIGNS

RESTRICTIVE INTAKE

BINGE EATING/PURGING

General appearance

Thin to cachectic, depending on
balance of intake and output
Might wear bulky clothing to hide
thinness and might resist being
examined

Thin to overweight, depending on
the balance of intake and output
through various means

Examine in hospital gown
Weight loss more rapid with reduced intake
and excessive exercise
Binge eating can result in large weight gain,
regardless of purging behavior
Appearance depends on balance of intake
and output and overall weight control habits

Weight

Low and falling (if previously
overweight, may be normal or
high); may be falsely elevated
if patient drinks fluids or adds
weights to body before being
weighed

Highly variable, depending on
balance of intake and output
and state of hydration
Falsification of weight is unusual

Weigh in hospital gown with no underwear,
after voiding (measure urine SG)
Remain in gown until physical exam completed
to identify possible fluid loading (low urine
SG, palpable bladder) or adding weights to
body

Metabolism

Hypothermia: temp <35.5°C
(95.9°F), pulse <60 beats/min
Slowed psychomotor response with
very low core temperature
Hypoglycemia
Hypokalemia
Amenorrhea
Delayed puberty

Variable, but hypometabolic state
is less common than in AN

Hypometabolism related to disruption of
hypothalamic control mechanisms as a result
of weight loss
Signs of hypometabolism (cold skin, slow
capillary refill, acrocyanosis) most evident in
hands and feet, where energy conservation is
most active
Metabolic acidosis or alkalosis

Skin

Dry, scaly
Increased prominence of hair
follicles
Orange or yellow hands
Hair loss

Calluses over proximal knuckle
joints of hand (Russell sign)

Carotenemia with large intake of β-­carotene
foods
Russell sign: maxillary incisors abrasion develops
into callus with chronic digital pharyngeal
stimulation, usually on dominant hand

Hair

Lanugo-­type hair growth on face
and upper body
Scalp hair loss, especially prominent
in parietal region

No characteristic sign

Body hair growth conserves energy
Scalp hair loss “telogen effluvium” can worsen
weeks after refeeding begins, as hair in
resting phase is replaced by growing hair

Eyes

No characteristic sign

Subconjunctival hemorrhage

Increased intrathoracic pressure during
vomiting

Teeth

Caries

Eroded dental enamel and
decayed, fractured, missing
teeth

Perimolysis (dental erosions) worse on lingual
surfaces of maxillary teeth, is intensified by
brushing teeth without preceding water rinse

Salivary glands

No characteristic sign

Enlargement, relatively nontender

Parotid > submandibular involvement with
frequent and chronic binge eating and
induced vomiting

Throat

No characteristic sign

Absent gag reflex

Extinction of gag response with repeated
pharyngeal stimulation

Heart

Bradycardia, hypotension, and
orthostatic pulse differential >25
beats/min

Hypovolemia if dehydrated

Changes in AN resulting from central
hypo­thalamic and intrinsic cardiac function
Orthostatic changes less prominent if athletic,
more prominent if associated with purging

Abdomen

Scaphoid, organs may be palpable
but not enlarged, stool-­filled left
lower quadrant
Constipation
Transaminitis

Increased bowel sounds if recent
laxative use

Presence of organomegaly requires investigation
to determine cause
Constipation prominent with weight loss
Pancreatitis
Esophageal or gastric ulceration or perforation

Extremities and
musculoskeletal
system

Cold, acrocyanosis, slow capillary
refill
Edema of feet
Loss of muscle, subcutaneous, and
fat tissue
Osteopenia

No characteristic sign, but may
have rebound edema after
stopping chronic laxative use

Signs of hypometabolism (cold) and
cardiovascular dysfunction (slow capillary
refill and acrocyanosis) in hands and feet
Edema, caused by capillary fragility more than
hypoproteinemia in AN, can worsen in early
phase of refeeding

Nervous system

No characteristic sign
Peripheral neuropathy

No characteristic sign

Water loading before weigh-­ins can cause
acute hyponatremia

Mental status

Anxiety about body image,
irritability, depressed mood,
oppositional to change

Depression, evidence of PTSD,
more likely suicidal than AN

Mental status often improves with healthier
eating and weight; SSRIs only shown to be
effective for BN

AN, Anorexia nervosa; BN, bulimia nervosa; ED, eating disorder; PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder; SG, specific gravity; SSRIs, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

274 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
overactive thyroid, such as hypothermia, bradycardia, and constipation, as well as weight loss and excessive physical activity, respectively.
In the CNS, craniopharyngiomas and Rathke pouch tumors can
mimic some of the findings of AN, such as weight loss and growth
failure, and even some body image disturbances, but the latter are
less fixed than in typical EDs and are associated with other findings,
including evidence of increased intracranial pressure. Mitochondrial
neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy, caused by a mutation in
the TYMP gene, presents with gastrointestinal dysmotility, cachexia,
ptosis, peripheral neuropathy, ophthalmoplegia, and leukoencephalopathy. Symptoms begin during the second decade of life and are
often initially diagnosed as AN. Early satiety, vomiting, cramps, constipation, and pseudoobstruction result in weight loss often before the
neurologic features are noticed (see Chapter 638.2). Acute or chronic
oromotor dysfunction and obsessive-­compulsive disorder may mimic
an ED. Fear of choking may lead to avoidance-­restrictive food intake
disorder.
Any patient with an atypical presentation of an ED, based on age, sex,
or other factors not typical for AN or BN, deserves a scrupulous search
for an alternative explanation. In ARFID, disturbance in the neurosensory processes associated with eating, not weight loss, is the central
concern and must be recognized for appropriate treatment. Patients
can have both an underlying illness and an ED. The core features of
dysfunctional eating habits (body image disturbance and change in
weight) can co-­occur with conditions such as diabetes mellitus, where
patients might manipulate their insulin dosing to lose weight.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Because the diagnosis of an ED is made clinically, there is no confirmatory laboratory test. Laboratory abnormalities, when found, are the
result of malnutrition secondary to weight control behaviors or medical
complications; studies should be chosen based on history and physical
examination. A routine screening battery typically includes complete
blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (should be normal), and
biochemical profile. Common abnormalities in ED include low white
blood cell count with normal hemoglobin and differential; hypokalemic, hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis from severe vomiting; mildly
elevated liver enzymes, cholesterol, and cortisol levels; low gonadotropins and blood glucose with marked weight loss; and generally
normal total protein, albumin, and renal function. An electrocardiogram (ECG) may be useful when profound bradycardia or arrhythmia
is detected; the ECG usually has low voltage, with nonspecific ST or
T-­wave changes. Although prolonged QTc has been reported, prospective studies have not found an increased risk for this. Nonetheless,
when a prolonged QTc is present in a patient with ED, it may increase
the risk for ventricular dysrhythmias.

COMPLICATIONS

No organ is spared the harmful effects of dysfunctional weight control behaviors, but the most concerning targets of medical complications are the heart, brain, gonads, and bones. Some cardiac findings
in EDs (e.g., sinus bradycardia, hypotension) are physiologic adaptations to starvation that conserve calories and reduce afterload.
Cold, blue hands and feet with slow capillary refill that can result
in tissue perfusion insufficient to meet demands also represent
energy-­
conserving responses associated with inadequate intake.
All these acute changes are reversible with restoration of nutrition and weight. Significant orthostatic pulse changes, ventricular
dysrhythmias, or reduced myocardial contractility reflect myocardial impairment that can be lethal. In addition, with extremely low
weight, refeeding syndrome (a result of the rapid drop in serum
phosphorus, magnesium, and potassium with excessive reintroduction of calories, specifically carbohydrates), is associated with
acute tachycardia and heart failure and neurologic symptoms (see
Chapter 63). With long-­term malnutrition, the myocardium appears
to be more prone to tachyarrhythmias, the second most common
cause of death in these patients after suicide. In BN, dysrhythmias
can also be related to electrolyte imbalance.

Clinically, the primary CNS area affected acutely in EDs, especially
with weight loss, is the hypothalamus. Hypothalamic dysfunction is
reflected in problems with thermoregulation (warming and cooling),
satiety, sleep, autonomic cardioregulatory imbalance (orthostasis),
and endocrine function (reduced gonadal and excessive adrenal cortex stimulation), all of which are reversible. Anatomic studies of the
brain in ED have focused on AN, with the most common finding being
increased ventricular and sulcal volumes that normalize with weight
restoration. Persistent gray matter deficits following recovery, related to
the degree of weight loss, have been reported. Elevated medial temporal lobe cerebral blood flow on positron emission tomography, similar
to that found in psychotic patients, suggests that these changes may be
related to body image distortion. Also, visualizing high-­calorie foods is
associated with exaggerated responses in the visual association cortex
that are similar to those seen in patients with specific phobias. Patients
with AN might have an imbalance between serotonin and dopamine
pathways related to neurocircuits in which dietary restraint reduces
anxiety.
Reduced gonadal function occurs in male and female patients; it
is clinically manifested in AN as amenorrhea in female patients and
erectile dysfunction in males. It is related to understimulation from the
hypothalamus as well as cortical suppression related to physical and
emotional stress. Amenorrhea precedes significant dieting and weight
loss in up to 30% of females with AN, and most adolescents with EDs
perceive the absence of menses positively. The primary health concern
is the negative effect of decreased ovarian function and estrogen on
bones. Decreased bone mineral density (BMD) with osteopenia or the
more severe osteoporosis is a significant complication of EDs (more
pronounced in AN than BN). Data do not support the use of sex hormone replacement therapy because this alone does not improve other
causes of low BMD (low body weight, lean body mass, low insulin-­like
growth factor-­1, high cortisol).

TREATMENT
Principles Guiding Primary Care Treatment

The approach in primary care should facilitate the acceptance by the
ED patient (and parents) of the diagnosis and initial treatment recommendations. A nurturant-­authoritative approach using the biopsychosocial model is useful. A pediatrician who explicitly acknowledges
that the patient may disagree with the diagnosis and treatment recommendations and may be ambivalent about changing eating habits,
while also acknowledging that recovery requires strength, courage,
willpower, and determination, demonstrates nurturance. Parents also
find it easier to be nurturing once they learn that the development of
an ED is neither a willful decision by the patient nor a reflection of
poor parenting. Framing the ED as a “maladaptive coping mechanism”
for a complex variety of issues with both positive and negative aspects
avoids blame or guilt and can prepare the family for professional help
that will focus on strengths and restoring health, rather than on the
deficits in the adolescent or the family.
The authoritative aspect of a physician’s role comes from expertise in
health, growth, and physical development. A goal of primary care treatment should be attaining and maintaining health, not merely weight
gain, although weight gain is a means to the goal of wellness. Providers
who frame themselves as consultants to the patient with authoritative
knowledge about health can avoid a countertherapeutic authoritarian
stance. Primary care health-­focused activities include monitoring the
patient’s physical status, setting limits on behaviors that threaten the
patient’s health, involving specialists with expertise in EDs on the treatment team, and continuing to provide primary care for health maintenance, acute illness, or injury.
The biopsychosocial model uses a broad ecologic framework,
starting with the biologic impairments of physical health related
to dysfunctional weight control practices, evidenced by symptoms
and signs. Explicitly linking ED behaviors to symptoms and signs
can increase motivation to change. In addition, there are usually
unresolved psychosocial conflicts in both the intrapersonal (self-­
esteem, self-­efficacy) and the interpersonal (family, peers, school)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 41 u Eating Disorders
domains. Weight control practices initiated as coping mechanisms
become reinforced because of positive feedback. That is, external
rewards (e.g., compliments about improved physical appearance)
and internal rewards (e.g., perceived mastery over what is eaten or
what is done to minimize the effects of overeating through exercise
or purging) are more powerful to maintain behavior than negative
feedback (e.g., conflict with parents, peers, and others about eating)
is to change it. Thus, when definitive treatment is initiated, more
productive alternative means of coping must be developed.

Nutrition and Physical Activity

The primary care provider generally begins the process of prescribing nutrition, although a dietitian should be involved eventually in
the meal planning and nutritional education of patients with AN or
BN. Framing food as fuel for the body and the source of energy for
daily activities emphasizes the health goal of increasing the patient’s
energy level, endurance, and strength. For patients with AN and low
weight, the nutrition prescription should work toward gradually
increasing weight at the rate of about 0.5-­1 lb/week, by increasing
energy intake by 100-­200 kcal increments every few days, toward a
target of approximately 90% of average body weight for sex, height,
and age. Weight gain will not occur until intake exceeds output, and
eventual intake for continued weight gain can exceed 4,000 kcal/
day, especially for patients who are anxious and have high levels of
thermogenesis from nonexercise activity. Stabilizing intake is the
goal for patients with BN, with a gradual introduction of “forbidden” foods while also limiting foods that might trigger a binge.
When initiating treatment of an ED in a primary care setting, the
clinician should be aware of common cognitive patterns. Patients
with AN typically have all-­or-­none thinking (related to perfectionism) with a tendency to overgeneralize and jump to catastrophic
conclusions, while assuming that their body is governed by rules
that do not apply to others. These tendencies lead to the dichotomization of foods into good or bad categories, having a day ruined
because of one unexpected event, or choosing foods based on rigid
self-­imposed restrictions. These thoughts may be related to neurocircuitry and neurotransmitter abnormalities associated with
executive function and rewards. Weight loss in the absence of body
shape, size, or weight concerns should raise suspicion about ARFID,
because the emotional distress associated with “forced” eating is not
associated with gaining weight, but with the neurosensory experience of eating.
A standard nutritional balance of 15–20% calories from protein,
50–55% from carbohydrate, and 25–30% from fat is appropriate.
The fat content may need to be lowered to 15–20% early in the
treatment of AN because of continued fat phobia. With the risk of
low BMD in patients with AN, calcium and vitamin D supplements
are often needed to attain the recommended 1,300 mg/day intake of
calcium. Refeeding can be accomplished with frequent small meals
and snacks consisting of a variety of foods and beverages (with
minimal diet or fat-­f ree products), rather than fewer high-­volume
high-­calorie meals. Some patients find it easier to take in part of
the additional nutrition as canned supplements (medicine) rather
than food. Regardless of the source of energy intake, the risk for
refeeding syndrome (e.g., see the previous section on “Complications”) increases with the degree of weight loss and the rapidity
of caloric increases (see Chapter 63). Therefore, if the weight has
fallen below 80% of expected weight for height, refeeding should
proceed carefully (not necessarily slowly) and possibly in the hospital (Table 41.7).
Patients with AN tend to have a highly structured day with
restrictive intake, in contrast to BN, which is characterized by a lack
of structure, resulting in chaotic eating patterns and binge-­purge
episodes. All patients with AN, BN, or ED-­NOS benefit from a daily
structure for healthy eating that includes three meals and at least one
snack a day, distributed evenly over the day, based on balanced meal
planning. Breakfast deserves special emphasis because it is often the

275

Table 41.7  Potential Indications for Inpatient Medical
Hospitalization of Patients with Anorexia
Nervosa
PHYSICAL AND LABORATORY
Heart rate <50 beats/min
Other cardiac rhythm disturbances
Blood pressure <80/50 mm Hg
Postural hypotension resulting in >10 mm Hg decrease or >25 beats/
min increase
Hypokalemia
Hypophosphatemia
Hypoglycemia
Dehydration
Body temperature <36.1°C (97°F)
<80% healthy body weight
Hepatic, cardiac, or renal compromise
PSYCHIATRIC
Suicidal intent and plan
Very poor motivation to recover (in family and patient)
Preoccupation with ego-­syntonic thoughts
Coexisting psychiatric disorders
MISCELLANEOUS
Requires supervision after meals and while using the restroom
Failed day treatment

first meal eliminated in AN and is often avoided the morning after
a binge-­purge episode in BN. In addition to structuring meals and
snacks, patients should plan structure in their activities. Although
overexercising is common in AN, completely prohibiting exercise
can lead to further restriction of intake or to surreptitious exercise;
inactivity should be limited to situations in which weight loss is dramatic or there is physiologic instability. Also, healthy exercise (once
a day, for no more than 30 min, at no more than moderate intensity)
can improve mood and make increasing calories more acceptable.
Because patients with AN often are unaware of their level of activity
and tend toward progressively increasing their output, exercising
without either a partner or supervision is not recommended.

Primary Care Treatment

Follow-­up primary care visits are essential in the management of
EDs. Close monitoring of the response of the patient and the family
to suggested interventions is required to determine which patients
can remain in primary care treatment (patients with early, mildly
disordered eating), which patients need to be referred to individual specialists for co-­management (mildly progressive disordered
eating), and which patients need to be referred for interdisciplinary team management (EDs). Between the initial and subsequent
visits, the patient can record daily caloric intake (food, drink,
amount, time, location), physical activity (type, duration, intensity), and emotional state (e.g., angry, sad, worried) in a journal
that is reviewed jointly with the patient in follow-­up. Focusing on
the recorded data helps the clinician to identify dietary and activity
deficiencies and excesses, as well as behavioral and mental health
patterns, and helps the patient to become objectively aware of the
relevant issues to address in recovery.
Given the tendency of patients with AN to overestimate their caloric
intake and underestimate their activity level, before reviewing the
journal record it is important at each visit to measure weight, without underwear, in a hospital gown after voiding; urine specific gravity; temperature; and blood pressure and pulse in supine, sitting, and
standing positions as objective data. In addition, a targeted physical
examination focused on hypometabolism, cardiovascular stability, and
mental status, as well as any related symptoms, should occur at each
visit to monitor progress (or regression).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

276 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Referral to Mental Health Services

In addition to referral to a registered dietitian, mental health and other
services are important elements of treatment of ED patients. Depending on availability and experience, these services can be provided by
a psychiatric social worker, psychologist, or psychiatrist, who should
team with the primary care provider. ARFID presents the challenge
of working with patients’ negative experiences of eating, or fear of
trauma such as vomiting or choking, while also addressing inadequate
nutritional needs. Although patients with AN often are prescribed a
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) because of depressive
symptoms, there is no evidence of efficacy for patients at low weight;
food remains the initial treatment of choice to treat depression in AN.
SSRIs, very effective in reducing binge-­purge behaviors regardless of
depression, are considered a standard element of therapy in BN. SSRI
dosage in BN, however, may need to increase to an equivalent of >60
mg of fluoxetine to maintain effectiveness.
Cognitive-­behavioral therapy, which focuses on restructuring
“thinking errors” and establishing adaptive patterns of behavior, is
more effective than interpersonal or psychoanalytic approaches in ED
patients. Dialectical behavioral therapy, in which distorted thoughts
and emotional responses are challenged, analyzed, and replaced with
healthier ones, with an emphasis on “mindfulness,” requires adult
thinking skills and is useful for older patients with BN. Group therapy can provide much needed support, but it requires a skilled clinician. Combining patients at various levels of recovery who experience
variable reinforcement from dysfunctional coping behaviors can be
challenging if group therapy patients compete with each other to be
“thinner” or take up new behaviors such as vomiting.
The younger the patient, the more intimately the parents need to
be involved in therapy. The only treatment approach with evidence-­
based effectiveness in the treatment of AN in children and adolescents
is family-­based treatment, exemplified by the Maudsley approach.
This three-­phase intensive outpatient model helps parents play a positive role in restoring their child’s eating and weight to normal, then
returns control of eating to the child, who has demonstrated the ability
to maintain healthy weight, and then encourages healthy progression
in the other domains of adolescent development. Features of effective
family treatment include (1) an agnostic approach in which the cause
of the disease is unknown and irrelevant to weight gain, emphasizing
that parents are not to blame for EDs; (2) parents being actively nurturing and supportive of their child’s healthy eating while reinforcing limits on dysfunctional habits, rather than an authoritarian “food police”
or complete hands-­off approach; and (3) reinforcement of parents as
the best resource for recovery for almost all patients, with professionals
serving as consultants and advisors to help parents address challenges.

Referral to an Interdisciplinary Eating Disorder Team

The treatment of a child or adolescent diagnosed with an ED is ideally
provided by an interdisciplinary team (physician, nurse, dietitian, mental health provider) with expertise treating pediatric patients. Because
such teams, often led by specialists in adolescent medicine at medical
centers, are not widely available, the primary care provider might need
to convene such a team. Adolescent medicine–based programs report
encouraging treatment outcomes, possibly related to patients entering
earlier into care and the stigma that some patients and parents may
associate with psychiatry-­based programs. Specialty centers focused on
treating EDs are generally based in psychiatry and often have separate
tracks for younger and adult patients. The elements of treatment noted
earlier (cognitive-­
behavioral, dialectical behavioral, family-­
based),
as well as individual and group treatment, should all be available as
part of interdisciplinary team treatment. Comprehensive services ideally include intensive outpatient and partial hospitalization as well as
inpatient treatment. Regardless of the intensity, type, or location of the
treatment services, the patient, parents, and primary care provider are
essential members of the treatment team. A recurring theme in effective treatment is helping patients and families reestablish connections
that are disrupted by the ED.

Inpatient medical treatment of EDs is generally limited to patients
with AN to stabilize and treat life-­threatening starvation and to provide supportive mental health services. Inpatient medical care may
be required to avoid refeeding syndrome in severely malnourished
patients, provide nasogastric tube feeding for patients unable or
unwilling to eat, or initiate mental health services, especially family-­
based treatment, if this has not occurred on an outpatient basis (see
Table 41.7). Admission to a general pediatric unit is advised only for
short-­term stabilization in preparation for transfer to a medical unit
with expertise in treating pediatric EDs. Inpatient psychiatric care of
EDs should be provided on a unit with expertise in managing often
challenging behaviors (e.g., hiding or discarding food, vomiting, surreptitious exercise) and emotional problems (e.g., depression, anxiety).
Suicidal risk is small, but patients with AN might threaten suicide if
made to eat or gain weight in an effort to “get their parents to back off.”
An ED partial hospital program offers outpatient services that are
less intensive than round-­the-­clock inpatient care. Generally held 4-­5
days/week for 6 to 9 hours each session, partial hospital program services typically are group based and include eating at least two meals
as well as opportunities to address issues in a setting that more closely
approximates “real life” than inpatient treatment. That is, patients sleep
at home and are free-­living on weekends, exposing them to challenges
that can be processed during the 25-­40 hours each week in program, as
well as sharing group and family experiences.

Supportive Care

In relation to pediatric EDs, support groups are primarily designed
for parents. Because their daughter or son with an ED often resists
the diagnosis and treatment, parents often feel helpless and hopeless.
Because of the historical precedent of blaming parents for causing EDs,
parents often express feelings of shame and isolation (www.maudsley
parents.org). Support groups and multifamily therapy sessions bring
parents together with other parents whose families are at various stages
of recovery from an ED in ways that are educational and encouraging.
Patients often benefit from support groups after intensive treatment or
at the end of treatment because of residual body image or other issues
after eating and weight have normalized.

PROGNOSIS

With early diagnosis and effective treatment, ≥80% of youth with
AN recover: They develop normal eating and weight control habits,
resume menses, maintain average weight for height, and function in
school, work, and relationships, although some still have poor body
image. With weight restoration, fertility returns as well, although
the weight for resumption of menses (approximately 92% of average
body weight for height) may be lower than the weight for ovulation.
The prognosis for BN is less well established, but outcome improves
with multidimensional treatment that includes SSRIs and attention
to mood, past trauma, impulsivity, and any existing psychopathology. Since the diagnosis of ARFID was only established in 2013,
little is known about its long-­term prognosis, although anecdotal
evidence suggests that weight restoration is not actively resisted as
it is in AN.

PREVENTION

Given the complexity of the pathogenesis of EDs, prevention is difficult. Targeted preventive interventions can reduce risk factors in older
adolescents and college-­age women. Universal prevention efforts to
promote healthy weight regulation and discourage unhealthy dieting
have not shown effectiveness in middle school students. Programs that
include recovered patients or focus on the problems associated with
EDs can inadvertently normalize or even glamorize EDs and should
be discouraged.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 42 u Disruptive, Impulse-­Control, and Conduct Disorders

Chapter 42

Disruptive,
Impulse-­Control, and
Conduct Disorders
Erica H. Lee, Keneisha R. Sinclair-­McBride,
David R. DeMaso, and Heather J. Walter
The disruptive, impulse-­
control, and conduct disorders (CDs) are
interrelated sets of psychiatric symptoms characterized by a core deficit
in self-­regulation of anger, aggression, defiance, and antisocial behaviors that typically begin in childhood or adolescence. These disorders
include oppositional defiant, intermittent explosive, conduct, and other
specified/unspecified disruptive/impulse-­control/CDs, as well as pyromania, kleptomania, and antisocial personality disorder. Although all
involve difficulty with both emotional and behavioral self-­regulation,
the disorders vary by the relative intensity of problems with emotional
regulation (e.g., anger outbursts) vs behavioral regulation (e.g., defiance, aggression, violating the rights of others or societal norms).

DESCRIPTION

Oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) is characterized by a persistent
pattern lasting at least 6 months of angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, and/or vindictiveness exhibited during interaction with at least one individual who is not a sibling (Table 42.1). For
preschool children, the behavior must occur on most days, whereas in
school-­age children, the behavior must occur at least once a week. The
severity of the disorder is considered mild if symptoms are confined to
only one setting (e.g., at home, at school, at work, with peers), moderate
if symptoms are present in at least two settings, and severe if symptoms
are present in three or more settings.
Intermittent explosive disorder (IED) is characterized by recurrent verbal or physical aggression that is grossly disproportionate
to the provocation or to any precipitating psychosocial stressors
(Table 42.2). The outbursts, which are impulsive and/or anger-­based
rather than premeditated and/or instrumental, typically onset rapidly, last <30 minutes, and frequently occur in response to a minor
provocation by a close intimate.
CD is characterized by a repetitive and persistent pattern over at
least 12 months of serious aggressive, destructive, and/or rule-­
violating behavior in which the basic rights of others or major age-­
appropriate societal norms or rules are violated (Table 42.3). The
symptoms of CD are divided into four major categories: aggression
to people and animals, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft,
and serious rule violations (e.g., truancy, running away). Three subtypes of CD (which have different prognostic significance) are based
on the age of onset: childhood-­onset type, adolescent-­onset type, and
unspecified. A small proportion of individuals with CD exhibit characteristics (lack of remorse/guilt, callous/lack of empathy, unconcerned about performance, shallow/deficient affect) that qualify for
the “with limited prosocial emotions” specifier. CD is classified as
mild when few if any symptoms over those required for the diagnosis
are present, and the symptoms cause relatively minor harm to others. CD is classified as severe if many symptoms over those required
for the diagnosis are present, and the symptoms cause considerable
harm to others. Moderate severity is intermediate between mild and
severe.
Other specified/unspecified disruptive/impulse-­
control/CD
(subsyndromal disorder) applies to presentations in which symptoms
characteristic of the disorders in this class are present and cause clinically significant distress or functional impairment, but do not meet full
diagnostic criteria for any of the disorders in this class.

277

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The prevalence of ODD is approximately 3%, and in preadolescents
is more common in males than females (1.4:1). One-­year prevalence
rates for IED and CD approximate 3% and 4%, respectively. For CD,
prevalence rates rise from childhood to adolescence and are higher
among males than females.

CLINICAL COURSE

Oppositional behavior can occur in all children and adolescents at
times, particularly during the toddler and early teenage periods when
autonomy and independence are normative developmental tasks.
Oppositional behavior becomes a concern when it is frequent, intense,
persistent, and pervasive and when it affects the child’s social, family,
and/or academic life. Some of the earliest manifestations of oppositionality are stubbornness (3 years), defiance and temper tantrums (4-­5
years), and argumentativeness (6 years). Approximately 65% of children with ODD exit from the diagnosis after a 3-­year follow-­up; earlier age at onset of oppositional symptoms conveys a poorer prognosis.
ODD often precedes the development of CD and there is an approximately 30% higher likelihood of CD when ODD is comorbid with
attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). ODD also increases
the risk for the development of depressive and anxiety disorders. The
defiant, argumentative, and vindictive symptoms carry most of the risk
for CD, whereas the angry, irritable mood symptoms carry most of the
risk for depression and anxiety.
IED usually begins in late childhood or adolescence and appears to
follow a persistent course over many years, with recurrent periods of
impulsive and aggressive outbursts.
The onset of CD may occur as early as the preschool years, but the
first significant symptoms usually emerge during the period from
middle childhood through middle adolescence; onset is rare after age
16 years. Symptoms of CD vary with age as the individual develops
increased physical strength, cognitive abilities, and sexual maturity.
Symptoms that emerge first tend to be less serious (e.g., lying), while
those emerging later tend to be more severe (e.g., sexual or physical
assault). Severe behaviors emerging at an early age convey a poor prognosis. In the majority of individuals, the disorder remits by adulthood;
in a substantial fraction, antisocial personality disorder develops. Individuals with CD also are at risk for the later development of mood,
anxiety, posttraumatic stress, impulse-­
control, psychotic, somatic
symptom, and substance-­related disorders.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The disorders in this diagnostic class share a number of characteristics
with each other as well as with disorders from other classes, and as such
must be carefully differentiated. ODD can be distinguished from CD
by the absence of physical aggression and destructiveness and by the
presence of angry, irritable mood. ODD can be distinguished from IED
by the lack of serious aggression toward others (e.g., physical assault).
IED can be distinguished from CD by the lack of predatory aggression
and other, nonaggressive symptoms of CD.
The oppositionality seen in ODD, the explosivity seen in IED, and
the aggression/destructiveness seen in CD must be distinguished from
those symptoms occurring in the context of other psychiatric disorders, particularly ADHD, depression, and bipolar, substance-­related,
autism spectrum, or psychotic disorders.

COMORBIDITY

Rates of ODD are much higher in children with ADHD, which suggests
shared temperamental risk factors. Depressive, anxiety, and substance-­
related disorders are most often comorbid with IED. ADHD and ODD
are both common in individuals with CD, and this comorbid presentation predicts worse outcomes. CD may also occur with anxiety, depressive, bipolar, learning, language, and substance-­related disorders.

SEQUELAE

The disruptive, impulse-­
control, and CDs are associated with a
wide range of psychiatric disorders in adulthood and with many
other adverse outcomes, such as suicidal behavior, physical injury,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

278 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 42.1  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Oppositional
Defiant Disorder

Table 42.2  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Intermittent
Explosive Disorder

A.	A pattern of angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior,
or vindictiveness lasting at least 6 mo as evidenced by at least four
symptoms from any of the following categories, and exhibited
during interaction with at least one individual who is not a sibling:

A.	Recurrent behavioral outbursts representing a failure to control
aggressive impulses as manifested by either of the following:
1.	Verbal aggression (e.g., temper tantrums, tirades, verbal
arguments or fights) or physical aggression toward property,
animals, or other individuals, occurring twice weekly, on
average, for a period of 3 mo. The physical aggression does
not result in damage or destruction of property and does not
result in physical injury to animals or other individuals.
2.	Three behavioral outbursts involving damage or destruction
of property and/or physical assault involving physical injury
against animals or other individuals occurring with a 12 mo
period.

ANGRY/IRRITABLE MOOD
1.	Often loses temper.
2.	Is often touchy or easily annoyed.
3.	Is often angry and resentful.
ARGUMENTATIVE/DEFIANT BEHAVIOR
4.	Often argues with authority figures or, for children and
adolescents, with adults.
5.	Often actively defies or refuses to comply with requests from
authority figures or with rules.
6.	Often deliberately annoys others.
7.	Often blames others for his or her mistakes or misbehavior.
VINDICTIVENESS
8.	Has been spiteful or vindictive at least twice within the past 6
mo.
Note: The persistence and frequency of these behaviors should be
used to distinguish a behavior that is within normal limits from a
behavior that is symptomatic. For children younger than 5 yr, the
behavior should occur on most days for a period of at least 6 mo
unless otherwise noted (Criterion A8). For individuals 5 yr or older,
the behavior should occur at least once per week for at least 6 mo,
unless otherwise noted (Criterion A8). Although these frequency
criteria provide guidance on a minimal level of frequency to define
symptoms, other factors should be considered, such as whether
the frequency and intensity of the behaviors are outside a range
that is normative for the individual’s developmental level, gender,
and culture.
B.	The disturbance in behavior is associated with distress in the
individual or others in his or her immediate social context (e.g.,
family, peer group, work colleagues), or it impacts negatively on
social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of
functioning.

B.	The magnitude of aggressiveness expressed during the recurrent
outbursts is grossly out of proportion to the provocation or to any
precipitating psychosocial stressors.
C.	The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not premeditated (i.e.,
they are impulsive and/or anger-­based) and are not committed to
achieve some tangible objective (e.g., money, power,
intimidation).
D.	The recurrent aggressive outbursts cause either marked distress
in the individual or impairment in occupational or interpersonal
functioning, or as associated with financial or legal consequences.
E.	Chronologic age is at least 6 yr (or equivalent developmental
level).
F.	The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not better explained by
another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder, bipolar
disorder, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, a psychotic
disorder, antisocial personality disorder, borderline personality
disorder) and are not attributable to another medical condition
(e.g., head trauma, Alzheimer disease) or to the physiologic
effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication). For
children ages 6-­18 yr, aggressive behavior that occurs as part of
an adjustment disorder should not be considered for this diagnosis.

C.	The behaviors do not occur exclusively during the course of a
psychotic, substance use, depressive, or bipolar disorder. Also, the
criteria are not met for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.

Note: This diagnosis can be made in addition to the diagnosis of
attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, oppositional
defiant disorder, or autism spectrum disorder when recurrent
impulsive aggressive outbursts are in excess of those usually
seen in these disorders and warrant clinical attention.

From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp. 462–463.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p. 466.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

delinquency and criminality, legal problems, substance use, unplanned
pregnancy, social instability, marital failure, and academic and occupational underachievement.

are more likely to elicit negative parenting responses, including physical
punishment, which can exacerbate anger and oppositionality in the child.
Other important family-­level influences include impaired parent–child
attachment, child maltreatment (physical and sexual abuse, neglect), exposure to marital conflict and domestic violence, family poverty and crime,
frequent changes in caregivers, and family genetic liability (family history
of the disorders in this class along with substance use, depressive, bipolar,
schizophrenic, somatization, and personality disorders, as well as ADHD,
have all been shown to be associated with the development of behavior
disorders).
Peer-­level influence on the development of behavior problems includes
peer rejection in childhood and antisocial peer groups. Neighborhood
influences include social processes such as collective efficacy, social control, and exposure to violence. Culturally, it is helpful to consider the
context in which undesirable behaviors occur to better understand their
function.

ETIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS

At the individual level, a number of neurobiologic markers (lower heart
rate and skin conductance reactivity, reduced basal cortisol reactivity,
abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex and amygdala, serotonergic abnormalities) have been variously associated with aggressive behavior disorders. Other biologic risk factors include pre-­, peri-­, and postnatal insults;
cognitive and linguistic impairment, particularly language-­based learning
deficits; difficult temperamental characteristics, particularly negative affectivity, emotional reactivity, poor frustration tolerance, and impulsivity; certain personality characteristics (novelty seeking, reduced harm avoidance,
and reward dependence); and certain cognitive characteristics (cognitive
rigidity, hostile attributions for ambiguous social cues).
At the family level, a consistently demonstrated risk factor is ineffective
parenting. Parents of behaviorally disordered children are more inconsistent in their use of rules, issue more and unclear commands, are more likely
to respond to their child based on their own mood rather than the child’s
behavior, are more likely to utilize a harsh or neglectful parenting style, are
less likely to monitor their children’s whereabouts, and are relatively unresponsive to their children’s prosocial behavior. Complicating this association is the consistent finding that temperamentally difficult children

PREVENTION

An effective conduct problem prevention program was Fast Track, a
multicomponent school-­
based intervention comprising a classroom
curriculum targeted at conflict resolution and interpersonal skills, parent
training, and interventions targeted at the school environment. Implemented in grades 1 through 10, former program participants at age 25
had a lower prevalence of any externalizing, internalizing, or substance

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 42 u Disruptive, Impulse-­Control, and Conduct Disorders
Table 42.3  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Conduct
Disorder
A.	A repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which the basic
rights of others or major age-­appropriate societal norms or rules
are violated, as manifested by the presence of at least 3 of the
following 15 criteria in the past 12 mo from any of the following
categories, with at least one criterion present in the past 6 mo:
AGGRESSION TO PEOPLE AND ANIMALS
1.	Often bullies, threatens, or intimidates others.
2.	Often initiates physical fights.
3.	Has used a weapon that can cause serious physical harm to
others (e.g., a bat, brick, broken bottle, knife, gun).
4.	Has been physically cruel to people.
5.	Has been physically cruel to animals.
6.	Has stolen while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse
snatching, extortion, armed robbery).
7.	Has forced someone into sexual activity.
DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY
8.	Has deliberately engaged in fire setting with the intention of
causing serious damage.
9.	Has deliberately destroyed others’ property (other than by fire
setting).
DECEITFULNESS OR THEFT
10.	Has broken into someone else’s house, building, or car.
11.	Often lies to obtain good or favors or to avoid obligations
(i.e., “cons” others).
12.	Has stolen items of nontrivial value without confronting a
victim (e.g., shoplifting, but without breaking and entering;
forgery).
SERIOUS VIOLATIONS OF RULES
13.	Often stays out at night despite parental prohibitions,
beginning before age 13 yr.
14.	Has run away from home overnight at least twice while living
in the parental or parental surrogate home, or once without
returning for a lengthy period.
15.	Is often truant from school, beginning before age 13 yr.
B.	The disturbance in behavior causes clinically significant impairment
in social, academic, or occupational functioning.
C.	If the individual is age 18 yr or older, criteria are not met for
antisocial personality disorder.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp. 469–471.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

abuse problem than program nonparticipants. Program participants also
had lower violent and drug crime conviction scores, lower risky sexual
behavior scores, and higher well-­being scores. Another useful prevention
program, the Seattle Social Development Project, was also a multicomponent school-­based intervention with teacher, parent, and student components targeting classroom management, interpersonal problem solving,
child behavior management, and academic support skills. Implemented
in grades 1 through 6, outcomes at age 19 years demonstrated that the
intervention decreased lifetime drug use and delinquency for participant
males compared with males in comparator communities but had no significant effects on females.

SCREENING/CASE FINDING

The parents of children presenting in the primary care setting should
be queried about angry mood or aggressive, defiant, or antisocial
behavior as part of the routine clinical interview. A typical screening question would be, “Does [name] have a lot of trouble controlling
[his/her] anger or behavior?” A number of standardized broad-­band
screening instruments widely used in the primary care setting (e.g.,
Pediatric Symptom Checklist, Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire)
have items specific to angry mood and aggressive behavior, and as such
can also be used to identify problems in this domain.

279

EARLY INTERVENTION

Youth (and/or their parents) presenting in the primary care setting who
self-­report or respond affirmatively to queries about difficulties managing angry mood or aggressive or antisocial behavior should be afforded
the opportunity to talk about the situation with the pediatric practitioner (separately with older youth as indicated). By engaging in active
listening (e.g., “I hear how you have been feeling. Tell me more about
what happened to make you feel that way”), the pediatric practitioner
can establish therapeutic rapport and begin to assess the onset, duration,
context, severity, and complexity of the symptoms, and associated dangerousness, distress, and functional impairment. In the absence of acute
dangerousness (e.g., homicidality, assaultiveness, psychosis, substance
abuse) and significant distress or functional impairment, the pediatric
practitioner can schedule a follow-­up appointment within a few weeks
to conduct a behavior assessment. At this follow-­up visit, to assist with
decision-­making about appropriate level of care, a focused symptom
rating scale can be administered (Table 42.4) and additional risk factors
explored (e.g., see the previous section on “Etiology and Risk Factors”).
For mild symptoms (manageable by the parent and not functionally impairing) and in the absence of major risk factors, guided self-­help
(anticipatory guidance) and monitoring with a scheduled follow-­up may
suffice. Guided self-­help can include provision of educational materials
(pamphlets, books, videos, workbooks, internet sites) that provide information to the youth about dealing with anger-­provoking situations, and
advice to parents about strengthening the parent–child relationship, effective parenting strategies, and the effects of adverse environmental exposures on the development of behavior problems. In a Cochrane review,
media-­based parenting interventions had a moderate positive effect on
child behavior problems, either alone or as an adjunct to medication. An
example of a self-­help program for parents is the Positive Parenting Program (Triple P; http://www.triplep-­parenting.com), online version, in
which parents can purchase 6-­8 modules of instruction addressing techniques for positive parenting and strategies for encouraging good behavior,
teaching new emotional and behavioral skills, and managing misbehavior
with youth from toddlers to teens (see Chapter 20).
If a mental health clinician has been co-­located or integrated into the
primary care setting, all parents of young children (universal prevention),
as well as the parents of youth with mild behavior problems (indicated
prevention), could be provided with a brief version of behavioral parent
training. For example, Incredible Years (http://www.incredibleyears.com)
has a 4-­8 session universal prevention version to help parents promote
their 2–6-­year-­old children’s emotional regulation, social competence,
problem solving, and reading readiness. A randomized trial in pediatric
practices found that Incredible Years significantly improved parenting
practices and 2–4-­year-­olds’ disruptive behaviors compared to a wait-­list
control. Incredible Years’ positive effects on parenting and child behavior
have been found for populations diverse in race, cultural background,
and socioeconomic status. Similarly, the Triple P program has seminar
(three, 90 minute sessions), brief (15-­30 min consultations), and primary
care (four, 20-­30 minute consultations) versions for the parents of youth
from birth to the teenage years, specifically designed for implementation
in the primary care setting. The Triple P interventions, supported by an
extensive evidence base, focus on strengthening the parent–child relationship, identifying and monitoring the frequency of a problem behavior, and
implementing and reviewing the effects of a targeted behavior plan. Meta-­
analyses have found that gains from Triple P are maintained over time.

TREATMENT

For youth who continue to have mild to moderate behavior problems after
several weeks of guided self-­help or a brief course of behavioral parent
training, or who from the outset exhibit moderate to severe symptoms, or
who have a history of maltreatment or severe family dysfunction or psychopathology, assessment and treatment in the specialty mental health setting by a child-­trained mental health clinician should be provided.
The youth’s problem behavior may predominantly occur at home, at
school, with peers, or in the community, or it may be pervasive. If possible,
interventions need to address each context specifically, rather than assuming generalizability of treatment. Thus, for behaviors mostly manifested
in the home setting, behavioral parent training would be the treatment of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

280 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 42.4  Selected Anger/Aggression Rating Scales
NAME OF INSTRUMENT
Children’s Aggression Scale

INFORMANT(S)

AGE RANGE (YR)

NO. OF ITEMS

Parent, Teacher

5-­18

33 (P), 23 (T)

Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory

Parent

2-­16

36

Outburst Monitoring Scale

Parent

12-­17

20

Sutter-­Eyberg Student Behavior
Inventory–Revised

Teacher

2-­16

38

Vanderbilt ADHD Diagnostic
Rating Scales

Parent, Teacher

6-­12

55 (P), 43 (T)

choice, whereas for behaviors manifested mostly at school, consultation
with the teacher regarding an assessment for a 504 plan or individualized
education plan (IEP) can be useful. School-­based services can include a
functional behavioral analysis to determine the function of the problematic
behavior for the child, and development of a behavioral intervention plan
to direct the child toward alternative positive behaviors that can achieve
the same goal. School-­based services should be considered whenever a
child is subjected to repeated disciplinary action in school or suspensions
for misbehavior. When there are pervasive problems, including aggression
toward peers, cognitive-­behavioral therapy (CBT) with the child/teen
can be employed in addition to the other interventions.
Behavioral parent training has been extensively studied for the treatment of youth problem behavior. These programs work by reshaping negative family patterns that may trigger or reinforce problem behaviors. They
are typically 10-­15 weeks in duration and focus on some combination
of the following components: understanding social learning principles,
developing a warm supportive relationship with the child, encouraging
child-­directed interaction and play, providing a predictable structured
household environment, setting clear and simple household rules, consistently praising and materially or socially rewarding positive behavior,
consistently ignoring annoying behavior (followed by praise when the
annoying behavior ceases), giving effective commands, and consistently
giving consequences (e.g., time-­
out, loss of privileges) for dangerous
or destructive behavior. Other important targets for parenting training
include understanding developmentally appropriate moods and behavior, managing difficult temperamental characteristics, fostering the child’s
social and emotional development, and protecting the child from traumatic exposures. Parent training can be implemented with families in
individual or group formats. Specific parent training programs include
Incredible Years and Triple P, described earlier, and Parent–Child Interaction Therapy, Helping the Noncompliant Child, and Parent Management
Training Oregon. Predictors of nonresponse to these interventions have
included greater initial symptom severity as well as involvement of the
parent with child protection services.
Difficulty with adherence to the complete treatment regimen has limited the effectiveness of parent training programs. Estimates of premature
termination are as high as 50–60%, and termination within five treatment
sessions is not uncommon. Predictors of premature termination have
included single-­parent status, low family income, low parental education
levels, young maternal age, minority group status, and life stresses.
CBT for youth with disruptive behavior also has been extensively studied. Common CBT techniques for disruptive behavior include identifying
the antecedents and consequences of disruptive or aggressive behavior,
learning strategies for recognizing and regulating anger expression,
problem-­solving and cognitive restructuring (perspective-­taking) techniques, and modeling and rehearsing socially appropriate behaviors that
could replace angry or aggressive reactions. Programs typically are delivered in 16-­20 weekly sessions.
Multicomponent treatments for serious behavior disorders such as CD
target the broader social context. Multidimensional Treatment Foster
Care, delivered in a foster care setting for 6-­9 months, typically includes
foster parent training and support; family therapy for biologic parents;
youth anger management, social skills, and problem-­
solving training; school-­based behavioral interventions and academic support; and

psychiatric consultation and medication management, when needed.
Multisystemic Therapy, typically lasting 3-­5 months, generally includes
social competence training, parent and family skills training, medications, academic engagement and skills building, school interventions
and peer mediation, mentoring and after-­school programs, and involvement of child-­serving agencies. Due to the strength of the supporting
evidence, these multicomponent programs have been designated “well-­
established” treatments for adolescents involved in the juvenile justice
system. Predictors of nonresponse to multicomponent treatments have
included higher frequency of rule-­breaking behavior and predatory
aggression, higher psychopathy scores, and comorbid mood disorders.
Psychosocial interventions should be considered the first-­line intervention; pharmacotherapy may provide benefit, particularly if psychosocial treatment has not led to adequate improvement. Three classes of
medication, stimulants, α2-­adrenergic agonists, and atypical antipsychotics, have evidence for the management of impulsive, anger-­driven
aggressive behavior, although none is approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for this indication, except irritability/
aggression in autism. Resource limitations may necessitate provision
of pharmacotherapy in the primary care setting; the safety and efficacy
of this practice can be enhanced by regular consultation with a child
and adolescent psychiatrist or developmental-­behavioral pediatrician.
There are favorable effects of stimulants on oppositional behavior, anger
outbursts, and aggression in youths, with or without comorbid ADHD.
The doses of stimulants used for aggression are similar to those used for
ADHD. An extended-­release α2-­adrenergic agonist (guanfacine) is efficacious for oppositionality comorbid with ADHD, with a dose of 1-­4 mg/
day, dosed according to weight. There is evidence for efficacy of risperidone in reducing aggression and conduct problems in children age 5-­18
years. The suggested usual daily dose of risperidone for severe aggression
is 1.5-­2 mg for children and 2-­4 mg for adolescents, titrating up as needed
and tolerated from starting doses of 0.25 mg (children) or 0.5 mg (adolescents). The use of this class of medication should be reserved for severe
presentations in which the safety of self and/or others is compromised.
Medication trials should be systematic, and the duration of trials should
be sufficient (generally 6-­8 weeks for atypical antipsychotics; shorter for
stimulants and α-­agonists) to determine the agent’s effectiveness. The
short-­term goal of medication treatment is to achieve at least a 50% reduction in aggressive symptoms, as assessed by a focused symptom rating
scale (see Table 42.4); the ultimate goal is to achieve symptom remission
(below clinical cutpoint on the rating scale). A second medication of the
same class can be considered if there is insufficient evidence of response
to the maximal tolerated dose. Care should be taken to avoid unnecessary
polypharmacy, in part by discontinuing agents that have not demonstrated
significant benefit. Discontinuation of the medication should be considered after a symptom-­free interval.

LEVEL OF CARE

Most children and adolescents with a behavior disorder can be safely
and effectively treated in the outpatient setting. Youths with intractable
CD may benefit from residential or specialized foster care treatment,
where more intensive treatments can be provided.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 43 u Tantrums and Breath-­Holding Spells

Chapter 43

Tantrums and Breath-­
Holding Spells
Keneisha R. Sinclair-­McBride, Erica H. Lee,
David R. DeMaso, and Heather J. Walter
Temper tantrums are common during early childhood. They are
typically developmentally normative expressions of children’s frustration with their own limitations or anger about not being able to get
their way. It is important for parents to recognize the different triggers for tantrums to determine the best course of action to prevent
or manage this behavior as it arises. Dealing with tantrum behavior
can become very frustrating for parents and these feelings should be
validated, while also helping make sure parents are aware that many
tantrums can be averted by awareness or attunement to certain cues
given by their child. In particular, parents should be aware that when
a child is tired, hungry, or has to make a transition, it can be expected
that the child will be more likely to have a tantrum because limit
setting or unmet expectations may feel particularly overwhelming
in these circumstances. In this case, it is advised that parents plan
ahead and take a preventive stance by being aware of triggers and
minimizing the potential for a tantrum. Parents should not make a
tired or hungry child accompany them on an extended outing unless
absolutely necessary. Additionally, depending on the child’s developmental level, it is helpful to have a clear discussion ahead of time
about the expectations in certain scenarios. An example of setting
expectations to help prevent a tantrum is: “When we go into the store
I need you to (1) stay with me, (2) keep your hands to yourself, and
(3) not whine for treats. If you can do these three things, we can
pick one treat to bring home.” When children are able to demonstrate
good control, their behavior should be acknowledged, praised, and
rewarded when appropriate. This will increase the likelihood that
they will engage in the desired response more often, even in situations they find frustrating.
When children tantrum as an expression of anger or sadness in
not getting their way, parents may feel inclined to give in or respond
to the negative behavior with yelling or threats. Unfortunately, these
responses can reinforce and even escalate the oppositional behavior.
Parents should attempt to avert defiance by giving the child choices
(e.g., you can walk to the car on your own two feet or I can carry you).
Active ignoring can be used for mild tantrum behaviors because paying attention, even negative attention, can be reinforcing. If a child
is tantruming in a way that is unsafe, they can be removed from the
unsafe situation and given a consequence by being placed in time-­out.
If the tantrum was to avoid a task, the child should be required to complete the task once time-­out is over.
Breath-­holding spells occasionally occur during a tantrum and can
be frightening to parents. These are reflexive events in which the crying
child becomes apneic, pale, or cyanotic, may lose consciousness, and
occasionally will have a brief seizure. Parents are best advised to ignore

281

breath holding during a tantrum once it has started. Without reinforcement, breath-­holding generally disappears.
Subtypes of breath-­holding spells include cyanotic, pallid, or mixed
episodes. Cyanotic spells are the dominant type. Pallid spells may be
similar to vasovagal-­related syncopal events in older children and
may be initiated by similar stimuli. Iron deficiency with or without
anemia may be present, and some children with breath-­holding spells
respond to iron therapy. There is no increased risk of seizure disorders
in children who have had a short seizure during a breath-­holding spell.
Medical conditions to rule-­out in breath-­holding spells (usually pallid)
include seizures, Chiari crisis, familial dysautonomia, cardiac arrhythmias, cataplexy, hereditary hyperekplexia, and other central nervous
system lesions.
The first key to the management of temper tantrums and breath-­
holding spells is to help parents intervene before the child is highly
distressed. The parent can be instructed to calmly remind the child of
the expected behavior and the potential consequence if the expected
behavior does not occur. In addition, distraction to another activity or
conversation may help. If the child does not comply, he or she should
be placed in time-­out for a period approximating 1 min for each year
of age. Parents should state the reason the child is being placed in time-­
out beforehand in a calm and neutral tone, but they should not discuss
the reasons during time-­out. Once the time-­out is over and the child is
calm, it may be helpful for parents to discuss with the child the reasons
for the child’s frustration and their expectations for how the child will
respond in the future.
Time-­out can be effectively used in children up to approximately 10
years of age. Parents should also be advised to be mindful of their own
reactions to their child’s tantrum behavior to avoid an escalation of the
child’s behavior caused by an angry parental response.
If behavioral measures such as time-­out fail, pediatricians must
assess other aspects of parent–child interactions, such as the frequency
of positive interactions, the consistency of parental responses to child
behavior, and the ways that parents handle anger, before making further recommendations. In the absence of frequent positive parent–
child interactions, time-­out may not be effective, and inconsistent
responding to problem behavior increases the likelihood of the negative behavior continuing. Children can be frightened by the intensity of
their own angry feelings and by angry feelings they arouse in their parents. Parents should model the anger control that they want their children to exhibit. Some parents are unable to see that if they lose control
themselves, their own angry behavior does not help their children to
behave differently. Advising parents to calmly provide simple choices
will help the child to feel more in control and to develop a sense of
autonomy. Providing the child with options also typically helps reduce
the child’s feelings of anger and shame, which can later have adverse
effects on social and emotional development. Providing choice also
reduces power struggles between the parent and child and can aid in
enhancing the parent–child relationship and building problem-­solving
skills.
When tantrum behavior, including breath holding, does not respond
to parent coaching or is accompanied by head banging or high levels of
aggression, referral for a mental health evaluation is indicated. Further
evaluation is also recommended if tantrum behavior persists into the
latency period and preteen years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

282 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders

Chapter 44

Lying, Stealing, and
Truancy
Keneisha R. Sinclair-­McBride, Erica H. Lee,
David R. DeMaso, and Heather J. Walter
Young children lie for a multitude of reasons. Lies for this age group can
be considered developmentally normative attempts at understanding language, communication, rules, and expectations. In early childhood, lying
often occurs as a child experiments with language. By observing the reactions of parents, preschoolers learn about expectations for honesty in communication. Lying can also be a form of fantasy for children, who often
describe things as they wish them to be rather than as they are. To avoid
an unpleasant confrontation, a child who has not followed a rule or met an
expectation may lie. At this stage, children often do not understand that
lying only postpones a confrontation. Parents should keep in mind that
lying behavior in this age group is rarely malicious or premeditated.
In older children, lying is generally an effort to cover up actions that do
not fit into the child’s conceptualization of themselves. Children in this
age group may lie as an attempt to maintain self-­esteem. Of course, lying
is also often used to avoid a negative consequence for misbehavior. Older
children are also more likely to intentionally leave out critical parts of a
story in an attempt to deceive or avoid a negative consequence. Lying can
also be promoted by poor adult modeling. Many children and adolescents lie to avoid adults’ disapproval. If children and teens are responded
to in harsh and punitive ways, they may lie to avoid this. Alternatively,
lying may be used as a method of rebellion, especially in adolescence.
Lying about forbidden activities, social media use, or other behaviors may
be an attempt to continue to break the rules without detection. Chronic
lying can occur in combination with several other antisocial behaviors
and is a sign of underlying psychopathology or family dysfunction.
Parents should address lying by giving the child a clear message of what
is acceptable. Sensitivity and support combined with limit setting are necessary for a successful intervention. Although habitual lying can become
frustrating for parents, they should be discouraged from making accusations or focusing on catching their child in a lie and instead should work
toward creating an atmosphere that makes it easier for their child to tell the
truth. Parents should let the child know that telling the truth about a difficult situation will allow the parents to help them better problem-­solve the
issue at hand. Should a situation arise where a child has lied and the parents
are aware of the true details, the lie should be confronted while providing
the facts of what is known and also stating the desired or expected behavior. This should be done in a calm, neutral manner. For example, if a parent
is aware that a child played video games instead of doing homework and
the child denies it, the parent can state, “I notice that your homework is
incomplete and that you are playing without permission. Our rule is that
you complete homework first. There will be no more video games for the
rest of the week.” This response reminds the child how he can meet his
goals in an acceptable way and an appropriate consequence can then be
given. Parents should be encouraged to address the expectations for their
home and children in a family meeting or in regular discussions with their
child outside the context of the child’s lying.
Regardless of age or developmental level, when lying becomes a
common way of managing conflict, intervention is warranted. If this
behavior cannot be resolved through the parents’ understanding of the
situation and the child’s understanding that lying is not a reasonable
alternative, a mental health evaluation is indicated.

STEALING

Many children steal something at some point in their lives. Often, when
very young children steal, the behavior is an impulsive action to acquire
something they want. A common example is the child who takes candy
or a toy from the store shelf. If a parent notices this behavior, they can

use the situation as a teaching opportunity to explain that community and
family expectations are that we have to pay for things at the store and not
take them without permission. It should not be expected that a very young
child will be aware of all the rules around shopping or stealing. It may also
be difficult for a child who has been used to being able to freely take whatever she wants to be aware of all the expected behaviors across different settings. When preschoolers and school-­age children begin to steal frequently
even after they have been told not to, the behavior may be a response to
stressful environmental circumstances and requires further exploration
and evaluation.
For some older children, stealing can be an expression of anger or
revenge for perceived frustrations with parents or other authority figures.
In such instances, stealing becomes one way the child and adolescent can
manipulate and attempt to control their world. Stealing can also be learned
from adults. Some children will report that the behavior is “exciting” for
them, and they may also engage in the behavior for peer approval. In some
cases, youth living in poverty may engage in the behavior as a survival
mechanism.
Kleptomania, an impulse-­control disorder, may begin in adolescence and is characterized by an intense impulse to steal objects that
may not be rationally needed by the patient. There are often comorbid disorders such as anxiety, eating disorders, substance misuse, and
depression. Treatment includes cognitive-­behavioral therapy (CBT)
in addition to various drugs such as lithium, naltrexone, and selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
Parents should work with their children to rectify stealing through
restitution. Parents should require that their child return stolen items
or pay for them with their own money (i.e., allowance or gift money).
When this is not possible, another reasonable consequence should be
given, such as losing a privilege or completing additional chores. When
stealing is part of a pattern of broader conduct problems, referral for a
mental health evaluation is warranted.

TRUANCY

Truancy and running away are never developmentally appropriate.
Truancy may represent an unsafe environment of disorganization
within the home including lack of appropriate supervision or older
children being required to caretake for younger siblings. Truancy can
also be a sign of developing conduct problems or behavioral health
problems including depression or anxiety. When truancy occurs in
younger children, there are usually psychosocial concerns with the
parents or adult caretakers in the home that prevent them from following through with the required demands of getting their children to
school each day. Families struggling with housing and food insecurity
may have difficulties having their children attend school regularly. Parents with intellectual disability or their own mental health or substance
abuse problems may become overwhelmed with managing the home
and caring for their children; thus they might not consistently ensure
their child gets to school. In addition, children might decide to remain
at home to take care of parents who are impaired.
Truancy is more common in preteens and adolescents and can be a
function of multiple factors, including but not limited to learning difficulties, social anxiety, depression, traumatic exposure, bullying, peer
pressure, and substance use. In any of these cases, the child should be
referred for further evaluation to assess the barriers to returning to
school. Best practices for dealing with truancy resulting from school
avoidance and anxiety include addressing the underlying psychologic
symptoms causing the school avoidance and empowering parents, children, and school staff to work on a consistent plan for a return to school.
Younger children may threaten running away out of frustration or a
desire to “get back at” parents. Older children who run away are almost
always expressing a serious underlying problem within themselves or
their family, including violence, abuse, and neglect. Adolescent runaways
are at high risk for substance abuse and other risk-­taking behaviors as
well as at risk for being victims of abuse (e.g., sexual exploitation).
Youth exhibiting truancy or running away should be referred for a
mental health evaluation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 46 u Self-Injurious Behavior

Chapter 45

Aggression
Keneisha R. Sinclair-­McBride, Erica H. Lee,
David R. DeMaso, and Heather J. Walter

Aggressive behavior is a serious symptom associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Early intervention is indicated for
persistent aggressive behavior given that children may not simply
“grow out of ” this pattern of behavior. Aggressive tendencies are
heritable, although environmental factors can promote aggression
in susceptible children. Both enduring and temporary stressors
affecting a family can increase aggressive behavior in children.
Aggression in childhood is correlated with both poverty and chaotic
family situations, including chronic unemployment, family discord,
and exposure to community and domestic violence, criminality,
and psychiatric disorders. Children born to teenage mothers and
parents with limited resources and support are also at risk. Males
are reported to be more aggressive than females. A difficult temperament and later aggressiveness are related. When children with
temperament difficulties are responded to with punitive discipline
strategies within the family environment, it can set up a cycle of
increasing aggression. Aggressive children often misinterpret social
cues in such a way that they perceive hostile intent in ambiguous
or benign interactions, and then may react with verbal or physical
aggression toward peers and parents.
It is important to differentiate the causes and motives for childhood aggression. Intentional aggression may be primarily instrumental (i.e., to achieve an end), primarily hostile (i.e., to inflict
physical or psychologic pain), or primarily impulsive. Impulsive
aggression can often be effectively managed with simple behavioral
interventions at home. Children who are callous, not empathetic,
and more consistently aggressive require intervention in the specialty mental health setting (see Chapter 42). These children are at
high risk for suspension from school and eventual school failure.
Because learning disorders are common in this population, aggressive children should be referred for screening. Aggressive behavior is often present in a variety of other psychologic conditions,
including attention-­deficit/hyperactivity and oppositional defiant,
intermittent explosive, conduct, and disruptive mood dysregulation
disorders (see Chapters 39 and 42).
Aggressive behavior in males is relatively consistent from the preschool period through adolescence. Without effective intervention,
a male with a high level of aggressive behavior between 3 and 6
years of age has a high probability of carrying this behavior into
adolescence. The developmental progression of aggression among
females is less well studied. Fewer females show physically aggressive behavior in early childhood. However, interpersonal coercive
behavior, especially in peer relationships, is seen in females. This
behavior may be related to the development of physical aggression
for females in adolescence (e.g., fighting) or other conduct problems (e.g., stealing).
Children exposed to aggressive models on television, in video games,
or in play have more aggressive behavior compared with children not
exposed to these models. Parents’ anger and aggressive or harsh punishment can model behavior that children may imitate when they are
physically or psychologically hurt. Parents’ abuse may be transmitted
to the next generation by several modes: children imitate aggression

283

that they have witnessed; abuse can cause neurologic damage, which
itself predisposes the child to violence; and internalized rage often
results from abuse.
Aggressive behavior in youth is often oriented toward peers
through bullying (see Chapter 15.1). Although it is developmentally
normative for children to engage in some teasing behavior, bullying
has a more serious tone. Bullying is defined as unwanted aggressive
behavior in which there is a real or perceived imbalance of power
or strength between the bully and the victim. Typically, it involves
a pattern of behavior repeated over time. Although most often perceived as physical aggression, bullying can take on a variety of forms,
including relational bullying, the most common form engaged in by
females. Cyberbullying is a particular risk during the middle and
high school years because of increased exposure and access to multiple social media platforms at this developmental stage. Parents
should be advised to closely monitor their child’s social media and
maintain open communication with their children. Children may
bully others because of impulse-­control and social skills deficits,
strong need for power and negative dominance, satisfaction in causing harm to others, or psychologic or material rewards. Children
who bully are at risk for a variety of negative school and psychologic
outcomes.
Victims of bullying are particularly at risk for negative outcomes,
especially if the behavior is not addressed by adults. Victimization
experiences are associated with school avoidance and school dropout, social isolation, somatic symptoms, and increased psychologic
problems such as depression and anxiety. There have been numerous cases of suicide in children who reported a prior history of
being bullied. Should a concern arise around bullying in the school
setting, parents should be advised to reach out to their child’s
teacher, school counselor, and school administrative staff to have
the bullying behavior addressed. Many schools also have a bullying
intervention protocol that can be implemented, and state departments of education have antibullying policies with formal protocols to address concerns. Given the significant psychologic risks
for both victims and perpetrators of bullying, it is essential that all
children who are persistently involved in these incidents be referred
for mental health evaluation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 46

Self-­Injurious Behavior
Kiera M. James and Molly C. Adrian
Self-­
injurious behaviors, or deliberate engagement in self-­
inflicted
harm, comprise both suicidal behaviors and nonsuicidal self-­injury
(NSSI) (see Chapter 40). NSSI, specifically, involves intentional self-­
inflicted damage to bodily tissue without the intent to die, though it
can unintentionally result in significant harm or even death.
Suicidal behaviors and NSSI are both transdiagnostic behaviors occurring
in the context of numerous psychiatry disorders as well as in the absence of
any diagnosis at all. Nonetheless, the vast majority of youth who engage in
NSSI meet diagnostic criteria for a psychiatry disorder. Self-­injurious behavior may also be associated with developmental disabilities often as a manifestation of stereotypic movement disorder (Chapter 37.2).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 46 u Self-Injurious Behavior

Chapter 45

Aggression
Keneisha R. Sinclair-­McBride, Erica H. Lee,
David R. DeMaso, and Heather J. Walter

Aggressive behavior is a serious symptom associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Early intervention is indicated for
persistent aggressive behavior given that children may not simply
“grow out of ” this pattern of behavior. Aggressive tendencies are
heritable, although environmental factors can promote aggression
in susceptible children. Both enduring and temporary stressors
affecting a family can increase aggressive behavior in children.
Aggression in childhood is correlated with both poverty and chaotic
family situations, including chronic unemployment, family discord,
and exposure to community and domestic violence, criminality,
and psychiatric disorders. Children born to teenage mothers and
parents with limited resources and support are also at risk. Males
are reported to be more aggressive than females. A difficult temperament and later aggressiveness are related. When children with
temperament difficulties are responded to with punitive discipline
strategies within the family environment, it can set up a cycle of
increasing aggression. Aggressive children often misinterpret social
cues in such a way that they perceive hostile intent in ambiguous
or benign interactions, and then may react with verbal or physical
aggression toward peers and parents.
It is important to differentiate the causes and motives for childhood aggression. Intentional aggression may be primarily instrumental (i.e., to achieve an end), primarily hostile (i.e., to inflict
physical or psychologic pain), or primarily impulsive. Impulsive
aggression can often be effectively managed with simple behavioral
interventions at home. Children who are callous, not empathetic,
and more consistently aggressive require intervention in the specialty mental health setting (see Chapter 42). These children are at
high risk for suspension from school and eventual school failure.
Because learning disorders are common in this population, aggressive children should be referred for screening. Aggressive behavior is often present in a variety of other psychologic conditions,
including attention-­deficit/hyperactivity and oppositional defiant,
intermittent explosive, conduct, and disruptive mood dysregulation
disorders (see Chapters 39 and 42).
Aggressive behavior in males is relatively consistent from the preschool period through adolescence. Without effective intervention,
a male with a high level of aggressive behavior between 3 and 6
years of age has a high probability of carrying this behavior into
adolescence. The developmental progression of aggression among
females is less well studied. Fewer females show physically aggressive behavior in early childhood. However, interpersonal coercive
behavior, especially in peer relationships, is seen in females. This
behavior may be related to the development of physical aggression
for females in adolescence (e.g., fighting) or other conduct problems (e.g., stealing).
Children exposed to aggressive models on television, in video games,
or in play have more aggressive behavior compared with children not
exposed to these models. Parents’ anger and aggressive or harsh punishment can model behavior that children may imitate when they are
physically or psychologically hurt. Parents’ abuse may be transmitted
to the next generation by several modes: children imitate aggression

283

that they have witnessed; abuse can cause neurologic damage, which
itself predisposes the child to violence; and internalized rage often
results from abuse.
Aggressive behavior in youth is often oriented toward peers
through bullying (see Chapter 15.1). Although it is developmentally
normative for children to engage in some teasing behavior, bullying
has a more serious tone. Bullying is defined as unwanted aggressive
behavior in which there is a real or perceived imbalance of power
or strength between the bully and the victim. Typically, it involves
a pattern of behavior repeated over time. Although most often perceived as physical aggression, bullying can take on a variety of forms,
including relational bullying, the most common form engaged in by
females. Cyberbullying is a particular risk during the middle and
high school years because of increased exposure and access to multiple social media platforms at this developmental stage. Parents
should be advised to closely monitor their child’s social media and
maintain open communication with their children. Children may
bully others because of impulse-­control and social skills deficits,
strong need for power and negative dominance, satisfaction in causing harm to others, or psychologic or material rewards. Children
who bully are at risk for a variety of negative school and psychologic
outcomes.
Victims of bullying are particularly at risk for negative outcomes,
especially if the behavior is not addressed by adults. Victimization
experiences are associated with school avoidance and school dropout, social isolation, somatic symptoms, and increased psychologic
problems such as depression and anxiety. There have been numerous cases of suicide in children who reported a prior history of
being bullied. Should a concern arise around bullying in the school
setting, parents should be advised to reach out to their child’s
teacher, school counselor, and school administrative staff to have
the bullying behavior addressed. Many schools also have a bullying
intervention protocol that can be implemented, and state departments of education have antibullying policies with formal protocols to address concerns. Given the significant psychologic risks
for both victims and perpetrators of bullying, it is essential that all
children who are persistently involved in these incidents be referred
for mental health evaluation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 46

Self-­Injurious Behavior
Kiera M. James and Molly C. Adrian
Self-­
injurious behaviors, or deliberate engagement in self-­
inflicted
harm, comprise both suicidal behaviors and nonsuicidal self-­injury
(NSSI) (see Chapter 40). NSSI, specifically, involves intentional self-­
inflicted damage to bodily tissue without the intent to die, though it
can unintentionally result in significant harm or even death.
Suicidal behaviors and NSSI are both transdiagnostic behaviors occurring
in the context of numerous psychiatry disorders as well as in the absence of
any diagnosis at all. Nonetheless, the vast majority of youth who engage in
NSSI meet diagnostic criteria for a psychiatry disorder. Self-­injurious behavior may also be associated with developmental disabilities often as a manifestation of stereotypic movement disorder (Chapter 37.2).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

284 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Although NSSI and suicidal behavior are distinct constructs
based on the intent of the behavior, they are also highly comorbid.
Research exploring the attitudes of youth who have engaged in NSSI
indicates that there is a strong identification with suicide and death
for this population, which makes NSSI a significant clinical issue
and risk factor that cannot be ignored or minimized. Although
some youth engage in repeated NSSI without ever attempting suicide, studies suggest that 50–75% of adolescents who have a history
of NSSI will make a suicide attempt at some point.
NSSI has been documented in children as young as 7 years of age,
with rates increasing from childhood (∼8%) to adolescents (∼18%),
and decreasing during adulthood (∼5.5%). Although traditionally
thought to be more prevalent in females than males, NSSI occurs in
both sexes. Emerging research suggests that, if present at all, gender
differences in rates of NSSI are more likely in clinical than community populations. Notably, however, rates of NSSI are particularly
high among transgender and gender nonconforming teens with up
to 55% reporting past-­year engagement in NSSI. There are no significant ethnicity or class differences among youth who engage in
NSSI. Youth identified as those with the highest risk include females
ages 15-­19 and males 20-­24.
Cutting is the most commonly reported form of NSSI. For those
youth who engage in NSSI for the first time, approximately 20% will
repeat the behavior within the same year; cutting is the most commonly repeated method of NSSI. Other methods of NSSI include
scratching, burning, carving, piercing, hitting or punching, biting,
picking at wounds, and digging nails into the skin. The most common areas of injury are the arms, legs, and torso, though NSSI may
also occur on other parts of the body (e.g., breasts, genitals, groin,
neck). Objects used in cutting include razors, scissors, broken glass,
hard plastic, knives, staples, paper clips, or any other objects sharp
enough to cause injury. Importantly, there are gender differences
in methods such that females are more likely to engage in cutting,
scratching, biting, hair pulling, and wound picking whereas males
are more likely to engage in burning and self-­battery, including hitting and head banging.
Youth often report exposure to NSSI before engaging in the
behavior. Some youth report that they have friends who self-­injure
(e.g., cut) to attempt to alleviate negative emotions. Others may
view stories of their peers’ engagement in NSSI on websites and
social media. Impressionable youth have also reported learning
about NSSI for the first time from celebrities who have engaged in
the behavior.
NSSI is associated with depression, anxiety, peer (bullying) victimization, social isolation, low self-­esteem, substance abuse, eating disorders,
impulsivity, poor school performance, delinquency, and neglectful or
highly punitive parenting practices, as well as trauma, including a history of physical or sexual abuse. The behavior may begin as an impulsive
response to internal distress for younger children, but for those who are
older, the behavior can take on a self-­reinforcing function. Youth may feel
a sense of relief or mastery over negative emotions once the behavior has
been completed. Some youth report that they engage in NSSI when feeling intense negative emotions, overwhelmed, or panicked to regulate their
emotions. Others engage in the behavior when they are feeling numb, to
“feel something” again. NSSI may also serve as a distraction from emotional pain, provide a sense of control over the body, or be used as a form
of self-­punishment for a perceived wrongdoing. NSSI may also function to
communicate distress or strength or provide peer group affiliation. Youth
often report that they are unable to resist the urge to engage in the behavior
and will continue to feel increasing levels of distress until they engage in
NSSI. Others plan or schedule the behavior, building it into their routine.
Youth who view NSSI as an effective, private, and necessary coping strategy tend to have more dependence on the behavior and more resistance to
stopping it.
Some adolescents and young adults engage in repeated NSSI for
years without disclosing the behavior. Due to the shame associated

with this stigmatized behavior, youth will often go to great lengths
to keep it a secret. Some wear bracelets to cover scars on their arms
or wear long sleeves in summer to hide the scarring. They report
feeling ashamed of the behavior and fear rejection or disappointment from family and friends should they find out. At times, fear of
being rejected or a disappointment to others can increase feelings
of depression and anxiety and can serve to perpetuate the behavior.
In contrast, others are more open about showing their scars and
sharing their behavior with others. In either case, the behavior is a
way to communicate or manage some level of distress. Many youth
who engage in NSSI may never be seen in a hospital emergency
department or by a mental health professional. Factors that protect against engagement in NSSI include a lack of awareness of,
or exposure to, NSSI; an aversion to physical pain; an aversion to
NSSI-­related stimuli (e.g., blood); a positive view of the self; the
use of other more adaptive emotion regulation strategies; and social
norms. Youth with repetitive NSSI should be referred to behavioral
health services. Effective treatment strategies include conducting a
functional analysis around NSSI behavior, identifying and teaching alternative emotion regulation strategies, and reducing access to
means to harm oneself. Reduction of NSSI has been observed with
dialectical behavior therapy for adolescents, cognitive-­behavioral
therapy, cognitive analytic therapy, and mentalization-­based therapy for adolescents. There are no psychopharmacologic treatments
that have demonstrated efficacy; thus behavioral approaches should
be prioritized.
Parents should be advised to monitor youth social media access
and be aware of their peer group. Maintaining open communication
can assist parents in recognizing an increase in concerning behaviors or patterns of behaviors. Parents should talk with their child
about strategies for managing strong emotions and provide emotion
coaching to support their child through experiences of distress. They
should also be encouraged to talk with their child about their use of
and exposure to drugs and alcohol as substance use can be associated
with NSSI. Learning that their child has been engaging in self-­injury
can be frightening for parents because they are unsure of what to do
or why their child is engaging in this behavior. It is important that
parents receive psychoeducation about NSSI to reduce common misconceptions that make it difficult to understand their child’s engagement in NSSI and respond effectively. Such information should be
digestible and accurate, including written suggestions and examples.
Parents should also seek mental health services for their child. It is
recommended that the child receive a full assessment for risk of suicide
when NSSI is a concern.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition (DSM-­5) has classified NSSI as a condition requiring further study before consideration for possible placement in forthcoming editions of DSM. Proposed diagnostic criteria include
self-­inflicted injury without suicidal intent occurring on 5 or more
days in the past year, with lack of suicidal intent either stated by the
individual or inferred by the individual’s repeated engagement in a
behavior not likely to result in death. The individual expects that
the self-­injurious behavior will relieve a negative feeling or thought,
resolve an interpersonal difficulty, or induce a positive feeling state.
The self-­injurious behavior is associated with interpersonal difficulties or negative feelings or thoughts, preoccupation with the
intended behavior that is difficult to control, or frequent thoughts
about the intended behavior. The proposed criteria also specify
that the behavior is not socially sanctioned (e.g., body piercing,
tattooing) and is not restricted to skin picking or nail biting. The
behavior must be associated with significant distress or functional
impairment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 47 u Childhood Psychoses

Chapter 47

Childhood Psychoses
Jennifer A. Zaspel and Rosa K. Kim
Psychosis is a severe disruption of thought, perception, and behavior resulting in loss of reality testing. Psychosis can occur as part
of a mood disorder, such as major depressive disorder or bipolar
I disorder; between mood disorder episodes, as in schizoaffective
disorder; or without mood disorder episodes, as in schizophrenia.
Transient psychotic episodes can arise during times of psychologic
or physiologic stress in patients who are vulnerable because of personality, developmental, or genetic disorders. Positive symptoms,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized thinking, and
grossly disorganized behavior, are key features that define psychoses across disorders, likely because of shared pathophysiologic
mechanisms. Negative symptoms, on the other hand, are most
typical of schizophrenia.
Delusions are fixed, unchangeable, false beliefs held despite conflicting evidence. They may include a variety of themes, including
persecutory, referential (the belief that irrelevant events or details
in the world are related directly to oneself), somatic, religious,
and grandiose. Delusions are considered bizarre if they are clearly
implausible. Hallucinations are vivid, clear, perceptual disturbances that occur without external stimulus and have the full force
and impact of normal perceptions. They may occur in any sensory
modality; auditory hallucinations are the most common associated
with psychosis. Disorganized thinking is inferred from an individual’s speech by examining their thought process and thought
content and is typically severe enough to impair one’s ability to
communicate. Grossly disorganized behavior may range from
childlike silliness to unpredictable agitation to catatonic behavior.
Negative symptoms include diminished emotional expression, avolition (decreased drive to perform purposeful tasks), alogia (lack
of speech), anhedonia, and social withdrawal. Negative symptoms
account for a substantial portion of the long-­term morbidity associated with schizophrenia.
Given the centrality of hallucinations and delusions in making a
diagnosis of a psychotic illness, their differentiation from developmentally normal fantasy is essential. When children are imagining, they
control the fantasy and do not have the perceptual experience of seeing and hearing. When children are hallucinating, they do not control
the hallucination. Almost two thirds of children will endorse at least
one psychotic-­like experience, most often a hallucination. When not
persistent or accompanied by distress, these experiences are not usually a cause for concern. The largest population-­based study to date
evaluating psychotic symptoms and neurocognition in youth 11-­21
years old found that those who endorsed more psychotic-­like experiences than is typical for their age had reduced accuracy across neurocognitive domains, reduced global functioning, and increased risk of
depression, anxiety, behavioral disorders, substance use, and suicidal
ideation. Thus psychotic-­like symptoms that are frequent, distressing,
and cause impairment signal a need for further evaluation and monitoring; however, only a small minority of these children will develop
persisting psychotic illnesses.

47.1 Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders
Jennifer A. Zaspel and Rosa K. Kim
Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders as described
in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition (DSM-­
5) include brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, substance/

285

medication-­induced psychotic disorder, psychotic disorder caused
by another medical condition, catatonia associated with another
mental disorder, catatonic disorder due to another medical condition, unspecified catatonia, delusional disorder, schizotypal personality disorder, and other specified/unspecified schizophrenia spectrum
and other psychotic disorders.

DESCRIPTION

The schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders are primarily characterized by the presence of symptoms of psychosis, specifically delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, or grossly
disorganized or catatonic behavior, and negative symptoms. Brief
psychotic disorder is characterized by the duration of one or more
of these symptoms for at least 1 day but less than 1 month followed
by complete resolution. Emergence of symptoms may or may not
be preceded by an identifiable stressor (Table 47.1). Although brief,
the level of impairment in this disorder may be severe enough that
supervision is required to ensure that basic needs are met and that
the individual is protected from the consequences of poor judgment
and cognitive impairment.
If two or more psychotic symptoms persist for between 1 and 6
months, the condition is called schizophreniform disorder (Table
47.2). To meet DSM-­5 criteria for schizophrenia, two or more psychotic symptoms must have been present for a significant portion
of time for at least 1 month (unless suppressed by treatment), and
the level of psychosocial functioning must either be markedly below
the level achieved before the onset or there is failure to achieve the
expected level of functioning. In addition, there must be continuous
signs of the disturbance for at least 6 months (Table 47.3).
Individuals with schizophrenia can display inappropriate affect,
dysphoric mood, disturbed sleep patterns, and lack of interest in
eating, or food refusal. Depersonalization, derealization, somatic
concerns, and anxiety and phobias are common. Cognitive deficits
are observed, including decrements in declarative memory, working memory, language function, and other executive functions, as
well as slower processing speed. These individuals may have no

Table 47.1  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Brief Psychotic
Disorder
A.	Presence of one (or more) of the following symptoms. At least one
of these must be (1), (2), or (3):
1.	Delusions
2.	Hallucinations
3.	Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence)
4.	Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior
Note: Do not include a symptom if it is a culturally sanctioned
response.
B.	Duration of an episode of the disturbance is at least 1 day but less
than 1 mo, with eventual full return to premorbid level of functioning.
C.	The disturbance is not better explained by major depressive or
bipolar disorder with psychotic features or another psychotic
disorder such as schizophrenia or catatonia, and is not attributable
to the physiologic effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a
medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
With marked stressor(s) (brief reactive psychosis): If symptoms occur
in response to events that, singly or together, would be markedly
stressful to almost anyone in similar circumstances in the
individual’s culture.
Without marked stressor(s): If the symptoms do not occur in
response to events that, singly or together, would be markedly
stressful to almost anyone in similar circumstances in the
individual’s culture.
With postpartum onset: If onset is during pregnancy or within 4 wk
postpartum.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p 94. Copyright
2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

286 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 47.2  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Schizophreniform
Disorder
A.	Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion
of time during a 1 mo period (or less if successfully treated). At least
one of these must be (1), (2), or (3):
1.	Delusions
2.	Hallucinations
3.	Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or
incoherence)
4.	Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior
5.	Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or
avolition)
B.	An episode of the disorder lasts at least 1 mo but less than 6 mo.
When the diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it
should qualified as “provisional.”
C.	Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features have been ruled out because either (1) no
major depressive or manic episodes have occurred concurrently
with the active-­phase symptoms or (2) if mood episodes have
occurred during active-­phase symptoms, they have been present
for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual
periods of the illness.
D.	The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another
medical condition.
Specify if:
With good prognostic features: This specifier requires the presence
of at least two of the following features: onset of prominent
psychotic symptoms within 4 wk of the first noticeable change
in usual behavior or functioning; confusion or perplexity; good
premorbid social and occupational functioning; and absence of
blunted or flat affect.
Without good prognostic features: This specifier is applied if two or
more of the previous features have not been present.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp 96–97.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

insight or awareness of their disorder, which is a predictor of nonadherence to treatment, higher relapse rates, and poorer prognosis. Hostility and aggression can be associated with schizophrenia,
although spontaneous or random assault is uncommon. Aggression
is more frequent for younger males and for individuals with a history of violence, nonadherence with treatment, substance abuse,
and impulsivity.
The essential features of schizophrenia are the same in childhood
as in adulthood, but it is more difficult to make the diagnosis. In children, delusions and hallucinations may be less elaborate, visual hallucinations may be more common, and disorganized speech may be
better attributed to an autism spectrum or communication disorder.
In youth with schizophrenia, the most frequent psychotic symptoms
are auditory hallucinations (82%), delusions (78%), thought disorder
(66%), disorganized or bizarre behavior (53%), and negative symptoms (50%). Childhood-­onset schizophrenia tends to represent a more
severe form of the disorder spectrum, with more genetic risk factors,
more brain abnormalities, and more prominent prepsychotic developmental disorders.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Brief psychotic disorder is reported to account for 9% of first-­onset
psychosis in the United States and is more common in females than
males. The incidence of schizophreniform disorders in the United
States appears as much as fivefold less than that of schizophrenia.
The lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia is approximately 0.3–0.7%,
although variations are reported by race/ethnicity, across countries, and by geographic origin for immigrants. The male-­to-­female
ratio is approximately 1.4:1. Males generally have poorer premorbid adjustment, lower educational achievement, more prominent
negative symptoms, and more cognitive impairment than females.

Table 47.3  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Schizophrenia
A.	Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion
of time during a 1 mo period (or less if successfully treated). At least
one of these must be (1), (2), or (3):
1.	Delusions
2.	Hallucinations
3.	Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or
incoherence)
4.	Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior
5.	Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or
avolition)
B.	For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the
disturbance, level of functioning in one or more major areas, such
as work, interpersonal relations, or self-­care, is markedly below
the level achieved before the onset (or when the onset is in
childhood or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected
level of interpersonal, academic, or occupational functioning).
C.	Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 mo.
This 6 mo period must include at least 1 mo of symptoms (or less
if successfully treated) that meet Criterion A (i.e., active-­phase
symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual
symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs of
the disturbance may be manifested by only negative symptoms or by
two or more symptoms listed in Criterion A present in an attenuated
form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).
D.	Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features have been ruled out because either (1) no
major depressive or manic episodes have occurred concurrently
with the active-­phase symptoms or (2) if mood episodes have
occurred during active-­phase symptoms, they have been present
for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual
periods of the illness.
E.	The disturbance is not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another
medical condition.
F.	If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication
disorder of childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of
schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations,
in addition to the other required symptoms of schizophrenia, are
also present for at least a month (or less if successfully treated).
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp 99–100.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Childhood (preadolescent)-­onset is exceedingly rare, with an incidence of less than 0.04%, and 2:1 ratio in males versus females.

CLINICAL COURSE

Brief psychotic disorder most often appears in adolescence or early
adulthood, with the average age of onset in the mid-­30s but can
occur throughout the life span. A diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder requires full remission within 1 month of onset and gradual
return to premorbid level of function. The age of onset of schizophreniform disorder is similar to that of schizophrenia. Recovery from an episode of the disorder is within 6 months; however,
about 65% of patients relapse and eventually receive a diagnosis of
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. Abrupt onset, confusion,
absence of blunted affect, and good premorbid functioning predict
a better outcome in schizophreniform disorder.
Schizophrenia typically develops between the late teens and the
mid-­30s; onset before adolescence is rare. The peak age at onset for
the first psychotic episode is in the early to mid-­20s for males and
in the late 20s for females. The onset may be abrupt or insidious,
but most individuals manifest a slow and gradual development of
symptoms, with about 50% of individuals complaining of depressive symptoms. The predictors of course and outcome are largely
unexplained. The course is favorable in approximately 20% of
cases; a small number of individuals are reported to recover completely. However, many remain chronically ill, with exacerbations
and remissions of active symptoms, whereas others experience

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 47 u Childhood Psychoses
progressive deterioration. Most individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia require some form of daily living support. Positive symptoms tend to diminish over time, and negative symptoms are the
most persistent, along with cognitive deficits.
It is important to recognize hallmark phases in the assessment
and management of schizophrenia. In the prodrome phase, most
patients experience functional deterioration over the course of
months (e.g., social withdrawal, idiosyncratic preoccupations,
unusual behaviors, academic failure, deteriorating self-­care skills,
and/or dysphoria) before the onset of overt psychotic symptoms.
The acute phase is characterized by prominent positive symptoms and deterioration in functioning and is the phase in which
most patients present for care. During the recovery phase, negative symptoms and disorganization may persist as active psychosis
remits. The residual phase has minimal to no positive symptoms,
although negative symptoms may cause continued impairment.
Some patients will experience chronic impairment despite adequate treatment.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis for the psychotic disorders is broad and
includes reactions to substances/medications (dextromethorphan,
LSD, hallucinogenic mushrooms, psilocybin, peyote, cannabis,
stimulants, inhalants, corticosteroids, anesthetics, anticholinergics, antihistamines, amphetamines); medical conditions causing
psychotic-­like symptoms (Table 47.4; see Table 32.4); and other psychiatric disorders (depressive, bipolar, obsessive-­compulsive, factitious, body dysmorphic, posttraumatic stress, autism spectrum,

287

communication, personality). The differential diagnosis can be difficult because many conditions that can be mistaken for psychosis
also increase the risk for it.
There are many indications that suggest psychotic symptoms may
be related to a physical illness rather than a primarily psychiatric illness (Table 47.5). When psychotic symptoms are caused by identifiable medical conditions, there are often impairments in attention,
orientation, recent memory, and intellectual function. Hallucinations associated with medical illness are more often tactile or visual,
whereas auditory hallucinations are more common in primary psychotic disorders. Patients whose hallucinations are caused by medical illness are more likely to recognize that they do represent reality.
A positive family or prior personal history of psychosis or other
serious psychiatric illnesses is less likely to be present.
Autoimmune encephalitis caused by anti–N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate
(NMDA) receptor or other autoantibodies may manifest with
psychosis, anxiety, depression, agitation, aggression, delusions,
catatonia, visual or auditory hallucinations, disorientation, and
paranoia in combination with sleep disturbances, autonomic dysfunction, dyskinesias, movement disorders, seizures, memory loss,
and a depressed level of consciousness (Fig. 47.1; see Table 32.5).
The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and MRI are usually, but not always,
abnormal. The constellation of a relatively rapid onset psychosis
and encephalitic features should suggest the diagnosis, although at
presentation, behavioral problems may be the dominant feature (see
Chapter 638.4; Table 47.6). A small number of patients present with
purely psychiatric symptoms without other neurologic findings.
Determining when identifiable medical conditions are causing delirium with prominent psychotic symptoms may be difficult

Table 47.4  Possible Causes of Secondary Psychosis
EXAMPLES

INVESTIGATIONS

Trauma

Traumatic head injury

CT, MRI

Autoimmune disorders

Systemic lupus erythematosus, NMDA receptor
encephalitis and others

Autoantibody titers

Cytogenetic/congenital
disorders

Velocardiofacial syndrome, agenesis of corpus callosum

Karyotyping, MRI

Toxic/substance-­induced
disorders

PCP, MDMA, LSD, cannabis, alcohol, cocaine, synthetic
cannabinoids (bath salts)
Lead, mercury or arsenic poisoning, ginseng, St. John’s
Wort, ma huang

Careful medication history; urine screen for drugs,
heavy metal screen; trial off the offending agent

Iatrogenic disorders

Antimalarials, steroids, isoniazid

Careful medication history; trial off the offending
agent

Cerebrovascular disorders

Stroke, subdural hematomas

CT, MRI

Space-­occupying disorders

Cerebral tumors

CT, MRI

Metabolic disorders

Pheochromocytoma, metachromatic leukodystrophy,
Wilson disease, adult Tay-­Sachs disease, acute
intermittent porphyria

Urinary catecholamines; arylsulfatase-­A levels,
copper and ceruloplasmin levels

Dietary disorders

Pellagra, B12 deficiency; thiamine deficiency

B12, folate, thiamine levels

Sepsis/infectious disorders

Neurosyphilis, toxoplasmosis, HIV disease, encephalitis

RPR to rule out syphilis; HIV antibody titers;
glucose, protein in CSF

Unknown cause/degenerative/
demyelinating disorders

Lewy body dementia, Parkinson disease, Huntington
disease, multiple sclerosis, Friedreich ataxia

MRI, CT, EEG, evoked potentials

Seizure disorders

Partial complex seizures, temporal lobe epilepsy

EEG, including sleep deprivation; telemetric EEG
as indicated

Endocrine disorders

Hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, hyperparathyroidism

Serum calcium, thyroid/parathyroid hormone levels

CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; EEG, electroencephalography; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; MDMA, 3,4-­methylenedioxy-­N-­methylamphetamine; NMDA, N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate; PCP,
phencyclidine; RPR, rapid plasma reagin.
Modified from Keshavan MS, Kaneko Y. Secondary psychoses: An update. World Psychiatry. 2013;12(1):4–15:Table 1, p 5.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

288 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Symptom presentation/hospital admission
(77% psychiatric, 23% neuropsychiatric)

Table 47.5  Red Flags and Features Suggesting Secondary
Etiologies of Psychosis
ATYPICAL FEATURES
• Normal before event
• Very early (≤13 yr) age of onset
• Acute or subacute onset (days, ≤1 mo)
• Catatonia
• Dyskinesias
• Isolated misidentification delusion (Capgras syndrome)
• Depressed level of consciousness; disorientation; somnolence
• Cognitive and recent memory decline
• Poor orientation
• Intractability despite adequate therapy
• Rapidly progressive and/or fluctuating (polymorphic) symptoms
• Multimodal hallucinations: visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory
• Poor response to antipsychotics
HISTORY
• Infectious prodrome (fever)
• New or worsening headache; change in headache pattern
• Paresthesias
• Past, current substance misuse
• Recent onset incontinence
• Anorexia/weight loss
• Risk factors for cerebrovascular disease or central nervous system
infections
• Malignancy
• Immunocompromised status
• Head trauma
• Seizures
• Hepatobiliary disorders
• Systemic lupus erythematosus/other autoimmune diseases
• Biologic relatives with similar medical complaints
• Aphasia, mutism, dysarthria
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
• Autonomic hyperactivity: tachycardia, hypertension, mydriasis,
sleep disturbance
• Incoordination, or gait difficulty; nystagmus
• Toxidrome
• Abnormal neurologic exam: upper and lower motor neuron focal
findings
• Movement disorder
• Neuroendocrine changes
DIAGNOSTIC ABNORMALITIES
• Abnormal electroencephalogram (extreme delta brush, diffuse
slowing)
• Abnormal cerebrospinal fluid (pleocytosis: greater than 5
lymphocytes)
• Positive urine toxicology
• Screening laboratory tests including N-­methyl-­d-­aspartate
receptor and other antibodies
• Abnormal neuroimaging studies (unilateral or bilateral hippocampal/
medial temporal lobe hyperdensities: limbic encephalitis)
• Hyponatremia
Modified from Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric
Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. 2nd ed. Elsevier, 2023: Table 31.9, p 526

and is more fully explored in Chapter 48. In general, delirium is
hallmarked by fluctuating levels of consciousness and is often associated with abnormalities in the neurologic exam and vital signs.
Psychosis may be present in patients with delirium, but it will be
accompanied by clear signs and symptoms of physical illness.
The diagnosis of a psychotic disorder should be made only after
other explanations for the observed symptoms have been thoroughly considered. Mistakenly diagnosing psychosis when it is not
present can lead to inappropriate use of antipsychotics with their
attendant risks. The persistence, frequency, and form of possible
psychotic symptoms, as well as the degree of accompanying distress
and functional regression, need to be considered in determining the
likelihood of an underlying psychotic pathophysiology.

Paranoid thoughts, visual or auditory
hallucinations!
• Bizarre personality changes,
memory problems (all patients)
• Unresponsiveness (decreased
consciousness)
• Dyskinesia, movement disorders
• Seizures
• Autonomic instability
• Central hypoventilation
• Cardiac dysrhythmias

Prodromal symptoms
Headache,
low-grade fever,
nonspecific
viral-like illness
(86% of patients)
0

1

2

3
4
5
Time (wk)
Fig. 47.1 Clinical characteristics of patients with anti–NMDA-­receptor
encephalitis. (Modified from Wandinger KP, Saschenbrecker S, Stoecker
W, Dalmau J. Anti-­NMDA-­receptor encephalitis: A severe, multistage, treatable disorder presenting with psychosis. J Neuroimmunol.
2011;231:86–91. Fig 2.)

Table 47.6  Proposed Diagnostic Criteria for Autoimmune
Psychosis
For a diagnosis of possible autoimmune psychosis:
The patient must have current psychotic symptoms of abrupt onset
(rapid progression of <3 months) with at least one of the following:
• C
 urrently or recently diagnosed with a tumor
• Movement disorder (catatonia or dyskinesia)
• Adverse response to antipsychotics, raising suspicion of neuroleptic
malignant syndrome (rigidity, hyperthermia, or raised creatine kinase)
• Severe or disproportionate cognitive dysfunction
• A decreased level of consciousness
• The occurrence of seizures that are not explained by a previously known
seizure disorder
• A clinically significant autonomic dysfunction (abnormal or unexpectedly
fluctuant blood pressure, temperature, or heart rate)

If a patient has possible autoimmune psychosis, they should be
investigated as per section 5 (“Consensus multimodal approach to
the systematic investigation of patients with suspected autoimmune
psychosis”), including electroencephalography, MRI, serum
autoantibodies, and CSF analysis (including CSF autoantibodies).
The results should lead to a diagnosis of non-­autoimmune
psychosis or probable/definite autoimmune psychosis.
For a diagnosis of probable autoimmune psychosis:
The patient must have current psychotic symptoms of abrupt onset
(rapid progression of <3 mo) with at least one of the seven clinical
criteria listed previously for possible autoimmune psychosis and at
least one of the following:
• C
 SF pleocytosis of >5 white blood cells/μL
• Bilateral brain abnormalities on T2 weighted fluid-­attenuated inversion
recovery MRI highly restricted to the medial temporal lobes
Or two of the following:
• Electroencephalogram encephalopathic changes (i.e., spikes, spike-­
wave activity, or rhythmic slowing [intermittent rhythmic delta or theta
activity] focal changes, or extreme delta brush
• CSF oligoclonal bands or increased IgG index
• The presence of a serum antineuronal antibody detected by cell-­based
assay

After exclusion of alternative diagnoses.
For a diagnosis of definite autoimmune psychosis:
The patient must meet the criteria for probable autoimmune
psychosis with IgG class antineuronal antibodies in CSF.
Note that these criteria do not exclude a diagnosis being made in
a patient with an acute onset (<3 mo) of psychosis, even if that
patient has had a previous psychotic, other psychiatric, or
encephalopathic episode that resolved.
From Pollak TA, Lennox BR, Müller S, et al. Autoimmune psychosis: an international
consensus on an approach to the diagnosis and management of psychosis of
suspected autoimmune origin [published correction appears in Lancet Psychiatry. 2019
Dec;6(12):e31]. Lancet Psychiatry. 2020;7(1):93–108: Panel 1, p 100.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 47 u Childhood Psychoses
COMORBIDITY

Among youth with schizophrenia, rates of comorbidity are approximately 34% for posttraumatic stress disorder, 34% for attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity and/or disruptive behavior disorders, and 32%
for substance abuse/dependence. At least 10–20% of children diagnosed with schizophrenia have intellectual delays; it is unclear if
this is related to the impact of the illness on cognitive testing. Children with schizophrenia also demonstrate impairments in language,
communication, and information processing. Co-occurring rates of
schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are higher than
would be expected in general populations; childhood-­onset schizophrenia has been linked to ASD, with an estimated 30–50% of cases
preceded by a diagnosis of an ASD.

SEQUELAE

Follow-­up studies of early-­onset schizophrenia suggest moderate to severe
impairment across the life span. Poor outcome is predicted by low premorbid functioning, insidious onset, higher rates of negative symptoms,
childhood onset, and low intellectual functioning. When followed into
adulthood, youth with schizophrenia demonstrated greater social deficits,
lower levels of employment, and lower likelihood of independent living,
relative to those with other childhood psychotic disorders.
Approximately 5–10% of individuals with schizophrenia die by
suicide or accidental death directly related to behaviors caused by
psychotic thinking, approximately 20% attempt suicide on one or
more occasions, and many more have suicidal ideation. Life expectancy is reduced in individuals with schizophrenia because of associated medical conditions; a shared vulnerability for psychosis and
medical disorders may explain some of the medical comorbidity of
schizophrenia.

ETIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS

Etiologic evidence for schizophrenia supports a neurodevelopmental
and neurodegenerative model, with multiple genetic and environmental risks having important roles. It has been hypothesized that although
psychotic disorders have their origins in early development, it is not
until youth are in their mid-­teens that the underlying neural structures manifest the disabling functional deficits and resultant psychotic
symptoms.

Genetic Factors

The lifetime risk of developing schizophrenia is 5-­20 times higher in
first-­degree relatives of affected probands than the general population. Concordance rates of 40–60% and 5–15% have been reported
in monozygotic and dizygotic twins, respectively. Genome-­wide
association studies have implicated variants in >100 different genes
that are statistically significant but individually only demonstrate
small increases in the risk for schizophrenia. The risk for schizophrenia increases with increasing burden of these risk alleles;
approximately 30% of the risk is attributable to common genetic
variants. Rare variants of larger effect have also been implicated as
increasing risk. Some rare copy number variants, where segments
of the genome encompassing many genes are either duplicated or
deleted, increase the risk of schizophrenia more markedly, with
odds ratios of 2-­25. Although these copy number variants may be
responsible for 0.5–1.0% of typical adolescent/adult-­onset schizophrenia, data indicate that they are responsible for about 12% of
schizophrenia cases with onset before age 13 years.

Environmental Factors

In utero exposure to maternal famine, advanced paternal age, prenatal infections, obstetric complications, marijuana use, and immigration have been hypothesized to contribute to the development of
schizophrenia. Cannabis use in teens is associated with a higher risk
of eventually developing psychosis, but it is difficult to determine
whether this is related to drug effects or an unmasking of underlying

289

disease potential. Environmental exposures may mediate disease
risk through direct neurologic damage, gene-­environment interactions, epigenetic effects, or de novo mutations. There is no evidence
that psychologic or social factors alone cause schizophrenia. Rather,
environmental factors potentially interact with biologic risk factors
to mediate the timing of onset, course, and severity of an acute episode. Expressed emotion within the family setting can influence the
onset and exacerbation of acute episodes and relapse rates.

NEUROANATOMIC ABNORMALITIES

Increased lateral ventricle volumes, along with reductions in hippocampus, thalamus, and frontal lobe volumes, have been reported in
schizophrenia. Youth with schizophrenia have reductions in gray matter volumes and reduced cortical folding. Neurotransmitter systems,
particularly central nervous system dopamine circuits, are hypothesized to have a key role in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. The
dopamine hypothesis is derived in part from the identification of D2
receptor blockade as the mechanism for the action of antipsychotic
medications. On neurologic exam, those with schizophrenia are often
found to have deficits in smooth-­pursuit eye movements and autonomic responsivity.

PREVENTION

There has been significant interest in prospectively identifying
youth at risk for schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders to provide early intervention before the development of a
chronic psychotic disorder. Those considered to be at clinically high
risk may express a variety of unusual or odd beliefs. They may have
unusual perceptual experiences, including frank hallucinations,
but retain insight into their unreality. Their speech and behavior
may be unusual, but not overtly disorganized. Individuals who had
been socially active may become withdrawn. The symptoms are
described as present at least once per week for the past month and
have begun or worsened over the past year. Although the symptoms are less severe and more transient than in a psychotic disorder,
20–40% of patients with these attenuated symptoms appear to go on
to a psychotic disorder within several years of symptom presentation. There is evidence that premorbid lower cognitive and social
skills as well as a history of substance abuse contribute to the risk of
developing a schizophrenia spectrum disorder.
Some evidence indicates that antipsychotic medication may delay
conversion to a psychotic disorder and ameliorate attenuated symptoms in active treatment, yet there appear to be no lasting effects after
the medication is withdrawn. Additionally, the known adverse effects
of antipsychotics argue against their being used broadly to prevent psychosis in these patients, given that about 65% do not go on to develop
a psychotic disorder.
Antidepressants have been associated with symptomatic
improvement in adolescents who are at risk of developing a schizophrenia spectrum disorder. Psychologic interventions, including
social skills, cognitive, and interaction training programs, as well as
educational family interventions and cognitive-­behavioral therapy
(CBT), are reported to improve symptoms and psychosocial functioning in youth with early symptoms and decrease the rate of conversion to psychosis.
Despite improvements in diagnostic predictive validity, significant
concern remains regarding a high false-­positive rate that may cause
individuals to be stigmatized or exposed to unnecessary treatment. In
this context, youth with early symptoms suggestive of psychosis should
be referred to a child and adolescent psychiatrist or other qualified
mental health specialist.

SCREENING

There are no validated tools for screening for schizophrenia spectrum
disorders in children or adolescents. A widely accepted premorbid
phenotype for childhood-­onset schizophrenia has yet to be established.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

290 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Of children with childhood-­onset schizophrenia, 67% show disturbances in social, motor, and language functioning, as well as learning
disabilities. Many meet criteria for comorbid ASDs, mood disorders,
and anxiety disorders.
Pediatric practitioners can make general inquiries of youth and
their parents regarding problems with thinking or perceptions,
including hallucinations and delusions. For younger children, the
clinician must ensure that the child understands the questions. True
psychotic symptoms are generally confusing to the individual. Highly
descriptive, detailed, organized, and situation-­specific reports are less
likely to represent true psychosis. Overt evidence of psychosis is not
always present on mental status examination, but in the absence of
this, the validity of symptom reports should be scrutinized. Given
the strong genetic component of schizophrenia spectrum disorders, a
thorough family history is key in supporting the workup of psychosis
in children. Youth presenting with possible psychosis warrant assessment and treatment by a child and adolescent psychiatrist or other
qualified mental health specialist.

ASSESSMENT

The diagnostic assessment of schizophrenia in youth is uniquely
complicated; misdiagnosis is common. Most children who report
hallucinations do not meet criteria for schizophrenia, and many do
not have a psychotic illness. The persistence, frequency, and form
of possible psychotic symptoms; the presence of distress; functional
impairment; and insight need to be considered in arriving at a diagnosis. Expertise in childhood psychopathology and experience in
assessing reports of psychotic symptoms in youth are important
prerequisite skills for clinicians evaluating youth for psychosis.
Comprehensive diagnostic assessments, which reconcile mental
status findings with the rigorous application of diagnostic criteria,
help improve accuracy.
All children who present with psychotic symptoms should receive
a thorough pediatric and neurologic evaluation to focus on ruling
out nonpsychiatric causes of psychosis (see Tables 47.4 and 32.4).
There is no neuroimaging or laboratory test that establishes a diagnosis of schizophrenia spectrum disorders; these diagnostic tests
are instead used to further assist with the medical evaluation while
also establishing baseline laboratory parameters for monitoring
medication therapy. Routine laboratory testing typically includes
blood counts; basic metabolic panel; and assessment of liver, renal,
and thyroid function. More extensive evaluation is indicated for
atypical presentations, such as a gross deterioration in cognitive and
motor abilities, focal neurologic symptoms, or delirium (see Table
47.5). Neuroimaging may be indicated when neurologic deficits are
present, or EEG may be indicated for a clinical history suggestive
of seizures or encephalopathy. Toxicology screens are indicated for
acute onset or exacerbations of psychosis when exposure to drugs
of abuse cannot be ruled out. Genetic testing is indicated if there
are associated dysmorphic or syndromic features. Tests to rule out
specific syndromes or diseases are indicated for clinical presentations suggestive of a specific syndrome (e.g., amino acid screens
for inborn errors of metabolism, ceruloplasmin for Wilson disease,
porphobilinogen for acute intermittent porphyria, neuronal antibodies for autoimmune encephalitis). Neuropsychologic testing
cannot establish the diagnosis but may be important for documenting cognitive deficits for academic planning.

TREATMENT

Treatment goals include decreasing psychotic symptomatology, directing the child toward a developmentally typical trajectory, and reintegrating the child into the home and community. Children and families
facing schizophrenia spectrum disorders require an array of mental
health services to address their psychologic, social, educational, and

cultural needs. Given the insidious onset and chronic course of these
disorders, the patient must be followed longitudinally, with periodic
reassessment to hone diagnostic accuracy and tailor services to meet
the patient’s and family’s needs. Integrated psychopharmacologic, psychotherapeutic, psychoeducational, and case management services are
often necessary.
Psychoeducation about the illness with an assessment of the
potential role of stigma in treatment participation is critical for
improving adherence with treatment recommendations. Assessing
a child’s strengths and vulnerabilities as well as available environmental resources is critical in devising an effective treatment plan.
School and community liaison work to develop and maintain a day-­
to-­day schedule for the patient is important. Specialized educational
programs should be considered within the school system. Cognitive remediation has led to some promising gains in planning ability
and cognitive flexibility. Effective and collaborative communication
among the family, the pediatrician, a child and adolescent psychiatrist, and other mental health providers increases the potential for the
patient’s optimal functioning.

Pharmacotherapy

First-­generation (typical) and second-­generation (atypical) antipsychotic medications are effective in reducing psychotic symptoms.
Antipsychotics appear to outperform placebo and to have approximately equal effectiveness, except for ziprasidone and clozapine,
which may be less and more effective than the others, respectively.
Risperidone, aripiprazole, quetiapine, olanzapine, and lurasidone
are FDA-­approved second-­generation antipsychotics for treating
schizophrenia in patients 13 years and older, and paliperidone for
those 12 years and older. Several first-­generation antipsychotics
are also FDA-­approved for children and adolescents. The choice of
which agent to use first is typically based on FDA approval status,
side effect profile, patient and family preference, clinician familiarity, and cost. Although clozapine is effective in treating both
positive and negative symptoms, it has a risk for agranulocytosis
and seizures, which limits its use to those patients with treatment-­
resistant disorders. Ziprasidone and paliperidone are associated
with QT prolongation; this finding along with the inferior effectiveness of ziprasidone limits its use with children and adolescents. All
antipsychotics carry some degree of risk of sedation, weight gain,
and extrapyramidal symptoms (see Chapter 33).
Most patients require long-­term treatment and are at significant
risk of relapse if their medication is discontinued. However, more
than 75% of youth with schizophrenia discontinue their medication within 6 months. Common reasons for discontinuation include
lack of efficacy, intolerable side effects, and general lack of adherence with treatment plan. Many patients will continue to experience
some degree of positive or negative symptoms, requiring ongoing
treatment. Patients should maintain regular physician contact to
monitor symptom course, side effects, and adherence. Depot or
long-­acting injectable antipsychotics have not been studied well in
pediatric age groups and have inherent risks with long-­term exposure to adverse side effects. They are typically only considered when
there is a well-­documented history of psychotic symptoms as well as
poor medication adherence.

Electroconvulsive Therapy

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be used with severely impaired
adolescents if medications are either not helpful or cannot be tolerated. It has not been systematically studied in children, but its use is
supported in adults with schizophrenia, typically in combination with
antipsychotic therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 47 u Childhood Psychoses

291

A.	Presence of one or both of the following symptoms:
1.	Delusions
2.	Hallucinations
B.	There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or
laboratory findings of both (1) and (2):
1.	The symptoms of Criterion A developed during or soon after
substance intoxication or withdrawal or after exposure to a
medication.
2.	The involved substance/medication is capable of producing
the symptoms in Criterion A.
C.	The disturbance is not better explained by a psychotic disorder
that is not substance/medication induced.
D.	The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
E.	The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With onset during intoxication: If the criteria are met for intoxication
with the substance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal: If the criteria are met for withdrawal
from the substance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly
after, withdrawal.

population is unknown, it is estimated that 7–25% of individuals
presenting with a first episode of psychosis meet criteria for this
diagnosis. Symptoms can be managed with antipsychotics until they
remit, which often happens shortly after the offending substance is
removed. Patients can develop a schizophrenia spectrum disorder
following substance exposure, but this tends to occur in individuals
who are at high risk for developing a primary psychotic disorder
regardless of substance exposure.
Psychosis due to another medical condition (see Table 47.8) is
also characterized by prominent hallucinations or delusions, but
history, physical exam, and laboratory findings support a direct
pathophysiologic connection between these symptoms and another
medical condition (see Tables 32.4, 47.4, 47.5, and 47.8). Any sensory modality can be affected by hallucinations. The hallucinations
vary in complexity depending on their etiology, and their description may be highly suggestive of a particular diagnosis, like olfactory hallucinations in temporal lobe epilepsy. Associations between
delusions and medical conditions tend to be less specific. The list
of medical conditions that can cause psychosis is long, and includes
epilepsy, strokes, neoplasms, endocrine disorders, genetic syndromes like velocardiofacial syndrome, autoimmune disorders,
and the permanent sequelae of toxic exposures (see Tables 32.4 and
47.4). Notably, delirium is excluded from psychosis due to another
medical condition. When narrowing the differential between
schizophrenia spectrum disorders, psychosis due to another medical condition, and any other etiology, it is important to consider the
timeline of symptoms, the presence of features that are atypical for
a primary psychosis, and the possibility of substance or medication exposure. Treatment of the underlying medical condition may
or may not require adjunctive antipsychotic treatment for management of psychosis, and the course and prognosis of the psychosis
will likely depend on the etiology.
A notable example of psychosis due to another medical condition is psychosis associated with epilepsy. The disorder manifests
with delusions or hallucinations associated with poor insight, and
can be further differentiated into ictal, interictal, and postictal psychosis. Ictal-­induced psychosis is a form of nonconvulsive status
epilepticus, usually a complex partial status that can last for hours
to days and is associated with periods of impaired consciousness.
Brief interictal psychosis can last days to weeks and is associated
with paranoia, delusions, and auditory hallucinations. Chronic
interictal psychosis resembles schizophrenia and manifests with
paranoia, visual hallucinations, and catatonia. Postictal psychosis is
the most common type (observed in 2–7% of patients with epilepsy)
and lasts up to 1 week and then spontaneously remits. The diagnosis
requires a strong index of suspicion and EEG monitoring. Treatment requires appropriate anticonvulsant drugs and, if the psychosis persists, initiating low-­dose antipsychotic medication.

From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp 110–115.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association. .

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography..

Table 47.8  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Psychotic
Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition

47.3 Catatonia in Children and Adolescents

47.2 Non-Schizophrenia Spectrum Psychotic
Disorders
Jennifer A. Zaspel and Rosa K. Kim
Beyond the schizophrenia spectrum of psychotic disorders, substance/
medication-­induced psychotic disorder (Table 47.7) and psychotic disorder due to another medical condition (Table 47.8) can be seen in
pediatric populations.
The hallmark features of substance/medication-­induced psychosis are delusions and hallucinations that develop within the
context of substance exposure: typically a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin exposure (see Tables 47.4 and 32.4 for a brief list).
Synthetic cannabinoids (bath salts) are a common drug producing
psychotic effects. A substance-­induced psychosis is distinguished
from a primary psychotic disorder by examining the onset and
course of symptoms; the onset of a primary psychosis may precede
substance exposure and may occur during periods of sustained
abstinence. Once they arise, psychotic symptoms may be present as
long as substance exposure is continued. Although the prevalence
of substance/medication-­induced psychotic disorder in the general

Table 47.7  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Substance/
Medication Induced Psychotic Disorder

A.	Prominent hallucinations or delusions.
B.	There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or
laboratory findings that the disturbance is the direct
pathophysiologic consequence of another medical condition.
C.	The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D.	The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
E.	The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
With delusions: If delusions are the predominant symptom.
With hallucinations: If hallucinations are the predominant symptom.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. pp 115–116.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association. .

Jennifer A. Zaspel and Rosa K. Kim
Catatonia is a constellation or syndrome of psychomotor features,
the most notable of which are decreased purposeful motor activity,
decreased engagement in interviews and physical exams, or excessive and peculiar motor activity. The most characteristic symptoms
are waxy flexibility and bizarre poses, but these may or may not
be present (Table 47.9). Diagnosis can be challenging, as psychomotor disturbances can range from unresponsiveness to agitation.
Catatonia has been associated with a broad array of conditions
affecting children, adolescents, and adults, including psychotic,
affective, drug-­related, autoimmune, encephalitic, and neurodevelopmental conditions (Table 47.10). Autoimmune encephalitis may
be the most common etiology in childhood. In addition, catatonia
(autism shut down syndrome) may complicate ASD (Chapter 58).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

292 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Table 47.9  Catatonia
Excitement: Extreme hyperactivity; constant motor unrest, which is
apparently nonpurposeful
Immobility/stupor: Extreme hypoactivity, immobility; minimally
responsive to stimuli
Mutism: Verbally unresponsive or minimally responsive
Staring: Fixed gaze, little or no visual scanning of environment,
decreased blinking
Posturing/catalepsy: Maintains posture(s), including mundane (e.g.,
sitting or standing for hours without reacting)
Grimacing: Maintenance of odd facial expressions
Echopraxia/echolalia: Mimics of examiner’s movements/speech
Stereotypy: Repetitive, non–goal-­directed motor activity (e.g., finger
play; repeatedly touching, patting, or rubbing self)
Mannerisms: Odd, purposeful movements (hopping or walking tiptoe,
saluting passersby, exaggerated caricatures of mundane movements)
Verbigeration: Repetition of phrases or sentences
Rigidity: Maintenance of a rigid posture despite efforts to be moved
Negativism: Apparently motiveless resistance to instructions or to
attempts to move/examine the patient; contrary behavior does the
opposite of the instruction
Waxy flexibility: During reposturing of the patient, offers initial
resistance before allowing themselves to be repositioned (similar
to that of bending a warm candle)
Withdrawal: Refusal to eat, drink, or make eye contact
Impulsivity: Suddenly engaging in inappropriate behavior (e.g., runs
down the hallway, starts screaming, or takes off clothes) without
provocation; afterward, cannot explain
Automatic obedience: Exaggerated cooperation with examiner’s
request, or repeated movements that are requested once
Passive obedience (mitgehen): Raising arm in response to light
­pressure of finger, despite instructions to the contrary
Negativism (gegenhalten): Resistance to passive movement that is
proportional to strength of the stimulus; response seems automatic
rather than willful
Ambitendency: Appears stuck in indecisive, hesitant motor movements
Grasp reflex: Striking the patient’s open palm with two extended
fingers of the examiner’s hand results in automatic closure of the
patient’s hand
Perseveration: Repeatedly returns to the same topic or persists with
the same movements
Combativeness: Belligerence or aggression, usually in an undirected
manner, without explanation
Autonomic abnormality: Abnormality of body temperature (fever),
blood pressure, pulse rate, respiratory rate, inappropriate sweating
From Dhossche DM, Wachtel LE. Catatonia is hidden in plain sight among different
pediatric disorders: A review article. Pediatr Neurol. 2010;43:307–315.

Table 47.10  Conditions Associated with Catatonia
Psychotic Disorders
• Paranoid schizophrenia, catatonic schizophrenia, psychosis,
autism, Prader-­Willi syndrome, intellectual impairment
Mood Disorders
• Bipolar disorder: manic or mixed episodes
Major Depressive Disorder
Medical Conditions
• Hyper-­hypothyroidism, euthyroid autoimmune thyroiditis,
Addison disease, infections, electrolyte imbalances, pathogenic
variants in SCN2A gene, systemic lupus erythematosus
Neurologic Conditions
• Epilepsy, strokes, traumatic brain injury, multiple sclerosis,
infectious and autoimmune encephalitis, acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis, neuromyelitis optica spectrum
Drugs
• Withdrawal: benzodiazepines, l-­dopa, gabapentin
• Overdose: LSD, PCP, cocaine, MDMA (Ecstasy), disulfiram,
levetiracetam
LSD, Lysergic acid; MDMA, 3,4-­methylenedioxy-­N-­methylamphetamine; PCP, phencyclidine.
Adapted from Weder ND, Muralee S, Penland H, Tampi RR. Catatonia: A review. Ann
Clin Psychiatry. 2008;20(2):97–107:Table 2.

Table 47.11  DSM-­5 Criteria for Catatonia Due to Another
Medical Condition
A.	The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the
following symptoms:
1.	Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to
environment).
2.	Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against
gravity).
3.	Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by
examiner).
4.	Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [Note: not
applicable if there is an established aphasia]).
5.	Negativism (i.e., opposing or not responding to instructions
or external stimuli).
6.	Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a
posture against gravity).
7.	Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
8.	Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non–goal-­
directed movements).
9.	Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
10.	Grimacing.
11.	Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
12.	Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
B.	There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or
laboratory findings that the disturbance is the direct
pathophysiologic consequence of another medical condition.
C.	The disturbance is not better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., a manic episode).
D.	The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a
delirium.
E.	The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other areas of functioning.
Coding note: Include the name of the medical condition in the name
of the mental disorder (e.g., F06.1 catatonic disorder due to hepatic
encephalopathy). The other medical condition should be coded
and listed separately immediately before the catatonic disorder
due to the medical condition (e.g., K71.90 hepatic encephalopathy;
F06.1 catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy)
Adapted from Weder ND, Muralee S, Penland H, Tampi RR. Catatonia: A review. Ann
Clin Psychiatry. 2008;20(2):97–107:Table 2.

The exact pathophysiology of catatonia is unknown, but neuroanatomic, neuroendocrine, immunologic, and neurotransmitter-­based
theories have all been proposed based on the various underlying
etiologies of catatonia. Morbidity and mortality are high in adults
who have experienced catatonia and are presumed to be high in
pediatric populations based on limited data primarily because of
the severity of an underlying illness that could cause catatonia.
Patients with schizophrenia spectrum disorders and catatonia tend
to be more impaired than those who do not experience catatonia,
and suicide rates are estimated to be 500-­fold higher than in the
general population.
Catatonia is defined as 3 or more of the 12 symptoms listed in
Table 47.11 and can be described by both etiology and presentation. The DSM-­5 broadly splits etiology into presentations related
to mental disorders and presentations related to another medical
condition, the diagnosis of which must be supported by the patient’s
history, physical exam, and any accompanying laboratory findings.
Pediatric prevalence rates range from 0.6–17% in child psychiatric
inpatients and up to 17% in medically hospitalized children, but
rates are difficult to determine due to underdiagnosis of the condition. Catatonia can be further subdivided into three presentation
categories: stuporous, excited, and malignant. Stuporous presentations are characterized by immobility, mutism, staring, and rigidity, whereas excited presentations include prolonged periods of
psychomotor agitation. Malignant catatonia is an emergent condition, presenting with hyperthermia, hypertension, rhabdomyolysis,
and psychomotor agitation in addition to the psychiatric and motor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 47 u Childhood Psychoses
Table 47.12  Standard Examination of Catatonia
The method described here is used to complete the 23-­item Bush-­
Francis Catatonia Rating Scale (BFCRS) and the 14-­item Bush-­
Francis Catatonia Screening Instrument (BFCSI). Item definitions
on the two scales are the same. The BFCSI measures only the
presence or absence of the first 14 signs.
Ratings are based solely on observed behaviors during the
examination, with the exception of completing the items for
“withdrawal” and “autonomic abnormality,” which may be based
on directly observed behavior or chart documentation.
As a general rule, only items that are clearly present should be rated.
If the examiner is uncertain as to the presence of an item, rate the
item as “0.”
PROCEDURE
1.	Observe the patient while trying to engage in a conversation.
2.	The examiner should scratch his or her head in an exaggerated
manner.
3.	The arm should be examined for cogwheeling. Attempt to
reposture and instruct the patient to “keep your arm loose.”
Move the arm with alternating lighter and heavier force.
4.	Ask the patient to extend his or her arm. Place one finger beneath
his or her hand and try to raise it slowly after stating, “Do not let
me raise your arm.”
5. Extend the hand stating, “Do not shake my hand.”
6. Reach into your pocket and state, “Stick out your tongue. I want
to stick a pin in it.”
7.	Check for grasp reflex.
8.	Check the chart for reports from the previous 24-­hour period.
Check for oral intake, vital signs, and any incidents.
9.	Observe the patient indirectly, at least for a brief period each day,
regarding the following:
• Activity level
• Abnormal movements
• Abnormal speech
• Echopraxia
• Rigidity
• Negativism
• Waxy flexibility
• Gegenhalten
• Mitgehen
• Ambitendency
• Automatic obedience
• Grasp reflex
Gegenhalten, Resistance to movements that is equal and opposite to the pressure exerted
by examiner; mitgehen, extreme mitmachen where even slightest pressure moves limb;
mitmachen, passive movement of extremity despite instruction not to move.
From Bush G, Fink M, Petrides G, Dowling F, Francis A. Catatonia. I. Rating scale and
standardized examination. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 1996;93(2):129–136.

symptoms seen in catatonia. The differential diagnosis for this type
includes neuroleptic malignant syndrome or serotonin syndrome
(see Chapter 33). Most children will present with a stuporous clinical picture, whereas the remaining cases present as excited or malignant, 19% and 5%, respectively. The severity of symptoms can be
measured and tracked using the Bush-­Francis Catatonia Rating
Scale, a validated tool that accompanies a standardized physical
examination and observation of patient behavior (Table 47.12). The
diagnostic approach is driven by the search for the underlying cause
for catatonia and the monitoring of its potentially dangerous effects
on the body.
Beyond supportive care and discontinuation of any precipitating
agents, treatment of catatonia should be expeditious to reduce the
medical sequelae of prolonged symptoms. Benzodiazepines, in particular lorazepam, are typically first-­line pharmacologic treatment

293

for catatonia. Low-­dose lorazepam is often trialed as a confirmatory
“challenge” for patients with suspected catatonia, where a positive
result is improvement or even resolution of symptoms within hours
of administration of the medication. If the initial challenge test does
reverse symptoms, increasing doses of lorazepam are indicated,
with careful monitoring to avoid side effects (Fig. 47.2). Rapid
withdrawal of benzodiazepines can, in turn, precipitate catatonia in
those who are susceptible. The use of antipsychotics in catatonia is
controversial, as they have been associated with an increased incidence of malignant catatonia or neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
ECT has also been used in both adults and children, though it is
underutilized due to caretaker and ethical concerns. Its use is typically recommended when other viable treatment options have either
not been successful or cannot be safely administered. It has been
successful in treating refractory catatonia in children with autism.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

47.4 Hallucinations of Childhood
Jennifer A. Zaspel and Rosa K. Kim
Hallucinations are perceptions that occur in the absence of identifiable external stimuli. Nondiagnostic hallucinations are those that
fall within the realm of normal human experience, such as hearing footsteps, knocking, or one’s name being called. Hypnogogic
and hypnopompic hallucinations are experienced as one transitions into and out of sleep, respectively, and on their own carry
no psychopathologic implications. In younger children, reported
hallucinations can reflect a developmentally appropriate blurring
between fantasy and reality, especially regarding dreams and imaginary friends. Children are also more susceptible to perceptual distortions or illusions (misinterpretations of external stimuli) but
may communicate these phenomena to adults in a way that most
would interpret as hallucinations. The first clinical task in evaluating youth who report hallucinations is to sort out those associated
with severe mental illness from those derived from other causes
(Fig. 47.3).
Acute phobic hallucinations are benign, common, and typically
occur in otherwise healthy preschool children. The hallucinations
are often visual or tactile, last 10-­60 minutes, and most often occur at
night. The children are quite frightened and might complain that bugs
or snakes are crawling over themselves and attempt to remove them.
The child’s fear is not alleviated by reassurance by the parents or physician, and the child is not amenable to reason. Findings on physical
and mental status examinations are otherwise normal, and the cause
is unknown. Symptoms can persist for 1-­3 days, slowly abating over
1-­2 weeks.
In children with nonpsychotic hallucinations, all other symptoms
of psychosis are absent. Nonpsychotic hallucinations typically occur
in the context of severe traumatic stress, developmental difficulties,
social and emotional deprivation, parents whose own psychopathology promotes a breakdown in the child’s sense of reality, cultural beliefs
in mysticism, and unresolved mourning. Auditory hallucinations
of voices telling the child to do “bad things” may be associated with
disruptive behavior disorders in an unconscious attempt to distance
oneself from undesirable behaviors. Hearing a voice invoking suicide
is often associated with depression. Trauma-­related hallucinations are
commonly associated with posttraumatic stress disorder and are likely
a representation of flashbacks. Auditory and visual hallucinations may
similarly be endorsed in complex bereavement. The content of the hallucinations is often relevant in understanding the underlying psychopathology and developmental issues.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

294 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Possible catatonia

Apply catatonia criteria

Medical workup + urine toxicology

Assess severity of catatonia
(e.g., using rating scales)

Search and eliminate culprit
substances or medications
Catatonia
LZP
challenge test

Improved

Not improved

3-day LZP trial

Bilateral ECT

Much improved

Somewhat improved

Not improved

LZP continuation

LZP + Bilateral ECT

Bilateral ECT

When relapsing,
LZP maintenance

When relapsing,
maintenance LZP + ECT

When relapsing,
maintenance-ECT

Hallucinations

Mental status examination

Delusions / Psychosis

Normal

• Schizophrenia
• Bipolar disorder
• Major depressive
disorder
• Drug induced
• Delusional infestation
• Autoimmune
encephalitis

• Fantasy
• Culture
• Grief
• Hypnogogic
hallucinations
• Night terrors
• Acute phobic
hallucinations
• Fever

History of seizures
• Complex partial
epilepsy
• Idiopathic occipital
epilepsy of Gastaut

Fig. 47.3 Algorithm for the evaluation of hallucinations.

The evaluation of the underlying condition directs the type of treatment needed. Diagnostic nonpsychotic hallucinations suggest the need
for disorder-­specific psychotherapy and adjunctive medication, if indicated. CBT focused on helping the youth understand the origin of the
hallucinations and on developing coping strategies for stressful situations may be helpful for older children and adolescents.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

When relapsing,
maintenance-ECT

Fig. 47.2 Algorithm for the eval-

uation, diagnosis, and treatment
of catatonia in children and adolescents. ECT, Electroconvulsive
therapy; LZP, lorazepam. (From
Dhossche DM, Wilson C, Wachtel LE. Catatonia in childhood
and adolescents: Implications
for the DSM-­
5. Prim Psychiatry.
2010;17:23–26.)

Chapter 48

Delirium
Colleen K. Manak and Rosa K. Kim
Delirium is defined as a disorder of awareness and attention and is
characterized by its waxing and waning nature. It is not a primary psychiatric diagnosis and instead occurs secondary to an underlying medical condition, though at the time of initial presentation the underlying
cause is often unknown. The symptoms of delirium are similar between
adults and children. Delirium in children carries risks of adverse outcomes, including death, if it is not treated. Untreated delirium can serve
to prolong the recovery course of comorbid and underlying conditions;
the clinical features of delirium, including agitation, aggression, and
confusion, can often interfere with necessary medical care. Delirium
in children and adolescents is associated with a 12.5–29% mortality
rate. Quick recognition, diagnosis, and treatment of delirium and its
underlying cause is essential in ensuring the best outcome for patients.

DIAGNOSIS

Criteria for the diagnosis of delirium are included in the DSM-­5
under Neurocognitive Disorders (Table 48.1). Delirium presents with
an acute onset, developing quickly over the course of hours to days
and symptoms tend to wax and wane. This fluctuation of symptoms
can be dramatic over the course of a day, with a patient appearing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 48 u Delirium
Table 48.1  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Delirium
A.	A disturbance in attention (i.e., reduced ability to direct, focus,
sustain, and shift attention) and awareness (reduced orientation to
the environment).
B.	The disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually
hours to a few days), represents a change from baseline attention
and awareness, and tends to fluctuate in severity during the course
of a day.
C.	An additional disturbance in cognition (e.g., memory deficit,
disorientation, language, visuospatial ability, or perception).
D.	The disturbances in Criteria A and C are not explained by another
preexisting, established, or evolving neurocognitive disorder and
do not occur in the context of a severely reduced level of arousal,
such as coma.
E.	There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or
laboratory findings that the disturbance is a direct physiologic
consequence of another medical condition, substance intoxication
or withdrawal (i.e., due to a drug of abuse or to a medication), or
exposure to a toxin, or is due to multiple etiologies.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. p. 596.
Copyright 2013. American Psychiatric Association.

Table 48.2  DSM-­5 Delirium Subtypes
Hyperactive delirium

Hypoactive delirium

Mixed delirium

Increased psychomotor activity
and mood lability
• Confusion
• Psychosis
• Disorientation
• Agitation
• Hypervigilance
• Hyper-­alertness
• Combativeness
• Loud, pressured speech
• Behavioral dysregulation
• Pulling at lines/catheters
Decreased psychomotor activity
• Sluggishness
• Lethargy
• Stupor
• Confusion
• Apathy
Normal level of psychomotor
activity
• Poor attention
• Decreased awareness
• Rapid fluctuation of activity
level

Adapted from Meagher D, Moran M, Raju B, et al. A new data-­based motor subtype
schema for delirium. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2008;20(2):185–193:Fig 1.

relatively well from a cognitive perspective during one assessment, and
then seeming acutely altered at the next. At the core of delirium is an
alteration in attention and awareness, and a disturbance in cognition.
Patients with delirium will struggle to focus and sustain attention. They
are often disoriented, showing confusion about where they are, poor
orientation to time, and sometimes disorientation to self. In addition
to these core features, delirium often presents with symptoms that have
the potential to be mistaken for psychosis or mania. People with delirium may hallucinate, engage in bizarre or purposeless movements, and
show alterations in their sleep–wake cycles.
Delirium can be further categorized into subtypes (Table 48.2). The
hyperactive subtype is characterized by increased motor activity, loss
of control of activity, restlessness, and wandering. The hypoactive

295

subtype presents with reduction in activity, speed of actions, awareness of surroundings, quantity and speed of speech, and alertness. It is
possible for patients to present with both hyperactive and hypoactive
symptoms over the course of 24 hours, classified as having a mixed
motor subtype. There has been emerging evidence of a fourth group,
identified as the no motor subtype, in which they do not show characteristics of either hyper-­or hypoactive subtypes.
Although these subtypes are often seen in both pediatric and adult
delirium, diagnosing delirium in children can pose challenges not
present in adult populations. Developmental differences, especially
in young children, necessitate alternative approaches to assessing and
diagnosing delirium. Bedside staff and caregivers can provide helpful
insight into behaviors and cognitive changes, such as changes in attention, increased fussiness over baseline, and difficulty soothing, which
might be missed by clinicians who are unable to evaluate symptoms of
delirium using traditional methods (Fig. 48.1).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The prevalence rate of pediatric delirium is an estimated to be 13–44%
among hospitalized children, with higher rates seen in patients who are
admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and/or those being mechanically ventilated. Increased risk for delirium may be associated with the
underlying medical condition, prolonged hospitalization (especially
ICU admission), young age, neurocognitive and developmental disorders, and a personal history of delirium. Potentially modifiable risk factors include polypharmacy, deep sedation, the use of benzodiazepines
and anticholinergic medications, disrupted sleep, pain, sensory deprivation, and lack of familiar environment or caregivers. Delirium can
occur at any age and has been observed in infants in the NICU.

ETIOLOGY

Although nearly any medical condition that requires hospitalization
can lead to delirium, there are diagnoses that are more commonly associated with delirium (Table 48.3). Similarly, there are several drugs that
are associated with the development of delirium in children including benzodiazepines, anticholinergic medications, sedatives, opiates,
steroids, and some illicit substances (synthetic cathinone, synthetic
cannabinoids).

ASSESSMENT

A thorough review of the medical record helps to identify predisposing and precipitating factors including exposures, changes in behavior,
recent illness, and surgeries. If a reasonable cause is unable to be found
on history, a further medical work-­up is usually indicated.
It is possible for children with known psychiatric illnesses to develop
delirium in response to medical stress. Having a comorbid psychiatric
diagnosis should not delay the diagnosis of delirium. Psychiatric illnesses that can be confused with delirium include psychosis, mania,
depression, and catatonia (Table 48.4). Key factors to look for in the
history of patients with delirium are an acute onset without prodrome
or other previous concern for worsening behavioral functioning, variable symptoms from moment to moment, and deficits in attention and
orientation.
One of the factors that complicates assessment of delirium in children is the developmental level of the child. A young child will be
unable to answer some of the standard assessment questions (e.g.,
questions about orientation), which means that a fair amount of the
assessment will come from the bedside staff and the child’s primary
caregivers. More standard assessment strategies can be utilized in older
children and adolescents.
In the patient interview, a good assessment will strive to evaluate
affect, thought process, thought content, attention, and orientation
to make the diagnosis of delirium. Because the nature of delirium
is waxing and waning, it would not be atypical to have a seemingly
normal exam in a patient one suspects to have delirium. Performing
multiple assessments over the course of time is important to making an accurate diagnosis. In delirium, patients can have a disruption in their normal affect and may appear restricted or dysthymic.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

296 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
Cornell Assessment of Pediatric Delirium (CAPD)
RASS score _____ (if –4 or –5 do not proceed)
Please answer the following questions based on your interactions with the patient over the course of your shift:
Never

Rarely

Sometimes

Often

Always

4

3

2

1

0

Never

Rarely

Sometimes

Often

Always

0

1

2

3

4

Score

1. Does the child make eye contact with the
caregiver?
2. Are the child’s actions purposeful?
3. Is the child aware of his/her surroundings?
4. Does the child communicate needs and
wants?

5. Is the child restless?
6. Is the child inconsolable?
7. Is the child underactive–very little
movement while awake?
8. Does it take the child a long time to
respond to interactions?
TOTAL

A
The Preschool Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU (psCAM-ICU)

1 Acute change or fluctuating course of mental status

• Is there an acute change from mental status baseline? (Y or N)
• Has the patient’s mental status fluctuated during the past 24 hours? (Y or N)
If “YES” to EITHER question then Feature 1 is present → Move on to Feature 2

No

STOP
Delirium
absent

Yes

2 Inattention

→ Show alternating pictures/mirrors and give verbal prompts

• Attends to 7 or less pictures/mirrors?
• Patient does not maintain spontaneous eye opening in between verbal prompts
If “YES” to EITHER question then Feature 2 is present → Move on to Feature 3

No

Yes

3 Altered level of consciousness (LOC)

• Does the patient currently have an altered LOC? (i.e. not alert and calm)
If “YES” then Feature 3 is present → DELIRIUM PRESENT
If “NO” then Feature 3 is not present → Move on to Feature 4

Delirium
present
Yes

No

4 Disorganized brain

Yes

• Does the patient have a sleep-wake cycle disturbance? (Any of the following)
• Sleeps mostly during the day

• Has difficulty getting to sleep

• Does not awaken easily to stimulation • Sleeps little at night
If “YES” then Feature 4 is present → DELIRIUM PRESENT

No

Delirium
absent

B
Fig. 48.1 Screening tools for the assessment of delirium. A, Cornell Assessment of Pediatric Delirium (CAPD). B, The Preschool Confusion Assess-

ment Method for the ICU (psCAM-­ICU). The short-­form (clinical) psCAM-­ICU is used to assess for delirium in infants and children who are at least
responsive to voice. RASS, Richmond Agitation and Sedation Scale. (A from Traube C, Silver G, Kearney J, et al. Cornell Assessment of Pediatric
Delirium: A valid, rapid, observational tool for screening delirium in the PICU*. Crit Care Med. 2014;42:656–663; B from Smith HA, Gangopadhyay
M, Goben CM, et al. The Preschool Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU: Valid and Reliable Delirium Monitoring for Critically Ill Infants and
Children. Crit Care Med. 2016;44:592–600:Fig. 2.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 48 u Delirium
Table 48.3  Etiologies of Pediatric Delirium (CRITICAL
CARE mnemonic)
Cardiovascular

Anemia, shock, vasculitis, hypertensive
encephalopathy

Respiratory

Respiratory insufficiency, respiratory failure,
pneumothorax

Infection

Sepsis, encephalitis, urinary tract infection,
meningitis, fever, pneumonia, tracheitis,
cellulitis, surgical site infection, COVID-­19

Toxins

Polypharmacy, heavy metals, drug:drug
interactions

Inflammatory process

Autoimmune and rheumatologic disease

CNS pathology

Stroke, seizure, head trauma, intracranial
bleed, tumor, anoxic brain injury

Abuse, withdrawal,
sedation

Alcohol, benzodiazepines, opioids,
barbiturates, prolonged/excessive sedation

Liver

Liver insufficiency, hepatic failure,
hyperammonemia

Catheters, central line
infections

Invasive device or procedure complications

Alimentation

Electrolyte imbalance, nutritional
deficiencies, dehydration

Renal

Renal insufficiency or failure

Endocrinopathies

Glycemic disturbance, thyroid disease,
parathyroid disease, adrenal disease

297

Thought processes are often disorganized, tangential, or circumstantial and may seem loosely associated with, or not at all related to,
the reality of what is going on in the moment. Patient with delirium
may also be perseverative in their thought content, with difficulty
moving away from a subject or becoming highly fixated on, or preoccupied with, one thing. They may have altered thought content,
with hallucinations. Visual hallucinations especially are one of the
hallmark alterations of thought content associated with delirium.
Attention is frequently impacted in delirium, with patients demonstrating decreased attention, with an impaired ability to attend to
a conversation or a situation. Orientation in people with delirium
is often altered, especially with regards to orientation to place and
time. Although all of these changes are observed to wax and wane
during the course of delirium, changes in orientation can be the
most striking, with patients sometimes going from being fully oriented to quite confused in the span of hours.

RATING SCALES

There are multiple rating scales that have been created to help to screen
for delirium, particularly in critical care or intensive care setting (see
Fig. 48.1). The Cornell Assessment for Pediatric Delirium (CAPD),
Pediatric Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit
(pCAM-­ICU), Preschool Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU
(psCAM-­ICU), and Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale (RASS) are all
scales that are frequently used to help monitor for delirium. The CAPD,
pCAM-­ICU, and psCAM-­ICU have all been validated for use in the
pediatric population. Rating scales are not diagnostic on their own but
can be useful for identifying patients at risk for delirium and for following response to treatment.

MEDICAL EVALUATION

Adapted from Malas N, Brahmbhatt K, McDermott C, Smith A, Ortiz-­Aguayo R, Turkel
S. Pediatric delirium: Evaluation, management, and special considerations. Curr
Psychiatry Rep. 2017;19(9):65.

Delirium is a clinical diagnosis and can be made with history and physical exam alone. There are no tests that are routinely recommended in

Table 48.4  Differential Diagnosis of Delirium
CLINICAL FEATURE

DELIRIUM

PSYCHOSIS

DEPRESSION

CATATONIA

Course

Acute onset, hours, days or
more

Insidious onset over many
months, prodrome

Insidious onset, at least 2
wk, often over months

Onset variable

Attention

Markedly impaired attention
and arousal

Normal to mild impairment

Mild impairment

Variable difficulty with
attention and arousal

Fluctuation

Characterized by a waxing and
waning course; disturbed
day/night cycle

Absent

Absent

Less likely to fluctuate,
motor signs may show
more fluctuation

Perception

Misperceptions; hallucinations
(visual, fleeting); paramnesia

Hallucinations, auditory
with personal reference

May have mood-­congruent
hallucinations

May have hallucinations,
especially if secondary to
primary psychosis

Speech and language

Abnormal clarity, speed and
coherence; disjointed and
dysarthric; misnaming;
characteristic dysgraphia

Disorganized with bizarre
theme

Decreased amount of
speech

Mutism; echolalia

Other cognition

Disorientation to time, place;
recent memory and
visuo­spatial abnormalities

Disorientation to person;
concrete interpretations

Mental slowing;
indecisiveness; memory
retrieval difficulty

Global disorientation

Behavior

Lethargy; nonsystematized
delusions; emotional lability

Systematized delusions;
paranoia; bizarre
behavior

Depressed mood;
anhedonia; lack of
energy; sleep and
appetite disturbance

Stupor; catalepsy;
negativism; posturing;
stereotypy; agitation not
influenced by external
stimuli; grimacing;
echopraxia

Electroencephalogram

Diffuse slowing; low voltage
fast activity; specific patterns

Normal

Normal

Normal, focal
abnormalities or
generalized slowing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

298 Part III u Behavioral and Psychiatric Disorders
the evaluation for delirium, rather clinicians should be guided by the
history and medical concerns. There are times when laboratory, imaging, and other testing modalities can be helpful particularly in patients
with suspected delirium when the underlying medical etiology of delirium is unknown.
Central nervous system imaging may be recommended to help
identify underlying processes that may be contributing to delirium;
brain imaging on its own is not a tool that can diagnose delirium
and is not recommended for the sole purpose of diagnosis.
Electroencephalogram (EEG) is one of the few tools that can
be used to help confirm a delirium diagnosis if there is diagnostic ambiguity or uncertainty. Various studies have found 65–86%
of children with delirium have abnormal EEGs. Findings associated
with delirium typically include some degree of diffuse background
slowing and disorganization. This EEG finding has been shown to
effectively discriminate between children with delirium and healthy
controls. However, these EEG findings are nonspecific and are not
sufficient to diagnose delirium. Another caveat when utilizing
EEG in the evaluation of delirium is the reality that several of the
underlying causes of delirium, including metabolic derangement,
seizures, infections, and intoxication, can also lead to EEG changes
in the absence of delirium (see Table 48.3).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Table 48.5  Nonpharmacologic Management of Delirium
Environmental
modifications

• Maintain lighting consistent with the
time of day
• Minimize noise
• Familiar objects
• Visible clock, calendar

Sensory modifications

• Have appropriate sensory aides
available (glasses, hearing aids)
• Soft, calming music
• Minimize lines, catheters, restraints
• Maintain comfortable position and body
alignment

Caregiver interventions

• Frequent reorientation
• Fewer care team providers/different
faces
• Cluster cares to minimize interruptions
• Promote normal sleep/wake schedule
• Presence of familiar caregivers

underlying process is being treated and removing medications that
may precipitate or worsen delirium.

Both medical and psychiatric disorders may share or mimic some of the
symptoms of delirium and can sometimes lead to complications when
trying to make the diagnosis. Catatonia, depression, and psychosis are
some of the more frequently occurring diagnoses that can be confused for
delirium in children and especially adolescents (see Table 48.4; see Chapter
47). In particular, catatonia can be difficult to separate from delirium, especially because the two can co-­occur. It is important to attempt to clarify
the diagnosis because treatment of delirium and catatonia is different; the
treatment for one can exacerbate the other. To help distinguish between
the two, it is often helpful to assess for motor signs seen in catatonia that are
not typically present in delirium (see Chapter 47.3). Additionally, catatonia
is less likely to present with a waxing and waning course. The Bush-­Francis
Rating Scale can be used to help diagnose catatonia (see Table 47.12).
Delirium can also mimic psychosis, frequently presenting with hallucinations and sometimes delusions. One of the most profound differences
between the two is the onset; delirium has an acute onset compared with
the prodromal nature of a first episode of psychosis. It would be unusual
for primary psychosis to develop over the course of days. However, this
is characteristic of delirium. Hallucinations in delirium are often visual,
whereas primary psychotic illnesses typically present with predominantly
auditory hallucinations. Delusional thought content in delirium often lacks
any internal structure or interconnectedness, while delusions in primary
psychotic disorders are frequently structured around a common theme.
Patients with depression may have some characteristics of delirium.
The course and onset can help to distinguish depression from delirium;
with depression the timing of onset is often closer to that of delirium.
Depression does not demonstrate a waxing and waning course, and
while cognition can be affected, it is often slowed with some memory
problems, whereas orientation remains intact.

Antipsychotics

TREATMENT
Nonpharmacologic Interventions

Other Medications

Nonpharmacologic interventions are a mainstay in both delirium
treatment and prevention. The goal behind these interventions is to
provide a supportive environment and to provide sensory and environmental modifications to help offset the challenges posed by the
need for hospital-­based care and treatment. Strategies such as frequent
reorientation, adherence to normal routines, clustering care, and maintaining a normal sleep–wake cycle are all frequently implemented to
prevent or manage delirium (Table 48.5)

Pharmacologic Treatment

Pharmacologic management of delirium focuses on both utilizing medications to help manage the symptoms of delirium while the

Medications for the behavioral symptoms of delirium target disruptive
behaviors that pose a danger to the patient and caregivers and interfere
with necessary medical care. Although these medications do not treat
the underlying cause of delirium, they can help to decrease distress
and lead to a shorter overall course. Antipsychotic medications are the
mainstay of treatment for the behavioral and psychiatric symptoms of
delirium. Both first-­and second-­generation antipsychotics are effective,
and the choice of medication is based on what other medical needs are
co-­occurring. It is recommended to “start low and go slow” to arrive at
an effective dose. Although typically used only for a short course (days
to weeks), it remains important to consider adverse effects of antipsychotic medications (see Chapter 33). All antipsychotics can cause QTc
prolongation; thus it is recommended that electrocardiogram (ECG)
monitoring be considered at the onset of and throughout the treatment.
For a patient who is unable to take medications by mouth, intramuscular
(IM) or intravenous (IV) haloperidol can be used. IV haloperidol is more
potent than IM or oral haloperidol; switching between formulations and
modes of administration must be done carefully. For patients who can
take medications by mouth, second-­generation antipsychotics are typically the preferred choice. Risperidone, quetiapine, and olanzapine have
all been shown to be effective in treating children and adolescents with
delirium. Risperidone and olanzapine are available in an oral disintegrating tablet, and quetiapine is available in a liquid solution, which makes
them easy to administer for patients who are dependent on a nasogastric
tube for nutrition. Choice of medication is often dependent on what is
available in the treatment setting, and the preferred route of administration. In chronically ill medical patients, inquiring about a past history of
delirium and treatment can be helpful in guiding medication choices.
Melatonin has some utility in the management of delirium as it can
help to promote a normal circadian rhythm and the return to a healthy
sleep–wake cycle. Trazodone has also been shown to have some benefit
for patients who are struggling with nocturnal sleep maintenance.

Medications to Avoid

In addition to adding medications for the treatment of delirium, eliminating unnecessary or potentially deliriogenic medications is equally
important. Benzodiazepines worsen delirium and should be avoided as
much as possible in patients at risk of developing delirium. They should
not be used to treat agitation in delirious patients. Anticholinergic
medications are also known to potentiate delirium and should also be
avoided. Minimizing polypharmacy to the extent possible can help to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 48 u Delirium
eliminate potentially deliriogenic medications and aid in the prevention of delirium.

Pain Medications

Opiate pain medications can be associated with worsening delirium
and should be used with care in patients at risk for delirium. Complicating this is the reality that untreated or undertreated pain can also
be associated with the development and perpetuation of delirium, so
ensuring adequate pain control will help to manage, and in some cases,
prevent delirium.

Course and Sequelae
Course

The resolution of delirium can be variable. Some patients improve
quickly once the underlying cause is identified and treated, while

299

others may take weeks to months to show full resolution of symptoms.
Patients who have delirium related to complex medical issues, such as
autoimmune encephalitis, or prolonged hospital stays, may have longer
lasting delirium. When symptoms improve, antipsychotic medications
can be weaned; patients do not need to be on them long term.

Sequelae

Patients who have delirium are more likely to have subsequent episodes
of delirium. There is evidence that patients with delirium go on to have
impaired cognitive functioning compared to patients who have never
had an episode of delirium.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

