Bone and Joint Disorders
Section 1

PART

XXX

IN UTERO POSITIONING

Orthopedic Problems
Chapter 713

Orthopedic Growth and
Development
Brendan A. Williams and Lawrence Wells
There is a wide spectrum of normal orthopedic growth and development in children. Normal values are often defined as those that
fall within 2 standard deviations of the mean value for the population, a range that accounts for approximately 95% of values. Statistically normal should not be confused with ideal in any given person’s
or parent’s mind. Table 713.1 lists terms used to describe some
common deviations from normal. Congenital anomalies can be categorized into production problems and packaging problems. Production problems include abnormalities caused by malformation,
dysplasia, or disruption that will not spontaneously resolve (see
Chapter 100). Packaging problems include deformations caused by
mechanical causes, including in utero positioning and molding, and
they usually resolve with time.

Table 713.1  Terminologies for Deviations
TERMINOLOGY

DESCRIPTION

Congenital

Anomaly that is apparent at birth

Deformation

A normally formed structure
that is pushed out of shape by
mechanical forces

Deformity

A body part altered in shape
from normal, outside the
normal range

Developmental

A deviation that occurs over
time; one that might not be
present or apparent at birth

Disruption

A structure undergoing normal
development that stops
developing or is destroyed or
removed

Dysplasia

A tissue that is abnormal or
wrongly constructed

Malformation

A structure that is wrongly
built; failure of embryologic
development or differentiation
resulting in abnormal or
missing structures

In utero positioning produces temporary joint and muscle contractures
and affects the torsional alignment of the long bones, particularly those of
the lower extremities. Normal full-­term newborns can have up to 20-­to
30-­degree hip and knee flexion contractures. These contractures tend to
resolve by 4-6 months of age. The newborn hip externally rotates in extension up to 80-90 degrees and has limited internal rotation to approximately
0-10 degrees. The lower leg often has inward rotation (internal tibial torsion). The face may also be distorted; the spine and upper extremities are
less affected by the in utero position. The effects of in utero positioning,
therefore, are physiologic in origin and resolve by 3-4 months of age.

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

Consideration of growth and development helps formulate treatment
strategies designed to preserve or restore normal growth potential.
Growth is subject to many variables, including genetics, nutrition, general health, endocrine status, mechanical forces, and physiologic age.
Growth also varies between two anatomic regions and even between
two bones of the same region.
Bone formation or ossification occurs in two different ways. In endochondral ossification, mesenchymal cells undergo chondrogenesis to
form cartilage that matures to become bone. Most bones in the axial
and appendicular skeleton are formed in this manner. In intramembranous ossification, osteoblasts are formed by direct differentiation
of mesenchymal cells into bone. Flat bones of the skull and clavicle are
examples of this pattern of bone formation.

CENTERS OF OSSIFICATION

At the beginning of the fetal period, the chondrocytes in the midshaft of the long bones form the primary centers of growth from
which the bone eventually lengthens. Secondary centers of ossification appear in the chondroepiphysis and mostly appear postnatally.
They direct the formation of bone throughout growth, particularly
joint development. The ossification centers that are typically present at birth are the distal femur, proximal tibia, calcaneus, and talus
(Fig. 713.1).

Anatomic Locations: Descriptive Terms

Typical long bones are divided into the physis, epiphysis, metaphysis, diaphysis, and perichondrial ring (Figs. 713.2 and 713.3). The
physis is the growth plate located at the end of bone. The epiphysis
is typically a secondary ossification center that contributes to joint
development. The metaphysis is the bone adjacent to the physis on
the side away from the joint. The diaphysis is the central part or
shaft of long bones. The perichondrial ring contributes to appositional growth.
The articular cartilage also contributes to the growth of the epiphysis. The perichondrial ring, which surrounds the physes, and the perichondrium around the epiphyses and periosteum, which surrounds
the metaphysis and diaphyseal regions of the bone, contribute to
appositional or circumferential growth. Bones without physes (pelvis,
scapulae, carpals, tarsals) grow by appositional bone growth from their
surrounding perichondrium and periosteum. Other bones (metacarpals, metatarsals, phalanges, spine) grow by a combination of appositional and endochondral ossification.

Important Growth and Developmental Milestones

Table 713.2 summarizes some important musculoskeletal growth
considerations.

4193
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4194 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
17 y

14-15 y

11-14 y
13-15 y

14 y
13-15 y

1-2 y

0-3 m

11-12 y

Secondary spongiosa
Cancellous bone

12 y M
11 y F
1-2 m M
1-6 m F

Compact bone

5-7 y M
3-6 y F

8-10 y

3-18 m

4-9 y

Physis

Osteoclast
Osteoblast

Metaphysis

Diaphysis

39 wk fetal

8-10 y M
7-9 y F

3-6 y

Epiphysis

Ossification center
Reserve cartilage
Proliferating cells
Vacuolating cells
Calcified cartilage
Primary spongiosa

4m

4-6 y

Articular cartilage

3-5 y
3-4 y

Birth

Fig. 713.3 Functional components of the growing end of a tubular

bone and their anatomic substrate. (From Kan JH, Strouse PJ. Embryology, anatomy, and normal findings. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2019: Fig. 128.5)

6m

9-12 m

Table 713.2  Skeletal Growth Considerations

A

B

Fig. 713.1 Ages of onset of secondary (epiphyseal and apophyseal)

ossification of the major bones of the upper (A) and lower (B) extremity.
F, Female; M, male; m, month; wk, week; y, year. (From Caffey J. Pediatric X-­ray Diagnosis, 8th ed. Chicago: Year Book, 1985.)

Epiphysis
Metaphysis

Epiphyseal plate (physis)
enclosed by perichondrial ring

• Abnormal stature can be assessed as “proportionate” or
“disproportionate” based on comparing the ratio of sitting height
with sub-­ischial height (lower limbs).
• Normally the arm span is almost equal to standing height.
• The head is disproportionately large at birth, and the ratio of head
height to total height is approximately 1:4 at birth, which changes
to 1:7.5 at skeletal maturity.
• Lower extremities account for approximately 15% of height at
birth and 30% at skeletal maturity.
• The rate of height and growth increase is not constant and varies
with growth spurts.
• By age 5, birth height usually doubles, and the child is
approximately 60% of adult height. The child is approximately
80% of final height at 9 yr old. During puberty, the standing height
increases by approximately 1 cm/mo.
• Bone age is more important than chronological age in
determining future growth potential.

Periosteum

Diaphysis

Medullary
canal
Compact
bone

Compact bone
cross section
Haversian

In the hip joint, the acetabulum forms with the convergence of three
primary ossification centers: ischium, ilium, and pubis.

GAIT/FUNCTIONAL MATURATION

Fig. 713.2 Diagram showing typical long bone divisions.

Growth Patterns in Upper and Lower Extremities

The upper extremity grows longitudinally, primarily from physes of the
proximal humeral physis and the distal radial and ulnar physes. In the
lower extremity, most of the longitudinal growth occurs around the
knee, in the distal femoral and the proximal tibial physes (Fig. 713.4).

Functional mobility develops in infants in a predictable fashion
(Table 713.3). Failure to achieve functional milestones is an indication for referral to a neurologist to determine if a central nervous
system (CNS) problem exists. CNS maturation contributes significantly to the development of gait. In early ambulation (at 8-15
months), the child usually has a wide-­based gait with hyperflexion
of hips and knees, and initial contact with the heel. By the age of 2
years, the wide gait diminishes, reciprocal arm swing begins, and
there is increased stride length and velocity. Adult fluid gait patterns usually start developing by 3 years and mature to an adult-­like
pattern by age 7 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 714 u Orthopedic Evaluation of the Child
COMPLETE
LIMB

LIMB
SEGMENT

15%

30%

cm/yr
0.8 (0.8)

37%

70%

1.2 (1.4)

28%

60%

0.9 (1.1)

COMPLETE
LIMB

LIMB
SEGMENT

40%

60%

cm/yr
1.04

10%
10%

20%
20%
25%

0.26
0.22 Ulna
0.25 Radius

75%
80%

0.75 Radius
0.9 Ulna

40%

20%

40%

0.7 (0.8)

Fig. 713.4 The contribution (%) of each physis to the overall length of
the extremities. (From Morrissy R, Weinstein S, eds. Lovell and Winter’s
Pediatric Orthopedics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
2001.)

Table 713.3  Functional Milestones
MILESTONE

ACHIEVED BY

Head control

3-6 mo

Sitting

6-9 mo

Crawling

8 mo

Pulling to stand

8-12 mo

Ambulating

12-18 mo

Chapter 714

Orthopedic Evaluation of
the Child
Kathleen J. Maguire and Lawrence Wells

4195

Table 714.1  Characterization of Pain and Presenting
Symptom
Location: Whether pain is localized to a particular segment or
involves a larger area.
Intensity: Usually on a pain scale of 1-10 to indicate severity.
Quality: Tumor pain is often unrelenting, progressive, and present
during the night. Pain at night particularly suggests osteoid
osteoma. Pain in inflammation and infection is usually continuous.
Onset: Was it acute and related to specific trauma or was it
insidious? Acute pain and history of trauma are more commonly
associated with fractures.
Duration: Whether transient, only lasting for minutes, or lasting for
hours or days. Pain lasting for longer than 3-4 weeks suggests a
serious underlying problem.
Progress: Whether static, increasing, or decreasing.
Radiation: Pain radiating to upper or lower extremities or complaints
of numbness, tingling, or weakness require appropriate workup.
Aggravating factors: Relationship to any activities, movements, or
particular positions.
Alleviating factors: Is the pain relieved by rest, heat/ice, and/
or medication? Conditions such as spondylolysis, Scheuermann
disease, inflammatory spondyloarthropathy, muscle pulls, or
overuse are improved by bed rest.
Gait and posture: Disturbances associated with pain.

vitamins, use of drugs or opiates, alcohol consumption, diabetes, immunization status (including receipt of rubella vaccine), and sexually transmitted infections. The child’s prenatal and perinatal history should
include information about the length of pregnancy, length of labor, type
of labor (induced or spontaneous, Cesarean or vaginal delivery), presentation of fetus (cephalic or breech), birth trauma, evidence of any fetal
distress at delivery, requirement for supplemental oxygen after the delivery, birth length and weight, Apgar score, muscle tone at birth, feeding
history, and period of hospitalization. In older infants and young children, evaluation of developmental milestones for posture, locomotion,
dexterity, social activities, and speech are important. Specific orthopedic
questions should focus on joint, muscular, appendicular, or axial skeleton complaints. Information regarding pain or other symptoms in any
of these areas should be elicited (Table 714.1). The family history can give
clues to heritable disorders. It also can forecast expectations of the child’s
future development and allow appropriate interventions as necessary.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

The orthopedic physical examination includes a thorough examination
of the musculoskeletal system along with a comprehensive neurologic
examination. The examination may vary depending on the age of the
child. The musculoskeletal examination includes inspection, palpation,
and evaluation of motion, strength, stability, and gait. A basic neurologic examination includes sensory examination, motor function, and
reflexes. The orthopedic physical examination requires basic knowledge of anatomy of joint range of motion, alignment, and stability.
Many common musculoskeletal disorders can be diagnosed by the history and physical examination alone. One screening tool that has been
useful in children is the pediatric gait, arms, legs, spine (pGALS) test,
the components of which are shown in Figure 714.1.

Inspection
A detailed history and thorough physical examination are critical to
the evaluation of a child with an orthopedic problem. The child’s family
and acquaintances are important sources of information, especially in
younger children and infants. Appropriate radiographic imaging and,
occasionally, laboratory testing may be necessary to support the clinical diagnosis.

HISTORY

A comprehensive history should include details about the prenatal, perinatal, and postnatal periods. Prenatal history should include information about maternal health, including smoking history, use of prenatal

Initial examination of the child begins with inspection. The patient
should be comfortable with adequate exposure and well-­lit surroundings
(lest some important physical findings be missed). Infants or young
children may be examined on their parent’s lap so that they feel more
secure and are more likely to be cooperative. The clinician should use
the guidelines listed in Table 714.2 during inspection.

Palpation

Palpation of the involved region should include assessment of local
temperature and tenderness; assessment for a swelling or mass, lymphadenopathy, spasticity or contracture, and bone or joint deformity; and
evaluation of anatomic axis of limb and of limb lengths.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4196 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Gait

A “Walk on your tip-toes.”
*Observe the child walking

B “Walk on your heels.” *Observe
the child walking

Arms

C “Put your hands out in front of
you.”

D “Turn your hands over and make E “Touch the tips of your fingers
a fist. Pinch your index finger
with your thumb.”
and thumb together.”

F Squeeze metacarpophalangeal
joints

G “Put your hands together.”*

H “Put your hands back to back.”*

I “Reach up and touch the sky.*
Look at the ceiling.”

J “Put your hands behind your
neck.”

L “Bend and then straighten your
knee.” (active movement of
knees and examiner feels for
crepitus)

M Passive flexion (90 degrees)
with internal rotation of hip

Legs

K Feel for effusion at the knee

Spine

N “Open your mouth and put 3 O Lateral flexion of cervical
of your (child’s own) fingers
spine: “Try and touch your
in your mouth.”*
shoulder with your ear.”

P Observe spine from behind

Q “Can you bend and touch
your toes?” Observe curve
of spine from side and
behind

Fig. 714.1 The components of pediatric gait, arms, legs, spine (pGALS) screen, with illustration of movement. Screening questions: (1) Do you

have any pain or stiffness in your joints, muscles, or back? (2) Do you have any difficulty getting yourself dressed without any help? (3) Do you have
any difficulty going up and down stairs? *Additions and amendments to the original adult gait, arms, legs, spine screen. (From Foster HE, Kay
LJ, Friswell M, et al. Musculoskeletal screening examination [pGALS] for school-­age children based on the adult GALS screen. Arthritis Rheum.
2006;55:709–716.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 714 u Orthopedic Evaluation of the Child
Table 714.2  Guidelines During Inspection of a Child with
Musculoskeletal Problem

Table 714.3  Beighton Grading for Hypermobility

• It is important to inspect how the patient moves about in the
room before and during the examination, as well as during various
maneuvers. Balance, posture, and gait pattern should also be
evaluated.
• General examination findings should include inspection for skin
rashes, café-­au-­lait spots, hairy patches, dimples, cysts, tuft of hair,
or evidence of spinal midline defects that can indicate serious
underlying problems that need review.
• General body habitus, including signs of cachexia, pallor, and
nutritional deficiencies, should be noted.
• In the setting of trauma, inspection of the injured limb should
note deformity, swelling, erythema, and ecchymosis about a joint
and/or long bone of the appendicular skeleton.
• Inspect the appendicular skeleton for evidence of deformity.
Note if the deformity appears centered at a joint, bone, or within
soft tissue. Attempt correction of the deformity to assess if it is
correctible/flexible or fixed.
• Note any obvious spinal asymmetry, axial deformities, trunk
decompensation, and evidence of muscle spasm or contractures.
The forward bending test is valuable in assessing asymmetry and
movement of the spine.
• Any discrepancies in limb lengths, as well as muscle atrophy,
should be recorded.

DESCRIPTION

4197

BILATERAL
TESTING

SCORE (MAX.
POINTS)

Passive dorsiflexion of the
fifth metacarpophalangeal
joint to >90 degrees

Yes

2

Passive hyperextension of the
elbow >10 degrees

Yes

2

Passive hyperextension of the
knee >10 degrees

Yes

2

Passive apposition of the
thumb to the flexor side of
the forearm, while shoulder
is flexed 90 degrees, elbow
is extended, and hand is
pronated

Yes

2

Forward flexion of the trunk,
with the knees straight, so
that the palms of the hands
rest easily on the floor

No

1

Total

9

From Smits-­Engelsman, B, Klerks M, Kirby A. Beighton Score: a valid measure for
generalized hypermobility in children. J Pediatr. 2011;158:119–123. Table 1.

Contractures are a loss of mobility of a joint from congenital or acquired
causes and are caused by periarticular soft tissue fibrosis or involvement
of muscles crossing the joint. Congenital contractures are common in
arthrogryposis (see Chapter 723). Spasticity is an abnormal increase in
tone associated with hyperreflexia and is common in cerebral palsy.
Deformity of the bone or joint is an abnormal fixed shape or position from congenital or acquired causes. It is important to assess the
type of deformity, its location, and degree of deformity on clinical
examination. It is also important to assess whether the deformity is
fixed or can be passively or actively corrected, and whether there is any
associated muscle spasm, local tenderness, or pain on motion. Classification of the deformity depends on the plane of deformity: varus (apex
away from midline) or valgus (apex toward midline), or flexion and
extension (in the sagittal plane). In the axial skeleton, especially the
spine, deformity can be defined as scoliosis, kyphosis, hyperlordosis,
and kyphoscoliosis (see Chapter 720).

Range of Motion

Active and passive joint motion should be assessed, recorded, and
compared with the opposite side. Baseline flexibility or hypermobility
beyond the range of normal motion should be noted. The Beighton
score for hyperflexibility has been validated in children and serves to
establish underlying laxity in the pediatric population (Table 714.3).
Objective evaluation should be done with a goniometer and recorded.
Vocabulary for direction of joint motion is as follows:
Abduction: Away from the midline
Adduction: Toward the midline
Flexion: Movement of bending from the starting position
Extension: Movement from bending to the starting position
Hyperextension: Movement in extension beyond the starting position
Supination: Rotating the forearm to face the palm upward
Pronation: Rotating the forearm to face the palm downward
Inversion: Turning the hindfoot inward
Eversion: Turning the hindfoot outward
Plantar flexion: Pointing the toes away from the body (toward the
floor)
Dorsiflexion: Pointing the toes toward the body (toward the ceiling)
Internal rotation: Turning inward toward the axis of the body
External rotation: Turning outward away from the axis of the body

Table 714.4  Normal Upper Extremity Motion in Children
in Degrees
MOTION

VALUE (IN DEGREES)

Shoulder elevation

180

Shoulder internal rotation

50-60

Shoulder external rotation

40-45

Shoulder extension

45-55

Shoulder internal rotation at 90
degrees of abduction

70

Shoulder external rotation at 90
degrees of abduction

100

Elbow flexion

145-150

Elbow extension

4-7

Adapted from Payares-­Lizano M, Pino C. Pediatric orthopedic examination. Pediatr Clin
North Am. 2020;67(1):1–21. Table 5; with additional data from McKay MJ, Baldwin JN,
Ferreira P, et al. Normative reference values for strength and flexibility of 1,000 children
and adults. Neurology. 2017;88(1):36–43.

Normal ranges of motion for the appendicular skeleton are noted
in Table 714.4 (upper extremity), Table 714.5 (hip), and Table 714.6
(lower extremity).

NEUROLOGIC EVALUATION

A careful neurologic evaluation is part of every pediatric musculoskeletal examination (see Chapter 630). The assessment should include
evaluation of developmental milestones, muscle strength (Table 714.7),
sensory assessment, muscle tone, and deep tendon reflexes. The neurologic evaluation should also assess the spine and identify any deformity, such as scoliosis and kyphosis, or abnormal spinal mobility. The
hips and feet should also be examined specifically, along with torsional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4198 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 714.5  Normal Hip Range of Motion in Children in Degrees
MOTION

AGE 2-5 (MALE/FEMALE)

AGE 6-10 (MALE/FEMALE)

AGE 11-17 (MALE/FEMALE)

Abduction

51/53

43/51

34/44

Adduction

17/18

15/18

14/17

Flexion

118/121

118/122

113/120

Extension

21/21

19/21

15/22

Internal rotation in flexion

45/47

40/41

35/35

External rotation in flexion

51/49

44/48

40/46

Internal rotation in extension

47/51

42/47

36/42

External rotation in extension

47/50

42/45

39/44

From Sankar WN, Laird CT, Baldwin KD. Hip range of motion in children: what is the norm? J Pediatr Orthop. 2012;32(4):399–405. Table 1.

Table 714.6  Normal Lower Extremity Motion in Children
in Degrees
MOTION

AGE 3-9 (MALE/
FEMALE)

AGE 10-19 (MALE/
FEMALE)

Knee flexion

145/144

140/142

Knee extension

4/4

2/2

Ankle dorsiflexion

33/31

32/31

Ankle plantarflexion

63/63

58/63

Table 714.8  Ashworth Scale of Spasticity
0

No increase in muscle tone

1

Slight increase in muscle tone, usually a catch or minimal
resistance at end range of motion

2

Moderate tone throughout range of motion

3

Considerable increase in tone; passive range of motion
difficult

4

Rigid in flexion or extension

Adapted from McKay MJ, Baldwin JN, Ferreira P, et al. Normative reference values for
strength and flexibility of 1,000 children and adults. Neurology. 2017;88(1):36–43. Table
e-4.

Table 714.9  Clinical Scale of Extremity Motor Control
GRADE

DEFINITION

1

Hypotonic, no volitional motion

DESCRIPTION

2

Hypertonic, no volitional motion

Grade 5

Normal

3

Mass flexion or extension in response to a stimulus

Grade 4

Movement against gravity and resistance

4

Grade 3

Movement against gravity over (almost) full
range

Patient can initiate movement but results in mass flexion
or extension

5

Grade 2

Movement of the limb with gravity eliminated

Slow volitional movement; stress or rapid movement
results in mass action

Grade 1

Visible contraction without movement of the
limb

6

Volitional control of specific joints/muscles

Grade 0

No visible contraction

Table 714.7  Medical Research Council (MRC) Scale for
Muscle Strength
MUSCLE GRADE

Data from Medical Research Council.

abnormalities of the lower extremity, which are vastly more common
in the neurologically involved population. Specific peripheral nerve
examinations may be necessary.
When the nervous system matures, the developing cerebral cortex normally inhibits rudimentary reflexes that are often present at
birth (see Chapter 630). Therefore, persistence of these reflexes can
indicate neurologic abnormality. The most commonly performed
deep tendon reflex tests include biceps, triceps, quadriceps, and gastrocnemius and soleus tendons. Upper motor neuron signs should
also be noted. The Ashworth scale is often used to grade spasticity (Table 714.8). Upper-­extremity motor control is often graded,
and these grades are useful both diagnostically and prognostically.
Passive range of motion should be assessed to determine extremity
motor control (Table 714.9). Localized or diffuse weakness must be

determined and documented. A thorough assessment and grading
of muscle strength is mandatory in all cases of neuromuscular disorders (see Table 714.7).

Gait Assessment

Children typically begin walking between 8 and ­16 months of age.
Early ambulation is characterized by short stride length, a fast
cadence, and slow velocity with a wide-­based stance. The gait cycle
is a single sequence of functions that starts with heel strike, foot
flat, heel off, toe off, and swing. These events describe one gait cycle
and include two phases: stance and swing. The stance phase is the
period during which the foot is in contact with the ground. The
swing phase is the portion of the gait cycle during which a limb is
being advanced forward without ground contact. Normal gait is a
symmetric and smooth process. Deviation from the norm indicates
potential abnormality and should trigger investigation.
Neurologic maturation is necessary for the development of gait
and the normal progression of developmental milestones. A child’s

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 714 u Orthopedic Evaluation of the Child
Table 714.10  Causes of Gait Disturbances
MECHANICAL
Acute injuries (accidental or nonaccidental)
Overuse conditions (mainly sports-­related)
Dysplastic lesions
Limb length discrepancy

Table 714.11  Differential Diagnosis of Limping in
Children by Age
AGE GROUP

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS

Early walker:
1-3 yr

PAINFUL LIMP
Septic arthritis and osteomyelitis
Transient synovitis
Fracture
Occult trauma (toddler’s fracture)
Intervertebral diskitis
Malignancy
Abuse (nonaccidental trauma)
Rheumatologic disorders (e.g., juvenile
idiopathic arthritis)

OSSEOUS
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease
Osteochondritis dissecans of knee and talus
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Osteomyelitis
Spondylodiscitis
Osteoid osteoma or other primary bone tumor
ARTICULAR
Developmental hip dysplasia
Septic arthritis
Transient synovitis
Rheumatic disease (juvenile idiopathic arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus)
Hemophilia-­related hemorrhage
Ankylosis of a joint

PAINLESS LIMP
Developmental dysplasia of the hip
Neuromuscular disorder
Polio
Cerebral palsy
Lower extremity length inequality
Child: 3-10 yr

NEUROLOGIC
Guillain-­Barré syndrome and other peripheral neuropathies
Intoxication
Cerebellar ataxia
Brain tumor
Lesion occupying spinal cord space
Posterior column spinal cord disorders
Myopathy
Hemiplegia
Complex regional pain syndrome
Cerebral palsy
HEMATOLOGIC/ONCOLOGIC
Sickle cell pain crisis
Leukemia, lymphoma
Metastatic tumor
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
OTHER
Soft tissue infection
Myositis
Fasciitis
Bursitis
Kawasaki disease
Conversion disorder
Gaucher disease
Phlebitis
Scurvy
Rickets
Peritonitis
From Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2018: Table 34.1, p. 615.

gait changes with neurologic maturation. Toddlers normally walk
with greater hip and knee flexion, flexed arms, and a wider base
of gait than older children. As the neurologic system continues to
develop in the cephalocaudal direction, the efficiency and smoothness of gait increase. The gait characteristics of a 7-­year-­old child
are similar to those of an adult. When the neurologic system is
abnormal (e.g., cerebral palsy), gait can be disturbed, exhibiting
pathologic reflexes and abnormal movements.
Deviations from normal gait occur in a variety of orthopedic conditions. Disorders that result in muscle weakness (e.g., spina bifida, muscular dystrophy), spasticity (e.g., cerebral palsy), or contractures (e.g.,
arthrogryposis) lead to abnormalities in gait. Other causes of gait disturbances include limp, pain, torsional variations (in-­toeing and out-­
toeing), toe walking, joint abnormalities, and leg-­length discrepancy
(Tables 714.10 and 714.11).

4199

PAINFUL LIMP
Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, myositis
Transient synovitis
Trauma, fracture
Rheumatologic disorders
Spondylodiscitis
Malignancy
PAINLESS LIMP
Developmental dysplasia of the hip
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease
Lower extremity length inequality
Neuromuscular disorder (e.g., muscular
dystrophy)
Polio
Cerebral palsy

Adolescent:
11 yr to
maturity

PAINFUL LIMP
Septic arthritis, osteomyelitis, myositis
Trauma (including overuse injuries and fractures)
Rheumatologic disorder
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (acute,
unstable)
Malignancy
Osteochondritis dissecans
PAINLESS LIMP
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (chronic,
stable)
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (acetabular
dysplasia)
Lower extremity length inequality
Neuromuscular disorder

Modified from Marcdante K, Kliegman R, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 7th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2015.

LIMPING

A thorough history and clinical examination are the first steps toward
early identification of the underlying problem causing a limp. Limping
can be considered either painful (antalgic) or painless, with the differential diagnosis ranging from benign to serious causes (e.g., septic
hip, tumor). In a painful gait, the stance phase is shortened as the child
decreases the time spent on the painful extremity. In a painless gait,
which indicates underlying proximal muscle weakness or hip instability, the stance phase is equal between the involved and uninvolved
sides, but the child leans or shifts the center of gravity over the involved
extremity for balance. A bilateral disorder produces a waddling gait.
Trendelenburg gait (i.e., trunk lists to the affected side with each step)
is produced by weak abnormal hip abductors. When the patient stands
on one foot, a Trendelenburg sign (i.e., sagging rather than rising of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4200 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
the unsupported buttock) can often be elicited when abductors are
weak.
Disorders most commonly responsible for an abnormal gait generally vary based on the age of the patient. The differential diagnosis of
limping varies based on age group (see Table 714.11) or mechanism.
Neurologic disorders, especially spinal cord, muscle, or peripheral
nerve disorders, can also produce limping and difficulty walking. Antalgic gait is predominantly a result of trauma, infection, or pathologic
fracture. Trendelenburg gait is generally caused by congenital, developmental, or muscular disorders. In some cases, limping also may be
caused by nonskeletal causes, such as testicular torsion, inguinal hernia, and appendicitis.

BACK PAIN

Children frequently have a specific skeletal pathology as the cause
of back pain. The most common causes of back pain in children are
trauma, spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis, and infection (see Chapter
720.5). Tumor and tumor-­like lesions that cause back pain in children are likely to be missed unless a thorough clinical assessment
and adequate workup are performed when required. Nonorthopedic
causes of back pain include urinary tract infections, nephrolithiasis,
and pneumonia.

RADIOGRAPHIC ASSESSMENT

Plain radiographs are the first step in evaluation of most musculoskeletal disorders. Advanced imaging includes MRI, nuclear bone scans,
ultrasonography, CT, and positron emission tomography. Rapid short
tau inversion recovery (STIR) MRI is a valuable screening test if a specific location is not well defined.

Plain Radiographs

Routine radiographs consist of anteroposterior and lateral views
of the involved area with inclusion of one joint above and below
the site of symptoms. Comparison views of the opposite side,
if uninvolved, may be helpful in difficult situations but are not
always necessary. Specialized views for each joint, such as oblique
views, may offer more specific and tailored imaging for an individual fracture or other condition. It is important for the clinician
to be aware of normal radiographic variants of the immature skeleton, including when to expect to see development and ultimately
closure of growth centers about the joints. Several synchondroses may be mistaken for fractures. A patient with “normal” plain
radiographic appearance but having persistent pain or symptoms might need to be evaluated further with additional imaging
studies.

Ultrasonography

Ultrasonography is useful to evaluate suspected fluid-­filled lesions
such as popliteal cysts and hip joint effusions. Major indications for
ultrasonography are fetal studies of the extremities and spine (including detection of congenital anomalies like spondylocostal dysostosis
or osteogenesis imperfecta), developmental dysplasia of the hip in
children 6 weeks to 6 months of age, joint effusions, occult neonatal
spinal dysraphism, foreign bodies in soft tissues, and popliteal cysts
of the knee.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

MRI is the imaging modality of choice for defining the exact anatomic extent of most musculoskeletal lesions (particularly if the
structure is soft tissue). MRI avoids ionizing radiation and does not
cause any known harmful effects. It produces excellent anatomic
images of the musculoskeletal system, including the soft tissue,
bone marrow cavity, spinal cord, and brain. It is especially useful

for defining the extent of soft tissue lesions, infections, and injuries.
Tissue planes are well delineated, allowing more accurate assessment of tumor invasion into adjacent structures. Cartilage structures can be visualized and differentiated (e.g., articular cartilage
of the knee can be distinguished from the fibrocartilage of the
meniscus). MRI is also helpful in visualizing unossified joints in
the pediatric population, including the shoulders, elbows, and hips
of young infants.

Magnetic Resonance Angiography

Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) has largely replaced routine
angiography in the preoperative assessment of vascular lesions and
bone tumors. MRA provides good visualization of peripheral vascular branches and tumor neovascularity in patients with primary bone
tumors.

Computed Tomography

CT has enhanced the evaluation of multiple musculoskeletal disorders. Coronal, sagittal, and axial imaging is possible with CT,
including three-­dimensional reconstructions that can be beneficial
in evaluating complex lesions of the axial and appendicular skeleton. It allows for visualization of the detailed bone anatomy and
the relationship of bones to contiguous structures. CT is useful to
readily evaluate tarsal coalition, accessory navicular bone, infection, growth plate arrest, osteoid osteoma, pseudoarthrosis, femoroacetabular impingement, complex fracture patterns (periarticular
and intra-­articular), bone and soft tissue tumors, spondylolysis, and
spondylolisthesis. CT is superior to MRI for assessing bone involvement and cortical destruction (even subtle changes), including calcification or ossification and fracture (particularly if displacement
of an articular fracture is suspected).

Nuclear Medicine Imaging

A bone scan displays physiologic information rather than pure
anatomy and relies on the emission of energy from the nucleotide
injected into the patient. Indications include early septic arthritis,
osteomyelitis, avascular necrosis, tumors (osteoid osteoma), metastatic lesions, occult and stress fractures, and cases of nonaccidental
trauma.
Total-­body radionuclide scan (technetium-99) is useful to identify bony lesions, inflammatory tumors, and stress fractures. Tumor
vascularity can also be inferred from the flow phase and the blood
pool images. Gallium or indium scans have high sensitivity for local
infections. Thallium-201 chloride scintiscans have >90% sensitivity and 80–90% accuracy in detecting malignant bone or soft tissue tumors. MRI has supplanted nuclear medicine imaging in many
circumstances.

LABORATORY STUDIES

Laboratory tests are occasionally necessary in the evaluation of a
child with musculoskeletal disorder. These may include a complete
blood cell count; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; C-­reactive protein
assay; Lyme titers; and blood, wound, joint, periosteum, or bone
cultures for infectious conditions such as septic arthritis or osteomyelitis. Rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, and human
leukocyte antigen B27 may be necessary for children with suspected
rheumatologic disorders. Creatine kinase, aldolase, aspartate aminotransferase, and dystrophin testing are indicated in children with
suspected disorders of striated muscle, such as Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes

Chapter 715

The Foot and Toes
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell,
and Richard S. Davidson
Abnormalities affecting the osseous and articular structures of the foot
may be congenital, developmental, neuromuscular, inflammatory, or
acquired. Problems with the foot and/or toes may be associated with a
host of connective tissue diseases and syndromes, and overuse syndromes
are commonly observed in young athletes. Symptoms may include pain
and difficulty with shoe wear, and cosmetic concerns are common. The
foot may be divided into the forefoot (toes and metatarsals), the midfoot
(cuneiforms, navicular, cuboid), and the hindfoot (talus and calcaneus).
Although the tibiotalar joint (ankle) provides plantarflexion and dorsiflexion, the subtalar joint (between the talus and calcaneus) is oriented
obliquely, providing inversion and eversion. Inversion represents a combination of plantarflexion and varus, whereas eversion involves dorsiflexion and valgus. The subtalar joint is especially important for walking on
uneven surfaces. Inversion of the transverse tarsal (Chopart) joint locks
the midfoot to provide a stable base on which to perform toe-­off during
the gait cycle. Eversion of the transverse tarsal joint unlocks the hindfoot
to provide accommodation during heel strike of the of the gait cycle. The
talonavicular and calcaneocuboid joints connect the midfoot with the
hindfoot.

4201

TREATMENT

The treatment of metatarsus adductus is based on the rigidity of the deformity, but most children respond to nonoperative treatment. Deformities
that are flexible and overcorrect into abduction with passive manipulation
may be observed. Those feet that correct just to a neutral position may benefit from stretching exercises, which can be demonstrated to the parents in
the office. In a walking child, the parents can try reversing the shoes as well.
If this is not effective, reverse-­last shoes can be prescribed to maintain the
abducted position of foot. These are worn full-­time (22 hours/day), and the
condition is reevaluated in 4-6 months. The position of the heel bisector
can be followed over the course of observation or treatment to monitor
for improvement. If improvement occurs, treatment can be continued for
an additional year or more. If there is no improvement, serial plaster casts
should be considered. When stretching a foot with metatarsus adductus,
care should be taken to maintain the hindfoot in neutral to slight varus
alignment to avoid creating hindfoot valgus. Feet that cannot be corrected
to a neutral position may benefit from initial serial casting; the best results
are obtained when treatment is started before 8 months of age. In addition to stretching the soft tissues, the goal is to alter physeal growth and
stimulate remodeling, resulting in permanent correction. Once flexibility
and alignment are restored, orthoses, corrective shoes, or wearing shoes
on opposite feet is generally recommended for 6-12 months. A dynamic
hallux varus usually improves spontaneously, and no active treatment is
required.
Surgical treatment may be considered in the small subset of patients
with symptomatic residual deformities who have not responded to treatment. Surgery is generally delayed until children are 4-6 years of age.
Cosmesis is often a concern, and pain and/or the inability to wear certain types of shoes may occasionally lead patients to consider surgery.

715.1 Metatarsus Adductus
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Metatarsus adductus involves adduction of the forefoot relative to the
hindfoot. When the forefoot is adducted, and sometimes in supination,
the deformity is termed metatarsus varus (Fig. 715.1). The disorder is
common in newborns, most frequently caused by intrauterine molding (deformation); the deformity is bilateral in 50% of cases. A careful
hip and neck examination must always be performed to look for other
abnormalities associated with intrauterine positioning.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The forefoot is adducted (occasionally supinated), whereas the midfoot
and hindfoot are normal. The lateral border of the foot is convex, and the
base of the fifth metatarsal appears prominent. Range of motion at the
ankle and subtalar joints is normal. Both the magnitude and the degree of
flexibility should be documented. When the normal foot is viewed from
the plantar surface, a line through the midpoint of (and parallel to) the
heel should extend through the second toe. In metatarsus adductus, the
line extends laterally to the second toe. Flexibility is assessed by stabilizing
the hindfoot and midfoot in a neutral position with one hand and applying
pressure over the first metatarsal head with the other. Correction with little
pressure is indicative of a more flexible deformity. In the walking child with
an uncorrected metatarsus adductus deformity, an in-­toe gait and abnormal shoe wear may occur. A subset of patients will also have a dynamic
adduction deformity of the great toe (hallux varus), which is often most
noticeable during ambulation. This usually improves spontaneously and
does not require treatment.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Radiographs are not performed routinely in infants with metatarsus
adductus. Older children with residual deformity should have anteroposterior (AP) and lateral weight-­bearing or simulated weight-­bearing radiographs. The AP radiographs demonstrate adduction of the metatarsals at
the tarsometatarsal articulation and an increased intermetatarsal angle
between the first and second metatarsals.

A

B
Fig. 715.1 Bilateral mild metatarsus adductus. A, Dorsal view show-

ing medial deviation of all the metatarsals. B, Plantar view showing the
“bean-­shaped” foot. This type of foot is easily corrected with serial
casting. (From Ricco AI. Disorders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig.
19-19.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4202 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Options for surgical treatment include either soft tissue releases or osteotomies depending on age, anatomy, deformity flexibility, and other
patient-­specific factors. An osteotomy (midfoot or multiple metatarsals)
is most likely to result in permanent restoration of alignment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.2 Calcaneovalgus Feet
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
A common finding in the newborn, the calcaneovalgus foot occurs secondary to in utero positioning (deformation). Excessive dorsiflexion and
eversion are observed in the hindfoot, and the forefoot may be abducted.
There may be an associated external tibial torsion (see Chapter 716).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A

B

The infant typically presents with the foot dorsiflexed and everted, and
occasionally the dorsum of the foot or toes will be in contact with the
anterolateral surface of the lower leg (Fig. 715.2). Dimpling may be indicative of reduced subcutaneous fat at the dorsolateral ankle. Plantarflexion
and inversion are often restricted. A careful hip examination should be
performed, and if there is any concern, hip ultrasonography should be
considered. When comparing risk for developmental dysplasia of the hip
(DDH) with other congenital foot deformities, congenital calcaneovalgus
has the highest association, with 6.1–19.4% of patients having coexisting
DDH. The calcaneovalgus foot may be confused with a congenital vertical
talus and may rarely be associated with a posteromedial bow of the tibia.
A calcaneovalgus deformity also may be seen in older patients, typically
those with a neuromuscular imbalance involving weakness or paralysis of
the gastrocsoleus muscle (e.g., polio, myelomeningocele).

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Radiographs are usually not required but should be ordered if the
deformity fails to correct spontaneously or with early treatment. AP
and lateral radiographs along with a lateral radiograph of the foot in
maximal plantarflexion may help distinguish calcaneovalgus from a
congenital vertical talus or congenital oblique talus. Evaluation of the
position of the talus in relation to the navicular in both the lateral and
maximally plantarflexed lateral view can help to diagnose congenital
vertical or oblique talus. If a posteromedial bow of the tibia is suspected, AP and lateral radiographs of the tibia and fibula are necessary.
In posteromedial bowing of the tibia, the deformity is located in the
tibia with the apex of deformity positioned posterior and medial. All
three conditions may be confused clinically with calcaneovalgus feet.

TREATMENT

Mild cases of calcaneovalgus foot, in which full passive range of motion is
present at birth, require no active treatment. These usually resolve within
the first few weeks of life. A gentle stretching program focusing on plantarflexion and inversion is recommended for cases with some restriction
in motion. For cases with a greater restriction in mobility, serial casts
may be considered to restore motion and alignment, although casting is
rarely required in the treatment of calcaneovalgus feet. Unresponsive cases
should be evaluated for associated neuromuscular or other etiologies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.3 Talipes Equinovarus (Clubfoot)
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Clubfoot or congenital talipes equinovarus (CTEV) is the term used
to describe a deformity involving malalignment of the calcaneo-­
talar-­
navicular complex. Components of this deformity may be

C
Fig. 715.2 Clinical picture of calcaneovalgus foot (A) that is passively
correctable (B) and is due to intrauterine positioning (C).
best understood using the mnemonic CAVE (cavus:midfoot,
adductus:forefoot, varus:heel, equinus:hindfoot). Although this is predominantly a hindfoot deformity, it involves plantarflexion (cavus) of the
first ray (the first metatarsal and first cuneiform) and adduction of the
forefoot/midfoot on the hindfoot. The hindfoot is in varus and equinus.
The clubfoot deformity may be positional, congenital, associated with
a variety of underlying diagnoses (neuromuscular or syndromic), or a
focal dysplasia of musculoskeletal tissue distal to the knee.
The positional (or postural) clubfoot is a normal foot that has been
held in a deformed position in utero and is found to be flexible on examination in the newborn nursery. The nonpositional congenital clubfoot
can either be idiopathic or syndromic. There is a spectrum of severity, but
clubfoot associated with neuromuscular diagnoses or syndromes is typically rigid and more difficult to treat. Clubfoot is also extremely common
in patients with myelodysplasia, arthrogryposis, and chromosomal syndromes such as trisomy 18 and chromosome 22q11 deletion syndrome
(see Chapter 99).
Congenital clubfoot is seen in approximately 1-2 in 1,000 births and
most likely results from a complex multifactorial polygenic inheritance.
The risk is ∼25% when both a parent and one sibling have clubfeet. It
occurs more commonly in males (2:1) and is bilateral in 50% of cases. The
pathoanatomy involves both abnormal tarsal morphology (plantar and
medial deviation of the head and neck of the talus) and abnormal relationships between the tarsal bones in all three planes, as well as associated
contracture of the soft tissues on the plantar and medial aspects of the foot.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A complete physical examination should be performed to rule out coexisting musculoskeletal and neuromuscular problems. The spine should
be inspected for signs of occult dysraphism. Examination of the infant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes
clubfoot demonstrates forefoot cavus and adductus and hindfoot varus
and equinus (Fig. 715.3). The degree of flexibility varies, and all patients
will exhibit calf atrophy. Internal tibial torsion, foot length shortening,
and leg-­length discrepancy (shortening of the ipsilateral extremity) will
be observed in a subset of cases. Although classically not associated with
DDH (see Chapter 719.1), there is a higher association of CTEV and DDH
than in the general population.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

AP and lateral radiographs are not recommended for idiopathic clubfoot.
For arthrogrypotic or syndromic feet, x-­rays may be helpful but must be
performed with the foot held in the maximally corrected position. The
lateral x-­
ray should be a trans-­
malleolar view. Multiple radiographic
measurements can be made to describe malalignment between the tarsal
bones. The navicular bone does not ossify until 3-6 years of age, so the
focus of radiographic interpretation is the relationship between segments
of the foot, forefoot to hindfoot. A common radiographic finding is “parallelism” between lines drawn through the axis of the talus and the calcaneus
on the lateral radiograph, indicating hindfoot varus. X-­ray may be particularly useful for older children with persistent or recurrent deformities that
are difficult to assess.

TREATMENT

Nonoperative treatment is initiated in all infants and should be started
as soon as possible following birth. Techniques have included taping and strapping, manipulation and serial casting, and functional
treatment. Historically, a significant percentage of patients treated by
manipulation and casting required a surgical release, which was usually performed between 3 and 12 months of age. Although many feet
remain well aligned after surgical releases, a significant percentage of
patients require additional surgery for recurrent or residual deformities, and stiffness remains a concern at long-­term follow-­up. While pain
is uncommon in childhood and adolescence, symptoms may appear
during adulthood. These concerns have led to considerable interest in
less-­invasive methods for treating the deformity.
The Ponseti method of clubfoot treatment, which is the standard of
initial treatment, involves a specific technique for manipulation and
serial casting, and may be best described as minimally invasive rather
than nonoperative (Fig. 715.4). The order of correction follows the mnemonic CAVE. Weekly cast changes are performed; 5-10 casts are typically
required. The most difficult deformity to correct is the hindfoot equinus,
and ∼90% of patients will require a percutaneous tenotomy of the heel cord

A

B

4203

under local anesthesia as an outpatient. Following the tenotomy, a long
leg cast with the knee flexed 90 degrees and the foot in maximal abduction (up to 70 degrees) with 0-10 degrees of dorsiflexion is worn for 3-4
weeks. The patient then begins a bracing program. An abduction brace
(bars and shoes) is worn 22 hours a day for 3 months and then at nighttime until the age of 3-5 years. A small subset of patients (up to 20%) with
recurrent, dynamic supination deformity will require transfer of the tibialis
anterior tendon to the lateral cuneiform. The results of the Ponseti method
are excellent at up to 40 years of follow-­up. Despite casting, children do not
have much dysfunction or delay in achieving normal motor milestones.
Compliance with the bracing program is essential as recurrence is common if the brace is not worn as recommended. Minimally invasive methods are most successful when treatment is begun at birth or during the
first few months of life, and with good compliance with postmanipulation
bracing.
Aggressive surgical realignment has a definite role in the management
of clubfeet, especially in the minority of congenital clubfeet that have failed
nonoperative or minimally invasive methods, and for the neuromuscular
and rigid syndromic clubfeet. In such cases, minimally invasive methods
such as the Ponseti technique may potentially be of value in decreasing the
need for surgery or the magnitude of surgery required. Common surgical approaches include a release of the involved joints (realignment of the
tarsal bones), a lengthening of the shortened posteromedial musculotendinous units, and usually pinning of the foot in the corrected position. The
“a la carte” method allows the surgeon to apply the principles of deformity
correction to be tailored to the unique characteristics of each deformity.
For older children with untreated clubfeet or those in whom a recurrence
or residual deformity is observed, bony procedures (osteotomies) may be
required in addition to soft tissue surgery. Triple arthrodesis is reserved as
salvage for painful, deformed feet in adolescents and adults.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.4 Congenital Vertical Talus
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Congenital vertical talus is an uncommon foot deformity in which the
midfoot is dorsally dislocated on the hindfoot and the ankle is in fixed
equinus. A variant form, called oblique talus, refers to subluxation of

C

Fig. 715.3 Talipes equinovarus in a newborn. A, Clinical appearance of an untreated clubfoot. B and C, Initial radiographic appearance of bilateral
untreated clubfeet. (From Ricco AI. Disorders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:
Fig. 19-42.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4204 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

C

F

D

E

Fig. 715.4 Ponseti method of clubfoot treatment. Ponseti casts show serial correction of the patient (A-­F). The last cast (E and F) was applied after
percutaneous heel cord tenotomy. (From Ricco AI. Disorders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 19.47, p. 717.)

the talonavicular joint and is usually neuromuscular in origin. There is
nearly an even split between idiopathic cases and cases with an underlying neuromuscular condition or a syndrome. Neurologic causes
include myelodysplasia, tethered cord, and sacral agenesis. Other associated conditions include arthrogryposis, Larsen syndrome, multiple
pterygium syndrome, and chromosomal abnormalities (trisomy 13-15,
19; see Chapter 99). Depending on the age at diagnosis, the differential
diagnosis may include a calcaneovalgus foot, oblique talus (talonavicular joint reduces passively), flexible flatfoot with a tight Achilles tendon, and tarsal coalition.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Congenital vertical talus has also been described as a rocker-­bottom
foot (Fig. 715.5). The plantar surface of the foot is convex, and the talar
head is prominent along the medial border of the midfoot. The forefoot
is dorsiflexed (dorsally dislocated) and abducted relative to the hindfoot,
and the hindfoot is in equinus and valgus. There is an associated contracture of the anterolateral (toe extensors) and the posterior (Achilles tendon, peroneals) soft tissues, which may overpower a weakened posterior
tibialis and toe flexors. The deformity is typically rigid in vertical talus

and flexible in oblique talus. Physical examination is required to identify
any coexisting neurologic and/or musculoskeletal abnormalities.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

AP, lateral, and maximal plantarflexion, and dorsiflexion lateral radiographs should be obtained when the diagnosis is suspected. The maximum plantarflexion view helps determine whether the dorsal subluxation
or dislocation of the midfoot on the hindfoot can be reduced passively,
that is, if the navicular can be aligned with the talus. The dorsiflexion
lateral view confirms the equinus contracture of the ankle. Although the
navicular does not ossify until 3-6 years of age, in younger patients the
relationship between the talus and the first metatarsal may be evaluated.

TREATMENT

The initial management consists of serial manipulation and casting,
which is started shortly after birth. A reverse Ponseti method of casting is particularly useful in stretching out the dorsiflexion and valgus
deformities. Open reduction and pin fixation can then stabilize the
midfoot, allowing simultaneous heel cord tenotomy and dorsiflexion
with casting to correct the ankle equinus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes

4205

C

A

B

D

Fig. 715.5 Congenital vertical talus. A, Pronation of the forefoot. B, Valgus of the heel. C, Absence of an arch, the rocker bottom deformity. D,

Elevation of the lateral toes and tight peroneal tendons. (From Ricco AI. Disorders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 19-67.)

In recalcitrant cases, the competing deformities of the midfoot and
the hindfoot make conservative treatment difficult. Initially an attempt
is made to reduce the dorsal dislocation of the forefoot/midfoot on
the hindfoot. Once this has been achieved, attention can be directed
toward stretching the hindfoot contracture. These deformities are typically rigid, and surgical intervention is required in the majority of cases.
In such cases, casting still helps to stretch out the contracted soft tissues
to minimize the magnitude of surgical correction required. Surgery is
generally performed between 3 and 12 months of age as a one-­stage
procedure. This involves release/lengthening of the contracted anterior
soft tissues in concert with an open reduction and wire fixation of the
talonavicular joint, followed by a posterior release with lengthening of
the contracted musculotendinous units. Fixation with Kirschner wires
is commonly performed to maintain alignment. Postoperatively, casting is employed for a variable period of time, and afterward patients
often require the use of an orthosis for extended periods, depending
on the underlying diagnosis. Salvage options for recurrent or residual
deformities in older children include a subtalar or triple arthrodesis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.5 Hypermobile Pes Planus (Flexible
Flatfeet)
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Flatfoot is a common diagnosis, and it has been estimated that up to 23% of
the public may be affected, depending on the diagnostic criteria employed.
Three types of flatfeet may be identified: a flexible flatfoot, a flexible flatfoot
with a tendo-­Achilles contracture, and a rigid flatfoot. Flatfoot describes
a change in foot shape, and there are several abnormalities in alignment
between the tarsal bones. There is eversion of the subtalar complex, valgus
alignment of the hindfoot, and midfoot sag at the naviculocuneiform and/
or the talonavicular joints. Additionally, the forefoot is abducted relative

to the hindfoot, and the head of the talus is uncovered and prominent
along the plantar and medial border of the midfoot/hindfoot. Although
hypermobile or flexible pes planus represents a common source of concern
for parents, these children are rarely symptomatic. Flatfeet are common
in neonates and toddlers and are associated with physiologic ligamentous
laxity. Improvement or correction is seen as the longitudinal arch develops
between 5 and 10 years of age in the vast majority of children. Flexible flatfeet persisting into adolescence and adulthood are usually associated with
familial ligamentous laxity (hypermobility syndromes) and often can be
identified in other family members.
Patients typically have a normal longitudinal arch when examined in a
non–weight-­bearing position or standing on the toes, but the arch flattens
when weight-­bearing. The hindfoot collapses into valgus, and the midfoot
sag becomes evident. The forefoot is supinated in weight-­bearing. Generalized hypermobility and ligamentous laxity are often observed. Range of
motion should be assessed at both the subtalar and the ankle joints. If the
heel cord is tight, the flexible fl
­ atfoot may become painful. When assessing
range of motion at the ankle, the hindfoot should always be inverted while
testing dorsiflexion to lock subtalar eversion and apparent dorsiflexion.
If the foot is neutral or everted, spurious dorsiflexion may occur through
the midfoot, masking a tendo-­Achilles contracture. If subtalar motion is
restricted, the flatfoot is considered “rigid,” and other diagnoses, such as
tarsal coalition and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, must be considered. On
occasion, there may be tenderness and/or callus formation under the talar
head medially. The shoes should be assessed as well and may have evidence
of excessive wear along the medial border.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Routine radiographs of asymptomatic flexible flatfeet are usually not
indicated. If obtained for diagnostic reasons, weight-­bearing radiographs (AP and lateral) are required to assess the deformity. The foot
should be positioned in the child’s normal stance as medial rotation
and hindfoot inversion may falsely correct the flatfoot. On the AP
radiograph, there is widening of the angle between the longitudinal
axis of the talus and the calcaneus, indicating excessive heel valgus, as
well as talonavicular uncoverage and forefoot abduction. The lateral

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4206 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
view shows decreased calcaneal pitch to the tibia and distortion of the
normal straight-­line relationship between the long axis of the talus and
the first metatarsal (i.e., Meary angle) with sag, either of the talonavicular or naviculocuneiform joint, resulting in flattening of the normal
medial longitudinal arch (Fig. 715.6).

TREATMENT

Although the natural history of the flexible flatfoot remains unknown,
there is little evidence to suggest that this condition results in long-­term
problems or disability. As such, treatment is reserved for the small subset of
patients who develop symptoms. Patients may complain of hindfoot pain,
difficulty with shoe wear, or fatigue after long walking. These patients may
benefit from a nonprescription orthosis, such as a medial arch support.
However, tight heel cords, when present, must be corrected before using
arch supports. Severe cases, often associated with an underlying connective tissue disorder such as Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (see Chapter 744) or
Down syndrome (see Chapter 99), may benefit from a custom orthosis
such as the UCBL (University of California Biomechanics Laboratory)
orthosis to better control the hindfoot and prevent collapse of the arch.
Although an orthosis may relieve symptoms, there is no evidence to suggest any permanent change in the shape of the foot or alignment of the
tarsal bones. Patients with a flexible flatfoot and a tight tendo-­Achilles
should be treated with stretching exercises. Often patients are referred to
physical therapy to ensure that they are stretching appropriately. For the
few patients with persistent pain despite conservative measures, surgical
correction of the flatfoot can be considered. This typically involves a lateral
column lengthening, which addresses all components of the deformity.
The procedure involves an osteotomy of the calcaneus, with placement
of a trapezoidal bone graft. A lengthening of the tendo-­Achilles is often
required, sometimes with a plantarflexion osteotomy of the medial cuneiform if the first ray remains supinated or in varus to restore the tripod
surface of the foot. This procedure preserves the mobility of the hindfoot
joints, in contrast to a subtalar or triple arthrodesis. Although a hindfoot
arthrodesis may correct the deformity adequately, the subsequent stress
transfer to neighboring joints may result in late-­onset, painful degenerative changes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.6 Tarsal Coalition
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Tarsal coalition, also known as peroneal spastic flatfoot, is characterized by a painful, rigid flatfoot deformity and peroneal (lateral calf)
muscle spasm without true spasticity. It represents a congenital fusion
or failure of segmentation between two or more tarsal bones. Any condition that alters the normal gliding and rotatory motion of the subtalar joint may produce the clinical appearance of a tarsal coalition. Thus

congenital malformations, arthritis, inflammatory disorders, infection,
neoplasms, and trauma can be possible causes.
The most common tarsal coalitions occur between the talus and
calcaneus at the medial talocalcaneal facet (subtalar or talocalcaneal
coalition) and between the calcaneus and navicular (calcaneonavicular
coalition). Coalitions can be fibrous, cartilaginous, or osseous. Tarsal
coalition occurs in approximately 1% of the general population and
appears to be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with nearly
full penetrance. Approximately 60% of calcaneonavicular and 50% of
medial facet talocalcaneal coalitions are bilateral.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Approximately 25% of patients will become symptomatic, typically during
the second decade of life. Although the flatfoot and a decrease in subtalar
motion may have been present since early childhood, the onset of symptoms may correlate with the additional restriction in motion that occurs as
a cartilaginous bar ossifies, reducing flexibility. Recurrent “ankle sprains”
often accompany the presenting symptoms. The timing of ossification
varies between the talonavicular (3-5 years of age), the calcaneonavicular
(8-12 years of age), and the talocalcaneal (12-16 years of age) coalitions.
Hindfoot pain is commonly observed, especially in the region of the sinus
tarsi and under the head of the talus. Symptoms are activity related and are
often increased with running or prolonged walking, especially on uneven
surfaces. There may be tenderness over the site of the coalition and/or pain
with testing of subtalar motion. The clinical appearance of a flatfoot is seen
in both the weight-­bearing and non–weight-­bearing positions. There is a
restriction in subtalar motion.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

AP and lateral weight-­bearing radiographs and an oblique radiograph of the foot should be obtained as well as a Harris or “heel”
view (Table 715.1). A calcaneonavicular coalition is seen best on the
oblique radiograph. On the lateral radiograph, there may be elongation of the anterior process of the calcaneus, known as the “anteater
sign” (Fig. 715.7). A talocalcaneal coalition may be seen on a Harris (axial) view of the heel. On the lateral radiograph, there may be
narrowing of the posterior facet of the subtalar joint or a C-­shaped
line along the medial outline of the talar dome and the inferior outline of the sustentaculum tali (“C sign”; Fig. 715.8). Beaking (or spur
formation) of the anterior aspect of the talus on the lateral view is
seen with some frequency and results from an alteration in the distribution of stress. Irregularity in the subchondral bony surfaces
may be seen in patients with a cartilaginous coalition, in contrast
to a well-­formed bony bridge in those with an osseous coalition. A
fibrous coalition may require additional imaging studies to diagnose.
Although plain films may be diagnostic, a CT scan is considered the
“gold standard” imaging modality when a coalition is suspected (see
Fig. 715.8). In addition to securing the diagnosis, this study helps
define the degree of joint involvement in patients with a talocalcaneal coalition. Although uncommon, more than one tarsal coalition
may be observed in the same patient. MRI is also very accurate at
detecting tarsal coalition, with a high rate of agreement with CT, and
Table 715.1  Radiographic Secondary Signs Associated
with Tarsal Coalition
Talar beaking
Posterior subtalar facet narrowing
Rounding and flattening of the lateral talar process
Hypoplasia of the talus, shortening of the talar neck
Anterior nose sign
Ball-­and-­socket ankle joint
Continuous C-­sign
Flatfoot deformity
Altered navicular morphology (wide or laterally tapering)
Dysmorphic sustentaculum tali (enlarged and ovoid on lateral
radiograph)

Fig. 715.6 Lateral weight-­bearing radiograph demonstrating features
of flatfoot.

From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2008: p. 2604.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes

4207

A
Fig. 715.7 Calcaneonavicular coalition in a child with the anteater

sign (arrow) and talar beak (dashed arrow). Elongation of the anterior
calcaneus resembling the nose of an anteater is present. (From Kan
JH, Laor T. Congenital anomalies of bone. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s
Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig.
131.11, p. 1250.)

may be useful when other diagnoses for pain are suspected and CT
is diagnostically suboptimal, or in young children whose tarsal bones
are not ossified. MRI offers less radiation exposure but requires more
time and may necessitate sedation.

TREATMENT

The treatment of symptomatic tarsal coalitions varies according to the
type and extent of coalition, the age of the patient, and the presence
and magnitude of symptoms. Treatment is required only for symptomatic coalitions, and the initial management consists of activity restriction and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications, often with a
shoe insert such as the UCBL orthosis. Immobilization in a short leg
walking cast for 4-6 weeks may be required in patients with more pronounced symptoms or those who do not respond to initial measures.
For patients with chronic pain despite an adequate trial of nonoperative therapy, surgical treatment should be considered as persistently
symptomatic patients who are treated surgically are less likely to report
persistent problems at long-­term follow-­up. Options include resection
of the coalition, osteotomy, and/or, in extensive coalitions, arthrodesis. For the calcaneonavicular coalition, resection, and interposition
of fat, bone wax, or of the extensor digitorum brevis muscle has been
successful. Often, concomitant hindfoot valgus and contracture of the
gastrocnemius-­soleus are present. In these patients, more reliable pain
relief can be obtained with resection of the coalition, correction of the
hindfoot valgus by calcaneal lengthening osteotomy with bank bone
graft and lengthening of the gastrocnemius-­soleus complex. For those
with extensive involvement of the joint and/or degenerative changes,
a triple arthrodesis may be the best option; this is rarely needed in
adolescents.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.7 Cavus Feet
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Cavus is a deformity involving plantarflexion of the forefoot or midfoot
on the hindfoot and may involve the entire forepart of the foot or just the
medial column. The result is an elevation of the medial longitudinal arch
(Fig. 715.9). A deformity of the hindfoot will often develop to compensate
for the primary forefoot abnormality. Although familial cavus may occur,
most patients with this deformity will have an underlying neuromuscular
etiology. The initial goal is to rule out, and if present, treat, any underlying causes. These diagnoses may relate to abnormalities of the spinal cord
(occult dysraphism, tethered cord, polio, myelodysplasia, etc.) and peripheral nerves (hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies [see Chapter 653],
such as Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth [CMT] disease, Dejerine-­Sottas disease, or

B
Fig. 715.8 Talocalcaneal coalition. A, A lateral radiograph demon-

strates the C sign (arrows), ovoid, elongated sustentaculum tali, and pes
planus. B, Computed tomography with coronal reformats in a different
patient demonstrates bilateral middle facet subtalar coalitions (arrowheads). (From Laor T, Kan JH. Congenital anomalies of bone. In: Coley
BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 131-13.)

Refsum disease). Although a unilateral cavus foot is most likely to result
from an occult intraspinal anomaly, bilateral involvement usually suggests
an underlying nerve or muscle disease. Cavus is commonly observed in
association with a hindfoot deformity. Two thirds of patients with pes
cavovarus have CMT, and conversely, 80% of CMT patients have pes cavovarus. In patients with hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies, progressive weakness and muscle imbalance result in plantarflexion of the first
ray and medial column. To obtain a plantigrade foot, the hindfoot must
roll into varus. With equinocavus, the hindfoot is in equinus, whereas in
calcaneocavus (usually seen in polio or myelodysplasia), the hindfoot is in
calcaneus (excessive dorsiflexion).

TREATMENT

Any underlying diagnosis must be identified, as this knowledge also
helps address the specific disorder and formulate the proper management strategy. With mild deformities, stretching through physical therapy or serial casting of the plantar fascia and contracted muscles with
exercises to strengthen weakened muscles may help delay progression. An ankle-­foot orthosis may be necessary to stabilize the foot and
improve ambulation. Surgical treatment is indicated for progressive or
symptomatic deformities that have failed to respond to nonoperative
measures or in the foot that is no longer braceable. The specific procedures recommended depend on the degree of deformity and the underlying diagnosis. In the case of a progressive neuromuscular condition,
recurrence of deformity is commonly observed, and additional procedures may be required to maintain a plantigrade foot. Families should
be counseled in detail regarding the disease process and the expected
gains from the surgery. The goal of surgery is to restore motion and
alignment, and to improve muscle balance. For milder deformities,
a soft tissue release of the plantar fascia, often combined with a tendon transfer, may suffice. For patients with a fixed bony deformity of
the forefoot, midfoot, and/or hindfoot, one or more osteotomies may
be required for realignment. A triple arthrodesis (calcaneocuboid,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4208 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

Fig. 715.10 Radiographs of Köhler disease (A) and Freiberg infracFig. 715.9 Clinical picture demonstrating pes cavus.
talonavicular, and subtalar) may be required for severe or recurrent
deformities in older patients. Long-­term bracing is usually helpful in
preventing recurrence.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.8 Osteochondroses/Apophysitis
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Osteochondroses are idiopathic avascular necroses of bones,
which may involve tarsal bones as well. Although rare, they may be
observed in the tarsal navicular (Köhler disease) or the second or
third metatarsal head (Freiberg infraction; Fig. 715.10). These are
generally self-­limited conditions that commonly result in activity-­
related pain, which can at times be disabling. The treatment is based
on the degree of symptoms and most often includes restriction of
activity. The diagnosis is made by history and physical examination
in conjunction with concordant radiographic findings. The navicular is particularly sensitive, as it is the last tarsal bone to ossify,
which may lead to compression from adjacent ossified bones. For
patients with Köhler disease, nonsurgical treatment with a short leg
cast or controlled ankle motion (CAM) boot for 6-8 weeks may provide significant relief. Patients with Freiberg infraction may benefit from a period of casting and/or shoe modifications such as a
rocker-­bottom sole, a stiff-­soled shoe, or a metatarsal bar (not pads)
to offload the forefoot. Degenerative changes and collapse of the
metatarsal head will occasionally occur following the gradual healing process, and surgical intervention is required in a small subset
of cases. Procedures have included joint debridement, bone grafting, redirectional osteotomy, subtotal or complete excision of the
metatarsal head, and joint replacement.
Apophysitis represents inflammation or stress injury to the areas
on or around growth plates in children and adolescents from repetitive tensile loading and is most often observed during periods of rapid
growth. Enthesopathy refers to injury or inflammation at attachment
points of tendons to bones. Calcaneal apophysitis (Sever disease) is
the most common cause of heel pain in children; treatment includes
activity modification, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications, heel
cord stretching exercises, and heel cushions or arch supports. Iselin
disease represents an apophysitis at the fifth metatarsal base where the
peroneus brevis attaches and is less common. Even though the mandate for imaging heel pain in all children remains controversial, radiographs should be considered when the symptoms are unilateral or fail
to respond to treatment. Gentle stretching, a period of rest (6-8 weeks),
and avoidance of sports will often resolve symptoms, although recurrence is common until maturity when the apophyses close.

tion (B).

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.9 Puncture Wounds of the Foot
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Most puncture wound injuries to the foot may be adequately managed
in the clinic or emergency department. Treatment involves a thorough
irrigation and a tetanus booster, if appropriate, and many clinicians will
recommend antibiotics. Using this approach, the majority will heal without complication. A subset of cases may develop cellulitis, most often
caused by Staphylococcus aureus, and require intravenous antibiotics with or without surgical drainage if an abscess develops. Persistent
signs of infection should be investigated more thoroughly. Deep infection is uncommon and may be associated with septic arthritis, infectious
chondritis, or osteomyelitis. The most common organisms are S. aureus
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa; the treatment involves a thorough surgical debridement followed by a short course (10-14 days) of systemic
antibiotics. Although plain radiographs will demonstrate any metallic
fragments or other radiopaque foreign bodies, ultrasonography (or CT
or MRI) may be necessary to identify radiolucent objects such as glass,
plastic, or wood. Routine empiric exploration and removal of foreign
bodies is not required but may be necessary when symptoms are present
or when an infection is suspected. Pain and/or gait disturbance is more
likely with superficial objects under the plantar surface of the foot.
A special situation occurs when a puncture wound from a nail
comes through a rubber sneaker or running shoe. This situation presents a high risk of a Pseudomonas infection, and consideration should
be given to a thorough irrigation and debridement under general anesthesia followed by systemic antibiotics for 10-14 days. Foreign-­body
entrapment of rubber may also occur.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

715.10 Toe Deformities
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson

JUVENILE HALLUX VALGUS (BUNION)

Juvenile hallux valgus is approximately 10-­
fold more common in
females than in males. A family history is common and is typically
associated with familial ligamentous laxity. The etiology is multifactorial, and important factors include genetic factors, ligamentous laxity, pes planus, wearing shoes with a narrow toe box, and occasionally
spasticity (e.g., in the setting of cerebral palsy). Bunion refers to the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes
bump that occurs with chronic rubbing against the prominent first
metatarsal head medially.

Clinical Manifestations

There is prominence of the first metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint
medially and often erythema and callus from chronic irritation (Fig.
715.11). The great toe metatarso-­phalangeal joint is in valgus and is
usually pronated. There is splaying (widening) of the forefoot. Pes
planus, with or without an associated heel cord contracture, is also
observed commonly. Although cosmesis is perhaps the most common
concern, patients may have pain in the region of the first MTP joint
and/or difficulty with shoe wear.

Radiographic Evaluation

Weight-­bearing AP and lateral radiographs of the feet should be
obtained. On the AP view, common measurements include the
angular relationships between the first and second metatarsals
(intermetatarsal angle, <10 degrees is normal) and between the
first metatarsal and the proximal phalanx (hallux valgus angle, <25
degrees is normal) (see Fig. 715.11). The orientation of the first
metatarsal–medial cuneiform joint is also documented. On the lateral radiograph, the angular relationship between the talus and the
first metatarsal helps identify a midfoot break associated with pes
planus. Radiographs are more helpful in surgical planning than in
establishing the diagnosis.

Treatment

Conservative management of adolescent bunions consists primarily
of shoe modifications. It is important that footwear accommodate
the width of the forefoot, or pressure on the medial prominence can
lead to callouses and pain. Patients should avoid wearing shoes with
a narrow toe box and/or a high heel. Shoe modifications, such as a
soft upper, bunion last, or heel cup, also may be recommended. In
the presence of flexible pes planus, an orthotic to restore the medial
longitudinal arch may be beneficial. If the flatfoot is rigid, further
evaluation for tarsal coalition should be pursued. If a tendo-­Achilles
contracture is present, stretching exercises are recommended. The
value of night splinting remains unproven. Surgical treatment is
reserved for those patients with persistent and disabling pain who
have failed a course of nonoperative therapy. Surgery is not advised

purely for cosmesis. Surgery is usually delayed until skeletal maturity to decrease the risk of either recurrence or overcorrection,
although guided growth via hemiepiphysiodesis in skeletally immature symptomatic patients is gaining popularity. Radiographs are
essential in preoperative planning to assess both the magnitude of
deformity (hallux valgus angle, intermetatarsal angle, distal metatarsal articular angle) and associated features such as obliquity of
the first metatarsal–medial cuneiform joint. Surgical treatment
often involves a soft tissue release and/or rebalancing procedure at
the first MTP joint, and a single or double osteotomy of the first
metatarsal to decrease foot width and realign the joints along the
medial column of the forefoot. If there is deformity in the medial
cuneiform, medial cuneiform opening wedge osteotomy and bone
graft placement can correct the proximal alignment. An arthrodesis
of the first MTP joint may be indicated in patients with spasticity to
prevent recurrence.

CURLY TOES

Curly toes, or varus deformity, is caused by contracture of the flexor
digitorum longus resulting in flexion at the MTP and interphalangeal
(IP) joints and medial deviation of the toe. It is extremely common
and is often seen in the parents of affected patients. The toe usually lies
underneath its neighbor, and the third, fourth, and fifth toes are most
commonly involved (Fig. 715.12). The deformity very rarely causes
symptoms, and active treatment (stretching, splinting, or taping) is
not required. Most cases improve over time, and a subset will resolve
completely. For the rare case in which there is chronic pain or skin
irritation, release of the flexor digitorum longus tendon at the distal
IP joint may be considered. Osteotomy in the older child may rarely
be considered.

OVERLAPPING FIFTH TOE

Congenital digitus minimus varus, or varus fifth toe, involves dorsiflexion and adduction of the fifth toe. The fifth toe typically overlaps the fourth. There is also a rotatory deformity of the toe, and
the nail tends to point outward. Mild congenital shortness of the
fifth metatarsal is common. The deformity is usually bilateral and
may have a genetic basis. Symptoms are frequent and involve pain
over the dorsum of the toe from shoe wear. Nonoperative treatment
has not been successful. For symptomatic patients, several different
options for reconstruction have been described. Common features
of operative intervention include releasing the contracted extensor
tendon and the MTP joint capsule (dorsal, dorsomedial, or complete), and plastic alteration of the tight skin. An alternative procedure involves creation of a syndactyly between the fourth and fifth
toes.

POLYDACTYLY

A

B

Fig. 715.11 Juvenile hallux valgus (bunion). A, Clinical appearance of

the right foot of an 11-­yr-­old with hallux valgus. B, Radiograph shows an
intermetatarsal angle of 15 degrees. The hallux valgus angle measures
42 degrees. It is the angle formed by a line drawn along the axis of the
proximal phalanx and a second line drawn along the shaft of the first
metatarsal. (From Ricco AI. Disorders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed.
Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022;
Fig. 19-111.)

4209

Polydactyly is the most common congenital toe deformity and is
seen in approximately 2 in every 1,000 births; it is bilateral in 50% of
cases. Polydactyly may be preaxial (great toe) or postaxial (fifth toe),
and occasionally one of the central toes is duplicated. Associated
anomalies are found in approximately 10% of postaxial and 20% of
preaxial polydactyly and may be present in over half of patients with
more rare forms of polydactyly. One third of patients will also have
polydactyly of the hand. Conditions that may be associated with
polydactyly include Ellis-­Van Creveld (chondroectodermal dysplasia), longitudinal deficiency of the tibia, and Down syndrome. The
extra digit may be either rudimentary or well formed, and plain
radiographs of the foot help define the anatomy and evaluate any
coexisting bony anomalies. Treatment is indicated for cosmesis
and to allow for fitting with standard shoes. This involves surgical
removal of the extra digit, and the procedure is generally performed
between 9 and 12 months of age. Rudimentary digits may be surgically excised earlier but should not be “tied off,” as this may leave
painful residual scars or bone masses. For surgical treatment, radiographic evaluation is critical to properly plan reconstruction for a
properly shaped and stable foot at maturity.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4210 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

Fig. 715.12 Curly third, fourth, and fifth toes. (From Ricco AI. Disor-

ders of the foot. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022. Fig. 19-133.)

SYNDACTYLY

Syndactyly involves webbing of the toes, which may be simple (soft tissue only) or complex (involving bone). The syndactyly may be incomplete or complete (extends to the tip of the toes), and the toenails may
be confluent. There is often a positive family history, and the third and
fourth toes are most frequently involved. Symptoms are extremely rare,
and cosmetic concerns are infrequent. Treatment is only required for a
subset of cases in which there is an associated polydactyly (Fig. 715.13).
Complex syndactyly may be seen in patients with Apert syndrome.

HAMMER TOE

A hammer toe is a flexion deformity of the lesser toes that involves the
proximal IP (PIP) joint. This deformity may be distinguished from a curly
toe by the absence of rotation. The second toe is most often involved, and
a painful callus may develop over the dorsum of the toe where it rubs on
the shoe or the tip of the toe which is directed against the sole of the shoe.
Nonoperative therapy is rarely successful, and surgery is recommended
for symptomatic cases. A release of the flexor tendons will suffice in most
cases. Some authors recommend a transfer of the flexor tendon to the
extensor tendon. For severe cases with significant rigidity, especially in
older patients, a partial or complete resection of the proximal phalanx
and a PIP joint fusion may be required.

MALLET TOE

Mallet toe involves a flexion contracture at the distal IP (DIP) joint
and results from congenital shortening of the flexor digitorum longus
tendon. Patients may develop a painful callus on the plantar surface
of the tuft or dorsal aspect of the DIP joint. As nonoperative therapy
is usually unsuccessful, surgery is required for patients with chronic
symptoms. For flexible deformities in younger children, stretching or
release of the flexor digitorum longus tendon is recommended. For
stiffer deformities in older patients, resection of the head of the middle
phalanx, or arthrodesis of the DIP joint, may be considered.

CLAW TOE

A claw toe deformity involves hyperextension at the MTP joint and flexion
at both the PIP and DIP joints, often associated with dorsal subluxation of
the MTP joint. This condition must be distinguished from hyperextension
of the MTP joint due to ground reaction where the stiff flexed toe in stance
pushes the MTP joint into hyperextension. If the MTP does hyperextend, this
is a claw toe. The majority are associated with an underlying neurologic
disorder and must be evaluated. The etiology is usually muscle imbalance,
and the extensor tendons are recruited to substitute for weakening of the
tibialis anterior muscle. If treatment is elected, surgery is required. Transfer
of the extensor digitorum (or hallucis) tendon to the metatarsal neck is
commonly performed along with a dorsal capsulotomy of the MTP joint
and fusion of the PIP joint (IP joint of the great toe).

ANNULAR BANDS

Bands of amniotic tissue associated with amniotic disruption syndrome (early amniotic rupture sequence, congenital constriction band

Fig. 715.13 Clinical picture of polysyndactyly involving the great toe.

syndrome, annular band syndrome) may become entwined along the
extremities, resulting in a spectrum of problems from in utero amputation (Fig. 715.14) to a constriction ring along a digit (Fig. 715.15; see
Chapter 100). These rings, if deep enough, may result in impairment of
arterial or venous blood flow as well as severe damage to the muscles,
tendons, and bone growth distal to the band. Even though concerns
regarding tissue viability are less common, swelling from impairment
in venous return is often an urgent problem. The treatment of annular
bands usually involves observation; however, circumferential release of
the band may be required emergently if arterial inflow is obstructed or
electively to relieve venous congestion. Physical therapy and bracing
may help prevent future contractures and deformities.

MACRODACTYLY

Macrodactyly represents an enlargement of the toes and may occur as
an isolated problem or in association with a variety of other conditions
such as Proteus syndrome (Fig. 715.16), neurofibromatosis, tuberous
sclerosis, and Klippel-­
Trenaunay-­
Weber syndrome. This condition
results from a deregulation of growth, and there is hyperplasia of one or
more of the underlying tissues (osseous, nervous, lymphatic, vascular,
fibrofatty). Macrodactyly of the toes may be seen in isolation (localized
gigantism) or with enlargement of the entire foot or leg. In addition to
cosmetic concerns, patients may have difficulty wearing standard shoes.
The initial treatment is observation, if possible. This is a difficult condition to treat surgically, and complications are frequent. For involvement
of a single toe, the best option may be a resection of the ray (including
the metatarsal). For greater degrees of involvement, debulking of the
various tissues is required. Often a growth arrest of the underlying osseous structures is performed. Stiffness and wound problems are common. The rate of recurrence is high, and more than one debulking may
be required. Patients may elect to have an amputation if the process
cannot be controlled by less extensive procedures. Leg length inequality
is common and must be looked for and treated if needed.

SUBUNGUAL EXOSTOSIS

A subungual exostosis is a benign bone mass that projects out from the
dorsal and medial surface of a distal toe phalanx, under the nail. The
etiology is unknown but may relate to minor, repetitive trauma. The
great toe is involved most often. Patients present with discomfort, and
the toenail may be deformed and elevated. The lesion may be demonstrated on plain radiographs and histologically involves normal bone
with a fibrocartilaginous cap. The treatment for symptomatic lesions is
excision, and the recurrence rate is approximately 10%.

INGROWN TOENAIL

Ingrown toenails are relatively common in infants and young children
and usually involve the medial and/or lateral border of the great toe.
Symptoms include chronic irritation and discomfort. Recurrent infection is seen in some cases. Parents should be instructed when cutting
toenails to cut straight across the distal aspect of the nail, rather than

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 715 u The Foot and Toes

4211

Table 715.2  Differential Diagnosis of Foot Pain
According to Age
AGE GROUP

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS

0-6 yr

Poorly fitting shoes
Fracture
Puncture wound
Foreign body
Osteomyelitis
Cellulitis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Hair tourniquet
Dactylitis
Leukemia

6-12 yr

Poorly fitting shoes
Trauma (fracture, sprain)
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (enthesopathy)
Puncture wound
Sever disease (calcaneal apophysitis)
Accessory tarsal navicular bone
Hypermobile flatfoot
Tarsal coalition
Oncologic (Ewing sarcoma, leukemia)

12-18 yr

Poorly fitting shoes
Stress fracture
Trauma (fracture, sprain)
Foreign body
Ingrown toenail
Metatarsalgia
Plantar fasciitis
Achilles tendinopathy
Accessory ossicles (navicular, os trigonum)
Tarsal coalition
Avascular necrosis of metatarsal (Freiberg
infarction) or navicular (Köhler disease) bones
Plantar warts

Fig. 715.14 Constriction band syndrome with congenital amputation.

From Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Schuh AM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 9th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023.

Fig. 715.15 Constriction band syndrome with foot involvement.

715.11 Painful Foot
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson
Table 715.2 shows a differential diagnosis for foot pain in different age
ranges. In addition to the history and physical examination, plain radiographs are most helpful in establishing the diagnosis. Occasionally more
sophisticated imaging modalities such as CT or MRI will be required.

715.12 Shoes
Christine M. Goodbody, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Richard S. Davidson

curve inward at the nail edges. If conservative measures, including shoe
modifications, warm soaks, and appropriate nail trimming fail to control the symptoms, surgical removal of a portion of the nail should be
considered.

In toddlers and children, a well-­fitting shoe with flexible soles is recommended. This recommendation is in part based on studies suggesting that the development of the longitudinal arch seems to be best in
societies in which shoes are not worn, and flatfeet are more common
in shod children. Well-­cushioned, shock-­absorbing shoes are helpful
in the child and adolescent athlete to decrease the chances of developing an overuse injury. Otherwise, shoe modifications are generally
reserved for abnormalities in either alignment between segments of the
foot or symptoms from an underlying condition (e.g., a limb-­length
discrepancy). Numerous modifications are available.
As a rule, shoes protect the foot from abnormal temperature as well
as rough surfaces and sharp objects but have not been shown to help
the normal foot develop. Poorly fitting shoes may create problems.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 715.16 Macrodactyly of the great toe in a case of Proteus syndrome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4212 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Chapter 716

Torsional and Angular
Deformities of the Limb
Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell,
and Lawrence Wells
716.1 Normal Limb Development
Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Lawrence Wells
During the seventh week of intrauterine life, the lower limb rotates
medially to bring the great toe toward the midline. The hip joint forms
by the eleventh week; the proximal femur and acetabulum continue to
develop until physeal closure in adolescence. The first component of
rotation is the femoral neck, which is rotated approximately 40 degrees
anteriorly at birth. This anterior rotation is referred to as anteversion
(the angle between the axis of the femoral neck and the transcondylar
axis). The increased anteversion results in increased internal rotation
of the hip. In most children, femoral anteversion decreases to 15-20
degrees by 8-10 years of age. Conditions such as cerebral palsy that
involve spasticity of the lower extremities can result in the persistence
of fetal anteversion. This results in torsional abnormalities of the lower
limb and gait disturbances. The second component of limb rotation is
found in the tibia. Tibial torsion is the angular difference between the
axis of the knee and the transmalleolar axis. Infants can have 30 degrees
of medial rotation of the tibia. When skeletally mature, the rotation is
between 5 degrees of medial rotation and 15 degrees of lateral rotation (Fig. 716.1). Excessive medial rotation of the tibia is referred to as
medial tibial torsion. This is very common and, although concerning
to parents, very rarely requires treatment. The medial or lateral rotation beyond ±2 SDs from the mean is considered abnormal rotation.
The third component of rotational (axial) abnormalities of the lower
extremity derives from the foot. Metatarsus adductus can cause the foot
to curve medially, pointing the toes inward. It is assessed by observing
the medial and lateral borders of the foot.
Torsional deformity may be simple, involving a single component, or
complex, involving multiple components. Complex deformities may be
additive (internal tibial torsion and internal femoral torsion are additive) or compensatory (external tibial torsion and internal femoral torsion are compensatory).
The normal tibiofemoral angle at birth is 10-15 degrees of physiologic varus. The alignment changes to 0 degrees by 18 months, and
physiologic valgus up to 12 degrees is reached in between 3 and 4 years
of age. The normal valgus of 7 degrees is achieved by 5-8 years of age
(Fig. 716.2). Persistence of varus beyond 2 years of age may be pathologic and is seen in conditions such as Blount disease. Overall, 95% of
developmental physiologic genu varum and genu valgum cases resolve
with growth. Persistent genu valgum or valgus into adolescence is considered pathologic and deserves further evaluation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

716.2 Limb Evaluation
Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Lawrence Wells
When evaluating concerns regarding the limb, the provider should
obtain a history documenting onset, progression, functional limitations, previous treatment, evidence of neuromuscular disorder, and
any significant family history. The examination should assess the exact

torsional profile and include (1) foot progression angle, (2) femoral
anteversion, (3) tibial version with thigh-­foot angle, and (4) assessment
of foot adduction and abduction.

FOOT PROGRESSION ANGLE

Limb position during gait is expressed as the foot progression angle
and represents the angular difference between the axis of the foot with
the direction in which the child is walking. Its value is usually estimated by asking the child to walk in the clinic hallway (Fig. 716.3).
Inward rotation of the foot is assigned a negative value, and outward
rotation is designated with a positive value. The normal foot progression angle in children and adolescents is 10 degrees (range: −5 to 20
degrees). The foot progression angle delineates whether there is an in-­
toeing or out-­toeing gait.

FEMORAL ANTEVERSION

Hip rotation is measured with the child in the prone position, the hip
in neutral flexion or extension, thighs together, and the knees flexed
to 90 degrees (Fig. 716.4). Both hips are assessed at the same time.
Internal rotation of the hip is measured by rotating the leg ipsilaterally,
and external rotation is measured by rotating the leg contralaterally.
Excessive anteversion has increased internal rotation, whereas retroversion has increased external rotation. The amount of anteversion can
be approximately estimated by palpating the greater trochanter of the
hip while internally rotating the limb. Femoral anteversion should be
measured at the point when the greater trochanter is most prominent
laterally during this rotation (Craig test).

TIBIAL ROTATION

Tibial rotation is measured using the transmalleolar angle. The transmalleolar angle is the angle between the longitudinal axis of the thigh
with a line perpendicular to the axis of the medial and lateral malleolus
(Fig. 716.5). In the absence of foot deformity, the thigh-­foot angle is
preferred (Fig. 716.6). It is measured with the child lying prone. The
angle is formed between the longitudinal axis of the thigh and the longitudinal axis of the foot. It measures the tibial and hindfoot rotational status. Inward rotation is assigned a negative value, and outward rotation
is assigned a positive value. Inward rotation indicates medial tibial torsion, whereas outward rotation represents lateral tibial torsion. Infants
have a mean angle of −5 degrees (range: −35 to 40 degrees) as a consequence of normal in utero position. In mid-­childhood through adult
life, the mean thigh-­foot angle is 10 degrees (range: −5 to 30 degrees).

FOOT SHAPE AND POSITION

The foot is observed for any deformities in prone and standing position. The heel bisector line (HBL) is used to evaluate the foot adduction and abduction deformities. The HBL is a line that divides the heel
in two equal halves along the longitudinal axis (Fig. 716.7). It normally
extends through the center of the second toe. When the HBL points
medial to the second toe, the forefoot is abducted, and when the HBL
is lateral to the second toe, the forefoot is adducted. Other lower-­
extremity problems, such as heel varus or valgus, can make assessment
of axial plane issues more difficult.
It is also important to screen children with these foot deformities
for associated hip dysplasia and neuromuscular problems (e.g., cerebral palsy).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

716.3 Torsional Deformities
Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Lawrence Wells

FEMORAL ANTEVERSION

In-­toeing gait most commonly results from excessive femoral anteversion. It occurs more commonly in females than males (2:1) in children
3-6 years of age and is congenital, resulting from persistent infantile

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 716 u Torsional and Angular Deformities of the Limb
Foot Progression Angle
FPA

Rotational Profile
R

L

20

FPA

2 SD

10

MR
LR

2 SD

0

TFA

10

Foot

A

B

1

3

5

7

80

60
2 SD

40
20

2 SD

40
20

2 SD
1

3

5

7

9

11 13 15-19
Age (yr)

30’s 50’s 70

0

D

2 SD
1

3

5

7

Lateral Rotation
LR

9

11 13 15-19
Age (yr)

30’s 50’s 70

Thigh–Foot Angle
TFA

100

40

80

20

60
40

2 SD

0

2 SD

20

20

2 SD
2 SD

40
1

E

30’s 50’s 70

80

60

C

9 11 13 15-19
Age (years)
Medial Rotation
MR males

Medial Rotation
MR females

0

4213

3

5

7

9

11 13 15-19
Age (yr)

30’s 50’s 70

F

1

3

5

7

9

11 13 15-19
Age (yr)

30’s 50’s 70

Fig. 716.1 A-­F, The rotational profile from birth to maturity is depicted graphically. All graphs include 2 SD from the mean for the foot progression
angle (FPA) for femoral medial rotation (MR) and lateral rotation (LR) (for males and females), and the thigh-­foot angle (TFA). (From Morrissey RT,
Weinstein SL, eds. Lovell and Winter’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1990.)

20°
15°

Varus 10°
5°
0°
5°

1 2 3 4

5 6 7

8 9 10 11 12 13

Valgus 10°
15°
20°

A

Age (yr)

B

Fig. 716.2 A, Development of the tibiofemoral angle during growth (after Salenius). B, Serial radiographs demonstrating normal transition from

varus alignment at 14 months to neutral position at 25 months to valgus tibiofemoral alignment at 39 months. (From Wimberly RL. Disorders of the
leg. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig 18.13.)

anteversion. On examination, many children with this condition will
have generalized ligamentous laxity. Gait examination reveals that the
entire leg is inwardly rotated. Internal hip rotation is increased beyond
70 degrees, and consequently the external rotation is restricted to 10-20
degrees. Clinically, the patellae point inward when the foot is straight,
and compensatory external rotation of the tibia is demonstrated. This
is frequently mistaken as “genu valgum.” The amount of anteversion
can be roughly estimated by palpating the greater trochanter of the hip

while internally rotating the limb. The point of maximal prominence of
the greater trochanter laterally during this rotation corresponds to the
degree of femoral anteversion.
Diagnosis is made clinically on examination; CT can provide objective measurements but is rarely indicated. The treatment is predominantly observation and reassurance. The torsion usually corrects with
longitudinal growth by 8-10 years of age. Although rare, persistent
deformity, unacceptable cosmesis, functional impairment, anteversion

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4214 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 716.3 Foot progression angle. The long axis of the foot is com-

pared with the direction in which the child is walking. If the long axis of
the foot is directed outward, the angle is positive. If the foot is directed
inward, the angle is negative and indicates in-­toeing. (From Thompson GH. Gait disturbances. In: Kliegman RM, ed. Practical Strategies
in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004.)

Fig. 716.5 Measurement of transmalleolar angle (TMA). (From Guler

O, Isyar M, Karataş D, et al. Investigating the relationship between internal tibial torsion and medial collateral ligament injury in patients undergoing knee arthroscopy due to tears in the posterior one third of the
medial meniscus. Knee. 2016;23[4]:655–658, Fig 2.)

A

malleolus, but by adulthood, it is reversed, with the tibia in 15 degrees
of external rotation. The treatment is observation and reassurance
because spontaneous resolution with normal growth and development
can be anticipated. Correction can be seen as early as 4 years of age and
in some children by 8-10 years of age. Persistent deformity with functional impairment is treated with supramalleolar derotation osteotomy,
but this is rarely necessary.

EXTERNAL FEMORAL TORSION

B
Fig. 716.4 Anteversion measured by medial rotation of hip (A) and

lateral rotation of hip (B). In this patient, internal rotation is nearly 90
degrees, suggestive of excessive femoral anteversion.

>45 degrees, and no external rotation beyond neutral are indications
for operative intervention. Surgery involves a derotation osteotomy of
the femur.

MEDIAL TIBIAL TORSION

Medial (internal) tibial torsion manifests with in-­toeing gait. It is
commonly associated with metatarsus adductus, genu valgum, or
femoral anteversion. This condition is usually seen during the second
year of life. It is often noticed after the child begins to walk independently. Many parents are concerned with a “bowed” appearance of the
legs. Normally at birth, the medial malleolus lies behind the lateral

Femoral retrotorsion, when of idiopathic origin, is usually bilateral.
The disorder is associated with an out-­toeing gait and increased incidence of degenerative arthritis. The clinical examination of external
femoral torsion shows excessive hip external rotation and limitation
of internal rotation. The hip will externally rotate up to 70-90 degrees
and internally rotate to only 0-20 degrees. External femoral torsion
can also follow a slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE). There
should be a low threshold to perform radiographs of the hips in children older than 10 years of age who present with hip or knee pain
and decreased internal rotation of the hip on clinical examination.
If a SCFE is detected, it is treated surgically. Occasionally, persistent
femoral retroversion after SCFE can produce functional impairment resulting in a severe out-­toed gait and difficulty opposing one’s
knees in the sitting position. The latter can be disabling to adolescent females. Should this occur, a Southwick osteotomy or surgical
realignment might be necessary.

LATERAL TIBIAL TORSION

Lateral (external) tibial torsion is less common than medial rotation
and is often associated with a calcaneovalgus foot. It can be compensatory to persistent femoral anteversion or secondary to a tight iliotibial
band. Natural growth rotates the tibia externally, and therefore external
tibial torsion can become worse with time. Clinically, the patella faces
outward when the foot is straight. The thigh-­foot angle and the transmalleolar angle are increased. There may be associated patellofemoral
instability with knee pain. Although some correction can occur with
growth, extremely symptomatic children may need a supramalleolar
osteotomy, which is usually done by 10-12 years of age.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 716 u Torsional and Angular Deformities of the Limb

4215

Fig. 716.6 Thigh-­foot angle. With the child in the prone position and

the knees flexed and approximated, the long axis of the foot can be
compared with the long axis of the thigh. The long axis of the foot bisects the heel and the third or middle toe. A, External tibial torsion produces excessive outward rotation. B, Normal alignment is characterized
by slight external rotation. C, Internal tibial torsion produces inward
rotation. (From Zolkoske AC, Fehr SD. Gait disturbances. In: Kliegman
RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Fig 45.6.)

A

B

C

GENU VARUM

Physiologic bowleg is a common torsional combination that is secondary to normal in utero positioning (Fig. 716.8). Spontaneous resolution
with normal growth and development can be anticipated. Persistence
of varus beyond 2 years of age may be pathologic. Causes of pathologic bowing include metabolic bone disease (vitamin D deficiency,
rickets, hypophosphatasia), asymmetric growth arrest (trauma, infection, tumor, Blount disease), bone dysplasia (dwarfism, metaphyseal
dysplasia), and congenital and neuromuscular disorders (Table 716.1).
It is important to differentiate physiologic bowing from Blount disease
(Table 716.2). Physiologic bowing should also be differentiated from
rickets and skeletal dysplasia. Rickets has classic bony changes seen
on plain radiographs with trumpeting widening and fraying of the
metaphysis along with widening of the physis (see Chapter 69).

TIBIA VARA

NORMAL

Fig. 716.7 Schematic demonstration of heel bisector line.

METATARSUS ADDUCTUS

Metatarsus adductus (see Chapter 715.1) manifests with forefoot
adduction and medial rotation of all metatarsals. Of children with
metatarsus adductus, 10–15% have hip dysplasia. The prognosis is
good because the majority get better with nonoperative intervention.
Feet that correct actively with stimulation of the lateral border of the
foot are treated with stretching exercises alone. Feet that are flexible
and correctable to neutral with manipulation are treated with stretching, reverse last shoes, or serial casting. Feet that do not correct fully
with conservative care or rigid deformities are treated with medial capsulotomy of the first metatarsal cuneiform joint and soft tissue release
by 2 years of age. Osteotomies of the base of the metatarsal may be
performed after 6 years of age.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

716.4 Coronal Plane Deformities
Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Lawrence Wells
Genu varum and genu valgum are common pediatric deformities of
the knee. Figure 716.2 presents the age-­appropriate normal values for
knee angle. Tibial bowing is common during the first year, bowlegs are
common during the second year, and knock-­knees are most prominent
between 3 and 4 years of age.

Idiopathic tibia vara, or Blount disease, is a developmental deformity resulting from abnormal endochondral ossification of the medial
aspect of the proximal tibial physis leading to varus angulation and
medial rotation of the tibia (Fig. 716.9). The incidence is greater in
Black patients and in overweight toddlers. It is also higher in patients
who have an affected family member or started walking early in life.
Idiopathic tibia vara has been classified into three types, depending
on the age at onset: infantile (1-3 years of age), juvenile (4-10 years of
age), and adolescent (11 years or older). The juvenile and adolescent
forms are commonly combined as late-­onset tibia vara. The exact cause
of tibia vara remains unknown, although it is thought to result from
abnormal growth of the physis due to excessive weight.
The infantile form of tibia vara is the most common. There is a predominance in Black females. Approximately 80% are bilateral with a
prominent medial metaphyseal beak, internal tibial torsion, and leg-­
length discrepancy. The characteristics of the juvenile and adolescent (late-­onset) forms include predominance in Black males, obesity,
normal or greater than normal height, less frequent bilateral involvement (approximately 50%), slowly progressive genu varum deformity,
pain rather than deformity as the primary initial complaint, no palpable proximal medial metaphyseal beak, minimal internal tibial torsion, mild medial collateral ligament laxity, and mild lower extremity
length discrepancy. The infantile group has the greatest potential for
progression.
An anteroposterior (AP) standing radiograph of both lower extremities with patellae facing forward and a lateral radiograph of the
involved extremity should be obtained (Fig. 716.10). Weight-­bearing
radiographs are preferred and allow maximal presentation of the clinical deformity. The metaphyseal-­diaphyseal angle (Drennan angle) can
be measured and is useful in distinguishing between physiologic genu
varum and early tibia vara (Fig. 716.11). This angle can aid in predicting the risk of progression. Angles greater than 16 degrees carry an
increased risk of progression, whereas those less than 10 degrees are
likely to resolve spontaneously. Patients with Drennan angles of 11-16
degrees should be monitored for progressive tibia vara.
The Langenskiöld classification, which describes six stages on radiographs for infantile Blount disease (Fig. 716.12), is the most widely

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4216 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
cited classification system, although other radiographic and MRI-­based
systems have been described. Langenskiöld differentiates based on
fragmentation of the epiphysis, beaking of the medial tibial epiphysis,
depression of the medial tibial plateau, and formation of a bony bar. CT
with three-­dimensional reconstructions and MRI can also be useful to
assess the meniscus; the articular surface of the proximal tibia, including
the posteromedial slope; or the integrity of the proximal tibial physis.
Management is based on the stage of the disease, the age of the child,
and the nature of presentation (primary or recurrent deformity). In children younger than 3 years and Langenskiöld stage <3, bracing is effective and can prevent progression in 50% of patients. A maximal trial of
1 year of orthotic management is recommended. If complete correction
is not obtained after 1 year or if progression occurs during this time, a
corrective osteotomy is indicated. Surgical treatment is also indicated in
children >4 years of age, those at Langenskiöld stage >3, and those with
severe deformities. A proximal tibial valgus osteotomy and associated
fibular diaphyseal osteotomy are usually the procedures of choice. In late-­
onset tibia vara, correction is also necessary to restore the mechanical
axis of the knee. Hemiplateau elevation with correction of posteromedial
slope has been established as a treatment modality in relapsed cases.

GENU VALGUM (KNOCK-­KNEES)
B

A

Fig. 716.8 Genu varum. A, In recumbent position, tibia and femora

are bowed, but the legs do not appear bowed. B, In erect position during weight bearing and with ankles in apposition, the legs are bowed.
(From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019.)

Table 716.1  Classification of Genu Varum (Bowlegs)
PHYSIOLOGIC
Asymmetric growth
Tibia vara (Blount disease)
• Infantile
• Juvenile
• Adolescent
Focal fibrocartilaginous dysplasia
Physeal injury
Trauma
Infection
Tumor

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

METABOLIC DISORDERS
Vitamin D deficiency (nutritional rickets)
Vitamin D–resistant rickets
Hypophosphatasia

716.5 Congenital Angular Deformities of
the Tibia and Fibula

SKELETAL DYSPLASIA
Metaphyseal dysplasia
Achondroplasia
Enchondromatosis

Brendan A. Williams, Jennifer J. Winell, and
Lawrence Wells

Modified from Thompson GH. Angular deformities of the lower extremities. In:
Chapman MW, ed. Operative Orthopedics, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott; 1993:
Table 222-1, p. 3132.

Table 716.2  Differentiation of Leg Bowing
PHYSIOLOGIC BOWING

The appearance of symmetric bilateral genu valgum most pronounced
around age 4 years of age is part of the normal physiologic process of
leg development. However, variation of up to 15 degrees of valgus is
possible until 6 years of age. The majority of physiologic valgus has a
good chance of correction until this age. The intermalleolar distance
with the knees approximated is normally <2 cm, and in a severe valgus deformity, it could measure >10 cm. Pathologic conditions leading
to valgus are metabolic bone disease (e.g., rickets or renal osteodystrophy), skeletal dysplasia, posttraumatic physeal arrest, tumors, and
infection. The increased valgus at the knee causes lateral deviation of
the mechanical axis with stretching of the medial aspect of the knee
leading to knee pain. Deformities >15 degrees and occurring after
6 years of age are unlikely to correct with growth and require surgical management. In the skeletally immature, medial tibial epiphyseal
hemiepiphysiodesis or stapling (guided growth) is attempted for correction. In the skeletally mature, osteotomy is necessary at the center of
rotation of angulation and is usually situated in the distal femur. Long-­
length AP radiographs of the leg in a weight-­bearing stance are necessary for preoperative planning.

BLOUNT DISEASE

Gentle and symmetric deformity

Asymmetric, abrupt, and sharp
angulation

Metaphyseal-­diaphyseal angle
<11 degrees

Metaphyseal-­diaphyseal angle
>11 degrees

Normal appearance of the
proximal tibial growth plate

Medial sloping of the epiphysis
Widening of the physis
Fragmentation of the metaphysis

No significant lateral thrust

Significant lateral thrust

POSTEROMEDIAL TIBIAL BOWING

Congenital posteromedial bowing is typically associated with a calcaneovalgus foot and rarely with secondary valgus of the tibia. The
exact cause is unknown. Early operative intervention is not indicated
because this bowing generally corrects with growth. However, despite
the correction of angulation, there can be residual shortening in the
tibia and fibula. The mean growth inhibition is 12–13% (range: 5–27%).
The mean leg length discrepancy at maturity is 4 cm (range: 3-7 cm).
The diagnosis of bowing is confirmed on radiographs, which show the
posteromedial angulation without any other osseous abnormalities.
The calcaneovalgus deformity of the foot improves with stretching or
modified shoe wear and occasionally ankle-­foot orthosis. Predicted leg
length discrepancy <4 cm is managed with age-­appropriate epiphysiodesis of the normal leg. Leg length discrepancy >4 cm is managed with
combination of contralateral epiphysiodesis and ipsilateral lengthening. A corrective osteotomy for distal valgus may be required and can
be done in the same setting while correcting leg length discrepancy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 716 u Torsional and Angular Deformities of the Limb

A

B

4217

C

Fig. 716.9 Blount disease in a 5-­year-­old child. A and B, Preoperative clinical appearance. Note the abrupt medial deviation of the tibia just be-

low the knee. Lateral “thrust” of the knee during weight bearing exacerbates the “limp.” C, Radiograph demonstrating abrupt angulation at the
epiphyseal-­metaphyseal junction and medial metaphyseal radiolucency and beaking with apparent lateral subluxation of the proximal end of the
tibia. (From Johnston CE, Young M. Disorders of the leg. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:
Fig 18.14.)

M-D angle

Fig. 716.11 Metaphyseal-­diaphyseal (M-­D) angle. Draw a line on the
Fig. 716.10 Anteroposterior radiograph of both knees in Blount disease.

ANTEROMEDIAL TIBIAL BOWING (POSTAXIAL
HEMIMELIA)

Fibular hemimelia is the most common cause of anteromedial bowing
of the tibia. The fibular deficiency can occur with complete absence of
fibula or with partial fibular development both proximally and distally.
It is associated with deformities of femur, knee, tibia, ankle, and foot.
The femur is short and has lateral condylar hypoplasia, causing patellar

radiograph through the proximal tibial physis. Draw another line along
the lateral tibial cortex. Last, draw a line perpendicular to the shaft line
as demonstrated in the diagram. (From Morrissey RT, Weinstein SL, eds.
Lovell and Winter’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1990.)

instability and genu valgum deformity. The tibia has anteromedial bowing
with reduced growth potential. The keys for management are addressing
the ankle stability and foot deformities. The ankle resembles a ball-­and-­
socket joint with lateral instability. The foot deformities are characterized
by the absence of lateral digits, equinocavovarus foot, and tarsal coalition.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4218 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

I

II

III

IV

V

VI

Fig. 716.12 Depiction of the stages of infantile Blount disease. (From Langeskiöld A. Tibia vara [osteochondrosis deformans tibiae]: a survey of
23 cases. Acta Chir Scand. 1952;103:1.)

1

1 AP

1

LAT

4

4A

2

AP

2A

AP

4A LAT

2A LAT

4B

AP

2B

AP

4B LAT

2B LAT

4C AP

3

3 AP

3

LAT

4C LAT

Fig. 716.13 Paley classification of congenital pseudoarthrosis of the tibia. Paley: type 1, no fractures; type 2, no fracture tibia, fracture fibula

with fibula (2A) at station (2B) proximal migration; type 3, fracture tibia, no fracture fibula; type 4, fracture tibia and fibula with fibula (4A) at station
(4B) proximal migration (4C) bone defect tibia with proximal migration fibula AP, Anteroposterior; LAT, lateral. (Reproduced with permission by the
Paley Foundation.) (From Paley D. Congenital pseudarthrosis of the tibia: biological and biomechanical considerations to achieve union and prevent
refracture. J Child Orthop. 2019;13:120–133.)

Various surgical options have been described, and the treatment is tailored to the patient’s needs and parents’ acceptance. A severely deformed
foot may be best managed with Syme or Boyd amputation and prosthesis
as early as 1 year of age. In the salvageable foot, leg length discrepancy
can be treated with contralateral leg epiphysiodesis or ipsilateral limb
lengthening.

ANTEROLATERAL TIBIAL BOWING

Anterolateral tibial bowing is associated with congenital pseudarthrosis
of the tibia (CPT). Previous estimates suggest that 50–60% of patients with
CPT have neurofibromatosis; however, this prevalence may be underestimated as the diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis often become evident after CPT has been diagnosed. Overall, less than 10% of patients with
neurofibromatosis have this lesion. The pseudarthrosis or site of nonunion
is typically situated at the middle third and distal third of the tibia. The
Boyd’s classification identifies six types of CPT with increasing severity
depending on the presence of cystic and dysplastic changes. The Paley classification is another frequently employed system (Fig. 716.13). The treatment for this condition has been very frustrating with poor results. Bracing
has been recommended to prevent fracture early in the course but does not
usually obviate need for later surgical intervention. Numerous treatment
protocols and surgical procedures have been described to achieve union,
such as single-­and dual-­onlay grafting with rigid internal fixation, intramedullary nailing with or without bone grafting, and circular frame fixation. With the growing use of microsurgery in orthopedics, vascularized

fibular autograft also has been used with varying results. Due to the rate
of complications occurring during reconstructive treatment, a below-­knee
amputation with early rehabilitation is also an accepted treatment strategy
for some of these patients.

TIBIAL LONGITUDINAL DEFICIENCY

Tibial longitudinal deficiency, or tibial hemimelia, follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Multiple classification systems have
been described, all of which largely categorize patients based on which
portion(s) of the tibia is deficient. The other associated anomalies are
foot deformities, hip dysplasia, and symphalangism of the hand. Traditionally, treatment has been guided by the Jones classification, which
describes presence of a proximal tibial anlage and a functional quadriceps mechanism. In type Ia deformity, the proximal tibial anlage is
absent, and knee disarticulation with prosthesis is recommended. In
types Ib and II, the tibial anlage is present, and the management consists of an early Syme amputation, followed later by synostosis of the
fibula with the tibia, and a below-­knee prosthesis. Type III is rare, and
the principal management is with Syme amputation and a prosthesis.
Type IV deformity is associated with ankle diastasis, which requires
stabilization of the ankle and correction of leg length discrepancy at a
later stage. Due to the varied pathology of this condition and its rarity,
treatment options and recommendations continue to evolve.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 717 u Leg-­Length Discrepancy

Chapter 717

Leg-­Length Discrepancy
Christine M. Goodbody and
Richard S. Davidson
A discrepancy in leg lengths may result from a variety of congenital or
acquired conditions (Table 717.1). Although up to 25% of adults may
have a difference of more than 1 cm, only a small percentage have more
than a 2 cm difference, for which the main consequence is gait asymmetry. An increase in vertical pelvic motion is observed, and more energy
must be expended during ambulation. Although a small compensatory
lumbar curvature may develop, a small leg-­length discrepancy (<2 cm)
is unlikely to result in back pain, structural scoliosis, or degenerative
arthritis. There is some evidence to suggest that larger, long-­standing
discrepancies may be associated with hip or knee arthritis, structural
scoliosis, and spine degenerative changes. The goal of treatment is to
have a discrepancy of <2-2.5 cm at skeletal maturity, and several treatment methods are available to achieve this objective. Knowledge of
the underlying etiology, coupled with regular follow-­up to assess limb
growth and skeletal maturity, allows the treating physician to project
the discrepancy at skeletal maturity and to plan treatment. A subset of
patients will have coexisting abnormalities in the viscera or musculoskeletal system that must also be identified and treated.

DIAGNOSIS AND CLINICAL FINDINGS

Gait asymmetry is the most frequent complaint. The long leg is often
kept flexed at the knee and hip in stance to level the pelvis. The diagnosis is made on physical examination, and specialized radiographs
help to quantify the existing discrepancy and predict what the discrepancy will be at maturity. The discrepancy may be caused by hypoplasia,
hyperplasia, or angular deformity (structural discrepancy), by soft-­
tissue contracture at the hips, knees, or ankles (apparent or functional
shortening), or by a combination of these conditions. Other contributing factors include joint subluxation or dislocation (hip), a decrease
in the height of the foot (congenital or neuromuscular), or structural
disorders of the pelvis. A careful physical examination is required to
identify all factors contributing to the discrepancy. Muscle contracture
about the hip will also create the appearance of leg-­length inequality.
For example, to bear weight on an abducted hip, the patient must hike
up the contralateral hip and pelvis, making the contralateral leg appear
short.
There are several clinical methods for measuring the extent of the
limb-­length discrepancy. The preferred method is to perform a standing examination in which blocks of various sizes are placed under the
short leg until the pelvis is leveled (Fig. 717.1). An alternate method is
to measure the length of each leg with the patient supine; the examiner
first extends the patient’s legs and examines the soles of the feet for
asymmetry before flexing the patient’s hip to 90 degrees to evaluate for
discrepant knee height (Galeazzi sign). Using a tape measure is very
inaccurate because of several variables, including the line of measurement used, muscle atrophy, and moving patients. The range of motion
at the hip, knee, and ankle must also be assessed to identify any causes
of apparent discrepancy. A 10-­degree fixed abduction (or adduction)
contracture of the hip may create an apparent leg-­length discrepancy
of 2-3 cm. Similarly, a flexion contracture of the hip and/or knee will
create apparent shortening of the extremity, whereas an equinus contracture at the ankle will create apparent lengthening of the extremity. A rigid lumbar scoliosis (suprapelvic contracture) will create pelvic
obliquity and an associated apparent limb length inequality. Once a
discrepancy is quantified in a child, it must be followed at regular intervals until maturity. Assessments at 6-­to 12-­month intervals are most
common depending on the rate of change.

4219

Leg-­length discrepancy may be associated with various genetic
overgrowth syndromes (see Table 717.1). If there are features other
than leg-­length discrepancy, specific diagnostic tests for Beckwith-­
Wiedemann syndrome and PIK3CA pathogenic variants must be
included in the patient’s evaluation. In these disorders, the leg overgrowth tends to increase over time.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Radiologic evaluation complements the clinical examination; both
are typically used when making treatment decisions. For an accurate
assessment, it is important that the child not move and keep their legs
extended; a lift may help. Five different techniques are available. The
teleoroentgenogram is a single radiographic exposure of both lower
extremities (standing) and requires a long cassette. A ruler is placed on
the film, and direct measurements are made, factoring in a 6% magnification error, which is usually accounted for using a radiographic
marker of known diameter to calibrate the image. One advantage is
that angular deformities may be assessed. Its primary indication is for
young children. Unfortunately, because only one exposure is used for
the leg and because the ankle is less dense than the hip, it may be difficult to “see” the whole leg. In addition, because the x-­ray source is at
the knee projecting up to the hip and down to the ankle, this method
projects the hip and ankle along the ruler, making the leg appear longer
than it really is, particularly in obese patients. The orthoroentgenogram consists of three separate exposures of the hips, knees, and ankles
on a long cassette. The patient is supine, and a ruler is placed on the
cassette for measurement of bone length. However, the patient must
lie still for the three exposures, which is often difficult to achieve in
younger children. Because the x-­ray beam is pointed at the hip, knee,
and ankle in each of the three exposures, the length measurement is
accurate and each of the three joints can be exposed properly. The
x-­rays expose from the top of the pelvis to the mid femur, from the
mid femur to the mid tibia, and from the mid tibia to below the foot for
each of the three exposures, respectively, permitting angular deformity
assessment in the frontal plane only. The scanogram also consists of
separate exposures of the hips, knees, and ankles on a cassette with a
radiographic ruler; a chest-­sized film cassette is used (Fig. 717.2). There
is no magnification error; patients must remain still for the three exposures, and angular deformities cannot be assessed. Although CT is an
accurate technique, the assessment is time-­consuming, and the patient
receives a larger dose of radiation. In addition, a radiologist must normalize the axis of the leg to the screen to accurately measure the limbs.
An advantage of CT is that limb and segment lengths can be measured
even if there are soft tissue contractures or deformity in the sagittal
plane. Another popular technique is called EOS. EOS is a proprietary
low-­dose x-­ray scanner that can simultaneously take orthogonal full-­
body images in a standing position and is therefore able to reconstruct
three-­dimensional (3D) images of the bony anatomy in question (Fig.
717.3). The advantages of EOS are that it has a much lower radiation
dose than standard x-­rays, it can capture frontal and sagittal planes
quickly and simultaneously, and there is no magnification error. The
disadvantages are that it requires a trained radiology technician to correctly align the limbs for computer measurement, and not all centers
have access to the technology at this time. Regardless of the technique,
it is critical that the patellae be pointed forward, that measurements
be made in the plane of the limb, that the legs be extended, and that
the same method be used in sequential measurements to be compared.
In the presence of flexion or extension deformities where 3D imaging is not employed, each bone should be x-­rayed individually with a
ruler where the x-­ray beam is perpendicular to the bone and the ruler
parallel to the bone.
In addition to quantifying the discrepancy, it is essential to determine skeletal age (bone age) to assess how much growth a patient has
left and to assist in estimating the size of discrepancy at maturity. An
anteroposterior radiograph of the hand and wrist is usually obtained at
each visit and compared with the standards in the Greulich and Pyle
Atlas to estimate skeletal age. Although more accurate techniques are
available, most are time-­consuming and impractical for routine clinical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4220 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 717.1  Causes of Lower Extremity Length Discrepancy
SHORTENING

LENGTHENING

SHORTENING

CONGENITAL
Hemiatrophy*
Skeletal dysplasias
Short femur
Proximal focal femoral deficiency*
Fibular, tibial hemimelia
Developmental dysplasia of the
hip*

CONGENITAL
Hemihypertrophy*
Local vascular malformation

NEUROMUSCULAR DISEASE
Poliomyelitis
Cerebral palsy*
Myelomeningocele
Peripheral neuropathy
Focal cerebral lesions (hemiplegia)

TUMOR
Developmental
Neurofibromatosis
Multiple exostosis
Enchondromatosis (Ollier disease)
Osteochondromatosis
Fibrous dysplasia (Albright
syndrome)
Punctate epiphyseal dysplasia
Dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica
(Trevor disease)
Radiation therapy before skeletal
maturity (physeal arrest)*
Resection of benign or malignant
neoplasm

TUMOR
Developmental
Neurofibromatosis
Soft tissue hemangioma
Arteriovenous malformation
Hemihypertrophy with Wilms
tumor
Aneurysm

INFECTION
Osteomyelitis*
Septic arthritis
Tuberculosis

INFECTION
Inflammation
Metaphyseal osteomyelitis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Hemarthrosis (hemophilia)

TRAUMA
Physeal injury*
Failed joint replacement
Osteotomy, atrophic nonunion
Overlapping, malposition of
fracture fragments*
Burns

TRAUMA
Metaphyseal, diaphyseal fracture
Diaphyseal operations (bone
grafts, osteosynthesis, periosteal
stripping)

OTHER
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease*
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis

LENGTHENING

LATERALIZED OVERGROWTH
(HEMIHYPERTROPHY /
HEMIHYPERPLASIA
SYNDROMES)
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
PIK3CA related overgrowth
spectrum (PROS)
Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome
CLOVES (congenital lipomatous
overgrowth, vascular
malformations, epidermal nevi,
scoliosis/skeletal, spinal)
Isolated lymphatic malformation
Fibroadipose vascular anomaly
Megalencephaly—capillary
malformation
Hemimegalencephaly /dysplastic
megalencephaly/focal cortical
dysplasia
Muscular hemihyperplasia
Fibroadipose hyperplasia or
overgrowth
CLAPO syndrome (capillary
malformation of lower lip,
lymphatic malformation of face
and neck, asymmetry of face and
limbs and partial or generalized
overgrowth)

*Common.
Modified from Moseley C. Leg-­length discrepancy. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1986;33(6):1385.

application. The range of variability using the atlas is approximately
9 months, so the method is most accurate when multiple data points
have been collected. Apps to calculate the discrepancy at maturity and
timing of treatment are available.

TREATMENT

Options for treatment include observation, a shoe lift or custom orthosis, a limb-­shortening procedure (acute shortening and internal fixation versus gradual shortening by growth arrest or guided growth),
a limb-­lengthening procedure (with internal or external fixation), or
a combination of these. Deformity correction is often accomplished
simultaneously. In the congenital deficiencies (femur, tibia, fibula) in
which the predicted limb-­length inequality will require more than
three lengthening operations (more than 20 cm), an early foot amputation may be the best option to achieve an optimal functional outcome.
In addition to the magnitude of discrepancy predicted at skeletal maturity, both the anticipated adult height of the patient (estimated from
family members) and the desires of the patient and the patient’s family
are important considerations.
Discrepancies of up to 2.5 cm may be treated by observation or a
shoe lift. With regard to a shoe lift, up to 1 cm may be placed within the
shoe, and up to 5 cm may be placed on the outside of the shoe. Complete correction of inequality is not required, and the height of the lift
should be adjusted based on the patient’s gait and comfort. An orthotic
may be used as a temporizing measure before definitive treatment.
For extended discrepancies, “foot in foot” extension prostheses are a

reasonable alternative until limb lengthening can be accomplished or
for patients who cannot or do not wish to undergo surgical correction.
For patients with a predicted ultimate discrepancy between 2 and­
5 cm, an epiphysiodesis is offered in skeletally immature patients, and
an acute shortening may be performed in a skeletally mature patient.
Epiphysiodesis refers to a temporary or permanent cessation of growth
at one or more physes. A permanent growth arrest is most commonly
performed when sufficient data are available with which to accurately
predict when to perform the procedure. Approximately 65% of the
growth of the lower extremity comes from the distal femur (37%, 9
mm/year) and proximal tibia (28%, 6 mm/year). Males typically grow
until 16 years of age, whereas females grow until 14 years of age. As
such, performing an epiphysiodesis of both the distal femur and the
proximal tibia in a patient with 3 years of growth remaining should
achieve approximately 4.5 cm of correction. Techniques used to determine the timing of epiphysiodesis are the Menelaus method (“rule of
thumb”), the Green and Anderson method, the Moseley straight-­line
graph, and the multiplier method (Figs. 717.4-717.6). Apps to make
calculations are available. The most common surgical technique for
permanent growth arrest is the percutaneous epiphysiodesis, in which
the physis is ablated with a drill and curetted under image intensification. This is an outpatient procedure with few complications. Insertion
of plates and screws or just screws across the physis is an alternative
but usually requires a second operation to remove the hardware. For
patients for whom sufficient data are unavailable or those for whom
the underlying diagnosis is associated with an unpredictable pattern

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 717 u Leg-­Length Discrepancy

A

4221

B

Fig. 717.1 Clinical assessment of limb length inequality with the aid

of graduated blocks. (A) True leg length inequality (or fixed functional discrepancy) results in asymmetric iliac crest or posterior iliac spine
heights with the patient standing erect. The examiner must be sure that
the patient is standing evenly on the legs, with the knees straight and
the feet flat on the floor. (B) A reasonably accurate estimation of leg
length inequality can be made by having the patient stand erect on sufficient graduated blocks under the shorter limb to level the pelvis. (From
Podeszwa D. Limb length discrepancy. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s
Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022: Fig 20.3.)

Fig. 717.3 2D Biplanar Whole Body EOS Imaging. (From Garg B,

Mehta N, Bansal T, Malhotra R. EOS Imaging: concept and current applications in spinal disorders. J Clin Orthop Trauma. 2020;11:786–793.
Fig. 2.)

Fig. 717.2 Scanogram to demonstrate exact leg-­length discrepancy.

of growth, then a reversible technique, such as staples, plates, and/
or screws, may be considered. Once equalization has been achieved,
the hardware can be removed, allowing growth to resume. When the
patient is skeletally mature or if it is deemed appropriate to wait until
maturity before treatment, depending on the magnitude of deformity
and patient/family preference, acute shortening may be the best option.
Acute shortening is typically performed at the femur (several techniques have been described), given the increased risk of complications
associated with shortening of the tibia and fibula including compartment syndrome and neurovascular problems.
For discrepancies >5 cm after maturity, or for smaller ones
depending on patient/family preference, lengthening of the short
limb is the procedure of choice. An exception would be a discrepancy secondary to overgrowth of one limb, in which acute or gradual shortening of the abnormal limb would be preferred so as to
preserve body proportions. Patients with anticipated discrepancies
>8-10 cm often require one or more limb-­lengthening procedures
(several years apart), with or without an epiphysiodesis to mitigate
the size of the ultimate discrepancy and need for more than one
lengthening. The most common technique used for limb lengthening involves placement of an intramedullary magnetic lengthening
nail or an external fixator, either a ring fixator such as the Ilizarov
device or a monolateral device (Fig. 717.7). The bone is cut at the
metaphyseal-­
diaphyseal junction, and lengthening is achieved
gradually through distraction at the corticotomy. The usual rate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4222 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Means and standard deviations derived from
longitudinal series 50 females and 50 males
MALES

Key

9

Means
Means ± 1
Means ± 2

8
7

Proximal tibia

5
4
3
2

5
4
3

6

2

5

1

4

0

3

5
4
3
2

2

1
0

Distal femur

6

6

Proximal tibia

Distal femur

Length (cm)

6

Length (cm)

FEMALES

1
0

1
7

8

9

A

10

11

12

13

14

0

15 16

9

10

11

B

Skeletal age (years)

12

13

14

15

16

17 18

Skeletal age (years)

Fig. 717.4 Growth remaining charts
for the distal femur and proximal tibia
for females (A) and males (B). These
charts are based on the growth data
and an estimate of the contribution to
growth of the distal femur (70%) and
the proximal tibia (56%) to the total
length of the respective bone. Data
are presented relative to skeletal age
from age 8 yr to skeletal maturity. (From
Podeszwa D. Limb length discrepancy.
In: ­Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric ­Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
­Elsevier, 2022: Fig 20.13.)

Multiplier for Males and Females
(Paley et al, 1999)
Males

100

LLD Prediction
Formulas

Females
Multiplier

at

ur

ity

Age Multiplier Age

80

4

M

Mean

5

6

7

8

9

10

90

80

11 12 1314

Skeletal age - Females

Reference slopes

70
al

im

ox

Pr

ur

60

Straight line graph
for
leg length discrepancies

Lo

ng

le

g

50

t

m
l fe

sta
h
Bot

Di

60

70

a
ibi

3

4

5

6

Skeletal age - Males
7

8

9

10

11

12

13

50

14 15 16

40

0
0.4
1
1.3
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

5.08
4.01
3.24
2.99
2.59
2.23
2.00
1.83
1.68
1.57
1.47
1.38
1.31
1.24
1.18
1.12
1.07
1.03
1.01
1.00
1.00

0
0.3
1
2
3
3.3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

4.63
4.01
2.97
2.39
2.05
2.00
1.83
1.66
1.53
1.43
1.33
1.26
1.19
1.13
1.07
1.03
1.00
1.00
1.00

Prenatal LLD (congenital)
∆m  ∆  M
Postnatal LLD (developmental)
∆m  ∆  I  G
•

Inhibition ≈ I  1  S  S•
LL
Growth remaining  G  L(M  1)
∆m  LLD at maturity
∆  Current LLD
L & S  Current length of long and
short leg
L• & S•  Length of long and short
leg at any other date since
LLD began

M

at
ur

ity

Fig. 717.6 Paley multiplier. This is a simple method of determining

30

the leg-­length discrepancy (LLD) at maturation. This is applicable for
shortening conditions in which growth retardation is consistent. (From
Paley D, Bhave A, Herzenberg JE, et al. Multiplier methods for predicting limb-­length discrepancy. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2000;82;1432–
1446.)

Mean

Fig. 717.5 The Moseley straight-­line graph for the assessment of

leg-­length inequalities. This allows simultaneous correlation of the normal leg, short leg, and bone age of the child. It will accurately predict
lengths of each extremity at skeletal maturity. The reference slopes are
used as a guide in determining when appropriate treatment should be
performed. (From Moseley CF. A straight-­line graph for leg-­length discrepancies. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1977;59:174–179.)

of lengthening is 1 mm/day in the femur and 0.75 mm/day in the
tibia, and it takes approximately 1 month of wearing the fixator for
each centimeter of length gained with a minimum of 3 months in
the fixator. Additional time in the fixation device may be required
for pathologic bone or for metabolic diseases affecting bone formation. A maximum of 15–25% of the original length of the bone
may be gained at each session and is limited by tolerance of the
soft tissues and nearby neurovascular structures. An advantage of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 717 u Leg-­Length Discrepancy

4223

Fig. 717.7 Ilizarov device demonstrating bone lengthening by dis-

Fig. 717.9 Anteroposterior radiograph of fibular hemimelia with leg-­

A

the circular fixator or multiaxial external fixators is the ability to
correct coexisting angular deformities at the same time. Technologic advances have allowed the development of totally implantable
intramedullary lengthening rods driven by external magnets. Internal lengthening has become the procedure of choice for patients
whose age and anatomy are appropriate for the procedure, especially in the femur where external fixation is more poorly tolerated.
These devices may provide improvements in patient satisfaction
and reduced complications, including a lower rate of contracture
and absence of pin site infection. New technologies for internal
lengthening in skeletally immature patients whose physes cannot
safely be violated by a rigid nail are actively under study. Complications of limb lengthening include pin tract infection (most common), wound infection, hypertension, joint subluxation, muscle
contracture, stretch-­
induced nerve palsy, premature consolidation, delayed union, implant-­related problems, and fractures after
implant removal.
Early amputation and prosthetic fitting may provide the best long-­
term function in patients with projected discrepancies in excess of
18-20 cm, especially when there are coexisting deformities or deficiencies of the ipsilateral foot (Figs. 717.8 and 717.9). The alternative would
be multiple reconstructive procedures throughout childhood and adolescence. The cultural and personal values of the child and family, as
well as the impact of multiple procedures on the child’s psychosocial
development, must also be kept in mind when formulating the treatment plan in these complex cases.

traction osteogenesis.

B

Fig. 717.8 Extension prosthesis leg-­length discrepancy (A) and compensated with extension prosthesis (B).

length discrepancy.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4224 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

The knee is a synovial joint and forms between the third and fourth
months of fetal development. Secondary ossification centers form
between the sixth and ninth fetal months at the distal femur and
between the eighth fetal month and the first postnatal month at the
proximal tibia. The patellar ossification center does not appear until 2-4
years of age in females and 3-5 years of age in males.

discoid meniscus, it is the type most commonly associated with the
knee snapping characteristic of DLM. A type II, or incomplete discoid lateral meniscus, is of variable size and covers a lower percentage of the tibial surface (see Fig. 718.1C) compared to the complete
type. Although the meniscus can become stretched or torn over time,
both the complete and the incomplete types are thought to develop
with normal peripheral attachments. A type III, or Wrisberg variant
lateral meniscus, has no peripheral attachments posteriorly. Instead, it
is stabilized posteriorly only by a prominent meniscofemoral ligament,
or ligament of Wrisberg, that secures the posterior horn of the lateral
meniscus to the lateral surface of the medial femoral condyle (see Fig.
718.1D). As a result, the Wrisberg ligament type of DLM is extremely
mobile. Although its shape is not necessarily discoid, the hypermobility of the posterior portion of the meniscus allows it to be extruded
anteriorly with flexion and for it to pop back into place with extension,
allowing it to present with the same snapping knee pain characteristic
of the other DLM variants.

ANATOMY AND RANGE OF MOTION

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Chapter 718

The Knee
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
NORMAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE KNEE

The knee is the largest joint in the body and acts primarily as a modified hinge. The distal femur is cam shaped, with the medial and lateral femoral condyles having slightly different shapes. The shape of the
articular surfaces allows the femur to glide posteriorly on the tibial plateau during knee flexion and also permits approximately 8-12 degrees
of rotation through the flexion and extension arc. The normal range of
motion of the knee is from neutral (or fully straight) to 140 degrees of
flexion. Increased ligament laxity, including hyperextension of up to
10-15 degrees, can be normal in many children. Most activities can be
performed in the flexion arc of 0-70 degrees.
The knee consists of three articulations: patellofemoral, tibiofemoral,
and tibiofibular. The anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments as well as
medial and lateral collateral ligaments stabilize the knee during movement. The medial and lateral menisci provide support under compressive forces, helping to redistribute the forces from the more rounded
distal femur to the flatter proximal tibia. The medial patellofemoral
ligament is the primary static soft tissue restraint against lateral patellar
displacement. There are also several bursae located about the knee to
cushion and reduce friction on tendons acting across the knee joint.

718.1 Discoid Lateral Meniscus
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
Discoid lateral meniscus (DLM) is a congenital anatomic variation
of the lateral meniscus that may be asymptomatic or cause the classic snapping knee syndrome. Many cases are asymptomatic for years,
making the true incidence difficult to determine. DLM is estimated to
occur in 3–5% of children and adolescents and is bilateral in about 20%
of cases.
Anatomically, the normal meniscus (Fig. 718.1A) is attached around
its periphery and at the tips of the “C” anteriorly and posteriorly onto
the tibia. During knee motion, the meniscus translates anteriorly and
posteriorly to match the slight rollback of the lateral femoral condyle
on the tibia with knee flexion. However, with DLM, the meniscal tissue
trapped between the articular surfaces is pushed anteriorly as the knee
flexes. These abnormal forces, over time, result in tears in the meniscal
tissue, the peripheral attachments, or both. Tearing or stretching of this
tissue allows for excessive meniscal displacement during knee range of
motion. Usually a pop is heard or sensed when flexing at about 90-120
degrees of knee flexion as the meniscus is extruded anteriorly and a
loud click or clunk is heard when extending the knee in the last 30
degrees of extension as the meniscus reduces back between the joint
surfaces.
The Watanabe classification system defines three types of DLM
based on arthroscopic appearance. A type I, or complete discoid lateral meniscus, is characterized by a thickened lateral meniscus with
complete coverage of the tibial surface (see Fig. 718.1B). Because
meniscus tissue is always between the joint surfaces with this type of

All types of DLM can be asymptomatic, especially if they have stable
peripheral attachments and no tears (see Fig. 718.1). Patients with
symptomatic DLM usually present with complaints of lateral knee pain
and examination findings consistent with a meniscal tear or meniscal instability because of absent peripheral attachments, allowing for
anterior extrusion during flexion and reduction with extension thus
producing the classic snapping knee. Although patients can present as
early as 2 years of age, presentation after 6 years of age is typical, with
the highest incidence of presentation during the teenage years.
Younger children usually present with no history of trauma or acute
inciting event but rather with a complaint of popping in the knee with
occasional swelling as a result of peripheral tears or instability of the
meniscus. Older children and adolescents often can recall an inciting
event and will sometimes report a history of the mechanical popping.
However, they more often note lateral joint line pain and knee swelling.
Weight gain during the adolescent growth spurt places increased static
and dynamic loads on the tissue, especially during high-­level sports.
In these patients, degeneration in the central portion of the DLM with
direct weight-­bearing makes the meniscus highly susceptible to injury
and tears, producing the lateral pain and swelling in the knee. Often,
the classic popping is not appreciated in these patients.
Physical examination often shows a mild effusion and tenderness
over the lateral joint line. For patients with an unstable meniscus, when
the knee is fully flexed, a pop with a slight protuberance along the lateral joint line anteriorly can sometimes be appreciated as the meniscus
is extruded anteriorly. When the knee is brought back into extension at
approximately 20-30 degrees short of full extension, the meniscus can
be felt to snap back in place and the protuberance at the lateral joint
line disappears.
A high level of suspicion is necessary based on history and clinical examination findings because many patients will present with a
complaint that their knee is “dislocating.” Radiographs including standard anteroposterior (AP), lateral, merchant (patellar), and 45 degrees
flexed posteroanterior (PA) (tunnel) views should be obtained if this
diagnosis is considered. Radiographs may appear normal or show
findings that include widening of the lateral aspect of the knee joint,
flattening of the lateral femoral condyle (resulting in a squared-­off
appearance), lateral tibial spine hypoplasia, and cupping of the lateral
aspect of the tibial plateau. Because these findings are very nonspecific,
with any history or physical examination findings suggestive of DLM,
evaluation using MRI will provide a definitive diagnosis. Diagnosis on
MRI is made if the ratio of the minimal meniscal width to the maximal
tibial width in the coronal plane is >20% and/or if continuity between
the anterior and posterior horns of the meniscus is present on three or
more consecutive slices in the sagittal plane.

TREATMENT

Patients with asymptomatic or incidentally found DLM without evidence of a tear or meniscal instability do not require treatment. They
should be educated on symptoms to anticipate, but activity restriction

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 718 u The Knee

A

B

C

4225

D

Fig. 718.1 The anatomy of the normal meniscus and discoid variants. A, The lateral meniscus normally has a C shape with circumferential and

root attachments. B, A type I, or complete, discoid lateral meniscus covers the entire tibial plateau and has normal attachments. C, A type II, or
incomplete, discoid lateral meniscus partially covers the tibial plateau and also has normal attachments. D, A type III, or Wrisberg ligament type,
appears similar in shape to a normal lateral meniscus but lacks sufficient attachments posteriorly resulting in a hypermobile meniscus. The ligament
of Wrisberg secures the posterior horn of the meniscus to the lateral aspect of the medial femoral condyle.

is not usually necessary. If knee pain or mechanical symptoms are persistent and limit activity or if a meniscal tear develops, surgical intervention should be considered. Partial meniscectomy, referred to as
saucerization, is often performed to reshape the meniscus arthroscopically with the goal of obtaining an anatomically normal-­appearing
meniscus (Fig. 718.2). Tears remaining in what would be the normal
rim of meniscal tissue are either repaired or excised. Meniscal instability is also addressed with repairs as appropriate. Because tears that
extend from the center of the meniscal tissue all the way to the peripheral rim are difficult to repair and removing this much meniscal tissue
leaves the joint surfaces unprotected, leading to early osteoarthritis,
addressing DLM tears as soon as they develop and before they extend
to the periphery is preferred. Approximately 9–17% of patients require
repeat operation, which is almost always due to repeated tear of the
meniscus. Patients with symptomatic DLM are 4.5 times more likely to
eventually require surgical treatment on their other knee.

A

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

718.2 Popliteal Cysts (Baker Cysts)
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
Popliteal cysts or Baker cysts are simple cystic masses filled with gelatinous material that develops in the popliteal fossa, the shallow depression located at the posterior part of the knee. They are considered rare
in children. They most commonly occur in the region of the medial
head of the gastrocnemius and semimembranosus muscles as an isolated fluid-­filled bursa or via herniation through the posterior joint
capsule of the knee into this same location. Histologically, the cysts are
classified as fibrous, synovial, inflammatory, or transitional. Typically,
popliteal cysts resolve spontaneously, although the process may take
several years.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Patients commonly present with a unilateral mass behind the knee that
may be fairly large when first noted. Typically, there is no associated
history of trauma or knee injury. Physical examination reveals a firm
but compressible mass in the popliteal fossa, often medially located and
distal to the popliteal crease. The mass is usually most prominent when
the knee is extended. Transillumination of the cyst on physical examination is a simple diagnostic test. Knee radiographs are normal but
should be obtained to rule out other lesions, such as osteochondromas,
osteochondritis dissecans, and malignancies. Ultrasonography, MRI,
or aspiration may confirm the diagnosis. Ultrasound can be used to
confirm a simple cystic lesion in the expected anatomic location and is
often the only diagnostic test necessary with these reassuring findings.
However, if a solid mass, vascular lesion, or complex cystic lesion is
identified on ultrasound, an MRI may be used to further evaluate the
mass. Additionally, in the presence of a knee effusion, an MRI should
be considered to evaluate for knee intraarticular pathology that may be

B
Fig. 718.2 Surgical treatment of discoid lateral meniscus. Arthroscop-

ic images of a complete discoid lateral meniscus before (A) and after (B)
partial meniscectomy.

causing the swelling. These children should also be assessed for other
pathology that may cause recurrent or intermittent knee effusions,
including Lyme disease, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, or other autoimmune processes. The presence of a solid mass detected on ultrasound
or MRI warrants additional diagnostic testing and referral for biopsy.

TREATMENT

In most cases, reassurance is all that is needed for popliteal cysts
because they often resolve spontaneously. Rest and leg elevation can
be suggested to promote drainage of the fluid accumulating within
the cyst. In rare cases in which the cyst is persistently symptomatic,
treatment options include aspiration to reduce the size of the cyst and/
or corticosteroid injection to reduce inflammation. However, because

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4226 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
cysts often recur after treatment, the risk of these procedures is not usually worth the benefits. Surgical excision of a popliteal cyst is indicated
only when symptoms are debilitating and have not resolved after an
extended period of conservative treatment. If surgical excision is pursued, concurrent arthroscopic treatment of underlying joint pathology
is typically recommended to significantly decrease recurrence rates.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

718.3 Juvenile Osteochondritis Dissecans
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) is a localized pathologic process
of the subchondral bone that secondarily affects the overlying articular cartilage and can progress to instability of the lesion with cartilage
separation and fragmentation. Although OCD may occur in different
joints, including the elbow and ankle, 75% of lesions are seen in the
knee. Emerging evidence suggests that the cause of OCD is vascular
insult to the developing knee that is unable to heal because of repetitive microtrauma. The disorder is being seen with rising frequency in
children and adolescents, with a higher incidence in patients >12 years
old, likely in large part because of the increased sports participation of
young athletes. OCD is more common in active children, and about
60% of cases occur in participants of high-­level athletics. The natural
history of juvenile OCD is not the same as that seen in adults. In the
knee, OCD most commonly affects the lateral aspect of the medial femoral condyle; however, the lateral femoral condyle and patella may also
be affected. Failure of both the bone and the cartilage surface to heal
completely is associated with an increased risk for developing premature osteoarthritis. Although the exact incidence of OCD is unknown,
it is estimated to occur bilaterally in 14–20% of patients.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

The most common presenting complaint is a vague or deep knee pain
that is often activity related with no history of significant trauma to the
knee. If the osteochondral fragment becomes unstable, the patient may
also develop mechanical symptoms, such as catching or locking. Physical examination findings include effusion, tenderness to palpation
over the femoral condyles, quadriceps atrophy, and diminished range
of motion. It is important to conduct a thorough history and physical
examination because several other conditions can present similarly in
the pediatric population, including torn meniscus, patellofemoral pain
syndrome, and hip pathologies such as Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease and
slipped capital femoral epiphysis.
Imaging evaluation of OCD typically includes plain radiographs
and MRI. Radiographs can establish the diagnosis and can be used to
evaluate the treatment response. Because most OCD lesions are located
more on the posterior aspect of the femoral condyle, a PA radiograph
with a 45-­degree flexed knee (tunnel view) is often required to evaluate for the presence of an OCD. Many of these patients also have some
degree of patellar-­related pain, necessitating merchant (patellar) view
plain films. Thus standard radiographic evaluation of nontraumatic
adolescent knee pain should routinely include AP, lateral, tunnel, and
merchant radiographs of the knee. An early lesion may appear as a
small radiolucency at the articular surface. A more advanced lesion
may have a well-­demarcated segment of subchondral bone with a
lucent line demonstrating separation from the condyle. The clinical
significance of irregularities in the ossification center of the developing
epiphysis in children younger than 10 years is unclear.
MRI is useful for both diagnosing and characterizing OCD lesions.
It can be used to determine the size and stability of the OCD, the
integrity of the articular cartilage, and the presence of loose bodies.
Fluid observed between the fragment and subchondral bone suggests
an unstable lesion and a high risk for detachment. Any linear signal
through the articular cartilage or displacement of the fragment indicates a potentially unstable lesion as well. Cysts surrounding the OCD
can indicate instability if there are multiple or they are large in size.

However, when deciding treatment, it is important to consider both
the clinical and radiographic findings as the ability of MRI to predict
OCD stability in the pediatric population has been reported to be only
30–92% accurate. For an unstable-­appearing OCD, based on either the
patients’ symptoms and signs or the imaging, arthroscopy is considered the gold standard to determine stability and should be performed
to evaluate the status of the lesion.

TREATMENT

Treatment for juvenile OCD includes nonoperative and surgical
management, with treatment decisions being based on many factors,
including the growth status and skeletal maturity of the patient, the
presence of symptoms, the size of the lesion, whether the lesion appears
intact and stable, or if there is any suggestion of instability. The rate
of juvenile OCD healing without surgical intervention is estimated to
be 30–60%. Skeletal immaturity (i.e., younger age), smaller lesion size,
and the absence of mechanical symptoms or pain have been associated
with a higher likelihood of OCD healing with nonoperative treatment.
Unstable OCD lesions will not usually heal with conservative treatment and thus almost always require surgical intervention.
Young patients with stable lesions, as evidenced by an intact articular surface on imaging (Fig. 718.3A), are deemed to have an acceptable
probability of healing and are often initially managed conservatively
with a period of restricted weight-­bearing and immobilization, followed by a period of strict activity restriction and physical therapy
for 3-6 months. OCD healing is followed with radiographs, usually
at intervals of approximately 1.5-3 months, until lesion healing has
been noted. If healing has not been radiographically confirmed in 3-6
months, surgical intervention is often considered. Because of the low
rate of healing in skeletally mature patients, even intact lesions are not
usually managed conservatively in this patient population, and surgery
is recommended.
Although nonsurgical treatment may be successful in stable lesions,
surgical treatment of these lesions is often more successful. Surgery
also seems to induce healing at a faster rate than conservative treatment. Because surgical treatment has a very low complication rate and
a time frame of recovery that closely parallels a course of conservative
treatment, some patients may choose to pursue early surgical intervention instead of trying nonoperative treatment first. For stable and
intact lesions, surgical management involves arthroscopic evaluation
of the joint followed by either a transarticular or retroarticular drilling
to stimulate bony healing by creating channels in the subchondral bone
that allow revascularization to occur.
More advanced and unstable lesions with findings of edema beneath
the fragment, subchondral cyst formation, and partial (see Fig. 718.3B)
or complete (see Fig. 718.3C) fragment detachment on arthroscopy
are potentially salvageable and should be treated surgically. Treatment
involves drilling or fixation with possible bone grafting. OCD lesions
may progress and become unstable and dislodge into the joint space (see
Fig. 718.3D). Removal of the loose body in addition to cartilage repair
and restoration are typically performed for unstable, unsalvageable
lesions. In the postoperative period, patients usually require physical
therapy to regain strength and range of motion, with a gradual return to
baseline activity levels once full healing has been observed. Early identification and treatment of OCD lesions often prevents recurrent symptoms in adulthood and reduces the risk of early-­onset osteoarthritis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

718.4 Osgood-­Schlatter Disease and
Sinding-­Larsen-­Johansson Syndrome
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
In skeletally immature patients, the tibial tubercle apophysis is an
extension of the proximal tibial epiphysis. As the femur rapidly grows
in length, patients often develop tight musculature, particularly of
the quadriceps, across the knee joint. These patients also develop

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 718 u The Knee

A

B

C

4227

D

Fig. 718.3 The spectrum of osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) pathology of the knee. A, A stable and intact lesion without breach of the overlying

articular cartilage. B, An OCD with fluid beneath the fragment, subchondral cyst formation, and partial fragment detachment. C, An unstable but
located lesion with fluid beneath the fragment, multiple subchondral cysts, and complete fragment detachment. D, A dislodged OCD lesion, resulting in a loose body within the knee joint space.

movement patterns that preferentially place stress on the knees during
physical activity instead of distributing that stress across other joints
in the lower extremity. The repetitive tensile microtrauma sustained
during sports or other athletic activities creates traction injuries at
the weak points in the extensor mechanism at the knee, as the stress
exceeds the developing skeleton’s ability to repair the damage.
Sinding-­Larsen-­Johansson (SLJ) syndrome and Osgood Schlatter (OS) disease are overuse injuries that occur at the most common
“weak points” in the system and are two of the most common causes
of anterior knee pain in children and adolescents. SLJ syndrome is an
insertional periostitis at the inferior pole of the patella. OS disease
is an irritation of the patellar tendon at its insertion into the tibial
tubercle or a traction apophysitis of the tibial tubercle growth plate.
These conditions typically present during periods of relative accelerated growth and self-­resolve within 12-24 months. SLJ syndrome tends
to occur in a slightly younger patient population most commonly ages
9-13 years, whereas OS disease presents in slightly older patients with
most symptomatic between the ages of 10-15 years. These conditions
are most common in very physically active children particularly those
that participate in sports such as basketball, volleyball, and soccer, in
which jumping, kicking, and squatting puts repetitive strain on the
patellar tendon.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Anterior knee pain, very specifically localized to the inferior pole of the
patella (SLJ syndrome) or over the tibial tubercle (OS disease), is the
most common patient complaint. Localized soft tissue swelling, along
with an eventual firm and fixed increased prominence at the tibial
tubercle, may occur with OS disease and may also be part of the initial complaint (Fig. 718.4). There is typically no acute traumatic inciting event, and the history of an acute traumatic onset of symptoms
should raise the possibility of a tibial tubercle fracture or patellar sleeve
fracture. The pain is aggravated by sports activities but may often persist with regular daily activities and even at rest. Physical examination
reveals point tenderness over the inferior pole of the patella (SLJ) or
over the tibial tubercle (OS disease). The presence of a knee effusion
should raise the possibility of other intraarticular pathology. Diagnosis
is usually made clinically, but radiographs may reveal fragmentation of
the tibial tubercle and soft tissue swelling consistent with OS disease
(Fig. 718.5) and be used to rule out other pathologies.
Another cause of patellar pain is fat pad impingement syndrome
(Hoffa disease), which is characterized by inflammation and swelling
of the infrapatellar fat pad, most often due to trauma or recent surgery.
Patients may have pain when extending the knee against resistance.

TREATMENT

In most patients, SLJ syndrome and OS disease are self-­limited processes and resolve with rest. Patients are treated with increasing levels

A

B

Fig. 718.4 Clinical manifestations of Osgood-­Schlatter disease. The
increased prominence of the tibial tubercle, indicated by the arrow, (A)
from traction apophysitis in a 15-­yr-­old male’s knee is contrasted with
the normal appearance of the tibial tubercle (B) in his contralateral, unaffected knee.

of activity restriction or immobilization to get them to a pain-­free state
before advancing their activities. For instance, if they have pain only
with running, but are pain free with normal daily activities, they may be
restricted from running but perform daily activities for 2 weeks before
advancing. In more severe cases, a knee immobilizer or even crutches
with restricted weight-­bearing are required to help the patient reach
a pain-­free state. Patients are usually advised to maintain this pain-­
free level of activity for 1-2 weeks before attempting to advance their
activities. Sports and other dynamic activities are restricted until the
patient is pain free with palpation and during daily activities for at least
2 weeks. During this rest period, addressing some of the contributing
factors, such as muscular tightness, can help prevent a recurrence with
activity resumption. A self-­directed stretching regimen, concentrating
on the quadriceps and hamstrings, may be provided. Some patients and
resistant cases may benefit from formal instruction in these exercises
with a physical therapist. Adjunctive therapy with ice (20 minutes every
2-4 hours and after activity) and NSAIDs (topical or oral) is common.
Communication with the patient and family members about the
disease and prognosis is an important component of treatment. Reassurance may be appropriate because some patients and parents fear
that the swollen tubercle may be a sign of a more significant pathology.
Patients and family members should be advised that the tibial tubercle
swelling will likely not fully resolve. Additionally, some evidence has
suggested that a subgroup of patients who are competitive athletes may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4228 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

experience long-­term pain, and therefore options of treatment strategies and goals regarding participation in competitive sports may need
to be discussed.
Treatment with hyperosmolar dextrose local injections may improve
outcomes in patients with recalcitrant OS disease. However, corticosteroid injections are not recommended because of the risk of rupture of
the patellar tendon due to steroid-­induced atrophy. In the rare situation
in which young adults have persistent and disabling symptoms, surgical removal of ossicles from the tubercle or reduction of an enlarged
tibial tubercle may be warranted. Complications are rare and include
early closure of the tibial tubercle with recurvatum or hyperextension,
deformity, and, rarely, patellar tendon rupture or avulsion fracture of
the tibial tubercle. Although rare, these complications can have significant long-­term consequences and should thus prompt counseling to
avoid playing through the pain.

entertained. Buckling or a sense of the knee giving way can occur, but
there is rarely any true patellar or knee instability. Swelling is not common and, if present, should prompt further investigation.
On physical examination, reproduction of the patient’s pain with
palpation about the medial or lateral aspects of the patella and pain
during squatting have the highest sensitivity for PFPS. With the knee
extended and the quadriceps relaxed, placing pressure on the patella
and translating it distally into the top of the trochlear groove, the grind
test, often also causes pain. Two tests, the patellar tilt test and the patellar apprehension test, have been found to have low sensitivity but the
highest specificity for PFPS. The patellar tilt test is performed while
holding the patella between two fingers, and with the knee extended,
the medial patella is compressed posteriorly while simultaneously trying to elevate the lateral aspect of the patella. A fixed lateral aspect of
the patella indicates tight lateral structures. With the patellar apprehension test, there is resistance to forced lateral displacement of the
patella. Reproduction of the patient’s pain with these maneuvers is an
important component of the examination. Active and passive range of
motion of the knee, alignment of the lower extremity, knee ligamentous stability, patellar tracking, and gait should be evaluated to identify any obvious causes of malalignment or an unstable patella. These
patients often have tight quadriceps, hamstrings, and heel cords, along
with weak hip musculature and poor overall balance. A single leg squat
can often highlight the hip weakness and balance and alignment issues
that contribute to this condition.
Radiographs are not required for diagnosis as there are no structural defects in PFPS; however, routine radiographs of the knee, including AP, lateral, tunnel (PA with 45-­degree flexed knee), and merchant
(patellar) views, are sometimes obtained to eliminate other etiologies
of vague knee pain, such as OCD. Radiographs of the hip should be
considered to rule out hip pathology, such as a slipped capital femoral
epiphysis, which can manifest as ill-­defined knee pain in adolescents
as well. An MRI is not routinely required for evaluation but should be
considered in any patient with a history of mechanical symptoms or
an effusion. MRI should be considered in cases refractory to standard
treatments as well.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

TREATMENT

A

B

Fig. 718.5 Radiographic findings of Osgood-­Schlatter disease. A,

Lateral radiograph of the knee of a 13-­yr-­old male demonstrates a sliver
of new bone formation (arrow) at the tibial tubercle. B, Lateral radiograph of the same child at 15 yr of age demonstrates characteristic
fragmentation (arrow) of the tibial tubercle.

718.5 Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
Also known as anterior knee pain syndrome, patellofemoral pain syndrome (PFPS) is one of the most common causes of knee pain and
is characterized by pain located around or behind the patella that is
elicited during activities that load the patella during knee flexion and
weight-­bearing such as squatting and running. PFPS affects 6–7% of
the general adolescent population and up to 25% of teens who participate in sports. Females are estimated to account for 55–62% cases. Previously, PFPS was thought to arise from a deranged patellar articular
surface; however, increasing evidence shows that anterior knee pain is
frequently present even with normal articular cartilage of the patella.
Even though abnormal patellar tracking may have a role in in the
pathogenesis, the precise etiology of the knee pain remains unknown
and is likely multifactorial. In adolescents, repetitive loading of the
knee joint without adequate time for recovery is thought to be a key
factor in developing PFPS.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Pain is usually described as being beneath or near the patella. The pain
is worse with bent knee activities, such as walking up and down stairs,
because these activities put the patella under high compressive loads.
Squatting, running, and other vigorous physical activities also exacerbate the anterior knee pain. Sitting in a flexed knee position for an
extended period of time, the so-­called theater sign, is another common complaint and is often relieved through knee extension. The onset
of symptoms in usually gradual, with no history of trauma. If a traumatic etiology is noted, consideration for other etiologies should be

Several methods of nonoperative treatment are used to address
PFPS. The mainstay of treatment is continued physiotherapy, involving overall lower-­extremity stretching and strengthening, including
short-­arc quadriceps strengthening, hip and core strengthening, and
exercises designed to address balance and overall body positioning
during dynamic activities. Home exercise programs can be effective
for the properly disciplined and motivated patient, but formal physical
therapy should be considered in resistant cases or in patients who are
unable to adhere to a self-­directed program. Combining physiotherapy
with activity modification and load management during treatment is
associated with an increased rate of return to sports. Orthoses, including patellar taping, knee sleeves, customized knee braces, or even shoe
inserts are often used in conjunction with physical therapy. Knee taping alone does not improve pain; however, exercise therapy in combination with knee taping has a greater reduction in pain than exercise
therapy alone. Evidence for long-­term benefit from other orthotic use
is unclear. Treatment with botulinum toxin injections, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory medications, or therapeutic ultrasound is not substantiated. Despite these efforts, 40% of adolescents will have some
pain that continues into early adulthood and significantly affects their
quality of life, knee function, and physical activity. Surgical treatment
of PFPS is rarely necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

718.6 Patellofemoral Instability
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
The stable tracking of the patellofemoral joint in the front of the knee
depends on a balance of the static restraints and the dynamic forces

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 718 u The Knee

4229

*
*

A

B

Fig. 718.6 A 14-­yr-­old female with patellar instability. A, A T2-­weighted fat suppression axial image through the mid-­patella and proximal trochlea

demonstrates the characteristic bone bruise pattern on the medial patella and along the lateral femoral condyle that occurs when the dislocated
medial patella impacts the lateral femur (asterisks). Injury to the patellar attachment of the medial patellofemoral ligament is also visible at the medial patella. The patella is laterally subluxated in a dysplastic trochlea that is flat to slightly convex (arrowheads) instead of having a normal concave
shape. B, A proton density weighted sagittal image through the center of the knee and patella demonstrates patella alta, with the distance from the
anterior tibia to the inferior aspect of the patellar cartilage (dotted line) being much longer than the length of the patellar cartilage.

acting on the patella. These include the restraining ligaments and the
articular anatomy of the patellofemoral groove that serve to balance the
dynamic forces of the quadriceps mechanism and overall limb positioning. During knee flexion, the pull of the quadriceps mechanism
tends to place an overall lateral displacing force at the patella. The Q
angle refers to the deviation between the angle of the patellar tendon
and the line of the quadriceps. Wider hips and valgus (knock-­kneed)
positioning increase the Q angle and thus the lateral force applied at
the patella. In extension, the static restraints, including the medial
restraining ligaments, primarily the medial patellofemoral ligament,
are responsible for guiding the patella into the trochlear groove in the
distal femur. Once in the trochlea, the bony congruity becomes the primary restraint to the net lateral forces.
Factors that contribute to patellofemoral instability are multifactorial, including ligamentous laxity; trochlear dysplasia, creating a shallow sulcus; condylar hypoplasia; patella alta (a high-­riding patella);
or malalignment that effectively increases the Q angle, such as genu
valgum, increased femoral anteversion, or a lateralized tibial tubercle.
Acute patellofemoral dislocation is the most common acute knee
disorder in children and adolescents between ages 10-19 years and
often occurs after a sudden valgus strain during sports participation,
but it may also be the result of direct trauma. Recurrent patellofemoral subluxation is more than one episode of patellar subluxation without frank dislocation. Lateral malalignment of the extensor mechanism
and trochlear dysplasia are the most common etiologic factors. Habitual dislocation of the patella describes patellar dislocation occurring
during every knee flexion/extension cycle. A dysplastic knee with contracture of the lateral portion of the quadriceps mechanism is often
associated. Several syndromes are associated with patellar instability,
including Down syndrome (see Chapter 57), Turner syndrome (see
Chapter 626.1), Kabuki syndrome (see Chapter 102.2), and Rubinstein-­
Taybi syndrome (see Chapter 102.3).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

With an acute patellar dislocation, patients will recall the acute event
and the sensation that their kneecap was out of place. A focused,
detailed history is important for characterizing the instability. Straightening the knee is all that is usually required to reduce the patella, but
sometimes this requires medical attention. Swelling is typically apparent immediately after the injury and appreciable on examination as

a large effusion. Pain along the knee from the medial patella to the
medial epicondyle of the femur is common. Lateral patellar translocation with the knee extended should be tested with the patellar apprehension test. In the acute setting, there will be increased translation
and pain and a feeling of insecurity. Patellar tracking is also an important component of the examination but may not be possible due to pain
in the acute setting. The J sign refers to the inverted J-­path the patella
takes, beginning in a laterally subluxated position and then suddenly
shifting medially to engage the femoral groove with early knee flexion.
The torsional profile of the extremity is also important to assess to rule
out possible rotational abnormalities of the femur or tibia.
Radiographs of a patient with patellar instability should include AP,
lateral, and merchant views (obtained with the knee bent 45 degrees,
with the beam of the x-­ray through the knee from head to toe) of the
patella. In children and adolescents with acute patellar dislocations,
osteochondral injuries are present in up to 75% of cases. Radiographs
should also be carefully examined for occult fractures. In the presence
of a significant knee effusion, mechanical symptoms, acute traumatic
patellar dislocation, or uncertainty in the diagnosis, further investigation should include an MRI to evaluate for loose bodies or cartilage
damage. MRI will demonstrate bone bruise patterns typical of patellar dislocation at the medial patellar facet and at the lateral femoral
condyle and a tear in the medial patellofemoral ligament (Fig. 718.6).
Risk factors for recurrent instability include skeletal immaturity, ligamentous laxity, patella alta (see Fig. 718.6), trochlear dysplasia (see Fig.
718.6), and lateralized tibial tubercle (particularly one situated outside
the lateral trochlear ridge).

TREATMENT

Nonoperative management that includes activity restriction, bracing, and
physical therapy with return to full activity within in 3-4 months is initially recommended for first-­time, acute patellar dislocation and recurrent
patellar subluxation, unless a large osteochondral fracture or additional
intraarticular pathology is seen on imaging studies. Short-­term immobilization for 3 weeks in extension with a posterior splint has been shown
to significantly decrease the risk of redislocation. After this, transition to
a patellar stabilizing brace usually improves symptoms. Successful treatment is usually achieved with formal physical therapy aimed at improving
extensor muscle tone, particularly the vastus medialis obliquus, activity-­
related body positioning, stretching the iliotibial band, and hip and core

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4230 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
muscle strengthening. Current criteria to return to full activity after conservative management requires absence of pain, recurring patellar instability, and knee effusion, as well as full range of motion, adequate core
strength and endurance, psychologic readiness, hop test showing limb
symmetry >85%, and satisfactory performance on sport-­specific drills.
Recurrent, ipsilateral patellofemoral instability is reported in up to 36%
of skeletally mature patients. However, the reported redislocation rate in
skeletally immature patients is as high as 69%. Risk factors for recurrence
include younger age at time of first dislocation, ligamentous laxity, open
physes, trochlear dysplasia (shallow trochlea), and extensor mechanism
malalignment. Patients at high risk for recurrent dislocation may elect to
undergo surgical stabilization early to prevent additional traumatic cartilage damage from a repeat dislocation, but early stabilization after the first
dislocation is not currently a mainstay of treatment.
Failure to improve after nonoperative treatment and persistent
patellar subluxation or experiencing a recurrent dislocation are the
major indications for surgical intervention. Patients are considered
surgical candidates for early intervention if there are loose bodies,
osteochondral fractures, or chondral damage to prevent mechanical
blocking of motion. Many different types of surgical procedures exist
to prevent dislocation of the patella, but almost all include reconstruction of the medial patellofemoral ligament. Distal realignment of the
patellar tendon insertion with a tibial tubercle osteotomy can help
improve overall alignment and is often included as part of the stabilization procedure in skeletally mature adolescents. In skeletally immature patients, surgical reconstruction with physeal-­sparing techniques
can be performed. Guided growth techniques can be used in patients
with growth remaining (typically 6 months–1 year) to correct overall
alignment. The surgical approach should be patient specific depending on the pathoanatomy contributing to the recurrent instability for
best outcomes. Return to full activity criteria is similar to that for
nonsurgical management but the timeline may be adjusted based on
underlying pathology and bone healing. Recurrence of patellofemoral
instability after surgical intervention is estimated to be around 20%.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

718.7 Anterior Cruciate Ligament Rupture
Anne M. Coyle and J. Todd R. Lawrence
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tears account for more than half of all
knee injuries. Young age is a known risk factor with peak incidence at
16-18 years old. Pediatric ACL reconstruction has become more prevalent as ACL tears in skeletally immature patients have greatly increased
in recent years. This increase is likely due to increased sports participation, increased intensity of training and competition, and participation
on multiple teams. Heightened awareness and improved methods for
diagnosis are also likely contributing factors to the growing awareness
of ACL injuries in children and adolescents.
Females are known to have up to a twofold increased risk for ACL
injury compared to males playing the same sport. The gender-­specific
discrepancy appears to be caused mostly by insufficient neuromuscular activation patterns in females, resulting in increased dynamic genu
valgum (knock-­knee), biased limb alignment when landing, and therefore a heightened tendency toward landing or stopping in an injury-­
prone position. Other nonmodifiable risk factors include generalized
joint laxity, knee recurvatum (hyperextension), femoral anteversion,
and contralateral ACL injury. Various pediatric ACL injury prevention
programs have shown benefits in not only reducing the rate of injuries
but also in increasing athletic strength and performance. Studies also
indicate that universal implementation of injury prevention programs
can be a cost-­effective prevention strategy.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Most ACL tears occur as a result of a noncontact injury involving a
rapid pivoting, cutting, landing, or stopping maneuver. Patients with
an acute knee injury from one of these activities who present with

knee effusion and report a “pop” have a 70% chance of an ACL tear.
The pop sensation occurs at the time of injury with later development
of swelling, limited range of motion, and sometimes a sensation of
instability. After the initial injury, patients may have surprisingly little
pain. On physical examination, the anterior drawer sign or Lachman
test may indicate increased anterior tibial translation. The Lachman
examination is performed by applying an anteriorly directed force to
the proximal tibia with the femur stabilized and the knee flexed 20-30
degrees. The amount of translation and the end point are assessed, with
increased translation and an indistinct end point indicating a positive
test. A pivot shift test can also be performed to confirm the diagnosis, but it is rarely tolerated in the conscious patient. It is conducted
by gently bending the knee while just supporting the lower leg. A
gentle valgus stress and slight internal rotation can enhance the shift.
Assessment for concurrent injury to the medial collateral ligament and
medial or lateral menisci should be considered as concurrent tears can
be present in up to 45% of ACL tears.
Radiographs of the knee are performed, including AP, lateral, tunnel (PA with 45 degrees flexed knee), and merchant (patellar) views,
to assess for other potential injuries common in pediatric and adolescent patients, such as tibial spine avulsion fractures or OCD. In acute
traumatic injuries, internal and external oblique radiographs can also
be helpful. Ultimately, knee MRI is usually necessary to confirm the
presence of an intrasubstance ACL tear and any associated meniscal
or chondral pathology (Fig. 718.7). Arthroscopic evaluation is the gold
standard for diagnosis and treatment.

TREATMENT

The management of ACL injury in this patient population can be
challenging, and the severity of the ACL tear and the degree of knee
instability are important in directing treatment. Incomplete or partial ACL tears with a firm endpoint on examination may be treated
nonoperatively, and the patient’s and family’s understanding and willingness to adhere to a protocol of bracing and activity restriction are
important factors in optimizing outcomes. For complete tears of the
ACL, surgical reconstruction is the preferred treatment for patients
who are physically, mentally, and emotionally capable of maintaining
precautions and complying with the long rehabilitation course after
the procedure. Increasing evidence suggests that optimal timing for
surgical intervention is within 3 months of injury to reduce the likelihood of additional damage occurring in the knee. While timing does
not seem to affect recovery of knee stability, the risk of meniscal injury
is up to 4.5 times higher when surgical intervention is delayed. Use
of autologous tissue for ACL reconstruction is usually recommended
for young active patients due to a lower risk of reinjury compared to
allograft tissue. Growth-­respecting ACL reconstruction techniques,
such as all-­epiphyseal, partial transphyseal, or traditional transphyseal reconstruction techniques, are used based on the skeletal maturity of the patient to minimize the risk for growth disturbance across
the distal femoral and proximal tibial physes. The ultimate treatment
course is an individual decision for the patient and family to make in
consultation with their physician.
Depending on the technique used for reconstruction and any
associated meniscal pathology addressed, weight-­bearing is initially
restricted, and a brace is used for the first 4-6 weeks postoperatively.
Physical therapy is started postoperatively and continued until strength
and functional testing are equal to the contralateral, unaffected limb.
Injury prevention through neuromuscular training is built into the
final phases of the rehabilitation and final screening tests to try to minimize the risk of reinjury. Most patients regain full range of motion and
report no pain by 12 weeks after surgery. Patients return to sports typically at a minimum of 9-12 months postoperatively and are followed
on a yearly basis thereafter until skeletal maturity to monitor progress
and for any signs of growth disturbance. The majority of athletes are
able to return to their same level of competition. The role of using a
brace following ACL reconstruction is not established. Rehabilitation
programs focused on strengthening, proximal control exercises, and
incorporation of various exercise genres have significantly reduced the
recurrence in female athletes. However, despite extensive prevention

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4231

*
*
A

B

Fig. 718.7 A 14-­yr-­old female with full-­thickness anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tear. A, A T2-­weighted fat-­suppression sagittal image through

the center of the knee demonstrates a full-­thickness tear of the ACL with a folded stump near the tibial attachment. (arrow). B, A T2-­weighted fat-­
suppression sagittal image through the lateral compartment demonstrates the characteristic kissing contusion pattern in the distal femoral condyle
and posterior tibial plateau related to the anterior pivot shift that occurs during the ACL injury (asterisks).

efforts, secondary injury rates within 24 months of ACL reconstruction remain very high when patients elect to return to risky sports.
The sports with the greatest risk for ACL tears are soccer, basketball,
and lacrosse for females and football, soccer, and lacrosse for males.
Revision of ACL reconstructions has been associated with increased
complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 719

The Hip
Wudbhav N. Sankar, Jennifer J. Winell,
B. David Horn, and Lawrence Wells
Anatomically, the hip joint is a ball-­and-­socket articulation between
the femoral head and acetabulum. The hip joint is a pivotal joint of the
lower extremity, and its functional demands require both stability and
flexibility.

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

The hip joint begins to develop at about the seventh week of gestation, when a cleft appears in the mesenchyme of the primitive limb
bud. These precartilaginous cells differentiate into a fully formed
cartilaginous femoral head and acetabulum by the eleventh week
of gestation (see Chapter 21). At birth, the neonatal acetabulum is
completely composed of cartilage, with a thin rim of fibrocartilage
called the labrum.

The very cellular hyaline cartilage of the acetabulum is continuous
with the triradiate cartilages, which divide and interconnect the three
osseous components of the pelvis (the ilium, ischium, and pubis).
The concave shape of the hip joint is determined by the presence of a
spherical femoral head.
Several factors determine acetabular depth, including interstitial
growth within the acetabular cartilage, appositional growth under the
perichondrium, and growth of adjacent bones (the ilium, ischium, and
pubis). In the neonate, the entire proximal femur is a cartilaginous
structure, which includes the femoral head and the greater and lesser
trochanters. The three main growth areas are the physeal plate, the
growth plate of the greater trochanter, and the femoral neck isthmus.
Between the fourth and seventh month of life, the proximal femoral
ossification center (in the center of the femoral head) appears. This
ossification center continues to enlarge, along with its cartilaginous
anlage, until adult life, when only a thin layer of articular cartilage
remains. During this period of growth, the thickness of the cartilage
surrounding this bony nucleus gradually decreases, as does the thickness of the acetabular cartilage. The growth of the proximal femur is
affected by muscle pull, the forces transmitted across the hip joint with
weight bearing, normal joint nutrition, circulation, and muscle tone.
Alterations in these factors can cause profound changes in the development of the proximal femur.

VASCULAR SUPPLY

The blood supply to the capital femoral epiphysis is complex and
changes with growth of the proximal femur. The proximal femur
receives its arterial supply from intraosseous (primarily the medial
femoral circumflex artery) and extraosseous vessels (Fig. 719.1).
The retinacular vessels (extraosseous) lie on the surface of the
femoral neck but are intracapsular because they enter the epiphysis from the periphery. This makes the blood supply vulnerable to
damage from septic arthritis, trauma, thrombosis, and other vascular insults. Interruption of this tenuous blood supply can lead to
avascular necrosis of the femoral head and permanent deformity of
the hip.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4232 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Posterior ascending
cervical arteries
Branches to
superior gluteal artery
Lateral ascending
cervical arteries

Medial ascending
cervical arteries
Branches to
obturator
externus
muscle

FEMORAL NECK

Medial
circumflex
femoral
artery

Anterior ascending
cervical arteries
ILIOPSOAS MUSCLE
Femoral
artery

Profundus femoral
artery

Lateral circumflex femoral
artery

719.1 Developmental Dysplasia of the Hip
Wudbhav N. Sankar, B. David Horn, Jennifer J. Winell,
and Lawrence Wells
Developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) refers to a spectrum of
pathology in the development of the immature hip joint. Formerly
called congenital dislocation of the hip, DDH more accurately describes
the variable presentation of the disorder, encompassing mild dysplasia
as well as frank dislocation.

CLASSIFICATION

Acetabular dysplasia refers to abnormal morphology and development
of the acetabulum. Hip subluxation is defined as only partial contact
between the femoral head and acetabulum. Hip dislocation refers to a
hip with no contact between the articulating surfaces of the hip. DDH
is classified into two major groups: typical and teratologic. Typical
DDH occurs in otherwise normal patients or those without defined
syndromes or genetic conditions. Teratologic hip dislocations usually
have identifiable causes, such as arthrogryposis or a genetic syndrome,
and occur before birth.

ETIOLOGY AND RISK FACTORS

Although the etiology remains unknown, the final common pathway
in the development of DDH is increased laxity of the joint, which fails
to maintain a stable femoroacetabular articulation. This increased
laxity is probably the result of a combination of hormonal, mechanical, and genetic factors. A positive family history for DDH is found
in 12–33% of affected patients. DDH is more common among female
patients (80%), which is thought to be because of the greater susceptibility of female fetuses to maternal hormones, such as relaxin, which
increases ligamentous laxity. Although only 3–4% of all babies are
born in breech presentation, the incidence of DDH in these patients
is 16–25%.
Any condition that leads to a tighter intrauterine space and, consequently, less room for normal fetal motion may be associated with
DDH. These conditions include oligohydramnios, large birth weight,
and first pregnancy. The high rate of association of DDH with other
intrauterine molding abnormalities, such as torticollis and metatarsus
adductus, supports the theory that the crowding phenomenon has a role
in the pathogenesis. The left hip is the most commonly affected hip.
In the most common fetal position, the left hip is usually forced into
adduction by the mother’s sacrum.

Fig. 719.1 Diagram of vascular anatomy of
the proximal femur.

Tight swaddling with the hips in the extended position has been
identified as an important risk factor for the development of hip dysplasia. Population studies of cultures that prefer immobilizing children
in hip extension have shown that swaddling in such a way that prevents
an infant from naturally drawing their hips to their chest (so called “M”
position) is detrimental for hip development.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although most newborn screening studies suggest that some degree
of hip instability can be detected in 1 in 100 to 1 in 250 babies, actual
dislocated or dislocatable hips are much less common, being found in
1-1.5 of 1,000 live births.
There is marked geographic and racial variation in the incidence of
DDH. These differences may result from environmental factors, such
as child-­rearing practices, rather than genetic predisposition. African
and Asian caregivers have traditionally carried babies against their
bodies in a shawl so that a child’s hips are flexed, abducted, and free to
move. This keeps the hips in the optimal position for stability and for
dynamic molding of the developing acetabulum by the cartilaginous
femoral head. Children in Native American and Eastern European cultures, which have a relatively high incidence of DDH, have historically
been swaddled in confining clothes that bring their hips into extension. This position increases the tension of the psoas muscle-­tendon
unit and might predispose the hips to displace and eventually dislocate
laterally and superiorly.

PATHOANATOMY

In DDH, several secondary anatomic changes can prevent reduction.
Both the fatty tissue in the depths of the socket, known as the pulvinar, and the ligamentum teres can hypertrophy, blocking reduction of
the femoral head. The transverse acetabular ligament usually thickens
as well, which effectively narrows the opening of the acetabulum. In
addition, the shortened iliopsoas tendon becomes taut across the front
of the hip, creating an hourglass shape to the hip capsule, which limits access to the acetabulum. Over time, the dislocated femoral head
places pressure on the acetabular rim and labrum, causing the labrum
to infold and become thick.
The shape of a normal femoral head and acetabulum depends on a
concentric reduction between the two. The more time that a hip spends
dislocated, the more likely that the acetabulum will develop abnormally. Without a femoral head to provide a template, the acetabulum
will become progressively shallow, with an oblique acetabular roof and
a thickened medial wall.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4233
CLINICAL FINDINGS
The Neonate

DDH in the neonate is asymptomatic and must be screened for in all
newborns by specific maneuvers. Physical examination must be carried
out with the infant unclothed and placed supine in a warm, comfortable setting on a flat examination table.
The Barlow provocative maneuver assesses the potential for dislocation of an initially nondisplaced hip. The examiner adducts the flexed
hip and gently pushes the thigh posteriorly in an effort to dislocate the
femoral head (Fig. 719.2). In a positive test, the hip is felt to slide out of
the acetabulum. As the examiner relaxes the proximal push, the hip can
be felt to slip back into the acetabulum.
The Ortolani test is the reverse of the Barlow test: The examiner
attempts to reduce a hip that is dislocated at rest (Fig. 719.3). The
examiner grasps the child’s thigh between the thumb and index finger
and, with the fourth and fifth fingers, lifts the greater trochanter while
simultaneously abducting the hip. When the test is positive, the femoral head will slip into the socket with a delicate clunk that is palpable
but usually not audible. It should be a gentle, nonforced maneuver.

A hip click is the high-­pitched sensation (or sound) felt at the very
end of abduction during testing for DDH with Barlow and Ortolani
maneuvers. A hip click can be differentiated from a hip clunk, which
is felt as the femoral head goes in and out of joint. Hip clicks usually
originate in the ligamentum teres or occasionally in the fascia lata or
psoas tendon and do not indicate a significant hip abnormality.

The Infant

As the baby enters the second and third month of life, the soft tissues
begin to tighten, and the Ortolani and Barlow tests are no longer reliable. In this age-­group, the examiner must look for other specific physical findings, including limited hip abduction, apparent shortening of the
thigh, proximal location of the greater trochanter, asymmetry of the gluteal or thigh folds (Fig. 719.4), and positioning of the hip. Limitation of
abduction is the most reliable sign of a dislocated hip in this age-­group.
Shortening of the thigh, the Galeazzi sign, is best appreciated by placing
both hips in 90 degrees of flexion and comparing the height of the knees,
looking for asymmetry (Fig. 719.5). Asymmetry of gluteal skin creases
may be a sign of hip dysplasia. Another helpful test is the Klisic test, in
which the examiner places the third finger over the greater trochanter and
the index finger of the same hand on the anterior superior iliac spine. In
a normal hip, an imaginary line drawn between the two fingers points to
the umbilicus. In the dislocated hip, the trochanter is elevated, and the line
projects halfway between the umbilicus and the pubis (Fig. 719.6).

A

B
Fig. 719.2 The Barlow provocative test is performed with the pa-

tient’s knees and hips flexed. A, Holding the patient’s limbs gently,
with the thigh in adduction, the examiner applies a posteriorly directed
force. B, This test is positive in a dislocatable hip.

Fig. 719.4 Asymmetry of thigh folds in a child with developmental
dysplasia of the hip.

A

B
Fig. 719.3 The Ortolani maneuver is the sign of the ball of the femo-

ral head moving in and out of the acetabulum. A, The examiner holds
the patient’s thigh and gently abducts the hip while lifting the greater
trochanter with two fingers. B, When the test is positive, the dislocated
femoral head falls back into the acetabulum with a palpable clunk as
the hip is abducted.

Fig. 719.5 Positive Galeazzi sign noted in a case of untreated developmental dysplasia of the hip.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4234 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
The Walking Child

The walking child often presents to the physician after the family
has noticed a limp, a waddling gait, or a leg-­length discrepancy. The
affected side appears shorter than the normal extremity, and the child
toe-­walks on the affected side. The Trendelenburg sign (see Chapter 714) is positive in these children, and an abductor lurch is usually
observed when the child walks. As in the younger child, there is limited
hip abduction on the affected side and the knees are at different levels
when the hips are flexed (the Galeazzi sign). Excessive lordosis, which
develops secondary to altered hip mechanics, is common and is often
the presenting complaint.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Ultrasonography

Because it is superior to radiographs for evaluating cartilaginous structures, ultrasonography is the diagnostic modality of choice for DDH
before the appearance of the femoral head ossific nucleus (4-6 months).
During the early newborn period (0-4 weeks), however, physical examination is preferred over ultrasonography because there is a high incidence of false-­positive sonograms in this age-­group. Therefore, waiting
to obtain an ultrasound until the infant is at least 6 weeks of age is
recommended unless the child has a strongly positive physical examination. In addition to elucidating the static relationship of the femur to
the acetabulum, ultrasonography provides dynamic information about
the stability of the hip joint. The ultrasound examination can be used to
NORMAL

A

DISLOCATED

monitor acetabular development, particularly of infants in Pavlik harness treatment; this method can minimize the number of radiographs
taken and might allow the clinician to detect treatment failure earlier.
In the Graf technique, the transducer is placed over the greater
trochanter, which allows visualization of the ilium, the bony acetabulum, the labrum, and the femoral epiphysis (Fig. 719.7). The angle
formed by the line of the ilium and a line tangential to the bony roof
of the acetabulum is termed the α angle and represents the depth of
the acetabulum. Values >60 degrees are considered normal, and those
<60 degrees imply acetabular dysplasia. The β angle is formed by a line
drawn tangential to the labrum and the line of the ilium; this represents the cartilaginous roof of the acetabulum. A normal β angle is <55
degrees; as the femoral head subluxates, the β angle increases. Another
useful test is to evaluate the position of the center of the head compared
with the vertical line of the ilium. If the line of the ilium falls lateral to
the center of the head, the epiphysis is considered reduced. If the line
falls medial to the center of the head, the epiphysis is uncovered and is
either subluxated or dislocated.
Screening for DDH with ultrasound remains controversial. Although
routinely performed in Europe, meta-­analyses indicate that data are
insufficient to give clear recommendations. In the United States, the
current recommendations are that every newborn undergo a clinical
examination for hip instability. Children who have findings suspicious
for DDH should be followed up with ultrasound. Most authors agree
that infants with risk factors for DDH (breech position, family history,
torticollis) should be screened with ultrasound regardless of the clinical findings.

Radiography

B

Fig. 719.6 Klisic test. A, In a normal hip, an imaginary line drawn

down through the tip of an index finger placed on the patient’s iliac
crest and the tip of the long finger placed on the patient’s greater trochanter should point to the umbilicus. B, In a dislocated hip, this line
drawn through the two fingertips runs below the umbilicus because the
greater trochanter is abnormally high.

Radiographs are recommended for an infant once the proximal femoral
epiphysis ossifies, usually by 4-6 months. In infants of this age, radiographs have proven to be more effective, less costly, and less operator
dependent than an ultrasound examination. An anteroposterior (AP)
view of the pelvis can be interpreted with the aid of several classic lines
drawn on it (Fig. 719.8).
Hilgenreiner’s line is a horizontal line drawn through the top of
both triradiate cartilages (the clear area in the depth of the acetabulum). Perkins line is a vertical line through the most lateral ossified
margin of the roof of the acetabulum, drawn perpendicular to Hilgenreiner’s line. The ossific nucleus of the femoral head should be located
in the medial lower quadrant of the intersection of these two lines.
Shenton’s line is a curved line drawn from the medial aspect of the
femoral neck to the lower border of the superior pubic ramus. In a
child with normal hips, this line is a continuous contour. In a child with
hip subluxation or dislocation, this line consists of two separate arcs
and is described as “broken.”



A

  65°



B

  42°

Fig. 719.7 A, Normal ultrasonographic image of the hip in an infant.
The α angle is >60 degrees. Note
that a line drawn tangential to the
ilium falls lateral to the center of the
femoral head. B, In this child with developmental dysplasia of the hip, the
left hip demonstrates an α angle of 42
degrees, and a line drawn tangential
to the ilium shows that <50% of the
femoral head is contained within the
acetabulum.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Perkins line

Hilgenreiner's
line

Perkins line

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4235

Hilgenreiner's line

32°

38°

Acetabular
index

Acetabular
index

A

Shenton's line Shenton's line
(NORMAL)
(BROKEN)

B

C

Normal Shenton's line

Fig. 719.8 A-­C, Radiographic measurements are useful in evaluating developmental dysplasia of the hip. Hilgenreiner’s line is drawn through the
triradiate cartilages. Perkins line is drawn perpendicular to Hilgenreiner’s line at the lateral edge of the acetabulum. The ossific nucleus of the femoral head should be located in the medial lower quadrant of the intersection of these two lines. Shenton’s line curves along the femoral metaphysis
and connects smoothly to the inner margin of the pubis. In a child with hip subluxation or dislocation, this line consists of two separate arcs and is
described as broken. The acetabular index is the angle between a line drawn along the margin of the acetabulum and Hilgenreiner’s line; in normal
newborns, it averages 27.5 degrees and decreases with age.

there is for acetabular and proximal femoral remodeling, and the more
complex the required treatments.

Newborns and Infants Younger Than 6 Months

Perkin line

Center–edge angle
of Wilberg

Fig. 719.9 Center–edge angle of Wilberg, which is the angle that is

formed between the Perkin’s line and a line drawn from the lateral lip
of the acetabulum through the center of the femoral head. This angle,
which is a useful measure of hip position in older children, is considered
normal if it is more than 19 degrees in children between the ages of 6
and 13 years. It increases with age. (From Kim HK, Herring JA. Developmental dysplasia of the hip. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric
Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig.13.31.)

The acetabular index is the angle formed between Hilgenreiner’s
line and a line drawn from the depth of the acetabular socket to the
most lateral ossified margin of the roof of the acetabulum. This angle
measures the development of the osseous roof of the acetabulum. In
the newborn, the acetabular index can be up to 40 degrees; by 4 months
in the normal infant, it should be no more than 30 degrees. In the older
child, the center-­edge angle of Wilberg is a useful measure of femoral
head coverage. This angle is formed at the juncture of the Perkins line
and a line connecting the lateral margin of the acetabulum to the center
of the femoral head (Fig. 719.9). In children 6-13 years, an angle >19
degrees is normal, whereas in children 14 years and older, an angle >25
degrees is considered normal.

TREATMENT

The goals in the management of DDH are to obtain and maintain a
concentric reduction of the femoral head within the acetabulum to
provide the optimal environment for the normal development of both
the femoral head and acetabulum. The later the diagnosis of DDH is
made, the more difficult it is to achieve these goals, the less potential

Newborns’ hips that are Barlow positive (reduced but dislocatable) or
Ortolani positive (dislocated but reducible) should generally be treated
with a Pavlik harness as soon as the diagnosis is made. The management of newborns with dysplasia who are younger than 4 weeks of age
is less clear. A significant proportion of these hips normalize within
3-4 weeks; consequently, many physicians prefer to reexamine these
newborns after a few weeks before making treatment decisions. A
study of newborns with mildly dysplastic hips based on the results of
an ultrasound (alpha angles between 43 and 50 degrees) and who were
randomly assigned to receive immediate abduction splinting or active
sonographic surveillance from birth with Frejka splinting (if treatment
was subsequently needed) revealed no difference in radiologic findings
at 6 years of age.
Triple diapers or abduction diapers have no place in the treatment of
DDH in the newborn; they are usually ineffective and give the family a
false sense of security. Acetabular dysplasia, subluxation, or dislocation
can all be readily managed with the Pavlik harness. Although other
braces are available (von Rosen splint, Ilfeld splint, Frejka pillow), the
Pavlik harness remains the most commonly used device worldwide
(Fig. 719.10). By maintaining the Ortolani-­positive hip in a Pavlik harness on a full-­time basis for 6 weeks, hip instability resolves in approximately 75% of cases. After 6 months of age, the failure rate for the
Pavlik harness is >50% because it is difficult to maintain the increasingly active and crawling child in the harness. Frequent examinations
and readjustments are necessary to ensure that the harness is correctly
fitted. The anterior straps of the harness should be set to maintain the
hips in flexion (usually ∼90-100 degrees); excessive flexion is discouraged because of the risk of femoral nerve palsy. The posterior straps
are designed to encourage abduction. These are generally set to allow
adduction just to neutral, because forced abduction by the harness can
lead to avascular necrosis of the femoral epiphysis.
If follow-­
up examinations and ultrasounds do not demonstrate
concentric reduction of the hip after 3-4 weeks of Pavlik harness treatment, the harness should be abandoned. Continued use of the harness
beyond this period in a persistently dislocated hip can cause Pavlik
harness disease or wearing away of the posterior aspect of the acetabulum, which can make the ultimate reduction less stable.

Children 6 Months to 2 Years of Age

The principal goals in the treatment of late-­diagnosed dysplasia
are to obtain and maintain reduction of the hip without damaging
the femoral head. Closed reductions are performed in the operating room under general anesthesia. The hip is moved to determine
the range of motion (ROM) in which it remains reduced. This is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4236 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 719.12 Arthrogram of a reduced hip for evaluating the stability
of reduction.

Fig. 719.10 Photograph of a Pavlik harness.

COMPLICATIONS

Redislocation

Safe zone

Maximum abduction

Fig. 719.11 Diagram of the safe zone of Ramsey.

The most important complication of DDH is avascular necrosis of the
femoral epiphysis. Reduction of the femoral head under pressure or
in extreme abduction can result in occlusion of the epiphyseal vessels
and produce either partial or total infarction of the epiphysis. Revascularization soon follows, but if the physis is severely damaged, abnormal growth and development can occur. Management, as previously
outlined, is designed to minimize this complication. With appropriate
treatment, the incidence of avascular necrosis for DDH is reduced to
5–15%. Other complications in DDH include redislocation, residual
subluxation, acetabular dysplasia, pressure ulcers from prolonged casting, and postoperative complications, including wound infections.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

compared to the maximal ROM to construct a “safe zone” (Fig.
719.11). An arthrogram obtained at the time of reduction is very
helpful for evaluating the depth and stability of the reduction (Fig.
719.12). The reduction is maintained in a well-­molded spica cast,
with the “human position” of moderate flexion and abduction
being the preferred position. After the procedure, single-­cut CT
or MRI may be used to confirm the reduction. Twelve weeks after
closed reduction, the plaster cast is removed; an abduction orthosis
is often used at this point to encourage further remodeling of the
acetabulum. Failure to obtain a stable hip with a closed reduction
indicates the need for an open reduction. In patients younger than
18 months of age, a concomitant acetabular or femoral procedure
is rarely required. The potential for acetabular development after
closed or open reduction is excellent and continues for 4-8 years
after the procedure.

Children Older Than 2 Years

Children 2-6 years of age with a hip dislocation usually require an
open reduction. In this age-­group, a concomitant femoral shortening osteotomy is often performed to reduce the pressure on the
proximal femur and minimize the risk of osteonecrosis. Because
the potential for acetabular development is markedly diminished
in these older children, a pelvic osteotomy is usually performed in
conjunction with the open reduction. Postoperatively, patients are
immobilized in a spica cast for 6-12 weeks.

719.2 Transient Monoarticular Synovitis
(Toxic Synovitis)
Wudbhav N. Sankar, Jennifer J. Winell, B. David Horn,
and Lawrence Wells
Transient synovitis (toxic synovitis) is thought to be a reactive arthritis
and is one of the most common causes of hip pain in young children.

ETIOLOGY

The cause of transient synovitis remains unknown. It has been variously described as a nonspecific inflammatory condition or as a postviral immunologic synovitis because it tends to follow recent viral
illnesses.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although transient synovitis can occur in all age-­groups, it is most prevalent in children between 3 and 8 years of age, with a mean onset at age 6
years. Approximately 70% of all affected children have had a nonspecific
upper respiratory tract infection the 7-14 days before symptom onset.
Symptoms often develop acutely (∼3 days) and usually consist of pain in
the groin, anterior thigh, or knee, which may be referred from the hip.
These children are usually able to bear weight on the affected limb and
typically walk with an antalgic gait with the foot externally rotated. The hip
is not held flexed, abducted, or laterally rotated unless a significant effusion
is present. They are often afebrile or have a low-­grade fever (≤38oC).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4237
DIAGNOSIS

Transient synovitis is a diagnosis of exclusion, and laboratory and
radiographic tests can be useful to rule out other more serious conditions. In transient synovitis, infection laboratory tests (ESR: <20
mm/hr, serum CRP: normal or ≤2 mg/dL, and WBC: <12,000 cells/
mm3) are relatively normal, but on occasion a mild elevation in the
ESR is observed. AP and Lauenstein (frog-­leg) lateral radiographs of
the pelvis may be acquired and are also usually found to be normal.
Ultrasonography of the hip is the preferred imaging modality and often
demonstrates a small joint effusion.
The most important condition to exclude before confirming a diagnosis
of toxic synovitis is septic arthritis. Children with septic arthritis usually appear more systemically ill and have more pain than those with
transient synovitis, often refusing to walk or move their hip at all. High
fever, refusal to walk, and elevations of the ESR, serum CRP, and WBC
all suggest a diagnosis of septic arthritis. If the clinical scenario is suspicious for septic arthritis, an ultrasound-­guided aspiration of the hip
joint should be performed to make the definitive diagnosis (see Chapter 726). An exception to these criteria is hip septic arthritis due to Kingella kingae or Lyme disease, which may have minimal inflammation
and low-­grade or no fever. Synovial fluid white blood cell counts are
low in toxic synovitis (<25,000) and much higher in Lyme and septic
arthritis (50,00-200,000). MRI may be needed to evaluate for an associated osteomyelitis if the patient has concerning examination or laboratory findings (see Chapter 725).

TREATMENT

The treatment of transient monoarticular synovitis of the hip is symptomatic. Recommended therapies include activity limitation and relief
of weight bearing until the pain subsides. Antiinflammatory agents and
analgesics can shorten the duration of pain. Most children improve in
5-7 days and recover completely within 3-6 weeks.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

719.3 Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes Disease
Wudbhav N. Sankar, Jennifer J. Winell, B. David Horn,
and Lawrence Wells
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease (LCPD) is a hip disorder of unknown etiology that results from temporary interruption of the blood supply to
the proximal femoral epiphysis, leading to osteonecrosis and femoral
head deformity.

ETIOLOGY

Although the underlying etiology remains obscure, most authors agree
that the final common pathway in the development of LCPD is disruption of the vascular supply to the femoral epiphysis, which results in
ischemia and osteonecrosis. Infection, trauma, and transient synovitis
have all been proposed as causative factors but are unsubstantiated.
Factors leading to thrombophilia, an increased tendency to develop
thrombosis, and a reduced ability to lyse thrombi have been identified. Factor V Leiden mutation, deficiency of proteins C and S, lupus
anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, antitrypsin, and plasminogen activator might play a role in the abnormal clotting mechanism.
These abnormalities in the clotting cascade are thought to increase
blood viscosity and the risk for venous thrombosis. Poor venous outflow leads to increased intraosseous pressure, which, in turn, impedes
arterial inflow, causing ischemia and cell death. LCPD is rarely due to
pathogenic variants in COL2A1, which is usually sporadic (de novo)
and manifests as an autosomal dominant trait.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of LCPD in the United States is 1 in 1,200 children,
with males 4-5 times more likely to be affected than females. The peak
incidence of the disease is between the ages of 4 and ­8 years. Bilateral

involvement is seen in approximately 10% of the patients, but the hips
are usually in different stages of collapse.

PATHOGENESIS

Early pathologic changes in the femoral head are the result of ischemia and necrosis; subsequent changes result from the repair process.
The disease course may have four stages, although variations have
been described. The initial stage of the disease, which lasts an average of 6 months, is characterized by synovitis, joint irritability, and
early necrosis of the femoral head. Revascularization then leads to
osteoclastic-­mediated resorption of the necrotic segment. The necrotic
bone is replaced by fibrovascular tissue rather than new bone, which
compromises the structural integrity of the femoral epiphysis. The second stage is the fragmentation stage, which typically lasts 8 months.
During this stage, the femoral epiphysis begins to collapse, usually laterally, and begins to extrude from the acetabulum. The healing stage,
which lasts approximately 4 years, begins with new bone formation in
the subchondral region. Reossification begins centrally and expands
in all directions. The degree of femoral head deformity depends on
the severity of collapse and the amount of remodeling that occurs.
The final stage is the residual stage, which begins after the entire head
has reossified. A mild amount of remodeling of the femoral head still
occurs until the child reaches skeletal maturity. LCPD often damages
the proximal femoral physis, leading to a short neck (coxa breva) and
trochanteric overgrowth.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The most common presenting symptom is a limp of varying duration.
Pain, if present, is usually activity related and may be localized in the
groin or referred to the anteromedial thigh or knee region. Failure
to recognize that thigh or knee pain in a child may be secondary to hip
pathology can cause further delay in the diagnosis. Less commonly, the
onset of the disease may be much more acute and may be associated
with a failure to ambulate.
Antalgic gait (a limp characterized by a shortening of gait phase on
the injured side to alleviate weight-­bearing pain) may be particularly
prominent after strenuous activity at the end of the day. Hip motion,
primarily internal rotation and abduction, is limited. Early in the
course of the disease, the limited abduction is secondary to synovitis and muscle spasm in the adductor group; however, with time and
the subsequent deformities that can develop, the limitation of abduction can become permanent. A mild hip flexion contracture of 10-20
degrees may be present. Atrophy of the muscles of the thigh, calf, or
buttock from disuse secondary to pain may be evident. An apparent
leg-­length inequality may be caused by an adduction contracture or
true shortening on the involved side from femoral head collapse.

DIAGNOSIS

Routine plain radiographs are the primary diagnostic tool for LCPD.
AP and Lauenstein (frog-­
leg) lateral views are used to diagnose,
stage, provide prognosis for, and follow the course of the disease (Fig.
719.13). It is important when evaluating disease progression that all
radiographs be viewed sequentially and compared with previous
radiographs to assess the stage of the disease and to determine the true
extent of epiphyseal involvement.
In the initial stage of LCPD, the radiographic changes include a
decreased size of the ossification center, lateralization of the femoral
head with widening of the medial joint space, a subchondral fracture,
and physeal irregularity. In the fragmentation stage, the epiphysis
appears fragmented, and there are scattered areas of increased radiolucency and radiodensity. During the reossification stage, the bone
density returns to normal via new (woven) bone formation. The residual stage is marked by the reossification of the femoral head, gradual
remodeling of head shape until skeletal maturity, and remodeling of
the acetabulum.
In addition to these radiographic changes, several classic radiographic signs have been reported that describe a “head at risk” for
severe deformity. Lateral extrusion of the epiphysis, a horizontal physis, calcification lateral to the epiphysis, subluxation of the hip, and a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4238 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

E

B

C

A

D

F

Fig. 719.13 Radiographic evolution of Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease, with onset in a male at 10-­yr, 11-­mo of age. Despite the late age of onset,
the femoral head remodels well as the patient approaches skeletal maturity. A, Anteroposterior (AP) radiograph obtained at onset of the disorder
shows increased density in the femoral head and apparent widening of the joint space (Waldenström’s initial stage). B, AP radiograph obtained 9 mo
after onset shows the head entering the fragmentation stage. The central fragment remains dense and has collapsed relative to the lateral portion
(lateral pillar) of the femoral head. The lateral pillar is lucent but has not collapsed, and the hip is classified as group B in the lateral pillar classification system. The joint space has widened further. C, AP radiograph obtained 17 mo after onset shows early reossification of the femoral head (the
healing stage). D, A closer view of the femoral head at 22 mo after onset of disease. There is still widening of the joint space, and the acetabulum
has a bicompartmental appearance. E, AP radiograph obtained 4 yr after onset. The femoral head is healed and in the residual state. There is still
widening of the joint space and incongruity of the head with the acetabulum. F, AP radiograph obtained 6 yr after onset shows improved roundness of the femoral head and better joint congruity. (From Kim HK, Herring JA. Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric
Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 14.19.)

radiolucent horizontal V in the lateral aspect of the physis (Gage’s sign)
are all associated with a poor prognosis.
In the absence of changes on plain radiographs, particularly in the
early stages of the disease, MRI is useful to diagnose early infarction and determine the degree of impaired perfusion. It is being
used more in early stages to help determine prognosis. During the
remodeling or residual stages, MRI is extremely helpful to define
the abnormal anatomy and determine the extent of intraarticular
injury. Arthrography can be useful to dynamically assess the shape
of the femoral head, demonstrate whether a hip can be contained,
and diagnose hinge abduction. Table 719.1 outlines the differential
diagnosis.

CLASSIFICATION

A four-­group classification is based on the amount of femoral
epiphysis involvement and a set of radiographic “head at-­risk”
signs. Group I hips have anterior femoral head involvement of
25%, no sequestrum (an island of dead bone within the epiphysis),
and no metaphyseal abnormalities. Group II hips have up to 50%
involvement and a clear demarcation between involved and uninvolved segments. Metaphyseal cysts may be present. Group III hips
display up to 75% involvement and a large sequestrum. In group
IV, the entire femoral head is involved. Use of this classification
system has been limited because of a high degree of interobserver
variability.
The Herring lateral pillar classification is the most widely used
radiographic classification system for determining treatment and
prognosis during the active stage of the disease (Fig. 719.14). The
Herring classification has a high degree of interobserver reliability. Classification is based on several radiographs taken during the
early fragmentation stage. The lateral pillar classification system
for LCPD evaluates the shape of the femoral head epiphysis on AP
radiograph of the hip. The head is divided into three sections or pillars. The lateral pillar occupies the lateral 15–30% of the head width,
the central pillar is approximately 50% of the head width, and the
medial pillar is 20–35% of the head width. The degree of involvement of the lateral pillar can be subdivided into three groups. In
group A, the lateral pillar is radiographically normal. In group B,
the lateral pillar has some lucency, but >50% of the lateral pillar
height is maintained. In group C, the lateral pillar is more lucent
than in group B, and <50% of the pillar height remains. Herring has

Table 719.1  Differential Diagnosis of Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes
Disease
OTHER CAUSES OF AVASCULAR NECROSIS
Sickle cell disease
Other hemoglobinopathies (e.g., thalassemia)
Chronic myelogenous leukemia
Steroid medication
Sequela of traumatic hip dislocation
Treatment of developmental dysplasia of the hip
Septic arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS MIMICKING PERTHES
Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Hypothyroidism
OTHER SYNDROMES
Osteochondromatosis
Metachondromatosis
Schwartz-­Jampel syndrome
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome
Maroteaux-­Lamy syndrome
Martsolf syndrome
Stickler syndrome
From Kim HKW, Herring JA. Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s
Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Box 14.6, p. 561.

added a B/C border group to the classification system to describe
patients with approximately 50% collapse of the lateral pillar.

NATURAL HISTORY AND PROGNOSIS

Children who develop signs and symptoms of LCPD before the age
of 6 years tend to recover with fewer residual problems. Patients
older than 9 years of age at presentation usually have a poor prognosis. The reason for this difference is that the remodeling potential
of the femoral head is higher in younger children. Greater extent of
femoral head involvement and duration of the disease process are
additional factors associated with a poor prognosis. Hips classified
as Catterall groups III and IV and lateral pillar group C generally
have a poor prognosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4239
100%
maintained

A

>50%

B

<50%

Approx 50%

C

B/C Border

Fig. 719.14 Lateral pillar classification for Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease. A, There is no involvement of the lateral pillar. B, More than 50% of the
lateral pillar height is maintained. B/C Border, Lateral pillar is narrowed or poorly ossified with approximately 50% height maintained. C, Less than
50% of the lateral pillar height is maintained.

TREATMENT

The goal of treatment in LCPD is preservation of a spherical, well-­
covered femoral head and maintenance of hip ROM that is close
to normal. Although the treatment of LCPD remains controversial, most authors agree that the general approach to these patients
should be guided by the principle of containment. This principle
is predicated on the fact that while the femoral head is fragmenting, and therefore in a softened condition, it is best to contain it
entirely within the acetabulum; by doing so, the acetabulum acts
as a mold for the regenerating femoral head. Conversely, failure
to contain the head permits it to deform, with resulting extrusion
and impingement on the lateral edge of the acetabulum. To be successful, containment must be instituted early while the femoral
head is still moldable; once the head has healed, repositioning the
femoral epiphysis will not aid remodeling and can, in fact, worsen
symptoms.
Initial options to manage symptoms include activity limitation,
protected weight bearing, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications. Nonoperative containment can be achieved by using a Petrie cast to restore abduction and to direct the femoral head deeper
into the acetabulum. Petrie casts are two long-­leg casts that are connected by a bar and can be helpful to keep the hips in abduction
and internal rotation (the best position for containment). Casting is
generally done in conjunction with an arthrogram to confirm containment and a tenotomy of the adductor tendons. After 6 weeks,
patients can be transitioned into an abduction orthosis with limited
weight bearing. Several older studies did not support the efficacy
of casting and long-­term bracing as a means of containment, but a
subsequent large series reported excellent results with this form of
treatment.
Surgical containment may be approached from the femoral side, the
acetabular side, or both sides of the hip joint. A varus osteotomy of
the proximal femur is the most common procedure. Pelvic osteotomies in LCPD are divided into three categories: acetabular rotational
osteotomies, shelf procedures, and medial displacement or Chiari osteotomies. Any of these procedures can be combined with a proximal
femoral varus osteotomy when severe deformity of the femoral head
cannot be contained by a pelvic osteotomy alone.
After healing of the epiphysis, surgical treatment shifts from containment to management of the residual deformity. Patients with hinge
abduction or joint incongruity might benefit from a valgus-­producing
proximal femoral osteotomy. Coxa breva and overgrowth of the greater
trochanter can be managed by performing an advancement of the
trochanter. This helps restore the length-­tension relationship of the
abductor mechanism and can alleviate abductor fatigue. Patients with
femoroacetabular impingement from irregularity of the femoral head
often can be helped with an osteoplasty or cheilectomy of the offending
prominence.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

719.4 Slipped Capital Femoral Epiphysis
Wudbhav N. Sankar, Jennifer J. Winell, B. David Horn,
and Lawrence Wells
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) is a hip disorder that affects
adolescents, most often between 10-16 years of age, and involves failure
of the physis and displacement of the femoral head relative to the neck.

CLASSIFICATION

SCFEs may be classified temporally, according to onset of symptoms
(acute, chronic, acute-­
on-­
chronic); functionally, according to the
patient’s ability to bear weight (stable or unstable); or morphologically,
as the extent of displacement of the femoral epiphysis relative to the
neck (mild, moderate, or severe), as estimated by measurement on
radiographic or CT images.
An acute SCFE is characterized as one occurring in a patient who
has prodromal symptoms for ≤3 weeks and should be distinguished
from a purely traumatic separation of the epiphysis in a previously
normal hip (a true Salter-­Harris type I fracture; see Chapter 724).
The patient with an acute slip usually has some prodromal pain in the
groin, thigh, or knee, and usually reports a relatively minor injury (a
twist or fall) that is not sufficiently violent to produce an acute fracture of this severity.
Chronic SCFE is the most common form of presentation. Typically,
an adolescent presents with a few months’ history of vague groin, thigh,
or knee pain and a limp. Radiographs show a variable amount of posterior and inferior migration of the femoral epiphysis and remodeling of
the femoral neck in the same direction.
Children with acute-­on-­chronic SCFE can have features of both
acute and chronic conditions. Prodromal symptoms have been present
for >3 weeks with a sudden exacerbation of pain. Radiographs demonstrate femoral neck remodeling and further displacement of the capital
epiphysis beyond the remodeled point of the femoral neck.
The stability classification separates patients based on their ability
to ambulate and is more useful in predicting prognosis and establishing a treatment plan. The SCFE is considered stable when the
child is able to walk with or without crutches. A child with an unstable SCFE is unable to walk with or without walking aids. Patients
with unstable SCFE have a much higher prevalence of osteonecrosis
(up to 50%) compared to those with stable SCFE (nearly 0%). This
is most likely because of the vascular injury caused at the time of
initial displacement.
SCFE may also be categorized by the degree of displacement of
the epiphysis on the femoral neck. The head-­shaft angle difference
is <30 degrees in mild slips, between 30 and 60 degrees in moderate slips, and >60 degrees in severe slips, compared to the normal
contralateral side.
SCFE is one of many etiologies of acquired coxa vara
defined by an abnormal decrease in the femoral neck shaft angle
(Table 719.2).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4240 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 719.2  Classification of Coxa Vara
ACQUIRED COXA VARA
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Sequela of avascular necrosis of the femoral epiphysis
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease
Traumatic coxa vara
Femoral neck fracture
Traumatic hip dislocation
Sequela of reduction for developmental dysplasia of the hip
Septic necrosis
Other causes of avascular necrosis of the immature femoral head
Coxa vara associated with pathologic bone disorders
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Fibrous dysplasia
Renal osteodystrophy
Osteopetrosis
Other bone-­softening conditions affecting the femoral neck
Congenital femoral deficiency with coxa vara
DEVELOPMENTAL COXA VARA
Isolated (may be bilateral)
Associated with a skeletal dysplasia
Cleidocranial dysostosis
Metaphyseal dysostosis
Other skeletal dysplasias
From Sucato DJ. Congenital coxa vara. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric
Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Box 16.1, p. 617.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

SCFEs are most likely caused by a combination of mechanical and
endocrine factors. The plane of cleavage in most SCFEs occurs through
the hypertrophic zone of the physis. During normal puberty, the
physis becomes more vertically oriented, which converts mechanical
forces from compression to shear. In addition, the hypertrophic zone
becomes elongated in pubertal adolescents due to high levels of circulating hormones. This widening of the physis decreases the threshold for mechanical failure. Normal ossification depends on a number
of different factors, including the thyroid hormone, vitamin D, and
calcium. Consequently, it is not surprising that SCFEs occur with
increased incidence in children with medical disorders, such as hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism, and renal osteodystrophy. Obesity, one
of the largest risk factors for SCFE, affects both the mechanical load
on the physis and the level of circulating hormones. The combination
of mechanical and endocrine factors results in gradual failure of the
physis, which allows posterior and inferior displacement of the head in
relation to the femoral neck.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The annual incidence of SCFE is 2 per 100,000 in the general population. Obesity is the most closely associated risk factor in the development of SCFE; approximately 65% of the patients are in the >90th
percentile in weight-­for-­age profiles. There is a predilection for males
to be affected more often than females and for the left hip to be affected
more often than the right. Bilateral involvement has been reported in as
many as 60% of cases, nearly half of which may be present at the time
of initial presentation.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The classic patient presenting with a SCFE is an obese male between
the ages of 11 and 16 years. Females present earlier, usually between
10 and 14 years of age. Patients with chronic and stable SCFEs tend
to present after weeks to months of symptoms. Patients usually
limp to some degree and have an externally rotated lower extremity. Physical examination of the affected hip reveals a restriction of
internal rotation, abduction, and flexion. Commonly, the examiner
notes that as the affected hip is flexed, the thigh tends to rotate progressively into more external rotation with increased flexion (Fig.
719.15). Most patients complain of groin symptoms, but isolated

Fig. 719.15 Clinical examination of a patient with a stable slipped

capital femoral epiphysis. Hip flexion and external rotation are limited.
With flexion of the affected hip, the limb rotates externally. (From Podesczwa D. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022:
Fig.15.5.)

thigh or knee pain is a common presentation from referred pain
along the course of the obturator nerve. Missed or delayed diagnosis often occurs in children who present with knee pain and do
not receive appropriate imaging of the hip. Patients with unstable
SCFEs usually present in an urgent fashion. Children typically
refuse to allow any ROM of the hip; much like a hip fracture, the
extremity is shortened, abducted, and externally rotated.

DIAGNOSTIC STUDIES

AP and frog-­leg lateral radiographic views of both hips are usually the only imaging studies needed to make the diagnosis. Because
approximately 25% of patients have a contralateral slip on initial
presentation, it is critical that both hips be carefully evaluated by
the treating physician. Radiographic findings include widening and
irregularity of the physis, a decrease in epiphyseal height in the center of the acetabulum, a crescent-­shaped area of increased density
in the proximal portion of the femoral neck, and the “blanch sign of
Steel” corresponding to the double density created from the anteriorly displaced femoral neck overlying the femoral head. In an unaffected patient, Klein’s line, a straight line drawn along the superior
cortex of the femoral neck on the AP radiograph, should intersect
some portion of the lateral capital femoral epiphysis. With progressive displacement of the epiphysis, Klein’s line no longer intersects
the epiphysis (Fig. 719.16). Although some of these radiographic
findings can be subtle, most diagnoses can be readily made on the
frog-­leg lateral view, which reveals the characteristic posterior and
inferior displacement of the epiphysis in relation to the femoral
neck (Fig. 719.17).

TREATMENT

Once the diagnosis is made, the patient should be admitted to the hospital immediately and placed on bed rest. Allowing the child to go home
without definitive treatment increases the risk that a stable SCFE will
become an unstable SCFE and that further displacement will occur.
Children with atypical presentations (younger than 10 years of age, thin
body habitus) should have screening labs sent to rule out an underlying
endocrinopathy.
The goal of treatment is to prevent further progression of the
slip and to stabilize (i.e., close) the physis. Although various forms
of treatment have been used in the past, including spica casting,
the current gold standard for the treatment of SCFE is in situ pinning with a single large screw (Fig. 719.18). The term in situ implies
that no attempt is made to reduce the displacement between the
epiphysis and femoral neck because doing so increases the risk of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 719 u The Hip 4241
osteonecrosis. Screws are typically placed percutaneously under
fluoroscopic guidance. Postoperatively, most patients are allowed
partial weight bearing with crutches for 4-6 weeks, followed by a
gradual return to normal activities. Patients should be monitored
with serial radiographs to be sure that the physis is closing and that
the slip is stable. After healing from the initial stabilization, patients
with severe residual deformity may be candidates for proximal femoral osteotomy to correct the deformity, reduce impingement, and
improve range of motion.
Because 20–40% of children will develop a contralateral SCFE at
some point, many orthopedists advocate prophylactic pin fixation of
the contralateral (normal) side in patients with a unilateral SCFE. The
benefits of preventing a possible slip must be balanced with the risks of
performing a potentially unnecessary surgery. Several recent studies
have attempted to analyze decision models for prophylactic pinning,
but controversy remains regarding the optimal course of treatment. If

Right

Left

Normal
Klein’s line

prophylactic pinning is not performed, patients and their families must
be instructed to return immediately if they develop contralateral hip
or leg pain.

COMPLICATIONS

Osteonecrosis and chondrolysis are the two most serious complications of SCFE. Osteonecrosis, or avascular necrosis, usually occurs as a
result of injury to the retinacular vessels. This can be caused by an initial force of injury, particularly in unstable slips, forced manipulation of
an acute or unstable SCFE, compression from intracapsular hematoma,
or as a direct injury during surgery. Partial forms of osteonecrosis can
also appear after internal fixation; this can be caused by a disruption of
the intraepiphyseal blood vessels. Chondrolysis, on the other hand, is
an acute dissolution of articular cartilage in the hip. There are no clear
causes of this complication, but it is thought to be associated with more
severe slips, to occur more commonly in females, and to be associated
with pins or screws protruding out of the femoral head.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Abnormal
Klein’s line

A

B

Fig. 719.18 Preoperative (A) and postoperative (B) radiographs demFig. 719.16 Illustration of Klein’s line.

A

B

onstrating the in situ pinning in a case of slipped capital femoral epiphysis.

C

Fig. 719.17 Radiographic appearance of slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE) on presentation. A, Appearance of acute SCFE on a frog-­leg

lateral view. The displacement of the epiphysis is suggestive of a Salter-­Harris type I fracture of the upper femoral physis. There are no secondary
adaptive changes noted in the femoral neck. B, Frog-­leg lateral radiographs in a patient with many months of thigh discomfort and a chronic slipped
epiphysis. Adaptive changes in the femoral neck predominate, and the epiphysis is centered on the adapted femoral neck. C, Frog-­leg lateral radiographs of a patient with acute-­on-­chronic SCFE. The patient had several months of vague thigh pain, with sudden, severe exacerbation of that
pain. The acute displacement of the epiphysis is evident. Unlike in acute SCFE (see A), secondary adaptive remodeling changes are also present
in the femoral neck, beyond which the epiphysis has acutely displaced. (From Podeszwa D. Slipped capital femoral epiphysis. In: Herring JA, ed.
Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 15.1, p. 583.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4242 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Chapter 720

The Spine
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Abnormalities of the spine can result from a variety of causes, including congenital, developmental, and traumatic. In addition to spinal
deformities, back pain is also prevalent in children and adolescents and
may be caused by a number of serious or relatively benign pathologies.

NORMAL SPINAL CURVATURES

A normal spinal column is straight in the anteroposterior (AP, coronal)
plane but has curvatures in the lateral (sagittal) plane. Normal cervical lordosis, thoracic kyphosis, and lumbar lordosis regions are biomechanically advantageous as they maintain relationships of the body
relative to the forces of gravity, which is important for balance. These
curvatures also help to conserve energy by minimizing the amount of
muscular activity required to maintain an upright posture.
Abnormalities affecting these normal curvatures, termed sagittal
plane imbalances, can be measured on a lateral spine radiograph.
A vertical line, or plumb line, drawn from the center of the seventh
cervical vertebra should normally fall through the posterosuperior
corner of the sacrum. Disorders affecting sagittal alignment include
thoracic hyperkyphosis and lumbar hyperlordosis. In contrast,
although scoliosis is actually a three-­dimensional deformity not limited to a single anatomic plane, it is most commonly described as a
frontal or coronal plane deformity with curvatures away from the
midline in this plane.

OVERVIEW OF ABNORMAL SPINAL CURVATURES

The most common spinal deformities are scoliosis and kyphosis. Early
diagnosis is important, as a subset of patients may be candidates for
early interventions to prevent curve progression. Bracing has been
proven to reduce the number of patients with curve progressing to
require surgery in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS).
Scoliosis may be idiopathic, due to congenital bony deformities,
or may be associated with a variety of underlying conditions, including neuromuscular diseases, connective tissue diseases, or genetic
syndromes. Oftentimes, the pediatrician is the first to diagnose these
conditions.
Although parents and families are often most concerned about
potential cosmetic abnormalities, the physician diagnosing a patient
with a spinal deformity must carefully consider both the potential for
underlying causes requiring treatment and the patient’s long-­term
prognosis. Progressive curvatures in the neuromuscular population
may result in respiratory insufficiency in addition to a loss of sitting
balance. Other conditions such as neurofibromatosis are associated
with a specific dystrophic curve pattern that can rapidly progress.
Sometimes, a spinal deformity might be the first sign of an underlying syndrome. Parents and the patient need an understanding of the
deformity, how it may progress, and potential complications associated
with the diagnosis. A classification of common spinal abnormalities is
presented in Table 720.1.

causing a visible prominence to be noted on the Adams forward bend
test. The sagittal plane is also affected, leading to abnormalities such as
decreased thoracic kyphosis.

ETIOLOGY

By definition, the etiology of idiopathic scoliosis remains unknown
despite a considerable body of research. It is likely that the disease
is multifactorial, with genetic, hormonal, cellular, and anatomic
contributions.
A genetic link has been proposed with sex-­linked dominant, autosomal dominant, and polygenetic inheritance patterns all suggested.
Genetic involvement has been substantiated in studies of twins, demonstrating a 73% concordance rate for AIS in monozygotic twins compared to a 36% concordance rate in dizygotic twins.
AIS is 2 to 10 times more common in females than males. Investigators have attempted to explain this difference as a genetic effect: it
has been hypothesized that males are not as susceptible to the involved
genes as females. Therefore, affected males must inherit a larger number of susceptibility genes to have a scoliosis phenotype. Males would
pass more susceptibility genes onto their children and would therefore
have more affected children. Fathers with AIS transmit the gene to 80%
of their children, but mothers with AIS transmit it to only 56% of their
children.
Exome sequencing has identified pathogenic variants in the
COL11A2 collagen gene in 32% of AIS cases. COMP promotor methylation has been correlated with a younger age and larger main curve
magnitude. Other gene variants have been found to demonstrate an
association with AIS, including PAX1, POC5, the Bsml polymorphism
in the vitamin D receptor gene, and FBN1. Additionally, females who
have first-­degree relatives with AIS have been found to have more
severe curves and longer arm spans than females who have a spontaneous case.
Cellular structures may be involved in the disease process. Calmodulin, a regulator of the contractile properties of muscle, occurs at
increased levels in the platelets of patients with progressive AIS. On
a more cellular level, differences in the mRNA expression of H19 and
ADIPOQ have been described in the paraspinal musculature from the
concave to the convex side of a curvature. Other functional evaluations
of patients with AIS have noted abnormalities in proprioception and
postural balance.
MRI studies of the brain in patients with AIS versus controls have
found that the cerebellum of affected patients is hypertrophied in areas
involving the somatosensory tracts, motor control, and response to
visual stimulation. These areas of hypertrophy may be a compensation
for impaired balance resulting from malalignment of the spine.
Approximately 30% of females with AIS have osteopenia on DEXA
studies, and of these, 80% will have lifelong osteopenia. Osteopenia has
been linked to an increased risk of curve progression. Insufficient vitamin D levels have been reported in over 90% of patients with operative
AIS.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Idiopathic scoliosis is the most common type of spinal curvature; 80%
of cases are idiopathic. The overall prevalence of idiopathic scoliosis in
skeletally immature patients ranges from 1–3% of the population. Most
curves are mild and do not require treatment, with only 0.5% being >20
degrees and 0.3% exceeding 30 degrees. Curves of ≤10 degrees occur
equally between males and females; however, those requiring an intervention occur in a 7:1 female-­to-­male ratio.

CLASSIFICATION OF IDIOPATHIC SCOLIOSIS

720.1 Idiopathic Scoliosis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Scoliosis is a complex, three-­dimensional spinal deformity, defined in
the coronal plane as a curve of at least 10 degrees on a posteroanterior
(PA) radiograph of the spine. Affected vertebrae are axially rotated,

Idiopathic scoliosis is classified according to the age at onset. Patients
with curves that are present before age 8-10 years have early-­onset scoliosis (EOS). Although EOS can have several etiologies, young patients
without a clearly identified cause are classified as having idiopathic
EOS. The subgroup of infantile idiopathic EOS refers to patients diagnosed before age 3 years and accounts for only 0.5–4% of cases of AIS.
AIS affects patients 10 years of age and older and comprises 70–80% of
all cases of idiopathic scoliosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

4243

Table 720.1  Classification of Spinal Deformities
SCOLIOSIS
Idiopathic
Infantile
Juvenile
Adolescent
Congenital
Failure of formation
Wedge vertebrae
Hemivertebrae
Failure of segmentation
Unilateral bar
Block vertebra
Mixed
Neuromuscular
Neuropathic diseases
Upper motor neuron
Cerebral palsy
Spinocerebellar degeneration (Friedreich ataxia, Charcot-­Marie-­
Tooth disease)
Syringomyelia
Spinal cord tumor
Spinal cord trauma
Lower motor neuron
Poliomyelitis
Spinal muscular atrophy
Myopathies
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Arthrogryposis
Other muscular dystrophies
Syndromes
Neurofibromatosis
Marfan syndrome
Compensatory
Leg-­length discrepancy
KYPHOSIS
Postural kyphosis (flexible)
Scheuermann disease
Congenital kyphosis
Failure of formation
Failure of segmentation
Mixed
Adapted from the Terminology Committee, Scoliosis Research Society. A glossary of
scoliosis terms. Spine. 1976;1:57.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION OF IDIOPATHIC
SCOLIOSIS

When evaluating a patient with a structural spinal curvature, a thorough history and physical examination are required because idiopathic
scoliosis is a diagnosis of exclusion. All other potential causes, including congenital bone malformations, neuromuscular and syndromic
diseases, and tumors must systematically be excluded.
The curvature is frequently found on a positive screening by primary care physicians, through a school screening program, or because
patients (or their family or friends) have noticed a cosmetic deformity.
Citing the need for early identification of scoliosis to reduce the risk of
operative complications with correction of large, neglected curves, the
Scoliosis Research Society advocates for school screening. The BrAIST study, which definitively demonstrated that patients treated with
Boston braces for 18 hours a day have a significantly lower incidence of
curves progressing to the surgical range, supports the potential value
of early detection through screening programs. Although the United
States Preventive Services Task Force previously recommended against
school screening programs, their updated 2018 recommendation statement concluded that evidence was insufficient to recommend for or
against screening.

A

B

C

D

Fig. 720.1 Structural changes in idiopathic scoliosis. A, As curvature

increases, alterations in body configuration develop in both the primary
and compensatory curve regions. B, Asymmetry of shoulder height,
waistline, and elbow-­to-­flank distance are common findings. C, Vertebral rotation and associated posterior displacement of the ribs on the
convex side of the curve are responsible for the characteristic deformity
of the chest wall (rib hump) in scoliosis patients. D, In the school screening examination for scoliosis, the patient bends forward at the waist.
Rib asymmetry of even a small degree is obvious. (From Scoles PV. Spinal deformity in childhood and adolescence. In: Behrman RE, Vaughn
VC III, eds. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, update 5. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 1989.)

Back pain is not commonly a primary presenting complaint of
patients with scoliosis, though when questioned, at least 30% of adolescents with idiopathic scoliosis will report some degree of back discomfort at some point in time. To keep this finding in perspective, a
similar number of healthy adolescents complain of episodes of low
back pain and discomfort. If a child presents with back pain associated
with a curvature, it is important to do a careful history and physical
exam, check spine radiographs, and rule out any diagnostic red flags
(see Chapter 720.5). Look for other causes of pain in these patients,
including spondylosis, spondylolisthesis, tethered cord, syrinx, herniated disk, or tumor such as osteoid osteoma or spinal cord tumor.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF IDIOPATHIC
SCOLIOSIS

Evaluate the patient in the standing position, from both the front
and the side, to identify any asymmetry in the chest wall, trunk, or
shoulders.
Begin the examination focusing on the back. The earliest abnormality noted on physical exam in patients with scoliosis is asymmetry
of the posterior chest wall on forward bending. This test, called the
Adams forward-­bending test (Fig. 720.1), is performed by observing
the patient’s back while he or she is bending 45 degrees forward. This
test can also be augmented with a scoliometer placed at the apex of
the deformity. An inclination measuring 7 degrees or more has been
suggested as the cutoff for orthopedic referral. Scoliosis is a three-­
dimensional deformity; patients develop a posterior rib hump on the
convex side of the spinal curve as a result of the rotational component
of the deformity. The anterior chest wall may be prominent on the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4244 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
concavity of the curve due to outward rib rotation. Other associated
findings may include shoulder imbalance, a lateral shift of the trunk,
or an apparent leg-­length discrepancy due to pelvic obliquity. A primary limb length discrepancy may also present as a lumbar spinal
deformity. This lumbar curvature is compensatory and flexible, with
the apex toward the shorter leg.
Next, examine the patient from the side to evaluate the degree
of kyphosis and lordosis. The upper thoracic spine normally has a
smooth, gently rounded kyphotic curve with an apex in the midthoracic region. The cervical spine and lower lumbar spine have concave,
or lordotic curves. The magnitude of these sagittal contours varies with
age. Children have less cervical lordosis and more lumbar lordosis than
do adults or adolescents. When examining a patient with idiopathic
scoliosis, a common finding is a loss of the normal thoracic kyphosis,
resulting in what is called a relative thoracic lordosis or hypokyphosis.
Another common, benign finding in normal adolescent thoracic
spines not associated with scoliosis is a flexible round back, or postural
kyphosis. This can be corrected voluntarily when the patient extends
his or her spine. This is different from sharp, abrupt, or accentuated
forward angulation in the thoracic or thoracolumbar region, which is
indicative of a pathologic kyphotic deformity.
The final exam component is a careful neurologic examination
because scoliosis may be associated with an underlying neurologic
diagnosis. Check superficial abdominal reflexes, extremity deep tendon reflexes, muscle strength, and atrophy and examine for clonus.
Also, remember to examine the patient’s feet because a cavovarus foot
can be associated with a tethered cord. A high suspicion is necessary
in patients with infantile and juvenile idiopathic scoliosis because up
to 25% have an associated intraspinal abnormality such as a tethered
spinal cord or syringomyelia. The index of suspicion for neurologic
involvement is further raised in the presence of back pain or neurologic
symptoms, bowel or bladder symptoms, café-­au-­lait spots, a sacral
dimple, midline cutaneous abnormalities such as a hair patch or skin
tag, unilateral foot deformity, or an atypical curve pattern.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION OF IDIOPATHIC
SCOLIOSIS

Standing, high-­quality PA and lateral radiographs of the entire spine are
recommended at the initial evaluation for patients with clinical findings suggestive of a spinal deformity. Many children’s hospitals have
low-­dose stereoradiographic imaging systems rather than conventional
radiographs, which can minimize radiation exposure and also provide
three-­dimensional reconstructions of spinal deformity. On the PA
radiograph, the degree of curvature is determined by the Cobb angle,
in which the angle between the superior and inferior vertebrae most
tilted into the curve is measured (Fig. 720.2).
Although the indications for performing an MRI are variable, it is
helpful when an underlying cause for scoliosis such as a spinal cord
abnormality is being considered. Patients with early-­onset scoliosis
have a higher incidence of associated cord anomalies. Other considerations include abnormal findings on the history or physical examination and atypical radiographic features, including abnormal curve
patterns. Atypical radiographic findings include curve patterns such as
a left thoracic curve, double thoracic curves, or high thoracic curves.
Other radiographic abnormalities include widening of the spinal canal
and erosive or dysplastic changes in the vertebral body or ribs. On
the lateral radiograph, an increase in thoracic kyphosis or an absence
of segmental lordosis may be suggestive of an underlying neurologic
abnormality.

NATURAL HISTORY OF IDIOPATHIC SCOLIOSIS

Treatment decisions are based on the natural history of idiopathic
scoliosis. Infantile idiopathic early-­onset scoliosis may spontaneously
resolve in 20–90% of cases. Patients with infantile scoliosis who have
cognitive disabilities, curves presenting after 1 year of age, and larger
magnitude curves are more likely to progress. A radiographic parameter called the Mehta angle can also be used to predict curve progression in infantile scoliosis. This measurement examines the vertebra at
the apex of the thoracic curve. It measures the angle formed by a line

32°

55°

38°

A

C

B

Fig. 720.2 A-­C, Cobb angles measurements. (From Morrissey RT,

Weinstein SL, eds. Lovell and Winter’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1990.)

b

a

Fig. 720.3 Measuring the rib-­vertebra angle difference (RVAD). A

line is drawn perpendicular to the inferior end plate of the apical thoracic vertebra. Another line is drawn between two points that bisect
the head and neck of the rib articulating with the apex. The angle
between the perpendicular line (a) and the rib line (b) is measured.
The same procedure is repeated for the rib on the opposite side. The
concave–convex side angles are equal to the RVAD. (Modified from
Mehta MH. The rib-­vertebra angle in the early diagnosis between
resolving and progressive infantile scoliosis. J Bone Joint Surg Br.
1972;54[2]:230–243.)

perpendicular from the vertebral end plate and a line down the center
of the rib. The measurement is calculated on the convex and concave
side, and the final rib vertebral angle difference (RVAD) is calculated
by subtracting the convex side from the concave side (Fig. 720.3). A
curve with an RVAD <20 degrees will resolve in about 80% of cases,
whereas one with an RVAD >20 degrees will progress in over 80% of
cases. Curves that resolve typically do so before 2 years of age.
Several factors affect the rate of curve progression in patients with
AIS. Curves are more likely to progress in more skeletally immature
patients with significant growth remaining. Findings associated with
significant growth remaining are younger age, premenarchal status,
Tanner stage I or II, Risser sign (a radiographic measurement of ossification of the iliac crest) of 0 or 1, and Sanders Maturity Scale values
of 1-4. The Sanders Skeletal Maturity Staging System examines skeletal
maturity using a single PA radiograph of the left hand and associates
this value with current curve magnitude. Patients are staged from S1-­
S8, with S1 being the most immature and S8 indicating early maturity.
Higher magnitude curves in more skeletally immature patients are
more likely to progress.
Other factors affecting curve progression are the current curve magnitude, curve pattern, and patient sex. Three-­dimensional spinal measurements of vertebral wedging, axial rotation, and torsion have been
correlated to curve progression. In general, female patients are more
likely than males to have curves that progress. Younger, premenarchal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine
females with curves between 20 and 30 degrees have a significantly
higher risk of progression than do females 2 years after menarche with
similar curves, demonstrating the significance of age on progression. In
fact, the older group is unlikely to have any progression at all whereas
premenarchal females with the same curve are likely to progress. Thoracic curves <30 degrees rarely progress after skeletal maturity, while
those >45 degrees may progress approximately 1-2 degrees annually
past skeletal maturity, and surgical stabilization is commonly offered.
Functionally, there are not many significant, clinically detrimental
effects of smaller curves. There is conflicting literature regarding the
exact curve magnitude and curve morphology in idiopathic thoracic
scoliosis that leads to cardiopulmonary impairment. Thoracic curves
of 50-70 degrees and greater have been associated with pulmonary
impairment, although magnitude of curve alone cannot fully predict
pulmonary function. Exercise capacity indicators, including heart rate,
peak oxygen intake, and work rate, were not affected by thoracic curve
magnitude, while FEV1 was influenced in a prospective study of AIS
patients. Factors such as thoracic kyphosis, curve stiffness, location of
curve apex, and degree of vertebral rotation may also impact pulmonary function. Surgical correction is correlated with improved total
lung capacity in patients with severe restrictive pulmonary function
preoperatively.
Long-­term studies have demonstrated that back pain is common
in patients with scoliosis, although there is no definitive connection
between pain and the curve magnitude or location. Furthermore,
nearly 70% of patients with pain reported low or moderate severity of symptoms, stating that the pain does not interfere with normal
activities.

TREATMENT OF IDIOPATHIC SCOLIOSIS

Treatment options include observation for small curves, bracing, and
surgical care. Vitamin D deficiency is common in patients with adolescent idiopathic scoliosis, so evaluation and supplementation if appropriate should be considered. Brace treatment decreases the incidence of
curve progression. The BrAIST study, examining the effect of Boston
braces in patients treated for 18 hours a day, was stopped before study
completion because the benefits of bracing became so clear that it was
unethical to continue patients in the nonbraced control arm of the
study. Treatment success (preventing curve progression to 50 degrees)
in the bracing group was 72%, whereas only 48% of those patients
observed without bracing avoided progression to the surgical range.
Other types of bracing have also been used, including the Providence
night bending brace and the Rigo Chêneau Brace. When discussing
bracing with families, is important to understand that bracing in AIS
does not lead to curve resolution or other measures of decreased magnitude but rather limits further progression. Additionally, while ∼30%
of patients who are braced will still require surgery, this does not necessarily mean that bracing was unsuccessful: without a brace, the curve
may have progressed more rapidly or to an even higher magnitude,
potentially requiring either an earlier surgery or more extensive fusion.
The bracing success rate depends on the amount of growth remaining. For example, patients with infantile or juvenile scoliosis are much
more likely to require a surgical procedure than those with adolescent
scoliosis and limited remaining growth. Patients at Risser 0 who are
very skeletally immature are at a higher risk of surgery even if they are
braced. It is recommended that these skeletally immature patients with
curves that are otherwise thought of as small magnitude (>30 degrees)
should be braced full time for a minimum of 18 hours daily. In addition to the effect of skeletal maturity, adherence with the recommended
protocol for wearing the brace will influence the outcome. Adherence
can be a challenge in the adolescent population. To better counsel parents and patients on their adherence, braces can be fitted with sensors
to monitor duration of wear, and surgeons can review this data with
families during follow-­up appointments.
Braces are offered for treatment of skeletally immature patients with
curves >30 degrees at the first visit or in patients who are being followed and have developed progression of their curvature beyond 25
degrees. Bracing is ineffective in curvatures >45 degrees because these
patients have already reached the threshold for surgical intervention.

4245

The brace is worn until complete cessation of growth in males, but in
females, weaning from the brace may be considered when the patient is
more than 2 years postmenarchal, is a Risser 4 or greater, and has grown
less than a centimeter over the previous 6 months. Some practitioners
will continue with the bracing beyond these parameters and base their
weaning on the Sanders scale and/or assessment of the maturity of
the distal radius and ulna, especially when the curve is more than 40
degrees because these curves are thought to have a significant incidence
of progression after bracing has been completed. There also has been
interest in using the Schroth method, which involves physical therapy
in addition to a bracing program. While several studies have suggested
that the Schroth method may enhance the success of a bracing program,
further study will be required to make definitive recommendations.
Serial body casting (Mehta casting) can be performed in patients
with early-­onset scoliosis to minimize the risk of curve progression and
potentially delay the necessity of growing spine procedures. In some
cases, the scoliosis can be permanently corrected without the need for
long-­term bracing or surgery. Although most patients can tolerate casting well, the treatment is labor intensive, and there may be a negative
impact on health-­related quality of life for patients and their caregivers
during and potentially after casting. Nonetheless, this quality-­of-­life
effect must be carefully weighed against the risk of increased complications in patients who begin earlier growth-sparing spine surgery. One
study found the risk of unplanned reoperation was 3 times higher in
those who had growth-sparing spine surgery before age 3 when compared with those who were able to delay surgery.
Traditional surgical treatment involves spinal instrumentation and
fusion and is usually recommended for skeletally immature patients
with progressive curves >45 degrees and skeletally mature patients
with curves >50 degrees. Some surgeons will also consider surgery
for lumbar curves >35 degrees, particularly if associated with truncal
imbalance. The goals of surgery are to arrest progression of the deformity, to improve cosmesis, and to achieve a balanced spine, all while
minimizing the number of vertebral segments that are stabilized and
thereby preserving as much motion as possible.
Implants including pedicle screws, sublaminar wires or bands, and
hooks are attached to two longitudinal rods (Fig. 720.4). All implants
function by allowing the application of mechanical forces to the spine,
correcting the deformity in both the frontal and lateral planes to
achieve normal frontal and sagittal spinal balance. Pedicle screw constructs also allow for derotational maneuvers, correcting the rib prominences associated with the axial component of the deformity. After
instrumentation, the spine is decorticated, and bone graft is placed for
the fusion portion of the procedure. The strength of modern spinal
implants maintains correction without requiring a postoperative brace
in most cases.
Most procedures are performed posteriorly using pedicle screw fixation, which affords excellent correction, especially of the rotational
component of the deformity. Posterior osteotomies are often added
to enhance flexibility and improve the degree of correction in stiffer
curves. Anterior spinal releases requiring a thoracotomy are performed
infrequently as a result of the efficacy of pedicle screw instrumentation. Open anterior thoracic and thoracolumbar procedures violate the
chest wall and often the diaphragm. Pulmonary function may take up
to 2 years to return to normal values. Although thoracoscopic techniques may be used to perform anterior spinal release with or without
instrumentation and fusion, their use has been limited because of the
efficacy of posterior pedicle screw constructs. However, patients with
conditions such as neurofibromatosis and myelomeningocele have a
higher likelihood of achieving a nonunion of their fusion, and an anterior fusion may be considered in addition to the posterior fusion in
these groups. Additionally, patients with severe, neglected deformities
may still benefit from combined anterior and posterior procedures.
Younger patients, in whom the triradiate cartilage remains open, are
at risk for “crank shafting,” or progressive deformity due to continued
anterior spinal growth, after a posterior fusion. Traditionally, these
patients were treated by simultaneous anterior fusion to remove this
growth potential; however, the rigidity of pedicle screw constructs has
negated the need for this additional surgery. While an anterior fusion

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4246 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

Fig. 720.5 A postoperative lateral radiograph of a skeletally imma-

Fig. 720.4 Preoperative standing posteroanterior radiograph of

ture patient with severe syndromic scoliosis after placement of growing
rods.

with instrumentation can be considered for idiopathic thoracolumbar
and lumbar curves, the posterior approach with pedicle screw fixation
is being used more frequently to avoid the need for anterior surgery
and chest wall violation.
Very young patients with growing spines are not candidates for
definitive posterior spinal fusion, as this will limit their lung capacity.
A commonly employed simple measurement of thoracic height (a vertical line drawn from T1-­T12) can help guide treatment decisions, with
fusion not recommended for patients with a thoracic height <22 cm.
In patients with remaining thoracic growth, growing spine procedures are recommended when surgical intervention is required.
The most commonly used implants are growing rods (traditional
and magnetic) and the vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib
(VEPTR).
Growing rods have fixation points placed at the proximal and distal
ends of the spinal deformity, which are then linked to subcutaneous
expandable rods, spanning the length of the deformity (Fig. 720.5).
These fixation points can be pedicle screws or hooks that affix to the
posterior elements of the spine. Traditional growing rods require
additional minor operations to lengthen the rods, performed about
every 6-8 months. Magnetically controlled growing rods (MCGRs),
once inserted, can be lengthened in the clinic using an external device,
thereby eliminating the need for further surgeries. Even with MCGR,
complications are relatively common, with 39% of patients experiencing at least one complication, including rod breakage, screw/
hook failure, failure of the rod to lengthen, and surgical site infection (though the risk of infection is lower than in traditional growing
rods). Whether patients have traditional or magnetic growing rods,
a final fusion is usually necessary once they have sufficient thoracic
height or attain skeletal maturity. In selected cases in which the device
is stable and the curve is well controlled once patients have achieved
adequate pulmonary maturity and chest wall growth, observation

has been selected rather than definitive fusion. Minimal correction
is achieved when converting growth sparing implants to definitive
spinal fusion because there is local osteopenia and usually fibrous or
osseous fusions at a subset of spinal segments. In patients who have
elected observation rather than conversion to a fusion, the indications
for conversion would include implant failure/loss of correction and/
or progression of curvature.
The VEPTR (Fig. 720.6) helps young children with thoracic insufficiency syndrome and is also used for early-­onset scoliosis in patients
with congenital or neuromuscular diagnoses. Long-­term survival rates
are favorable for these extremely severe deformity patients treated by
VEPTR, though the risk of implant-­related complications is substantial. Surgery in these young syndromic patients carries a substantial
risk of complications, and one study reported a complication rate of
nearly 85% with a mortality rate of over 15% over the entire course of
operative treatment for early-­onset scoliosis.
Significant interest remains in developing surgical techniques to
treat AIS that can avoid spinal fusion. One fusionless technique currently used is anterior vertebral body tethering, consisting of a flexible
cord attached with screws to affected vertebrae, allowing for correction of a curve dynamically by limiting growth on the curve convexity. Although the device most certainly limits motion to some extent,
one would expect greater motion than patients treated with fusion.
The ideal indications for tethering remain unclear, though commonly
employed criteria are patients age 9-15 years with thoracic curves of
40-67 degrees and Risser stage of ≤1.
A meta-­analysis of tethering found that pooled complication rates
were 26% for patients treated with a tether versus 0.6% for those treated
with a standard posterior spinal fusion. Additionally, the mean reoperation rates in studies that had at least 3 years of follow-­up were 24.7%
in patients treated with tethers versus 1.8% in posterior spinal fusion
patients. Patients treated with posterior spinal fusion have a mean revision rate at 10 years of 7.5% (i.e., >90% are definitively treated with a
single procedure).
Another novel fusionless treatment is the ApiFix, which is an
expandable, ratcheting, hinged rod connected to a cluster of pedicle
screws above and below a curve. The device is placed posteriorly and
can allow more motion than traditional fusion techniques, but this has
been associated with a 50% complication rate within 2 years, including

a 14-­
yr-­
old female who was skeletally immature and developed a
68-­degree right thoracic and a 53-­degree left lumbar scoliosis (A). Her
trunk was shifted to the right, and the left shoulder was slightly depressed. Based on the risk of future progression, she was treated by an
instrumented posterior spinal fusion from T3 to L3 with correction of
the right thoracic curve to 20 degrees and the left lumbar curve to 10
degrees (B). Coronal spinal balance was restored, and shoulder height
was maintained.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

4247

cysts, teratomas, dermoid sinuses, fibrous bands, and a tight filum
terminale. Cutaneous findings that may be seen in patients with
closed spinal dysraphism include hair patches, skin tags or dimples,
sinuses, and hemangiomas. Infants with these cutaneous abnormalities overlying the spine may benefit from ultrasonography to rule out
an occult spinal dysraphic condition. MRI is often delayed in older
patients until a clinical indication is present, such as tethering of the
spinal cord, which may present as back or leg pain, calf atrophy, progressive unilateral foot deformity (especially cavovarus), and problems with bowel or bladder function.

CLASSIFICATION OF CONGENITAL SCOLIOSIS

Congenital scoliosis is classified by the type of developmental abnormality: either a failure of formation or a failure of segmentation. The
deformities are then further described by the anatomic features of the
affected vertebrae. Failure of formation results in wedge vertebrae or
hemivertebrae. Failure of segmentation results in unilateral bar vertebrae or block vertebrae. Some instances of congenital scoliosis result
from a combination of both failure of formation and failure of segmentation (Fig. 720.7). One or more bony anomalies may occur in isolation
or in combination.

NATURAL HISTORY OF CONGENITAL SCOLIOSIS
Fig. 720.6 A postoperative posteroanterior radiograph of a patient
with Jeune syndrome after placement of a right rib-­to-­rib VEPTR (vertical expandable prosthetic titanium rib).

implant breakage, failure of the ratchet mechanism, osteolysis, and
bacterial seeding of implants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

720.2 Congenital Scoliosis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Congenital scoliosis is a spinal deformity that results from abnormal
development of the vertebrae. Asymmetric spinal growth due to one
or more vertebral anomalies leads to spinal curvature. Although the
malformation is present at birth, it may not become clinically apparent
until a later time as growth progresses.

ETIOLOGY

Embryologic development of the spine begins at the fifth week of gestation. An insult to the normal developmental process occurs, resulting
in abnormal growth of one or more vertebrae. Oftentimes, this abnormal development is associated with additional developmental anomalies or known syndromic conditions, including Alagille, Jarcho-­Levin,
Klippel-­Fiel, Goldenhar, and VACTERL syndromes.

ASSOCIATED CONDITIONS

It is common for children with congenital scoliosis to have associated
malformations in other organ systems that must be ruled out. Genitourinary abnormalities are identified in 20–40% of children with
congenital scoliosis and include unilateral renal agenesis, ureteral
duplication, horseshoe kidney, and genital anomalies. Approximately
2% of these patients have a silent obstructive uropathy. Renal ultrasonography should be performed early on in all children with congenital
scoliosis; other studies such as CT or MRI may also be required.
Cardiac anomalies are identified in 10–54% of patients. A thorough
cardiac examination should be performed as well as a referral to pediatric cardiology for consideration of echocardiography.
Intraspinal anomalies are identified in approximately 15–40%
of patients. Spinal dysraphism is the general term applied to such
lesions (see Chapters 631 and 689). Examples include diastematomyelia, split cord malformations, intraspinal lipomas, arachnoid

The risk of progression depends on the growth potential of each
anomaly, which may vary considerably. Close radiographic follow-­up
is required. Progression of these curves is most pronounced during
periods of rapid growth associated with the first 2-3 years of life and
adolescence.
The anatomic characteristics of the malformed vertebra play a significant role in the progression of deformity. The most severe form
of congenital scoliosis is a unilateral unsegmented bar with a contralateral hemivertebra. In this anomaly, the spine is fused to the side of
the unsegmented bar but also has a growth center on the other side at
the location of the hemivertebra at the same level. This combination
of deformities in the bony spine results in a rapidly progressive curve.
All affected patients usually require surgical stabilization. A unilateral
unsegmented bar is also associated with significant progression and in
most cases will require surgical intervention. An isolated hemivertebra
must be followed closely, and many, but not all, of these will be associated with a progressive deformity that requires surgical intervention.
In contrast, an isolated block vertebra has little growth potential and
rarely requires treatment.

TREATMENT OF CONGENITAL SCOLIOSIS

Early diagnosis and prompt treatment of progressive curves are essential. Bracing is not traditionally indicated for most congenital curves
due to their structural nature, except in rare cases to control additional curves not associated with the bony abnormality or to attempt
to delay surgery until a safer age for a surgical procedure. Once a bony
abnormality is identified that is likely to progress, surgery is recommended before progression occurs, preventing development or further
inevitable progression of spinal deformity. If the deformity has already
developed, surgical correction is difficult to achieve and the risk of neurologic complications is high.
Surgical techniques depend on the curve anatomy, flexibility, patient
age, and surgeon preference. Young patients with growing spines may
benefit from a growing spine procedure to allow further growth while
limiting curve progression. In terms of definitive fusion, an anterior
and posterior spinal fusion was often historically required, though with
pedicle screw constructs, a posterior fusion can be sufficient. A convex
hemiepiphysiodesis is an option for selected cases with milder curves and
younger patients, fusing only one side of the spine to allow some correction of the deformity by permitting growth on the noninvolved side of the
curve. Complete excision of a hemivertebra along with fusion of a short
segment of the spine through a posterior approach has been performed
with greater frequency and often in early childhood. A definitive fusion is
still required for many progressive curvatures at skeletal maturity.
Adolescents with a congenital etiology of their spinal deformities are
at higher risk of developing in-­hospital complications than those with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4248 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Defects of Segmentation
Block vertebra

Unilateral Bar

Unilateral Bar and Hemivertebra

Unilateral
failure of
segmentation

Bilateral
failure of
segmentation

Defects of Formation
Hemivertebra

Wedge vertebra

Unilateral
complete
failure of
formation

Unilateral
partial failure
of formation

Fig. 720.7 The defects of segmentation and

Fully segmented Semi segmented

Incarcerated

Nonsegmented

idiopathic scoliosis, including shock, infection, and acute respiratory
distress syndrome.

SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCE: THORACIC
INSUFFICIENCY SYNDROME

When multiple levels of the thoracic spine are involved in the presence of fused ribs, a progressive three-­dimensional deformity of the
chest wall may impair lung development and function. This development is termed thoracic insufficiency syndrome, when the chest wall
is unable to support normal respiration, which can result in decreased
life expectancy (Chapter 467.5).
Thoracic insufficiency syndrome may be seen in patients with several
recognized conditions such as Jarcho-­Levin syndrome (spondylocostal or
spondylothoracic dysplasia) and Jeune syndrome (asphyxiating thoracic
dystrophy) as well as patients with early-­onset scoliosis (idiopathic, neuromuscular, or congenital) and severe spinal deformities in older patients.
These difficult cases are treated with expansion thoracoplasty, in which
the thoracic cage is gradually expanded over time by progressive lengthening of the chest wall on the concavity of the spinal deformity (or in some
cases on both sides of the spine). The procedure involves an opening wedge
thoracostomy, followed by placement of a VEPTR. The implant is then
lengthened at regular intervals (Fig. 720.8). The primary goal is to gradually correct the chest wall deformity to improve pulmonary function, and
a secondary goal is correction of an associated spinal deformity. In patients
with associated fused ribs, insertion of a VEPTR with an opening wedge
thoracostomy results in improved pulmonary function. VEPTR also has
been used successfully in patients with early-­onset congenital scoliosis.
Complications are frequent, and multiple procedures are required; however, this strategy offers hope for many patients with complex, challenging
cases. The decision of whether to proceed with a final spinal arthrodesis
once chest wall and pulmonary development are thought to be adequate
will depend on the specifics of each case. Some patients may elect to be
followed even after skeletal maturity if the implant remains in stable position. Further research will be required to answer this and other questions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

formation that can occur during spinal development. (From McMaster MJ. Congenital scoliosis. In Weinstein SL, ed. The Pediatric Spine:
Principles and Practice, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001:163.)

720.3 Neuromuscular Scoliosis, Genetic
Syndromes, and Compensatory
Scoliosis
R. Justin Mistovich and David A. Spiegel

NEUROMUSCULAR SCOLIOSIS

Scoliosis is frequently identified in children with neuromuscular
diseases such as cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophies, myopathies,
spinal muscular atrophy, Friedreich’s ataxia, myelomeningocele,
polio, and arthrogryposis. Children with spinal cord injuries are
also at high risk to develop a progressive curvature. The etiology
and natural history of these patients differ from idiopathic and congenital scoliosis. Most cases result from weakness and/or imbalance
of the trunk musculature. Spasticity may also contribute to spinal
curvatures. In some cases, such as myelomeningocele, coexisting
congenital vertebral anomalies may be present, further contributing to curve development.
A spinal deformity is more common in patients with higher
degrees of neurologic impairment, particularly those who are nonambulatory with inadequate control of their trunk. It is diagnosed
in more than 70% of nonambulatory patients with cerebral palsy
and over 90% of patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
The diagnosis is suspected on physical examination. In nonambulatory patients, the most common curve pattern is a long, sweeping
C-­shaped thoracolumbar or lumbar curve (Fig. 720.9). The curve is
typically associated with pelvic obliquity, which may have an impact
on seating balance. In contrast, ambulatory patients with diagnoses
such as Friedreich ataxia may have curve patterns more similar to that
of idiopathic scoliosis.
In ambulatory patients, the examination is similar to the physical
examination for idiopathic scoliosis. In nonambulatory patients, the
back is inspected with the patient sitting upright. Any asymmetry
should be noted. These patients often need manual support to maintain
an upright position. If any progressive asymmetry is observed, sitting

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

A

B

Fig. 720.8 A, Anteroposterior preoperative radiograph of a 7-­mo-­old

infant with congenital scoliosis and fused ribs. A three-­dimensional reconstruction of a CT scan of the chest of this infant estimated his lung
volume to be 173.2 mL3. B, Anteroposterior radiograph after implantation of a vertically expandable prosthetic titanium rib and several expansions over 33 mo. The lung volume now measures 330.3 mL3, an increase
of 90.7%. (From Gollogly S, Smith JT, Campbell RM. Determining lung
volume with three-­dimensional reconstructions of CT scan data: a pilot
study to evaluate the effects of expansion thoracoplasty on children with
severe spinal deformities. J Pediatr Orthop. 2004;23:323–328.)

Fig. 720.9 Imaging shows a long C-­shaped curve with convexity to

the left side and significant pelvic obliquity, a curve pattern often seen
in patients with neuromuscular scoliosis. (From Pruthi S. Scoliosis. In:
Coley BD, ed. Caffey’ Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 12th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2013: Fig 135-10B.)

PA and lateral radiographs should be obtained. Because prophylactic
treatment or bracing cannot alter the natural history of the disease, our
own preference is to establish the diagnosis clinically and obtain radiographs if the curve is noted to progress.
The clinical course of patients with neuromuscular scoliosis depends
on the severity of neuromuscular involvement as well as the nature of
the underlying disease process. Progressive diseases are often associated with progressive curvatures. The consequences of a progressive
scoliosis in the neuromuscular population involve function, especially
sitting and standing balance, and ease of hygiene and personal care.
Pulmonary dysfunction may be expected with the gradual deformation

4249

of the rib cage and vertebra-­pelvic axis, as well as collapse of the spine
with the pelvis impinging on the rib cage. Diaphragmatic function is
impaired, and changes in chest volume and chest wall architecture will
undoubtedly exacerbate the pulmonary dysfunction owing to underlying muscle weakness. Pulmonary function may be difficult to document
in some patient populations, especially those with severe cerebral palsy.
Additionally, patients with initial marginal ambulatory function may
lose the ability to walk altogether as their scoliosis advances. Curves
associated with pelvic obliquity result in asymmetric seating pressures,
which may limit sitting endurance and may cause skin breakdown and
decubitus ulcers. Patients may also experience pain from impingement
of the rib cage on the iliac crest.
The treatment of neuromuscular scoliosis depends on the age of
the patient, the underlying diagnosis, and the magnitude of the deformity. The goal is to achieve or maintain a straight spine over a level
pelvis, especially in the nonambulatory population, and to intervene
early before curve magnitude and rigidity become severe. Neuromuscular curves often continue to progress after skeletal maturity. Curves
of >40-50 degrees will continue to worsen over time. Brace treatment
does not affect the natural history of neuromuscular scoliosis, and
standard braces used for idiopathic scoliosis are poorly tolerated in
neuromuscular patients. A soft spinal orthosis may improve sitting
balance and ease of care, although it does not ultimately change the
natural history of the curvature.
A spinal arthrodesis should be offered to patients with progressive curvatures over 40-50 degrees. The indications will differ
somewhat based on the underlying diagnosis. For example, patients
with Duchenne muscular dystrophy are often offered surgery when
their curves progress beyond 20-30 degrees, before their anticipated
decline in pulmonary or cardiac function makes the procedure
riskier or precludes their ability to tolerate surgery. Ambulatory
patients with curvatures similar to those seen in idiopathic scoliosis
are managed by principles similar to those used with idiopathic etiologies. Patients who are nonambulatory with pelvic obliquity are
usually managed by a long spinal fusion extending from the upper
thoracic spine to the pelvis, or the lower lumbar spine in selected
cases. A brace is not required after this procedure. Treatment decisions must be individualized in nonambulatory patients with spastic quadriplegia and are based on loss of function, the potential to
improve hygiene or personal care, and the desires of the family and/
or caregivers. These treatment decisions are complex, and research
has demonstrated the benefit of formal decision aids for families to
assist with understanding treatment risks and benefits.
Although complications are relatively frequent in comparison to
patients with non­neuromuscular curves, the available literature suggests that most patients benefit in terms of function and ease of care.
Additionally, data suggest that corrective surgery for patients with
neuromuscular scoliosis may improve weight gain postoperatively.
It is important to identify risk factors for perioperative complications. Research studies have identified nonambulatory patients and
those with curves ≥60 degrees as having a significantly increased risk
of postoperative major complications, including ileus, pneumonia,
infection, and wound problems. Gastrostomy (G)-­tube dependence
and increased blood loss were also found to be risk factors for postoperative complications. Baclofen pumps have not been associated
with increased risk of complications. ASA classification ≥3, BMI ≥95th
percentile, and extension of fusion to the pelvis have been found to
be associated with postoperative infections. One study subclassified
patients with Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS)
level 5 in terms of their risk for complications from spinal fusion.
These patients have severe functional limitations and are at a high risk
of perioperative complications, although not all are identical in terms
of risk factors. They identified four subgroups, based on the associated
presence of a G-­tube, tracheostomy, history of seizures, and nonverbal
status. Patients with none of these risk factors were subclassified as 5.0;
one associated risk factor was 5.1; two were 5.2; and three or more were
5.3. The rate of major complications for patients with 5.0 GMFCS levels

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4250 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
was 12%, whereas patients with 5.3 GMFCS level had a 49% rate of
major complications.

SYNDROMES AND GENETIC DISORDERS

This diverse group of diagnoses includes neurofibromatosis (see
Chapter 636.1), osteogenesis imperfecta (see Chapter 742), connective tissue diseases such as Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743)
and Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (see Chapter 744), and Prader-­Willi
syndrome (see Chapter 99). Patients with these diagnoses should
have their spine examined routinely during visits to their primary
care physician. The follow-­up and treatment are based on the age
of the patient, the degree of deformity, whether progression has
been documented, and the underlying diagnosis. Growth-­sparing
surgical strategies are appropriate in these diverse patient populations depending on curve onset. Each has unique aspects to their
medical and surgical care, often with anatomic abnormalities such
as dysplastic bone and dural ectasia, and as a group these diseases
have a higher rate of complications related to bleeding, wound healing, infection, neurologic dysfunction, nonunion, and the development of progressive curvatures above or below the instrumented
segments in comparison with patients requiring surgery for idiopathic scoliosis. Knowledge of the patient’s genetic disorder, including prognosis and life expectancy, is important when determining
whether surgical correction is appropriate.

COMPENSATORY SCOLIOSIS

Leg-­length inequality is a common clinical diagnosis and is usually associated with a small compensatory lumbar curvature (see
Chapter 717). This is one cause of false-­positive screening examinations. Patients with leg-­length inequality may have the pelvis
become tilted toward the shorter limb and subsequently develop an
associated lumbar curve. The apex of the curve points toward the
short leg. There is little evidence to suggest that a small compensatory lumbar curve places the patient at risk of progression or back
pain. However, children with leg-­length inequality may also have
idiopathic or congenital scoliosis. A standing radiograph may be
obtained with a block under the foot on the short side, which corrects the leg-­length discrepancy and levels the pelvis. If the curvature disappears when the limb-­length discrepancy is corrected, a
diagnosis of a compensatory curve is made. An alternative imaging
study is a PA radiograph with the patient seated.
In neuromuscular disorders such as polio (see Chapter 296) or
cerebral palsy (see Chapter 638.1), an adduction or abduction contracture of the hip, described as a fixed infrapelvic contracture,
may have an associated compensatory lumbar scoliosis to maintain
standing balance. For patients who ambulate, a 10-­degree fixed contracture will result in up to 3 cm of apparent leg-­length discrepancy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

720.4 Kyphosis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
The normal thoracic spine has 20-50 degrees of kyphosis from T3-­
T12 using the Cobb method on a standing lateral radiograph of the
spine. A thoracic kyphosis in excess of the normal range of values
is termed hyperkyphosis. Patients with hyperkyphosis may present
with cosmetic concerns, back pain, or both. A flexible or postural
kyphosis may be overcorrected voluntarily or with postural adjustment; however, a rigid kyphosis cannot be corrected passively.
Causes of rigid kyphosis include Scheuermann disease and congenital kyphosis, among others. Table 720.2 lists conditions associated with hyperkyphosis.

Table 720.2  Conditions Associated with Hyperkyphosis
• Trauma causing spinal fractures
• Spinal infections resulting from bacteria, tuberculosis, and fungi
• Metabolic diseases such as osteogenesis imperfecta or
osteoporosis
• Iatrogenic (laminectomy, spinal irradiation)
• Neuromuscular diseases
• Neoplasms
• Congenital/developmental
• Disorders of collagen such as Marfan syndrome
• Dysplasias such as neurofibromatosis, achondroplasia, and
mucopolysaccharidoses

The evaluation and treatment depend on the underlying diagnosis, the degree of deformity, curve flexibility, whether the deformity
is progressive, and severity of associated symptoms.

FLEXIBLE KYPHOSIS (POSTURAL KYPHOSIS)

Postural kyphosis is a common cosmetic concern and is most often
recognized by parents or peers. Adolescents with postural kyphosis
can correct the curvature voluntarily. A standing lateral radiograph
will show an increase in kyphosis but no pathologic changes of the
involved vertebrae. There is no evidence that postural kyphosis
progresses to a structural deformity. Although mild aching discomfort is sometimes reported, there is no evidence that the condition
leads to long-­term symptoms, alterations in function, or reduced
quality of life. The mainstay of treatment is reassurance. Physical
therapy can be considered for muscular discomfort. Although core
strengthening is certainly beneficial to most patients, no data suggest that a permanent alteration in alignment can be maintained.
Neither bracing nor surgery plays a role in the management of this
condition.

STRUCTURAL KYPHOSIS
Scheuermann Disease

Scheuermann disease is the most common form of structural hyperkyphosis and is defined by wedging of >5 degrees of three or more
consecutive vertebral bodies at the apex of the deformity on a lateral
radiograph. In addition, the apex of the thoracic kyphosis is lower
than expected. Other radiographic findings include irregularities
of the vertebral end plates and Schmorl nodes, which are herniations of the vertebral disk into the surface of the vertebral body. The
etiology remains unknown but most likely involves the influence
of mechanical forces in a genetically susceptible individual. Histologic specimens taken of patients with Scheuermann disease have
shown a disordered pattern of endochondral ossification. However,
it remains unclear whether these findings are the primary result of
a genetic or metabolic pathologic process, or simply the secondary result of mechanical overload. The reported incidence varies
from 0.4% to 10%, affecting males three times more frequently than
females.

Physical Exam and Clinical Manifestations

The patient should be examined from the side. Hyperkyphosis of the
thoracic spine will typically be associated with a sharp contour. The
apex of the deformity will often be in the lower thoracic spine. Patients
are unable to correct the deformity voluntarily. Pain is a relatively common complaint. It is typically mild and near the apex of the kyphosis.
The symptoms are intermittent, rarely severe, and occasionally limit
certain activities. Neurologic symptoms are uncommon.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

4251

1 year of growth remaining and a kyphosis of >55-60 degrees may
benefit from a bracing program. A Milwaukee brace, which extends
up to the neck, is recommended for curves with an apex above T7,
whereas curves with a lower apex may often be treated by a thoracolumbar orthosis. The brace should be worn for up to 23 hours daily.
Consideration may also be given to a serial casting or stretching
program to gain flexibility before instituting the brace program. The
goal of the brace is to prevent progression. A permanent improvement in alignment is seen less frequently. Skeletally mature patients
with little or no pain and acceptable cosmesis are not treated. In
patients with progressive deformity >70-80 degrees who are dissatisfied with their cosmetic appearance or have persistent back pain
despite nonoperative measures, a spinal fusion may be considered.
Patients treated operatively have less pain and greater satisfaction
with their outcome compared to those treated nonoperatively.
An instrumented posterior spinal fusion from the upper thoracic
to the mid-­lumbar spine is commonly performed, with spinal osteotomies to allow compression of the posterior elements to facilitate
deformity correction. These osteotomies allow for shortening of the
spine, which should reduce the risks of neurologic complications.
An alternative that was used with frequency in the past is combining an anterior spinal release (diskectomies and fusion) with the
posterior spinal fusion. This strategy has been used less frequently
because of increased complications, length of stay, and costs, in
addition to the satisfactory outcomes associated with posterior only
surgery. Procedures for kyphosis carry a higher risk than fusions
performed for AIS.

CONGENITAL KYPHOSIS
Fig. 720.10 Standing lateral radiograph of a 14-­yr-­old boy with se-

vere Scheuermann kyphosis. This measures 92 degrees between T3
and T12. Note the wedging of the vertebrae at T6, T7, T8, and T9. The
normal thoracic kyphosis is ≤40 degrees.

Radiographic Evaluation

The standard imaging protocol includes standing PA and lateral radiographs (Fig. 720.10). A specific, standardized technique in which the
arms are folded across the chest is recommended for the lateral view.
In addition to the diagnostic findings noted earlier, a mild scoliosis is
commonly seen. Less frequently, a spondylolisthesis may be identified
on the lateral radiograph.

Natural History

Treatment depends on the age of the patient, the degree of deformity,
and whether any symptoms are present. Adolescent patients with
Scheuermann kyphosis may have more complaints of back pain compared to other adolescents, but this often improves after skeletal maturity. A long-­term follow-­up study noted continued curve progression
at about half a degree annually and poorer health-­related quality of life
compared to normative population values. Kyphotic deformities >90
degrees are more likely to be esthetically unacceptable, symptomatic,
and progressive. Deformities more than 100 degrees may be associated
with restrictive pulmonary dysfunction.

Treatment

There are few absolute guidelines for treatment, and decisions must
therefore be individualized. Skeletally immature patients with mild
deformity may benefit from a hyperextension exercise program,
but the effects of this strategy on pain relief and spinal alignment,
or the natural history, remain unknown. Patients with more than

Congenital kyphosis results from congenital anomalies of the vertebrae. In an anterior failure of formation (type I), a portion of
the vertebral body fails to form. The resulting kyphosis is typically
identified after birth and carries a high risk of progression and
neurologic dysfunction. Spinal cord dysfunction commonly results
from compression at the apex of the deformity. The second type of
congenital kyphosis involves an anterior failure of segmentation, in
which two vertebrae are fused (type II). The posterior elements of
the spine continue to grow, but the anterior spine does not, resulting in a variably progressive kyphosis and a much lower risk of
neurologic dysfunction. Patients must be followed closely, and
treatment is required in a significant number of cases. Similar to
congenital scoliosis, abnormalities of other organ systems should
be ruled out.
The treatment depends on the type of malformation, the degree
of deformity, and whether neurologic symptoms are present. Bracing is ineffective, and surgical treatment is the only option for
progressive curves. Because the natural history is poor for type I
deformities and neurologic deterioration is likely, spinal fusion is
usually performed shortly after the diagnosis is made. The surgical goals are to prevent or treat kyphotic deformities to restore
adequate spinal alignment, while avoiding neurologic deterioration and complications and maximizing spinal growth to the extent
possible. This usually involves some form of limited spinal fusion,
which may include anterior and/or posterior components, with or
without resection of the vertebral remnant, and spinal instrumentation. Ideally, only a short segment of the spine will be fused to try to
maximize trunk height. Deformities resulting from anterior failure
of segmentation also require spinal stabilization in some cases, but
progression is typically slower, and patients are often followed over
years to determine whether surgical stabilization will be required.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4252 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

720.5 Back Pain in Children
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Back pain is a frequent complaint in pediatric and adolescent
patients, with studies demonstrating single-­year prevalence rates
between 7% and 58% of adolescents. An epidemiologic cross-­
sectional survey found 33.7% of children 10-18 years old experienced back pain within the prior year, with 8.9% of them describing
the pain as severe. Risk factors for back pain include increasing
growth, female sex, family history, overuse injury resulting from
sport participation, manual labor, mobile phone usage of more than
10 hours per week (back and neck pain), and possibly carrying a
heavy backpack. Patients with scoliosis commonly have back pain;
up to 25% may rate this as severe. The pain may be linked to anxiety,
depression, and/or substance misuse (smoking, alcohol); psychosocial factors are often underappreciated. Younger patients are felt to
have a greater likelihood of a pathologic diagnosis, and therefore
a more aggressive workup has been suggested. The incidence of
both pediatric and adolescent back pain has increased, whereas the
proportion of patients having diagnosable pathology is decreasing,
with 75–80% of patients having a negative workup. These trends
add further complexity to determining the proper approach to diagnosis and treatment. The differential diagnosis is extensive (Table
720.3). Although the likelihood of serious pathology is low, a complete history and careful physical exam must be performed on all
patients (Table 720.4).

CLINICAL EVALUATION

Providers should take a full history, identifying the location, character,
and duration of symptoms. Any history of acute trauma or repetitive
physical activities should be sought. It is important to identify patients
with at-­risk athletic pursuits, including football linemen or gymnasts
who have a high incidence of spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis.
Symptoms consistent with a neoplastic or infectious etiology include
pain that is constant or unrelenting, not relieved by rest, and wakes the
patient from sleep. Fevers, chills, night sweats, or constitutional symptoms of weight loss or malaise are additional red flags for infectious or
neoplastic processes (see Table 720.4).
Symptoms of neurologic dysfunction must also be uncovered.
Patients should be questioned about the presence of any radicular
symptoms, gait disturbance, muscle weakness, alterations in sensation, muscle atrophy, and changes in bowel or bladder function.
The physical examination includes a complete musculoskeletal and
neurologic assessment. The patient should be adequately undressed
for the clinical exam. The provider should inspect the patient from the
back and the side, identifying any changes in alignment in the frontal
or sagittal plane. Assessment of range of motion in flexion, extension,
and lateral bending should be performed. Recall that pain with extension suggests pathology within the posterior elements of the spine,
such as spondylolysis. Forward flexion will exacerbate pain linked to
abnormalities of the anterior column of the spine (vertebral body or
disk), such as a herniated disk or diskitis.
Palpation will reveal any areas of point tenderness over the posterior
bony elements of the spinal column or the muscles and identify muscle
spasm or strain.
Because pain may be referred from a nonspine region, an
abdominal examination should be performed, and a gynecologic
evaluation should also be considered. Pathology at the sacroiliac
joint may also mimic low back pain. This joint should be stressed
by compression of the iliac wings or by external rotation at the hip
(Faber test).
A detailed neurologic examination should be performed, including manual muscle testing, sensation, proprioception, and reflexes.
The patient should be examined for myelopathy by performing the
Babinski test, assessing for hyperreflexia, and checking for sustained (more than three beats) of clonus. The superficial cutaneous
abdominal reflex should be tested by gently stroking the skin on

Table 720.3  Differential Diagnosis of Back Pain
INFECTIOUS AND INFLAMMATORY DISEASES
Spondylodiscitis*
Vertebral osteomyelitis (pyogenic, tuberculosis)
Spinal epidural abscess
Transverse myelitis
Pyelonephritis*
Perinephric abscess
Pancreatitis
Paraspinal muscle abscess, myositis
Psoas abscess
Endocarditis
Pelvic osteomyelitis or myositis
Pelvic inflammatory disease
RHEUMATOLOGIC DISEASES
Pauciarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis*
Reactive arthritis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Psoriatic arthritis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Fibrositis, fibromyalgia
DEVELOPMENTAL DISEASES
Spondylolysis*
Spondylolisthesis*
Scheuermann kyphosis*
Scoliosis
Chiari malformation type 1 with or without syringomyelia
Spinal dysraphism
Cauda equina syndrome
MECHANICAL TRAUMA AND ABNORMALITIES
Muscle strain/sprain*
Hip/pelvic anomalies (sacroiliac joint dysfunction)
Herniated disk (rare)
Juvenile osteoporosis (rare)
Overuse syndromes (facet syndrome)*
Vertebral stress fractures
Vertebral compression fractures
Limbus vertebra
Lumbosacral sprain*
Seatbelt injury
Trauma (direct injury; e.g., motor vehicle crash)*
Strain from heavy knapsacks
Radiculopathy (sciatica)
NEOPLASTIC DISEASES
Primary vertebral tumors (osteogenic sarcoma, Ewing sarcoma)
Metastatic tumor (neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma)
Primary spinal tumor (neuroblastoma, lipoma, cysts, astrocytoma,
ependymoma)
Malignancy of bone marrow (ALL, lymphoma)
Benign tumors (eosinophilic granuloma, osteoid osteoma,
osteoblastoma, bone cyst)
OTHER
Disk space calcification (idiopathic, after diskitis)
Conversion reaction
Sickle cell anemia*
Nephrolithiasis
Hemolysis (acute)
Hematocolpos
Postprocedure pain after lumbar puncture
*Common.
ALL, Acute lymphocytic leukemia.
Modified from Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Schuh AM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics,
9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023:774.

each of the four quadrants surrounding the umbilicus. Normally,
the umbilicus will move toward the area stimulated. A normal
examination includes symmetry in the response on both sides of
the midline, even if the reflex cannot be elicited on either side. An
abnormal test suggests the presence of a subtle abnormality of spinal cord function, most commonly syringomyelia. A straight leg

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine
Table 720.4  Red Flags: Most Common Indications from
History and Examination for Pathologic
Findings Needing Special Attention and
Sometimes Immediate Action

4253

720.6 Spondylolysis and Spondylolisthesis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel

A detailed history and physical exam are the most important components of the initial evaluation and should focus on identifying “red flags”
and differentiating between mechanical and nonmechanical back pain
(see Table 720.4). Findings consistent with a nonmechanical etiology
warrant a more aggressive evaluation and/or prompt referral.
Patients with mechanical or muscular back pain and symptoms that
are activity related and improve with rest are typically treated by rest for
a few days or activity restrictions and nonnarcotic analgesics. Physical
therapy for core strengthening should be considered if the acute symptoms do not resolve or if the pain is chronic. The patient should be asked
to return for a follow-­up appointment after 4-6 weeks. Plain radiographs
are commonly obtained at the discretion of individual practitioners.
However, if no red flags are present, providers may defer radiographs
because of the cumulative adverse effects of radiation exposure. Patients
presenting with red flags or those who have not improved after 6 weeks
of conservative care necessitate further investigation.

Spondylolysis represents a defect in the pars interarticularis, the segment of bone connecting the superior and inferior articular facets in
the vertebra. It is thought to result from repetitive hyperextension
stresses, in which compressive forces are transmitted from the inferior
articular facet of the superior vertebra to the pars interarticularis of the
inferior vertebra. Supporting the mechanical theory, spondylosis has
never been described in nonambulatory adults. However, there may be
a genetic association with 19–69% of affected patients having a first-­
degree relative also affected. A stress fracture, unilateral or bilateral,
may progress to a spondylolysis. In many cases, this stress fracture does
not heal, resulting in a pseudarthrosis, or false joint, and thereby allowing motion through this bony area where motion should not normally
exist.
Spondylolysis is common in athletes who engage in repetitive spinal
hyperextension, especially gymnasts, football interior linemen, weightlifters, and wrestlers. Approximately 4–8% of the entire pediatric population is affected, making it the most common cause of back pain in
adolescents when a diagnosis can be established. Patients with excessive lordosis in the lumbar spine may be predisposed to developing a
spondylolysis, and a genetic component has also been suggested. The
lesion is most common at L5, but it may be identified at upper lumbar
levels as well.
Spondylolisthesis represents a forward slippage of one vertebra on
another and is identified in approximately 4–5% of the population.
The multiple causes of spondylolisthesis include dysplastic/congenital
defects, isthmic (due to a pars stress fracture), trauma, and neoplasm.
In children and adolescents, the most common types are dysplastic
and isthmic. Between 5% and 15% of patients with spondylolysis will
develop spondylolisthesis.
Spondylolisthesis is assessed on a standing lateral radiograph of
the lumbosacral junction according to (1) the percentage of forward translation of one vertebra on the other, (2) the slip angle,
measuring the rotation of the involved vertebrae in the sagittal
plane, and (3) relative position of the sacrum during upright posture. A grade 1 slip of L5 on S1 has <25% of the width of the
vertebral body of L5 translated anteriorly on S1. Similarly, grade
2 is 25–50%, grade 3 is 50–75%, and grade 4 is 75–100%. Spondyloptosis, or grade 5 spondylolisthesis, describes a complete displacement of one vertebral body on the level below. The slip angle,
which demonstrates the degree to which the superior vertebra is
flexed forward relative to the underlying vertebra, and the verticality of the sacrum both have a significant effect on sagittal balance or the relationship of the sagittal weight-­b earing axis to the
body segments. Abnormalities in sagittal spinal balance may be
associated with compensatory flexion of the knees during ambulation, hamstring spasm and/or contracture, and back pain.

RADIOGRAPHIC AND LABORATORY EVALUATION

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

• Children younger than 18 yr old with considerable pain
• History of violent trauma
• Nonmechanical nature of pain (i.e., constant pain not affected by
movement; pain at night)
• History of cancer
• Systemic steroid use
• Drug use
• HIV infection or other immunocompromised patients
• Unintentional weight loss
• Systemically ill, particularly signs of infections such as fever or
night sweats
• Persisting severe restriction of motion or intense pain with
minimal motion
• Structural deformity including scoliosis, Chiari malformation,
tethered cord
• Difficulty with micturition (urinary retention)
• Loss of anal sphincter tone or fecal incontinence
• Progressive motor weakness or gait disturbance, paresthesias, pes
cavus, foot drop, saddle anesthesia
• Marked morning stiffness
• Peripheral joint involvement
• Iritis, skin rashes, colitis, urethral discharge, or other symptoms of
rheumatologic disease
• Inflammatory disorder such as ankylosing spondylitis suspected
• Family history of rheumatologic disease or structural abnormality

raise test should be done to check for nerve root tension secondary
to a herniated disk, slipped vertebral apophysis, or other pathology. This examination should reproduce any neurologic symptoms
distal to the knee.

MEDICAL DECISION-­MAKING

When further workup is indicated, PA and lateral radiographs of the
involved region of the spine are the initial images of choice. Some clinicians will also use oblique radiographs of the lumber spine when spondylolysis is in the differential diagnosis. If plain radiographs are normal,
advanced imaging modalities should be considered, including a three-­
phase technetium bone scan, a bone scan with single-­photon emission
computed tomography (SPECT) if spondylolysis is suspected, CT for
viewing osseous detail, and MRI for viewing soft tissue detail or bony areas
of inflammation.
When systemic signs or constitutional symptoms are present, a
CBC, ESR, and CRP should be ordered. In certain cases, laboratory
tests to evaluate for inflammatory diseases such as juvenile idiopathic
arthritis, seronegative spondyloarthropathies, and ankylosing spondylitis are indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Spondylolysis may occasionally be asymptomatic and diagnosed incidentally on imaging obtained for other reasons. It usually presents with
mechanical low back pain that may radiate to the buttocks, with or
without spasm of the hamstring muscles. Neurologic symptoms are
rare in patients with spondylolysis. However, patients with spondylolisthesis may experience neurologic symptoms from compression or
stretching of the nerve roots, causing radiculopathy or even the surgical emergency of cauda equina in which bowel and bladder function
is affected.

PHYSICAL EXAM

Patients with spondylolysis often have discomfort with spinal
extension or hyperextension. Provocative testing may include keeping the spine extended for 10-20 seconds to see if back pain can
be reproduced. There may be discomfort with palpation of the spinous process of the involved vertebra. Patients with higher grades

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4254 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
of spondylolisthesis demonstrate loss of lumbar lordosis, flattening
of the buttocks on visual inspection, and a vertical sacrum resulting
from posterior rotation of the pelvis. A step-­off may be palpated
between the spinous processes of the involved vertebrae. Hamstring
contracture is tested by measuring the popliteal angle. The hip is
flexed to 90 degrees while fully extending the contralateral hip to
the level the pelvis. The knee is then passively extended, and the
popliteal angle represents the angle between the thigh (vertical) and
the lower leg axis. A careful, complete neurologic examination is
essential because diagnosis of spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis
is often delayed.

2

3

4

5

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

The initial evaluation of the lumbar region should include high-­
quality AP and lateral radiographs. Some authors also prefer to
obtain oblique radiographs, which demonstrate the classic “Scotty
dog” finding on the pars interarticularis. The lumbar spine in
oblique radiograph projections normally appears to form the figure of a “Scotty dog” (i.e., Scottish terrier), with the transverse process forming the nose, the pedicle forming the eye, and the pars
interarticularis forming the neck; in spondylolysis, the pars interarticularis will have a defect or a break, mimicking a “collar” on the
radiograph. Standing PA and lateral radiographs of the entire spine
are obtained if findings suggestive of scoliosis or hyperkyphosis are
also present (Figs. 720.11 and 720.12). In patients with normal plain
films, traditional imaging studies included a bone scan with SPECT
to diagnose a spondylolysis during the earliest stage of a stress
reaction, before the formation of a stress fracture or an established
pseudarthrosis. The radiation exposure from this test, though, is
substantial—bone scans have 7-9 times the radiation dose of two-­
view plain films. In comparison, CT scans carry only 2 times the
radiation dose of two-­view plain films. The sensitivity of MRI using
STIR imaging is comparable to SPECT and led to a recommendation for MRI STIR rather than bone scans in acute cases in which
plain films could not make a diagnosis. MRI sequences will demonstrate inflammation associated with an acute spondylolysis while
avoiding radiation exposure. A CT scan with thin cuts may provide
additional information to establish the presence of a pars defect and
may be indicated in chronic, refractory cases. MRI is also indicated
in the presence of signs or symptoms of cauda equina or nerve root
involvement.

4

5

1

A

B

Fig. 720.11 A, Normal spine at 9 months of age. B, Spondylolysis in

the L4 vertebra at 10 yr of age. (From Silverman FN, Kuhn JP. Essentials
of Caffrey’s Pediatric X-­ray Diagnosis. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers; 1990:94.)

TREATMENT

The asymptomatic patient with spondylolysis requires no treatment.
Patients with pain are treated initially by activity modification, physical
therapy for core strengthening, and analgesic medications. The use of a
lumbosacral orthosis, which immobilizes the spine in slight flexion to
decompress the posterior elements, may lead to a faster resolution of
symptoms, though a recent SRS Evidence Based Medicine Committee
report determined that the benefit of bracing is not well established.
This orthosis is typically worn for 3-4 months. Participation in sports
or other activities that exacerbate pain should be restricted until the
symptoms have resolved. Providers should consider checking a vitamin D level in patients with spondylolysis and treating if deficient.
Most patients experience resolution of their symptoms even though
the spondylolysis heals in only a small number of patients. Surgery
should be offered for chronic, refractory back pain when conservative
measures have failed. For those with spondylolysis at L5, a posterior
spinal fusion from L5 to S1 is indicated as the mobility at this joint is
limited relative to that observed at higher levels in the spine. For the
infrequent cases in which the defect is at higher levels in the lumbar
spine, techniques for repairing the pseudarthrosis without fusion are
considered.
Recommendations for the management of spondylolisthesis depend
on the age of the patient, the presence of pain or neurologic symptoms,
and the degree of deformity. For low-­grade lesions, the management
is similar to that for spondylolysis. Significant progressive slippage
may occur in 3–5% of skeletally immature patients, and patients must
be followed through skeletal maturity. Progression of deformity is

Fig. 720.12 Defect in the pars interarticularis (arrow) of the neural

arch of L5 (spondylolysis) that has permitted the body of L5 to slip forward (spondylolisthesis) on the body of S1. (From Silverman FN, Kuhn
JP. Essentials of Caffrey’s Pediatric X-­ray Diagnosis. Chicago: Year Book
Medical Publishers; 1990:95.)

increased in higher grade slips and in cases of dysplastic spondylolisthesis. However, there is only a 1.4% incidence of progression after
adolescence. Guidelines for the timing of follow-­up, and whether or
not to obtain routine radiographs at each follow-­up, differ between
individuals and institutions; we typically follow asymptomatic patients
yearly with a standing lateral of the lumbosacral junction. Nonoperative management in minimally symptomatic or asymptomatic patients
is appropriate, and delaying surgical treatment does not appear to
worsen outcomes.
For low-­grade slips with persistent symptoms despite nonoperative measures, an in situ posterior spinal arthrodesis is suggested.
Additionally, patients with a more kyphotic slip angle have been
shown to have poorer prognosis, although operative treatment did
not significantly improve their outcome. The surgical approach for
high-­grade slips varies between surgeons and institutions. The main

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

4255

principle is to stabilize the unstable segment of the spine, avoid
neurologic complications, and restore adequate sagittal balance
to the spine. The typical components of these complex procedures
include (1) posterior decompression of the L5 and S1 nerve roots
(laminectomy and takedown of pseudarthrosis), (2) instrumented
posterior spinal fusion from L4 or L5 to S1 and occasionally the
pelvis is included in the instrumentation, (3) diskectomy at L5-­S1
with placement of anterior column support (transforaminal cage or
fibular allograft from sacrum to L5), and (4) reduction of the slippage by positioning the hips in extension or by an “instrumented
reduction” using the spinal implants. Adding the anterior column
support enhances rates of fusion. Reduction improves radiographic
outcomes but may increase the risk of unplanned surgeries, pseudarthrosis (failure of fusion), and neurologic complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

720.7 Spine Infection
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Spondylitis, meaning inflammation of the vertebrae, is most commonly due to infectious or autoimmune processes. Spondylodiscitis is defined as a primary infection of the intervertebral disk
(diskitis) with spread to the vertebrae (osteomyelitis). Based on
MRI, some think the infection begins in the vertebral body with
subsequent rupture into the disk space. The most common etiology
is hematogenous seeding of bacteria, with the original infection of
the well-­perfused end plate extending into the disk and vertebral
body. Spondylodiscitis is more commonly seen in children younger
than 5 years of age but can occur at any age; it is often associated
with vertebral body osteomyelitis. Patients in the younger age range
have vascular channels between the vertebral end plate and the disk
space, explaining the prevalence of diskitis with osteomyelitis.
Staphylococcus aureus is the most common organism causing
spine infections. Other organisms include Kingella kingae and less
often group A streptococcus and Escherichia coli. Rare causes of
vertebral bone infection include tuberculosis (often multiple vertebral bodies), Serratia marcescens, brucellosis, and cat-­scratch disease. Blood cultures have a sensitivity of only 30%. Percutaneous or
less often open biopsy of the disk space is positive only 50–85% of
the time; polymerase chain reaction is indicated for the diagnosis
of Kingella. The differential diagnosis includes chronic recurrent
multifocal osteomyelitis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A high index of suspicion is required to establish the diagnosis of
infectious spondylodiscitis. Patients may experience back pain,
abdominal pain, fever, or malaise. Fever is less common and may
be present in only 30% of patients. Toddlers may develop a limp
or refuse to walk, stand, or sit. In an effort to reduce the pain associated with spinal motion, the child will hold the spine in a rigid
position. There may also be a paraspinal muscle spasm. Local point
tenderness over the affected spinous process is common. There may
be a “list” or leaning of the trunk when the patient is viewed from
the front or back, and from the side there may be a loss of lumbar
lordosis. Neurologic manifestations are rare and, if present, suggest
that an epidural abscess may be present. The infection may drain
beyond the spine to the paravertebral space and psoas muscles.
Spine flexion compresses the anterior elements of the spine and will
elicit an increase in pain. Asking a child to pick up an object from the
ground is a simple way to elicit this provocative test.
Although the white blood count may remain normal, the ESR is
elevated in 80% of cases, and the CRP is also elevated.

A

B

Fig. 720.13 Spondylodiscitis. Sagittal T2-­weighted (A) and coronal

short tau inversion recovery (B) images demonstrate destruction of T7-­
T8 intervertebral disk with abnormal marrow signal in the adjacent vertebral bodies and associated paravertebral soft tissue phlegmon. (From
Bosemani T, Huisman TAGM. Spine imaging. In: Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 9.31, p. 345.)

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

The earliest radiographic finding is a postural loss of lumbar lordosis.
Later characteristic features on plain radiographs are disk space narrowing, or loss of disk height, and irregularity of the adjacent vertebral
end plates. However, these findings do not develop until 2-3 weeks after
the onset of symptoms. The diagnosis may be established earlier using
MRI. MRI is the most sensitive and specific imaging to diagnose osteomyelitis and to identify abscesses and/or neural compression (Figs.
720.13 and 720.14).

TREATMENT

Once the diagnosis is suspected clinically, the treatment involves
symptomatic care and empiric anti-­staphylococcal antibiotics, as S.
aureus is the most common pathogen isolated. Kingella kingae is recognized as a common pathogen in patients from 6 months to 4 years
of age. A first-­generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefazolin) or semisynthetic antistaphylococcal penicillin (e.g., oxacillin) is recommended
in areas where methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA) is not prevalent. Clindamycin should be considered in areas where MRSA is more
common. Some areas of the world report increasing clindamycin resistance among both methicillin-­resistant and methicillin-­susceptible S.
aureus isolates, leading to consideration of vancomycin or linezolid.
Blood cultures should be obtained before the administration of antibiotics. The antibiotic agent may be modified if blood cultures are
positive. Symptomatic care includes rest and analgesics, antiinflammatory medications, and a spinal orthosis may also be considered. The
typical antibiotic course is from 4-6 weeks. Data in osteomyelitis suggest that conversion from intravenous to oral agents may be acceptable after several days depending on the clinical course (see Chapter

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4256 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
associations include preexisting disk degeneration, congenital malformation, and genetic or environmental factors. There may be a potential
association between disk degeneration and the herpes virus. Missense
pathogenic variants in collagen-­encoding genes may be present in 80%
of young patients with symptomatic lumbar disk herniations.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A

B

Fig. 720.14 Tuberculous vertebral osteomyelitis in 13-­yr-­old female

with progressive loss of strength and coordination in legs. (A) Sagittal
reformatted soft-­tissue window images from a CT of the spine (B) sagittal fat-­saturated postcontrast T1-­weighted MR images of the thoracic
spine demonstrate marked kyphosis at site of bony collapse at the level
of the midthoracic spine (arrows in A and B), as well as surrounding
soft tissue abscess (arrowheads in B) predominately anteriorly, at the
same level. (Modified from Maddocks ABR, Pollock AN. Infections of
the spine and spinal cord. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 44.8AC, p. 422.)

725). A CT-­guided needle biopsy of the disk space can be considered.
Although the diagnostic yield on cultures is low (20–40%), the pathologic findings may show acute inflammatory cells to establish the
diagnosis (≥1 neutrophil per high power field). This intervention is
often reserved for patients who do not respond to empiric antibiotics
or when there are questionable diagnostic features. Surgical treatment
is rarely required, and indications include establishing the diagnosis in
patients who fail to respond to empiric antibiotics, and those in whom
an abscess and/or neurologic involvement are identified.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

720.8 Intervertebral Disk Herniation/
Slipped Vertebral Apophysis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Intervertebral disk herniation is the result of a tear in the outer layer
of the vertebral disk, called the annulus fibrosus, which then allows for
protrusion of the inner nucleus pulposus. At times, a free fragment of
disk can rupture and compress the nerve roots or spinal cord. Bulging
of the annulus without rupture may also be observed, resulting in back
pain and occasionally radicular symptoms. Symptoms are due to either
direct mechanical compression or a local inflammatory response.
Slipped vertebral apophysis, also called a posterior ring apophysis
separation, is due to an injury and is only found in skeletally immature patients. A small fragment of bone from the posterior corner of
the vertebral body apophysis avulses and may cause direct mechanical
compression to the spinal cord or nerve root, similar to a disk herniation. (An apophysis is a normal outgrowth of bone with its own
physis, or growth plate. Another example is the tibial tubercle.) Both
disk herniations and ring apophysis separations can cause back pain,
radicular symptoms (nerve root compression or irritation), or spinal
cord compression.

ETIOLOGY

Predisposing activities for both conditions include heavy lifting, repetitive axial loading activities, and occasionally traumatic injury such as
a fall. Approximately 30–60% of patients with symptomatic herniated disks have a history of a trauma or sports-­related injury. Other

Symptoms of intervertebral disk herniation or slipped vertebral apophysis in adolescents are similar to adult herniated disk symptoms. The
major complaint is back pain, present in nearly 90% of patients. Over
30% of patients complain of radicular symptoms or radiating sciatic-­
type pain into the legs. The back pain is often made worse by coughing, a Valsalva maneuver, or sitting. Pain may be relieved by standing
or back extension, which increases the disk space between vertebral
bodies. Providers should inquire about weight loss, fever, or other constitutional symptoms to rule out an infectious or neoplastic etiology.
On physical examination, both paraspinal muscle spasm and a generalized spinal stiffness are common. Patients may lean toward the unaffected side to increase the size of the affected neural foramen, thereby
partially relieving symptoms. This results in a reactive scoliosis—not a
true spinal curve—that improves with symptom resolution. Although
overt signs of neurologic involvement are absent in most patients, a
positive straight leg raise test, causing radicular pain to shoot down the
affected leg, is usually present. Pain is also worsened by spinal flexion.
It is critical to perform a full neurologic evaluation, including sensation to light touch, pinprick, and proprioception; muscle strength; and
reflexes. Providers must also evaluate for perineal numbness, or saddle
anesthesia. This finding, combined with changes in bowel or bladder
function, is indicative of cauda equina syndrome, a surgical emergency
in which the nerve roots at the caudal end of the spinal cord are compressed or damaged.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Radiographs often show loss of lumbar lordosis, which is due to muscle spasm, and sometimes a mild lumbar scoliosis. Other radiographic
findings include degenerative changes and a loss of intervertebral disk
height. MRI is the best study to establish the diagnosis of a disk herniation (Fig. 720.15). CT is especially helpful to visualize a partially ossified fragment associated with a slipped apophysis.

TREATMENT

The initial treatment is nonoperative in the vast majority of patients—
even if symptoms or findings of radiculopathy are observed. Treatment
focuses on rest, activity modification, NSAIDs, and physical therapy.
An orthosis may provide additional symptomatic relief. Complete
bed rest is not recommended. Epidural steroid injection (ESI) may be
discussed with patients after approximately 6 weeks of symptomatic
treatment if symptoms persist, though the evidence is not yet definitive. However, if patients elect to undergo an ESI, they should not have
more than a single injection if the first did not provide any relief. Clinical experience has demonstrated that multiple injections are no more
likely to provide relief than a single injection and expose patients to
additional risks of infection, scarring, and neural injury. If a patient
experiences substantial relief from an ESI and has a later recurrence of
symptoms, consideration may be given for a repeat injection after performing a complete physical exam and ruling out any new pathology.
Surgical treatment should be considered when nonoperative measures have failed or when a profound neurologic deficit such as cauda
equina syndrome is present or evolving. Unfortunately, children and
adolescents respond less favorably to nonoperative therapy compared
with adults, and a significant percentage will require surgical intervention. Although patients with disk herniation may improve with reduction in the local inflammatory response around the nerve root and also
as the disk material loses water volume and shrinks, which eliminates
mechanical compression, patients with symptomatic ring apophyseal
separations have a bony fragment causing their symptoms and are
unlikely to improve spontaneously.
The surgical technique involves removing a small area of the lamina
via a posterior approach, called a laminotomy, which allows exposure

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 720 u The Spine

4257

Fig. 720.15 Lumbar disk herniation.

A

Sagittal (A) and axial T2-­weighted (B)
images demonstrate a disk extrusion
at L5-­S1 level with near-­complete infilling of bilateral lateral recesses, left
greater than right, and effacement
of the thecal sac. (From Bosemani
T, Huisman TAGM. Spine imaging.
In: Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds.
Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites,
4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:
Fig. 9.30, p. 345.)

B

of the neural elements and underlying disk. Any loose fragments are
removed. A bulging disk may also be opened surgically to decompress
the area compressing the neural elements, although a complete diskectomy is inadvisable. The surgical approach is similar in the case of a
slipped vertebral apophysis, in which fragments of bone and cartilage
must also be removed. This often requires a bilateral laminotomy to
completely address the pathology. Patients with congenital lumbar spinal stenosis may be more likely to require surgical treatment and also
may require a posterior decompression in addition to the discectomy.
The initial results are excellent in the majority of patients. Approximately 30% may have recurrent herniations and resultant symptoms
of back or leg pain at longer-­term follow-­up. These recurrences are
initially treated nonoperatively; however, repeat discectomy may be
required, and if so, a significant number of patients may require a
spinal arthrodesis to stabilize the damaged motion segment. A spinal
fusion may also be required for instability associated with spondylolisthesis or other etiology.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

720.9 Tumors
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Back pain may be the most common presenting complaint in children
who have a tumor involving the vertebral column or the spinal cord.
Other associated symptoms may include weakness of the lower extremities, scoliosis, and loss of sphincter control. The majority of tumors are
benign (see Chapter 550), including osteoid osteoma, osteoblastoma,
aneurysmal bone cyst, and eosinophilic granuloma. Malignant tumors
involving the vertebral column may be osseous, such as osteosarcoma
or Ewing sarcoma. They may involve the spinal cord and sympathetic
or parasympathetic nerves in cases of ganglioneuroma, ganglioneuroblastoma, and neuroblastoma. Tumors from other primary sites can
also metastasize to the spine.
High-­quality plain radiographs may show vertebra plana, or symmetric collapse of a single vertebra with preserved disk space; this
is most commonly seen with eosinophilic granuloma (Fig. 720.16).
Other useful imaging modalities include bone scans, which help with
localization and identification of other lesions; MRI, which is helpful

A

B

Fig. 720.16 (A) Lateral radiograph of the lumbar spine of a 6-­yr-­old

female with a painful osteolytic lesion of the L2 vertebral body with
vertebral plana deformity. CT-­
guided frozen section biopsy showed
eosinophilic granuloma; intralesional methylprednisolone injection was
performed. (B) Lateral radiograph of the lumbar spine shows complete
reconstitution of the lesion 7 years after diagnosis and treatment. (From
Angelini A, Mavrogenis AF, Rimondi E, et al. Current concepts for diagnosis and management of eosinophilic granuloma of bone. J Orthop
Traumatol. 2017;18:83-90. Fig. 3.)

to identify soft tissue extension and neurologic compression; and CT,
which provides excellent bony detail.
A biopsy is usually required to establish the diagnosis. Treatment of
tumors of the spinal column may require a multidisciplinary approach.
These cases should ideally be managed in centers with experience
in the care of patients with these lesions. Many lesions are surgically
treated by laminectomy, and postoperative surveillance is essential
to identify cases of post­laminectomy kyphosis or other spinal deformities, which when progressive may require an instrumented spinal
fusion to stabilize.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4258 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Chapter 721

The Neck
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
721.1 Torticollis
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Torticollis, literally meaning “twisted neck,” is not a diagnosis but
rather a clinical manifestation of a variety of underlying conditions
(Table 721.1). Common names associated with this condition include
“wry-­neck” and “cock-­robin” deformity. Although congenital muscular
torticollis is the most common diagnosis in cases presenting at or close
to the time of birth, the differential diagnosis for acquired torticollis
is large. Therefore a thorough evaluation is required to identify the
underlying cause.

associated with congenital muscular torticollis are absent or if the
deformity does not respond to the stretching treatment, because torticollis in infants may also be due to congenital vertebral anomalies.
Surgical release of the SCM is considered in patients with persistent
deformity after failure of conservative treatment. The muscle may be
released at its insertion on the clavicle (unipolar release) or at both its
origin and insertion (bipolar release). There is no agreement as to the
most appropriate time for the surgical release, but surgical treatment
is typically delayed until at least 18 months of age; some even suggest
waiting until the child is approaching school age. Although range of
motion can be improved after surgical release even during the teenage
years, remodeling of facial asymmetry and plagiocephaly may be less
predictable in patients older than infancy. Surgical management results
in satisfactory function and acceptable cosmesis in more than 90% of
patients; however, with early diagnosis and treatment, surgery should
be required in only a minority of cases. Patients who have residual or
untreated CMT beyond a year of age may develop secondary skeletal
abnormalities such as a mild cervicothoracic scoliosis or rotational
malalignment and tilting of upper and lower cervical vertebrae (especially at the atlantoaxial joint). It is presumed that such malalignment
will improve with release of contracture, but in older patients, skeletal
deformities may persist.

CONGENITAL MUSCULAR TORTICOLLIS

Congenital muscular torticollis (CMT) is due to a contracture of the
sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle, which results in a tilting of the
head and neck toward the side of the contracted muscle with rotation
of the head to the opposite side (Fig. 721.1). In most cases (75%), the
right SCM muscle is involved, causing the patient’s face and chin to
point to the left side.
CMT is thought to result from an intrauterine deformation or compression and is more common in children of primigravida mothers.
CMT may be associated with the presence of a palpable mass or nodule
of fibrous tissue within the substance of the SCM muscle in approximately 50% of cases (Figs. 721.2 and 721.3). Findings on muscle biopsies and MRI studies led to the hypothesis that SCM muscle injury
from compression or stretch may create localized ischemia, which
in turn results in fibrosis and subsequent contracture—essentially an
intramuscular compartment syndrome. In rare cases, the condition
can result from hereditary muscle aplasia.
Associated findings with CMT include plagiocephaly, facial asymmetry, and positional musculoskeletal deformities such as metatarsus
adductus (15%) and calcaneovalgus feet. Hip dysplasia may be identified in 8–20% of affected patients. In addition to routine screening
by physical examination for hip dysplasia, providers should consider
obtaining either an ultrasound at 6 weeks of age or a plain radiograph
of the pelvis at 4-6 months of age in children with CMT even if the
physical exam is normal and there are no other risk factors for DDH.
The cornerstone of treatment for CMT is physical therapy and a
home stretching program in which caregivers are instructed to gently
stretch the contracted SCM by rotating the infant’s chin to the ipsilateral shoulder and simultaneously tilting the head toward the contralateral shoulder. The best results occur when treatment is started
within the first 3 months of life, leading to resolution in nearly all cases.
Patients who start their physical therapy later can expect a more prolonged course, and a subset will not achieve a normal range of motion.
Recently, single frequency microcurrent has been used as an adjunct
to physical therapy with the goal of reducing the time of treatment
and also addressing the challenges of patients presenting at a later
age. Botulinum toxin injections may also be considered as an adjunct,
especially in resistant cases in older patients. Plagiocephaly commonly
accompanies CMT, and patients may be referred to a craniofacial clinic
or specialist for discussion of treatment with a cranial remolding helmet. Early restoration of motion reduces the likelihood that patients
will have persistent facial asymmetry or cranial molding abnormalities.
Although firm guidelines for imaging the cervical spine have not
been established, anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of
the cervical spine may be obtained when the typical clinical features

Table 721.1  Differential Diagnosis of Torticollis
CONGENITAL
Muscular torticollis
Positional deformation
Hemivertebra (cervical spine)
Unilateral atlanto-­occipital fusion
Klippel-­Feil syndrome
Unilateral absence of sternocleidomastoid
Pterygium colli
TRAUMA
Muscular injury (cervical muscles)
Fibromatosis coli (sternocleidomastoid tumor of infancy)
Atlanto-­occipital subluxation
Atlantoaxial subluxation
C2-3 subluxation
Rotary subluxation
Fractures
Foreign body
INFLAMMATION
Cervical lymphadenitis
Retropharyngeal abscess
Cervical vertebral osteomyelitis
Grisel syndrome (nontraumatic subluxation of the atlantoaxial joint
due to local inflammation)
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Lemierre syndrome
Upper lobe pneumonia
NEUROLOGIC
Visual disturbances (nystagmus, superior oblique or lateral rectus
paresis)
Dystonic drug reactions (phenothiazines, haloperidol,
metoclopramide)
Cervical cord tumor
Posterior fossa brain tumor
Syringomyelia
Wilson disease
Dystonia musculorum deformans
OTHER
Acute cervical disk calcification
Sandifer syndrome (gastroesophageal reflux, hiatal hernia)
Benign paroxysmal torticollis
Bone tumors (eosinophilic granuloma)
Soft tissue tumor
Psychogenic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 721 u The Neck

A

B

4259

C

Fig. 721.1 Congenital muscular torticollis. A, Torticollis secondary to a contracted left sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle. B, Mass in right SCM

(arrow) of a newborn. Note intrauterine folding deformity of the right ear. C, Flattening of the left occipital area and left ear formation resulting
from supine positioning of a child with right congenital torticollis. (From Johnson CE. Disorders of the neck. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric
Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig 8.6, p. 93.)

A
Fig. 721.2 Clinical presentation of a 2-­ × 2-­cm firm, left-­sided neck
mass. (From Baik G, Blask A, Reilly BK. Unilateral neck mass in a neonate. J Pediatr. 2018;202:329, Fig. 1.)

OTHER CAUSES OF TORTICOLLIS

The evaluation of torticollis becomes more complex when the typical
findings associated with CMT are absent, the usual clinical response
is not observed, or the deformity presents at a later age. In addition to
a careful history and physical examination, consultation with an ophthalmologist and neurologist will be helpful. Plain radiographs should
be obtained, and MRI of the brain and cervical spine will be required
in a subset of cases.
The differential diagnosis is extensive (see Table 721.1). Neurogenic torticollis is uncommon and results from tumors of the
posterior fossa or brainstem, syringomyelia, and Arnold-­Chiari
malformation. In addition to the neurologic examination, MRI of
the brain and cervical spine is required to establish the diagnosis.
Benign paroxysmal torticollis of infancy is also uncommon and
may be due to vestibular dysfunction. Episodes may last from minutes to days, and the side of the deformity may alternate. The condition is self-­limiting, and no specific treatment is required other
than ruling out other treatable causes. Torticollis may also be seen
in association with diskitis or vertebral osteomyelitis; juvenile idiopathic arthritis; cervical disk calcification; visual problems, such as
congenital nystagmus or paresis of the superior oblique or lateral
rectus muscle; benign or malignant bone tumors; and in cerebral
palsy and chronic gastroesophageal reflux from a hiatal hernia
(Sandifer syndrome).

B
Fig. 721.3 Sonographic image of the symptomatic left neck in a

3-­wk-­old neonate with fibromatosis colli of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle. A, Longitudinal image of the sternocleidomastoid muscle
showing enlargement with a fusiform configuration and masslike focus
within the expanded segment of the muscle (arrows). The echotexture
of the mass is mildly heterogenous and echogenic compared with the
normal muscle on the contralateral side. Color flow is preserved within
the mass. B, The mass has a more rounded configuration on the transverse ultrasound image (arrows). (From Baik G, Blask A, Reilly BK. Unilateral neck mass in a neonate. J Pediatr. 2018;202:329, Fig. 2.)

ATLANTOAXIAL ROTATORY DISPLACEMENT

Atlantoaxial rotatory displacement (AARD) represents a spectrum of
pathology involving axial alignment (rotational) and motion between
C1 and C2. The vertebrae may be partially displaced (subluxated)
or completely displaced (dislocated) in the neutral or resting position with head facing forward. Motion between the vertebrae may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4260 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
be normal (reducible with full range of motion), “sticky” (partially
reducible with loss of motion), or fixed (irreducible with no motion
between C1 and C2). Loss of motion at the C1-­C2 joint results in 50%
loss of cervical rotation. Prompt diagnosis and treatment are essential as the malalignment may become irreducible after several weeks.
If the displacement persists, the facet of C2 will become deformed
(resulting in increased forward slope), which increases the risk of C1
facet sliding off of the C2 facet leading to relapse of deformity.
AARD may complicate infection or inflammation of the tissues of the
upper airway, neck, or pharynx (Grisel syndrome), minor traumatic injuries, and surgical procedures in the oropharynx, ear, or nose. The diagnosis
is most often made clinically, with the SCM muscle on the contralateral side
(away from the head tilt) in spasm and prominent. Additionally, patients
with AARD often have pain at rest and with head manipulation, features
not seen with CMT. Plain radiographs are difficult to interpret given the
head tilt, and AARD is best appreciated on a dynamic rotational CT scan,
in which axial images are obtained through the upper cervical spine with
the head at neutral and rotated maximally toward both the right and the
left. The patient must be relaxed and comfortable for images to be successfully obtained. MRI may demonstrate edema or inflammation of the
supporting ligaments. Clinicians may choose to treat a patient empirically
if the history and clinical findings are characteristic, reserving advanced
imaging for patients who have not responded clinically. If the patient is
seen within a few days of the onset of symptoms, a trial of analgesics and a
soft collar may be attempted. Patients with symptoms that persist or have
been present for more than a week are often admitted to the hospital for
analgesia, muscle relaxants, and a period of soft cervical traction. If this
fails to reduce the displacement, halo traction may be attempted. If the
joint can be reduced, patients are typically immobilized for at least 6 weeks
in a halo vest. The treatment course is more challenging and outcomes less
favorable for patients presenting more than 4 weeks after symptom onset.
In such cases traction is typically employed to reduce the joint and then a
halo vest used for up to 3-4 months to maintain the reduction. Some have
used manipulation under anesthesia to obtain reduction before manipulation. The longer period of immobilization in these chronic cases allows
for remodeling of the C2 facet, therefore reducing the risks of relapse
after treatment. For those who fail these nonoperative treatment strategies, the most common treatment is a C1-­C2 arthrodesis. A less common
approach has been to perform an open reduction of the joint followed by
either immobilization or by surgical fusion.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

B

721.2 Klippel-­Feil Syndrome
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Klippel-­Feil syndrome (KFS) includes the classic triad of a low posterior hairline, short neck, and decreased cervical range of motion
(Fig. 721.4). However, these clinical findings are present in <50% of
patients with KFS. Limited cervical motion may be the most common
finding, present in 64.5% of patients, whereas only 9.7% of patients had
all three findings. Patients have a congenital fusion (failure of segmentation) of one or more cervical motion segments at the craniocervical junction and/or in the subaxial spine and often have additional
associated congenital anomalies of the cervical spine and other organ
systems.
Additional findings in the cervical spine include occipitocervical
synostosis, odontoid abnormalities, basilar invagination (proximal
migration of the C2 vertebra above the foramen magnum), and Chiari malformation. Other associations include Sprengel’s deformity
(congenital elevation of the scapula), congenital scoliosis, genitourinary anomalies (25–35%), sensorineural hearing loss (5%), and congenital heart disease (5–10%). Renal abnormalities include double
collecting systems, renal aplasia, and horseshoe kidney. The cervical
spine anomalies seen in patients with KFS may also be seen with Goldenhar syndrome, Mohr syndrome, VACTERL syndrome, and fetal
alcohol syndrome. Clinical problems are more common in adults and
include pain or neurologic symptoms from spinal instability or stenosis. Although the incidence has been estimated at 1 in 40,000-42,000
births, many patients with this condition are undiagnosed

ETIOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION

Most cases are sporadic, but four genetic forms have been described,
two of which are autosomal dominant and two are autosomal recessive.
A number of chromosomal abnormalities have also been associated
with KFS. Pathogenic variants have been reported in the mesenchymal
homeobox 1 gene (MEOX1, regulates segmentation of vertebrae), the
growth differentiating factor 3 or 6 genes (GDF), and the myosin 18
(MYO18B) gene.
One classification system is the most practical and has three types,
namely a single fused segment (I), multiple noncontiguous fusions (II),
and multiple contiguous fused segments (III). Patients with type I tend
to have axial pain, whereas while those with types II/III are more likely
to have neurologic symptoms.

C

Fig. 721.4 Clinical picture of a 5-­yr-­old with Klippel-­Feil syndrome. A, Note short neck and low hairline. B and C, Radiographs of the cervical spine

(B, flexion; C, extension) demonstrate congenital fusion and evidence of spinal instability (arrow). (From Drummond DS. Pediatric cervical instability.
In: Weisel SE, Boden DS, Wisnecki RI, eds. Seminars in Spine Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1996;292–309.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 721 u The Neck
CLINICAL PRESENTATION

KFS is present at birth but does not usually become clinically
apparent until the second or third decades. Patients at this point
present with pain, loss of motion, or neurologic symptoms. Pain
is extremely common by adulthood and may be referred to the
neck, occiput, and shoulders/upper back. The source of discomfort
may be musculoskeletal and/or neurologic. The pain is greater in
patients with more extensive involvement. Headache, dizziness, and
fatigue have also been reported. Given that the same physiologic
stresses are applied to a smaller number of mobile spinal segments,
patients are at risk for the development of hypermobility and often
instability, especially at motion segments adjacent to the fused vertebrae. Weakness or clumsiness consistent with myelopathy may be
the presenting symptoms.

Table 721.2  Causes of Pediatric Cervical Instability
CAUSES

SUBTYPES

Congenital

Cranio-­occipital defects (occipital vertebrae,
basilar impression, occipital dysplasias,
condylar hypoplasia, occipitalized atlas)
Atlantoaxial defects (aplasia of atlas arch,
aplasia of odontoid process)
Subaxial anomalies (failure of
segmentation and/or fusion, spina bifida,
spondylolisthesis)
Syndromic disorders (e.g., Down syndrome,
Klippel-­Feil syndrome, 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome, Larsen syndrome, Marfan
syndrome, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome)

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

A comprehensive musculoskeletal and neurologic examination is
required, given associated anomalies in the musculoskeletal and
visceral systems. Scoliosis is present in more than 50% of patients
with KFS, and congenital anomalies may be identified in other
regions of the spine as well. The neurologic exam focuses on identifying any signs of radiculopathy or myelopathy. Spinal cord compression, or myelopathy, may result from stenosis or instability. A
physical exam will demonstrate upper motor neuron signs such as
hyperreflexia, Hoffman’s sign, Babinski’s sign, and sustained clonus,
with more than three beats considered pathologic. Nerve root compression, or radiculopathy, may be due to stenosis and is identified
by weakness or decreased sensation in the muscles or dermatomes
served by a particular nerve root.

RADIOLOGIC INVESTIGATION

Initial radiologic evaluation should include an AP, lateral, and
oblique view of the cervical spine. The characteristic finding is a
congenital fusion of two or more vertebrae resulting from a failure of segmentation; however, multiple vertebrae may be involved.
Because congenital anomalies may exist in more than one region of
the spine, radiographs of the thoracic and lumbosacral spine should
be routinely obtained. Flexion-­extension lateral views of the cervical spine may help to identify segments with excessive motion.
Referral to an orthopedist is appropriate once the diagnosis is established. Patients with this condition usually undergo CT and MRI
of the spine to accurately characterize the bony anomalies and also
identify any coexisting neural pathology. A renal ultrasound is routinely obtained to identify associated anomalies (e.g., duplicated
collecting system, absence of a kidney, horseshoe kidney). Additional imaging, such as echocardiogram, may identify cardiovascular anomalies, mainly septal defects.
Audiologic evaluation is indicated for patients diagnosed with KFS;
hearing impairment may be identified in up to one third of affected
patients.

TREATMENT

The three patterns commonly associated with instability include (1)
C2/C3 fusion with occipitocervical synostosis, (2) extensive fusion
over multiple levels with an abnormal occipitocervical junction, and
(3) two fused segments separated by an open joint space.
Pain may often be controlled by activity restriction, intermittent
immobilization, or other nonoperative modalities. Patients who are
chronically symptomatic, have instability with positive neurologic
symptoms or exam findings, or are thought to be at increased risk
for neurologic deterioration are candidates for surgical treatment.
Operative interventions include decompression of nerve roots or
the spinal cord itself and/or spinal fusion to address cervical spinal
instability.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

4261

Acquired

Trauma
Infection (pyogenic/granulomatous)
Tumor (including neurofibromatosis)
Inflammatory conditions (e.g., juvenile
idiopathic arthritis)
Osteochondrodysplasias (e.g.,
achondroplasia, diastrophic dysplasia,
metatropic dysplasia, spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia)
Storage disorders (e.g.,
mucopolysaccharidoses)
Metabolic disorders (rickets)
Miscellaneous (including osteogenesis
imperfecta, after surgery)

721.3 Cervical Anomalies and Instabilities
R. Justin Mistovich, Keith D. Baldwin, and
David A. Spiegel
Anomalies of the craniovertebral junction or lower cervical spine
may be seen in isolation or in association with other conditions.
These include genetic syndromes, skeletal dysplasias, connective
tissue disorders, and metabolic disorders. These anomalies may
be congenital or developmental. Although most anomalies remain
asymptomatic and undiagnosed, a subset will place the patient at
risk of neurologic injury as a result of instability or spinal canal
stenosis. The most frequently encountered causes of cervical spine
instability in children can be categorized etiologically (Table 721.2).
Patients with conditions that have known associations involving the
cervical spine should have a complete evaluation, including history,
physical examination, and initial radiographic examination. Lateral radiographs in flexion and extension may be helpful to evaluate instability, and advanced imaging such as CT or MRI may be
required to further characterize any abnormalities noted on plain
radiographs.
Patients may complain of neck pain or neurologic symptoms.
Radicular symptoms include pain, weakness, and numbness within
the distribution of a nerve root. Myelopathic symptoms include generalized weakness, gait disturbance, increased fatigue with ambulation, upper extremity clumsiness, and abnormalities in bowel or
bladder function. Other symptoms such as headaches, dizziness, or
vertigo have also been described. Physical exam findings may include
restricted cervical mobility, cervical tenderness or spasm, and neurologic abnormalities.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4262 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Although the upper cervical spine has limited flexion and extension, roughly 50% of cervical rotation occurs at the atlantoaxial
(C1-2) joint. The main constraints to motion in the upper cervical spine are soft tissue (ligaments and joint capsules) rather than
osseous. Excessive motion or instability may result in a compressive injury to the brainstem or spinal cord. Anomalies at the craniovertebral junction include congenital fusion of the occiput to C1
(occipitalization of the atlas), basilar impression and invagination
(proximal migration of the C2 vertebra as the result of softening
of the bones and with normal bones, respectively), and accessory
vertebrae. Aplasia or hypoplasia of the atlas or the axis may result in
atlantoaxial instability.

Down Syndrome

OS ODONTOIDEUM

Os odontoideum is the most common anomaly of the odontoid,
or dens, and radiographically appears as an oval-­shaped, well-­
corticated bony ossicle that is positioned cephalad to the body of
the axis. There is a discontinuity, and the upper portion of the dens
moves with the ring of C1, narrowing the space available for the
spinal cord and placing it at risk for injury. The body of the dens is
mesenchymal in origin and originates from the first cervical vertebra. Subsequent separation allows it to then fuse with the C2 vertebra. It is formed by two separate ossification centers, one on either
side of the midline that eventually fuse and are visible at birth. The
os odontoideum may be in a normal anatomic position (orthotopic)
or adjacent to the occipital bone (dystopic). Although the etiology
remains unclear, both traumatic (nonunion of a fracture, repetitive
shear stresses from hypermobility on growing cartilage) and developmental (failure of fusion of the ossification centers) theories have
been proposed.
Symptoms may include pain and/or neurologic dysfunction.
Myelopathy may develop from neural stretch, ischemia, or bony
impingement, whereas vertebrobasilar findings may result from
ischemia due to stretching or thrombosis of the vertebral arteries. Neurologic examination may reveal a combination of both
upper and lower motor neuron signs. Some patients are completely
asymptomatic with the anomaly noted incidentally on a lateral cervical spine radiograph.

A

The radiographic evaluation begins with AP, lateral, and open
mouth odontoid views, which may be supplemented by flexion
and extension lateral radiographs. CT provides the best bony detail
and is useful in defining each anomaly. MRI, including dynamic
images in flexion and extension, is best for evaluating neurologic
impingement.
Patients who are asymptomatic with no instability may be managed by observation with serial radiographs, activity restriction,
and taking special precautions if they require intubation/general
anesthesia. Those with neurologic symptoms and instability require
surgical stabilization by an instrumented posterior arthrodesis
between C1 and C2.

B

Ligamentous hyperlaxity is a characteristic feature of Down syndrome and may result in hypermobility or instability at the occipitoatlantal or the atlantoaxial joints in 4–30% of patients (see
Chapter 57). These patients may also have coexisting congenital or
developmental anomalies of the cervical spine, such as occipitalization of the atlas, atlantal arch hypoplasia, basilar invagination, and
os odontoideum.
Although the natural history of this spectrum of pathology remains
unknown, a small subset of patients will develop instability with neurologic dysfunction. The clinical diagnosis of neurologic dysfunction
may be challenging because patients often present with subtle findings such as decreased exercise tolerance, tripping/falling, or other
gait abnormalities. The challenge lies in the early identification of such
cases, especially in patients who plan to participate in activities with
increased risk of trauma to the head or neck such as tumbling or other
sports.
All patients with Down syndrome require screening by history
and physical examination at regular intervals. The guidelines for
health supervision for children with Down syndrome suggest that
routine radiographic screening is not indicated in asymptomatic
patients and that a lateral radiograph in neutral alignment should
be obtained for all patients with symptoms of possible atlantoaxial
instability (neck pain, radicular pain, weakness, spasticity/change
in tone, gait difficulties, hyperreflexia, or change in bowel or bladder function). Dynamic images are suggested when abnormalities

C

Fig. 721.5 Flexion (A) and extension (B) radiographs of a case of Down syndrome demonstrating atlanto-­occipital hypermobility and subluxation.
C, Instability and symptoms were relieved by an occipitoaxial arthrodesis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 722 u The Upper Limb

A

4263

C

B

Fig. 721.6 Radiographs of the cervical spine in a child with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome showing evidence of platybasia, occipitocervical, and

atlantoaxial instability. A, Neutral radiograph. B, Flexion. C, Extension. (From Drummond DS. Pediatric cervical instability. In: Weisel SE, Boden DS,
Wisnecki RI, eds. Seminars in Spine Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1996:292–309.)

are present on the initial lateral radiograph. Although variations
in practice patterns likely exist and recommendations may vary
between states, radiographic screening is required before participation in the Special Olympics. Patients with coexisting os odontoideum are candidates for routine radiographic surveillance because
they are at greater risk for progression of displacement and neurologic injury.
Plain radiographs are ideally obtained in children older than 3
years unless clinical findings mandate earlier evaluation, consisting
of an AP and lateral in neutral alignment, usually supplemented by
a lateral view in flexion and extension. The atlanto-­dens interval
(ADI) is used to evaluate the relationship between C1 and C2 (atlantoaxial joint) and is measured as the space between the dens and the
anterior ring of C1 on lateral radiographs in neutral, flexion, and
extension (Fig. 721.5). Although the ADI should be 3 mm or less in
the population without Down syndrome, a normal ADI in children
with Down syndrome is <4.5 mm. Hypermobility is diagnosed as
an ADI between 6 and 10 mm, whereas an ADI >10 mm represents frank instability and carries greater risk of neurologic injury.
Evaluating the space available for the spinal cord is also important,
and a measurement of ≤14 mm between the posterior odontoid and
posterior arch is felt to be abnormal. Progression from hypermobility to instability on surveillance radiographs is uncommon. In one
series of patients with Down syndrome screened routinely, an ADI
of ≥6 mm was identified in 4.4%, and 1.6% were noted to progress
to hypermobility/instability over 4 years. MRI in flexion and extension is indicated to evaluate for impingement and/or neurologic
injury in patients with appropriate clinical symptoms or findings
and/or those with radiographic instability, and an increase in signal
intensity within the spinal cord at the level of excessive motion is
diagnostic of neurologic injury.
Although hypermobility at the occipitoatlantal joint is present in
>50% of children with Down syndrome, most patients do not develop
instability or neurologic symptoms. The relationships at this articulation are difficult to measure reliably on plain radiographs. An MRI in
flexion and extension is required to evaluate any questionable radiographic findings, especially in the presence of clinical symptoms.
Involvement of the subaxial spine is less common and is typically
encountered in the adult population of patients with Down syndrome.
Degenerative changes or instability may result in pain, radiculopathy,
and/or myelopathy.
Specific treatment recommendations have not been standardized,
but patients diagnosed with hypermobility may be restricted from
participation in contact sports and other activities that increase the
risk of trauma to the cervical spine. Patients with C1-2 instability

with or without neurologic findings are candidates for an atlantoaxial
fusion.

22Q11.2 Deletion Syndrome

The chromosome deletion of 22q11.2 is a common genetic syndrome, with an overall prevalence of 1 in 5,950 births and encompasses a wide spectrum of abnormalities. There are characteristic
facial features, cleft palate, and cardiac anomalies. Cervical spine
anomalies are also common. At least one developmental variation
of the occiput or cervical spine is noted in all patients. The occipital
variations observed include platybasia, an abnormal flattening of
the base of the skull, and basilar impression. Variations in anatomy
of C1 include dysmorphic shape, an open posterior arch, and occipitalization, while axis variations include a dysmorphic dens and “C2
swoosh” (upswept lamina and posterior elements). A range of cervical vertebral fusions is noted in these patients, the most common
being at the C2-3 level. Increased segmental motion is commonly
observed, but symptomatic instability is quite uncommon. With
frequent occurrence of upper cervical spine anomalies in patients
with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (Fig. 721.6), advanced imaging of
the upper cervical spine is suggested to characterize the anomalies. Regular follow-­up is required as a small subset of patients may
develop instability. A flexion-­extension MRI of the cervical spine
may be considered for evaluation of symptomatic patients to rule
out instability and/or neurologic injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 722

The Upper Limb
Robert B. Carrigan
SHOULDER

The shoulder is a ball-­and-­socket joint that is similar to the hip; however, there are several anatomic differences between the two. The
shoulder is a very shallow ball-­and-­socket joint compared to the hip
and is more prone to dislocation than the hip. In addition, shoulder

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4264 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
range of motion (ROM) is much greater than that of the hip. This is
due to the size of the humeral head relative to the glenoid and the
presence of scapulothoracic motion. The shoulder positions the hand
along the surface of a theoretical sphere in space, with its center at the
glenohumeral joint.

Sprengel Deformity

Sprengel deformity, or congenital elevation of the scapula, is a
disorder of development that involves a high scapula and limited
scapulothoracic motion. The scapula originates in early embryogenesis at a level posterior to the fourth cervical vertebra. It
descends during development to below the seventh cervical vertebra. Failure of this descent, either unilateral or bilateral, is the
Sprengel deformity. The severity of the deformity depends on the
location of the scapula and associated anomalies. The scapula in
mild cases is simply rotated, with a palpable or visible bump corresponding to the superomedial corner of the scapula. Function is
generally good. In moderate cases, the scapula is higher on the neck
and connected to the spine with an abnormal omovertebral ligamentous or bony connection. Shoulder motion, particularly abduction, is limited. In severe cases, the scapula is small and positioned
on the posterior neck. The neck may be webbed. Most patients with
Sprengel deformity have associated anomalies of the musculoskeletal system, especially in the spine (Klippel-­Feil syndrome), making spinal evaluation important.

Treatment

In mild cases, treatment is generally unnecessary. A prominent and
unsightly superomedial corner of the scapula can be excised. In more
severe cases, surgical repositioning of the scapula with rebalancing
of parascapular muscles can significantly improve both function and
appearance.

Congenital Pseudarthrosis of the Clavicle

The clavicle is a tubular S-­shaped bone that articulates with the
sternum and acromion. It acts as a strut to keep the shoulder from
protracting forward. Congenital pseudoarthrosis of the clavicle is a
failure of the two primary ossification centers of the clavicle to fuse
during embryogenesis (Fig. 722.1). The condition presents exclusively on the right side and may be confused for an acute clavicle
fracture sustained during birth. A thorough history and physical
exam will help to distinguish between the two conditions. Although
both a birth-­related clavicle fracture and a congenital pseudoarthrosis will present with a bump or prominence over the mid-­
clavicle, a birth-­related clavicle fracture will be tender to palpation
on exam. The parents may also report that the child is fussy with
feeding and changing. Congenital pseudoarthrosis of the clavicle
will be painless on exam. Radiographically the congenital pseudoarthrosis clavicle will have two rounded edges at the midportion
with signs of hypertrophy.

Treatment

There is not a clear consensus regarding treatment of congenital
pseudoarthrosis of the clavicle. Surgery is indicated for patients with
symptoms of thoracic outlet syndrome (impingement of the clavicle on the brachial plexus and subclavian vessels). However, most
patients are asymptomatic with few functional limitations and do
not require surgical repair. Surgical treatment may be considered for
patients with unacceptable cosmetic deformity, pain, or functional
deficits.
The operative treatment of congenital pseudoarthrosis of the
clavicle consists of opening the pseudoarthrosis site, preserving the
periosteum, debriding the hypertrophic ends, bone grafting, and
stabilization.

ELBOW

The elbow is the most congruent joint in the body. The stability of the
elbow is imparted via this bony congruity and through the medial and
radial collateral ligaments. Where the shoulder positions the hand
along the surface of a theoretical sphere, the elbow positions the hand
within that sphere. The elbow allows extension and flexion through the
ulnohumeral articulation and pronation and supination through the
radiocapitellar articulation.

Panner Disease and Osteochondritis of the
Capitellum

Panner disease is a disruption of the blood flow to the subchondral
bone and articular cartilage of the capitellum (Fig. 722.2). It typically occurs in males between the ages of 5 and 13 years. Presenting symptoms include lateral elbow pain, loss of motion, and, in
advanced cases, mechanical symptoms of the elbow (loose bodies).
The mechanism of injury can be impaction or overloading of the
joint, as seen with sports such as gymnastics and baseball. It can
also be idiopathic. Radiographs of the elbow may be normal or may
show a small lucency within the subchondral bone of the capitellum. MRI is the study of choice to evaluate a suspected capitellar
lesion. MRI can demonstrate the extent of the involvement in the
subchondral bone and the integrity of the cartilage of the articular
surface.

Treatment

Treatment is typically conservative. Rest, activity modification, and
patient education are initial treatment options. In cases in which the
articular cartilage fragments and loose bodies form, arthroscopy of
the elbow is warranted to remove the loose bodies. When the cartilage defect in the capitellum is large and symptomatic, procedures for
restoration of the articular cartilage may be considered. These procedures include drilling of the subchondral bone (microfracture) to
promote scar cartilage and osteochondral autograft transplantation
(OATS).

Radial Longitudinal Deficiency

Radial longitudinal deficiency of the forearm comprises a spectrum
of conditions and diseases that have resulted in hypoplasia or absence
of the radius (Table 722.1). Clinical characteristics consist of a small,
shortened limb with the hand and wrist in excessive radial deviation.
Partial or complete absence of the radial structures of the forearm and
hand are observed (Fig. 722.3).
Radial longitudinal deficiency can range in severity from mild to
severe and has been classified into four types according to Bayne and
Klug (Table 722.2). Radial longitudinal deficiency can be associated
with other syndromes such as Holt-­Oram and Fanconi anemia. Complete and thorough workup of these associated conditions is important
for the long-­term health of the child.

Treatment
Fig. 722.1 Radiograph of congenital pseudoarthrosis of the clavicle.

The goals for the treatment of radial longitudinal deficiency include
centralizing the hand and wrist on the forearm, balancing the wrist,
and maintaining appropriate thumb and digital motion. Shortly after

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 722 u The Upper Limb

A

B

Fig. 722.2 T1 (A) and T2 (B) coronal MRI images of the elbow depicting Panner disease of the elbow.

Table 722.1  Syndromes Commonly Associated with
Radial Deficiency
SYNDROME

CHARACTERISTICS

Holt-­Oram syndrome

Heart defects, most commonly atrial
septal defects
Absent thumb or long finger-­like
thumb

Thrombocytopenia-­absent
radius syndrome

Thrombocytopenia present at birth
but improves over time
Thumbs present, radii absent

VACTERL association

Vertebral abnormalities, anal
atresia, cardiac abnormalities,
tracheoesophageal fistula,
esophageal atresia, renal defects,
radial dysplasia, lower limb
abnormalities

Fanconi anemia

Aplastic anemia does not present
at birth, develops about 6 yr of
age; fatal without bone marrow
transplant
Chromosomal breakage challenge
test and genetic testing available
for early diagnosis
Thumb hypoplasia but present

From Trumble T, Budoff J, Cornwall R, eds. Core Knowledge in Orthopedics: Hand,
Elbow, Shoulder. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2005:425.

4265

dislocation of the radial head. The proximal end of the radius, or
radial head, is anchored to the proximal ulna by the annular ligament. It wraps around like a leash from the ulna, around the radial
head, and back to the ulna. If the radius is pulled distally, the annular ligament can slip proximally off the radial head and into the
joint between the radial head and the humerus (Fig. 722.4). The
injury is typically produced when a longitudinal traction force is
applied to the arm, such as when a falling child is caught by the
hand, or when a child is pulled by the hand. The injury usually
occurs in toddlers and rarely occurs in children older than 5 years
of age. Subluxation of the annular ligament produces immediate
pain and limitation of supination. Flexion and extension of the
elbow are not limited. Swelling is generally absent. The diagnosis
is made by history and physical examination because radiographs
are typically normal.

Treatment

The annular ligament is reduced by rotating the forearm into supination while holding pressure over the radial head. A palpable click
or clunk can be felt. The child recovers active supination and usually
has relief of discomfort. Sometimes pain may persist after reduction
maneuvers. Immobilization is not required, but recurrence can happen. Parents should avoid activities that apply traction to the elbows.
Parents can learn reduction maneuvers for recurrent episodes to avoid
trips to the emergency department or pediatrician’s office. Recurrence
beyond 5 years of age is rare.

WRIST

The wrist is composed of the two forearm bones (radius and ulna)
as well as the eight carpal bones. The wrist allows flexion, extension, and radial and ulnar deviation through the radiocarpal and
midcarpal articulations. Pronation and supination occur at the
wrist through the distal radial ulnar joint (DRUJ). The wrist is a
complex joint with numerous ligamentous and soft tissue attachments. It has complex kinematics that allows for its generous ROM,
but when these kinematics are altered, significant dysfunction can
occur.

Madelung Deformity

Madelung deformity is a deformity of the wrist that is characterized
as radial and palmar angulations of the distal aspect of the radius
(Fig. 722.5). Growth arrest of the palmar and ulnar aspect of the
distal radial physis is the underlying cause of this deformity. Bony
physeal lesions and an abnormal radiolunate ligament (Vicker’s
ligament) have been implicated. The deformity can be bilateral and
affects females more than males.

Treatment

birth, stretching and splinting of the wrist and hand should be started
to elongate the contracted radial soft tissues.
Surgery for correction of the wrist deformity is focused on addressing the tight structures and varies by age and level of involvement. The
classic surgical technique for children with good elbow motion is centralization of the wrist on the forearm, which is often associated with
recurrence of the deformity. When considering a centralization procedure, the preoperative plan begins with careful examination of the
patient; considerations regarding thumb and elbow function must be
made before surgery. The surgery typically occurs when the child is 1
year of age. Correction of the radial deviation as well as centralization
of the wrist can be accomplished with a variety of different surgical
techniques. These techniques include open release, capsular reefing,
and tendon rebalancing. External fixation techniques and free tissue
transfers also have been described.

Treatment of Madelung deformity is typically observation. Mild deformities can be observed until skeletal maturity. Moderate to severe
deformities that either are painful or limit function may be candidates
for surgical intervention. Surgical treatment for Madelung deformity
is often motivated by appearance. Patients and their families may be
concerned about the palmar angulation of the wrist and the resulting
prominent distal ulna.
There are a multitude of surgical options for treating Madelung
deformity. For the skeletally immature patient, resection of the tethering soft tissue (Vicker’s ligament) and physiolysis (fat grafting of any
bony lesion seen within the physis) is often the first option. When
Madelung deformity is encountered in skeletally mature patients,
an osteotomy may be considered. Dorsal closing wedge, dome, and
ulnar shortening osteotomies may be used alone or in combination to
achieve the desired result.
Long-­term considerations of Madelung deformity concern the
incongruity of the DRUJ and resulting premature DRUJ arthritis.

Nursemaid’s Elbow

Gymnast’s Wrist

Nursemaid’s elbow is a subluxation and interposition of the annular ligament of the elbow. It is often confused for a subluxation or

Gymnast’s wrist refers to the changes observed in the physis of the distal radius in the setting of repetitive stress associated with gymnastics

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4266 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

C

B

A

D

E

Fig. 722.3 Spectrum of phenotypes of radial dysplasia. A, Type 1 radius with a hypoplastic thumb. B, Type IV radius with an absent thumb. C,
Radiograph of a type IV radius. D and E, Phocomelic radial deficiency. (From Oishi S, Stutz C, Lake A. Disorders of the upper extremity. In: Herring
JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 12.72, p. 337.)

Table 722.2  Modified Classification of Radial Longitudinal Deficiency
TYPE

THUMB

CARPUS

DISTAL RADIUS

PROXIMAL RADIUS

N

Hypoplastic or absent

Normal

Normal

Normal

0

Hypoplastic or absent

Absence, hypoplasia, or coalition

Normal

Normal, radioulnar synostosis,
or congenital dislocation of
the radial head

1

Hypoplastic or absent

Absence, hypoplasia, or coalition

>2 mm shorter than the
ulna

Normal, radioulnar synostosis,
or congenital dislocation of
the radial head

2

Hypoplastic or absent

Absence, hypoplasia, or coalition

Hypoplasia

Hypoplasia

3

Hypoplastic or absent

Absence, hypoplasia, or coalition

Physis absent

Variable hypoplasia

4

Hypoplastic or absent

Absence, hypoplasia, or coalition

Absent

Absent

From James MA, McCarroll HR Jr, Manske PR. The spectrum of radial longitudinal deficiency: a modified classification. J Hand Surg Am. 1999;24:1145–1155.

(Fig. 722.6). Symptoms include pain with weight bearing, swelling, and
loss of motion (mainly wrist extension). The pain is typically mild at
first and worsens with time and increased activity. Children will have
pain over the distal radial physis on palpation. The child should also
be examined for coexisting wrist pathology including DRUJ instability
and triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) tears. Radiographs are
often normal but may show chronic changes in the distal radial physis,
including widening, sclerosis, and partial physeal arrest. Ulnar positive
variance may also be observed because of partial growth arrest of the
radius. MRI may be useful to examine the extent of physeal involvement as well as TFFC pathology

Treatment

Treatment of gymnast’s wrist begins with rest. Typically, the child is
prohibited from weight-­bearing activities for a period of 6 weeks or
until symptoms resolve. The child is slowly progressed back to their
routine. If symptoms return during the recovery phase, rest is reinitiated. It is not uncommon for relapses to occur when returning to competition. This may be difficult for the child and parents to understand,
as gymnasts and gymnast’s families are often very motivated to continue their sport. Use of braces, such as Tiger Paws, may help limit the
amount of force transmitted to the wrist and in turn help with injury
prevention.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 722 u The Upper Limb

4267

In cases where significant damage is seen in the distal radius physis,
surgery may be indicated to prevent future morphologic changes in
the wrist. Surgery may include epiphysiodesis of the radius and ulna,
shortening of the ulna, and TFCC repair.

Capitellum

Ganglion

Radial
head

Annular
ligament

Fig. 722.4 Nursemaid’s elbow. Illustration depicting subluxation of

the radial head inferior to the annular ligament, with interposition of the
ligament to the radiocapitellar joint space. This entity is sometimes in
the differential in the setting of upper extremity injury in a small child.
Radiographs are negative and serve only to exclude the presence of
bony injury when the diagnosis is not clear. (From Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 7.102.)

The wrist joint articulation is lubricated with synovial fluid, which is
produced by the synovial lining of the joint and maintained within the
joint by the joint capsule. A defect in the capsule can allow fluid to leak
from the joint into the soft tissues, resulting in a ganglion. The term
cyst is a misnomer, because this extraarticular collection of fluid does
not have its own true lining. The defect in the capsule can occur as
a traumatic event, although trauma is rarely a feature of the presenting history. The fluid usually exits the joint in the interval between the
scaphoid and lunate, resulting in a ganglion located at the dorsoradial
aspect of the wrist. Ganglia can occur at other locations, such as the
volar aspect of the wrist, or in the palm because of leakage of fluid
from the flexor tendon sheaths. Pain is not commonly associated with
ganglia in children, and when it is, it is unclear whether the cyst is the
cause of the pain. The diagnosis is usually evident on physical examination, especially if the lesion transilluminates. Extensor tenosynovitis
and anomalous muscles can mimic ganglion cysts, but radiography or
MRI is not routinely required. Ultrasonography is an effective, noninvasive tool to support the diagnosis and reassure the patient and family.

Treatment

Regarding the treatment of ganglia in children, consider the vowels
AEIOU.
Aspiration: Simple aspiration of the fluid has a high recurrence rate
and is painful for children given the large-­bore needle required to
aspirate the gelatinous fluid. However, in older children who would
like to try and decompress the cyst before considering surgery, this
may be reasonable.
Excision: Surgical excision, including excision of the stalk connecting
the ganglion to its joint of origin, has a high success rate, although
the ganglion can recur.
Injection: Aspiration of the cyst and a simultaneous injection of a corticosteroid have been shown to be effective in treating recurrence in
children.
Observation: Up to 80% of ganglia in children <10 years of age resolve
spontaneously within 1 year of being noticed. If the ganglion is painful or bothersome and the child is >10 years of age, treatment may
be warranted.
Ultrasound: For children’s parents who are concerned about the mass
and want a radiographic study to confirm the diagnosis, ultrasound
is a noninvasive test to confirm the diagnosis.

HAND
Fig. 722.5 Radiograph of an adolescent with Madelung deformity.

The hand and fingers allow for complex and fine manipulations. An
intricate balance among extrinsic flexors, extensors, and intrinsic

A

C

B

D

Fig. 722.6 Gymnast’s wrist. A and B, Posteroanterior radiographs of the bilateral wrists show widening and irregularity of the distal radial physis.

Abnormal linear lucency is seen in the metaphyses, with surrounding sclerosis noted. Findings reflect disrupted growth at the physes. C, Coronal T1
and D, coronal T2 magnetic resonance images with fat saturation show similar abnormality at the distal radial physis, along with abnormal increased
fluid signal along the metaphysis. (From Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017:
Fig. 7.107.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4268 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 722.3  Classification of Camptodactyly
TYPE

CHARACTERISTICS

I

Congenital, no sex bias, small finger only

II

Acquired between 7-11 yr, typically progressive

III

Severe, significant contracture, bilateral and associated
with other musculoskeletal syndromes

Adapted from Kozin SH. Pediatric hand surgery. In: Beredjiklian PK, Bozentka DJ, eds.
Review of Hand Surgery. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004:223–245.

muscles allows these complex motions to occur. Congenital anomalies
of the hand and upper extremity rank just behind cardiac anomalies in
incidence. Like cardiac anomalies, if they are not properly identified
and remedied, may have long-­term consequences.

Camptodactyly

Camptodactyly is a nontraumatic flexion contracture of the proximal
interphalangeal joint that is often progressive. The small and ring fingers are most often affected. Bilateralism is observed two thirds of the
time. The etiology of camptodactyly is varied. Several different hypotheses have been offered as to the cause of this condition. Camptodactyly
can be divided into three different types (Table 722.3).

Treatment

Nonsurgical treatment is the primary treatment of camptodactyly.
Mild contractures of less than 30 degrees are usually well tolerated and
do not need treatment. Serial casting or static and dynamic splinting
can prevent contractures from worsening.
Surgical treatment is limited to the treatment of severe contractures. At the time of surgery, all contracted and anomalous structures are released. Results of contracture release for camptodactyly
are mixed; often a loss of flexion results from an attempt to improve
extension.

Clinodactyly

Angular deformity of the digit in the coronal plane, distal to the
metacarpophalangeal joint is clinodactyly. The most observed finding is a mild radial deviation of the small finger at the level of the
distal interphalangeal joint. This is often due to a triangular or trapezoidal middle phalanx. In some cases, a disruption of the physis at
the middle phalanx produces a longitudinal epiphysial bracket. This
bracket is thought to be the underlying cause for the formation of the
“delta phalanx” that is often observed in clinodactyly. Clinodactyly
has been observed in other fingers, including the thumb (Fig. 722.7)
and ring finger.

Treatment

The initial treatment for clinodactyly is observation. For severe deformities and for those affecting the thumb, surgery may be indicated.
Surgery is technically demanding. Bracket resections, corrective osteotomies, and growth plate ablations are the most common procedures
performed to correct the observed angular deformities. Results are
good, and recurrences are few.

Polydactyly

Polydactyly or duplication of a digit can occur either as a radial deformity (involving the thumb), central (index, middle, or ring), or as an
ulnar deformity (involving the small finger) (Table 722.4). Each has an
inherited and genetic component. Transmission is typically in an autosomal dominant pattern and has been linked to differences in genes
localized to chromosome 2.
Duplication of the thumb has been subdivided into seven types
by Flatt and Wassel based on the degree of duplication (Table 722.5).
Small finger duplication has been further subdivided into two types.

Fig. 722.7 Clinodactyly of the thumb.

Table 722.4  Syndromes Associated with Polydactyly*
Carpenter syndrome
Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome
Meckel-­Gruber syndrome
Polysyndactyly
Trisomy 13
Orofaciodigital syndrome
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
Bardet-­Biedl syndrome
Meckel-­Gruber syndrome
Pallister-­Hall syndrome
Short Rib-­polydactyly syndromes (type I, II)
*There are many syndromes with polydactyly; this is a partial list.

Table 722.5  Wassel Classification of Thumb Duplication
TYPE

CHARACTERISTICS

I

Bifid distal phalanx

II

Duplicate distal phalanx

III

Bifid proximal phalanx

IV

Duplicate proximal phalanx

V

Bifid metacarpal

VI

Duplicate metacarpal

VII

Triphalangeal component

Data from Wassel, HD. The results of surgery for polydactyly of the thumb: a review.
Clin Orthop. 1969;125:175–193.

Type A is a well-­formed digit. Type B is a small, often underdeveloped
supernumerary digit.

Treatment

Thumb and small finger duplication are typically treated with ablation of the supernumerary digit. Treatment options vary based on the
degree of involvement. Less well-­formed digits can be treated with
suture ligation. Well-­formed digits require reconstructive procedures
that preserve important structures such as the collateral ligaments and
nail folds (Fig. 722.8).

Thumb Hypoplasia

Hypoplasia of the thumb is a challenging condition for both the patient
and the doctor. The thumb represents ∼40% of hand function. A less-­
than-­optimal thumb can severely limit a patient’s function as they
grow and develop. Hypoplasia of the thumb can range from being mild
with slight shortening and underdeveloped musculature to complete

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 722 u The Upper Limb

A

B

C

D

E

4269

F

Fig. 722.8 A and B, Preoperative and postoperative pictures of a Wassel II thumb duplication. C, Clinical photograph. D, Radiograph postaxial
polydactyly. E, Clinical photograph. F, Radiograph of central polydactyly.

absence of the thumb. Radiographs are useful to help determine osseous abnormalities. The most important finding on physical exam is
the presence or absence of a stable carpometacarpal (CMC) joint. This
finding helps guide surgical treatment.

Treatment

If the thumb has a stable CMC joint, reconstruction is advised. Key
elements of thumb reconstruction include rebuilding the ulnar collateral ligament of the metacarpophalangeal joint, tendon transfers to aid
thumb abduction, and procedures to deepen the web space.
If a stable CMC joint is not present or the thumb is completely
absent (Fig. 722.9A), pollicization (surgical construction of a thumb
from a finger) is the definitive treatment (see Fig. 722.9B). Pollicization
is a complex procedure rotating the index finger along its neurovascular pedicle to form a thumb. This procedure is typically performed at
around 1 year of age and may be followed by subsequent procedures to
deepen the web space or augment abduction.

A

Syndactyly

Failure of the individual digits to separate during development produces syndactyly. Syndactyly is one of the more common anomalies observed in the upper limb (Table 722.6). It is seen in 0.5 of
1,000 live births. Syndactyly can be classified as simple (skin attachments only), complicated (bone and tendon attachments), complete (fusion to the tips, including the nail), or incomplete (simple
webbing).

Treatment

Division of conjoined digits should be considered before the second year of life. Border digits should be divided earlier (3-6 months)
because of concern for tethered growth of digits of unequal length.
Digits of similar size, such as the index, middle, and ring, may wait
until the child is older to consider separation. Reconstruction of the
web space and nail folds as well as appropriate skin-­grafting techniques
must be used to ensure the best possible functional and cosmetic result
(Fig. 722.10).

Fingertip Injuries

Young children commonly sustain crush injuries to the fingertips from
doorjambs, car doors, and other tight spaces. Injury can range from
a simple subungual hematoma to complete amputation of part or the
entire fingertip. Radiographs are important to rule out fractures. Physeal fractures associated with nailbed injuries are open fractures with
a high risk of osteomyelitis, growth arrest, and deformity if not treated
correctly.
The treatment of the soft tissue injury depends on the type of injury.
For suture repairs, only absorbable sutures should be used. Removal of
sutures from a young child’s fingertip can be difficult and may require
sedation or general anesthesia. If a subungual hematoma exists but the
nail is normal and no displaced fracture is present, the nail need not be
removed for nailbed repair. If the nail is torn or avulsed, the nail should
be removed, and the nailbed and skin should be inspected and repaired
with absorbable sutures where appropriate
If the fingertip is completely amputated, treatment depends on
the level of amputation and the age of the child. Distal amputations

B
Fig. 722.9 A, Congenital absence of the thumb. B, Postsurgical image after pollicization.

of skin and fat in children <2 years of age can be replaced as a composite graft with a reasonable chance of surviving. Similar amputations in older children can heal without replacing the skin if no
bone is exposed and the amputated area is small. A variety of coverage procedures exist for amputations through the midportion of
the nail. Amputations at or proximal to the proximal edge of the
fingernail should be referred emergently to a replant center for
consideration for microvascular replantation. When referring, all
amputated parts should be saved, wrapped in saline-­soaked gauze,
placed in a watertight bag, and then placed in ice water. Ice should
never directly contact the part because it can cause severe osmotic
and thermal injury.

Trigger Thumb and Fingers

The flexor tendons for the thumb and fingers pass through fibrous tunnels made up of a series of pulleys on the volar surface of the digits.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4270 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
These tunnels can become tight at the most proximal or first annular
pulley. Swelling of the underlying tendon occurs, and the tendon no
longer glides under the pulley. In children, the most common digit
involved is the thumb. Trigger thumbs are not congenital deformities
but rather are developmental and most frequently occur before 2 years

of age. The incidence of trigger thumb is approximately 3 per 1,000
children at 1 year of age. A history of trauma is rare, and the condition is often painless. Overall function is rarely impaired. A trigger
thumb typically manifests with the inability to fully extend the thumb
interphalangeal joint. A palpable nodule can be felt in the flexor pollicis longus tendon at the base of the thumb metacarpal phalangeal
joint volarly. Other conditions can mimic trigger thumb, including the
thumb-­in-­palm deformity of cerebral palsy. Similar findings in the fingers (index through small) are much less common and may be associated with inflammatory conditions such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis
(Fig. 722.11).

Table 722.6  Syndromes Associated with Syndactyly*
Apert syndrome
Carpenter syndrome
Chotzen syndrome
de Lange syndrome
Fanconi pancytopenia
Fetal hydantoin syndrome
Holt-­Oram syndrome
Laurence-­Moon-­Biedl syndrome
Noack syndrome
Orofaciodigital syndrome
Pfeiffer syndrome
Poland syndrome
Polysyndactyly
Trisomy 13
Trisomy 18
Trisomy 21

Treatment

Trigger thumbs spontaneously resolve in up to 30% of children who
are diagnosed before 1 year of age. Spontaneous resolution beyond that
age is uncommon. Corticosteroid injections are effective in adults but
are not effective in children and risk injury to the nearby digital nerves.
Surgical release of the first annular pulley is curative and is generally
performed between 1 and 3 years of age. Treatment of trigger fingers
other than the thumb in children involves evaluation and treatment
of any underlying inflammatory process and in some cases surgical
decompression of the flexor sheath and possible flexor tendon partial
excision.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

*There are many more syndromes associated with syndactyly; this list is not all-­inclusive.

A

C

B

D

Fig. 722.10 Preoperative (A and B) and postoperative (C and D) pictures of a simple syndactyly.

A

B

C

Fig. 722.11 A, Clinical picture of trigger thumb in a 2 yr old; note flexed posture of the interphalangeal joint. B, Intraoperative picture of flexor
tendon following release of A1 pulley. C, Intraoperative picture of benign growth along flexor tendon causing triggering in an index finger.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 723 u Arthrogryposis 4271
with arthrogryposis; however, the type of anterior horn cell involvement is usually not from spinal muscular atrophy syndrome. Other less
common neurologic disorders include neonatal myasthenia, myotonic
dystrophy, olivo-­ponto-­cerebellar disorders, and neuronal migration
anomalies.

Chapter 723

Arthrogryposis
Christine M. Goodbody, Helen M. Horstmann,
and Richard S. Davidson
Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita refers to a heterogeneous group
of muscular, neurologic, and connective tissue anomalies that present
with two or more joint nonprogressive contractures at birth, as well as
muscle weakness. It is associated with abnormal contraction of muscle
fibers, causing reduced mobility with a decreased active and passive arc
of motion. Arthrogryposis is not a specific diagnosis but a descriptive
term with various etiologies and complex clinical features, including
multiple congenital contractures of various limb joints. It is associated
with over 300 different disorders encompassing malformation, malfunction, and neurologic deficiency (see Chapter 648.10).
Approximately 1% of all births show some form of contractures of
the joints ranging from unilateral clubfoot to amyoplasia (the most
severe), a condition characterized by pervasive, crippling contractures involving many joints. The overall incidence of arthrogryposis is
1/5,000-10,000 live births with equal gender ratios.
Although children with arthrogryposis may have many other
problems, such as micrognathia and feeding issues, focus is on the
orthopedic problems frequently seen in this group of children. In the
absence of central nervous system lesions, many children have normal
intelligence.

ETIOLOGY

The main cause of arthrogryposis is fetal akinesia or decreased fetal
movement. The associated pattern of abnormalities is often referred to
as the fetal akinesia deformation sequence. This sequence manifests
as multiple joint contractures, oligohydramnios, craniofacial anomalies (e.g., micrognathia), and pulmonary hypoplasia because of lack
of movement of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles. Intrinsic and
extrinsic causes of fetal akinesia are categorized into six groups (Fig.
723.1) and include a multitude of disorders (Table 723.1).

Neurologic Abnormalities

Neurologic abnormalities are present in 70–80% of cases. Patchy damage to the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord can lead to characteristic limb posturing of arthrogryposis. Neurologic disorders, such
as spinal muscular atrophy and anterior horn disease, are associated

Anterior horn cell disease
Other neurologic disorders
Maternal
diseases
Vascular
compromise

Myopathies and other
muscle disorders

Fetal
hypokinesia or
restricted fetal
movement

Fetal
crowding
Connective tissue
abnormalities

Multiple
congenital
contractures

Fig. 723.1 Etiology of arthrogryposis. (Data from Hall JG. Arthrogryposis multiplex congenital: etiology, genetics, classification, diagnostic approach, and general aspects. J Pediatr Orthop B. 1996;6:159–
166.)

Muscular Abnormalities

These rare abnormalities affect the function and structure of the muscles. Amyoplasia, the most common form of arthrogryposis, is associated with abnormally decreased fetal movement and is characterized
by underdeveloped, contracted muscles causing joint deformity. The
involved skeletal muscle is replaced by fatty or fibrous tissue. Some
muscular diseases associated with arthrogryposis are muscular dystrophies, congenital myopathies (central core, nemaline, centronuclear),
intrauterine myositis, and mitochondrial diseases.

Limited Intrauterine Spacing

Uterine constraint is rarely the primary cause of arthrogryposis. Maternal uterine anomalies will occasionally increase contractures of fetal
limbs with arthrogryposis already existing. Other known causes are
lack of amniotic fluid within the uterus, and tumors, such as fibroids,
that can prevent movement by impinging on uterine space.

Connective Tissue Abnormalities

When the tendons, bones, joints, and joint lining develop atypically,
the resulting decrease in fetal movement causes congenital contractures. Diseases such as diastrophic dysplasia, campomelic dysplasia,
and metatropic dysplasia result from connective tissue not developing
properly. These are specific diagnoses resulting in limited joint motion
and not true distal arthrogryposis. In some cases, the connective tissue
develops normally but does not attach to the proper location around a
bone or joint, and the subsequent abnormal movement results in distal
joint involvement.

Maternal Diseases

Maternal diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, diabetes mellitus, myasthenia gravis, maternal hyperthermia, infection (Zika virus), drugs,
and trauma, are associated with an increased incidence of arthrogryposis. In approximately 10% of neonates born to mothers with myasthenia gravis, maternal antibodies enter the fetal circulation through
the placenta, causing transient myasthenia gravis; this inhibits fetal
acetylcholine receptors, which leads to damaged fetal muscles.

Intrauterine Vascular Compromise

Abnormal fetal blood supply may be associated with arthrogryposis.
This occurs when inadequate vascular supply to the fetus causes fetal
hypoxia resulting in anterior horn cell death, which, in turn, decreases
neurologic and myologic function. The result is fetal akinesia and secondary joint contractures. Multiple congenital contractures have been
reported in individuals after bleeding throughout pregnancy or after a
failed attempt at terminating the pregnancy.

CLASSIFICATION

Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita is divided into subgroups with different signs, symptoms, and causes as a practical way to make a differential diagnosis. However, given the wide spectrum of disease presentation
and etiology, no one classification system exists that is entirely comprehensive. Disorders involving primarily the limbs, such as amyoplasia
and distal arthrogryposis, are the most common subgroups. Disorders
involving limbs and other body parts typically represent a form of multiple pterygium syndrome, which is characterized by weblike membranes
that form across joints, affecting a child’s ability to extend those joints
and causing fixed flexion deformities. Disorders with limb involvement
and abnormal neurologic function are caused by atypical central nervous
system development, peripheral nervous system abnormalities, damaged
or absent anterior horn cells, or a combination thereof.
Amyoplasia, also known as classic arthrogryposis, is a sporadic symmetric disorder that causes fibrotic replacement of the muscles. Symptoms include internally rotated and adducted shoulders, extended

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4272 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 723.1  Associated Etiologies of Arthrogryposis
ARTHROGRYPOSIS CAUSED BY NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS
• Focal anterior horn cell deficiency
• Generalized anterior horn cell deficiency
• Structural brain disorder/damage
• Uncertain location
(Spastic conditions are excluded)
DISTAL ARTHROGRYPOSIS SYNDROMES
• Type I dominant distal
• Type IIa dominant distal (Freeman-­Sheldon syndrome)
• Digitotalar dysmorphism
• Trismus pseudocamptodactyly
• Distal distribution, type not specified
PTERYGIUM SYNDROMES
• Multiple pterygium syndrome
• Lethal multiple pterygium syndrome
• Popliteal pterygium syndrome
• Ptosis, scoliosis, pterygia
• Antecubital webbing syndrome (Liebenberg)
MYOPATHIES
• Emery-­Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
• Hypotonia, myopathy, mild contractures
ABNORMALITIES OF JOINTS AND CONTIGUOUS TISSUE
• Congenital contractural arachnodactyly
• Freeman-­Sheldon syndrome
• Laxity or hypertonicity with intrauterine dislocation and
contractures
• Larsen syndrome
• Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with joint laxity
• Trisomy 18, extended breech position with bilateral hip
dislocation
• Siblings with bifid humeri, hypertelorism, and hip and knee joint
dislocations
SKELETAL DISORDERS
• Diastrophic dysplasia
• Parastremmatic dysplasia
• Kniest dysplasia
• Metatropic dysplasia
• Campomelic dysplasia
• Schwartz syndrome
• Fetal alcohol syndrome with synostoses
• Osteogenesis imperfecta with bowing/contractures
INTRAUTERINE/MATERNAL FACTORS
• Fetal alcohol syndrome with contractures
• Infections
• Untreated maternal systemic lupus erythematosus
• Intrauterine fetal constraint
• Deformity (pressure)
• Amniotic fluid leakage
• Multiple pregnancies
• Intrauterine tumors
• Disruption (bands)
MISCELLANEOUS
• Pseudotrisomy 18 with contractures
• Roberts pseudothalidomide syndrome
• Deafness with distal contractures
• VACTERL association
• Multiple abnormalities and contractures not otherwise specified
• ARC
SINGLE JOINT
• Campomelia
• Symphalangism
• “Trigger” finger
ARC, Arthrogryposis, renal tubular acidosis, cholestasis; VACTERL, vertebral defects,
imperforate anus, congenital heart disease, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal and limb
defects.
Modified from Mennen U, Van Heest A, Ezaki MB, et al. Arthrogryposis multiplex
congenita. J Hand Surg Br. 2005;30(5):468–474. Copyright 2005 The British Society for
Surgery of the Hand.

elbows, pronated forearms, flexed fingers and wrists, dislocated
hips, feet with severe equinovarus contractures, and extended knees.
Involved muscles are hypoplastic and fibrotic. Often, patients have
midfacial hemangioma. Intelligence is usually normal (Figs. 723.2 and
723.3).
Distal arthrogryposis is an autosomal dominant disorder that primarily affects the distal joints of the limbs. Characteristics of the upper
limbs are medially overlapping fingers, clenched fists, ulnar deviation
of fingers, camptodactyly, and hypoplasia. Lower limbs show talipes
equinovarus, calcaneovalgus, vertical talus, or metatarsus varus (Fig.
723.4), in addition to limited motion at the involved joints. Ten different types of distal arthrogryposis have been categorized based on
specific traits they share with each other (Table 723.2).

MANAGEMENT OF ORTHOPEDIC PROBLEMS OF
ARTHROGRYPOSIS

When a child is born with arthrogryposis, the many stiff or dislocated
joints pose issues of timing and best practices of management. The
overarching goal of management in the lower extremities are plantigrade feet and joints that function to optimize ambulatory potential,
whereas in the upper extremity, the aim is largely the ability to grasp,
feed, and toilet independently. A child may have stiff elbows, dislocated
hips; dislocated, hyperextended, or contracted knees; and clubfeet (Fig.
723.5). The stiffness and deformity need to be aggressively addressed
through a combination of modalities. A team of clinicians, including
therapists for the upper and lower extremities, orthotists, and orthopedic surgeons, will be involved.
Initially, passive range-­of-­motion exercises and judicious splinting
directed and assisted by physical and occupational therapy will help
to address the various deformities. Splinting and casting can be augmented by a taping program that can be taught to the family so that the
taping can be redone frequently to take advantage of improved range of
motion. The ingenuity of the therapists and/or orthotists to create the
right splints and braces using appropriate thermoplastics, neoprene,
Velcro, and other materials can be effective (Fig. 723.6).
The therapeutic and orthopedic goal for the child with arthrogrypotic limb deformities is to achieve maximal joint motion and to
optimize joint position for function. In the lower extremities, the foot
needs to be plantigrade. The knees need to have optimal motion for
sitting and standing. Hips need to be stabilized, especially if the child
has walking potential. In the upper extremities, in cases where there is
extreme stiffness, the goals should include positioning of one arm for
feeding and the other for toileting. Two-­handed activities require some
symmetry, which can be a challenging goal with extreme contractures
and limited muscle strength. Serial casting may be beneficial in correcting joint contractures. Although scoliosis is common, it usually
does not become a problem until adolescence (see Chapter 720).

FOOT PROBLEMS

Clubfoot deformities are the most commonly seen deformities with
arthrogryposis (Fig. 723.7). A clubfoot has components of hindfoot
equinus, midfoot varus, and forefoot adduction. Clubfeet in arthrogryposis tend to be more resistant to improvement than in idiopathic cases,
but the traditional methods of treatment are nevertheless employed.
Casting is begun shortly after birth in a method known as the Ponseti
method. Casts are changed weekly until a plateau is reached, then heel
cord lengthening is needed. Other deformities such as vertical talus
are also seen and are addressed in a similar approach, although with
case-­appropriate differences in casting techniques (see Chapter 715).
Persistent stiffness often leads to more comprehensive soft tissue
releases. This is typically done around age 6-12 months and is followed
by 3 months of further casting and additional bracing as needed, especially as the foot is growing. When deformities are not corrected in
early childhood, additional bony surgery may be needed later. Some of
the approaches to this involve bony wedge osteotomies, lateral column
lengthening, bone decancellation, or talectomy. Ring or multiaxial
monolateral external fixation with or without osteotomies are used in
late correction of residual deformities.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 723 u Arthrogryposis 4273

Fig. 723.2 Infant with stiff elbows, wrists, fingers, dislocated left hip,
valgus stiff knees, and clubfeet.

Fig. 723.4 Infant with club feet, stiff knees, dislocated hips, stiff fingers, and facial hemangioma.

KNEE PROBLEMS

Fig. 723.3 Infant with stiff elbows, wrists, fingers, dislocated left hip,
clubfeet, and micrognathia.

Children with significant deformities are often in ankle foot
orthoses through much of their lives to avoid deformity recurrence
and to augment the standing base caused by weak leg muscles. A
plantigrade, pain-­free, stable foot is the goal of foot management.
Foot stiffness is anticipated and unavoidable in arthrogryposis
involving the foot.

Knee issues in patients with arthrogryposis may include knee
extension or flexion contracture, subluxation, and stiffness. Knee
flexion contracture is more common in arthrogryposis and is often
resistant to nonsurgical treatment. It can be structurally complex
and associated with skin webbing known as pterygiums, which
require Z-­plasty lengthenings. In the case of a flexion contracture,
the quadriceps musculature is often deficient and weak. When a
trial of casting and splinting of the knee contractures is insufficient,
surgical intervention with hamstring lengthenings and posterior
knee capsular releases are often needed. Soft tissue relaxation by
femoral shortening has also shown benefit.
In the case of knee hyperextension, the quadriceps are sometimes
fibrotic and weak despite seeming to overpower the hamstrings.
Casting and splinting should begin shortly after birth, which can
be done in conjunction with clubfoot casting as needed following
the principles of Ponseti. If splinting and therapy fail, lengthening
of the quadriceps can be achieved through a number of surgical
techniques that may include detachment of the rectus femoris and
lengthening of the quadriceps either percutaneously or through a
mini open procedure, which may minimize scarring.
Long-­standing stiffness may lead to joint surface flattening and
other bony abnormalities that can permanently reduce the arc of
motion. Repositioning the arc of motion through bony osteotomies
may improve sitting or standing. Follow-­up bracing can help to compensate for weak, fibrotic muscles of the legs. Use of guided growth
plates and screws may also be of benefit.

HIP PROBLEMS

Teratologic hip dislocations are common within the spectrum of
arthrogryposis and usually require open reduction of the hip. Hips
in a child with less upper-­extremity involvement and more supple
hips that are not pathologically stiff may respond to early treatment with a Pavlik harness. Coexisting knee hyperextension should

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4274 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 723.2  A Classification System and Clinical Features
of Distal Arthrogryposes
TYPE

DESCRIPTION

I

Characteristic clinical features are camptodactyly
and talipes equinovarus with possible concomitant
shoulder and hip contractures. The DA1 variant is
determined by a gene located on chromosome 9.

II

The phenotype was first described in 1938 as the
Freeman-­Sheldon syndrome, where contractures
of fingers and toes are accompanied by kyphosis,
scoliosis, and malformations of the facial skeleton
with characteristic facial appearance: narrow mouth,
wide cheeks, an H-­shaped chin dimple, small wide-­
based nose, high palate, and small tongue. Growth
retardation, inguinal hernia, and cryptorchidism
have also been reported. Another name of this
syndrome is “whistling face” syndrome. The
Freeman-­Sheldon syndrome is currently classified
as DA2A, as a separate DA2B subtype, known
as Sheldon-­Hall syndrome has been described;
this syndrome combines clinical features of DA1
(hand and foot contractures) and some features of
DA2 (prominent nasolabial folds, slanted down-­
facing eyes, and narrow mouth) and is currently
considered to be probably the most common type
of distal arthrogryposis.

III

Also known as Gordon syndrome, this rare syndrome
is characterized by low stature and palatoschisis.

IV

Rare. Contractures with severe scoliosis.

V

Contractures with ocular signs and symptoms
such as limited eye motion, ptosis, strabismus,
and the absence of typical hand flexion creases.
Chest wall muscle abnormalities have also been
observed, potentially causing restricted respiratory
movements and, consequently, pulmonary
hypertension.

VI

Similar to DA3, DA4; very rare, characterized by
sensorineural auditory abnormalities.

VII

Difficulties in mouth opening (trismus) and
pseudocamptodactyly: wrists position in palmar
flexion with MCP joints in extension. Sometimes
accompanied by low stature and knee flexion
contractures.

VIII

Autosomal dominant multiple pterygium syndrome.

IX

Beals syndrome, i.e., congenital arachnodactyly with
contractures of small joints of the fingers. Patients
with this type of arthrogryposis are tall and slender,
phenotypically resembling Marfan syndrome but
without cardiovascular abnormalities.

X

Congenital plantar flexion contractures of the foot.

Fig. 723.5 Child with stiff elbows, wrists, knees, and clubfeet.

From Kowalczyk B, Feluś J. Arthrogryposis: an update on clinical aspects, etiology, and
treatment strategies. Arch Med Sci. 2016;12(1):10–24. Table 1.

first be treated with physical therapy and serial casting to allow for
appropriate Pavlik harness fitting. However, careful observation of
the hip during knee flexion is necessary because tightening of the
quadriceps and hip flexors can push the hip into posterior dislocation. Once some knee flexion has been achieved, the Pavlik harness
can be useful in further flexing the knee and maintaining hip stability in the infant. Most often, the hips are stiff and not reducible by
closed means. For these, open reduction with pelvic reconstruction

Fig. 723.6 Infant with splints to extend metatarsophalangeal joints,
wrists, and knees.

and femoral osteotomy are commonly required, typically at 1 year
of age. There is some controversy about reducing bilateral hip dislocations because a high failure rate can result in asymmetry of the
pelvis, pain, leg length inequality, and stiffness. If a child has little

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 723 u Arthrogryposis 4275
Shoulder

Because of the rotational capacity of the shoulder, derotation osteotomy of the humerus is only occasionally needed. This is usually done
in later childhood.

Elbow

A stiff elbow that does not respond to therapy requires surgical
intervention starting with soft tissue and capsular release. Capsulotomy of the posterior elbow combined with a V-­Y or Z reconstructive lengthening of the triceps allows improved elbow flexion.
Muscle transfer to the forearm can permit active elbow flexion;
however, each child needs individual assessment as to an available
flexor source. The triceps is commonly used, but caution must be
exerted into the overall muscle balance because use of the triceps
can create elbow flexion overpowering and an opposite contracture.

Wrist

ambulatory potential, they may do as well retaining the bilateral hip
dislocations and positioning the hips for sitting. Management decisions should be made in conjunction with the family and guided by
a pediatric hip surgeon.

Wrist flexion deformity is improved with soft tissue balancing as well
as partial carpectomies. The carpectomies need to be trapezoidal with
more removed from the dorsum and the radial side to balance the wrist
flexion contracture as well as the tendency for ulnar deviation. Thumb
adduction may require an adductor release with an opponensplasty.
Tendon transfers such as transfer of the extensor indicis pollicis to the
extensor pollicis longus is helpful for improved function of the thumb
in clasp thumb deformity.
Finger stiffness and wrist contractures often respond to therapy and
bracing without need for surgery.

Ambulation

Scoliosis

Fig. 723.7 Clubfeet in infant with arthrogryposis.

As would be expected, walking is more difficult for children with
arthrogryposis because of the muscle weakness and limited joint
motion. Children with arthrogryposis who walk have lower activity
levels and take fewer steps than their peers. Not surprisingly, muscle
fatigue and pain on exertion are common.

UPPER EXTREMITY PROBLEMS

If splinting and a movement exercise program do not result in
optimally functional upper extremities, surgical management may
improve use of the arms of the child with arthrogryposis. A typical
child with arthrogrypotic involvement of the upper extremities has
internally rotated arms, extended elbows, flexed wrists, and thumb-­
in-­palm or clasp-­thumb deformities (see Figs. 723.2 and 723.3).
Treatment is geared toward optimizing use of the arms and hands,
particularly for critical activities of daily living, such as feeding and
toileting. Therapy to improve motion of the joints is started immediately after birth. Pediatric hand therapists are the optimal leaders
of the mobility treatment program. Therapy is augmented by use
of splints so that less-­extensive surgery will ultimately be required.
The elbow is the critical length adjuster of the arm, allowing the
arm to reach out as is necessary for toileting or to approach the
mouth for feeding. If necessary, lack of these motions can be compensated for with modified silverware and other adaptive equipment, including arm extenders for grabbing.

Surgery of the Upper Extremity

Surgical correction of arthrogrypotic upper extremity contractures
should be started after 1-3 months and completed by age 12 months so
that the child can optimize his or her motor development. This allows
for improved results by optimizing the joint growth remodeling plasticity. One-­stage procedures yield the best results. Delays in surgery
result in more problems of intraarticular adhesions as well as fixed joint
incongruity.

Scoliosis develops in some children with arthrogryposis, with the
reported incidence ranging from 2.5–66%. Scoliosis can be congenital or paralytic. It is often accompanied by hip contractures associated
with hip dislocation and compensatory lumbar lordosis. Curves <30
degrees can be treated initially with bracing in a thoracolumbar spinal orthosis (TLSO brace). After 40 degrees, spinal fusion is generally
warranted.

Surgical Staging

Surgical treatment of the lower limbs usually begins distally and
works proximally. The feet are corrected around 6 months of age,
the knees around 8 months of age, and the hips around 12 months
of age because pelvic osteotomy is often needed to stabilize the hips
properly.
The upper extremities are corrected during infancy when the child
is seen early. Hand, physical, and occupational therapy are a critical
part of the team to optimize function before and after surgery. Further
surgery during childhood may be needed to optimize functional use of
the upper and lower extremities.

Prognosis

Although most patients with arthrogryposis are ambulatory into
adulthood, fewer are entirely independent, and many have pain
or limitations in walking and standing. Surgical advancements in
upper extremity positioning have improved function, and procedures to correct lower extremity contractures, including not only
surgery but also casting for clubfeet, have increased long-­term
ambulatory potential. However, there is significant variability in
this population, and further work must be done to optimize intervention techniques and their appropriate utilization.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4276 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
loose attachment to the shaft. This intact hinge or sleeve of periosteum
lessens the extent of fracture displacement and assists in reduction and
maintenance of fracture reduction. The thick periosteum, however,
may act as an impediment to reduction, particularly if the fracture has
penetrated the periosteum, or in reduction of a displaced growth plate
fracture.

Chapter 724

Common Fractures
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells

724.1 Unique Characteristics of Pediatric
Fractures

Trauma is a leading cause of death and disability in children older than
1 year of age (see Chapter 14). Several factors make fractures of the
immature skeleton different from those involving the mature skeleton.
The anatomy, biomechanics, and physiology of the pediatric skeletal
system differ from those of adults, resulting in different fracture patterns (Fig. 724.1), diagnostic challenges, and management techniques.
Children have a high functional demand and expectations while carrying concerns regarding remaining skeletal growth and development.
Epiphyseal lines, rarefaction, dense growth lines, congenital fractures, and pseudofractures may appear on radiographs, which make
it challenging to identify and differentiate an acute fracture. Although
most fractures in children heal well, some fractures have poor outcomes
if handled with insufficient expertise. The differences in the pediatric
skeletal system predispose children to injuries different from those of
adults. Important differences are the presence of periosseous cartilage,
physes, and a thicker, stronger, more osteogenic periosteum that produces new bone, called callus, more rapidly and in greater amounts.
The pediatric bone is less dense and more porous than adult bone. The
low density is from lower mineral content, and the increased porosity
is the result of an increased number of haversian canals and vascular
channels. These differences result in a comparatively lower modulus
of elasticity and lower bending strength. The bone in children can fail
either in tension or in compression; because the fracture lines do not
propagate as in adults, there is less chance of comminuted fractures.
Hence, pediatric bone can crush, splinter, and break incompletely (e.g.,
buckle fracture, greenstick fracture), as opposed to adult bone which
generally breaks like glass and may comminute.
A common teaching is that joint injuries, dislocation, and ligament
disruptions are infrequent in children. Damage to the physis is more
likely. Although this is generally true, MRI studies show that ligament
damage in ankle injuries may be more common than once thought.
Interdigitating mammillary bodies and the perichondrial ring enhance
the strength of the physes. Biomechanically, the physes are not as
strong as the ligaments or metaphyseal bone. The physis is most resistant to traction and least resistant to torsional forces. The periosteum is
loosely attached to the shaft of bone and adheres densely to the physeal
periphery. The periosteum is essentially injured in all fractures, but it
is less likely to have complete circumferential rupture because of its

A

B

C

D

E

Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells

FRACTURE REMODELING

Remodeling is the third and final phase in the biology of fracture
healing; it is preceded by the inflammatory and reparative phases.
This occurs from a combination of appositional bone deposition on
the concavity of deformity, resorption on the convexity, and asymmetric physeal growth. Thus reduction accuracy is somewhat less
important than it is in adults (exceptions include intraarticular fractures) (Fig. 724.2). The three major factors that have a bearing on
the potential for angular correction are skeletal age, distance from
the physis, and orientation to the joint axis. Rotational deformity and
angular deformity not in the axis of the joint motion have less potential for remodeling. Remodeling is greatest when the child has many
years of growth remaining and when the fracture occurs close to the
physis, has less deformity to remodel, and is adjacent to a rapidly
growing physis (e.g., the proximal humerus or distal radius). Remodeling typically occurs over several months after the fracture until
skeletal maturity. Generally, skeletal maturity is reached in postmenarchal females between 13 and 15 years of age and in males between
15 and 17 years of age.

OVERGROWTH

Physeal stimulation from the hyperemia associated with fracture healing may also cause overgrowth. It is usually more prominent in lower
extremity long bones such as the femur. The growth acceleration is usually present for 6 months to 1 year after the injury. Femoral fractures
in children younger than 10 years of age may overgrow up to 1-3 cm.
If external fixation or casting is employed, bayonet apposition of bone
may be preferred for younger children to compensate for the expected
overgrowth. This overgrowth phenomenon will result in equal or near
equal limb lengths at the conclusion of fracture remodeling if the fracture shortens less than 2 cm. After 10 years of age, overgrowth does not
tend to occur, and anatomic alignment is recommended. In physeal
injuries, growth stimulation is associated with use of implants or fixation hardware that can cause stimulus for longitudinal growth.

F

G

H

I

Fig. 724.1 Illustration of fracture patterns. A, Longitudinal fracture line parallel to bony axis. B, Transverse fracture line perpendicular to bony axis.

C, Oblique fracture line at angle to bony axis. D, Spiral fracture line runs a curvilinear course to the bony axis. E, Impacted fractured bone ends
compressed together. F, Comminuted fragmentation of bone into three or more parts. G, Greenstick bending of bone with incomplete fracture
of convex side. H, Bowing bone plastic deformation. I, Torus buckling fracture. (From White N, Sty R. Radiological evaluation and classification of
pediatric fractures. Clin Pediatr Emerg Med. 2002;3:94–105.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 724 u Common Fractures

B

A
A

B

Fig. 724.2 Remodeling in children is often extensive, as in this proxi-

mal tibial fracture (A) and as seen 1 yr later (B). (From Dormans JP.
Pediatric Orthopedics: Introduction to Trauma. Philadelphia: Mosby;
2005:38.)

Fig. 724.3 A, Harris growth arrest lines on either side of the femur
pointing centrally in the femur indicating a central growth arrest. B, Corresponding MRI image showing central growth arrest. (A, Courtesy Dr.
Keith D. Baldwin, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)

PROGRESSIVE DEFORMITY

RAPID HEALING

Children’s fractures heal more quickly than adults as a result of children’s growth potential and thicker, more active periosteum. When
children approach adolescence and maturity, the rate of healing slows
and mirrors that of an adult.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

724.2 Pediatric Fracture Patterns
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells
The different pediatric fracture patterns are the reflection of a child’s
characteristic skeletal system. The majority of pediatric fractures can
be managed by closed methods and heal well.

PLASTIC DEFORMATION

Plastic deformation is unique to children. It is most commonly
seen in the forearm and occasionally the fibula. The fracture results
from a force that produces microscopic failure on the tensile side of
bone and does not propagate to the concave side (Fig. 724.4). The
concave side of bone also shows evidence of microscopic failure in
compression. The bone is angulated beyond its elastic limit, but the
energy is insufficient to produce a fracture. Thus no fracture line
is visible radiographically (Fig. 724.5). Although the plastic deformation is permanent, it is important to remember that children
have great remodeling capability; for example, a 20-­degree bend
in the ulna of a 4-­year-­old child is expected to correct completely
with growth. These findings inform “acceptability” of fracture
alignment.

Zone of
overload
Zone of
fatigue

Force

Injuries to the physes can be complicated by permanent or temporary
growth arrest, leading to progressive limb deformity. The most common cause is complete or partial closure of the growth plate. This can
occur in any long bone but is particularly seen in fractures involving
the distal ulna, distal femur, and proximal tibia growth plates. An MRI
is helpful for early diagnosis of growth arrest, as well as measurement
of the percent of physeal closure after such an injury. Harris growth
arrest lines may be observed in the setting of asymmetric growth and
will point toward the area of growth arrest (Fig. 724.3). If these lines
are parallel to the physis, this finding indicates that the growth plate is
healthy. As a consequence of growth arrest, angular deformity or shortening, or both, can occur. The partial arrest may be peripheral, central, or combined. The magnitude of deformity depends on the specific
physis involved, the degree of involvement, and the amount of growth
remaining.

4277

B

C

A

Zone of
load

D
Fracture
point

Zone
of elastic
deformation

Zone of plastic deformation
Deformation

Fig. 724.4 Graphic relation of bony deformation (bowing) and force

(longitudinal compression) showing that the limit of an elastic response
is not a fracture but plastic deformation. If the force continues, a fracture results. A, Reversible bowing with stress; B, microfractures occur;
C, point of maximal strength; between C and D, bowing fractures; and
D, linear fracture occurs. (Modified from Borden S IV. Roentgen recognition of acute plastic bowing of the forearm in children. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med. 1975;125:524–530.)

BUCKLE OR TORUS FRACTURE

Buckle, or torus, fractures represent a failure in compression of the
bone, usually occurring at the junction of the metaphysis and diaphysis. The distal radius is the most common location, but it may occur
in other areas as well (Fig. 724.6). They are inherently stable, usually
associated with an acceptable amount of angulation, and heal in 3-4
weeks with simple immobilization.

GREENSTICK FRACTURE

These fractures occur when the bone is bent and there is failure on the
tensile (convex) side of the bone. The fracture line does not propagate
to the concave side of the bone (Fig. 724.7). The concave side shows
evidence of microscopic failure with plastic deformation. If the angulation at the fracture site is unacceptable, it is usually necessary to break
the bone on the concave side because the plastic deformation recoils it
back to the deformed position. It is important to distinguish this unicortical fracture pattern from buckle fractures, as these fractures are
at greater risk of loss of reduction and often require a longer period of
immobilization.

COMPLETE FRACTURES

Fractures that propagate completely through the bone are called complete fractures. These fractures may be classified as spiral, transverse, or
oblique, depending on the direction and shape of the fracture lines. A
rotational force is responsible for spiral fractures. Most spiral fractures

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4278 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 724.7 Greenstick fractures of the radial and ulnar diaphyses in an
8-­yr-­old boy. The fracture lines only extend through part of the cortex.
(From Pai DR, Strouse PJ. Skeletal trauma. In: Coley BD ed. Caffey’s
Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig.
142.5, p. 1435.)

Table 724.1  Salter-­Harris Classification
16°

SALTER-­
HARRIS TYPE

Fig. 724.5 Plastic deformation is a microfailure in tension without a
visible fracture line. (Courtesy Dr. John Flynn, Children’s Hospital, Philadelphia.)

CHARACTERISTICS

I

Separation through the physis, usually through
the zones of hypertrophic and degenerating
cartilage cell columns

II

Fracture through a portion of the physis but
extending through the metaphyses

III

Fracture through a portion of the physis extending
through the epiphysis and into the joint

IV

Fracture across the metaphysis, physis, and
epiphysis

V

Crush injury to the physis

bending force and is amenable to successful reduction by using the
intact periosteum from the concave side as a hinge.

EPIPHYSEAL FRACTURES

A

B

Fig. 724.6 Buckle fracture is a partial failure in compression. Anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B) radiographs of the distal radius. (From
Dormans JP. Pediatric Orthopedics: Introduction to Trauma. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2005:37.)

are stable and heal quickly due to the large surface area; however, spiral
fractures occurring as a result of a high-­energy trauma may present
with shortening of the bone and loss of alignment. Oblique fractures
are defined by a 30-­degree angle to the axis of the bone and are often
unstable. The transverse fracture pattern occurs following a three-­point

Fractures involving the epiphysis often involve the growth plate (physis); therefore the potential for growth disturbance leading to deformity or discrepancy exists, and long-­term observation is necessary. The
distal radial physis is the most injured physis. Salter and Harris (SH)
classified physeal injuries into five groups (Table 724.1 and Fig. 724.8).
This classification helps to predict the outcome of the injury and offers
guidelines in formulating treatment. Most SH type I and II fractures
usually can be managed by closed reduction techniques and do not
require perfect alignment because they tend to remodel with growth,
as long as there is enough growth remaining. One classic exception is
the distal femur, where SH type II fractures are unstable and require
anatomic reduction with adequate fixation. The SH type III and IV
epiphyseal fractures involve the articular surface and require anatomic
alignment (<2 mm displacement) to prevent any step off and realign
the growth cells of the physis. SH type V fractures are usually not diagnosed initially. They manifest in the future with growth disturbance.
Other injuries to the epiphysis are avulsion injuries of the tibial spine
and muscle attachments to the pelvis. Osteochondral fractures are also
defined as physeal injuries that do not involve the growth plate.

CHILD ABUSE

See also Chapter 17.
Fractures are the second most common manifestation of child
abuse after skin injury (bruises, burns/abrasions). The orthopedic surgeon sees 30–50% of all nonaccidental traumas. Child abuse should
be suspected in nonambulatory children with lower-­extremity long-­
bone fractures. No fracture pattern or types are pathognomonic for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 724 u Common Fractures

4279

Table 724.2  Skeletal Injuries from Child Abuse

Type I

Type III

HIGH-­SPECIFICITY FINDINGS
• Classic metaphyseal lesions
• Posterior rib fracture
• Scapular fracture
• Sternal fracture
• Spinous process fracture
• First rib fracture

Type II

Type IV

MODERATE-­SPECIFICITY FINDINGS
• Multiple fractures
• Fractures of differing age
• Spine fracture
• Complex skull fracture
• Physeal fractures of the long bones
• Digital fractures

Type V

Fig. 724.8 Salter-­Harris classification of physeal fractures, types I-­V.
child abuse; any type of fracture can result from nonaccidental trauma
(Table 724.2). Transverse fractures in long bones are the most prevalent, and corner fractures in the metaphysis are the most classic. The
fractures that suggest nonaccidental injury include femur fractures in
nonambulatory children (younger than age 18 months), distal femoral
metaphyseal corner fractures, posterior rib fractures, scapular spinous
process fractures, and proximal humeral fractures. Fractures that were
unwitnessed or carry a suspicious or changing story or delayed presentation also warrant investigation. A full skeletal survey is essential in every suspected case of child abuse because it can demonstrate
other fractures in different stages of healing. Radiographically, some
systemic diseases mimic signs of child abuse, such as osteogenesis
imperfecta, osteomyelitis, Caffey disease, vitamin C deficiency, and
fatigue fractures. Many hospitals have a multidisciplinary team to
evaluate and treat patients who are victims of child abuse; these teams
are critical to engage early and preferably in the emergency room setting, as difficulty arises managing these emotionally charged issues in
a clinic setting. Dedicated teams are most well equipped to identify
and manage these issues. It is mandatory to report these cases to social
welfare agencies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

724.3 Upper Extremity Fractures
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells

PHALANGEAL FRACTURES

Finger fractures are among the most common fracture types in children. The different phalangeal fracture patterns in children include
physeal, diaphyseal, and tuft fractures. The mechanism of injury varies from a direct blow to the finger to a finger trapped in a door (see
Chapter 722). Crush injuries of the distal phalanx manifest with severe
comminution of the underlying bone (tuft fracture), disruption of
the nail bed, and significant soft tissue injury. These injuries are best
managed with irrigation, tetanus prophylaxis, and antibiotic prophylaxis; antibiotics effective against staphylococci (e.g., first-­generation
cephalosporins) are usually appropriate, although the mechanism of
injury may warrant other antibiotic coverage. Radiographs in patients
with fingertip crush injuries should be scrutinized for evidence of a
Seymour fracture, an open physeal fracture of the distal phalanx with
possible interposition of the nail matrix. These patients are at higher
risk of nail plate deformity and infection without surgical treatment.
A mallet finger deformity is the inability to extend the distal portion

LOW-­SPECIFICITY FINDINGS
• Diaphyseal fractures of the long bones
• Simple skull fractures
• Clavicle fracture
• Subperiosteal new bone formation
From Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2019: Box 143.2, p. 1455; modified from Kleinman PK. Diagnostic Imaging of
Child Abuse, 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 1998.

of the digit and is caused by a hyperflexion injury. It represents an
avulsion fracture of the physis of the distal phalanx. The treatment is
continuous splinting of the digit in extension for 6 weeks. The physeal injuries of the proximal and middle phalanx are similarly treated
with cast immobilization. The most common physeal finger fracture
results from an abduction injury to the small finger. These fractures
often require a closed reduction before immobilization. Diaphyseal
fractures may be oblique, spiral, or transverse in fracture geometry.
They are assessed for angular and rotational deformity with the finger
in flexion. The patient should be asked to make a fist. All fingers should
point toward the scaphoid. If they do not, a malrotation is suspected,
even in the presence of x-­rays in which the bones appear minimally
displaced. Malrotation or angular deformity may require correction to
avoid finger crossover and to optimize hand function. These deformities are corrected with closed reduction, and, if unstable, they need
surgical fixation with a percutaneous pin.

HAND FRACTURES

Metacarpal fractures are commonly seen in children or adolescents
who strike a person or object with a closed fist. When metacarpal fractures are not displaced, they can be managed with splinting and/or
casting. Displaced fractures are typically managed with closed reduction and casting. If reduction cannot be maintained, surgical stabilization may be required.
Fractures of carpal bones are rare in young children but become
more common in adolescence. Most carpal bones are stable and can be
treated with immobilization in a splint or cast. The scaphoid is the most
commonly fractured carpal bone and presents with tenderness at the
anatomic snuffbox. Scaphoid fractures may be difficult to visualize on
initial radiographs; if clinical suspicion for fracture is high, the patient
with negative initial radiographs should be placed in a thumb spica
splint with a plan to repeat imaging in 14-21 days.

FOREARM FRACTURES

Fractures of the wrist and forearm are very common in children,
accounting for nearly half of all fractures seen in the skeletally immature. The most common mechanism of injury is a fall on the outstretched hand. Of forearm fractures, 80% involve the distal radius
and ulna, 15% involve the middle third, and the rest are rare fractures
of the proximal third of the radius or ulnar shaft (Fig. 724.9). Most
forearm fractures in younger children are torus or greenstick fractures.
The torus fracture is an impacted fracture, and there is minimal soft
tissue swelling or hemorrhage. They may be managed in either a short

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4280 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

Fig. 724.10 A rotationally malaligned forearm fracture that initially

had good alignment but lost reduction in the cast. Note that the radial
styloid is visible, but the biceps tuberosity is not. The two should normally be 180 degrees from one another. These landmarks are sometimes hard to appreciate in children but were visible on other views in
this child.

C

D

Fig. 724.9 Common pediatric fracture patterns. A, Posteroanterior

and (B) lateral radiographs of the wrist demonstrate a buckle fracture
of the distal radial metaphysis (arrows). C, Radiograph of the forearm
demonstrates a greenstick fracture of the radial shaft, with the fracture
extending through a single cortex. D, Anteroposterior radiograph of
the forearm shows an oblique fracture through the distal radial shaft,
with plastic bowing deformity of the adjacent distal ulna. (From Walters
MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 7.90.)

arm (below the elbow) cast or removable wrist splint and usually heal
within 3-4 weeks.
Diaphyseal fractures can be more difficult to treat because the limits
of acceptable reduction are much more stringent than for distal radial
fractures. A significant malunion of a forearm diaphyseal fracture can
lead to a permanent loss of pronation and supination, leading to functional difficulties. This is particularly true with malrotation of the fragments. Diaphyseal fractures are vulnerable to rotational malalignment
because of insertion of the pronator muscle groups and the supinator
groups. This malalignment is particularly hard to assess because the
deformity is in the axial plane and is evaluated with anteroposterior
(AP) and lateral radiographs (Fig. 724.10). The physical examination focuses on soft tissue injuries and ruling out any neurovascular
involvement. The AP and lateral radiographs of the forearm and wrist
confirm the diagnosis. Displaced and angulated fractures require
manipulative closed reduction under general anesthesia or conscious
sedation. They are immobilized in an above-­elbow cast for at least 6
weeks. Bone fractures in older children and adolescents (>10 years of
age) must be followed carefully as they often lose reduction. Loss of
reduction and unstable fractures require open reduction and internal
fixation. Fixation may be with intramedullary nails or plate fixation,
which yield similar results.

DISTAL HUMERAL FRACTURES

Fractures around the elbow receive more attention because more
aggressive management is needed to achieve an excellent result. Many
injuries are intraarticular, involve the physeal cartilage, and can result
in malunion or nonunion. Because the distal humerus develops from
a series of ossification centers, these ossification centers can be mistaken for fractures by inexperienced eyes. Careful radiographic evaluation is an essential part of diagnosing and managing distal humeral
injuries. It is important to remember that the distal humerus is only
responsible for 20% of the growth of the humerus; therefore there is
very low potential for remodeling. Observation of soft tissue swelling
and tenderness is critical to pick up subtle injuries. Common fractures include separation of the distal humeral epiphysis (transphyseal

fracture), supracondylar fractures of the distal humerus, and epiphyseal fractures of the lateral condyle or medial epicondyle. The mechanism of injury is most frequently a fall on an outstretched arm. The
physical examination includes noting the location and extent of soft
tissue swelling, ruling out any neurovascular injury, specifically anterior interosseous nerve involvement or evidence of compartment syndrome. A transphyseal fracture in a very young child who does not have
the reflex to keep the arm outstretched to break a fall should raise suspicion of child abuse. AP and lateral radiographs of the involved extremity
are necessary for the diagnosis. If the fracture is not visible, but there is
an altered relationship between the humerus and the radius and ulna
or the presence of a posterior fat pad sign, a transphyseal fracture or
an occult fracture should be suspected (Fig. 724.11). Imaging studies
such as oblique radiographs, CT, MRI, and ultrasonography may be
required for further confirmation. Displaced supracondylar fractures
may be associated with concomitant neurovascular injury (Fig. 724.12)
or, rarely, a compartment syndrome. Ulnar nerve injury is identified
by decreased sensation over the cutaneous innervation of the lateral
aspects of the hand as well as a motor deficit of abduction and adduction of the fingers. Neurologic injury may also appear in the postoperative period. Careful neurologic examination of the hand before and
after is needed to document and treat nerve injury. Most nerve injuries
associated with displaced supracondylar fractures are neuropraxias
and will resolve in several months.
In general, distal humeral fractures need restoration of anatomic
alignment. This is necessary to prevent deformity and to allow for normal growth and development. Closed reduction alone, or in association
with percutaneous fixation, is the preferred method. Open reduction is
indicated for fractures that cannot be reduced by closed methods, fractures with vascular compromise after closed reduction, open fractures,
or interarticular fractures, particularly in older children. Inadequate
reductions can lead to loss of motion, cubitus varus, cubitus valgus,
and rare nonunion or elbow instability. Elbow stiffness is not as common as in adult fractures but may occur with fractures which are severe
or intraarticular.

PROXIMAL HUMERUS FRACTURES

Fractures of the proximal humerus account for <5% of fractures in
children. They usually result from a fall onto an outstretched arm or
direct trauma. The fracture pattern tends to vary with the age group.
Physeal and metaphyseal fractures are both common. Among physeal
fractures of the proximal humerus, children younger than 5 years of
age most commonly have SH I injuries, those 5-10 years of age have
metaphyseal fractures, and children older than 11 years of age have
SH II injuries. Examination includes a thorough neurologic evaluation, especially of the axillary nerve. The diagnosis is made on AP
radiographs of the shoulder. An axillary view is obtained to rule out

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 724 u Common Fractures

4281

with closed reduction and further stabilization if unstable. Occasionally, open reduction is required because of button-­holing of the fracture spike through the deltoid or interposition of the tendon of biceps.
The majority of longitudinal growth (80%) of the limb comes from
the proximal humeral physis. Additionally, the glenohumeral joint is
capable of a large amount of motion. As such, this area is extremely
tolerant to deformity. Indications for open reduction are rare. However,
as adolescents approach adulthood, these fractures will remodel less.

CLAVICULAR FRACTURES
A

B

Fig. 724.11 Supracondylar humerus fracture. A, Lateral radiograph of

the elbow demonstrates a type II supracondylar humerus fracture, with
disruption of the anterior humeral line (black line). This line normally
passes through the middle third of the capitellum. Here the capitellum
is displaced behind the line. A large joint effusion is noted. B, Anteroposterior radiograph of the elbow shows a type III supracondylar humerus fracture. There is no cortical continuity and significant displacement and overlap of fracture fragments. (From Walters MM, Robertson
RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 7.97.)

Brachial
artery
Median
nerve

Neonatal fractures occur as a result of direct trauma during birth, most
often through a narrow pelvis or following shoulder dystocia. They
can be missed initially and can appear with pseudoparalysis. Childhood fractures are usually the result of a fall on the affected shoulder or
direct trauma to the clavicle. The most common site for fracture is the
junction of the middle and lateral third clavicle. Tenderness over the
clavicle will make the diagnosis. A thorough neurovascular examination
is important to diagnose any associated brachial plexus injury. Biceps
function is critical to assess, as it is a prognostic indicator for future
function.
An AP radiograph of the clavicle demonstrates the fracture and
can show overlap of the fragments. Physeal injuries occur through the
medial or lateral growth plate and are sometimes difficult to differentiate from dislocations of the acromioclavicular or sternoclavicular joint.
Further imaging such as a CT scan may be necessary to further define
the injury. Posterior medial clavicular physeal injuries are particularly
problematic due to their proximity to the great vessels and the trachea.
Closed versus open reduction with a cardiac/thoracic team on standby
is necessary. This can be delayed if there is no sign of vascular or respiratory compromise.
The treatment of most clavicle fractures consists of an application
of a figure-­of-8 clavicle strap or a simple sling. A figure-­of-8 strap
will extend the shoulders and minimize the amount of overlap of the
fracture fragments. Evidence exists for adults that fractures that are
shortened or displaced result in strength loss of the shoulder without
anatomic reduction and fixation. Many centers are extending that indication to older adolescents; however, a 2019 report suggests similar
satisfaction and outcomes with less complications in nonoperatively
treated adolescent clavicle fractures when compared with operatively
treated injuries. If a fracture is open, tenting the skin, or resulting in
neurovascular compromise, surgery is indicated. The physeal fractures
are treated with simple sling immobilization without any reduction
attempt. Often, anatomic alignment is not achieved, nor is it necessary.
Clavicle fractures heal rapidly, typically in 3-6 weeks. A palpable mass
of callus is usually visible in thin children, and this remodels satisfactorily in 6-12 months. Complete restoration of shoulder motion and
function is uniformly achieved.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 724.12 Posterolaterally displaced type III (extension-­type) supracondylar humeral fracture. The proximal fragment displaces anteromedially, thus placing the brachial artery and median nerve at risk. (From
Ho C. Upper extremity injuries. In: Herring JA, ed. Tachdjian’s Pediatric
Orthopaedics, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 202: Fig. 29.30, p. 1194.)

any dislocation, whereas a scapular-­Y view or an axillary view assesses
angular deformity in an orthogonal plane. Many children are too
uncomfortable to tolerate an axillary view; thus, in this case, a Velpeau
axillary can be obtained while the arm remains in a sling. SH I injuries do not require reduction because they have excellent remodeling
capacity, and simple immobilization in a sling for 2-3 weeks is sufficient. Metaphyseal fractures usually do not need reduction unless the
angulation is >50 degrees. In general, sling immobilization is all that
is required. SH II fractures with <30 degrees of angulation and <50%
displacement are managed in a sling. Displaced fractures are treated

724.4 Lower Extremity Fractures
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells

HIP FRACTURES

Hip fractures in children account for <1% of all pediatric fractures.
These injuries result from high-­energy trauma and can be associated
with injury to the chest, head, or abdomen. Treatment of hip fractures
in children is associated with a complication rate of up to 60%, including an overall avascular necrosis rate of 50% and a malunion rate of up
to 30%. The unique blood supply to the femoral head accounts for the
high rate of avascular necrosis. Fractures are classified by the Delbet
classification as transphyseal separations, transcervical fractures, cervicotrochanteric fractures, and intertrochanteric fractures. The management principles include urgent anatomic reduction (either open or
closed), stable internal fixation (avoiding the physis if possible), and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4282 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
spica casting if the child is younger. Urgent management has been associated with a lower rate of avascular necrosis and superior overall outcomes. Capsular decompression also has been advocated as decreasing
overall pressure on the epiphyseal vessels and has been demonstrated
experimentally; the clinical results, however, remain mixed.

fractures heal well, and children usually have excellent results. Open
fractures need to undergo irrigation and debridement as well as antibiotic treatment. The tibia is a subcutaneous bone, so if severe soft tissue
loss occurs with an open fracture, the patient may need plastic surgery
consultation. Definitive external fixation versus internal fixation and
simultaneous soft tissue coverage are alternative treatment strategies to
minimize infection. Tibia fractures are associated with compartment
syndrome. Vigilance is necessary to avoid disastrous outcomes associated with missed compartment syndrome. Emergent fasciotomy is
indicated as soon as compartment syndrome is diagnosed. Several return
trips to the operating room are often necessary to close, versus cover,
the fasciotomy wounds.

FEMORAL SHAFT FRACTURES

Fractures of the femur in children are common. All age groups, from
early childhood to adolescence, can be affected. The mechanism of
injury varies from low-­energy twisting type injuries to high-­velocity
injuries in vehicular accidents. Femur fractures in children younger
than age 2 years should raise concern for child abuse. A thorough physical examination is necessary to rule out other injuries and assess the
neurovascular status. In the case of high-­energy trauma, any signs of
hemodynamic instability should prompt the examiner to look for other
sources of bleeding. AP and lateral radiographs of the femur demonstrate the fracture. An AP radiograph of the pelvis is obtained to rule
out any associated pelvic fracture. Treatment of shaft fractures varies
with the age group, as described in Table 724.3.

TODDLER FRACTURES

PROXIMAL TIBIA FRACTURES

Toddler fractures occur in young ambulatory children. The age range
for this fracture is typically around 1-4 years (Fig. 724.13). The injury
often occurs after a seemingly harmless twist or fall and is often unwitnessed. It is a result of a torsional injury. The children in this age group
are usually unable to articulate the mechanism of injury clearly or to
describe the area of injury well. The radiographs may show no fracture;
in these cases, the diagnosis is made by physical examination. The classic symptom is refusal to bear weight, which can manifest as pulling up
the affected extremity or florid display of protest. The other common
sign is point tenderness at the fracture site. The AP and lateral views of
the tibia-­fibula might show a nondisplaced spiral fracture of the distal
tibial metaphysis. An oblique view is often helpful because the fracture
line may be visible in only one of the three views. Often the fracture

TIBIA AND FIBULA SHAFT FRACTURES

A

Proximal tibia fractures can be physeal injuries, metaphyseal injuries,
or avulsion injuries of the tibial spine or tubercle. Physeal injuries can
be either isolated or as part of tibial tubercle fracture. If the distal segment is displaced posteriorly the trifurcation of the popliteal vessels
may be involved. Careful neurovascular examination is warranted both
pre-­and postreduction. Anatomic reduction and pin fixation is preferred with unstable fractures or displaced SH III or IV fractures.
Proximal tibial metaphyseal fractures, or the Cozen fracture, are
most common in the 3-­to 6-­year-­old age group. They may result in
a late valgus deformity even if anatomically reduced. This deformity
tends to remodel within 1-2 years but can cause great distress to parents and treating clinicians.
Tibial eminence fractures are fractures of the bony prominence that
is the attachment of the anterior cruciate ligament. The mechanism of
injury is similar to an anterior cruciate ligament tear in an adult. Displaced fractures require surgical reduction and fixation. This may be
done either open or arthroscopically.
Tibial tubercle fractures are common in patients with Osgood-­
Schlatter syndrome. Care must be taken to observe for compartment
syndrome as the injury is associated with injury of the recurrent anterior tibial artery. The injury may be treated nonoperatively if the fracture is displaced <2 mm and the patient has no extensor lag (rare).
Open reduction and internal fixation is preferred otherwise.
The tibia is the most commonly fractured bone of the lower limb in
children. This fracture generally results from a direct injury. Most
tibial fractures are associated with a fibular fracture, and the mean
age of presentation is 8 years. The child presents with pain, swelling,
and deformity of the affected leg and is unable to bear weight. Distal
neurovascular examination is important in assessment. The AP and
lateral radiographs should include the knee and ankle. Closed reduction and immobilization are the standard method of treatment. Most

B

Fig. 724.13 Toddler’s fracture of the tibia in a 2-­yr-­old child present-

ing with a limp and no history of trauma. A, Lateral radiograph of the
lower leg shows a subtle, nondisplaced, oblique fracture through the
tibial shaft (arrows). B, Anteroposterior radiograph obtained 10 days
later shows healing, with subperiosteal new bone formation along the
tibial shaft (arrows). (From Walters MM, Robertson RL, eds. Pediatric
Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig.
7.117, p. 256.)

Table 724.3  Femoral Shaft Fracture: Treatment Options by Age
TREATMENT OPTIONS
Spica cast
Traction and spica cast

0-2 YR

3-5 YR

x

x
x

6-10 YR

>11 YR

x

x

Intramedullary rod

x

x

x

External fixator

x*

x*

x*

Screw or plate

x

x

x

*Open fracture.
Modified from Wells L. Trauma related to the lower extremity. In: Dormans JP, ed. Pediatric Orthopaedics: Core Knowledge in Orthopaedics. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2005:93.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 724 u Common Fractures

4283

line is not visualized until 2-3 weeks later, when periosteal reaction and
resorption at the fracture site allow better visualization. Inflammatory
markers may be ordered to rule out infectious processes if the diagnosis is in doubt. Bone scans were employed in the past but impart a large
amount of radiation to the child. The fracture can be safely treated with
a below-­knee cast or a controlled ankle motion (CAM) walking boot
for approximately 3 weeks.

TRIPLANE AND TILLAUX FRACTURES

Triplane and Tillaux fracture patterns occur at the end of the growth
period and are based on relative strength of the bone-­physis junction
and asymmetric closure of the tibial physis. The triplane fractures are
so named because the injury has coronal, sagittal, and transverse components (Fig. 724.14). The Tillaux fracture is an avulsion fracture of the
anterolateral aspect of the distal tibial epiphysis. Radiographs and further imaging with CT and three-­dimensional reconstructions are necessary to analyze the fracture geometry. The triplane fracture involves
the articular surface and hence anatomic reduction is necessary. The
reduction is further stabilized with internal fixation. The Tillaux fracture is treated by closed reduction. Open reduction is recommended if
a residual intraarticular step-­off persists.

METATARSAL FRACTURES

Metatarsal fractures are common in children. They usually result from
direct trauma to the dorsum of the foot. High-­energy trauma or multiple fractures of the metatarsal base are associated with significant
swelling. A high index for compartment syndrome of the foot must be
maintained and compartment pressures must be measured if indicated.
Diagnosis is obtained by AP, lateral, and oblique radiographs of the
foot. Most metatarsal fractures can be treated by closed methods in a
below-­knee cast or walking boot. Weight-­bearing is allowed as tolerated. The Jones fracture of the proximal fifth metatarsal is an exception
as it lies at a watershed area of vascular supply and thus has an increased
risk of nonunion. Patients with Jones fractures should initially be non-­
weightbearing and should be referred to an orthopedics specialist.
Displaced fractures can require closed or open reduction with internal
fixation. Percutaneous, smooth Kirschner wires (K-­wires) generally
provide sufficient internal fixation for these injuries.

TOE PHALANGEAL FRACTURES

Fractures of the lesser toes are common and are usually secondary to
direct blows. They commonly occur when the child is barefoot. The
toes are swollen, ecchymotic, and tender. There may be a mild deformity. Diagnosis is made radiographically. Bleeding suggests the possibility of an open fracture. The lesser toes usually do not require closed
reduction unless significantly displaced. If necessary, reduction can
usually be accomplished with longitudinal traction on the toe. Casting is not usually necessary. Buddy taping of the fractured toe to an
adjacent stable toe usually provides satisfactory alignment and relief
of symptoms. Crutches and heel walking may be beneficial for several
days until the soft tissue swelling and the discomfort decrease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

724.5 Operative Treatment of Fractures
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells
Surgery is required for 4–5% of pediatric fractures. The common indications for operative treatment in children and adolescents include
displaced physeal fractures, displaced intraarticular fractures, unstable
fractures, multiple injuries, open fractures, failure to achieve adequate
reduction in older children, failure to maintain an adequate reduction,
and certain pathologic fractures.
The aim of operative intervention is to obtain anatomic alignment
and relative stability. Rigid fixation is not necessary as it is in adults for
early mobilization. The relatively stable construct can be supplemented

A

B

Fig. 724.14 The triplane fracture is a transitional fracture: anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B) radiographs. (From Dormans JP. Pediatric Orthopedics: Introduction to Trauma. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2005:38.)

Table 724.4  Common Indications for External Fixation in
Pediatric Fractures
Grades II and III open fractures
Fractures associated with severe burns
Fractures with soft tissue loss requiring free flaps or skin grafts
Fractures requiring distractions such as those with significant bone
loss
Unstable pelvic fractures
Fractures in children with associated head injuries and spasticity
Fractures associated with vascular or nerve repairs or reconstruction

with external immobilization such as a cast, splint, or CAM walking
boot. SH types III and IV injuries require anatomic alignment, and if
they are unstable, internal fixation is used (smooth K-­wires, preferably
avoiding the course across the growth plate). Multiple closed reductions of an epiphyseal fracture are contraindicated because they can
cause permanent damage to the physis.

SURGICAL TECHNIQUES

It is important to take great care with soft tissues and skin. The other
indications for open reduction and internal fixation are unstable fractures of the spine, ipsilateral fractures of the femur and tibia, neurovascular injuries requiring repair, and open fractures. Closed reduction
and minimally invasive fixation are specifically used for supracondylar
fractures of the distal humerus and most phalangeal fractures. Failure
to obtain anatomic alignment by closed means is an indication for
an open reduction. Percutaneous techniques such as intramedullary
fixation and minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis are increasingly
popular as well.
As children become older, surgical techniques become more similar to adult techniques. The classic example of this is the femoral shaft
fracture. Newborns may be treated with a soft dressing or Pavlik harness; young children may have a spica cast; older children will often be
treated with flexible nails. Adolescents will frequently be treated with
rigid intramedullary fixation similar to their adult counterparts.
Table 724.4 summarizes the main indications for external fixation.
The advantages of external fixation include rigid immobilization of
the fractures, access to open wounds for continued management, and
easier patient mobilization for treatment of other injuries and transportation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. The majority of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4284 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
complications with external fixation are pin tract infections, chronic
osteomyelitis, and refractures after pin removal.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

724.6 Complications of Fractures in Children
Jason B. Anari, Alexandre Arkader, and
Lawrence Wells
Complications of fractures in children can be categorized as (1)
complications of the injury itself, (2) complications of treatment,
and (3) late complications resulting from growth disturbance or
deformity.

COMPLICATIONS RESULTING FROM INJURY

Growth arrest is possible in physeal fractures, particularly widely
displaced physeal fractures about the distal femur, proximal tibia, or
distal ulna. Fractures about the hip may cause avascular necrosis or
premature physeal closure, particularly when the fracture involves the
proximal femoral physis. Unacceptable alignment may cause loss of
motion or limb malalignment. Fracture malunion may cause cosmetically unappealing bumps or curves in the limb, and at times functional
impairment. Compartment syndrome can occur, particularly in
diaphyseal tibia fractures or high energy or open both bone forearm
fractures. Supracondylar humerus fractures, distal femur fractures,
and proximal tibia fractures may result in neurovascular compromise.
Nonunions are rare in children but can be seen with intraarticular
fractures, such as distal humerus lateral condyle fractures. Malunions
or missed Monteggia fracture dislocations about the elbow can cause
permanent stiffness and loss of function if the deformity is not corrected. Displaced intraarticular fractures can result in posttraumatic
arthritis and early joint degeneration. Open fractures can result in
infection and osteomyelitis if inadequately treated. Older children with
severe injuries of the lower extremity can be vulnerable to deep vein
thrombosis.

COMPLICATIONS OF TREATMENT

Treatment may complicate fractures. Cast immobilization can
result in cast ulcers, either from inadequate padding of bony prominences or from patients placing objects in the cast. Casts that are
too tight can cause neurovascular compromise and compartment
syndrome. Patients can get cast saw burns from using cast saws that
are too dull to remove the cast. Safe operation of a cast saw requires
monitoring of blade temperature. The saw blade should be intermittently cooled by taking a break to avoid overheating and thermal
injury to the skin. Improperly placed casts can promote fracture
displacement and malunion. Surgical treatment can be complicated
by blood loss, neurovascular compromise, iatrogenic physeal damage, and hardware complications such as infection or hardware failure. Symptomatic hardware may require later removal.

LATE COMPLICATIONS OF TRAUMA

Late effects of trauma can be from partial or complete closure of the
physis or malunion of the fracture. This can lead to limb angular deformity, shortening, or incongruency. Angular deformities can be treated
by hemiepiphysiodesis or osteotomy. Joint incongruency may be a very
difficult problem to deal with and may ultimately lead to early degenerative joint disease. Reflex sympathetic dystrophy is another poorly
understood late effect of trauma but can be debilitating. Distal radius
fractures have an above average rate of reflex sympathetic dystrophy
relative to other injuries. Physical and occupational therapists are very
helpful in managing this condition. Limited evidence exists that vitamin C may be useful in the acute setting of high-­risk injuries to prevent
this complication.

Chapter 725

Osteomyelitis
Samir S. Shah
Osteomyelitis, or infection of the bone, may be classified as acute or
chronic. These clinical definitions correspond with treatment recommendations. Acute osteomyelitis is defined as the diagnosis of bone
infection within 4 weeks after onset of clinical signs or symptoms in
a previously uninfected bone. Chronic osteomyelitis is defined as a
protracted and indolent disease process with presence of a sequestrum
or relapse of infection at the same site following apparently successful
treatment; sequestra may arise as a complication of treated or untreated
acute hematogenous osteomyelitis.

ETIOLOGY

Bacteria are the most common pathogens in acute skeletal infections.
Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227.1) is the most common infecting organism in osteomyelitis among all age groups, including newborns. The prevalence of community-­acquired methicillin-­resistant S.
aureus (CA-­MRSA) as a cause of osteomyelitis varies substantially by
region.
Group B streptococcus (see Chapter 230) and gram-­negative enteric
bacilli (Escherichia coli, see Chapter 246) are prominent pathogens in
neonates; group A streptococcus (see Chapter 229) constitutes <10%
of all cases in this group. After 6 years of age, most cases of osteomyelitis are caused by S. aureus, group A streptococci, or Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (see Chapter 251.1). Cases of Pseudomonas infection are
related almost exclusively to puncture wounds of the foot, with direct
inoculation of P. aeruginosa from the foam padding of the shoe into
bone or cartilage, which develops as osteochondritis. Salmonella spp.
(see Chapter 244) and S. aureus are the two most common causes of
osteomyelitis in children with sickle cell disease (see Chapter 511.1).
Streptococcus pneumoniae (see Chapter 228) most commonly causes
osteomyelitis in children younger than 24 months of age and in children with sickle cell disease, but its frequency has declined because
of pneumococcal conjugate vaccines. Bartonella henselae (see Chapter
255) can cause osteomyelitis of any bone but is most often seen in pelvic and vertebral bones.
Kingella kingae (see Chapter 239) is the second most common cause
of osteomyelitis in children younger than 4 years of age. The organism
causes osteomyelitis, spondylodiscitis, and septic arthritis (see Chapter
726) in this age group, especially when there is a subacute presentation.
K. kingae can be difficult to detect unless polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) testing is used.
Infection with atypical mycobacteria (see Chapter 263), S. aureus, or
Pseudomonas can occur after penetrating injuries. These organisms, as
well as coagulase-­negative staphylococci or gram-­negative enteric bacteria, may cause bone infection related to implanted materials such as
orthopedic hardware. Fungal infections usually occur as part of multisystem disseminated disease; Candida (see Chapter 280) osteomyelitis
sometimes complicates fungemia in neonates with or without indwelling vascular catheters. Blastomycosis causes multiple bone lesions in
endemic areas.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The median age of children with musculoskeletal infections is approximately 6 years. Bone infections are more common in males than
females.
Minor closed trauma is a common preceding event in cases of osteomyelitis, occurring in approximately 30% of patients. Impaired host
defenses (e.g., hemoglobinopathies, human immunodeficiency virus,
or chronic granulomatous disease) also increase the risk of skeletal
infection. Table 725.1 lists other risk factors.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 725 u Osteomyelitis
Table 725.1  Microorganisms Isolated from Patients with
Osteomyelitis and Their Clinical Associations
MOST COMMON CLINICAL
ASSOCIATION

MICROORGANISM

Frequent microorganism in any
type of osteomyelitis

Staphylococcus aureus
(susceptible or resistant to
methicillin)

Associated with septic arthritis,
spondylodiscitis, long or
unusual bones, age <4 yr, mild
symptoms

Kingella kingae

Foreign body–associated
infection

Coagulase-­negative
staphylococci, other skin flora,
atypical mycobacteria, fungi

Common in nosocomial
infections

Enterobacteriaceae,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Candida spp.

Decubitus ulcer or ulceration
associated with sensory
autonomic neuropathies

S. aureus, streptococci, gram-­
negative enterics, and/
or anaerobic bacteria;
polymicrobial infections are
common

Sickle cell disease

Salmonella spp., S. aureus, or
Streptococcus pneumoniae

Exposure to kittens

Bartonella henselae

Human or animal bites

Pasteurella multocida or
Eikenella corrodens

Immunocompromised patients

Aspergillus spp., Candida
albicans, or Mycobacteria spp.

Populations in which tuberculosis
is prevalent

Mycobacterium tuberculosis

Populations in which these
pathogens are endemic

Brucella spp., Coxiella
burnetii, fungi found in
specific geographic areas
(coccidioidomycosis,
blastomycosis, histoplasmosis)

Modified from Lew DP, Waldvogel FA. Osteomyelitis. Lancet. 2004;364:369–379.

PATHOGENESIS

Bacteria reach bone matrices most commonly via hematogenous
spread (primary bacteremia). Less common mechanisms include
direct inoculation (i.e., trauma or procedures) or contiguous spread
from infection of adjacent sites such as synovial fluid or soft tissues.
The unique anatomy and circulation of the ends of long bones result
in the predilection for localization of bloodborne bacteria. In the
metaphysis, nutrient arteries branch into non-anastomosing capillaries under the physis, which make a sharp loop before entering venous
sinusoids draining into the marrow. Low-­velocity blood flow in this
area predisposes to bacterial invasion. Once a bacterial focus is established, phagocytes migrate to the site and produce an inflammatory
exudate (metaphyseal abscess). The generation of proteolytic enzymes,
toxic oxygen radicals, and cytokines results in decreased oxygen tension, decreased pH, osteolysis, and tissue destruction. As the inflammatory exudate progresses, pressure increases spread through the
porous metaphyseal space via the Haversian system and Volkmann
canals into the subperiosteal space. Purulence beneath the periosteum
may lift the periosteal membrane of the bony surface, further impairing blood supply to the cortex and metaphysis.
In newborns and young infants, transphyseal blood vessels connect the metaphysis and epiphysis, so it is common for pus from the
metaphysis to enter the joint space. This extension through the physis

4285

has the potential to result in abnormal growth and bone or joint deformity. During the latter part of the first year of life, the physis forms,
obliterating the transphyseal blood vessels. Joint involvement can
occur where the metaphysis is intraarticular (hip, ankle, shoulder, and
elbow), and subperiosteal pus ruptures into the joint space.
In later childhood, the periosteum becomes more adherent, favoring pus to decompress through the periosteum. Once the growth plate
closes in late adolescence, hematogenous osteomyelitis more often
begins in the diaphysis and can spread to the entire intramedullary
canal. Septic arthritis contiguous with a site of osteomyelitis is also seen
in older children with S. aureus osteomyelitis, which may be related to
simultaneous hematogenous inoculation of bone and joint space. Septic arthritis may also result from infected material entering the synovial
space from an adjacent osteomyelitis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The earliest signs and symptoms of acute osteomyelitis, often subtle
and nonspecific, generally depend on patient age. Neonates might
exhibit pseudoparalysis or pain with movement of the affected extremity (e.g., diaper changes). Half of neonates do not have fever and might
not appear ill. Older infants and children are more likely to have pain,
fever, and localizing signs such as edema, erythema, and warmth. With
involvement of the lower extremities, limp or refusal to walk is seen in
approximately half of patients.
Focal tenderness over a long bone can be an important finding. Local
swelling and redness with osteomyelitis suggests spread of infection
beyond the metaphysis and into the subperiosteal space, representing
a secondary soft tissue inflammatory response. Pelvic osteomyelitis can
manifest with subtle findings such as hip, thigh, groin, or abdominal
pain. Vertebral osteomyelitis typically presents as back pain with or without tenderness to palpation over the vertebral processes (Chapter 720.7).
Long bones are principally involved in osteomyelitis (Table 725.2);
the femur and tibia are equally affected and together constitute almost
half of all cases. The bones of the upper extremities account for 25% of
all cases. Flat bones are less commonly affected.
Usually, a single site of bone or joint is involved, although multifocal
osteomyelitis may be noted in up to 20% of children with S. aureus infections. In neonates, two or more bones are involved in almost half of the
cases. Multifocal disease may also be seen with tuberculosis, cat-­scratch
disease, and brucellosis. Clinical manifestations of chronic infection are
more indolent, and fever is unusual. Children with subacute symptoms
and focal findings in the metaphyseal area (usually of the tibia) might
have a Brodie abscess, with a well-­defined radiographic lucency and
surrounding reactive bone. The contents of Brodie abscesses are often
sterile, but S. aureus is often the most common pathogen (Fig. 725.1).
Some patients with osteomyelitis due to S. aureus infection develop a
deep venous thrombosis adjacent to the affected bone that can produce
septic pulmonary emboli; these patients are often critically ill. Uncomplicated disease should be distinguished from more complicated osteomyelitis (Table 725.3).

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of osteomyelitis begins with clinical suspicion and
requires appropriate cultures and imaging studies. Blood cultures
should be performed in all suspected cases before administration of antibiotic therapy. Blood cultures are positive in ∼30% of patients. Blood
culture contamination rates are low, generally <5%; microbes such
as coagulase-­negative staphylococci, α-­streptococci (except S. pneumoniae and S. anginosus group), Bacillus species, Corynebacterium,
and Cutibacterium are usually considered contaminants when identified in blood culture from a patient with acute or subacute hematogenous osteomyelitis.
Depending on the results of imaging studies, aspiration or biopsy
of bone or subperiosteal abscess for Gram stain, standard bacterial
culture, PCR for K. kingae, and possibly bone histology provides the
optimal specimen for culture to confirm the diagnosis and significantly
increases the yield compared with blood culture alone. These specimens, which identify a causative bacteria in ∼60% of cases, are often
obtained by the interventional radiologist or at the time of surgical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4286 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 725.2  Site of Involvement in Acute Hematogenous
Osteomyelitis
SITE

%

TUBULAR BONE
Femur

25

Tibia

24

Humerus

13

Phalanges

5

Fibula

4

Radius

4

Ulna

2

Metatarsal

2

Clavicle

0.5

Metacarpal

0.5

CUBOIDAL BONE
Calcaneus

5

Talus

0.8

Carpals

0.5

Cuneiform

0.5

Cuboid

0.3

IRREGULAR BONE
Ischium

4

Ilium

2

Vertebra

2

Pubis

0.8

Sacrum

0.8

FLAT BONE
Skull

1

Rib

0.5

Sternum

0.5

Scapula

0.5

Maxilla

0.3

Mandible

0.3

Data from Krogstad P. Osteomyelitis. In: Cherry JD, Harrison GJ, Kaplan SL, et al., eds.
Feigin and Cherry’s Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier, 2019: Table 55.2.

drainage by the orthopedic surgeon. Direct inoculation of clinical
specimens into aerobic blood culture bottles can improve the recovery
of K. kingae, particularly if held for 1 week. PCR is the most sensitive
technique to detect K. kingae, even up to 6 days after antibiotics are
initiated. Anaerobic, fungal, and mycobacterial cultures may be performed if risk factors are identified by history or physical examination.
There are no specific laboratory tests for osteomyelitis. Laboratory evaluation of children with suspected osteomyelitis may include a complete
blood count and C-­reactive protein (CRP). A complete blood count may
contribute to assessment of infection severity (e.g., anemia, thrombocytopenia) and suggest an alternative diagnosis (e.g., hematologic malignancy).
The initial CRP is elevated in most children with acute osteomyelitis. CRP
is nonspecific and does not establish the diagnosis of osteomyelitis, but
serial monitoring of an elevated CRP may be of value in assessing response
to therapy or identifying complications. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR) is no longer routinely recommended in cases of acute hematogenous osteomyelitis. Data on procalcitonin are insufficient.

RADIOGRAPHIC EVALUATION

Radiographic studies play a crucial role in the evaluation of osteomyelitis. Conventional radiographs and MRI are the primary modalities.
Ultrasonography, CT, and radionuclide studies can also contribute to
establishing the diagnosis in selected cases.

Plain Radiographs

Within 72 hours of onset of symptoms of osteomyelitis, plain radiographs of the involved site using soft tissue technique and compared
with the opposite extremity, if necessary, can show displacement of
the deep muscle planes from the adjacent metaphysis caused by deep-­
tissue edema. Lytic bone changes are not visible on radiographs until
30–50% of the bony matrix is destroyed. Tubular long bones do not
show lytic changes for 7-14 days after onset of infection. Infection in
flat and irregular bones can take longer to appear. Radiographs in children with possible osteomyelitis are important to exclude other possible causes (e.g., fracture) of the presenting symptoms and signs.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Computed
Tomography

MRI is more sensitive than CT or radionuclide imaging in acute osteomyelitis and is the best radiographic imaging technique for identifying
abscesses and for differentiating between bone and soft tissue infection. MRI provides precise anatomic detail of subperiosteal pus and
accumulation of purulent debris in the bone marrow and metaphyses
for possible surgical intervention. In acute osteomyelitis, purulent
debris and edema appear dark, with decreased signal intensity on T1-­
weighted images, with fat appearing bright (Figs. 725.2 and 725.3). The
opposite is seen in T2-­weighted images. The signal from fat can be
diminished with fat-­suppression techniques to enhance visualization.
Gadolinium administration can also enhance MRI. Cellulitis and sinus
tracts appear as areas of high signal intensity on T2-­weighted images.
Short tau inversion recovery (STIR) MRI is a rapid imaging modality
for osteomyelitis (Fig. 725.4). MRI can also demonstrate contiguous
or isolated septic arthritis, pyomyositis, or venous thrombosis. Whole
body rapid STIR MRI is an effective alternative to radionuclide imaging
where multiple sites of infection are suspected or the site of infection cannot be clearly localized on exam. CT can demonstrate osseous and soft
tissue abnormalities and is ideal for detecting gas in soft tissues but has
poor sensitivity for detecting the presence of osteomyelitis.

Radionuclide Studies

Radionuclide imaging, an alternative to MRI, may be useful if multiple
foci are suspected. Technetium-99 (99mTc) methylene diphosphonate,
which accumulates in areas of increased bone turnover, is the preferred agent for radionuclide bone imaging (three-­phase bone scan).
Any areas of increased blood flow or inflammation can cause increased
uptake of 99mTc in the first and second phases, but osteomyelitis causes
increased uptake of 99mTc in the third phase (4-6 hours). Three-­phase
imaging with 99mTc has excellent sensitivity (84–100%) and specificity
(70–96%) in hematogenous osteomyelitis and can detect osteomyelitis
within 24-48 hours after onset of symptoms. The sensitivity in neonates is much lower because of poor bone mineralization. Advantages
include infrequent need for sedation and the ability to image the entire
skeleton for detection of multiple foci. Disadvantages include exposure
to radiation, inability to image surrounding soft tissues, and overall
lack of detail, which limits the tests’ utility for preoperative planning.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Distinguishing osteomyelitis from cellulitis or trauma (unintentional or
abuse) may be difficult, particularly when the history is limited. Myositis or
pyomyositis can also appear similar to osteomyelitis with fever, warm and
swollen extremities, and limping; tenderness to palpation of the affected
soft tissue area is generally more diffuse than noted in acute osteomyelitis.
Myositis and pyomyositis may be isolated but are often found adjacent to
an osteomyelitis on MRI. Pyomyositis is most often caused by S. aureus,
followed by group A streptococcus. The pelvic muscles are a common site
of pyomyositis and can mimic a pelvic osteomyelitis. MRI is the definitive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 725 u Osteomyelitis

4287

*

*
A

C

B

Fig. 725.1 A, Radiograph demonstrates a lytic lesion in the proximal fibula with laminated thick periostitis. Axial T2-­weighted fat-­saturated MR

image (B) shows a layered appearance with intermediate signal (arrowhead) between inner and outer rims of lower signal intensity (arrows) and a
more central hyperintense region. Also note the soft tissue phlegmon/early abscess formation (asterisk). On an axial T1-­weighted, fat-­saturated,
postgadolinium MR image (C), a rim of low signal sclerosis (outer arrow) surrounds an inner rim of enhancing granulation tissue (inner arrow), which
surrounds the nonenhancing abscess. (From Kan JH, Meyers AB, Azouz EM. Musculoskeletal infections. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 137.17.)

Table 725.3  Characteristics of Uncomplicated vs Complicated Osteomyelitis*
CHARACTERISTIC

UNCOMPLICATED

COMPLICATED

Sites of infection

Single bone

Two or more bones involved
Additional soft tissue sites of infection
beyond the bone (e.g., muscle [myositis or
pyomyositis], pneumonia, and liver abscess)

Clinical response to medical and surgical
treatment

Rapid (within 3-5 days), including signs of sepsis
or septic shock

Slow, prolonged response, or lack of clinical
response
Need for more than one surgery for source
control

Course of bacteremia when present

Rapid resolution of bacteremia (serial blood
cultures become negative when obtained
within 1-2 days after the initiation of therapy
and source control)

Prolonged bacteremia (3 or more days),
suggestive of uncontrolled infection/distant
site(s) of infection

Acute sequelae of infection

None

Venous thrombosis or septic thrombophlebitis
Endocarditis

Late sequelae of infection

No findings that suggest risk of physis injury
or other short-­or long-­term osteoarticular
sequelae of infection

Findings concerning for physeal injury with
potential impacts on bone growth with long-­
term sequelae
Presence of or concern for pathologic fracture

*This set of criteria is consensus based with primary focus on clinical findings and course. It may be reasonable to include additional laboratory tests such as the serum C-­reactive
protein (CRP) in making a determination of an uncomplicated vs complicated course. Concepts such as (1) rapid fall of the CRP concentration within 48 hr of initiation of treatment
or (2) a 50% or more decline from peak CRP concentration within 3-5 days of admission or first surgical debridement may be considered. Further research into the various
components and functionality of this definition, and any added utility of the CRP or other laboratory markers, will have value and is encouraged.
From Woods CR, Bradley JS, Chatterjee A, et al. Clinical practice guideline by the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society of America: 2021 guideline on diagnosis and management of
acute hematogenous osteomyelitis in pediatrics. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc. 2021;10(8):801–844. Table 1.

study to identify and localize pelvic pyomyositis (Fig. 725.5). An iliopsoas
abscess can manifest with thigh pain, limp, and fever and must be considered in the differential diagnosis of osteomyelitis. The iliopsoas abscess
may be primary (hematogenous: S. aureus) or secondary to infection in
adjacent bone (S. aureus), kidney (E. coli) or intestine (E. coli, Bacteroides
spp.). Mycobacterium tuberculosis has been reported in patients with HIV
infection. Any child with negative x-­ray imaging and a negative hip aspiration who presents with fever, limp, and elevated inflammatory markers
should be evaluated for pyomyositis.
Appendicitis, urinary tract infection, and gynecologic disease are
among the conditions in the differential diagnosis of pelvic osteomyelitis. Children with leukemia commonly have bone pain or joint pain
as an early symptom. Neuroblastoma with bone involvement may be
mistaken for osteomyelitis. Primary bone tumors need to be considered, but fever and other signs of illness are generally absent except in
Ewing sarcoma. In patients with sickle cell disease, distinguishing bone
infection from infarction may be challenging.

Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO) (also called
chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis, CNO) is a nonpyrogenic, sterile
inflammatory bone disease that is considered an autoinflammatory disorder (see Chapter 204). It may also be associated with a family history
of autoimmune disease; the affected patient may have other inflammatory diseases such as Crohn disease, Sweet syndrome, psoriasis, and
palmar plantar pustulosis. CRMO in children has many similarities
with synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis syndrome
(SAPHO), seen in adults. CRMO also has similarities to Majeed syndrome, an autosomal recessive disorder with a microcytic dyserythropoietic anemia, and with a deficiency of interleukin-1 receptor
antagonist (DIRA), an autosomal recessive autoinflammatory disease.
In contrast to infectious osteomyelitis, CRMO is multifocal, recurrent, and may involve bones not typical of osteomyelitis (spine, pelvis,
clavicle, mandible, and calcaneus). Plain radiographs reveal osteolytic
lesions or sclerosis; whole body STIR MRI imaging is the diagnostic
study of choice (Fig. 725.6).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4288 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B
Fig. 725.2 MRI of an 8-­year-­old female with acute pelvic hematog-

enous osteomyelitis. A, Axial T1-­weighted contrast-­enhanced MRI with
fat saturation reveals a nonenhancing fluid collection adjacent to the
inflamed pubic synchondrosis. B, The fluid collection appears hyperintense on the corresponding T2-­weighted image (arrowheads). In addition, a contrast enhancement within the adjacent internal obturator
muscle is seen (arrow), indicating acute pelvic hematogenous osteomyelitis with complicating adjacent abscess formation and soft tissue
inflammation. (From Weber-­Chrysochoou C, Corti N, Goetschel P, et al.
Pelvic osteomyelitis: a diagnostic challenge in children. J Pediatr Surg.
2007;42:553–557.)

Fig. 725.4 Coronal STIR MR image demonstrates a salt-­and-­pepper

appearance of marrow edema and periosteal reaction (arrow). (From
Kan JH, Azouz EM. Musculoskeletal infections. In: Coley BD, ed.
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019: Fig. 137.14.)

A
A

B

Fig. 725.3 Acute osteomyelitis of the distal femur in a 5-­yr-­old male.

A, T2-­weighted fat-­saturated axial MRI shows a large subperiosteal abscess (arrows) at the posterior aspect of the femur. Increased signal is
seen within the bone, and there is adjacent soft tissue edema. B, T1-­
weighted fat-­saturated postgadolinium sagittal MRI shows the longitudinal extent of the subperiosteal abscess with enhancing wall (arrows).
(From Kan JH, Azouz EM. Musculoskeletal infections. In: Coley BD, ed.
Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2019: Fig. 137.13.)

Pain in CRMO is usually insidious and noted at night; fever is not
always present. The mean age of onset is 10 years. The CRP may be
elevated but is not as high as in bacterial osteomyelitis. Pain usually
responds to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. Second-­line treatments include systemic corticosteroids or tumor necrosis factor-­α
inhibitors.

B
Fig. 725.5 A, Pelvic pyomyositis in a 10-­yr-­old male presenting with

limping. Pelvis MRI demonstrates an avid contrast enhancement of the
internal obturator muscle (arrowhead) with an abscess on T1-­weighted
fat-­saturated postcontrast axial image (arrow). B, Pyomyositis in a 7-­yr-­old
male with left pelvic pain and fever. Axial T1 fat-­saturated postcontrast
image through the inferior ramus of the obturator ring demonstrates multiloculated, rim-­enhancing fluid collections in the adductor muscles (arrow), which is characteristic of pyomyositis. (A from Bartoloni A, Gómez
A, Pilar M, et al. Imaging of the limping child. Eur J Radiol. 2018;109:155–
170. Fig 13; B from Pruthi S, Thapa MM. Infectious and inflammatory disorders. Magn Reson Imaging Clin North Am. 2009;17:423. Fig 7.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 725 u Osteomyelitis

A

B

4289

C

Fig. 725.6 MRI in a patient with chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis. A, Whole body image showing multiple foci of osteomyelitis (arrows),

some of which are distributed symmetrically. B, Image of the ankle showing inflammatory metaphyseal and epiphyseal lesions. C, Image of the left
femur showing involvement of the diaphysis with a soft tissue reaction. (From Wipff J, Adamsbaum C, Kahan A, Job-­Deslandre C. Chronic recurrent
multifocal osteomyelitis. Joint Bone Spine. 2011;78:555–560. Fig. 3, p. 557.)

TREATMENT

Optimal treatment of skeletal infections requires collaborative
efforts of pediatricians, orthopedic surgeons, and interventional
radiologists. Obtaining a blood culture before antibiotics are given
is essential. Most patients with osteomyelitis have an indolent, non–
life-­threatening condition, and in these circumstances antibiotics
may be deferred until a decision about whether to obtain additional
diagnostic cultures (periosteal abscess, bone) has been made. A
short duration of antibiotic pretreatment (<48 hours) for osteomyelitis caused by S. aureus has minimal impact on culture yield from
abscess or bone specimens. In critically ill patients, empirical antimicrobial therapy should be initiated without delay.

Antimicrobial Therapy

The initial empirical antimicrobial therapy is based on knowledge
of likely bacterial pathogens at various ages, the results of the Gram
stain of aspirated material, and additional considerations (Table
725.4). In neonates, an antistaphylococcal penicillin, such as nafcillin or oxacillin (100-200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6hr IV), and a
broad-­
spectrum cephalosporin, such as cefepime (100-150 mg/
kg/24 hr divided q12hr IV), provide coverage for the methicillin-­
susceptible S. aureus (MSSA), group B streptococcus, and gram-­
negative bacilli. If methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus (MRSA) is
suspected, clindamycin or vancomycin is substituted for nafcillin.
If the neonate is a premature infant or has a central vascular catheter, the possibility of nosocomial bacteria (gram-­negative enteric,
Pseudomonas, or S. aureus) or fungi (Candida spp.) should be considered. In older infants and children, the principal pathogens are
S. aureus, K. kingae, and group A streptococcus.
Cefazolin (100-150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6hr IV) or nafcillin
(100-200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6hr) is the agent of choice for parenteral treatment of osteomyelitis caused by MSSA and is the backbone of empirical treatment for acute hematogenous osteomyelitis.
A major factor influencing the selection of empirical therapy is the
rate of methicillin resistance among community S. aureus isolates.

In areas where the prevalence of CA-­MRSA is >10–20%, clindamycin (30-40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-8hr) or vancomycin (40-60 mg/
kg/24 hr divided q6-8hr IV) should be used as empirical treatment.
Clindamycin is often preferred over vancomycin when the rate of
clindamycin resistance is low among community S. aureus isolates
given the renal toxicity associated with vancomycin. Because β-­
lactams are superior to clindamycin and vancomycin for the treatment of MSSA, dual drug therapy in critically ill children should be
continued until the causative organism is identified and susceptibilities are known. Rapid molecular diagnostic tests that can accurately differentiate MRSA from MSSA within hours of blood culture
positivity can help to avoid prolonged exposure to multiple agents.
Clindamycin is the best studied alternative therapy for susceptible
isolates of MRSA and for MSSA when a β-­lactam cannot otherwise
be used.
Penicillin is first-­line therapy for treating osteomyelitis caused by
susceptible strains of S. pneumoniae and all group A streptococci.
Cefotaxime or ceftriaxone is recommended for pneumococcal isolates with resistance to penicillin and for most Salmonella spp.
Special situations dictate deviations from the usual empirical antibiotic selection. In patients with sickle cell disease with osteomyelitis,
gram-­negative enteric bacteria (Salmonella) are common pathogens,
as well as S. aureus, so a broad-­
spectrum cephalosporin such as
cefepime (150 mg/kg/24 hr q8hr IV) is used in addition to clindamycin
or vancomycin. Clindamycin is a useful alternative drug for patients
allergic to β-­lactam drugs. In addition to good antistaphylococcal
activity, clindamycin has broad activity against anaerobes and is useful for treating infections secondary to penetrating injuries or compound fractures. For immunocompromised patients, combination
therapy is usually initiated, such as with vancomycin and ceftazidime,
cefepime, or piperacillin-­tazobactam, with or without an aminoglycoside. K. kingae responds to β-­lactam antibiotics, including penicillin
and cephalosporins, but some isolates produce a β-­lactamase. Thus a
first-­generation cephalosporin (cefazolin) is a reasonable component
of empirical therapy in children younger than 4 years of age. Although

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4290 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 725.4  Antibiotic Choice and Duration of Therapy for Uncomplicated Pediatric Acute Hematogenous Osteomyelitis
Caused by Staphylococcus aureus*,†
PATHOGEN

PARENTERAL THERAPY

Staphylococcus aureus,
methicillin susceptible

S. aureus, methicillin
resistant, susceptible to
clindamycin

S. aureus, methicillin ­resistant,
resistant to clindamycin

DURATION‡

ORAL CONVALESCENT THERAPY

Preferred:§
Cefazolin
Semisynthetic penicillin,# e.g.,
oxacillin and nafcillin

Preferred: Cephalexin

3-4 weeks if uncomplicated

Alternatives:#
Clindamycin
Vancomycin
Ceftaroline

Alternative: Clindamycin

3-4 weeks if uncomplicated

Preferred: Clindamycin

Preferred: Clindamycin

3-4 weeks if uncomplicated

Alternatives:
Vancomycin
Daptomycin
Ceftaroline
Linezolid

Alternatives:¶
Linezolid

No data

Preferred: Vancomycin

Preferred: Linezolid

No data

Alternatives:
Daptomycin
Ceftaroline
Linezolid

Alternatives: Insufficient clinical data for
the treatment of AHO to recommend
other oral antibiotics with in vitro
activity against S. aureus

No data

*Uncomplicated AHO is defined as the presence of infection in a single site with rapid clinical response to antimicrobial therapy (i.e., resolution of fever and marked improvement in
clinical signs within 3-5 days), with no more than a single early surgical procedure required as source control for the infection. Complicated infections may require a longer duration
of treatment than uncomplicated infections, particularly if multiple surgeries are needed to establish source control.
†Not all antibiotics listed have been prospectively evaluated in clinical trials of acute bacterial osteomyelitis. Prospective studies to evaluate the effectiveness of a range of antibiotic
doses in various degrees of severity of uncomplicated and complicated osteomyelitis, with or without surgery, have not been performed, although retrospective data have been
reported for many antibiotics in the treatment of pediatric osteomyelitis.
‡The suggested duration of therapy should be based on clinical course (pace of resolution of fever and clinical signs and symptoms, noting the need for surgical intervention[s]
required, if any), supported by decline of inflammatory markers.
§Preferred and alternative agents are selected based on published data regarding in vitro activity, clinical efficacy, and safety. Agents are generally listed in order of preference.
#Many of the β-­lactamase-­stable penicillins cause significant phlebitis in peripheral veins with infusion; administration through a central venous catheter is preferred.
¶Alternative antibiotics that may display in vitro activity against S. aureus have not been evaluated prospectively in AHO. However, linezolid has been evaluated in prospective
controlled clinical trials for invasive methicillin-­resistant S. aureus nosocomial pneumonia in adults and is more likely to provide adequate therapy of invasive S. aureus AHO,
compared with trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, which is not recommended for children with AHO by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) Clinical Practice Guidelines
for Treatment of Methicillin-­Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Infections in Adults and Children.
AHO, Acute hematogenous osteomyelitis.
From Woods CR, Bradley JS, Chatterjee A, et al. Clinical practice guideline by the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society of America: 2021 guideline on diagnosis and management of
acute hematogenous osteomyelitis in pediatrics. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc. 2021;10(8):801–844. Table 4.

the efficacy of treating osteomyelitis caused by B. henselae is uncertain,
azithromycin plus rifampin may be considered.
When the pathogen is identified and antibiotic susceptibilities
are determined, appropriate adjustments should be made to use
the antibiotic with the narrowest spectrum, lowest adverse effect
profile, and most favorable host tolerance. If a pathogen is not identified and a patient’s condition is improving, therapy is continued
with the initially selected antibiotic or an agent with a comparable
spectrum of coverage. This selection is more complicated owing
to the presence of MRSA isolates in the community. If a pathogen
is not identified and a patient’s condition is not improving, repeat
aspiration or biopsy and the possibility of a noninfectious condition
should be considered.
Duration of antibiotic therapy is individualized depending on the
organism isolated and clinical course. Most acute cases of osteomyelitis, including those caused by S. aureus, can be treated with
antibiotics for 21-28 days provided that the patient shows prompt
resolution of signs and symptoms (within 5-7 days) and the CRP
has normalized; a total of 4-6 weeks of therapy may be required
for those with substantially slower resolution of symptoms or normalization of CRP. For group A streptococcus, S. pneumoniae, or

Haemophilus influenzae type b, treatment duration may be shorter.
A total of 7-10 postoperative days of treatment is adequate for
Pseudomonas osteochondritis from a foot puncture wound, when
curettage of infected tissue has been performed. Immunocompromised patients generally require prolonged courses of therapy, as do
patients with mycobacterial or fungal infection.
For typical cases, antimicrobial agents may be changed from intravenous to oral administration when a patient’s condition clearly has
improved, the child is afebrile, and bacteremia has resolved. Oral
cephalexin (75-100 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8hr) may be used for susceptible staphylococcal or streptococcal infections. Oral clindamycin (30-40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-8hr) can be used to complete
therapy for children with clindamycin-­susceptible CA-­MRSA or for
patients who are seriously allergic or cannot tolerate β-­lactam antibiotics. The oral regimen decreases the risk of complications related
to prolonged intravenous therapy, is more comfortable for patients,
and permits treatment outside the hospital if adherence to treatment can be ensured. Outpatient intravenous antibiotic therapy
via a central venous catheter can be used for completing therapy at
home for (1) patients unable or unwilling to take oral medication;
(2) patients with underlying medical conditions that make enteral

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 726 u Septic Arthritis 4291
drug absorption unreliable; (3) patients without comparable oral
antibiotic options (e.g., resistant bacteria, drug allergy); and (4)
patients with disseminated infection (e.g., endocarditis, pulmonary
septic emboli). Catheter-­related complications, including infection
or mechanical problems, can lead to readmission or emergency
department visits.
In children with venous thrombosis complicating osteomyelitis,
administration of anticoagulants under the supervision of a hematologist until the thrombus has resolved is a generally accepted practice,
although high-­quality evidence to support this practice is lacking; antibacterial therapy alone may be sufficient.

Surgical Therapy

When frank pus is obtained from subperiosteal or metaphyseal aspiration or is suspected based on MRI findings, a surgical drainage procedure is usually indicated. Surgical intervention is also often indicated
after a penetrating injury and when a retained foreign body is possible.
In selected cases, catheter drainage performed by an interventional
radiologist is adequate.
Treatment of chronic osteomyelitis consists of surgical removal
of sinus tracts and sequestrum, if present. Surgical implantation of
antibiotics is not generally recommended. Antimicrobial therapy,
typically administered orally, is continued for several months or
longer until clinical and radiographic findings suggest that healing has occurred. Normalization of CRP and ESR is expected in
successful treatment of chronic osteomyelitis but does not by itself
indicate clearance of the underlying infection. Many patients with
chronic osteomyelitis have a normal CRP and ESR even at the onset
of illness.

Physical Therapy

The major role of physical therapy is a preventive one. If a child is
allowed to lie in bed with an extremity in flexion, limitation of extension can develop within a few days. The affected extremity should be
kept in extension with sandbags, splints, or, if necessary, a temporary
cast. Casts are also indicated when there is a potential for pathologic
fracture. After 2-3 days, when pain is easing, passive range-­of-­motion
exercises are started and continued until the child resumes normal
activity. In neglected cases with flexion contractures, prolonged physical therapy is required.

Prognosis

When pus is drained and appropriate antibiotic therapy is given, the
improvement in signs and symptoms is rapid. Failure to improve or
worsening by 48-72 hours requires review of the appropriateness
of the antibiotic therapy, the need for surgical intervention, or the
accuracy of the diagnosis. Acute phase reactants may be useful as
monitors. In acute osteomyelitis, the serum CRP typically decreases
below 2 mg/dL within 7-10 days after starting treatment, whereas
the ESR typically rises for 5-7 days and then falls slowly, dropping
sharply after 10-14 days. Failure of CRP to follow the usual course
should raise concerns about the adequacy of therapy. Recurrence of
disease and development of chronic infection after treatment occur
in <10% of patients.
Because children are in a dynamic state of growth, sequelae of
skeletal infections might not become apparent for months or years;
therefore long-­term follow-­up is necessary, with close attention
to range of motion of joints and bone length. Although firm data
about the impact of delayed treatment on outcome are not available,
it appears that initiation of medical and surgical therapy within 1
week of onset of symptoms provides a better prognosis than delayed
treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 726

Septic Arthritis
Samir S. Shah
Without early recognition and prompt institution of appropriate medical and surgical therapy, septic arthritis in infants and children has the
potential to damage the synovium, adjacent cartilage, and bone and
may cause permanent disability.

ETIOLOGY

Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227.1) is the most common
cause of bacterial arthritis in all age groups. Methicillin-­resistant S.
aureus (MRSA) accounts for a high proportion (>25%) of community
S. aureus isolates in many areas of the United States and throughout
the world. Group A streptococcus (see Chapter 229) and Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumococcus; see Chapter 228) historically cause
10–20%; S. pneumoniae is most likely in the first 2 years of life, but
its frequency has declined since the introduction of the pneumococcal
conjugate vaccines. Kingella kingae is recognized as a relatively common etiology with improved culture and polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) methods in children younger than 4 years (see Chapters 239 and
725). In sexually active adolescents, gonococcus (see Chapter 238) is
a common cause of septic arthritis and tenosynovitis, usually of small
joints or as a monoarticular infection of a large joint (knee). Neisseria meningitidis (see Chapter 237) can cause either a septic arthritis
that occurs in the first few days of illness or a reactive arthritis that is
typically seen several days after antibiotics have been initiated. Group
B streptococcus (see Chapter 230) is an important cause of septic
arthritis in neonates. Q fever and brucellosis should be considered in
endemic areas and with an exposure risk.
Fungal infections usually occur as part of multisystem disseminated disease; Candida arthritis can complicate systemic infection
in neonates with or without indwelling vascular catheters. Primary
viral infections of joints are rare, but arthritis accompanies many viral
(parvovirus, mumps, rubella live vaccines) syndromes, suggesting an
immune-­mediated pathogenesis.
A microbial etiology is confirmed in approximately 65% of cases of
septic arthritis. In addition, some cases treated as bacterial arthritis
are actually postinfectious (gastrointestinal or genitourinary) reactive
arthritis (see Chapter 198) rather than primary infection. Lyme disease produces an arthritis more like a rheumatologic disorder and not
typically suppurative.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Septic arthritis is more common in young children. Half of all cases
occur by 2 years of age, and 75% of all cases occur by 5 years of age.
Adolescents and neonates are at risk of gonococcal septic arthritis.
Most infections in otherwise healthy children arise hematogenously.
Less commonly, infection of joints can follow penetrating injuries
or procedures such as trauma, arthroscopy, prosthetic joint surgery,
intraarticular steroid injection, and orthopedic surgery. Immunocompromised patients and those with rheumatologic joint disease are also
at increased risk of joint infection.

PATHOGENESIS

Septic arthritis primarily occurs as a result of hematogenous seeding
of the synovial space. Less often, organisms enter the joint space by
direct inoculation or extension from a contiguous focus. The synovial membrane has a rich vascular supply and lacks a basement membrane, providing an ideal environment for hematogenous seeding. The
presence of bacterial products (endotoxin or other toxins) within the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4292 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
joint space stimulates cytokine production (tumor necrosis factor-­α,
interleukin-1) within the joint, triggering an inflammatory cascade.
The cytokines stimulate chemotaxis of neutrophils into the joint space,
where proteolytic enzymes and elastases are released by neutrophils,
damaging the cartilage. Proteolytic enzymes released from the synovial cells and chondrocytes also contribute to destruction of cartilage
and synovium. Bacterial hyaluronidase breaks down the hyaluronic
acid in the synovial fluid, making the fluid less viscous and diminishing its ability to lubricate and protect the joint cartilage. Damage
to the cartilage can occur through increased friction, especially for
weight-­bearing joints. The increased pressure within the joint space
from accumulation of purulent material can compromise the vascular
supply and induce pressure necrosis of the cartilage. Synovial and cartilage destruction results from a combination of proteolytic enzymes
and mechanical factors.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most septic arthritides are monoarticular. The signs and symptoms of
septic arthritis depend on the age of the patient. Early signs and symptoms may be subtle, particularly in neonates. As with osteomyelitis,
neonates might exhibit pseudoparalysis or pain that limits voluntary movement of the affected extremity (e.g., diaper changes). Septic
arthritis in neonates and young infants is often associated with adjacent osteomyelitis caused by transphyseal spread of infection, although
osteomyelitis contiguous with an infected joint can be seen at any age
(see Chapter 725).
Older infants and children might have fever and pain, with localizing signs such as swelling, erythema, and warmth of the affected joint.
With involvement of joints of the pelvis and lower extremities, limp or
refusal to walk often occurs.
Erythema and edema of the skin and soft tissue overlying the site
of infection are seen earlier in septic arthritis than in osteomyelitis
because the bulging infected synovium is usually more superficial,
whereas the metaphysis is located more deeply. Septic arthritis of
the hip is an exception because of the deep location of the hip joint.
With Lyme arthritis, joint swelling is typically quite prominent and
may be disproportionate to the relatively lesser degree of pain and
limited range of motion when compared with suppurative arthritis.
Lyme arthritis has a predilection for large joints, particularly the
knees and hips, and may be either monoarticular or pauciarticular
at presentation.
Joints of the lower extremity constitute 75% of all cases of septic arthritis (Table 726.1). The elbow, wrist, and shoulder joints are
involved in approximately 25% of cases, and small joints are uncommonly infected, except in gonococcal arthritis. Suppurative infections
of the hip, shoulder, elbow, and ankle in infants and children may be
associated with an adjacent osteomyelitis of the proximal femur, proximal humerus, proximal radius, and distal tibia because the metaphysis
extends intraarticularly. Concomitant osteomyelitis is less common

Table 726.1  Distribution of Hematogenous Bacterial
Arthritis*
BONE

PERCENT (%)

Knee

∼35

Hip

∼25

Ankle

∼10

Elbow

∼10

Wrist

∼4

Shoulder

∼5

Small joints

∼1–2

*Excludes Lyme disease and immune-­complex postinfectious arthritis. Viral (rubella,
mumps, chikungunya) infectious arthritis is often small and multiple joints. Septic
bursitis (shoulder, prepatellar) may be confused with bacterial joint infections.

in older children and adolescents as their anatomy and physiology
become more adult-­like.

DIAGNOSIS

The white blood cell count (WBC) and differential, ESR, and CRP are
generally elevated in children with joint infections, but elevations are
nonspecific and might not be helpful in distinguishing between infection and other inflammatory processes. Most children with septic
arthritis will have normal leukocyte counts and ESR at presentation,
and normal test results do not preclude the diagnosis of septic arthritis.
A CBC, however, may assist with assessment of illness severity (e.g.,
anemia, thrombocytopenia) or with identification of other causes of
the patient’s symptoms (e.g., leukemia).
Blood cultures should be performed in all cases of suspected septic
arthritis but are positive in ∼20% of proven or probable septic arthritis. Cervical, anal, and throat cultures should be obtained when gonococcus is suspected. Aspiration of the joint fluid provides the optimal
specimen to confirm the diagnosis. Most large joint spaces are easy to
aspirate, but the hip can pose technical problems; ultrasound guidance
facilitates aspiration. Although yield for joint aspirate cultures is higher
than from blood cultures, the overall culture yield when combining
both methods remains less than 50%. Multiplex bacterial PCR panels
have a yield around 50% from joint fluid specimens, but this increase
over culture is almost entirely because of their enhanced ability to detect
K. kingae. Other strategies to increase detection of K. kingae include
prompt inoculation onto solid media and inoculation of the joint fluid
in blood culture bottles. A diagnosis of Lyme arthritis is made via a
two-­step test of an ELISA or IFA followed by a reflex Western blot for
samples that are positive or equivocal by the first methodology. Patients
with Lyme arthritis are seropositive because arthritis is a late manifestation of infection. PCR is rarely necessary but can detect Borrelia burgdorferi in joint aspirate specimens in cases of Lyme arthritis.
Synovial fluid analysis for cell count, differential, protein, and
glucose has limited utility in diagnosing infectious arthritis. Joint
fluid WBC counts >50,000 cells/mm3 (often >100,000 cells/mm3)
suggest bacterial infection as the most likely etiology, but this finding is neither sensitive nor specific enough to exclude or confirm
a bacterial infection in isolation. When the results of joint aspirate cell counts and culture are not strongly suggestive of a joint
infection, but the clinical presentation is worrisome for a bacterial
etiology, infectious causes of sympathetic joint effusions such as
adjacent pyomyositis and osteomyelitis should be investigated by
MRI (see Chapter 725).
Monitoring elevated CRP may be of value in assessing response to
therapy or identifying complications. In addition, patients with adjacent infections complicating septic arthritis more frequently have a
CRP >10-13 mg/dL compared with patients with septic arthritis alone.
Other findings such as older age, prolonged symptoms, bacteremia,
alterations in other lab values (such as elevated absolute neutrophil
count or thrombocytopenia), and failure to rapidly improve with
therapy have been less consistently associated with adjacent infection.
Nonetheless, adjacent infection should be considered in patients demonstrating multiple risk factors.

Radiographic Evaluation

Radiographic studies play a crucial role in evaluating septic arthritis.
Conventional radiographs and ultrasonography are performed as part
of the routine workup. CT, MRI, and radionuclide studies can all contribute to establishing the diagnosis in selected cases (Fig. 726.1).

Plain Radiographs

Plain films can suggest the diagnosis of septic arthritis by showing widening of the joint capsule, soft tissue edema, and obliteration of normal
fat lines. Plain films can also help to exclude other causes of joint pain
such as fractures. Plain films of the hip can show medial displacement
of the obturator muscle into the pelvis (the obturator sign), lateral displacement or obliteration of the gluteal fat lines, and elevation of Shenton’s line with a widened arc.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 726 u Septic Arthritis 4293
genital) and parasitic infections, streptococcal pharyngitis, or viral
hepatitis can resemble acute septic arthritis (see Chapter 198).

TREATMENT

Optimal treatment of septic arthritis requires coordination between
primary care physicians, orthopedic surgeons, and radiologists.

Surgical Therapy

Hip effusion Tracking soft-tissue
abscess

Fig. 726.1 MRI of staphylococcal septic arthritis of left hip, with fluid

collections between planes of gluteal muscles. Arrows indicate fluid collection. (From Matthews CJ, Weston VC, Jones A, et al. Bacterial septic
arthritis in adults. Lancet. 2010;375:846–854.)

Ultrasonography

Ultrasonography is included with plain films in routine evaluations
because it is particularly helpful in detecting joint effusion and fluid
collection in the soft tissue and subperiosteal regions. Ultrasonography
is highly sensitive in detecting joint effusion, particularly for the hip
joint, where plain radiographs are normal in more than 50% of cases
of septic arthritis of the hip. Ultrasonography can serve as an aid in
performing hip aspiration.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Computed
Tomography

MRI and CT can confirm the presence of joint fluid in patients with
suspected osteoarthritis infections but are not routinely indicated. MRI
is useful in evaluating for adjacent osteomyelitis or pyomyositis but is
typically reserved for cases when the index of suspicion for these conditions is high. Considerations include patient factors such as younger
age, the clinical presentation (e.g., protracted pain preceding joint
swelling), the results of laboratory investigations such as joint aspiration and CRP, and response to therapy.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of septic arthritis depends on the joint
or joints involved and the age of the patient. For the hip, transient
synovitis, pyomyositis, Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease, slipped capital
femoral epiphysis, psoas abscess, and proximal femoral, pelvic, or
vertebral osteomyelitis, as well as diskitis, should be considered.
Transient synovitis (toxic synovitis) is a postinfectious arthritis of
the hip that is often seen in young children after a viral infection
(see Chapter 719.2). For the knee, distal femoral or proximal tibial
osteomyelitis, pauciarticular rheumatoid arthritis, and referred
pain from the hip should be considered. Knee or thigh pain may
be referred from the hip. Other conditions such as trauma, cellulitis, pyomyositis, sickle cell disease, hemophilia, Lyme arthritis,
leukemia, serum sickness, and IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­S chönlein
purpura) can mimic purulent arthritis. When several joints are
involved, serum sickness, collagen vascular disease, rheumatic
fever, and IgA vasculitis should be considered. Arthritis is one of
the extraintestinal manifestations of inflammatory bowel disease.
Reactive arthritis after a variety of bacterial (gastrointestinal or

Drainage and irrigation of the infected joint via arthroscopy or
arthrotomy is typically performed to decompress the joint and
remove inflammatory debris. The decision to proceed to one of these
procedures after arthrocentesis is based on the gross appearance of
the joint fluid, or joint fluid WBC and differential, in the context of
the clinical presentation and the specific joint that is infected. Infection of the hip is generally considered a surgical emergency because
of the vulnerability of the blood supply to the head of the femur. For
joints other than the hip, daily aspirations of synovial fluid may be
required. In general, one or two subsequent aspirations suffice. If fluid
continues to accumulate after 4-5 days, arthrotomy or video-­assisted
arthroscopy is needed. At the time of surgery, the joint is flushed with
sterile saline solution. Antibiotics are not instilled because they are
irritating to synovial tissue, and adequate amounts of antibiotic are
achieved in joint fluid with systemic administration.

Antimicrobial Therapy

Empiric antimicrobial therapy should be started immediately in a child
with presumed septic arthritis who is ill-­appearing or has a rapidly
progressive infection. Antibiotic therapy may be deferred until initial
joint aspirate has been collected for diagnostic purposes in a child with
presumed septic arthritis who does not appear clinically ill.
The initial empirical antimicrobial therapy is based on likely bacterial pathogens at various ages, the results of the Gram stain of aspirated
material, and additional considerations. In neonates, an antistaphylococcal penicillin, such as nafcillin or oxacillin (100-200 mg/kg/24 hr divided
q6hr IV), and a broad-­spectrum cephalosporin, such as cefepime (100150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12hr IV), provide coverage for the S. aureus,
group B streptococcus, and gram-­negative bacilli. If MRSA is a concern,
clindamycin or vancomycin is selected instead of nafcillin or oxacillin. If
the neonate is a small premature infant or has a central vascular catheter,
the possibility of nosocomial bacteria (S. aureus, gram-­negative enterics,
or Pseudomonas aeruginosa) or fungi (Candida) should be considered.
In children with septic arthritis, empirical therapy to cover for
S. aureus and streptococci includes at minimum nafcillin (100200 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6hr). In preschool-­age children (i.e., 6
months to 4 years), empiric therapy should include an antibiotic
with activity against Kingella kingae as well as S. aureus, such as
cefazolin (100-150 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8hr).
In areas where methicillin resistance is noted in ≥10–15% of community-­
acquired methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (CA-­MRSA) strains, adding an
antimicrobial that is effective against local CA-­MRSA isolates is suggested. Vancomycin (15 mg/kg q6hr IV) is preferred in patients who are
ill-­appearing, suspected to be bacteremic, or if local clindamycin resistance
is more than 10–15%. Clindamycin (30-40 mg/kg/24 hr divided q6-8hr) is
a good alternative when treating CA-­MRSA infections. For immunocompromised patients, combination therapy is usually initiated, such as with
vancomycin and ceftazidime, cefepime, or piperacillin/tazobactam, with
or without an aminoglycoside. Adjunct therapy with dexamethasone has
been shown in some studies to decrease the duration of fever and promote
a more rapid decline in inflammatory markers, but this is not yet part of
routine care. Lyme arthritis is treated with oral doxycycline (4.4 mg/kg/24
hr divided q12hr) for 28 days in children >8 years old. For children <8
years old, oral amoxicillin (50 mg/kg/24 hr divided q8hr) or cefuroxime
(30 mg/kg/24 hr divided q12hr) is recommended. A second 28-­day course
may be considered for patients with persistent or recurrent symptoms after
completing the initial course of treatment. Intravenous ceftriaxone (50
mg/kg q24hr IV) for 14-28 days may be considered as an initial or second
course of therapy for severe or refractory cases.
Empirical antimicrobials are narrowed to targeted therapy when the
pathogen is identified. If a pathogen is not identified and a patient’s condition is improving, therapy is continued with the antibiotic selected

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4294 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
initially. If a pathogen is not identified and a patient’s condition is not
improving, consideration should be given to the need for repeat aspiration, the presence of an extraarticular infection requiring surgical
debridement, or the possibility of a noninfectious etiology. In such cases,
MRI may be performed to assist with subsequent management decisions.
Duration of antibiotic therapy is individualized depending on the
organism isolated and the clinical course. A total of 10-14 days is usually adequate for streptococci, S. pneumoniae, and K. kingae; longer
therapy may be needed for S. aureus and gram-­negative infections (3
weeks), concomitant osteomyelitis (4 weeks), extensive disease, or slow
response to treatment. Normalization of CRP in addition to a normal
examination supports discontinuing antibiotic therapy. The prognostic significance of an improved but still minimally elevated ESR in the
third or fourth week of therapy is not clear if all other clinical and laboratory parameters are favorable. In selected patients, obtaining a plain
radiograph of the joint before completing therapy can provide evidence
(typically periosteal new bone) of a previously unappreciated contiguous site of osteomyelitis that would likely prolong antibiotic treatment.
Oral antibiotics can be used to complete therapy once the patient is
afebrile for 48-72 hours and is clearly improving.
Surgically administered intraarticular antibiotics are not
recommended.

PROGNOSIS

Improvement in signs and symptoms occurs rapidly after joint
drainage and antibiotic administration. Failure to improve or worsening by 48-72 hours requires review of the appropriateness of the
antibiotic therapy, the need for surgical intervention, and the correctness of the diagnosis. CRP may be useful to monitor response
to therapy. Failure of CRP to decline should raise concerns about
the adequacy of therapy. Recurrence of disease and development of
chronic infection after treatment occur in <10% of patients.
Septic arthritis can lead to numerous long-­term sequelae in children, including leg-­length discrepancy or angular deformity from
growth arrest, limitations in range of motion due to chondral damage, and avascular necrosis of the femoral head from septic arthritis
of the hip. The overall rate of these sequelae with current therapies
is <5%. However, children are in a dynamic state of growth, so these
abnormalities might not become apparent for months or years;
therefore long-­term follow-­up is necessary, with close attention to
range of motion of joints and bone length. Involvement of the hip is
associated with a higher rate of sequelae. Initiation of medical and
surgical therapy within 1 week of onset of symptoms provides a better prognosis than delayed treatment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 2

Sports Medicine
Chapter 727

Prevention of Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the American College of Sports Medicine, and the American Academy of Pediatrics all
recommend daily moderate to vigorous physical activity for all adolescents. Physical activity has favorable effects on blood pressure, body
composition, and serum lipid levels in youths and is associated with
lower rates of cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis, and colon and breast cancer among adults.

Pediatricians should promote physical activity to their patients,
especially those with lower rates of physical activity and sports participation, including children with special healthcare needs (see Chapter
756) and those from lower socioeconomic groups. Physicians also have
the responsibility of providing medical clearance for participation in
physical activity and sports as well as for the diagnosis and rehabilitation of injuries.
Approximately 30 million children and adolescents participate in
organized sports in the United States. Around 3 million sport-­related
injuries occur annually in young athletes, if injury is defined as time lost
from the sport. Deaths in sports are rare, with the majority of nontraumatic deaths caused by cardiac diseases (see Chapter 485). Nonetheless,
approximately 30% of life-­threatening injuries in children presenting to
an emergency room are sports related. Overall, injury rates and injury
severity in sports increase with age and pubertal development, related to
the greater speed, strength, and intensity of competition.
Identifying mechanisms of injury and establishing and enforcing
rules that reduce the likelihood of that mechanism of injury, including
penalizing dangerous play, have reduced catastrophic injury rates. Injury
rates also have been reduced by removing environmental hazards, such
as trampolines in gymnastics and stationary (versus breakaway) bases
in softball, and by modifying heat injury rates in soccer tournaments
by adding water breaks and reducing the playing time. Certain types
of equipment can mitigate the risk of some injuries, such as the use of
mouth guards to reduce dental injuries. The most consistently identified
risk factor for injury is prior injury. In other words, although reinjury
may often be due to insufficient recovery and rehabilitation of a prior
injury, appropriate rehabilitation reduces injury risk. Preseason training
for adolescent athletes, with an emphasis on speed, agility, core strength,
landing mechanics, and flexibility, is associated with lower injury rates
in soccer and fewer serious knee injuries in female athletes. Traditional
stretching maneuvers or massage have not been demonstrated to reduce
the risk of injury or muscle soreness, but ankle taping and use of lace­up ankle braces are helpful in preventing ankle injuries. One setting
for implementing some of these prevention strategies and for detecting
unrehabilitated injuries and medical problems that could affect participation in sports is the preparticipation sports examination (PSE).

PREPARTICIPATION SPORTS EXAMINATION

The PSE is performed with a directed history and physical examination,
including a screening musculoskeletal examination (see Table 485.2 in
Chapter 485). It identifies possible problems in 1–8% of athletes and
excludes fewer than 1% from participation. The PSE is not a substitute
for the recommended comprehensive annual evaluation, which looks
at behaviors that are potentially harmful to teens, such as sexual activity, drug use, and violence, and assesses for depression and suicidal ideation and addresses broader issues of prevention. Table 727.1 identifies
the purposes of the PSE. If possible, the PSE should be combined with
the comprehensive annual health visit with an emphasis on preventive
healthcare (see Chapters 13 and 28).
State requirements for how often a young athlete needs a PSE differ,
ranging from annually to entry to a new school level (middle school,
high school, college). At a minimum, a focused, annual interim evaluation should be done on an otherwise healthy young athlete. The PSE is
optimally performed 3-6 weeks before the start of practice.

History and Physical Examination

The essential components of the PSE are the history and focused medical and musculoskeletal screening examinations. Identified problems
require more investigation (Table 727.2). While many medical conditions should not limit sports participation, many specialty organizations have released recommendations regarding sports participation
(Table 727.3). In the absence of symptoms, no screening laboratory
tests are required. Return to sports after COVID-19 infection is based
on the severity of infection (mild, moderate, or ICU admission and/or
MIS-­C), and the intensity of follow-­up, especially for those with active
cardiac involvement during the acute phase of the illness (Fig. 727.1).
Seventy-­five percent of significant findings are identified by the history;
a standardized questionnaire given to the parent and athlete is important

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 727 u Prevention of Injuries

4295

Table 727.1  Objectives of the Preparticipation Sports
Examination

Table 727.3  Sports Participation Recommendations by
Condition

• Determination of the general health of the athlete
• Disclosure of defects that may limit participation
• Detection of conditions that may predispose the athlete to injury
• Determination of optimal level of performance
• Classification of the athlete according to individual qualifications
• Fulfillment of legal and insurance requirements for organized
athletic programs
• Evaluation of size and level of maturation of younger athletes
• Improvement of fitness and performance
• Provision of opportunities for students to compete who have
either physiologic or pathologic health conditions that may
preclude blanket approval
• Provision of the opportunity to counsel youths and answer health
and personal questions
• Entry of the athlete into the local sports medicine system,
establishing a doctor-­patient relationship that continues

CONDITION

From Sanders B, Blackburn TA, Boucher B. Preparticipation screening-­the sports
physical therapy perspective. Int J Sports Phys Ther. 2013;8(2):180–193. Table 1.

Restrict contact or collision
sports until evaluation by
a hematologist who can
assess degree of hemostatic
abnormality and the sport-­
specific risk

Sickle cell disease

Individual decision-­making
given variation in phenotypic
expression

Diabetes mellitus

No restrictions

Skin infections (herpes
gladiatorum, tinea
gladiatorum, impetigo,
molluscum contagiosum, warts,
and MRSA)

Prevent transmission by:
• Covering infected site
• Using prophylactic
medications as prescribed
• No sharing of personal
items
• Thorough cleaning of
equipment

Mononucleosis infection

Light, noncontact activity may
be introduced as tolerated 3
weeks after illness onset with
avoidance of contact/collision
sports until 4 weeks after illness
onset

Blood-­borne infections (hepatitis
B, hepatitis C, HIV)

No restrictions

COVID-19 infection

See Fig. 727.1

Heat illness, history of

Gradual acclimatization to
heat over 7-14 days, avoid
participation while ill (fever, skin
rash, viral symptoms), ensure
free access to fluids at all times,
consume sodium-­containing
food/fluids to replace
insensible losses, rest periods
of at least 3 hours before
practice or games

Down syndrome

Individual decision-making
based on the presence of
congenital heart disease or
atlantoaxial instability

Table 727.2  Preparticipation Sports Examination
COMPONENT OF THE
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

CONDITION TO BE DETECTED

Vital signs

Hypertension, cardiac disease,
bradycardia or tachycardia

Height and weight

Obesity, eating disorders,
malabsorption

Vision and pupil size

Legal blindness, absent eye,
anisocoria, amblyopia

Lymph node

Infectious diseases, malignancy

Cardiac (performed standing
and supine)

Heart murmur, prior surgery,
dysrhythmia, femoral pulses

Pulmonary

Recurrent and exercise-­induced
bronchospasm, chronic lung
disease

Abdomen

Organomegaly, abdominal mass

Skin

Contagious diseases (impetigo,
herpes, staphylococcal,
streptococcal)

Genitourinary

Varicocele, undescended testes,
tumor, hernia

Musculoskeletal

Acute and chronic injuries, physical
anomalies (scoliosis)

because the young athlete might not know or might forget important
aspects of the history. The questionnaire should include questions about
the family history and the patient’s previous medical, surgical, cardiac, pulmonary, neurologic, dermatologic, visual, psychologic, musculoskeletal,
and endocrinologic problems, as well as about prior heat illness, medications, allergies, immunizations, and diet. The most commonly identified
problems are unrehabilitated injuries. An investigation of previous injuries, including diagnostic tests, treatment, and present functional status,
is indicated.
Sudden death during sports can result from undetected cardiac disease, such as hypertrophic or other cardiomyopathies (see Chapter 488),
anomalous coronary vessels (see Chapter 481.2), or a ruptured aorta
in Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743). In many cases, the underlying
heart disease is not suspected, and death is the first sign of underlying
heart disease (see Chapter 485). However, in approximately 25–50% of
cases, preceding symptoms of dizziness, chest pain, syncope, palpitations,
shortness of breath, and/or a family history of early, unexpected death are
identified retrospectively. Chest radiographs, electrocardiograms, and

RECOMMENDATION

Hemophilia

Data from Herman D, Gadi N, Peck E. Team medical coverage. In Miller MD, Thompson
SR, eds. DeLee, Drez, & Miller’s Sports Medicine, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2020.

echocardiograms are not recommended as routine screening tests in the
United States, but screening electrocardiograms are recommended in a
number of other countries and are becoming more commonly used among
higher risk groups in the United States, such as collegiate and professional
athletes. If there is a suspicion of heart disease, such as a history of syncope,
presyncope, palpitations, or excessive dyspnea with exercise, or a family
history of a condition such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or prolonged
QT or Marfan syndrome, the evaluation should be complete and include
a 12-­lead electrocardiogram, an echocardiogram, Holter or event-­capture
monitoring, and a stress test with electrocardiographic monitoring. Recommendations for participation with identified cardiac disease should be
made in consultation with a cardiologist.
Sports may also be classified by intensity (Fig. 727.2) and contact (Table
727.4). Athletes may seek to participate in sports against medical advice
and have done so successfully for professional sports. Section 504(a) of
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 prohibits discrimination against disabled
athletes if they have the capabilities or skills required to play a competitive
sport. This was reinforced through the Americans with Disabilities Act of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Significant symptoms
Systemic symptoms/signs,
cough, fever, muscle aches,
fatigue, shortness of breath,
fast heart rate

Rest from exercise; perform
activities of daily living only;
avoid unnecessary exertion

Monitor daily progress
of symptoms

Improvement/
resolution

Confirmation of acute
COVID-19 infection

Minimal or no symptoms
Asymptomatic or mild
symptoms only, mild sore
throat, mild runny nose,
no fever, normal pulse rate

Light exercise, at about 50%
intensity of normal pre-COVID
exercise routine, 15–30 mins
duration × 3 days*

Deteriorating symptoms#

No improvement
14 days* after
diagnosis

Moderate exercise, at about
75% intensity of normal
pre-COVID exercise routine,
30+ mins duration × 3 days*

Assessment by
medical practitioner

Resumption of normal
pre-COVID exercise routine

Monitor response to attempted exercise, looking for symptoms such as excessive fatigue.
lack of exercise tolerance. Only progress if responding normally to exercise stimulus
Cease exercise for
48 hours; rest; then retry
light exercise

Adverse response to
attempted exercise

Repeated adverse response
to attempted exercise
>30 days* after diagnosis

• Dry, post-viral cough may persist beyond the acute COVID-19 infection
• Individuals should be 10 days post diagnosis or onset of symptoms (or have negative RAT on days 6 & 7), before rejoining group / team activities
• *Number of days at each step may be modified in high performance sport, where athletes have the benefit of close medical supervision
• Those with medical comorbidities should adopt a more cautious approach to return to exercise
• # Cardiac symptoms should be treated as a medical emergency: Pressure, tightness, squeezing pain in chest, arms, neck, jaw, or back,
cold sweat, difficulty breathing, collapse, sudden dizziness

Fig. 727.1 Graduated return to exercise after COVID-19 infection. RAT, rapid home antigen test. (From Hughes DC, Orchard JW, Partridge EM,

II. Moderate (10-20%)
I. Low (<10%)

Increasing Static Component

III. High (>30%)

et al. Return to exercise post-COVID-19 infection: a pragmatic approach in mid-2022. J Sci Med Sport. 2022;25:544–547. Fig. 1.)

Bobsledding/Luge
Field events (throwing)
Gymnastics*†
Martial arts
Rock climbing
Sailing
Water skiing*†
Weight lifting*†
Windsurfing*†

Body building*†
Downhill skiing
Skateboarding*†
Snow boarding*†
Wrestling*

Boxing
Canoeing
Kayaking
Cycling*†
Decathlon
Rowing
Speed skating
Triathlon*†

Archery
Auto racing*†
Diving*†
Equestrian*†
Motorcycling*†

American football*
Field events (jumping)
Figure skating
Rodeoing*†
Rugby
Running (sprint)
Surfing
Synchronized swimming†
“Ultra” racing

Basketball*
Ice hockey*
Cross-country skiing
(skating technique)
Lacrosse*
Running (middle distance)
Swimming
Team handball
Tennis

Bowling
Cricket
Curling
Golf
Riflery
Yoga

Baseball/Softball
Fencing
Table tennis
Volleyball

Badminton
Cross-country skiing
(classic technique)
Field hockey*
Orienteering
Race walking
Racquetball/Squash
Running (long distance)
Soccer*

A. Low (<50%)

B. Moderate (50-75%)

C. High (>75%)

Increasing Dynamic Component

Fig. 727.2 Classification of sports. This classification is based on peak static and dynamic components achieved during competition; however,

higher values may be reached during training. The increasing dynamic component is defined in terms of the estimated percentage of maximal oxẏ 2max) achieved and results in an increasing cardiac output. The increasing static component is related to the estimated percentage
gen uptake (Vo
of maximal voluntary contraction reached and results in an increasing blood pressure load. The lowest total cardiovascular demands (cardiac output
and blood pressure) are shown in the palest color, with increasing dynamic load depicted by increasing blue intensity and increasing static load by
increasing red intensity. Note the graded transition between categories, which should be individualized on the basis of player position and style
of play. *Danger of bodily collision (see Table 727.4 for more detail on collision risk). †Increased risk if syncope occurs. (Modified from Mitchell JH,
Haskell W, Snell P, et al. 36th Bethesda conference. Task force 8: classification of sports. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:1364–1367.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
Table 727.4  Sports According to Risk of Impact and
Educational Background
JUNIOR HIGH
SCHOOL

HIGH SCHOOL/COLLEGE

Impact
expected

American football
Ice hockey
Lacrosse
Wrestling
Karate/judo
Fencing
Boxing

American football
Soccer
Ice hockey
Lacrosse
Basketball
Wrestling
Karate/judo
Downhill skiing
Squash
Fencing
Boxing

Impact may
occur

Soccer
Basketball
Field hockey
Downhill skiing
Equestrian
Squash
Cycling

Field hockey
Equestrian
Cycling
Baseball/softball
Gymnastics
Figure skating

Baseball/softball
Cricket
Golf
Riflery
Gymnastics
Volleyball
Swimming
Track and field
Tennis
Figure skating
Cross-­country skiing
Rowing
Sailing
Archery
Weightlifting
Badminton

Cricket
Golf
Riflery
Volleyball
Swimming
Track and field
Tennis
Cross-­country skiing
Rowing
Sailing
Archery
Weightlifting
Badminton

Impact not
expected

From Levine BD, Baggish AL, Kovacs RJ, et al. Eligibility and disqualification
recommendations for competitive athletes with cardiovascular abnormalities: Task force
1: classification of sports: dynamic, static, and impact: a scientific statement from the
American Heart Association and American College of Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2015;66(21):2350–2355.

1990. Participation in competitive sports is considered a privilege, not a
right. Knapp v Northwestern University established that “difficult medical
decisions involving complex medical problems can be made by responsible physicians exercising prudent judgment (which will be necessarily
conservative when definitive scientific evidence is lacking or conflicting)
and relying on the recommendations of specialist consultants or guidelines
established by a panel of experts.”
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 728

Management of
Musculoskeletal Injury
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
MECHANISM OF INJURY
Acute Injuries

Sprains, strains, and contusions account for the majority of musculoskeletal injuries. A sprain is an injury to a ligament or joint capsule. Most

4297

sprains are graded I-­III. A grade I sprain is defined as mild damage to
a ligament or ligaments without instability of the affected joint. A grade
II sprain is considered a partial tear to the ligament, such that it exhibits excessive laxity but has a firm endpoint on examination. A grade III
sprain is a complete tear of the ligament with instability to the affected
joint and without a firm endpoint on examination. A strain is an injury
to a muscle or tendon, and these are also graded I-­III. Grade I muscle
strains involve disruption of only a few muscle fibers, pain is mild to
moderate, and range of motion and strength are at or near normal. Grade
II strains represent a more significant, partial tear of the muscle and frequently involve loss of range of motion and strength. Grade III strains are
defined as complete rupture of the musculotendinous unit. On examination, grade III strains, and often grade II strains, present with ecchymosis
and a palpable step-­off at the site of injury. A contusion is a crush injury
to any soft tissue. The history of the injury is especially helpful in assessing musculoskeletal trauma. More severe injuries, including fractures
or internal derangement of a joint, may have acute signs and symptoms
such as immediate swelling, deformity, numbness or “give-­way” weakness, a loud painful pop, mechanical locking of the joint, or instability.

Overuse Injuries

Overuse injuries are caused by repetitive microtrauma that exceeds the
body’s rate of repair. This can occur in muscles, tendons, bone, bursae,
cartilage, and nerves. Overuse injuries can occur in all sports but are
more commonly seen in sports emphasizing repetitive motion such as
swimming, running, tennis, baseball pitching, and gymnastics. Factors
leading to overuse injuries can be categorized as extrinsic (i.e., training errors, poor equipment, or workout surface) and intrinsic (i.e.,
athlete’s anatomy or medical conditions). Training error is the most
commonly identified factor. For example, at the beginning of the training program, athletes might violate the “10% rule” by increasing the
duration or intensity of workouts by more than 10% per week. This
may exceed the body’s capacity to recover between bouts of activity,
leading to accumulated microtrauma that manifests as an overuse
injury. Intrinsic factors include abnormal biomechanics that may be
due to underlying anatomic causes (e.g., leg-­length discrepancy, pes
planus, pes cavus, tarsal coalition, valgus heel, external tibial torsion,
and femoral anteversion), muscle imbalance, inflexibility, and medical conditions (deconditioning, nutritional deficits, amenorrhea, and
obesity). To identify the cause of an overuse injury, the athlete should
be questioned about the specifics of their training. Specifically, runners, for example, should be asked about their shoes, orthotics, running surface, weekly mileage or time spent running per week, speed or
hill workouts, and previous injuries and rehabilitation. When causative
factors are identified, they can be modified or eliminated so that after
rehabilitation the athlete does not suffer a recurrent overuse injury.
For athletes engaged in excessive training that causes an overuse
injury, curtailing all exercise may not be necessary. Treatment incorporates a reduction of training load (relative rest) combined with a rehabilitation program designed to return athletes to their sport as soon
as possible while minimizing risk of re-­injury. Early identification of
an overuse injury requires less alteration of the workout regimen. In
addition, proper sleep, nutrition, and stress management can optimize
recovery between bouts of activity, promoting physiologic adaptation
and reducing the risk of accumulated damage that leads to injury.
It has become more commonplace for young athletes to specialize
in a single sport and engage in year-­round training. Families should
be advised about the risks of specialization in young athletes because
this is associated with burnout, decreased motivation and enjoyment,
and increased risk of overuse injuries. This is especially evident among
baseball pitchers, in whom repeated exposure to the highly repetitive
and forceful throwing motion can damage the tissues in the elbow and
shoulder in a growing athlete. These athletes and their parents should
be counseled to diversify their sport participation at younger ages,
which may increase their enjoyment and performance in sport, as well
as reduce the risk of overuse injury.
The goals of treatment in overuse injuries are to control pain and
spasm to rehabilitate flexibility, strength, endurance, and proprioceptive deficits (Table 728.1). In many overuse injuries, the role of inflammation in the process is minimal. For most injuries to tendons, the term

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4298 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 728.1  Staging of Overuse Injuries
GRADE

GRADING SYMPTOMS

TREATMENT

I

Pain only after activity
Does not interfere with performance or intensity
Generalized tenderness
Disappears before next session

Modification of activity, consider cross-­training, home rehabilitation
program

II

Minimal pain with activity
Does not interfere with performance
More localized tenderness
Disappears before next session

Modification of activity, cross-­training, home rehabilitation program

III

Pain interferes with activity and performance
Definite area of tenderness
Usually disappears between sessions

Significant modification of activity, strongly encourage cross-­
training, home rehabilitation program, and outpatient physical
therapy

IV

Pain with activities of daily living
Pain does not disappear between sessions
Marked interference with performance and training intensity

Discontinue activity temporarily, cross-­training only, oral analgesic,
home rehabilitation program, and intensive outpatient physical
therapy

V

Pain interferes with activities of daily living
Signs of tissue injury (e.g., edema)
Chronic or recurrent symptoms

Prolonged discontinuation of activity, cross-­training only, oral
analgesic, home rehabilitation program, and intensive outpatient
physical therapy

tendinitis is no longer used because there is little or no inflammation
on histopathology of the affected tendons. Rather, there is evidence of
microscopic trauma to the tissue and a disorientation of the tendon
fibers. Most of these entities are more appropriately called tendinosis;
when the tendon tissue is scarred and when markedly abnormal, tendinopathy. With tendinosis, there is less of a role for antiinflammatory
medication in the treatment, except as an analgesic.
Novel treatments are emerging for the effective treatment of chronic
tendinopathies. Under ultrasound guidance, pathologic areas of tendon tissue can be targeted with injections of autologous blood or
platelet-­rich plasma to stimulate a proinflammatory and more robust
healing response. Platelet-­rich plasma is a controversial therapy with
a mixed body of evidence related to its effectiveness for certain acute
and chronic tendinopathies; there is a lack of consensus regarding its
role in the standard of care. Pathologic tissue can also be targeted with
percutaneous needle fenestration or tenotomy, and tendon-­fat pad
adhesions can also be addressed through mechanical needle scraping
or hydrodissection techniques using ultrasound.

placed directly over the injury as tolerated for 20 minutes continuously
3 or 4 times per day until the swelling resolves. Compression limits
further bleeding and swelling but should not be so tight that it limits
perfusion. Elevation of the extremity promotes venous return and limits swelling. A nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) or acetaminophen are indicated for analgesia.
Pain-­free isometric strengthening and range of motion exercises
should be initiated as soon as tolerable. Pain inhibits full muscle contraction; deconditioning results if the pain and resultant disuse persist
for days to weeks, thus delaying recovery. Education about the nature
of the injury and the specifics of rehabilitation exercises, including
handouts with written instructions and drawings demonstrating the
exercises, are helpful.

INITIAL EVALUATION OF THE INJURED EXTREMITY

Initially, the examiner should determine the quality of the peripheral
pulses and capillary refill rate, as well as the gross motor and sensory
function to assess for neurovascular injury. The first priorities are to
maintain vascular integrity and skeletal stability.
Criteria for immediate attention and rapid orthopedic consultation
include vascular compromise, nerve compromise, and open fracture.
With the latter, the exposed wound should be covered with sterile saline-­
soaked gauze, the injured limb should be padded and splinted, and systemic antibiotics should be administered. Pressure should be applied to
any site of excessive bleeding. Additional criteria include deep laceration over a joint, unreducible dislocation, grade III (complete) tear of
a muscle-­tendon unit, and displaced, significantly angulated fractures.

TRANSITION FROM IMMEDIATE MANAGEMENT TO
RETURN TO PLAY

Rehabilitation of a musculoskeletal injury should be initiated on the
day of the injury.

Phase 1

Limit further injury, control swelling and pain, and minimize strength
and flexibility losses. PRICE principles (Protection, Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation) need to be applied. Crutches, air stirrups for
ankle sprains, slings for arm injuries, and elastic wraps (4-8 inches)
for compression are a helpful inventory of medical supplies. Ice can be

Phase 2

Improve strength and range of motion (e.g., flexibility) while allowing the
injured structures to heal. Protective devices are removed when the patient’s
strength and flexibility improve and activities of daily living are pain-­free.
Flexibility can then be addressed by a program of specific stretches, held for
15-30 seconds for three to five repetitions, once or twice daily. A physical
therapist or athletic trainer is invaluable in guiding the athlete through this
process. Protective devices might need to be used upon return to sports
participation. Swimming, water jogging, and stationary cycling are good,
low-­impact aerobic exercises that can allow the injured lower extremity to
be used pain-­free while maintaining cardiovascular fitness.

Phase 3

Achieve near-­normal strength and flexibility of the injured structures
and further improve or maintain cardiovascular fitness. Strength
and endurance are improved under controlled conditions using elastic bands and closed kinetic chain exercises (movement of multiple
joints and limb segments with foot fixed to a static surface, such as the
floor or wall) at this point and then progressing next to using exercise
equipment followed by free weights. Additional sensory proprioceptive
training allows the athlete to redevelop the kinesthetic sense critical to
joint function and stability during activity.

Phase 4

Return to exercise or competition without restriction. When the athlete has reached normal range of motion, strength, proprioception, and
endurance, the athlete can initiate sports-­specific exercises. The athlete
will transition from the rehabilitation program to functional rehabilitation appropriate for the sport. Substituting sports participation for rehabilitation is inappropriate; rather, there should be progressive stepwise

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
functional return to a full activity or play program. For instance, a basketball player recovering from an ankle injury might begin a walk-­run-­
sprint-­cut program before returning to competition. At any point in
this progression, if pain is experienced, the athlete needs to stop, apply
ice, avoid running for 1-2 days, continue to perform ankle stabilizing
exercises, and then resume running at a lower intensity and progress
accordingly.

Relative Rest and Return-­to-­Play Guidelines

Relative rest refers to the concept that the athlete participates in rehabilitation and return to sport activities provided the injured structures
do not hurt during or within 24 hours of the activity. Exercising beyond
the pain threshold delays recovery.

IMAGING

Traditional imaging modalities such as x-­ray, ultrasound, MRI, and CT
are well-­established in the routine diagnostic workup of musculoskeletal injury. An obvious advantage of ultrasound is a lack of radiation. It is
also better tolerated by younger children who may have difficulty complying with MRI or CT protocols. Dynamic movement or stressing of
a limb, joint, or structure can provide valuable diagnostic information
and can easily be compared to the contralateral side for comparison.
Snapping or popping sensations, suspected intramuscular hematomas,
stress fractures, and prognostic scrutiny of strains, sprains, and tendinopathies are all high-­yield applications of diagnostic musculoskeletal sonography. Ultrasound imaging can also increase the accuracy
of therapeutic injections, improving injection efficacy while simultaneously reducing adverse outcomes by erroneous needle placement.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES OF
MUSCULOSKELETAL PAIN

Traumatic, rheumatologic, infectious, hematologic, psychologic, congenital, and oncologic processes—especially under the age of 12 years
old —can result in a presenting complaint of musculoskeletal pain.
Symptoms such as fatigue, weight loss, rash, multiple joint complaints,
fever, chronic or recent illness, pain out of proportion to the nature of
the injury, and persistent pain despite conservative care suggest a diagnosis other than sports-­related trauma. The possibility of child abuse,
including sexual abuse, should not be overlooked. Incongruity between
the patient’s history and physical examination findings should lead to
further evaluation. A negative review of systems with an injury history
consistent with the physical findings suggests a sports-­related etiology.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.1 Growth Plate Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Approximately 20% of pediatric sports injuries seen in the emergency department are fractures, and 25% of those fractures involve an
epiphyseal growth plate or physis (see Chapter 724). Growth in long
bones occurs in three areas and is susceptible to injury. Immature bone
can be acutely injured at the physis (e.g., Salter-­Harris fractures, see
Chapter 724.2), the articular surface (e.g., osteochondritis dissecans
[OCD]), or the apophysis (e.g., avulsion fractures). Males suffer nearly
twice as many physeal fractures as females, with the highest incidence
of fracture occurring during peak height velocity (females: age 12 ± 2.5
years; males: age 14 ± 2 years). The physis is a pressure growth plate and
is responsible for longitudinal growth in bone. The apophysis is a bony
outgrowth at the attachment of a tendon and is a traction physis. The
epiphysis is the end of a long bone, distal or proximal to the long bone,
and contains articular cartilage at the joint.
Physeal injuries of the upper extremity are most commonly seen at
the distal radius in the growing child or adolescent and are typically due
to excessive force applied to the upper extremity. Injuries of this nature
can be seen in athletes, including those participating in gymnastics,
cheerleading, ice skating, hockey, and weightlifting. Mechanisms of

4299

injury include falls onto an outstretched hand or repetitive dorsiflexion
and axial loading through the distal radius (see Chapter 734). Chronic
wrist pain can be seen in up to 79% of young gymnasts—particularly
female gymnasts between the ages of 12-14 years—and is commonly
termed gymnasts’ wrist (see Chapter 722). With repetitive axial loading, temporary metaphyseal ischemia may be induced, preventing cartilage calcification and causing the physis to widen. With widening of
the distal radial physis, microfractures can develop. Clinical features
include radial wrist pain (particularly dorsal) that is aggravated with
passive and active hyperextension activities and relieved with suspension of the offending activity. Tenderness or focal pain around the circumference of the distal radius is often noted. Differential diagnosis
includes metacarpal fractures, scaphoid fracture and, in the older child
or adolescent, de Quervain tenosynovitis. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis,
malignancy, and infection need to be considered in a child with a painful, swollen wrist without a history of trauma. X-­rays of the wrist can
be helpful, particularly when compared to the contralateral extremity.
Radiographs can show physeal widening with cystic changes involving
the metaphyseal segment, breaking of the distal epiphysis, and, in later
stages, positive ulnar variance (longer ulna compared to the radius).
MRI is often helpful for stress fractures when radiographs are inconclusive and will show signs of stress reaction (bone marrow edema,
periosteal reaction, etc.), even if a fracture line is not evident. PRICE
principles are followed with nonnarcotic pain management. Salter-­
Harris fractures types I and II can be treated with closed reduction and
immobilization. Ulnar-­shortening osteotomy may be necessary in the
athlete with significant ulnar positive variance. Physeal injuries at the
knee (distal femur, proximal tibia) are rare, whereas those at the ankle
(distal fibula most commonly) are more frequent—typically occurring
as a result of an inversion injury—and predominantly consist of Salter-­
Harris I fractures.
Growth disturbance following a growth plate injury is a function of
location of the physeal fracture. This influences the probability that a
physeal bar will form, resulting in growth arrest. In the upper extremity, the areas making the largest contribution to longitudinal growth are
the proximal humerus and distal radius and ulna; in the lower extremities, the distal femur and the proximal tibia and fibula are the greatest
contributors to longitudinal growth. Injuries to these areas are more
likely to cause growth disturbance compared with physeal injuries at
the other end of these long bones. The type of physis fracture relative to
the risk of growth disturbance is described by the Salter-­Harris classification system (see Table 724.1). A grade I injury is least likely to result
in growth disturbance, and grade V is the most likely fracture to result
in growth disturbance.
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) affects the subchondral bone
and overlying articular surface (see Chapter 718.3). With avascular necrosis of subchondral bone, the articular surface can flatten,
soften, or break off in fragments. The etiology may be related to
repetitive stress injury in some patients. OCD most commonly presents in the lower extremities at the knee, affecting the lateral aspect
of the medial femoral condyle in 70% of patients, the lateral femoral
condyle in 20%, and the patella in 10%. In the upper extremities,
it is most frequently seen at the elbow (Fig. 728.1)—affecting the
capitellum—and is often associated with repetitive overhead throwing or swinging activities (e.g., baseball). Other sites where OCD
lesions are seen are the ankle (talus) and radial head. OCD classically affects athletes in their second decade. The most common
presentation is poorly localized, vague joint pain. There is rarely a
history of recent acute trauma. Some OCD lesions are asymptomatic and incidental—diagnosed on “routine” radiographs—whereas
others manifest as joint effusion, pain, decreased range of motion,
and mechanical symptoms (e.g., locking, popping, or catching).
Activity usually worsens the pain.
Physical examination might show no specific findings. Sometimes
tenderness over the involved condyle can be elicited by deep palpation.
Diagnosis is usually made with plain radiographs. Treatment of OCD
includes both nonoperative and surgical management (Chapter 718.3).
Long-­term sequelae can be seen in up to 25% with atypical lesions,
older age, effusion, and lesions of large size.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4300 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 728.2 Anterior inferior iliac spine avulsion. (Copyright Laurel
Sauer, 2017.)

Fig. 728.1 Osteochondritis dissecans in the elbow. (Copyright Laurel
Sauer, 2017.)

Avulsion fractures occur when a forceful muscle contraction dislodges the apophysis from the bone. They occur most commonly
around the hip (Fig. 728.2) and are typically treated nonsurgically if
no significant displacement of the avulsed fragment is present. Acute
fractures to other apophyses (i.e., knee and elbow) require urgent
orthopedic consultation. Chronically increased traction at the muscle-­
apophysis attachment can lead to repetitive microtrauma and pain at
the apophysis. The most common areas affected are the knee (Osgood-­
Schlatter and Sinding-­Larsen-­Johansson disease), the ankle (Sever
disease) (Fig. 728.3), the proximal fifth metatarsal (Iselin disease), and
the medial epicondyle (Little Leaguer’s elbow). Traction apophysitis
of the knee and ankle can often be treated in a primary care setting. The
main goal of treatment is to minimize the intensity and incidence of
pain and disability. Exercises that increase the strength, flexibility, and
endurance of the muscles attached at the apophysis, using the relative
rest principle, are appropriate. The use of a patellar strap can provide
benefit in reducing the traction force placed upon the tibial apophysis
during activity. Symptoms can last for 12-24 months if untreated. As
growth slows, symptoms abate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.2 Shoulder Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Shoulder pain associated with radiating symptoms down the arm
should raise the possibility of a neck injury (see Chapter 730). Neck
pain and tenderness or limitation of cervical range of motion requires
cervical spine immobilization and transfer of the athlete for further
evaluation. If there is no neck pain, tenderness, or limitation of motion
of the cervical spine, the shoulder is likely the site of the primary injury.

Fig. 728.3 Calcaneal apophysitis (Sever disease). (Copyright Laurel
Sauer, 2017.)

CLAVICLE FRACTURES

Clavicle fracture is one of the most common shoulder injuries (see
Chapter 724.3). Injury is usually sustained by a fall on the lateral
side of an adducted shoulder, on an outstretched hand, or by direct
blow. Approximately 80% of fractures occur in the middle third of the
clavicle. With younger children, plastic bowing of the clavicle may be
present instead of an overt fracture but should be treated in the same
fashion. Treatment is conservative and includes the use of an arm sling
or figure-­of-8 brace for comfort and protection. An arm sling is preferred because it is generally more comfortable and easier to apply with
similar clinical outcomes. Healing time is shorter in comparison to
that in adults—generally 3-6 weeks. An additional 2-­to 3-­week period
of protection from contact/collision activities is recommended after
clinical and radiographic healing is achieved to prevent re-injury. If
nondisplaced, most medial and lateral clavicular fractures can be managed similar to middle-­third clavicular fractures. Displaced lateral
and medial third fractures require orthopedic consultation because of
a higher incidence of acromioclavicular (AC) osteoarthritis (lateral),
and physeal involvement (medial). Distal clavicular osteolysis is likely
an overuse injury associated with slow dissolution and resorption of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
bone. The cause of injury is unclear, appearing most consistent with a
stress reaction or fracture at the site of considerable force. This lesion
is commonly seen in weightlifting athletes and can be seen in older
children. Nonoperative treatment, including activity limitations, ice,
NSAIDs, and cortisone injections, can be helpful. For weightlifters,
narrowing their hand spacing on the barbell and slowing descent phase
of the bench press to end 4-6 cm above the chest are recommended
activity modifications. For those not willing to modify weightlifting
activity or those with persistent symptoms despite conservative care,
surgery can be very successful and involves removal of the distal clavicle (approximately 1 cm) with no loss of strength and full return to
activity anticipated.

ACROMIOCLAVICULAR JOINT SEPARATION

An AC joint separation most commonly occurs when an athlete sustains a direct blow to the acromion with the humerus in an adducted
position, forcing the acromion inferiorly and medially. Force is
directed toward the AC joint and coracoclavicular ligaments because of
the inherent stability of the sternoclavicular joint. Patients have point
tenderness at the AC joint, pain with lifting their arms above the level
of their shoulder, and possibly an apparent step-­off between the distal
clavicle and the acromion (Fig. 728.4).
Type I AC joint injuries involve isolated sprain of the AC ligament with the periosteal sleeve intact (Fig. 728.5). There is no visible deformity, and the radiographs are normal. Pain is elicited with
adduction of the humerus across the chest and palpation of the AC
joint. Type II injuries involve disruption of the AC and coracoclavicular ligaments, as well as partial disruption of the periosteal sleeve.
Radiographs may show slight widening of the AC joint, though the
distance between the clavicle and the coracoid process is unchanged
in comparison to the uninjured shoulder. Treatment of type I and
type II AC injuries is conservative and consists of ice, NSAIDs, and
a sling for immobilization. Shoulder range of motion exercises and
strengthening of the rotator cuff, deltoid, and trapezius musculature

Fig. 728.4 Palpitation of acromioclavicular joint. (From Anderson SJ.
Sports injuries. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health. 2005;35:105–176.)

4301

are incorporated early in the rehabilitative course once pain-­free
range of motion is achieved in order to prevent residual joint stiffness. A short course of physical therapy may be helpful if range of
motion limitations are present 2-4 weeks out from injury. Consideration for return to play is made when the patient no longer has
focal AC joint tenderness, exhibits full, painless range of motion, has
strength sufficient to be functionally protected from a collision or
fall, and can perform maneuvers required within their sport. Typically, return to play from a type I AC injury is 1-2 weeks, and 2-4
weeks for type II.
Type III AC joint injury is more severe, involving further tearing of
the AC and coracoclavicular ligaments and disruption of the periosteal
sleeve with instability of the distal clavicle because of deltotrapezial fascial detachment. Radiographs will commonly show superior displacement of the distal clavicle from the coracoid of 25–100%. The treatment
of type III AC injuries is controversial. Many can be treated nonoperatively—similar to that described for types I and II AC injuries—if there
is no damage to the overlying skin or neurovascular compromise to the
injured limb. The patient should be counseled that this injury is likely
to result in a noticeable defect to ascertain whether this is acceptable.
Surgery for type III AC injuries is uncommon and primarily for athletes involved with throwing sports or for cosmesis. Types IV, V, and
VI AC joint injuries have progressive worsening of ligamentous and
fascial disruption with varied locations of the clavicular displacement.
These injuries should be referred to an orthopedist for consultation and
operative repair.

ANTERIOR GLENOHUMERAL DISLOCATION

The most common mechanism of injury causing an anterior glenohumeral dislocation is contact with the shoulder abducted to 90 degrees
and forcefully externally rotated. Patients complain of severe pain and
that their shoulder “popped out of place” or “shifted.” Patients with an
unreduced anterior dislocation have a hollow region inferior to the
acromion and a bulge in the anterior portion of the shoulder caused by
anterior displacement of the humeral head. Abnormal sensation of the
lateral deltoid region and the extensor surface of the proximal forearm
should be assessed to evaluate for concomitant injury to the radial or
musculocutaneous nerves, respectively.
Reduction of a dislocated shoulder should be made expediently,
assuming that there is no crepitus to suggest a fracture. Numerous
safe methods for closed reduction have been described, including the
traction–counter traction technique, the Stimson maneuver, and the
abduction maneuver. Postreduction radiographs are helpful and may
show evidence of a posterior lateral humeral head impaction fracture
(Hill-­Sachs lesion). Injuries to the surrounding soft tissues, including
the anterior capsule and labrum, are best evaluated by MRI—often with
an accompanying arthrogram of the glenohumeral joint. Once reduced,
initial treatment of a dislocation includes placing the patient into an
arm sling for comfort and protection. The duration of immobilization
is controversial and may last from a few days to 6 weeks. The most
significant risk after an acute traumatic dislocation is recurrence. Most
sports medicine practitioners encourage early range of motion and
strengthening exercises as tolerated. Rehabilitation focuses on progressive strengthening of the rotator cuff, deltoid, and periscapular muscles
at increasing degrees of abduction and external rotation. Strengthening of the rotator cuff muscles is extremely important because they are
the dynamic stabilizers of the glenohumeral joint and are integral to
the prevention of future dislocation. Plyometric exercises also may be
incorporated near the end of rehabilitation to improve proprioceptive
function in preparation for return to athletics. Patients can return to
play when strength, range of motion, and proprioception are equal
to the uninjured shoulder to the extent that they are able to protect
the shoulder and perform sports-­specific activities without pain. Surgery is to be considered in cases of recurrent dislocations or in those
individuals that fail to heal adequately after prolonged rehabilitation.
Additionally, early operative repair should be considered for athletes
participating in contact or collision sports that inherently have higher
recurrence rates.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4302 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Type I

Type IV

Type II

Type V

Type III

Type VI

Fig 728.5 Rockwood’s classification of acromioclavicular (AC) joint injuries in children. Type 1, sprain of the AC ligaments without disruption of the

periosteal tube. Type II, partial disruption of the periosteal tube. This may produce some AC instability. Type III, large split in the periosteal tube allowing superior displacement of the lateral clavicle. Type IV, large split in the periosteal tube (large arrow) with posterior displacement of the lateral
clavicle through the trapezius muscle (curved arrow). Type V, complete disruption of the periosteal tube with displacement of the clavicle through the
deltoid and trapezius muscles into the subcutaneous tissues. Type VI, inferior dislocation of the distal clavicle below the coracoid process. (Redrawn
from Sanders JO, Rockwood CA, Curtis RJ. Fractures and dislocations of the humeral shaft and shoulder. In Rockwood CA, Wilkins KE, Beaty JH,
eds. Fractures in Children. Vol 3. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-­Raven; 1996:974.)

ROTATOR CUFF INJURY

The muscles of the rotator cuff consist of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis. The function of these muscles
is to rotate the humerus and stabilize the humeral head against the
glenoid. The supraspinatus is most commonly injured, either by an
acute traumatic injury or chronic tendinosis from overuse. Specifically,
rotator cuff tendinosis commonly presents with the complaint of pain
with overhead arc of motion, such as with throwing, lifting, or reaching for objects above one’s head. Pain is often poorly localized about
the shoulder, although it may be referred to the deltoid. The onset of
pain is often insidious and is commonly associated with increased frequency or duration of overhead throwing or lifting activities. Pain is
exacerbated with overhead activities but is often present at rest as well;
nighttime pain occurs in more severe cases. On exam, manual muscle
testing of the rotator cuff muscles often produces pain and in some
cases weakness in comparison to the uninjured shoulder. Supraspinatus tendinosis produces pain with active abduction against resistance
in which the patient abducts the arm to 90 degrees, forward flexes to
30 degrees anterior to the parasagittal plane, and internally rotates the
humerus.
The treatment of rotator cuff tendinosis includes relative rest from
athletics or activities causing pain as well as the use of ice, analgesia,
and/or NSAIDs. Strengthening of the rotator cuff and scapular stabilizer musculature, modifications of technique, and core strengthening
are important components of rehabilitation often supervised by a physical therapist. In the young athlete, rotator cuff pain is most commonly

a result of glenohumeral instability and not rotator cuff impingement
syndrome. The latter is more commonly seen in adults and is caused by
impingement of the rotator cuff by the bony structures superior to it.
As a result, treatment focusing on stretching alone can make symptoms
worse. Return to play often includes gradual increases in load placed
upon the rotator cuff as the patient resumes prior activities, such as an
interval throwing program in baseball.
Glenoid labrum tears may present in similar insidious fashion to
rotator cuff tendinosis or may be associated with an acute traumatic
dislocation. This frequently manifests with pain in the glenohumeral
joint and may be associated with mechanical sensations of clicking or
catching in the shoulder. This can frequently be reproduced on exam.
One of the most common lesions is a superior labrum anterior and
posterior (SLAP) lesion. Throwing athletes are at particular risk. The
mechanism of injury is thought to be related to a traction injury along
the long head of the biceps at its attachment at the superior glenoid
labrum, occurring during the throwing cycle. Radiographs are usually normal. MRI with arthrogram is the best study to identify glenoid
labrum pathology (Fig. 728.6).
Proximal humeral stress fracture (epiphysiolysis) is an uncommon cause of proximal shoulder pain and is suspected when shoulder pain does not respond to routine measures. Gradual onset of deep
shoulder pain occurs in a young athlete involved in repetitive overhead
motion, such as in baseball, tennis, or swimming, but with no history
of trauma. Tenderness is noted over the proximal humerus; the diagnosis is confirmed by detecting a widened epiphyseal plate on plain

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury

4303

Fig. 728.7 Deflection of the supracondylar fat pad with a joint effusion (fat pad sign) (arrows) showing evidence of a fracture. (Copyright
Laurel Sauer, 2017.)

Fig. 728.6 Coronal intermediate-­
weighted MRI showing superior

labral tear (arrow) and tendinosis of the supraspinatus tendon (arrowhead). There is no adjacent perilabral edema, suggesting chronic
injury. (From Chang, I-­Yuan J, Polster JM. Pathomechanics and magnetic resonance imaging of the thrower’s shoulder. Radiol Clin N Am.
2016;54[5]:801-805. Fig. 13.)

radiographs, increased uptake on nuclear scan, or edema of the physis
on MRI. Treatment is total rest from throwing for at least 6-8 weeks.
Non–sports-­related conditions that need to be considered in any
child with a painful shoulder include an undiagnosed Sprengel deformity. This deformity involves the scapula, which fails to descend from
its cervical region overlying the first through fifth ribs. Children often
present with a shortened neckline and a lack of normal scapular thoracic motion. Malpositioning of a glenoid can cause limited forward
flexion and abduction of the shoulder. An omovertebral bar is present
in up to 50% of cases. This bar connects the superior medial angle of
the scapula and the cervical spine and consists of fibrous cartilaginous
tissue or bone. Other regional abnormalities can include scoliosis with
a prominent scapula on the convex side, congenital rib anomalies, and
undiagnosed Klippel-­Feil syndrome. Winging of the scapula raises the
question of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. Family histories
can be most helpful. Primary bone tumors (see Chapter 550) common
to the upper extremities include Ewing sarcoma of the scapula and
osteogenic sarcoma of the proximal humerus, in addition to osteoblastomas and chondroblastomas common to the diaphysis and epiphysis
of long bones. The most common presenting manifestations of osteosarcoma are pain, upper limb dysfunction, and swelling. Similar presentations can be seen in Ewing sarcoma, along with weight loss and
fever. Symptoms not responding to conservative treatment require further investigation and specialty consultation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.3 Elbow Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson

ACUTE INJURIES

The most commonly dislocated joint in childhood is the elbow. Radial
head subluxation, or “nursemaid’s elbow,” comprises the majority of
these (see Chapter 722). Posterior dislocation is the next most common
type of elbow dislocation, typically resulting from falling backward
onto an outstretched arm with the elbow in extension. The dislocation
may be complete or incomplete—termed “perched”—with the trochlea
subluxed upon the top of the coronoid process. The ulnar collateral

ligament (UCL) is commonly disrupted along with other components
of the soft tissue capsule about the elbow. Fractures of the olecranon
(>80% occurrence) or medial epicondyle may be present as well. An
obvious deformity is visualized with the olecranon process displaced
prominently behind the distal humerus. Careful examination of the
distal radius and ulnar pulses to assess vascular integrity of the distal
upper arm is important because of the potential for injury to the brachial artery. Sensation to the distal extremity should also be assessed
because of possible injury to the radial, median, and ulnar nerves.
Reduction should be performed as soon as possible before significant
swelling and muscle spasm potentially complicate the procedure. Longitudinal traction is applied to the forearm with gentle upward pressure
on the distal humerus so that the coronoid process clears the trochlea.
If reduction is unable to be performed, the arm should be placed in a
padded splint and sling and the patient transported to an emergency
facility.
Supracondylar humeral fractures can result from the same mechanism of injury as elbow dislocations and can be difficult to distinguish
on exam from a posterior dislocation because of significant swelling
about the elbow joint. These, too, can be complicated by concomitant
injury to the brachial artery and to a lesser extent the median, radial,
and ulnar nerves. The injury typically occurs in the first decade of life,
which is associated with peak hyperlaxity of the elbow joint in children
between the ages of 5-8 years. An acute compartment syndrome can
develop after these fractures, which is associated with a fat pad sign on
radiographs (Fig. 728.7). These fractures should be referred for orthopedic consultation and are discussed in more depth in Chapter 724.
Direct trauma to the elbow can cause bleeding and inflammation
in the olecranon bursa resulting in olecranon bursitis. Aspiration is
rarely required, and this injury can be managed with ice, compressive
dressing, and analgesia (PRICE principles). An overlying elbow pad
provides comfort during activity and prevents re-­injury.

Chronic Injuries

Overuse injuries in the upper extremities occur primarily in throwing sports, sports that require repetitive wrist flexion or extension, or
sports that demand weight-­bearing on hands (gymnastics).
Little Leaguer’s elbow is a broad term for several different elbow
problems. Throwing overhand creates valgus stress to the elbow with
medial opening of the joint and lateral compressive forces. Medial
elbow pain is a common complaint of young throwers, resulting from
repetitive valgus overload of the wrist flexor-­pronator muscle groups
and their attachment on the medial apophysis. In preadolescents who
still have maturing secondary ossification centers, traction apophysitis
of the medial epicondyle is likely. Patients have tenderness along the
medial epicondyle; pain is exacerbated by valgus stress or resisted wrist
flexion and pronation. Wrist pain may be present in more severe cases.
Radiographs may show widening of the growth plate at the medial

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4304 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
apophysis in comparison to the uninjured elbow. Treatment includes
no throwing for 4-6 weeks and pain-­free strengthening and stretching of the flexor-­pronator group followed by a 1-2 week progressive
functional throwing program with careful rehabilitation. Incorporation of core strengthening and scapular stabilizing exercises, as well as
addressing proper throwing mechanics (to reduce the load upon the
medial elbow), are important components of the rehabilitation program. Little Leaguer’s elbow has to be treated with a period of rest from
throwing because of the risk of nonunion of the apophysis and chronic
pain. If pain occurs acutely, an avulsion fracture of the medial epicondyle must be considered. Radiographs should be taken in any thrower
with acute elbow pain. If the medial epicondyle is avulsed (Fig. 728.8),
orthopedic consultation is indicated.
In older adolescents and young adults with a fused apophysis, the
structure at the elbow vulnerable to injury is the UCL. UCL sprains/
tears are common in sports requiring high-­velocity throwing or overhead activities. Medial elbow pain that is worst during the acceleration

A

B
Fig. 728.8 The many faces of little Leaguer’s elbow in a 14-­yr-­old

pitcher. A, AP radiograph and coronal oblique fat-­
saturated T2-­
weighted MRI demonstrate features of chronic medial epicondyle stress
injury (yellow arrow) as well as findings of capitellar osteochondritis dissecans (white arrowhead). Proximal medial ulnar collateral ligament
edema/grade 1 sprain also noted at the humeral attachment (red arrow).
B, Sagittal short tau inversion recovery and fat-­saturated T1-­weighted
MR arthrogram images emphasize the classic features of injury to the
“metaphyseal equivalent” bone deep to the disorganized and obliterated secondary physis of the ossifying capitellum. (From Braithwaite
KA, Marshall KW. The skeletally immature and newly mature throwing
athlete. Radiol Clin N Am. 2016;54[5]:841–855. Fig. 11.)

phase of throwing is common. A loss of throwing velocity and control,
as well as a sensation of elbow joint “opening” during throwing is also
frequently described. On exam, focal tenderness to palpation over the
UCL is present. Additionally, laxity may be appreciated with valgus
stress of the elbow when flexed to 30 and/or 90 degrees. Radiographs
are generally unremarkable. Diagnostic ultrasonography or MRI with
arthrography is often necessary to assess the integrity of the UCL. Partial tears can be treated with a period of time off from throwing (2-4
weeks) followed by careful progressive rehabilitation as discussed earlier for medial elbow pain. If there is a complete tear, surgical repair is
indicated if the athlete desires to continue a pitching career.
Medial epicondylitis, or golfer’s elbow, is another common cause of
medial elbow pain in the individual with fused apophyses. It is commonly caused by overuse of the flexor pronator muscle groups at their
origin at the medial humeral epicondyle. This occurs frequently in athletics or activities with repetitive wrist flexion. Tenderness is noted over
the medial epicondyle and exacerbated by passive wrist extension or
resisted wrist flexion. Treatment includes rest from the inciting activity,
ice, stretching and strengthening of the wrist flexors, forearm straps,
counterforce bracing, and analgesia. Local injection of corticosteroids
can be considered as an adjunctive treatment if initial conservative
measures fail. Ulnar nerve dysfunction can be a complication of valgus
overload and can occur with any of the diagnoses previously discussed.
Persisting paresthesia or motor weakness in the ulnar nerve distribution should be evaluated with electromyography and nerve conduction studies. Diagnostic ultrasonography can also be of use to assess for
focal thickening of the nerve, as a sign of irritation, as well as dynamically visualizing the nerve through the arc of elbow flexion to assess for
subluxation over the medial epicondyle (Fig. 728.9).
Lateral elbow pain can be caused by compression during the throwing motion at the radiocapitellar joint. Panner disease is osteochondrosis of the capitellum that occurs between ages 7 and 12 years (Fig.
728.10). OCD of the capitellum occurs at age 13-16 years (see Fig.
728.1). Although patients with both conditions present with insidious onset of lateral elbow pain exacerbated by throwing, patients with
OCD have mechanical symptoms (popping, locking) and, more commonly, decreased range of motion. Patients with Panner disease have
no mechanical symptoms and often have normal range of motion. The
prognosis of Panner disease is excellent, and treatment consists of relative rest (no throwing), brief immobilization, and repeat radiographs
in 6-12 weeks to assess bone remodeling. In OCD, radiographs show a
more focal lesion in the capitellum with eventual flattening and potentially fragmentation. MRI can be very helpful in early diagnosis and
with subsequent staging. A diagnosis of OCD requires orthopedic consultation, with treatment depending on the severity of the lesion and
fragmentation.
Lateral epicondylitis, or “tennis elbow,” is the most common overuse elbow injury in adults but is relatively uncommon in children and
adolescents (Fig. 728.11). It is a tendinosis of the extensor muscle origin
at the lateral humeral epicondyle, which is commonly found in individuals performing activities requiring repetitive or prolonged grip.
Tenderness is localized over the upper lateral epicondyle and is worsened with passive wrist flexion or resisted wrist extension. Treatment
includes relative rest, analgesia, and specific stretching and strengthening exercises for the elbow and forearm. As with medial epicondylitis,
corticosteroid injection can be considered as an adjunctive treatment
if initial conservative measures fail. Improper equipment (i.e., wrong
grip size or overstrung racket) and poor technique can contribute to
the onset of symptoms. Return to play should be gradual and progressive to prevent re-injury.
Elbow injuries can be minimized but not necessarily prevented by
preseason stretching and strengthening exercises. The importance of
core strengthening and scapular stabilization with respect to preventing elbow and shoulder injuries in the throwing athlete cannot be overstated. The most important consideration for preventing elbow injuries
in throwers is limitation of the number of pitches and advising players, coaches, and athletes that they should stop immediately when they
experience elbow pain. If it persists, they need medical evaluation. It
has been recommended that a young pitcher have age-­specific limits

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury

4305

A

B

Fig. 728.10 Panner disease. Note fragmentation of the humeral capitellum and flattening of the articular surface (arrow). (Copyright Laurel
Sauer, 2017.)

728.4 Low Back Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson

C
Fig. 728.9 Ulnar nerve subluxation. Dynamic ultrasound imaging of

the ulnar nerve (arrow) in the ulnar groove at the elbow. A, The ulnar
nerve positioned appropriately in the ulnar groove with the elbow extended. With elbow flexion, (B) the nerve becomes perched upon the
medial epicondyle. As the elbow moves into terminal flexion, (C) the
nerve is completely dislocated anteriorly over the medial epicondyle.
(Courtesy Nicholas Goyeneche, MD, ultrasound clinic files, Ochsner
Clinic Medical Center.)

on pitch counts, including the number of pitches thrown per game and
per week, as well as maintaining appropriate days off between games
pitched. A good rule of thumb is that the maximal number of pitches
per game should be approximately 6 times the pitcher’s age in years.
Other less-­common problems that cause elbow pain are ulnar neuropathy/subluxation, tricipital or bicipital tendonitis (distal), olecranon apophysitis, and loose bodies. Non–sports-­related injuries that
need to be considered in the child with a painful elbow include undiagnosed congenital conditions such as radial dysplasia, including radial
ulnar synostosis and mild persistent brachial plexus palsy. The elbow is
not an uncommon site for inflammatory arthritides, including juvenile
idiopathic arthritis, sepsis, hemophilia, and sickle cell disease. Neoplasia to consider includes osteoblastomas and chondroblastomas, which
are common in the diaphysis and epiphysis of longer bones, in addition
to osteosarcoma. As always, in the child with persistent symptoms who
is not responding to conservative care, further diagnostic workup is
indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

SPONDYLOLYSIS, SPONDYLOLISTHESIS, AND
FACET SYNDROME
Spondylolysis

Spondylolysis, a common cause of back pain in athletes, is a stress
fracture of the pars interarticularis (see Chapter 720.6). It can occur at
any vertebral level but is most likely at L5. Complete spondylolysis has
never been found in the newborn. Its occurrence increases between
the ages of 5.5 and 6.5 years to a rate of 5%. Prevalence in adolescent
athletes evaluated for low back pain is 13–47%. Besides hyperextension that causes an acute fracture, the mechanism of injury is either a
congenital defect or hypoplastic pars. This is exacerbated by repetitive
lumbar extension loading. Ballet, weightlifting, gymnastics, and football are examples of sports in which repetitive extension loading of the
lumbar spine frequently occurs.
Patients often present with pain of insidious onset. However, there
may be a precipitating injury, such as a fall, or a single episode of hyperextension. The pain is worse with extension, may radiate to the buttocks, and can eventually affect activities of daily living. Rest or supine
positioning usually alleviates the pain.
On examination, the pain is reproduced with lumbar extension
while standing, especially when standing on one leg (single-­leg hyperextension test). Limited forward spinal flexion and tight hamstrings
may be seen. Neurologic examination is generally normal. There is
often well-­localized tenderness to deep palpation just lateral to the
involved spinous process.
The diagnosis can be confirmed by finding a pars defect on an oblique
lumbar spine radiograph. The defect is rarely seen on anteroposterior

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4306 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

C

B

D

Fig. 728.11 A 22-­yr-­old tennis player with persistent lateral elbow pain despite 3 months of physical therapy. A, Coronal T1 sequence shows

thickening and intermediate signal in the common extensor tendon (CET; arrow). B, Coronal T2 fat suppression (FS) (CET; arrow) and (C) axial proton
density FS sequences reveal fluid signal within the CET and discontinuity of tendon fibers, consistent with a partial-­thickness tear (CET; arrow). D,
Corresponding long axis ultrasound image shows an anechoic fluid cleft (arrow) in the undersurface of the CET (arrowheads). (From Gustas CN, Lee
KS. Current imaging concepts and image-­guided treatments for the injured thrower’s elbow. Radiol Clin N Am. 2016;54[5]:817–839. Fig. 2.)

(AP) and lateral views. MRI or bone single-­
photon emission CT
(SPECT) is needed to confirm diagnosis if radiographs are normal
and spondylolysis is suspected. A plain CT scan can help identify the
degree of bony involvement and is sometimes used to assess healing.
Treatment includes pain relief and activity restriction. Rehabilitation
consisting of trunk strengthening, hip flexor stretching, and hamstring
stretching is important in most cases. A thoracic lumbar sacral orthotic
may be considered for symptom management in cases in which conservative measures fail, but the overall benefit of bracing on healing is
unclear.

Spondylolisthesis and Facet Syndrome

Spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis, and facet syndrome are injuries to
the posterior elements of the vertebrae. Spondylolisthesis occurs when
bilateral pars defects exist and forward displacement or slippage of a
vertebra occurs upon the vertebra inferior to it (see Chapter 720.6).
Facet syndrome has history and physical examination findings similar to those of spondylolysis. It is caused by instability or injury to the
facet joint, posterior to the pars interarticularis and at the interface of
the inferior and superior articulating processes. Facet syndrome can be
established by identifying facet abnormalities on CT or by exclusion, if
a radiograph and MRI rule out spondylolysis.
Treatment of posterior element injuries is conservative and directed
at reducing the extension-­loading activity, often for 2-3 months. Body
mechanics, posture principals, core strengthening, and lumbar pelvic
stabilization routines can be very helpful in the functional recovery of
the motivated athlete. Walking, swimming, and cycling can be appropriate exercises during the rehabilitation phase. Rarely, spinal segmental fusion can be indicated in the athlete with spondylolisthesis and
persistent symptomatic segmental instability despite conservative care.

LUMBAR DISK HERNIATION, STRAIN, AND
CONTUSION

Intervertebral disk injury in children and adolescents is uncommon.
Symptoms include pain with prolonged standing and prolonged periods of lumbar flexion, such as sitting in a car. Presentation is variable,

and patients may report an acute pain onset with an obvious inciting
event or an insidious onset with a history of heavy lifting or repetitive axial load activities. In contrast to the selective motor and sensory deficits often observed in adults with disk herniation, athletes
younger than 20 years of age less commonly have pain or tenderness
over the course of the sciatic nerve. Physical examination findings
may be minimal but usually include pain with forward flexion and
lateral bending. It is unusual to have a positive straight leg test or any
neurologic deficit in the young athlete with an injured disk. There
may be tenderness of the vertebral spinous process at the level of the
disk injury. A general aching sensation in the lower back or upper
buttocks may be present. MRI usually confirms a clinical diagnosis.
Assuming the herniation is not large and the pain is not intractable,
treatment is conservative with analgesia and physical therapy. Surgery is rarely necessary.
Acute lumbar strain or contusion can be seen in the younger athlete and is usually associated with precipitating activity often outside
of the normal routine. Physical examination reveals tenderness in the
paraspinal and lateral soft tissues often associated with recreating the
mechanism of injury. Thoracic and lumbar strain in the school-­age
child is frequently associated with obesity, deconditioning, positive
family history, and poorly supervised and equipped recreational activity. Up to 20% of youths have experienced back pain at some point in
their life before the age of 15 years. The backpack is the most common
cause of back pain of a benign nature in children, with up to 74% of
school backpack–wearers experiencing pain. Back pain is more common with the heavy backpack (>10–20% of body weight), female sex,
large body mass index, and single shoulder strap.
Treatment is conservative and includes analgesia, myofascial release,
massage, and physical therapy, as tolerated. The natural history of acute
back strain in adults is that 50% are better in 1 week, 80% in 1 month,
and 90% in 2 months, regardless of therapy. The course of back pain in
young athletes is likely similar given the elimination of obvious precipitating influence and/or activities, as discussed previously.
Sacroiliitis manifests as pain over the sacroiliac joints; it is usually
chronic but is occasionally associated with a history of trauma. Patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
have a positive result with the Patrick test, performed in the supine position by resting the foot of the affected side across the opposite knee (“figure-4” position), stabilizing the contralateral iliac crest, and externally
rotating the hip on the affected side (pushing the knee down and lateral).
Symptomatic improvement with knee-­to-­chest maneuvers and subsequent posterior pelvic tilt may be present. A radiograph of the sacroiliac
joints is indicated, and if results are positive, exploration for a rheumatologic disease (ankylosing spondylitis [see Chapter 197], juvenile idiopathic
arthritis [see Chapter 196], or inflammatory bowel disease [see Chapter
382]) is warranted.
Treatment is with relative rest, NSAIDs, and physical therapy. Ankylosing spondylitis is more likely if the onset of lower back pain is before 40
years of age, if there is morning stiffness demonstrating improvement with
activity, a family history is present, there is clear benefit from antiinflammatory medication, and if the pain has a gradual onset having lasted longer
than 3 months.

OTHER CAUSES

Non–sports-­related causes of low back pain in the young athlete are
numerous and include infection (osteomyelitis, diskitis) and neoplasia (see Chapter 720.5). These should be considered in patients with
fever, weight loss, other constitutional signs, or lack of response to initial therapy. Osteomyelitis of the lower back or pelvis is often, but not
always, associated with fever. Undiagnosed Scheuermann disease needs
to be considered with a history of chronic back pain; it is more common in males and younger adolescents and should be distinguished
from symptomatic postural roundback and congenital decompensating
kyphosis. Atypical Scheuermann disease or thoracolumbar apophysitis
can progress and become the pediatric equivalent of an adult compression fracture. Benign tumors of the spine include osteoid osteoma, which
presents with intense focal nighttime pain that is not activity related and
is almost always relieved by aspirin or NSAIDs. Undiagnosed osteoblastoma, eosinophilic granuloma, aneurysmal bone cyst, and fibrous dysplasia are additional benign tumors not to be excluded. Malignant spinal
tumors include Ewing sarcoma (onion skin appearance) and osteogenic
sarcoma (sunburst pattern); both are associated with the Codman triangle, which is the triangular area of new subperiosteal bone seen on
radiographs when a tumor raises the periosteum away from the bone.
Metastatic tumors of the spine include neuroblastoma, spinal cord
tumors, leukemia, and lymphoma. Wilms tumor can also metastasize
to the spine and be associated with hemihypertrophy. Referred pain to
the spine always needs to be considered. Conditions that can refer pain
include pyelonephritis, renal osteodystrophy, pneumonia, endocarditis, cholecystitis, nephrolithiasis, pancreatitis, megacolon, constipation/
ileus, hiatal hernia/reflux, pelvic inflammatory disease, and sickle cell
crisis. Undiagnosed pregnancy is a consideration in the age-­appropriate
female. Psychogenic pain and fibromyalgia can be seen in children. Child
abuse can present in the spine, with soft tissue injuries more common
than fractures. Posterior rib and spinous process fractures can be seen in
up to 30% of abused children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

4307

728.5 Hip and Pelvis Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Injuries to the hip and pelvis represent a small percentage of sports
injuries, but they are potentially severe and require prompt diagnosis.
Hip pathology can manifest as knee pain with normal findings on knee
examination.
In children, transient synovitis (see Chapter 719.2) is the most
common nontraumatic cause of hip pain. It usually manifests with
acute onset of a limp, with the child refusing to use the affected leg
and painful range of motion on examination. There may be a history of
minor trauma or a recent viral infection. This is a self-­limiting condition that usually resolves in 48-72 hours.
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease (avascular necrosis of the femoral
head) also presents in childhood with insidious onset of limp and hip
pain (see Chapter 719.3).
Until skeletal maturity (Table 728.2), younger athletes are susceptible to apophyseal injuries (e.g., the anterior superior iliac spine).
Apophysitis develops from overuse or from direct trauma. Avulsion
fractures occur in adolescents playing sports requiring sudden, explosive bursts of speed (see Fig. 728.2). Large muscles contract and create
force greater than the strength of the attachment of the muscle to the
apophysis. Biomechanical susceptibility of the pelvis allows separation to occur in the cartilaginous region between the apophysis and
the adjoining bone. The most common sites of pelvic avulsion fractures are the anterior superior iliac spine (sartorius and tensor fasciae
lata), anterior inferior iliac spine (rectus femoris), lesser femoral trochanter (iliopsoas), ischial tuberosity (hamstrings), and the iliac crest
(abdominal muscles). Symptoms include localized pain and swelling
with decreased strength and range of motion. Bilateral radiographs are
important for comparison to assess for displacement, if any, of the fracture fragment. Significant displacement or the presence of a large fragment may require orthopedic consultation. Initial treatment includes
ice, analgesics, rest, and pain-­free range of motion exercises. Crutches
are usually needed initially for ambulation. Surgery is not typically
indicated because most of these fractures—even large or displaced
ones—heal well. Direct contact to the bone around the hip and pelvis
causes exquisitely tender subperiosteal hematomas called “hip pointers.” These injuries are more commonly seen around the anterior superior iliac spine and the iliac crest. Limited active range of motion can be
identified about the hip, brought on by contracture of locally attached
musculature such as hip flexors and hip abductors. Symptomatic care
includes rest, ice, analgesia, and protection from re-­injury.
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis usually occurs among 11-­to
15-­year-­olds during the time of rapid linear bone growth (see Chapter
719.4) and often presents with complaints of pain in the groin area or,
on occasion, referred pain felt at the knee. Bilateral hip radiographs
confirm the diagnosis.
A femoral neck stress fracture can manifest as vague progressive
hip pain in an endurance athlete. Females are at higher risk. This diagnosis should be suspected in the running athlete with vague anterior

Table 728.2  Age of Appearance and Fusion of Apophyses in Hip and Pelvis
APOPHYSIS

FUSION (YR)

RELATED MUSCLE GROUP(S)

Anterior inferior iliac spine

APPEARANCE (YR)
13-15

16-18

Quadriceps

Anterior superior iliac spine

13-15

21-25

Sartorius

Lesser trochanter

11-12

16-17

Iliopsoas

Greater trochanter

2-3

16-17

Gluteal

Ischial tuberosity

13-15

20-25

Hamstrings

Iliac crest

13-15

21-25

Abdominal obliques
Latissimus dorsi

From Waite BL, Krabak BJ. Examination and treatment of pediatric injuries of the hip and pelvis. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am. 2008;19:305–318.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4308 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
thigh pain without a history of trauma or acute injury. On examination, there may be pain with passive stretch of the hip flexors and
pain with hip rotation. If radiographs do not demonstrate a periosteal reaction consistent with a stress fracture, MRI may be indicated
to confirm the suspected diagnosis and determine the location of the
fracture. Orthopedic consultation is necessary in femoral neck stress
fractures because of their predisposition to nonunion and displacement with minor trauma or continued weight-­bearing. These fractures
carry increased risk of avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Whereas
compression (inferomedial) side femoral neck stress fractures can typically be treated conservatively with non–weight-­bearing, tension side
(superolateral femoral neck) fractures may be at particular risk of progression and often require surgical fixation.
Osteitis pubis is an inflammation at the pubic symphysis that may be
caused by excessive side-­to-­side rocking of the pelvis. It can be seen in
an athlete in any running sport and is more common in sports requiring additional use of the adductor muscles such as ice hockey, soccer,
and inline skating. Athletes typically present with vague groin pain that
may be unilateral or bilateral. On physical examination, there is tenderness over the symphysis and sometimes over the proximal adductors.
Adduction strength testing causes discomfort. Radiographic evidence
(irregularity, sclerosis, widening of the pubic symphysis with osteolysis) may not be present until symptoms are present for 6-8 weeks; MRI
is more sensitive to early changes. Relative rest for 6-12 weeks may be
required. Some patients require corticosteroid injection as adjunctive therapy. Ultrasound needle guidance may be used to improve the
accuracy of the injection while simultaneously avoiding injury to surrounding structures, such as the bladder, and vascular structures of the
genitalia.
Acetabular labrum tears can occur in the hip, similar to glenoid
labrum tears in the shoulder. Athletes may have a history of trauma
and complain of sharp anterior hip pain associated with a clicking or
catching sensation. Clinical diagnosis is often difficult; magnetic resonance arthrography is the gold standard for diagnosis, but MRI may be
useful as well.
Snapping hip syndrome is caused by the iliopsoas musculotendinous unit riding over the pectineal eminence of the pelvis, anterior
hip capsule, or the iliotibial band (ITB) over the greater trochanter.
Lack of flexibility in these muscles results in snapping, as the musculotendinous unit slides over the associated bony prominence. It is most
commonly seen in ballet dancers and runners, and it can occur as an
acute or, more commonly, overuse injury. Athletes present with either
a painful or painless click or snap in the hip, usually located lateral or
anterior and deep within the joint. Examination often reproduces the
symptoms. Radiographs are not usually needed in the workup. Ultrasound examination can be useful to visualize the anatomic structures
in question causing the snapping sensation. Core weakness may be
present, leading to excessive movement about the hip girdle contributing to increased sliding of the tight muscle over the boney prominence.
Treatment involves analgesia, relative rest, biomechanical assessment,
core flexibility, and stretching/strengthening of the involved soft tissue. Patients with concomitant greater trochanteric bursitis may benefit from a corticosteroid injection into the inflamed bursa to improve
pain control and facilitate rehabilitation. The athlete may return to
activity as tolerated. Common soft tissue injuries around the hip and
pelvis include strain and tendinosis of the hip flexors (groin) and hamstrings in addition to quadriceps contusions and greater trochanteric
bursitis.
The term athletic pubalgia is commonly used to describe a number of different pathologies that may cause lower abdominal or groin
pain. Often called a sports hernia, this is a source of confusion as
no true hernia exists through the inguinal canal or abdominal wall.
The pathophysiology stems from tissue injury to the structures that
comprise the pubic aponeurosis, most commonly the tendinous
attachment of the abdominal and hip adductor musculature. Like a
true hernia, pain may radiate into the anterior thigh, inguinal region,
perineum, and/or scrotum. Physical exam may exhibit tenderness
over, or adjacent to, the pubic ramus and/or reproduction of pain
with resisted abdominal flexion or hip adduction. MRI, CT scan, and

bone scan can be helpful in ruling out other diagnoses but usually
are negative. Some radiology departments may have MRI protocols
specific for athletic pubalgia that provide more detailed imaging of
the pathologic area. Patients who continue with symptoms despite
conservative care, such as physical therapy, may be candidates for surgical intervention.
Femoroacetabular impingement (FAI) may coexist with athletic
pubalgia to produce groin pain. FAI is defined as an abnormal contact
between the femoral neck and the acetabulum as a result of excessive
bone on the acetabular rim, the femoral neck, or both. X-­rays and MRI
can be diagnostic. As in athletic pubalgia, a period of rest and rehabilitation should be attempted, and those who fail conservative treatment
should be referred to a sports medicine specialist.
Undiagnosed non–sports-­related conditions need to be considered. Differential diagnoses may include the epiphyseal dysplasias,
congenital or developmental hip dysplasia, additional causes of avascular necrosis, including sickle cell disease, Gaucher disease, rheumatoid
arthritis, and other collagen disorders and steroid therapy. Inguinal
hernia should be recognized in those patients with groin pain exacerbated with coughing/Valsalva maneuver and a palpable mass in the
groin. Traumatic hip dislocations are relatively rare in children but
should not be overlooked. Leg-­length discrepancies (usually >1 cm)
can be symptomatic at the hip in an otherwise healthy child. Common tumors in the lower extremities include osteosarcoma along with
osteoblastoma, aneurysmal bone cysts, and fibrous dysplasia (more
common in the pelvis). Metastatic tumors to the lower extremities
include neuroblastoma, lymphoma, and leukemic infiltration with
joint arthralgia. Child abuse always needs to be considered in a young
patient with musculoskeletal pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.6 Knee Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Knee pain is common among adolescents. Acute knee injuries that
cause immediate disability and/or effusion are likely to be due to fracture, patellar dislocation, anterior or posterior cruciate ligament injury,
or meniscal tear. The mechanism of injury is usually a weight-­bearing
event. Physeal injuries tend to predominate in younger patients,
whereas more skeletally mature adolescents tend to sustain ligamentous injuries. If the knee swells more immediately (within several hours
of injury), the swelling is likely caused by a hemarthrosis and more
severe injury. The injury most likely to occur with a hemarthrosis is
an anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury. This injury (rare in children younger than 12 years) is usually caused by direct contact, landing
off-­balance from a jump, quickly changing direction while running, or
hyperextension. Instability is often present but may be hard to detect
in the presence of significant swelling. Females are more than twice as
likely as males to disrupt their ACL, often during sports such as basketball or soccer. Occasionally, these injuries are associated with an
avulsion injury of the anterior tibial spine. Most athletes with significant ACL injury need orthopedic consultation with consideration of
ACL reconstruction. Chronic ACL insufficiency may increase the risk
of meniscal injury, early osteoarthritis, and further joint dysfunction.
Physeal-­sparing reconstructions with minimal risk of growth arrest or
angular deformity have been reported with success in children younger
than 12 years and adolescents.
Posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) injury occurs from a direct blow
to the region of the proximal tibia when the knee is flexed, such as
might occur with a dashboard injury or a fall to the knees in volleyball.
PCL injuries are rare and are usually treated nonsurgically.
Medial collateral ligament injuries typically result from a valgus
blow to the outside of the knee. Isolated lateral collateral ligament
injuries are uncommon and result from significant varus knee stress.
Because they are extra-­articular, lateral collateral and medial collateral
ligament injuries should not produce a significant knee effusion and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
are generally less disabling. Isolated medial and lateral collateral injuries are generally managed nonsurgically with conservative care and
appropriate rehabilitation.
Meniscal tears generally occur by the same mechanisms as ACL
injuries. They are often associated with less hemarthrosis, significant
joint line pain, and increased pain with full knee flexion. MRI will usually yield the diagnosis; conservative care, including PRICE principles,
is therapeutic for smaller injuries. Orthopedic consultation is indicated
for meniscus tears in children and adolescents, and surgery may be
indicated for larger tears, displaced tears, or those not healing with
conservative care over 6-8 weeks. An isolated meniscal tear in a child
younger than 10 years of age is unusual. The surgical choice is often
repair of the meniscus rather than resection because of the increased
potential in children for cartilaginous healing. Discoid meniscus (an
anatomic variant covering lateral tibial plateau) should be considered
in children younger than 12 years of age and those with a suspected
meniscus injury without a history of notable trauma.
Patellar dislocation occurs most often as a noncontact injury when
the quadriceps muscles forcefully contract to extend the knee while the
tibia is externally rotated in relation to the femur. Patellar dislocation is
the second most common cause of hemarthrosis. The patella is almost
always dislocated laterally, and this motion tears the medial patellar
retinaculum, causing bleeding in the joint. Recurrent episodes of patellar instability are associated with less swelling. Patellar dislocations are
often associated with genu valgum, external tibial torsion, and general
ligamentous hyperlaxity. Exercises to strengthen the quadriceps, particularly the vastus medialis, and the use of patella-­tracking braces may
be helpful. Recurrent instability can require surgical intervention. Surgical stabilization of the medial patellar tissues and lateral retinacular
release can be helpful in more difficult cases.

4309

INITIAL TREATMENT OF ACUTE KNEE INJURIES

The physician should inspect for an effusion and obvious deformities;
if any deformity is present, the physician should assess neurovascular status and transfer the patient for emergency care as indicated. If
no gross deformities are present and neurovascular integrity is intact,
initial maneuvers include full passive extension and gentle valgus and
varus stress to the knee while in extension. Any laxity to varus or valgus
stress in full extension implies a multiligamentous injury. Comparison to
the noninjured knee is always helpful for assessing degrees of laxity and
range of motion. The patient’s ability to contract the quadriceps should
be noted. Pain occurring with quadriceps contraction, or the inability
to contract the quadriceps muscle, implies an injury to the extensor
mechanism. Tenderness over the medial patella, medial retinaculum,
or above the adductor tubercle is associated with a patellar dislocation
(usually lateral). Point tenderness is consistent with fracture or injury
to the underlying structure. Meniscal tears usually manifest as tenderness along the joint line, accentuated with flexion of the knee beyond
90 degrees. Pain or limitation in either flexion or extension while rotating the tibia implies a meniscal injury. Ligament injury is manifested as
pain or laxity with the appropriate maneuver (Fig. 728.12).
If a patient cannot weight-­bear without pain, or has clinical signs
of instability, significant swelling, or any other major concern, the
knee should be immobilized and crutches provided. The Ottawa knee
rule, which has been validated for children over 5 years of age, helps
determine which patients with mild knee injuries require radiographs.
X-­rays should be obtained if any of the following apply: 55 years or
older, point tenderness of fibular head, tenderness of the patella, inability to flex knee to 90 degrees, or inability to bear weight (inability to
take four steps) both immediately after the injury and in the emergency
department.

Valgus stress
and flexion

Internal
rotation
20°-30°
Lachman test

Lateral pivot shift test
90°
Valgus stress
and extension
Anterior drawer test

External
rotation

Apley compression test

McMurray test

Fig. 728.12 Examination maneuvers include the Lachman, anterior drawer, lateral pivot shift, Apley compression, and McMurray tests. The Lach-

man test, performed to detect anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injuries, is conducted with the patient supine and the knee flexed 20-30 degrees.
The anterior drawer test detects ACL injuries and is performed with the patient supine and the knee in 90 degrees of flexion. The lateral pivot shift
test is performed with the patient supine, the hip flexed 45 degrees, and the knee in full extension. Internal rotation is applied to the tibia while the
knee is flexed to 40 degrees under a valgus stress (pushing the outside of the knee medially). The Apley compression test, used to assess meniscal integrity, is performed with the patient prone and the examiner’s knee over the patient’s posterior thigh. The tibia is externally rotated while a
downward compressive force is applied over the tibia. The McMurray test, used to assess meniscal integrity, is performed with the patient supine
and the examiner standing on the side of the affected knee.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4310 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
If the patella is dislocated, reduction may be achieved with gentle
active assistive knee extension. Straight-­
leg immobilizers offer no
structural support and are only used for comfort and reminding the
patient to be careful with any weight-­bearing. A derotational hinge
brace may be indicated for stabilization, such as after an injury involving both the ACL and medial collateral ligament. The leg should be
elevated, and an elastic wrap can be applied for compression (PRICE
principles).

CHRONIC INJURIES
Patellofemoral Stress Syndrome

Patellofemoral stress syndrome (PFSS), or runner’s knee, is the most
common cause of anterior knee pain. PFSS is also known as patellofemoral pain syndrome or patellofemoral dysfunction (see Chapter
718.5). It is a diagnosis of exclusion used to describe anterior knee pain
that has no other identifiable pathology. Chondromalacia may be seen
in association with softening of the articular cartilage underneath the
patellar surface. Pain is usually difficult to localize. Patients indicate a
diffuse area over the anterior knee as the source, or they might feel as
if the pain is originating from underneath the patella. Bilateral pain
is common, and pain is often worse going up stairs, after sitting for
prolonged periods, or after squatting or running. There should be a
negative history for significant swelling or true mechanical symptoms,
which would indicate a more serious injury. History of change in activity is common, such as altered training surface or terrain, increased
training regimen, or performance of new tasks.
Examination should include evaluation of stance and gait for lower
limb alignment, musculature, and midfoot hyperpronation. Flexibility of the hamstrings, iliotibial band, and gastrocnemius should be
assessed, because stress is increased across the patellofemoral joint
when these structures are excessively tight. Hip range of motion should
be assessed to rule out hip pathology. Medial patellar tenderness or
pain with compression of the patellofemoral joint confirms the diagnosis in the absence of a significant effusion and other positive findings.
PFSS is a clinical diagnosis usually managed without imaging.
Treatment focuses on assessing and improving flexibility, strength,
and gait abnormalities. In the presence of midfoot hyperpronation
(ankle valgus), new shoes or the use of arch supports can improve
patellofemoral mechanics and alleviate pain. Ice and analgesics can be
used to help control pain. Reduced overall activity or training is important initially in rehabilitation. Short arc quadriceps strengthening exercises can be helpful: active knee extension with or without resistance
between 0 and 30 degrees of knee flexion. Hip and core strengthening
exercises are also beneficial. Therapeutic taping techniques to improve
patella tracking within the trochlear groove can be helpful with the
assistance of a sports physical therapist. The use of a patellar stabilizing
brace with a lateral buttress to maintain patellar alignment may be of
benefit in more chronic cases as well.

Osgood-­Schlatter Disease

Osgood-­Schlatter disease is a traction apophysitis occurring at the
insertion of the patellar tendon on the tibial tuberosity (see Chapter
718.4). Because it is also related to overuse of the extensor mechanism, Osgood-­Schlatter disease is treated like PFSS. A protective pad
to protect the tibial tubercle from direct trauma can be used. Therapeutic taping of the tibial tubercle may provide comfort, along with
well-­fitted knee sleeves and/or straps. NSAIDs are often prescribed for
comfort. Stretching focused on the quadriceps and hamstrings is recommended, and PRICE principles apply. Patients and parents should
be made aware that resolution is usually slow, often requiring 12-18
months. Complications are rare and can include growth arrest with
recurvatum deformity and rupture or avulsion of the patellar tendon/
tibial tubercle.

Other Chronic Injuries

Sinding-­Larsen-­Johansson disease is a traction apophysitis occurring
at the inferior pole of the patella. It occurs most often in volleyball and
basketball athletes. Treatment is similar to PFSS and Osgood-­Schlatter
disease.

Patellar tendinosis, or jumper’s knee, is caused by repetitive microtrauma of the patellar tendon, usually at the inferior pole of the patella.
In approximately 10% of cases, the quadriceps tendon above the patella
is affected. It is associated with jumping sports but may occur in runners as well. Treatment is similar to that for PFSS, with an emphasis
on eccentric strengthening in physical therapy. Relative rest is more
important in patellar tendinosis because chronic pain can be associated
with irreversible changes in the tendon. In these cases, recalcitrant to
rest, activity modifications, and physical therapy, there may be a role of
biologic injections such as platelet-­rich plasma to the pathologic area.
Surgical techniques also have a good success rate if needed.
Iliotibial band (ITB) friction syndrome is the most common cause
of chronic lateral knee pain. Generally, it is not associated with swelling
or instability. It is from friction of the ITB along the lateral knee, resulting in bursitis. Tenderness is elicited along the ITB as it courses over the
lateral femoral condyle or at its insertion at Gerdy’s tubercle along the
lateral tibial plateau. Tightness of the ITB is also noted using the Ober
test. To perform an Ober test, the athlete lies on one side, the inferior
hip is flexed, and the superior hip is extended with the knee flexed. The
examiner holds the superior foot in midair, and if the superior knee
drops inferiorly toward the exam table, it implies a flexible ITB and a
negative Ober test. If the knee and leg stay in midair, the Ober test is
positive, suggesting a tight ITB. Treatment principles follow those for
PFSS, except the emphasis is on improving flexibility of the ITB.
Other soft tissue injuries to be considered include prepatellar and
pes anserine bursitis, plical syndromes, and Hoffa syndrome. The pes
anserine bursa lies just under the conjoined tendon of the sartorius,
gracilis, and semitendinosus muscles as it attaches medially to the
proximal tibia. In Hoffa syndrome, the fat pad beneath the patella and
posterior to the patella ligament becomes pinched with anterior pain
on knee extension. These conditions are generally more common in
adolescents, those with genu recurvatum, and long-­distance runners.
Undiagnosed non–sports-­related conditions always need to be considered in the context of any child with a painful knee, particularly those
younger than 12 years old. These include conditions such as OCD (see
Chapter 718.3), which is most common on the lateral aspect of the
medial femoral condyle. Inflammatory and infectious arthritis, Baker
cyst (see Chapter 718.2), and hip pain referred to the knee are additional considerations. Tumors more common to the knee joint include
osteogenic sarcoma (distal femoral and proximal tibial), Langerhans
cell histiocytosis in the diaphysis, and eosinophilic granuloma in the
epiphysis of long bones. Metastatic tumors to the lower extremities
include neuroblastoma and lymphoma. As with any musculoskeletal
injury in a child not responding to conservative care, more in-­depth
diagnostic pursuit for alternative pathology is mandatory.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.7 Lower Leg Exertional Pain: Shin
Splints, Stress Fractures, and Chronic
Compartment Syndrome
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Stress injury to the bones of the lower leg occurs on a continuum from
mild injury (shin splints) to stress fracture. All occur by an overuse
mechanism.
Medial tibial stress syndrome, or shin splints, manifests with pain
along the medial tibia and is the most common overuse injury of the
lower leg. The pain initially appears toward the end of exercise, and if
exercise continues without rehabilitation, the pain worsens and occurs
earlier in the exercise period. There is diffuse tenderness over the lower
third to half of the distal medial tibia. Any focal tenderness of the tibia
is suspicious for a tibial stress fracture. A stress fracture tends to be
associated with more severe pain and is painful during the entire workout. Shin splints and stress fractures represent a continuum of stress
injury to the tibia and are thought to be related to traction of the soleus

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
on the tibia. Eccentric contraction of the medial aspect of the soleus is
required to control pronation from initial contact to mid-­stance with
running. This contraction increases the stress of the fascial origin of the
soleus, possibly through Sharpey fibers, causing disruption to the tibial
periosteum and fibrocartilaginous attachments.
The diagnosis can be made by history and physical examination.
Findings on plain radiographs of the tibia are typically unremarkable
with shin splints, as well as with tibial stress fractures within the first 2
weeks of injury. Beyond this time frame, radiographs may demonstrate
periosteal reaction if a stress fracture is present but may still be unremarkable. Sensitivity of plain radiographs can be increased by obtaining four views of the tibia: AP, lateral, and both oblique views. MRI is
the most sensitive test to diagnose stress injuries as it can reveal both
a stress fracture and stress reaction in the affected bone. Stress reactions may include bone marrow edema or periosteal reaction without
a fracture line but represent an impending progression to a fracture if
the offending stress is not reduced or eliminated.
The treatment of shin splints involves relative rest, correcting
training errors, and addressing muscle imbalances and abnormal
mechanical alignment. Orthotics and/or new shoes may be useful
in patients who hyperpronate. Fitness can be maintained with non–
weight-­bearing activities, such as swimming, cycling, and water jogging. With shin splints, after 7-10 days, patients can usually start on
the walk-­jog program. If pain worsens, 2-3 pain-­free days are required
before resuming the walk-­jog program. Ice should be used daily, and
an analgesic should be used for pain control. Stretching the plantar
flexors and hamstrings and strengthening the ankle dorsiflexors may
be useful. Therapeutic taping and wrapping techniques to support the
soft tissue attachments have been useful in some when directed by a
skilled sports therapist. Being pain free for 7-10 days is recommended
before exercises are commenced. Individuals with pain at rest and who
are not responsive to treatment require continued evaluation for stress
fracture. Treatment of tibial stress fractures is similar but requires more
prolonged avoidance of running and jumping, usually 6-8 weeks.
Chronic compartment syndrome occurs in an athlete in a running sport, usually during a period of heavy training. It is caused by
muscle hypertrophy and increased intracompartmental pressure with
exercise. There is typically a pain-­free period of about 10 minutes at the
beginning of a workout before onset of constant throbbing pain that
is difficult to localize. It lasts for minutes to hours after exercise and is
relieved by ice and elevation. Classically, there is numbness of the foot
associated with high pressure within the corresponding muscle compartment. The most common compartment affected is the anterolateral
compartment with compression of the fibular nerve followed by the
deep posterior compartment. The physical examination in the office
is often normal, but weakness of the extensor hallucis longus (anterolateral compartment) and decreased sensation between the first and
second toe may be present. Symptoms may be elicited through exercise in or near the examination room (jogging in place, stair climbing,
etc.), and prompt evaluation after symptom onset may aid in diagnosis. Radiologic evaluation is typically negative and used primarily to
rule out other conditions. Compartment pressure measurements are
the test of choice. Treatment involves reduction of activity, antiinflammatory medication, orthotics (hyperpronation), heel cord stretching,
light strengthening of distal musculature, optimal footwear, and cross-­
training (swimming, cycling, and water jogging). Cryotherapy and
superficial heat can also be of help. Persistent systems, despite conservative care, may require fasciotomy.
Popliteal artery entrapment syndrome occurs when the popliteal
artery is compressed by the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle
and the fascial band of the soleus with activity; the entrapment may be
anatomic or functional (from hypertrophy). Patients may have claudication and paresthesia (involvement of the tibial nerve), and calf
swelling (primary venous obstruction). Most patients have exertional
leg pain with no symptoms at rest; pain may be unilateral or bilateral
depending on the type of entrapment syndrome. The tibial or dorsalis pedis pulse may be reduced or absent with passive ankle dorsiflexion with the knee extended. Doppler exam in the neutral and flexion
position confirms the diagnosis in most patients; magnetic resonance

4311

angiography or CT angiography may be needed if the Doppler exam
is inconclusive. Surgical correction is the treatment of choice and
involves medical gastrocnemius fasciotomy, take down of the soleus
tibial attachments, and resection of the fibula soleus band. If the artery
is injured, it requires bypass surgery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

728.8 Ankle Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Ankle injuries are the most common acute athletic injury. Approximately 85% of ankle injuries are ankle sprains, and 85% of these are
inversion injuries (foot planted with the lateral fibula moving toward
the ground), 5% are eversion injuries (foot planted with the medial
malleolus moving toward the ground), and 10% are combined.

EXAMINATION AND INJURY GRADING SCALE

In obvious cases of fracture or dislocation, evaluating neurovascular
status with as little movement as possible is the initial priority. If no
deformity is obvious, the next step is inspection for edema, ecchymosis, and anatomic variants. Key sites to palpate for tenderness are the
entire length of the fibula; the medial malleolus; the base of the fifth
metatarsal; the anterior, medial, and lateral joint lines; the navicular;
and the Achilles tendon complex. Assessment of active range of motion
(patient alone) in dorsiflexion, plantar flexion, inversion, and eversion
along with gentle resisted range of motion can be helpful.
Provocative testing attempts to evaluate the integrity of the ligaments. In a patient with a markedly swollen, painful ankle, provocative
testing is difficult because of muscle spasm and involuntary guarding.
It is more useful on the field before much bleeding and edema have
occurred. The anterior drawer test assesses for anterior translation
of the talus and competence of the anterior talofibular ligament. The
inversion stress test examines the competence of the anterior talofibular and calcaneofibular ligaments (Fig. 728.13). In the acute setting, the
integrity of the tibiofibular ligaments and syndesmosis can be examined
by the syndesmosis squeeze test. Pain at the ankle joint with squeezing
the superior aspect of the lower leg implies injury to the interosseous
membrane and syndesmosis between the tibia and fibula—suspicious
for a high ankle sprain or more severe injury. Athletes with this injury
cannot bear any weight and have severe pain with dorsiflexion and
external rotation of the foot. Occasionally, the peroneal tendon dislocates from the fibular groove simultaneously with an ankle sprain. To
assess for peroneal tendon instability, the examiner applies pressure
from behind the peroneal tendon with resisted eversion and plantar

Fig. 728.13 Inversion stress tilt test for ankle instability. (From Hergenroeder AC. Diagnosis and treatment of ankle sprains: a review. Am
J Dis Child. 1990;144:809–814.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4312 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
flexion, and the tendon pops anteriorly. If either a significant syndesmotic injury or an acute peroneal dislocation is suspected, orthopedic
consultation should be sought.

RADIOGRAPHS

AP, lateral, and mortise views of the ankle are obtained when patients
have pain in the area of the malleoli, are unable to bear weight, or have
focal bone tenderness over the distal tibia or fibula. The Ottawa ankle
rules help define who requires radiographs (Fig. 728.14). A foot series
(AP, lateral, and oblique views) should be obtained when patients have
pain in the area of the midfoot or bone tenderness over the navicular
or fifth metatarsal, and/or an inability to bear weight. It is important
to differentiate an avulsion fracture of the fifth metatarsal base (dancer’s fracture) from the more distal Jones fracture of the proximal fifth
metatarsal (located about 2 cm distal to the proximal end). The former is treated like an ankle sprain; the latter fracture has an increased
risk of nonunion and requires orthopedic consultation. Injury to the
deltoid ligament of the medial ankle is rare but should raise the question of proximal fibular fracture. In this circumstance more proximal
tibial imaging may be necessary. A talar dome fracture may present
as an ankle sprain that does not improve. Radiographs on initial presentation can have subtle abnormalities. Any suspicion on the initial
radiographs of a talar dome fracture warrants orthopedic consultation
and further imaging. In the early adolescent, always look carefully at
the tibial epiphysis. Nondisplaced Salter III fractures can be subtle and
need to be recognized early and referred to an orthopedic surgeon
promptly. Diagnostic ultrasound, when available at the point of care,
can efficiently provide prognostic information by direct visualization of injured ligaments. Additionally, dynamic stress can be applied
during ligament visualization to assess for gaping of the joint, which
is indicative of more complete tearing with an increased duration of
expected recovery.

INITIAL TREATMENT OF ANKLE SPRAINS

Ankle sprains need to be treated with PRICE principles. This should be
followed for the first 48-72 hours after the injury to minimize bleeding
and edema. For an ankle injury, this may consist of crutches and an
elastic wrap, although other compression devices, such as an air stirrup
splint, are also effective. This allows early weight-­bearing with protection and can be removed for rehabilitation. It is important to start a
rehabilitation program as soon as possible.

Rehabilitation

Rehabilitation should begin the day of injury; for patients who have
pain with movement, isometric strengthening can be started. Early-­
phase intervention includes restoration of functional range of motion,
strengthening with emphasis on peroneal musculature, and early sensory proprioceptive training. Later intervention includes higher-­level
balance activities, advanced proprioception exercises, and endurance
training. When determining when an athlete is ready for running,
there must be full range of motion and nearly full strength compared
to the uninjured side. While standing on the uninjured side only, the
athlete is instructed to hop 8-10 times, if possible. When this can be
achieved without pain on the injured side, the athlete can begin to run,
starting out with jogging and gradually progressing in speed. The athlete must stop if there is significant pain or limp. Finally, before returning to sport, the athlete must be able to sprint and change directions off
the injured ankle comfortably. Performing some sport-­related tasks is
also helpful in determining readiness for return to play.
Recurrent ankle injuries are more likely in patients who have not
undergone complete rehabilitation. Ankle sprains are less likely in
players wearing high-­top shoes or lace-­up ankle braces. Proper taping of the ankle with adhesive tape can provide functional support but
loosens with use and is often unavailable. Surgery is a consideration for
chronic mechanical instability with lateral complex ligamentous laxity in the failure of more conservative care. Salter-­Harris grade I distal
fibular fractures need careful consideration, particularly in the child
younger than 12 years of age. The physeal plates are generally the weakest link in the musculoskeletal chain and tend to slide or pull apart
before the surrounding soft tissue and/or ligaments tear in this younger
population.

OTHER CAUSES OF ANKLE PAIN

Toddler’s fracture needs to be considered in young children with ankle
pain, especially in those younger than 6 years (see Chapter 724.4). The
proposed mechanism involves sheer stress with lack of displacement
because of the periosteum that is relatively strong compared to the elastic bone in younger children. Initial radiographs may be inconspicuous
(a faint spiral oblique line) or even normal. The condition can be mistaken for osteomyelitis, transient synovitis, or even child abuse. Toddler’s fracture usually occurs in the lower third of the tibia, whereas
nonaccidental injury typically affects the upper two-­thirds or midshaft
Medial view

Lateral view
Malleolar zone

A Posterior edge
or tip of lateral
malleolus-6 cm

B Posterior edge
or tip of medial
malleolus-6 cm

Mid-foot zone

C Base of fifth
metatarsal
A series of ankle x-ray films is required only if
there is any pain in malleolar zone and any of
these findings:
• Bone tenderness at A
• Bone tenderness at B
• Inability to bear weight both immediately and
in emergency department

D Navicular

A series of ankle x-ray films is required only if
there is any pain in mid-foot zone and any of
these findings:
• Bone tenderness at C
• Bone tenderness at D
• Inability to bear weight both immediately and
in emergency department

Fig. 728.14 Ottawa ankle rules. (From Bachmann LM, Kolb E, Koller MT, et al. Accuracy of Ottawa ankle rules to exclude fractures of the ankle and
mid-­foot; systematic review. BMJ. 2003;326:417–419.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 728 u Management of Musculoskeletal Injury
of the tibia. Other less common conditions that cannot be excluded
include os fibulare, a congenital unfused secondary ossification center
of the distal fibula. This can be seen in younger patients with recurrent
ankle sprains, particularly as their body weight and activity increase
during the early academic years. Undiagnosed tarsal coalitions can
also be seen in the presence of ankle sprains in younger children (most
commonly talocalcaneal and calcaneal navicular). Muscular strains
and/or tendinoses are more prevalent in the older child and adolescent, and include peroneal, posterior tibialis, and gastrocnemius/
Achilles types. Tarsal tunnel syndrome (entrapment of the posterior
tibial nerve) is more prevalent in the adolescent/younger adult and is
commonly associated with medial ankle pain and burning or tingling
into the sole of the foot.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for a complete
Bibliography.

728.9 Foot Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
Metatarsal stress fractures can occur in any running athlete. The history is often one of insidious pain with activity that is getting worse.
Examination reveals point tenderness over the mid-­shaft of the metatarsal, most commonly the second or third metatarsal. Radiographs
might not show the periosteal reaction before pain has been present for
2 weeks or more. Treatment is relative rest for 6-8 weeks. Shoes with
good arch supports reduce stress to the metatarsals.
Vague dorsal foot pain in an athlete in a running sport can represent a navicular stress fracture. Unlike other stress fractures, it might
not localize well on examination. If there is any tenderness around the
navicular, a stress fracture should be suspected. This stress fracture can
take many weeks to show up on plain radiographs, so MRI should be
done to confirm the diagnosis. Because this fracture is at high risk of
nonunion, immobilization and non–weight-­bearing for 8-12 weeks is
the usual treatment. A CT scan should be obtained to document full
healing after the period of immobilization.
Sever disease (calcaneal apophysitis) occurs at the insertion of
the Achilles tendon on the calcaneus and manifests as activity-­related
pain (see Fig. 728.3). It is more common in males, is often bilateral,
and usually occurs between ages 8 and 13 years. Tenderness is elicited
at the insertion of the Achilles tendon into the calcaneus, especially
with squeezing the heel (positive squeeze test). Sever disease is associated with tight Achilles tendons and mid-­foot hyperpronation that
puts more stress on the plantar flexors of the foot. Treatment includes
relative rest, ice, massage, stretching, and strengthening the Achilles
tendon. Correcting the mid-­foot hyperpronation with orthotics, arch
supports, or stabilizing shoe wear is important in most athletes with
Sever disease. If the foot is neutral or there is mild hyperpronation,
cushioned heel lifts can be helpful to unload the Achilles tendon and its
insertion. With optimal management, symptoms frequently improve
in 4-8 weeks. Generally, if there is no limp during the athletic activity,
young athletes with Sever disease should be allowed to play.
Plantar fasciitis is an overuse injury resulting in degeneration of
the plantar aponeurosis. Rare in prepubertal children, this diagnosis is
more likely seen in the adolescent or young adult. Athletes report heel
pain with activity that is worse with the first steps of the day or after
several hours of non–weight-­bearing. Tenderness is elicited on the
medial calcaneal tuberosity. Relative rest from weight-­bearing activity is helpful. Athletes get plantar fasciitis when shoes are worn with
inadequate arch supports. New shoes or use of semirigid arch supports
often lessen the pain. Stretching the calves and plantar fascia helps,
assisted at times with therapeutic ultrasound treatment. Some patients
benefit from night splints even though they can make sleep difficult.
As long as there is no limping with athletic activity, the athlete may
continue participation. Complete recovery is usually seen at 6 months.

4313

Corticosteroid injection, extracorporeal shock-­wave therapy, or injections of platelet-­rich plasma can be considered in those cases recalcitrant to conservative treatments.
Calcaneal stress fracture is seen in the older adolescent or young
adult involved in a running sport. There is heel pain with any weight-­
bearing activity. The physical examination reveals pain with squeezing
the calcaneus. Sclerosis can show up on the AP and lateral radiographs
after 2-3 weeks of pain. MRI may need to be performed to confirm the
diagnosis in some cases. The calcaneus is an uncommon location for a
stress fracture and is often associated with osteopenia. Treatment is rest
from running and other weight-­bearing activity for at least 8 weeks.
Immobilization is rarely necessary.
Pes planus, or “flat feet,” may be termed “flexible” or “rigid.” Flexible pes planus is usually asymptomatic and is the most common type
found in children (see Chapter 715.5). Foot orthotics may be helpful
for older children with foot pain or associated muscle cramping. Rigid
pes planus is a congenital deformity associated with other anomalies
in 50% of cases. It is caused by failure of the tarsal bones to separate,
leaving a bony cartilaginous or fibrous bridge or coalition between two
or more tarsal bones (see Chapter 715.6). Talocalcaneal coalitions are
more symptomatic between 12 and 16 years of age, whereas calcaneonavicular coalitions are more symptomatic between 8 and 12 years of
age. Symptoms are insidious with occasional acute arch, ankle, and
mid-­foot pain, which is at times brought on with sports-­related activities. The hindfoot often does not align in its normal varus position on
tiptoe maneuvers. Patients are predisposed to ankle sprains secondary
to limited subtalar motion, and stress to the subtalar and transverse
tarsal joints frequently causes pain. CT scans are diagnostic, and initial treatment is conservative with short leg casting and/or molded
orthoses and rest. In the case of failure of conservative care, surgical
intervention is usually necessary. Rigid cavus feet can also be associated with metatarsalgia, clawing, and intrinsic muscle atrophy, which
are all possible in the young athlete (see Chapter 715.7). With a cavus
foot, undiagnosed neurologic conditions, such a Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth
disease, spinal dysraphism, Friedrich ataxia, or spinal tumor, need to
be considered. Custom-­molded orthotics may be helpful, and family
history can be critical. Symptomatic, accessory navicular bones and
sesamoiditis can be considered when these areas are painful and do not
have evidence of fracture or prior trauma. These conditions are more
common in the adolescent or younger adult and can be exacerbated
with sporting activities.
Other conditions causing foot pain include Lisfranc sprain and/
or dislocation, which is more common in football linemen or other
athletes requiring heavy loading on the mid-­foot and forefoot joints,
and gymnasts using the balance beam. The Lisfranc joint is the tarsal
metatarsal articulation of the three cuneiform bones and the cuboid
with the five proximal metatarsals. Turf toe can be seen, particularly
in the older child and/or adolescent running on artificial or synthetic
surfaces. It results from hyperextension through the first metatarsal
phalangeal joint, spraining the ligaments surrounding the joint often
in a football and/or soccer activity.
Iselin apophysitis is an apophysitis that occurs at the tuberosity
of the fifth metatarsal. The apophysis at this site appears between
the ages of 9 and 14 years and is located within the insertion of
the peroneus brevis tendon. This condition can be a predisposing
factor to dancer’s fracture (see Chapter 728.8). Freiberg disease,
which involves the collapse of the articular service and subchondral
bone, usually of the second metatarsal, and Kohler disease, which
involves irregular ossification of the tarsal navicular joint with
localized pain and increased density, should always be considered
in the evaluation osteochondroses of the foot (see Chapter 715.8).
Freiberg disease is more common in girls between the ages of 12
and 15 years, whereas Kohler disease occurs in younger individuals,
age 2-9 years, and is frequently reversible with conservative care,
including orthoses and casting.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4314 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Chapter 729

Sports-­Related Traumatic
Brain Injury (Concussion)
Alex M. Taylor, William P. Meehan III, and
Mark R. Proctor
Concussion is a form of traumatic brain injury (TBI) caused by sudden acceleration, deceleration, or rotational forces to the brain, which
can occur with a blow to the head, neck, face, or body. The resulting
pathophysiologic state is associated with a constellation of signs and
symptoms that, for sport-­related concussions (SRCs), typically self-­
resolve within 7-10 days. A minority of children can experience persistent postconcussion symptoms (PPCS) that extend beyond 28 days
and limit functional ability, cause social isolation, reduce school attendance and performance, and can lead to anxiety, mood alteration, and
lower quality of life. Accurate diagnosis and appropriate management
of concussion is needed to safely return children to school and sports
and to avoid the potential for worse outcomes.

DEFINITION/TERMINOLOGY

The spectrum of TBI ranges from mild to severe. Classification is typically determined by score on the Glasgow Coma Scale (see Chapter
79), with severe = <
−8, moderate = 9-12, and mild = 13-15. Although
concussion and mild TBI (mTBI) are sometimes used interchangeably, concussion may be best understood as the clinical syndrome that
is associated with mTBI. There are several agreed on features:
◆	Concussion may be caused by a direct blow to the head, face, neck,
or elsewhere on the body with an “impulsive” force transmitted to
the head.
◆	Concussion typically results in the rapid onset of short-­lived impairment of neurologic function that resolves spontaneously. However,
in some cases, signs and symptoms may evolve over minutes to
hours.
◆	Concussion may result in neuropathologic changes, but the acute
clinical signs and symptoms largely reflect a functional disturbance
rather than a structural injury and, as such, no abnormality is seen
on standard structural neuroimaging studies.
◆	Concussion results in a range of clinical signs and symptoms that
may or may not involve loss of consciousness (Fig. 729.1). Resolution of the clinical and cognitive features typically follows a sequential course. However, in some cases, symptoms may be prolonged.
To be defined as a concussion, the clinical signs and symptoms cannot
be explained by drug, alcohol, or medication use, other injuries (such as
cervical injuries, peripheral vestibular dysfunction), or other comorbidities (e.g., psychologic factors or coexisting medical conditions).

EPIDEMIOLOGOY

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),
as many as 3.8 million sport-­related TBIs may occur in the United
States annually with 70–90% of these injuries classified as concussion.
One study suggested that current surveillance systems may capture
only one out of every nine concussions.
Approximately 20% of middle and high school children report a lifetime prevalence of concussion. Sports participation is the most common mechanism of injury. An estimated 1.1-1.9 million recreational
and sports-­related concussions occur each year in children 18 years or
younger. In gender comparable sports, female athletes report higher
rates of concussion than males, and both groups are more likely to suffer a concussion in competition than at practice. Among males, the
incidence of concussion is highest in collision (contact) sports, including rugby, American football, ice hockey, lacrosse, basketball, soccer,
and wrestling. Among females, the incidence of concussion is highest

in soccer, lacrosse, and field hockey. Other sports and recreational
activities in which concussions frequently occur include bicycling,
skateboarding, skiing, and snowboarding. Younger children may have
playground-­associated concussions.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The constellation of symptoms associated with concussion are not
caused by observable structural injury or hemorrhage; clinical imaging
studies (MRI/CT) typically are normal. However, there is a proposed
cascade of events that lead to the clinical syndrome. A sudden acceleration, deceleration, or rotation of the brain is thought to result in
parenchymal shear stress and strain that disrupts neuronal function in
a cascade of ionic and metabolic fluctuations. Affected neurons experience massive depolarization and then require additional adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) to restore cellular homeostasis. Glucose levels
dramatically increase to fuel ATP production, which ultimately causes
lactic acid accumulation. At the same time this process occurs, there is
a decrease in cerebral blood flow, which may persist for several weeks.
Consequently, less glucose is available when it is most needed to fuel
ATP for ionic recovery. The signs and symptoms of concussion are
thought to reflect the energy crisis or mismatch between the demand
and availability of fuel in the brain after trauma.

SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

Signs and symptoms of concussion can be classified into five categories,
including somatic, vestibular, cognitive, emotional, and sleep related
(Table 729.1). Acutely, headache is the most commonly reported
symptom, followed by dizziness, difficulty concentrating, and confusion. Sleep disturbance, anxiety, and mood-­related symptoms are more
likely to occur several weeks post-­injury. Brief loss of consciousness
occurs in less than 5% of SRCs and is not associated with injury severity or time to recover. The most reliable predictor of recovery is initial
symptom burden; children who experience greater symptom load and
severity are at increased risk of PPCS. However, several noninjury–
related factors can also affect recovery, including female sex, history of
migraines, history of prior concussion, poorer preinjury child adjustment, family dysfunction, neurodevelopmental disorder (e.g., learning
disability, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder [ADHD]), and psychiatric illness (e.g., anxiety, depression).
Although concussion typically results in an immediate onset of short-­
lived neurologic dysfunction that resolves spontaneously, signs and
symptoms may develop over several minutes to hours. The diagnosis can
be challenging and further complicated by the presence of concussion-­
like symptoms in noninjured athletes. Children with preexisting neurodevelopmental disorders, mental health concerns, history of prior
concussion, or headaches/migraines may endorse concussion-­like symptoms in the absence of injury. A reasonable mechanism of injury needs
to be identified as well as a measurable change from baseline symptoms.
To this end, age-­appropriate symptom scales or checklists may be useful
in assessing SRC and monitoring recovery (Table 729.1). Many symptom rating scales are available, and some are incorporated into sideline
assessment tools, including the Sport Concussion Assessment Tool version 6 (SCAT6), which is approved for age 13 years and older. It is important to use a developmentally appropriate scale for younger children
(e.g., Child-­SCAT6 for children age 5-12 years) and to use the same tool
in subsequent assessments to allow for tracking of symptoms over time.

INITIAL ASSESSMENT AND TOOLS

The initial diagnosis and management of concussion often begins on
the field, rink, or court. Whether on the sideline and/or at a medical
clinic, the first step is to rule out an injury that requires immediate
attention. Acute care should include cervical spine stabilization, evaluation of airway, breathing, and circulation, and motor and sensory
neurologic testing. Once a spinal cord injury or more severe injury to
the brain is ruled out, it is important to: (1) perform a detailed evaluation of the athlete’s mental status, (2) assess signs and symptoms, and
(3) identify risks for delayed recovery (i.e., neurodevelopmental disorders, mental health concerns, history of prior concussion, or headaches/migraines). This process is facilitated by use of a validated sideline

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 729 u Sports-­Related Traumatic Brain Injury (Concussion) 4315

xacerbation of prefor e
exis
r
o
tin
nit
o
gc
M
Vestibular
on
di
tio
Physical exam
Impaired balance/gait
ns
Abnormal vestibular-ocular reflex
,
Targeted treatment
Graded exposure to stimuli
Vestibular rehabilitation

Ocular

Cognitive

Physical exam
Abnormal near point convergence
Impaired accommodation
Abnormal pursuits
Abnormal saccades
Symptom provocation with above tests

Physical exam
Normal
Confusion
Disorientation
Poor performance on in-office cognitive testing

Balance problems

Feeling like “in a fog”

Dizziness

Targeted treatment
Ocular rehabilitation
Lens changes

Difficulty
remembering
Blurred vision

“Don’t feel right”
Nausea or vomiting
Concussion symptoms

Difficulty concentrating
Confusion
Feeling slowed down

Headache

Nervous or anxious

Neck pain

Fatigue or low energy

Drowsiness

Headache-migraine
Physical exam
Normal
Avoidance reaction to bright light
Occipital tenderness
Neck tenderness
Tight neck muscles

Sensitivity
to noise

Fatigue
Irritability
Trouble falling asleep

“Pressure in head”

Sadness
More emotional

Targeted treatment
Manual therapy
Treatment of HA disorder

ic
ob
r
ae

Anxiety-Mood

Physical exam
Normal
Tired of subdued appearance
Decreased arousal
somnolence
Targeted treatment
Cognitive behavioral therapy
Graded exertional tolerance
training in chronic setting

d

Physical exam
Normal
Agitated
Anxious
Flat affect
Tearful
Targeted treatment
Maintain social engagement
Mental health counseling
Cognitive behavioral therapy

,
iene
hyg
ep
sle

se
rci
e
ex

Targeted treatment
Academic modifications
Formal neurocognitive
evaluation/rehabilitation

from SCAT symptom evaluation

Sensitivity to light

arding ex
p
e
c
t
nsel reg
a
tion
Cou
o
f
r
ec
o
v
er
y,

Genera
l rec
om
me
nd
ati
on
s:

Abnormal visual motion sensitivity
or other abnormal vestibular testing

subsy
m
pto
m

th
re
s
h
ol

Fig. 729.1 Constellation of symptoms after concussion. Overlapping clinical domains to monitor and facilitate individualized management after

concussion. (From Harmon KG, Clugston JR, Dec K, et al. American Medical Society for Sports Medicine position statement on concussion in sport.
Br J Sports Med. 2019;53[4]:213–225.)

assessment tool. SCAT6 is recommended and includes standardized
methods for recording relevant demographics, observable signs of
injury, postconcussion symptoms, and memory function (excluding
children <12 years), as well as the GCS, cervical spine assessment,
brief neurologic exam, and the modified Balance Error Scoring System (m-­BESS). Another often-­used sideline assessment is the Sideline
Assessment of Concussion, which includes a mental status exam, brief
neurologic exam, and cognitive screen.
The Balance Error Scoring System (BESS) measures postural stability or balance and consists of six stances, three on a firm surface and the
same three stances on an unstable (medium density foam) surface. The
modified BESS (m-­BESS) is frequently used because it does not rely on
availability of medium-­density foam for administration. Both include
three stances: feet shoulder width apart, a tandem stance (one foot in

front of the other), and a single-­leg stance on the person’s nondominant
leg, which are performed for 20 seconds with eyes closed and hands on
the iliac crests. An error is recorded each time athletes lift their hands
off their hips, open their eyes, step, stumble, fall, remain out of the test
position for more than 5 seconds, move hips into more than 30 degrees
of flexion or abduction, or lift their forefoot or heel. Normative data are
available for comparison, although preseason balance screening provides more precise, individualized data. Furthermore, most evidence
suggests that balance impairments generally resolve within 3 days
postinjury.
Clinicians should screen for vision problems after concussion. In
addition to visual acuity and visual field testing, the Vestibular Ocular
Motor Screening Assessment (VOMS) is another tool that is increasingly used to evaluate concussion. It involves a standardized method to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4316 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 729.1  Postconcussion Symptom Scale
NONE

MILD

Headache

0

1

2

MODERATE
3

4

SEVERE
5

6

“Pressure in head”

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Neck pain

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Nausea or vomiting

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Dizziness

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Blurred vision

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Balance problems

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Sensitivity to light

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Sensitivity to noise

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Feeling slowed down

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Feeling like “in a
fog”

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

“Don’t feel right”

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Difficulty
concentrating

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Difficulty
remembering

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Fatigue or low
energy

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Confusion

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Drowsiness

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

More emotional

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Irritability

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Sadness

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Nervous or anxious

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Trouble falling asleep

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

From Echemendia RJ, Meeuwisse W, McCrory P, et al. Sport concussion assessment
tool—5th edition. Br J Sports Med. 2017;51:851–858.

assess smooth pursuits, horizontal and vertical saccades, convergence,
horizontal vestibular ocular reflex, and visual motion sensitivity. Findings on the VOMS have been shown to distinguish children with concussion from uninjured controls, and vestibular-­ocular dysfunction
may have a particularly deleterious effect on academics.
Neuropsychologic assessment quantifies cognitive symptoms of
concussion and can help to identify comorbidities that can complicate the diagnosis. The areas identified as most vulnerable to injury
include attention and executive function (e.g., speed of processing),
new learning and memory, and reaction time. Obtaining preseason
or “baseline” data enables clinicians to accurately detect cognitive
impairment after injury and aids interpretation of data for athletes
with preexisting or contextual factors that affect cognitive function
(e.g., neurodevelopmental disorder, sleep, anxiety, and depression).
Computer-­administered neurocognitive tests are frequently used
because the cost and availability of trained neuropsychologists to
administer and interpret more comprehensive tests are prohibitive. Further, testing may be of additional benefit in determining
appropriate school and home interventions for children who go on
to experience PPCS.
The application of neuropsychologic assessment varies depending
on the time of referral. Research generally supports the use of brief cognitive screens acutely (∼3 days postinjury) such as those incorporated

into the SCAT and SAC. Computerized administered neurocognitive
assessment or a hybrid approach that includes paper and pencil measures of function are most often administered subacutely (∼4-30 days
postinjury) to assist in return-to-play decision-­making, documenting
lingering cognitive deficits, and providing rationale for academic supports or accommodations. The purpose of neuropsychologic assessment for patients with prolonged or chronic postconcussion symptoms
(30+ days) is to provide the referring clinician and patient with additional insight into injury and noninjury factors affecting recovery, as
well as their impact on cognitive function. Symptoms of comorbidities,
including sleep deprivation, deconditioning, and pain, closely resemble
postconcussion symptoms and similarly influence health-­related status and cognition. Research also indicates that anxiety and depression,
family functioning, and caregiver adjustment, as well as neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., learning disability or ADHD) are strong predictors of prolonged symptoms.
In addition to ruling out more severe injury, the primary goal of
both sideline assessment and/or office-­based assessment is to prevent
concussed athletes from returning to play prematurely. The brain is
likely more vulnerable to reinjury immediately after concussion and
until ionic and metabolic functioning normalizes. Consistent with this,
most reinjuries occur within the first 10 days of an initial concussion.
Thus, if a concussion is suspected, it is often wise to remove younger
athletes from play for 24 hours or until the diagnosis of concussion
can be confidently ruled out. Athletes who experience prolonged loss
of consciousness, focal neurologic deficits, excessive somnolence,
progressively worsening headache pain, repeated vomiting, slurred
speech, and significant confusion may need to be seen in the emergency department where brain imaging can be conducted to rule out
more severe head injury.
A blood test (Brain Trauma Indicator) is FDA approved for patients
≥18 years of age with concussion who have normal mental status) to
help identify patients in need of cranial imaging. The test measures brain
proteins, glial fibrillary acid protein, and ubiquitin C-­terminal hydroclase-1, and may also be useful in detecting concussion in children.

MANAGEMENT

After diagnosis and removal from play, the initial management strategy is education of the child and parents about concussion, including
the signs and symptoms, effects on cognition, and expected trajectory of recovery. Early limited, subsymptom levels of physical activity may improve recovery, whereas complete rest beyond 2-3 days is
associated with delayed recovery. Children (symptomatic or asymptomatic) who can tolerate light exercise soon after injury should be
encouraged to do so because it prevents deconditioning and can help
with sleep and mood regulation. Importantly, early moderate and
intense exercise is associated with symptom exacerbation and longer
recovery times, and exercise of any intensity is deferred if it provokes
symptoms in the first few days postinjury. Most children will begin
to achieve some level of activity tolerance within 2-3 days. Management plans should then focus on gradually and progressively resuming noncontact, low-­risk physical activity until full recovery (Table
729.2).
Most children who sustain a concussion will experience full recovery with adherence to relative rest, followed by graduated return to
physical and cognitive activity. Nonetheless, some athletes require
targeted symptom management, particularly when they are slow to
improve (Table 729.3; see Fig. 729.1). Acetaminophen or NSAIDs
may help to reduce acute headache pain. Prescription medications
are sometimes warranted, including topiramate, amitriptyline, or
cyproheptadine for posttraumatic headaches, peripheral nerve
blocks for occipital or cervicogenic headaches, and gabapentin for
headaches with a neuropathic component. Otolaryngology referral
or vestibular therapy is recommended for management of dizziness,
vertigo, and imbalance. For children with visual disturbance, assessment and visual rehabilitation therapy managed by an optometrist
or ophthalmologist is appropriate. Psychologic assessment and intervention, particularly cognitive behavioral therapy, is recommended

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 729 u Sports-­Related Traumatic Brain Injury (Concussion) 4317
Table 729.2  Graduated Return to Play Protocol
STAGE

AIM

ACTIVITY

GOAL OF EACH STEP

1

Symptom-­limited activity

Daily activities that do not provoke
symptoms

Gradual reintroduction of work/school
activities

2

Light aerobic exercise

Walking or stationary cycling at slow to
medium pace. No resistance training

Increase heart rate

3

Sport-­specific exercise

Running or skating drills. No head impact
activities

Add movement

4

Noncontact training drills

Harder training drills (e.g., passing drills).
May start progressive resistance training

Exercise, coordination, and increased
thinking

5

Full contact practice

After medical clearance, participate in
normal training activities

Restore confidence and assess
functional skills by coaching staff

6

Return to sport

Normal game play

NOTE: An initial period of 24-48 hr of both relative physical rest and cognitive rest is recommended before beginning the return to sport progression.
There should be at least 24 hr (or longer) for each step of the progression. If any symptoms worsen during exercise, the athlete should go back to the previous step. Resistance
training should be added only in the later stages (stage 3 or 4 at the earliest). If symptoms are persistent (e.g., more than 10-14 days in adults or more than 1 mo in children), the
athlete should be referred to a healthcare professional who is an expert in the management of concussion.
From Patricios JS, Schneider KJ, Dvorak J, et al. Consensus statement on concussion in sport: the 6th International Conference on Concussion in Sport–Amsterdam, Oct 2022. Br J
Sports Med. 2023;57:695.

Table 729.3  Common Potential Interventions for Specific
Symptoms After Pediatric Concussion
SPECIFIC SYMPTOMS

POTENTIAL INTERVENTIONS

Headache

Lifestyle modifications (water
intake, meal schedule, sleep,
and exercise), cervicovestibular
therapy, acute medications,
preventive medications, and
avoiding overuse of acute
medications

Light-Headedness or Exercise
Intolerance

Increase water and salt intake
and gradual increase in
exercise

Dizziness or Neck Pain

Vestibular therapy and cervical
spine therapy

Balance or Coordination
Difficulties

Neuromuscular training

Sleep Difficulties

Lifestyle modifications (bedtime
routine, white noise, avoid
caffeine, and exercise earlier),
and melatonin

Anxiety or Mood Problems

Counselling, antidepressants,
and anxiolytics

Cognitive Difficulties

Cognitive testing and academic
accommodations

From Beauchamp MH, Degeilh F, Rose SC: Improving outcome after paediatric concussion: challenges and possibilities. Lancet Child Adolesc 2023;7:728-738 (Panel 2, p. 733).

for athletes who experience worsening or newly developed symptoms of anxiety or depression. Both are potentially heightened as a
direct consequence of concussion as well as the resulting limitations
on everyday activities and social interaction. A multidisciplinary and
collaborative approach to target specific treatments is advised for
children whose symptoms do not show improvement with standard
behavioral interventions.

Return to School

Of particular importance to children and their families is the effect
of concussion on cognitive function and school performance.

Children and adolescents exposed to greater levels of cognitive
stress endorse worse symptoms and experience longer recovery
after concussion. Students who experience postconcussion symptoms report difficulty in school. There is also evidence that overly
restricting cognitive exertion and school participation can delay
recovery. Current recommendations focus on using self-­reported
symptoms to determine school readiness, followed by increasing exposure to classroom learning, tests, and assignments (Table
729.3). In general, children and adolescents are encouraged to
attend school, even if on a modified schedule, in 2-3 days or sooner,
with a program of academic adjustments and modifications that
allow for ongoing learning to occur with minimal symptom provocation. Clinicians should provide documentation to schoolteachers and administrators requesting compressed assignments, more
time to complete tests or assignments, deferred examinations, rest
breaks, audiobooks, oral teaching, large font printed material, or
preprinted notes where indicated.

Return to Play

There is a six-­stage return-­to-­play (RTP) protocol for a safe return
to activities (see Table 729.2). Starting with physical rest, athletes are
progressed to light aerobic exercise, moderate levels of sport-­specific
exercise, noncontact training drills, full contact practice, and normal game play. Athletes should be completely asymptomatic, free of
medications used to treat concussion symptoms, at full school, and
back to baseline functioning on all domains tested before the injury
before returning to contact or collision sports. Children and adolescents should remain at each stage of rehabilitation for no less than
24 hours before advancing to the next level. Thus a minimum of 5
days should pass before consideration of full return to competition. If
symptoms return at any stage of exertion, the athlete should rest until
the symptoms resolve and then return to the previous level of exertion. The final decision for RTP should be made by a licensed clinical provider with experience in the evaluation and management of
sports-­related concussions. Note that some states or schools require
an extended minimum number of symptom-­free days before RTP,
so clinicians need to be aware of the laws or local recommendations
regarding RTP.

Risks for Persistent Postconcussion Symptoms

From 80–90% of children and adolescents diagnosed with concussion will clinically recover within 4 weeks. Factors associated with
prolonged recovery include a history of prior concussions, female

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4318 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 729.4  Graduated Return to School Strategy
STAGE

AIM

ACTIVITY

GOAL OF EACH STEP

1

Daily activities at home that do
not give the child symptoms

Typical activities of the child during the day as long Gradual return to typical activities
as they do not increase symptoms (e.g., reading,
texting, screen time). Start with 5-15 min at a time
and gradually build up

2

School activities

Homework, reading, or other cognitive activities
outside of the classroom

Increase tolerance to cognitive
work

3

Return to school part-­time

Gradual introduction of schoolwork. May need to
start with a partial school day or with increased
breaks during the day

Increase academic activities

4

Return to school full time

Gradually progress school activities until a full day
can be tolerated

Return to full academic activities
and catch up on missed work

From Patricios JS, Schneider KJ, Dvorak J, et al. Consensus statement on concussion in sport: the 6th International Conference on Concussion in Sport–Amsterdam, Oct 2022. Br J
Sports Med. 2023;57:695.

sex, history of migraines, neurodevelopmental disorder (e.g.,
ADHD, learning disability), successive concussion soon after recovery, and acute symptom severity and burden. Female sex and initial
symptom severity are the factors associated with more persistent
symptoms in adolescents.

Chapter 730

Cervical Spine Injuries
Julie M. Kerr and Joseph A. Congeni

Retiring Young Athletes

Retirement from contact sports is rare but sometimes indicated,
even in younger athletes. Indications for retirement include chronic
neuropsychologic deficit, increased recovery times for successive
injuries, decreased threshold for repeat concussions, and multiple
concussions over the course of an athletic career.

COMPLICATIONS/LONG-­TERM EFFECTS

Second impact syndrome, seen more frequently in younger athletes than adults, refers to a rare, catastrophic neurologic injury
involving diffuse cerebral swelling that purportedly occurs in athletes who sustain a second head injury before full recovery from a
concussion. Although second impact syndrome is rare, its occurrence highlights the importance of removing children with concussion from play and other activities that place them at increased risk
of head injury until fully recovered. Pathogenic variants in CACNA1A have been associated with delayed and severe cerebral edema
after minor head trauma.
Some literature suggests that young athletes who suffer repetitive
head impacts and multiple concussions may be at risk for neurodegenerative diseases, such as chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE)
or Alzheimer disease. CTE describes pathologic changes in the brain
observed postmortem, which are hypothesized to be associated with
changes in mood, behavior, and cognition function. At present, there is
no way to diagnose CTE in living persons and its incidence and prevalence are unknown.

PREVENTION

The strongest evidence for concussion prevention is in support of
concussion education initiatives, age limits on contact, fair play, and
adherence to rules of the game or competition. Additionally, there
is some evidence that neck strengthening may reduce the risk of
concussion. Current research shows no proven benefit to personal
protective equipment (i.e., helmets, mouthguards) or dietary supplements in reducing the risk of concussion or its severity, although
it is important for athletes to wear properly fitted sport specific protective equipment to prevent more serious head injury and maxillofacial and dental trauma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Sports participation has surpassed motor vehicle crashes as the number
one cause of cervical spine injuries (primarily involving soft tissue) in
youth older than 8 years of age. American football, hockey, wrestling,
and gymnastics have the highest incidence in the United States; internationally, rugby is nearly as high. Catastrophic cervical spine injuries
fortunately are rare but can occur as a result of the scrum or tackling in
rugby and tackling plays in American football.
The normal cervical spine has a lordotic curve, allowing it to absorb
shock and dissipate force with application of an axial force. When
the neck is flexed forward, the spine straightens, losing this shock-­
absorbing property. An axial load to the top of the head in this flexed
position transmits force through the spine.

SOFT TISSUE INJURY

The most frequent injury resulting from trauma to the head and neck
involves the muscles, tendons, and ligamentous structures. Even though
strains, sprains, and contusions are common and are managed with cervical, scapulothoracic, and shoulder-­strengthening exercises, thorough
evaluation is required to rule out more serious injuries. Even without bony
abnormalities, the cervical spine may become unstable secondary to soft
tissue injury.
Spinal laxity results when most restraining ligaments are injured. When
compared with adjacent vertebra, laxity should horizontally be less than 3.5
mm and angular displacement less than 11 degrees on plain flexion/extension films. However, younger athletes have more baseline laxity, making
the criteria less applicable, and muscle spasm can acutely mask instability.
If subluxation is remotely suspected, a hard cervical collar should be placed
and flexion/extension views obtained again at 2-4 weeks when inflammation and spasm have subsided. A loss of lordosis on lateral x-­ray is associated with significant weakness of cervical muscles, particularly the cervical
extensors. Disk injuries are rare in pediatric patients. Rupture or herniation
must be considered in any cervical pain differential (see Chapter 81).

SPEAR TACKLER’S SPINE

This clinical entity is characterized by progressive spinal changes secondary to incorrect tackling form. Findings on plain x-­ray consist of (1)
narrowing of cervical spinal canal, (2) loss or reversal of normal cervical
lordosis, and (3) preexisting minor posttraumatic x-­ray evidence of bony

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 730 u Cervical Spine Injuries
or ligamentous injury. Although rule changes in collision and contact
sports have limited the practice of contacting an opponent with a “head-­
down” neck position, this condition persists. Most experts argue that this
condition disqualifies athletes from return to play.

CERVICAL FRACTURES

All significant neck injuries should be treated seriously until cleared with
appropriate examination and imaging. Although many cervical fractures
are stable, improper management or inadequate evaluation could produce
catastrophic results. Until formally evaluated, the patient should be immobilized and treated as if the patient has an unstable cervical fracture (see
Chapter 81).

STINGERS (BURNERS)

Stingers are unilateral (never bilateral) peripheral nerve injuries occurring at an anatomic location between the cervical nerve root and the
brachial plexus. Three proposed mechanisms include traction or tensile
stretch injury, compressive injury, and direct trauma. A typical presentation is a transient episode of unilateral burning pain, with or without
numbness, that radiates from the shoulder, down the upper arm, and
into the hand. Symptoms of C5 and C6 root injury with deltoid and
biceps weakness are the most common presentation. These symptoms
may last for several minutes to days but do not result in permanent
neurologic deficit or abnormal imaging evaluations. Examination
should assess for weakness, especially shoulder abduction, external
rotation, and elbow flexion. The cervical spine should have full and
pain-­free range of motion and no tenderness to palpation.
The Spurling Compression test helps to assess for cervical radiculopathy as a cause of upper extremity pain. The patient is seated with their
neck tilted to the affected side. In a positive test, the pain is reproduced
with gentle axial compression. The test has high specificity (∼93%) but
relatively low sensitivity (∼30%), meaning that positive tests indicate
likely cervical radiculopathy but many patients with cervical radiculopathy will not have a positive test.
Return to play may be considered the same day if the exam is reassuring. This requires complete resolution of symptoms, full range of motion,
and normal strength. Multiple stingers, bilateral symptoms, or symptoms
persisting for longer than one hour should prompt further evaluation
with cervical spine radiographs and other imaging modalities as indicated
before resumption of any physical activities.

BURNING HANDS SYNDROME

The athlete with this syndrome presents with intense paresthesia and
associated hand and arm weakness in both upper extremities. This is
suggestive of a central cord syndrome with cord compression of the
spinothalamic and corticospinal tracts. As with stingers, most of these
episodes resolve in minutes to days. Persistent symptoms or repeated
episodes warrant further evaluation and imaging.

Table 730.1  Return to Play
NO CONTRAINDICATION TO RTP
Healed fractures
Healed C1 or C2 fracture with normal cervical
spine ROM
Healed subaxial fracture without sagittal
plane deformity
Asymptomatic clay-­shoveler’s (C7) spinous
process avulsion fracture
Congenital
conditions

Klippel-­Feil (single-­level anomaly not C0/C1
articulation)
Spina bifida occulta

Degenerative/
postsurgical
conditions

Cervical disk disease (no change in baseline
neurologic status)
Single-­level ACF with/without
instrumentation
Single-­or multiple-­level posterior cervical
laminotomy

Recurrent stingers

Fewer than three episodes lasting <24 hours
Must have full cervical range of motion
No persisting neurologic deficit

Transient
quadriparesis

Single episode
Full cervical range of motion
Normal neurologic exam
No radiologic instability
Normal spinal reserve (as evidenced on MRI)

RELATIVE CONTRAINDICATION TO RTP
Stingers/burners
Prolonged symptomatic burner/stinger
Three or more stingers
Transient
quadriparesis

Transient quadriparesis lasting >24 hours
More than 1 episode with symptoms of any
duration

Postsurgical

Healed two-­level ACF
PCF with/without instrumentation

ABSOLUTE CONTRAINDICATION TO RTP
Transient
Cervical myelopathy
quadriparesis and
Continued neck discomfort
any one or more of Reduced ROM
Neurologic deficit from baseline after injury
Surgical procedures

C1 + C2 fusion
Cervical laminectomy
Three-­level ACF or PCF

Soft tissue injuries

Asymptomatic ligamentous laxity (>11
degrees of kyphotic deformity)
C1 + C2 hypermobility with anterior dens
>3.5 mm (adult), >4 mm (child), i.e., Down
syndrome
Symptomatic cervical disk herniation

Other conditions

Spear tackler’s spine
Multilevel Klippel-­Feil anomaly (see Chapter
721.2)
Healed subaxial fracture with sagittal
kyphosis, coronal plane abnormality, or cord
encroachment
Ankylosing spondylitis
Rheumatoid arthritis with spinal abnormalities
Spinal cord abnormality (cord edema,
compression, etc.)
Arnold-­Chiari syndrome
Basilar invagination
Occipital-­C1 assimilation (occipitalization or
connection)
Spinal stenosis (canal width <13 mm between
C3 and C7)

TRANSIENT QUADRIPARESIS

Transient quadriparesis is a temporary neurologic episode encompassing sensory symptoms with or without motor changes. Transient
quadriparesis is also known as cervical cord neurapraxia, commotio
spinalis, and spinal cord concussion. Transient quadriparesis can be
divided into three types: plegia (complete loss of motor function),
paresis (motor weakness), and paresthesia (sensory symptoms only).
There is also a three-­part grading system: grade 1 symptoms lasting less
than 15 minutes, grade 2 symptoms lasting 15 minutes to 24 hours, and
grade 3 symptoms persisting beyond 24 hours. Transient quadriparesis
must be differentiated from a stinger, and the player should be removed
from activity and spinal cord injury considered.
Mechanisms of injury include hyperextension, hyperflexion, and
axial loading. Anatomically, when the neck is hyperflexed or hyperextended, the spinal canal is narrowed by up to 30%, increasing the
likelihood of cord injury.
Evaluation should start with plain flexion and extension films if
stable. CT should be used if cervical fracture is suspected. MRI should
then be used to evaluate for intrinsic spinal cord abnormalities or
ongoing cord or root compression.

4319

ACF, Anterior cervical fusion; PCF, posterior cervical fusion; ROM, range of motion; RTP,
return to play.
Adapted from Cantu R, Li YM, Abdulhamid M, et al. Return to play after cervical spine
injury in sports. Curr Sports Med Rep. 2013;12:14–17.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4320 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Chapter 731

Heat Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson

Fig. 730.1 An MRI (sagittal) demonstrating spinal cord contusion

(edema in central portion of spinal cord). (From Krabak BJ, Kanarek SL.
Cervical spine pain in the competitive athlete. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N
Am. 2011;22:459–471. Fig. 2).

Return to play for transient quadriparesis is heavily debated and
lacks data to guide decision-­making. Some experts argue that one episode is a contraindication to return to contact sports, whereas others
agree with using the Return to Play Table (Table 730.1) for absolute and
relative contraindications for return. If allowed to return to play and a
second episode of transient quadriparesis occurs, the complete workup
must be repeated.

CONGENITAL SPINAL STENOSIS

Developmental narrowing of the cervical spinal canal predisposes an
athlete to higher risk of spinal cord injury. This condition can be found
incidentally while working up other conditions. Currently, the “gold
standard” imaging modality is an MRI measuring a canal width of <13
mm between C3 and C7 to define stenosis, with “normal” being greater
than 15 mm.
Functional stenosis can be seen with dynamic MRI in flexion and
extension to determine whether the canal space decreases with movement. The positioning of the canal in flexion or extension causes narrowing from movement of the vertebra and ligament, respectively. The
measured diameter may be irrelevant if disk protrusion or ligament
hypertrophy causes compression. This narrow “reserve space” around
the spinal cord puts the athlete at greater risk for injury as compared
with the same force applied to a normal spine.

SPINAL CORD INJURY

Spinal cord injury is the most devastating complication of cervical
trauma. Hemorrhage and transection are considered irreversible and
associated with complete cord injury, whereas contusion and edema
are considered to have more potential for recovery (Fig. 730.1). These
severe injuries should be managed by providers with expertise in this
area.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Heat illness is among the leading causes of death in U.S. high school
athletes. It is a continuum of clinical signs and symptoms that can be
mild (heat stress) to fatal (heat stroke). Children are more vulnerable to
heat illness than adults because they have a greater ratio of surface area
to body mass and produce greater heat per kilogram of body weight
during activity. The sweat rate is lower in children, and the temperature at which sweating occurs is higher. Although there is considerable
interindividual variability, children can take longer to acclimatize to
warmer, more humid environments (typically 8-12 near-­consecutive
days of 30-­to 45-­minute exposures). Children also have a blunted
thirst response compared with adults and might not consume enough
fluid during exercise in hot, humid environments to prevent dehydration. In addition, certain medications may predispose to heat-­related
injury (Table 731.1).
Three major categories for heat illness are generally used: heat
cramps, heat exhaustion, and heat stroke (Table 731.2). However,
symptoms of heat illness overlap and progress as the core temperature rises. Heat cramps are the most common heat injury and
usually occur in mild dehydration and/or salt depletion, typically
affecting the calf and hamstring muscles. They tend to occur later
in activity, as muscle fatigue is reached and water loss and sodium
loss worsen. Heat cramps will normally respond to oral rehydration
with electrolyte solution and with gentle stretching. The athlete can
return to play when the ability to perform is not impaired. Other
minor heat illnesses include heat syncope, heat edema, and heat
tetany. Heat syncope is fainting after prolonged exercise, attributed to poor vasomotor tone and depleted intravascular volume; it
responds to fluids, cooling, and supine positioning. Heat edema is
mild edema of the hands and feet during initial exposure to heat; it
resolves with acclimatization. Heat tetany is carpopedal tingling or
spasms caused by heat-­related hyperventilation during short periods of exposure to intense heat. It responds to moving to a cooler
environment and decreasing respiratory rate (or rebreathing by
breathing into a bag).
Heat exhaustion is a moderate illness with a core temperature of
37.7–40°C (100–104°F). It is manifested as weakness, fatigue, headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, orthostasis, piloerection, and possibly syncope. Central nervous system dysfunction is mild, if present.
Treatment includes moving to a cool environment, cooling the body
with fans, removing excess clothing, and placing ice over the groin and
axillae. If a patient is not able to tolerate oral rehydration, IV fluids are
indicated. Patients should be monitored, including rectal temperature,
for signs of heat stroke. If rapid improvement is not achieved, transport
to an emergency facility is recommended.
Heat stroke is a severe illness manifested by central nervous system
disturbances and potential tissue damage. It is a medical emergency;
the mortality rate is up to 50%. Sports-­related heat stroke is characterized by profuse sweating and is related to intense exertion, whereas
“classic” heatstroke with dry, hot skin is of slower onset (days) in
elderly or chronically ill persons. Rectal temperature is usually >40°C
(104°F). Significant damage to the heart, brain, liver, kidneys, and
muscle occurs, with possible fatal consequences if untreated. Treatment is immediate whole-­body cooling via cold water immersion
(Table 731.3). Airway, breathing, circulation, core temperature, and
central nervous system status should be monitored constantly. Rapid
cooling should be ceased when core temperature is approximately
38.3–38.9°C (101–102°F). IV fluid at a rate of 800 mL/m2 in the
first hour with normal saline or lactated Ringer solution improves

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 731 u Heat Injuries
Table 731.1  Medications and Drugs That May Increase
the Risk of Heat-Related Injury
MEDICATIONS
Anticholinergic agents (including antihistamines)
β ­Blockers
Antipsychotics (including SSRIs, TCAs)
Lithium
Diuretics
Salicylates
Sympathomimetic agents
Calcium channel blockers
Antiseizure medications (topiramate, zonisamide)
DRUGS OF MISUSE/SUPPLEMENTS
Amphetamines (including ephedra)
Cocaine
Ecstasy
Phencyclidine
Cathinone (synthetic marijuana) agents
LSD
Alcohol
Anabolic steroids
SSRI, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; TCA,
tricyclic antidepressants.

Table 731.2  Spectrum of Heat Illness
HEAT CRAMPS AND DEHYDRATION: CAUTIOUS RETURN TO
PLAY
Muscle cramps
Thirst
Fatigue
Light-­headedness
Sweating
Flushed face
HEAT EXHAUSTION: REMOVE FROM PLAY
Dizziness
Rapid pulse
Headaches
Nausea
Vomiting
Loss of coordination
Profuse sweating
Core temperature less than 40°C (104°F)
HEAT STROKE: MEDICAL EMERGENCY, CALL 911
Core temperature of 40°C (104°F) or higher
Hot dry skin
Multiple system failure
Delirium
Convulsions
Abnormal vital signs
From Merkel DL, Molony JT Jr. Medical sports injuries in the youth athlete: emergency
management. Int J Sports Phys Ther. 2012;7:242–251. Table 4.

intravascular volume and the body’s ability to dissipate heat. Immediate transport to an emergency facility is necessary. Physician clearance is required before return to exercise.
Dehydration is common to all heat illness; consequently, measures
to prevent dehydration may also prevent heat illness. Thirst is usually
an adequate indicator of hydration status; excessive hypotonic fluid
replacement beyond sweat and urine losses can lead to hyponatremia.
Endurance athletes should be cautioned not to drink beyond thirst.
Mild dehydration (2–3%) does not usually affect performance and
itself does not cause cramping, fatigue, or heat stroke.
Exercise-­associated hyponatremia (Na < 135 mmol/L) may be asymptomatic or symptomatic (lightheadedness, nausea, headache, confusion, cerebral edema) and is often seen in endurance sports (marathon,

4321

Table 731.3  Current Therapy for Heat-­Related Illness
• Acclimatization is key for prevention of exertional heat illness.
• Heat illness is most effectively managed by immediate recognition
of the signs and symptoms and proper diagnosis.
• Core body temperature measurement must be done with a rectal
thermometer.
EXERCISE-­ASSOCIATED COLLAPSE
• Continue walking after race to prevent development.
• Position the patient in the supine or Trendelenburg position and
start fluid administration.
HEAT EXHAUSTION
• Provide rapid cooling with ice bags to areas adjacent to large
vasculature (groin, neck, axilla).
• Administer oral or intravenous (IV) fluid to correct for hydration
deficit.
HEAT STROKE
• Ensure the ability to maintain adequate circulation, airway, and
breathing.
• Ice-­water immersion is the most effective way to provide rapid
cooling.
• The goal of cooling is to reduce and maintain a temperature
below 38.3°C (101°F).
• Transport to the hospital may be required if the patient’s
temperature is not reduced effectively or the patient does not
return to normal mental status after 30 minutes of medical
treatment.
From Cleland P. Heat illness. In: Kellerman RD, Rakel DP, Heidelbaugh JJ, Lee EM, eds.
Conn’s Current Therapy 2023. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023: p. 1390.

Maintain plasma osmolality
within normal range

Minimize
hyponatremia

Drink to
THIRST

Prevent excessive
dehydration
(protect performance)

Maintain plasma volume
within normal range for the activity

Fig. 731.1 Primary recommended fluid intake strategy to prevent

symptomatic exercise-­associated hyponatremia. (From Hew-­Butler T,
Rosner MH, Fowkes-­Godek S, et al. Statement of the third international
exercise-­associated hyponatremia consensus development conference,
Carlsbad, California, 2015. Clin J Sport Med. 2015;25:303–320. Fig. 1.)

triathlon, cycling, swimming), hiking, football, and police or military
drills. Major risk factors include overdrinking water or hypotonic sports
drinks, weight gain during exercise, exercise duration >4 hours, readily
available fluids, and inexperienced or slow pace. Athletes are advised to
be hydrated before exercise and should drink to thirst (Fig. 731.1). Fluids
should contain sodium and not be ingested in excess.
During a football practice, for example, scheduled breaks every
20-30 minutes with helmets off can decrease the cumulative amount
of heat exposure. Practices and competitions should be scheduled in
the early morning or late afternoon to avoid the hottest part of the day.
Guidelines have been published about modifying activity related to
temperature and humidity (Fig. 731.2). Proper clothing such as shorts
and T-­shirts without helmets can improve heat dissipation. Prepractice
and postpractice weight can be helpful in determining the amount of
fluid necessary to replace (8 oz for each pound of weight loss). When
practicing or performing in a warm environment, gradual acclimatization is recommended.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4322 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Relative humidity (%)

Classification

Temperature (°F)

NWS Heat index
80 82 84 86
40 80 81 83 85
45 80 82 84 87
50 81 83 85 88
55 81 84 86 89
60 82 84 88 91
65 82 85 89 93
70 83 86 90 95
75 84 88 92 97
80 84 89 94 100
85 85 90 96 102
90 86 91 98 105
95 86 93 100 108
100 87 95 103 112

88
88
89
91
93
95
98
100
103
106
110
113
117
121

90
91
93
95
97
100
103
105
109
113
117
122
127
132

92
94
96
99
101
105
105
112
116
121
126
131

94
97
100
103
106
110
114
119
124
129
135

96
101
104
108
112
116
121
126
132

98
105
109
113
117
123
128
134

100
109
114
118
124
129
136

102
114
119
124
130
137

104
119
124
131
137

106 108 110
124 130 136
130 137
137

Heat
index

Effect on the body

Caution

80°F 90°F

Fatigue possible with prolonged exposure and/or
physical activity

Extreme
danger

90°F 103°F

Heat stroke, heat cramps, or heat exhaustion
possible with prolonged exposure
and/or physical activity

Danger

103°F 124°F

Heat cramps or heat exhaustion likely, and
heat stroke possible with prolonged exposure
and/or physical activity

Extreme
danger

125°F or
higher

Heat stroke highly likely

Likelihood of heat disorders with prolonged exposure or strenuous activity

Caution

Extreme caution

Danger

Extreme danger

Fig. 731.2 Heat index. To determine the heat index using this chart, air temperature and the relative humidity need to be known. For example,
if the air temperature is 100°F and the relative humidity is 55%, the heat index will be 124°F. When the relative humidity is low, the apparent temperature can actually be lower than the air temperature. (Courtesy National Weather Service, United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration. https://www.weather.gov/ama/heatindex.)

Fluids with electrolytes and carbohydrates are important during
exercise lasting longer than 1 hour. Salt supplements should not be
used by most people because of the risk of causing hypernatremia and
delayed gastric emptying. If excessive fluid intake contributes to hyponatremia, salt supplements will not avoid the decline in serum sodium.
They may be useful in a person with a high sweat rate or recurrent heat
cramps.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Immunological
Gastrointestinal

Menstrual
function

Cardiovascular

Triad

Bone health

RED-S

Chapter 732

Nutrition and Endocrine
Conditions in Athletes
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson

Psychological*

Endocrine

Growth +
development

Metabolic
Hematological

Excessive physical training in young women can adversely affect reproductive function and bone mineral status, especially when combined
with calorie restriction (Fig. 732.1; see Chapters 41 and 159).
The majority of bone mass is acquired by the end of the second
decade of life (see Chapter 749). Approximately 60–70% of adult bone
mass is genetically determined, and the remaining is influenced by
three modifiable factors: exercise, calcium intake, and sex steroids (primarily estrogen). Exercise promotes bone mineralization in the majority of young women and should be encouraged. In females with eating
disorders and those who exercise to the point of excessive weight loss
with amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea, exercise can be detrimental to
bone mineral acquisition, resulting in reduced bone mineral content,
or osteopenia. In males, prolonged negative energy balance can similarly result in bone demineralization, although this may be more occult
without the obvious sign of menstrual cycle disruption.
Specifically, bone mineralization is negatively affected by amenorrhea (absence of menstruation for 3 or more consecutive months). This
may be influenced by abnormal eating patterns, or disordered eating,
that results in insufficient caloric intake. When occurring together,
disordered eating, amenorrhea, and osteoporosis represent the female
athlete triad. A more inclusive definition refers to the interrelationships among energy availability, endocrine function, and bone mineral

Fig. 732.1 Health consequences of relative energy deficiency in sport

(RED-­S) showing an expanded concept of the Female Athlete Triad to
acknowledge a wider range of outcomes and the application to male
athletes. *Psychologic consequences can either precede RED-­S or be
the result of RED-­S. (Courtesy Dr. Naama W. Constantini, Shaare Zedek
Medical Center, Hebrew University, Israel.)

density, as athletes are distributed along a spectrum of health and
disease. The male athlete triad describes the impact of these interrelated problems in male athletes. In addition, the International Olympic Committee introduced the concept of relative energy deficiency
in sport (RED-­S), outlining the myriad physiologic, psychologic, and
performance consequences of low energy availability in both male and
female athletes (see Fig 732.1). At health supervision visits and the preparticipation physical examination, special attention should be given
to screening for any unhealthy features of the female or male athlete
triads (Tables 732.1 and 732.2).
In both male and female athletes, low energy availability can
result in disruption of the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­gonadal axis.
Menstrual abnormalities (including amenorrhea) result from

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 732 u Nutrition and Endocrine Conditions in Athletes
Table 732.1  Recommended Screening Questions for the
Female Athlete Triad*
• Have you ever had a menstrual period?
• How old were you when you had your first menstrual period?
• When was your most recent menstrual period?
• How many periods have you had in the past 12 months?
• Are you presently taking any female hormones (estrogen,
progesterone, birth control pills)?
• Do you worry about your weight?
• Are you trying to or has anyone recommended that you gain or
lose weight?
• Are you on a special diet or do you avoid certain types of foods or
food groups?
• Have you ever had an eating disorder?
• Have you ever had a stress fracture?
• Have you ever been told you have low bone density (osteopenia
or osteoporosis)?
*The Triad Consensus Panel recommends asking these screening questions at the time
of the sport preparticipation evaluation.
From Constantini NW. Medical concerns of the dancer. Book of Abstracts. XXVII FIMS
World Congress of Sports Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, 2002. p. 151.

Table 732.2  Recommended Screening Questions for the
Male Athlete Triad
• Do you worry about your weight?
• Are you trying or has anyone recommended that you lose or gain
weight?
• Are you on a special diet, or do you avoid certain types of foods
or food groups?
• Have you ever had an eating disorder?
• Have you ever had a stress fracture?
• Have you ever been told that you have low bone density or
osteoporosis?
• Have you ever been diagnosed with low testosterone levels?
• Do you have low libido (sex drive)?
• Do you have morning erections?*
• Do you need to shave your facial hair less frequently?*
*Recommend inclusion on only preparticipation physical examinations for postpubertal
athletes.
From Fredericson M, Kussman A, Misra M, et al. The male athlete triad – a consensus
statement from the Female and Male Athlete Triad Coalition part II: diagnosis,
treatment, and return-­to-­play. Clin J Sport Med. 2021;31(4):349–366. Box 1.

suppression of the spontaneous hypothalamic pulsatile secretion of
gonadotropin-­releasing hormone (Fig. 732.2; see Chapter 159.1). It
is believed that the amenorrhea results from reduced energy availability, defined as energy intake minus expenditure. Energy availability below a threshold of 30 kcal/kg/day lean body mass is thought
to result in menstrual disturbances, whereas availability at or above
45 kcal/kg/day is generally considered sufficient for optimal physiologic function. Other causes of menstrual cycle irregularities to be
ruled out are pregnancy (see Chapter 161), pituitary tumors, thyroid abnormalities, polycystic ovary syndrome (see Chapter 589),
anabolic-­androgenic steroid use (see Chapters 157 and 733), and
other medication side effects. Negative energy balance also appears
to disrupt thyroid function and appetite-­regulating hormones (e.g.,
leptin, ghrelin), increase resistance to growth hormone, decrease

4323

insulin and insulin-­like growth factor 1, and increase cortisol levels.
Although a threshold has yet to be established, low energy availability in males may also lead to decreased levels of testosterone and
luteinizing hormone.
The low estrogen state of amenorrhea predisposes the female
athlete to osteopenia and increases the risk of stress fractures,
especially of the spine and lower extremity. If left unchecked, bone
loss may be partially irreversible despite resumed menses, estrogen
replacement, or calcium supplements. Similarly, low energy availability in males reduces bone turnover and can contribute to bone
demineralization. Routine bone mineral density screening is not
recommended but can help guide treatment and return to activity
in severe cases.
Three eating disorders can occur in athletes, contributing to low
energy availability. Anorexia nervosa manifests as weight <85% of
estimated ideal body weight with evidence of starvation manifesting
as bradycardia, hypothermia, and orthostatic hypotension or orthostatic tachycardia. Bulimia nervosa manifests as recurrent episodes
(at least once weekly) of binge eating with a sense of lack of control
over eating during an episode with recurrent episodes of compensatory behaviors, such as induced vomiting or excessive exercise. A
third category, unspecified feeding or eating disorder (UFED), is
a general description for disorders failing to meet the criteria for the
two previous disorders. Many young people who previously were
diagnosed with UFED have a specific diagnosis of anorexia or bulimia. Signs of an eating disorder are weight loss, food restriction,
depression, fatigue, worsened athletic performance, and preoccupation with calories and weight. The athlete might avoid events surrounding food consumption or might hide and discard food. Signs
and symptoms include fat depletion, muscle wasting, bradycardia
worsened from baseline, orthostatic hypotension, constipation,
cold intolerance, hypothermia, gastric motility problems, and in
some cases lanugo (see Chapter 41). Electrolyte abnormalities can
lead to cardiac dysrhythmias. Psychiatric problems (depression [see
Chapter 39], anxiety [see Chapter 38], and suicide risk [see Chapter
40]) are of higher incidence in this population.
For treatment of eating disorders, control of the symptoms is a
central theme. The first step is confronting the athlete about the
abnormal behavior and unhealthy weight. In general, exercise is
not recommended if body weight is <85% of estimated ideal body
weight, although there are exceptions, especially if the athlete is
eumenorrheic. If the athlete is unable to gain weight with nutrition and medical counseling alone, then psychologic consultation
is sought (Fig. 732.3).
Most athletes will not initially admit a problem, and many are
unaware of the serious physical consequences. In some cases, athletes may have pursued athletic participation (e.g., in endurance
activities) as a means to reduce or maintain a low body weight.
A helpful technique in talking to these athletes is to sensitively
point out performance issues. Education about decreased strength,
endurance, and concentration can be a motivating factor for treatment. Often, the athlete’s family needs to be involved, and the athlete should be encouraged to reveal necessary information to them.
Psychology or psychiatry referral is important in the multidisciplinary approach to treatment of disordered eating. It is important
for the physician to monitor the athlete’s physical health while the
mental health professional is caring for the mental aspects of the
eating disorder.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4324 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Uterine pathology or outflow tract
disorder
History and Examination
Disorders of sexual differentiation
Initial Investigation (based on H&P)
•
•
•
•
•
•

F
I
N
D
I
N
G
S

D
I
A
G
N
O
S
I
S

LH, FSH, hCG
Prolactin
TSH, free T4
Estradiol, testosterone (total and free),
DHEA/S ± 8 AM 17 (OH) progesterone
Progesterone challenge test
± Pelvic ultrasound

Normal gonadotropins
Possibly ↑ LH/FSH
↑ Total/free testosterone

Low to normal
gonadotropins
Negative progesterone
challenge test
Possibly ↑ prolactin

Positive progesterone
challenge test

Hypothalamic-pituitary
etiology
Rule out outflow tract
obstruction if not done so
previously
Consider FHA (prolactin
typically not elevated)*

Rule out pregnancy

↑ Gonadotropins
Negative progesterone
challenge test

Chronic anovulation/
PCOS

Primary ovarian
insufficiency

Abnormal TSH,
prolactin, DHEA/S or
8 AM 17(OH)
progesterone

Specific
investigation of
endocrine disorder

* If energy deficiency-related amenorrhea, including exercise, weight loss, or disordered eating related, consult with sports dietitian and
obtain a bone mineral density test (site of testing should be based on the age of the patient: spine and whole body for growing children and
adolescents, spine and hip for adult women); refer or consult with endocrinologist if not experienced in treatment.

Fig. 732.2 Amenorrhea algorithm. Recommended clinical evaluation of an athlete with primary or secondary amenorrhea, or prolonged oligome-

norrhea, includes a history and physical examination, initial and follow-­up laboratory testing, and diagnosis by a physician. Referral or consultation
with endocrinology is recommended if the diagnosing physician is not experienced with treatment of functional hypothalamic amenorrhea or other
etiologies of amenorrhea. DHEA/S, Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; FHA, functional hypothalamic amenorrhea; FSH, follicle-­stimulating hormone;
hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; PCOS, polycystic ovarian syndrome; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone. (Modified
from Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, Illingworth P. Amenorrhea, anovulation, and dysfunctional uterine bleeding. In: Jameson JL, De Groot LJ, eds. Endocrinology Adult and Pediatric, 6th ed. St. Louis: Saunders, 2010: pp. 2341–2355.)

Recovery of Bone Mineral Density
PROCESS: Years

Recovery of Menstrual Status
Recovery of Energy Status

PROCESS: Months

OUTCOMES:

PROCESS: Days
or Weeks

OUTCOMES:

nEstrogen continues to
inhibit bone resorption

nReproductive hormones
OUTCOMES:
nEnergy status will
stimulate anabolic
hormones (IGF-1) and
bone formation
nEnergy status will
reverse energy
conservation
adaptations

nEstrogen exerts an antiresorptive effect on bone

nEnergy status will
stimulate anabolic
hormones (IGF-1) and
bone formation

Fig. 732.3 Treatment of the female athlete triad. The
three components of the triad recover at different rates
with the appropriate treatment. Recovery of energy status is typically observed after days or weeks of increased
energy intake and/or decreased energy expenditure.
Recovery of menstrual status is typically observed after
months of increased energy intake and/or decreased
energy expenditure, which improves energy status. Recovery of bone mineral density may not be observed
until years after recovery of energy status and menstrual
status has been achieved. IGF-1, Insulin-­like growth factor-1. (From De Souza MJ, Nattiv A, Joy E, et al. 2014
Female Athlete Triad Coalition consensus statement on
treatment and return to play of the female athlete triad.
Br J Sports Med. 2014;48:289. Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 733 u Performance-­Enhancing Aids

Chapter 733

Performance-­Enhancing
Aids
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
See also Chapter 157.
Ergogenic aids are substances used for performance enhancement,
most of which are unregulated supplements (Table 733.1). Many agents
have significant side effects without proven ergogenic properties. The
2004 Controlled Substance Act outlawed the purchase of steroidal
supplements, such as androstenediol and androstenedione, with the
exception of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA).
The prevalence of lifetime steroid use is highest among males in the
United States; among a large representative sample, 3–4% of males in
middle school and 5–6% of those in high school report having used
steroids for muscle enhancement. The European School Survey Project on Alcohol and Other Drugs found that 1% of European youth
reported any use of steroids. Steroids in oral, injectable, and skin cream
form are taken in various patterns. Cycling is a term used to describe
taking multiple doses of steroids for a period, ceasing, and then starting again. Stacking refers to the use of different types of steroids in both
oral and injectable forms. Pyramiding involves slowly increasing the
steroid dose to a peak amount and then gradually tapering down.
Anabolic-­androgenic steroids have been used in supraphysiologic doses for their ability to increase muscle size and strength and
decrease body fat. An evidence base does support the increase in
muscle mass and strength; the effects appear to be related to the myotrophic action at androgen receptors, as well as competitive antagonism at catabolism-­mediating corticosteroid receptors. However, they
have significant endocrinologic side effects, such as decreased sperm
count and testicular atrophy in men and menstrual irregularities and
virilization in women. Hepatic problems include elevated aminotransaminases and γ-­
glutamyl transferase, cholestatic jaundice, peliosis
hepatitis, and a variety of tumors, including hepatocellular carcinoma.
There is evidence that anabolic-­androgenic steroids might predispose
to a number of cardiovascular risk factors as well, including higher

4325

blood pressure, lower high-­density lipoprotein, higher low-­density
lipoprotein, higher homocysteine, and decreased glucose tolerance.
The possible psychologic effects include aggression, several personality
disorders, and a variety of other psychologic problems (anxiety, paranoia, mania, depression, psychosis). Physical findings that may accompany anabolic-­androgenic steroid use in males include gynecomastia,
testicular shrinkage, jaundice, male pattern baldness, acne, and marked
striae. Women can develop hirsutism, voice deepening, clitoral hypertrophy, male-­pattern baldness, acne, and marked striae.
Testosterone precursors (also known as prohormones) include
androstenedione and DHEA. Their use in the adolescent population
has increased markedly in conjunction with reports of high-­profile athletes’ use. They are androgenic but have not been proven to be anabolic.
If they are anabolic at all, they work by increasing the production of
testosterone. They also increase production of estrogenic metabolites.
The side effects are similar to those of anabolic-­androgenic steroids and
far outweigh any ergogenic benefit. These substances cannot be sold
without prescription.
Creatine is an amino acid mostly stored in skeletal muscle as creatine phosphate or phosphocreatine. Phosphocreatine has the ability
to rephosphorylate adenosine diphosphate through the donation of its
phosphate group, yielding creatine and adenosine triphosphate. Creatine phosphate is then reconstituted through oxidative phosphorylation. The exogenous provision of creatine can therefore allow for a
greater concentration of phosphocreatine in muscle, increasing muscle
performance. The use of creatine as an ergogenic aid has increased,
especially since other supplements have been withdrawn from the
market. Thirty percent of high school football players have used creatine. There is evidence that creatine, as a source of increased energy,
enhances strength and maximal exercise performance when used during training.
Caffeine is an active ingredient in energy drinks and some endurance sport supplements that has been shown to have ergogenic effects
in both aerobic and anaerobic efforts. It acts primarily as an antagonist at the adenosine receptor, resulting in a number of potentially
ergogenic effects such as reduced fatigue and increased muscle power.
Although moderate doses of caffeine are considered relatively safe,
when included in an energy drink combined with alcohol, excessive
caffeine ingestion may result in tachycardia, gastritis, nausea, vomiting,
and central nervous system excitation. Overdoses of caffeine may result
in seizures, arrhythmias, and hypotension.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 733.1  Characteristics of Common Performance-­Enhancing Substances
PERFORMANCE-­
ENHANCING
­SUBSTANCE

DESIRED EFFECTS

MAJOR ADVERSE
EFFECTS

MINOR ADVERSE
EFFECTS

ROUTE OF
­ADMINISTRATION

STATUS

Anabolic-­androgenic
steroids*

Increase muscle size,
strength, lean body
mass; decrease
body fat

Testicular atrophy,
CV disease,
atherosclerosis,
myocardial disease,
liver dysfunction,
cancer

Acne, gynecomastia

Banned by IOC and
all major sporting
bodies

Oral, topical,
injectable

Creatine

Increase in strength,
power output, sprint
performance, total
work to fatigue,
peak force/power;
decrease lactate
threshold; increase
weight and lean
body mass

Heatstroke

Dehydration

Allowed

Oral

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4326 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 733.1  Characteristics of Common Performance-­Enhancing Substances—cont’d
PERFORMANCE-­
ENHANCING
­SUBSTANCE

DESIRED EFFECTS

MAJOR ADVERSE
EFFECTS

MINOR ADVERSE
EFFECTS

STATUS

ROUTE OF
­ADMINISTRATION

Human growth
hormone†

May increase lean
body mass and
decrease fat mass

Carpal tunnel
syndrome,
intracranial
hypertension,
CV disease,
hyperlipidemia,
insulin resistance

Arthralgias

Banned by IOC
and International
Federations

Injectable

Amphetamines/
stimulants‡,§

Increase in alertness
and metabolism;
may increase
strength, muscular
power, speed,
acceleration,
aerobic power,
anaerobic capacity,
endurance

Arrhythmias, heat
exhaustion,
seizures, myocardial
infarction, sudden
death

Agitation, GI upset,
nausea, headaches,
insomnia,
hallucinations

Banned by IOC,
NCAA, NFL

Oral, injectable,
inhalable

Erythropoietin/blood
doping

Increase in oxygen-­
carrying capacity,
endurance

Hypertension,
myocardial
infarction,
pulmonary
embolism, immune
reaction

Headaches

Banned by IOC and
all major sporting
bodies

Injectable

Beta-­hydroxy-­beta-­
methylbutyrate

May increase lean
body mass, muscle
strength, power;
enhance recovery

Unknown

Unknown

Allowed

Oral

Protein supplements

Increase lean body
mass, improve
healing

Unknown in previously Unknown
healthy athletes

Allowed

Oral

*Including selective androgen receptor modulators and aromatase inhibitors or estrogen receptor modulators.
†Including various growth factors (IGF-1, etc.).
‡Caffeine is commonly used and remains permitted by WADA.
§Includes various beta-2-­agonists prohibited by WADA, except when needed for therapy of asthma but within therapeutic limits.
CV, Cardiovascular; GI, gastrointestinal; IOC, International Olympic Committee; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; N/A, not applicable; NCAA, National Collegiate Athletic Association;
NFL, National Football League; WADA, World Anti-­Doping Agency.
Modified from Momaya A, Fawal M, Estes R. Performance-­enhancing substances in sports: a review of the literature. Sports Med. 2015;45:517–531. Table 1.

Chapter 734

Specific Sports and
Associated Injuries
Gregory L. Landry and Andrew M. Watson
SPORTS PARTICIPATION, EARLY SPECIALIZATION,
INJURY RISK, AND BURNOUT

It is estimated that 60 million youth, age 6-18 years, participate in organized athletics, with 44 million participating in multiple sports. It has
also been estimated that 69% of females and 75% of males age 8-17
years participate in at least one organized sport team or club. Participating in sport gives children the opportunity to develop self-­esteem
and leadership skills, promote peer socialization, and improve general
health and fitness. Some parents encourage their children to participate
in a single sport because they think this will allow the athlete more time
to focus on sport-­specific skills and will increase the likelihood that
their child will be selected for elite teams, a college scholarship, or professional contract. They may also feel pressure from coaches. However,

only 0.2–0.5% of U.S. high school athletes rise to the professional level;
Olympic-level athletes start training in their main sport at an older age
than their less elite peers and on average participate in two other sports
before, or in parallel with, their main sport. A study at the collegiate
level revealed that 70% of surveyed athletes did not specialize in their
sport until 12 years of age, and 88% participated in more than one sport
at some point during childhood. Multisport athletes, in general, have
a more diverse skill set, can transfer skills from one sport to another,
have a decreased risk of overuse injury, have lower rates of burnout,
and thus are less likely to quit sports at a younger age. Exposure to
multiple sports also allows these athletes to identify the sport they most
enjoy.
Risk of injury in sports increases with age and training volume. In
general, there is an increased risk of injury if young athletes participate
in more weekly organized sport hours than their age. When young athletes exceed a 2:1 ratio of weekly hours in organized sports to weekly
hours in unorganized free play, they are more likely to suffer a serious overuse injury. Overuse injuries unique to young athletes include
apophyseal injuries and physeal stress injuries secondary to decreased
muscle mass, increased joint hypermobility, and imbalances in growth
and strength (see Chapter 728). Overuse injuries and fractures are more
likely to occur during adolescent growth spurts as physes, apophyses,
and articular surfaces in a rapid phase of growth are less resistant to
tensile, shear, and compressive forces than either mature bone or more
immature prepubescent bone, and because of decreased blood flow to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 734 u Specific Sports and Associated Injuries
the physes. When this underlying vulnerable physiology is combined
with overscheduling secondary to participation in a large number of
competitive events at young ages, the risk of overuse injury increases.
These events often include tournaments, which may consist of multiple
games in a short period of time. This type of schedule does not allow
enough time for rest and recovery.
Sports specialization is traditionally defined as “participating in a
single sport for greater than eight months per year, choosing a single
main sport, and/or quitting all other sports to focus on one sport.”
Athletes who specialize early sometimes report increased anxiety and
stress secondary to worrying about failure, trying to meet adult expectations, or experiencing parental pressure to participate or perform
at a certain level, and often feel as though they have a lack of control
in sport decision-­making. These feelings can contribute to burnout,
which can lead to quitting sports early and ultimately increased inactivity as an adult. To reduce the risk of overuse injury and burnout, one
should limit weekly and yearly participation time, limit sport-­specific
repetitive movements, and ensure adequate rest and recovery periods.
Thus it has been recommended that “intense training in a single sport
to the exclusion of others should be delayed until adolescence in order
to optimize success while minimizing injury, stress, and burnout.”

FOOTBALL

Football is the sport with the greatest number of participants in the
United States, especially at the high school level, and with the highest
number and rate of injuries. Most of these injuries are relatively minor,
and compared with injuries in many other sports, are less severe, as evidenced by fewer days lost from injury. Age, weight, and position played
contribute to injury risk, with older and heavier players, running backs,
and linebackers having higher injury rates. The most common football
injuries include joint sprains, muscle strains, and contusions, with the
lower extremities injured most frequently.
Although the majority of catastrophic sports injuries in the United
States have occurred in football, these injuries are rare. Catastrophic
injury is defined as a fatal injury or a severe injury with or without permanent severe functional disability. Disabling injuries include cervical
spine and cerebral injuries.
Head and neck injuries in football include concussion, neck sprain,
and brachial plexopathy. Compared to other sports, brain injury (concussion) (see Chapter 729) occurs with the highest rate in football, a
result of the frequent exposure to contact during practices and games,
although more concussions occur in games than practices. When compared to other sports, cervical spine injuries occur at higher rates in
football given the increased risk of high-­velocity contact, neck flexion,
and axial loading. Proper blocking and tackling form with the neck
extended rather than flexed is essential to help reduce the risk of cervical spine injury. Although not shown to reduce the concussion rate,
helmets can help reduce facial and dental trauma and provide some
protection from side head blows. A “stinger” or “burner” represents
a brachial plexus neurapraxia (see Chapter 730). This is the most common nerve injury in football and results from traction, compression,
or a direct blow to the upper cervical nerve roots of the brachial plexus
caused by forceful lateral neck bending.
Heat illness is possible in pediatric athletes given physiologic factors, including increased heat production per body weight, less efficient heat dissipation, and higher body temperatures associated with
dehydration. Dehydration and associated electrolyte abnormalities and
poor acclimatization increase the risk of heat illness. Heat illness risk
can be reduced with proper hydration prepractice, during, and postpractice, avoiding practice in high heat or humidity, wearing breathable, light-­colored clothing, removing the helmet between plays, and
avoiding certain medications such as antihistamines, anticholinergics,
stimulants, and supplements (see Chapter 731).
Contusions to the arm or thigh muscles can result in the development of a large hematoma if not treated aggressively in the acute stage,
resulting in prolonged time away from football. Large hematomas
and those allowed to persist are at risk for development of myositis
ossificans.

4327

Low back pain can be caused by spondylolysis, especially in players with repetitive hyperextension of the spine (see Chapter 720.6).
Education on tackling mechanics, core strengthening, and hamstring
flexibility are important in prevention of and/or recovery from a spondylolysis injury. Shoulder trauma can cause glenohumeral joint dislocations, the majority of which are anterior dislocations and have a
high rate of recurrence; acromioclavicular joint sprains; and fractures
to the clavicle or humerus (see Chapter 724). Knee injuries (see Chapter 728.6) are common and include anterior cruciate ligament (ACL)
tears and, less frequently, medial collateral ligament (MCL) tears. Knee
bracing in high school football players is controversial and lacks significant evidence.
Ankle sprains occur frequently, with lateral ankle sprains resulting
in less time away from the sport than high ankle sprains. The risk of
re-­injury may be reduced by rehabilitation, including strengthening
and range of motion, and the use of a lace-­up ankle brace (see Chapter 728.8). Turf toe, a sprain to the first metatarsophalangeal joint,
is caused by forceful dorsiflexion of the toe while wearing soft, lightweight, flexible shoes. Calcaneal apophysitis at the insertion of the
Achilles tendon on the calcaneus, also known as Sever disease, is an
overuse injury that typically presents as heel pain in a cleated athlete
who is still growing (typically age 7-10 years).

BASEBALL/SOFTBALL

Baseball-­and softball-­related injury sites are most commonly the
shoulder, elbow, ankle, and hip. Facial injuries and concussions are also
seen. The most common mechanisms of injury include pitching repetition and being hit by a ball or a bat.
Throwing injuries of the shoulder and elbow are typically seen
in pitchers secondary to overuse, with contributory factors, including high pitch count, pitch type, and inadequate rest. Little League
shoulder is a repetitive microtrauma injury to the open proximal
humeral physis, and Little League elbow is a repetitive microtrauma
injury to one or more of the six ossification centers in the elbow (see
Chapter 728.3). Little League shoulder is the most common injury
seen in softball windmill pitching, with similar shoulder stress as seen
in overhand pitching. Poor core strength and alteration in biomechanics, especially when fatigued, may contribute to injury risk (Fig.
734.1). Age-­related pitch count and rest guidelines, “Pitch Smart,” are
available online and are endorsed by the Little League. Curve balls
and sliders should not be thrown by players younger than 14 years
of age. Current recommendations also advise against participating in
multiple leagues and participating in year-­round baseball, given the
increased risk of injury with this volume of play. Adherence to the
guidelines is the responsibility of the athlete, parents, and coaches.
Counseling athletes (and coaches) to stop all throwing activities if the
player experiences shoulder or elbow pain, with medical evaluation
if no resolution with rest, is essential. If injured, a gradual return to
throwing protocol under the direction of a physical therapist with
additional focus on strengthening and throwing mechanics should
be considered. Catchers are more vulnerable to traumatic sprains of
the interphalangeal and metacarpal phalangeal joints, head injuries,
including concussions from the ball striking the mask, and knee injuries associated with the deep squatting posture. Knee savers are pads
attached to the shin guards that increase the angle between the knee
and thigh and prevent hyperflexion of the knees. No scientific studies
have been done to assess their effectiveness.
Death or serious injury in baseball is rare but may result from direct
contact by the ball or bat, causing serious head injury or commotio
cordis, which is a direct blow to the chest during a critical time in the
cardiac cycle resulting in a possibly fatal arrhythmia. Batting helmets,
with consideration of faceguards, must be worn properly to help prevent face and head injuries. Modifications to the hardness of baseballs
used with younger athletes may also be helpful. Chest protectors have
not been shown to reduce the risk of commotio cordis.
Sliding causes the most injuries in base runners, including head
injury and lower limb injuries. If sliding is allowed, correct sliding technique must be taught because many injuries are secondary to timing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4328 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
issues. Head-­first sliding is controversial and is not recommended for
players younger than 10 years of age.

BASKETBALL/VOLLEYBALL

When combining male and female sports participation, basketball has one
of the highest injury rates, even though it is considered a “safe sport” from
a contact perspective. Common maneuvers of basketball and volleyball
include jumping, pivoting, running, and sudden acceleration and deceleration, which increase the risk for knee and ankle injuries. Similarly, injury
to the fingers may result from the passing, catching, and striking of the ball
inherent in these sports. Scaphoid fractures may result from falling on an
outstretched hand. Injuries to the face and eyes can also occur.
Ankle sprains are the most common injury and are usually caused
by inversion with plantar flexion, placing the lateral ligaments at risk.
An avulsion fracture of the base of the fifth metatarsal at the insertion of the peroneus brevis tendon is another sequela of inversion ankle
injuries. A high ankle sprain or syndesmosis ligament injury typically
results from an excessive external rotation in a dorsiflexed position,
and these athletes have pain out of proportion to examination findings.
Foot pain may be secondary to calcaneal apophysitis (Sever disease),
retrocalcaneal bursitis, posterior tibialis tendinosis, accessory tarsal
navicular, sesamoiditis, blisters, subungual hematoma, and paronychia
(see Chapter 704). Achilles tendinosis is also a common overuse injury.
Knee injuries include those caused by overuse, such as traction
apophysitis at the insertion of the patella tendon on the tibial tubercle
(Osgood-­Schlatter disease) (see Chapter 718.4), traction apophysitis
at the distal patella (Sinding-­Larsen-­Johansson syndrome) and patellar tendinosis (jumper’s knee) (see Chapter 728.6).
ACL injury occurs in both male and female participants; however,
among children 12-17 years old, the frequency of ACL injury in female
participants is slightly higher. The exact reason for this discrepancy is
unclear; however, some data suggest that female athletes do not exhibit the
same neuromuscular adaptions that male athletes exhibit during pubertal
growth spurts. Multiple studies on the effect of neuromuscular training
and strengthening programs focused on ACL injury prevention in females
suggest that these types of programs may reduce the risk of ACL injury.
As with other jumping sports, other acute ligament sprains (MCL with or
without ACL) can occur. For all participants, a program focused on the
sport-­specific strengthening of hip, core, and hamstring muscles to prevent
dynamic valgus when landing can help to reduce knee injury rates.
The overhead nature of volleyball can result in overuse shoulder
injuries, including rotator cuff tendinosis, shoulder impingement syndrome, labral tears, and glenohumeral instability. Players may want to
limit the number of overhead spikes and serves they perform, similar to pitch count limits in baseball, to help reduce the risk of overuse

A

B

injuries. Finger injuries seen in both basketball and volleyball participants include sprains, dislocations, and fractures.
Eye injuries, although rare, can be reduced by wearing protective
eyewear. Facial injuries typically result from an elbow or hand hitting the opponent’s face during rebounding or defending. Head injury
can occur in both sports when the player makes contact with another
player, the floor, or equipment (such as the net pole in volleyball).

TENNIS

Injury rates in high-­level youth tennis players are higher than in adults.
Tennis injuries occur twice as often in the lower extremity as in the upper
extremity. Lower extremity injuries tend to be more acute, whereas upper
extremity and trunk injuries tend to be more chronic, and the incidence
of overuse injury is high. Overall injury rates are similar for males and
females. However, male players age 5-10 years were more likely to sustain
injuries to the head and neck and suffer injuries as a result of contact with
the net, ball, or racket than other groups.
The most common injury in tennis players is to the ankle, although the
knee and thigh are vulnerable as well. Lower extremity injuries are related
to the frequent directional changes, creating significant concentric and
eccentric loads. Overuse injuries include iliopsoas tendonitis or bursitis,
patellofemoral stress syndrome, patellar tendinosis, Osgood-­Schlatter disease, medial gastrocnemius strain (“tennis leg”), Achilles tendonitis, and
Sever disease. Stress fractures in the lower extremity in elite players are
most common at the tarsal navicular, metatarsals, and tibia.
In the upper extremities, tennis elbow (lateral epicondylosis with
extensor carpi radialis brevis tendinosis) and extensor carpi ulnaris
(ECU) tendinosis with or without subluxation, are particularly prevalent in the recreational player and are thought to be most likely related
to overuse and improper technique (see Fig. 728.11). With repetitive
overload of the wrist flexor–pronator muscle groups, traction apophysitis at the medial humeral epicondyle and medial epicondylar fragmentation of the humerus, especially in younger males, can occur. This
can secondarily involve the ulnar collateral ligament and ulnar nerve.
Shoulder pain often results from labral injury, a common site of injury
for overhead athletes. Anteroposterior glenohumeral instability, glenohumeral internal rotation deficit with impingement, rotator cuff strain,
and scapular dyskinesis are all possible. Wrist problems include an
enlarged dorsal ganglion cyst, radiocarpal joint capsular impingement
or synovitis, chronic degenerative tears of the triangular fibrocartilage
complex, and acute fracture of the hook of the hamate. Stress fractures
may occur in the metacarpals (second metacarpal in particular) and
less commonly in the humerus, ulna, and radius.
It has been hypothesized that repeated loading during service, particularly using a “topspin” serve at a young age, may contribute to the

C

Fig. 734.1 Little League shoulder MRI findings. A, Coronal oblique fat-­saturated T2 weighted image in a 12-­yr-­old pitcher demonstrates diffuse

proximal humeral primary physeal widening and undulation with bone marrow edema within the metaphysis and lateral epiphysis. B and C Sagittal
oblique fat-­saturated T2 weighted images obtained in a 13-­yr-­old pitcher demonstrate preservation of the normal anterior medial humeral physis
(arrows) in contrast to the widened irregular physis posteriorly and laterally. (From Braithwaite KA, Marshall KW. The skeletally immature and newly
mature throwing athlete. Radiol Clin N Am. 2016;54:841–855.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 734 u Specific Sports and Associated Injuries
development of spondylolysis (pars interarticularis fracture) or
spondylolisthesis. However, the most common back injury in tennis is
lumbar muscle strain.

LACROSSE

Lacrosse is one of the fastest growing sports for both male and female
youth, high school, and college level athletes. Protective equipment and
rules are different for male and female players. Required equipment
for male players includes mouth guard, helmet, gloves, and elbow and
shoulder pads. Required equipment for female players includes eye
wear and mouth guard. Checking is allowed in men’s lacrosse but is
not permitted in youth or women’s games.
Injury rates are nearly three times higher in competition than
in practice. The most common injuries for all players include lower
extremity injuries, primarily ankle and knee sprains, and head injuries.
Ankle sprains typically occur in the setting of cutting, dodging, and
twisting activities. The likelihood of subsequent injury may be reduced
with bracing. ACL tears are a common knee injury and typically occur
in noncontact cutting or pivoting. Prepractice training should include
balance, lower extremity strengthening, and neuromuscular feedback
activities, as these have been proven to help reduce the ACL injury rate.
Head injury occurs in both male and female players. Player-­to-­
player contact is the typical mechanism for head injury in male players. Incidental contact with the stick is the typical mechanism for head
injury in female players. Eyewear for female athletes has been shown to
reduce the risk of significant eye injury.
Upper extremity injuries include acromioclavicular sprains and hand
and thumb fractures, particularly in games that permit contact and checking. Shoulder and elbow injuries are typically secondary to contact injury.
As with any sport with significant protective equipment that impedes
heat loss, heat illness can occur. Players and coaches should be mindful
of hydration, temperature, humidity, and duration of play. Commotio
cordis is a rare but possible risk. The use of chest protectors has been
evaluated and has not been shown to reduce risk.

SWIMMING/DIVING

In competitive swimming, injuries to the shoulder are most common and
are generally a result of chronic overuse. Swimmer’s shoulder is a general
term for shoulder overuse in a swimmer and is typically a combination
of subacromial impingement/bursitis and tendinosis of the rotator cuff
and long head of the bicep tendon. Commonly, a narrowed subacromial
space, increased laxity of the shoulder capsule, and relative weakness of
the scapular stabilizers result in protracted shoulder posture, which contributes over time to the insidious onset of shoulder pain and possible
scapulohumeral dyskinesis. Freestyle, back, and butterfly strokes tend to
exacerbate the pain. Prevention includes monitoring training load, proper
technique, and strengthening exercises. The multiaxial instability of the
glenohumeral joint common in swimmers is addressed with rehabilitation
focusing on strengthening of the rotator cuff and scapular stabilizer musculature. Knee and hip/groin pain can be exacerbated with breaststroke
given the whip kick motion required in this stroke.
Swimmer’s ear, or otitis externa, presents with pain and often
drainage from the external auditory canal. It is caused by bacterial,
or less commonly, fungal infection of the external auditory canal as a
result of chronic, excessive wetness (see Chapter 679).
Diving is a sport that many athletes start at a young age with early sport-­
specific, specialized training. The most common injury for divers is shoulder strain, given overhead activity and the significant force taken by the
shoulder, which is dependent on the angle of entry into the water. Low
back pain can be seen in divers and may be associated with lumbar hyperextension to compensate for limited shoulder flexibility when entering the
water, which can lead to spondylolysis. Diving is also associated with a risk
of cervical spinal cord injury secondary to axial loading; according to the
National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center, diving is the fifth leading
cause of spinal cord injury in the United States.

SOCCER

Soccer enjoys a very high level of popularity and participation among
youth worldwide. In the United States, the annual rate of injury in

4329

soccer more than doubled between 1990 and 2014, and almost three
million children were seen in U.S. emergency departments for injuries
related to soccer during those years. Mechanisms of injury include noncontact, body-­to-­body contact, falls, or ball-­to-­body contact. Although
lower extremity injuries are by far the most common, younger children
are more likely to injure an upper extremity, and upper extremity injuries are most likely to be fractures. Torso and significant abdominal
injuries can occur. Low back symptoms are relatively less common and
are most often muscular in nature.
Injuries in youth soccer occur predominately in the lower extremity
and include joint and ligament injuries, abrasions, contusions, muscle strains, and fractures of the ankle, knee, and thigh. Ligamentous
injuries to the ACL and MCL at the knee and the anterior talofibular
ligament at the ankle can occur because of the cutting and pivoting
maneuvers required during play or as a result of contact with another
player. ACL injuries, particularly in females, have gained attention
in recent years. ACL injuries are more common in high school girls’
soccer than in other girls’ sports. Risk factors may include genetics,
hormones, age, sex, previous injury, and anthropomorphic factors.
Overuse syndromes such as patellofemoral dysfunction, Osgood-­
Schlatter, Sinding-­
Larsen-­
Johansson, and Sever disease frequently
occur. Hip problems include the hip pointer (iliac crest contusion),
iliac crest apophysitis, and chronic groin pain (muscle strain, sports
hernia, osteitis pubis). The terms sportsman’s hernia, inguinal insufficiency, and conjoint tendon tear may comprise a constellation of different pathologic processes producing similar groin pain. These injuries
may occur with the combined forceful rotation of the torso and kicking
motion. Femoral neck stress fractures, slipped femoral capital epiphysis, and avulsion fractures of the pelvis or femur should also be considered in the differential. Neuromuscular factors, such as quadriceps
dominance, muscle activation patterns and dynamic stability, may
be modifiable; thus the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), and
other organizations support neuromuscular training programs aimed
at risk reduction for both sexes.
Concussion is common in soccer, primarily as a result of contact
between players, player and goal post, and player and ground. Recent
evidence suggests that intentional heading of the ball rarely results in
a concussion, although the long-­term effect of repeated subconcussive
impacts for intentional heading remains unknown. The U.S. Soccer
Concussion Initiative updated recommendations to reduce head injury
risk in youth soccer players, including a ban on heading the ball for
age 10 and under and limited heading of the ball for 11-13 year olds.
It remains unknown if this has reduced the number or severity of concussions. Padded headbands have not been shown to reduce the risk of
concussion in youth soccer players.

ICE HOCKEY

Ice hockey is a fast-­paced collision sport associated with injuries caused
by contact from other players, the ice, or the boards, as well as from
the puck or stick. With injury rates similar to other high school full-­
contact sports, concussions, contusions, fractures, ligament sprains,
muscle strains, lacerations, joint separations, dislocations, and subluxations are commonly reported. Injuries are more likely to occur in
competition than in practice, and overall injury rates appear to be on
the rise, possibly related to increased participation.
Concussion was the most commonly reported injury in U.S. high
school ice hockey athletes, with head and face injuries accounting for
34% of all of the reported injuries. Injuries to the shoulder and arm are
also common and include contusions, strains, acromioclavicular separations, and clavicle fractures. Over 50% of upper extremity fractures
occur in the forearm, wrist, and hand. Other specific hockey injuries
include hip pain secondary to femoroacetabular impingement (FAI),
high ankle sprains, hip adductor strain, and osteitis pubis.
The role of factors such as age, size, level of skill, player position,
and sex in injury risk is inconclusive, although evidence suggests that
concussion may be more frequent in females and fractures more common in males.
Body checking is the single most common mechanism of injury. In
Canada, 11-­and 12-­year-­old Pee Wee hockey players who were allowed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4330 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
to body check had a threefold greater risk of injury than those who
were not. USA Hockey rules of play do not allow body checking in
the 12-­year and under youth leagues. Body checking is not allowed in
girls’/women’s leagues of any age. The AAP recommends the expansion
of nonchecking programs and the restriction of body checking to elite
levels of boys’ play after 15 years of age. AAP recommendations also
include the use of protective equipment (helmets and full-­face shields
or cages), rules to eliminate dangerous play with a zero-­tolerance policy for head contact and body contact from behind, and safer play education for coaches and athletes.

FIELD HOCKEY

Field hockey is played worldwide by both male and female athletes.
Protective equipment, including mouth, shin, and ankle guards, is recommended but not required. Players are twice as likely to be injured in
game versus practice. Lower limb injuries, particularly inversion ankle
sprains, are the most common. Bracing may help with ankle re-­injury
rates. Other lower extremity injuries include hamstring strain, ACL
tears, and contusions. The most common upper limb injury occurs
when the hand is struck by a stick or a ball, as field hockey does not
require the use of padded gloves for protection. Head injury and facial
lacerations occur at a very high rate and are typically caused by contact
with the stick or ball. Injury types and rates may differ based on the
position played; however, specific data are lacking.
Injury prevention is important in this sport and can be attained via
the use of protective equipment, including permitted head or face protection, and sport-­specific training, including balance, strengthening,
and proprioceptive training activities.

SKIING AND SNOWBOARDING

Injury frequency in skiing, snowboarding, and related winter sports has
declined over the past several decades, largely secondary to improved
equipment (boots, bindings, poles) and slope conditions. Of concern,
however, is that severe head and spinal cord injuries are on the rise due
to increased speed and the addition of acrobatic maneuvers (terrain
parks, half pipes, aerial tricks). Head and neck injuries are the primary
cause of fatal injury. Of the World Cup events, freestyle skiers (particularly aerials and slope style) have a higher incidence of head injury than
snowboard and alpine events. Overall, the risk of injury is higher in
snowboarders, males, beginners, and those with improper equipment.
Lower extremity injuries are more commonly associated with skiing,
while head, internal organ, upper extremity, and ankle injuries are more
common in snowboarders. The most common lower extremity injury in
skiing is ligamentous (ACL, MCL, and LCL) at the knee. Lower-­extremity
injuries in skiers also include contusions, knee dislocation, femur fractures,
spiral fractures of the tibia (“boot top” fractures), and high ankle sprains.
Snowboarders are at a unique risk for fracture of the lateral process of the
talus, which is often initially misdiagnosed as an ankle sprain.
Upper-­extremity injuries are more common in snowboarding because
both of the snowboarder’s feet are strapped onto the same board and, without poles, there is an increased risk of falls on outstretched arms. Common
injuries include distal radial, ulnar, and metacarpal fractures, sprains, and
contusions. Other high-­incidence upper extremity injuries in snowboarding include shoulder soft tissue injuries, clavicle fractures, acromioclavicular sprains, and glenohumeral joint dislocations. A unique skiing injury is
skier’s thumb, a sprain of the ulnar collateral ligament of the thumb, which
typically results from a fall with the thumb in abduction and hyperextension around a ski pole. Phalanx fractures and bony avulsions can also be
associated with this injury.
Snow sport athletes may experience visceral injuries to the spleen, liver,
and kidney. Spine injuries, including fracture and strain, may also occur.
It is strongly advised that individuals of all ages wear helmets for
skiing and snowboarding. Wrist protectors are also recommended for
snowboarders. Care should be taken to ensure up-­to-­date and properly fitted and adjusted equipment. Preventive measures endorsed by
the AAP include participation in formal instruction, such as in a ski
school, having adequate supervision, and exercising responsible speed
and technique. Cardiovascular fitness, endurance, and muscle strength
are believed to be critical components in injury prevention; however,
there is limited supportive literature.

SKATEBOARDING

Injuries associated with skateboarding are predominantly acute, including contusions, lacerations, sprains, and fractures, affecting the wrists,
forearms, and to a lesser extent, the ankles and head. Fractures involving the upper extremities are more common in younger skateboarders,
often from a fall onto an outstretched arm. Lower-­extremity fractures
and head injuries predominate in the adolescent population, which is
likely because of higher complexity of the airborne maneuvers and tricks
often attempted. Loss of balance leading to a fall when failing to perform
a particular maneuver, especially when catching a wheel, is generally the
primary cause of injury. These falls can occur at high velocities (up to 40
mph), placing the skateboarder at risk for serious injuries.
Traumatic brain injuries do occur within this sport; the incidence
increases with age and is more common in males than females. In
older children and adolescents, the neglected use of helmets and the
increased speed of their skating contribute to this fact.
In addition to helmet use, other safety measures recommended
include wrist guards as well as elbow and knee pads. The building of
skateboard parks has been a recent strategy to remove skateboarders from pedestrians, bicyclists, and motor vehicle traffic, while also
encouraging adult supervision.

CYCLING AND MOTOCROSS

Bicycle riding has been a beloved childhood recreational activity for
decades. Cycling options have expanded to include a variety of events
such as track and road racing as well as mountain biking, mountain
bike terrain parks or “free-­riding,” cyclo-­cross, and freestyle BMX. As
increased speed, jumps, and other human-­made obstacles have been
added, risk for injury has increased. Motocross, beginning as early as 4
years of age, adds further complexity as it uses two-­wheeled motorized
cycles racing through designed outdoor courses.
Recreational bicycling injuries include abrasions, lacerations, contusions, and fractures. Head and face as well as genitourinary injuries
are common. Helmet use is strongly encouraged to reduce the risk of
serious head injury. Upper extremity fractures predominate in mountain bikers and mountain terrain park riders. Risk of injury is increased
in mountain biking males between 10 and 14 years and in those who
admit to riding faster than usual. Motocross riders sustain more serious injuries. Head injuries include skull fractures and a variety of intracranial bleeds that may occur even when using a helmet.

WRESTLING

Wrestlers may have great fluctuations in weight to meet weight-­
matched competition standards. Such fluctuations are sometimes
associated with fasting, dehydration, and then binging. Counseling
wrestlers and their parents regarding impaired performance from these
components of disordered eating, especially with respect to decreased
speed and strength, is important to deter athletes from incorporating
them into routine practice. Most states have rules in place to mitigate
this risk by limiting the amount of weight loss for each wrestler.
Wrestling moves apply a variety of torques or forces to the extremities and spine, potentially resulting in a number of common injuries.
Takedown maneuvers and subsequent impact with the mat can produce
concussions, neck strain/sprain, or spinal cord injury. Spondylolysis (see
Chapter 720.6) is a concern in wrestlers given repetitive lumbar extension.
Stingers and burners—also seen among football players—are
caused by stretching or pinching of the brachial plexus (see Chapter
730). Overall, the two most common sites of injury in wrestling are the
shoulder and knee.
At the shoulder, subluxation is common. This generally occurs anteriorly with the shoulder forcibly abducted and extended. Patients are
commonly aware of their shoulder slipping in and out. Injuries to the
hand are less common and typically include metacarpophalangeal and
proximal interphalangeal joint sprains.
Knee injuries (see Chapter 728.6) are also common, and include
prepatellar bursitis, medial and lateral collateral ligament sprains,
and medial and lateral meniscus tears. Acute or recurrent traumatic
impact to the mat can result in prepatellar bursitis. If the overlying skin
is broken, septic bursitis may occur, resulting in swelling, redness, and
warmth over the anterior knee.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 734 u Specific Sports and Associated Injuries
Dermatologic problems associated with wrestling include herpes
simplex (see Chapter 299: herpes gladiatorum), impetigo (see Chapter 706.1), staphylococcal furunculosis or folliculitis, superficial fungal
infections, and contact dermatitis. Herpes gladiatorum and superficial
bacterial skin infections are contraindications to wrestling until the
lesions have resolved. Washing of the wrestling mats with appropriate
antibacterial and antifungal solution is required after daily wrestling
sessions to keep the mats disinfected and prevent the spread of dermatologic contagion.
Auricular hematoma is caused by friction or direct trauma to the
auricle (see Chapter 683). If allowed to remain without evacuation,
irreversible deformity of the auricle often results, termed cauliflower
ear. Properly fitted headgear is the best means of prevention, and early
aspiration of the accumulated blood may reduce the risk of deformity.

RUNNING

Running for sport and exercise has increased in popularity for children
and adolescents. Running problems are typically caused by overuse
injury related to muscle imbalance; a minor skeletal deformity; repetitive overload; and/or poor flexibility, strength, endurance, or proprioception. With each step while running, the foot impact ranges from 3-8
times the athlete’s body weight. Errors in training, including increasing the distance or intensity of workouts too rapidly, often result in
injury to the runner. Minor variations (e.g., malalignment) in anatomy
that do not cause problems at rest can predispose to injury at specific
sites, such as over-­pronation contributing to increased patellofemoral
stress. Muscle fatigue, environmental temperature (see Chapter 731),
and running surface (grass vs unyielding concrete) also contribute to
injury. Barefoot or minimalist running shoes may promote greater
weight distribution through the forefoot during running, and biomechanical research suggests reduced joint forces through the knee
and hip. However, increased forces can occur through the foot, ankle,
and lower leg in individuals not accustomed to this style of running.
Prevention of injuries is possible by muscle-­strengthening exercises,
incorporating periods of rest into training plans, and the use of good-­
quality running shoes that match an athlete’s foot type.
Shin splints, or medial tibial stress syndrome, is a descriptive term
for pain located diffusely over the distal medial tibia and should be
distinguished from tibia stress fracture and chronic exertional compartment syndrome. Medial tibial stress syndrome is a periosteal stress
reaction at the insertion of the soleus muscle. It can be seen in new
runners, runners that have markedly increased their training duration
in a short period of time, and runners with higher body mass indices
(BMIs). Continued loading and stress of medial tibial stress syndrome
can lead to a stress fracture. Stress fractures in runners (see Chapter 724.4) have been documented at the femoral neck, inferior pubic
rami, subtrochanteric area, proximal femoral shaft, proximal tibia, fibula, calcaneus, tarsal navicular, metatarsals, and sesamoids. The most
common are in the metatarsals, tibia, and fibula. The anterior proximal tibia, femoral neck (tension or superior side), tarsal navicular, and
sesamoids are most at risk for nonunion.
Muscle strains most frequently affect the hamstrings, followed by the
quadriceps, hip adductors, soleus, and gastrocnemius muscles. Lower
extremity tendon injuries are more common than apophyseal injuries
in young, skeletally immature runners. Tendon injury is most common
in the Achilles tendon, followed by the posterior tibial, peroneal, iliopsoas, and proximal hamstring tendons. Achilles tendinosis should be
distinguished from retrocalcaneal bursitis.
Knee pain in the runner is frequently anterior in location and
is commonly caused by patellofemoral pain syndrome (runner’s
knee), which results from excessive dynamic, usually lateral, motion
of the patella in relationship to the femoral intracondylar groove (see
Chapter 728.6). The athlete’s body habitus (i.e., increased Q-­angle,
over-­pronation) and presence of core and hip abductor weakness may
contribute to this overuse injury. Posterior knee pain can be caused
by gastrocnemius strain, while posteromedial pain may be caused by
proximal tibial stress fracture or semimembranosus/semitendinosus
tendinosis. Lateral knee pain is commonly caused by iliotibial band
syndrome and less so by popliteal tendinosis, which may be precipitated by running downhill. Iliotibial band syndrome may combine a

4331

component of both bursitis and tendinosis owing to mechanical friction of the iliotibial band (an extension of the tensor fasciae latae) over
the lateral femoral epicondyle. Vague knee pain that worsens with
activity or traumatic event, particularly if associated with joint swelling, should raise suspicion for osteochondritis dissecans, most commonly located at the lateral aspect of the medial femoral condyle.
Chronic exertional compartment syndrome can involve any of the
muscle compartments, but the most common is the anterior compartment. There is typically poorly localized throbbing pain that begins
10-15 minutes into a run. Pain typically prevents further training, thus
limiting the risk of nerve injury (see Chapter 728.7).
Plantar fasciitis is an inflammation of the supporting structures of
the longitudinal arch of the foot due to repetitive cyclic loading with
foot strike. Pain is typically worst with the first step out of bed in the
morning and with running and is located on the medial aspect of the
heel. Pes planus and over-­pronation are common in these patients. Calcaneal stress fracture should be considered, especially in the amenorrheic distance runner (see Chapter 732).
The female and male athlete triads (or relative energy deficiency
in sport), referring to abnormalities in energy availability, endocrine
function, and bone health, are well documented in adolescent running
literature and are important education topics for the runner, parents,
and coaches (see Chapter 732).

CHEERLEADING

Like other sports, cheerleading has become increasingly popular and
evolved to become more competitive and athletic. Cheerleading can
begin as early as 3-6 years of age and includes skill levels ranging from
recreational to sideline, competition to professional. The sport includes
advanced gymnastic tumbling and “stunts” involving athletes lifting
and throwing other athletes overhead. This requires repetitive flexion,
hyperextension, and rotation of the spine as well as compressive loading on landings, and the risk of athlete contact and falls.
Stunting injuries account for the majority of injuries, with bases
(the athletes who lift, throw, and catch another athlete) at higher risk
of injury than fliers (athletes who are lifted and thrown). The primary
mechanism of injury is contact with another athlete. Injuries sustained
in tumbling are the second most common.
The overall injury rate in cheerleading is low at 1/1,000 athletic exposures. However, injuries may be severe; of all female sports, the risk of
catastrophic injury is the highest in cheerleading. Following a period of
increasing incidence of injury, it appears that injury rates have stabilized.
Head and facial injury accounts for almost one third of injuries sustained. Head trauma primarily results from falls while stunting or from
a pyramid formation, which includes the base cheerleaders as well. After
concussion, strains and sprains account for the most likely injuries, with
ankle the most common site followed by wrist and trunk. Fractures are
more likely to occur in the upper extremity. Overuse injuries are common.
Strategies to reduce the risk of injury include designating cheerleading as an official sport, ensuring athletes undergo preparticipation exams, participating in conditioning and strength training, using
proper lifting technique, avoiding stunting over hard surfaces, and
educating coaches and trainers about sport safety, including specific
rules for the execution of technical skills. The American Association of
Cheerleading Coaches and Administrators and others have also set up
rules to limit the type of stunts performed, and the National Federation of State High School Associations annually updates rules for spirit
events with the intent of improving cheerleading safety.

GYMNASTICS

Typically, males and females begin gymnastics participation at 4-5 years
of age. The highest level of competition is in the mid-­teens followed by
retirement, often by 20 years of age for females and mid-20s for males.
Both acute and chronic injuries, with a high incidence of overuse-­related
injuries, are seen in gymnasts and commonly involve the wrists, shoulders,
ankles, and back. Injury types and rates in the acrobatic and circus arts are
similar to those seen in traditional gymnastics.
The injury rate is similar in male versus female gymnasts. Lower-­
extremity injuries are more common in female gymnasts, whereas
upper body injuries occur with higher frequency in male gymnasts.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4332 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Apparatus competed upon accounts for this discrepancy, such as the
horizontal bar and ring exercises for male gymnasts, which place a
great deal of stress upon the shoulders, and floor exercise, vault, and
balance beam for female gymnasts, stressing the feet and ankles. In
addition to mechanical or traumatic injuries, female gymnasts may
have delayed menarche and can be at risk for hypothalamic amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea, as well as low body weight for height, which is
related to disordered eating. Despite the presence of these two components of the female athlete triad (see Chapter 732), the third component, reduced bone density or osteoporosis, is not commonly seen. In
fact, bone density tends to be high in most gymnasts, which is thought
to be secondary to their performance involving repetitive high-­impact
activities. Nevertheless, stress fractures, in both the upper and lower
extremities, are a significant problem. The short stature associated with
male and female gymnasts is probably caused by selection bias and not
the result of gymnastics training.
The amount of weight bearing through the upper extremities in
gymnastics can contribute to the development of both traumatic and
overuse injuries. During upper extremity weight bearing, the wrist,
particularly over the radial physis, is subjected to a force almost twice
the athlete’s body weight and up to 16 times the body weight during
high-­impact loading activities. This, along with repetitive motion, axial
compression, and torsional forces, contributes to the increasing frequency of wrist pain and injury in gymnastics and acrobatics. Wrist
pain and injury is also correlated with training intensity, based on skill
level and number of hours of training per week. Wrist injuries typically
seen include distal radial epiphysitis (gymnast’s wrist), triangular
fibrocartilage complex tears, scaphoid fractures, scapholunate dissociation, dorsal ganglion cysts, and wrist sprains (see Chapter 722).
Individualized training regimens, including gradual increase in training load and reduced training during growth spurts, as well as the use
of wrist orthoses, should be considered for these athletes.
Ankle sprain remains the most common injury in gymnastics, secondary to forces seen in landing and dismounting. Ankle sprains that
have not responded to conservative management should be further
evaluated for osteochondral defects of the talar dome. Heel pain may
be secondary to plantar fasciitis, Sever disease, or calcaneal stress fracture. Patellar tendinopathy may contribute to knee pain in a gymnast.
Spine injuries are notable for a high incidence of spondylolysis, a
stress fracture of the pars interarticularis, and, in less frequent cases,
spondylolisthesis, both related to repetitive extension loading of spine
(see Chapter 720.6). Other potential sources of back pain in a gymnast
include intervertebral disk pathology, Scheuermann disease (juvenile
kyphosis) (see Chapter 720.4), and mechanical back pain secondary to
biomechanical imbalances.

DANCE

Dance, including ballet, modern dance, or drill line, is a highly
demanding activity that may be associated with delayed menarche in
females and disordered eating in both female and male dancers (see
Chapter 732). Acute injuries commonly involve the lower extremities.
Overuse injuries are common, due to the repetitive nature of maneuvers incorporated into training and performance and occur at the same
rate in amateur male and female dancers. Injuries seen in modern/
contemporary dance are similar in type and incidence to those seen in
traditional ballet.
Frequently, kinetic chain dysfunction contributes to injury and
should be considered when evaluating the dancer. Common mistakes
in technique can cause injury, such as forcing excessive “turnout”
(external rotation at the hip) in ballet resulting in undue stress placed
upon the hip and knees (see Chapter 728.6).
Foot problems are common and include metatarsal stress fractures, subungual hematomas, sesamoiditis, tenosynovitis (especially of the flexor digitorum longus), plantar fasciitis, Achilles
tendinitis, retrocalcaneal bursitis, calluses, and bunions (see Chapter 728.7). A dancer’s fracture is an avulsion fracture of the distal shaft of the fifth metatarsal. This fracture is at risk for delayed

healing as a result of the tenuous blood supply in the area and may
necessitate surgical fixation. Common ankle injuries and pain
include acute sprains, anterior and posterior impingement syndromes, and osteochondral defects of the talus. Soft tissue impingement between the lateral malleolus and talus can cause persistent
pain after an inversion injury. Medial tibial stress syndrome (“shin
splints”) and tibial stress fractures are noted in the lower leg. Achilles
tendinopathy is seen due to the demands of running and jumping.
Patellar malalignment or hypermobility can result in patellofemoral
pain syndrome or, less frequently, patellar subluxation/dislocation.
Patellar tendinopathy is widely reported. Internal snapping hip
syndrome, caused by the iliopsoas tendon riding over the anterior
hip capsule and iliopectineal eminence, and hip flexor (rectus femoris and iliopsoas) tendinosis are commonly noted in traditional ballet. Gluteal region pain with sciatica may be a result of piriformis
syndrome, which occurs because of the repetitive external hip rotation required in ballet (see Chapter 728.5).
The proper time to allow a ballet dancer to go en pointe is a common question asked by dancers and parents alike. The average age
to go en pointe is 12 years. A functional test should be part of that
decision: if the young dancer is able to perform a passé steadily away
from the barre and maintain an en pointe position without pain or
instability, the dancer is likely ready to begin dancing en pointe.
Posterior impingement syndrome of the ankle can be seen with
dancing en pointe, given compression between bony or soft tissue
structures during terminal plantarflexion. An os trigonum is commonly the cause of bony-­related posterior impingement syndrome.

ADAPTIVE SPORTS

Participation in sports and recreational activities helps to minimize
deconditioning; improve strength, endurance, and cardiopulmonary
fitness; and promote companionship, sense of achievement, and self-­
esteem (see Chapter 756). Participation can also support the development of the child’s motor coordination and adjustment to physical
limitations. However, children with disabilities tend to participate
less in physical activity for myriad reasons, including lack of access
to activities or opportunities for participation, lack of self-­confidence,
and fear of injury by the child, parent, or physician. Direction into
appropriate sports/physical activity rather than excluding them should
be guided by the child’s physical or mental challenge, physical abilities,
preparticipation exam, and consideration of the American Academy of
Orthopedic Surgeons “participation possibility chart,” which outlines
recommended sports and recreation based on physical disability.
Fear of injury remains a barrier to participation for many; however, the risk of injury for an adaptive sport athlete is no greater than
for an athlete without disability. Injuries in the adaptive sport athlete
are influenced by the specific disability, equipment used, and prosthetic or orthotics worn. Acute soft tissue injuries, including skin
abrasions, contusions, sprains, and strains, tend to be the most common injuries; fractures and dislocations tend to be uncommon, given
the lower participation in contact sports. Overuse injuries commonly
occur in this athlete population. Lower limb injuries are more common in athletes with amputations or cerebral palsy, and upper limb
injuries are more common in spinal cord injury and wheelchair-­
based athletes. Appropriate training to support muscle balance and
avoid muscle imbalance, as well as the management of spasticity and
properly fitting prosthetics and orthotics can help to reduce the risk
of overuse injuries. Pressure sores are common in wheelchair-­based
athletes and can be avoided with vigilant skin care and monitoring
and weight shifting.
Consideration of the athlete’s disability and medications is essential
because they may have increased propensity for abnormalities in, for
example, thermoregulation, resulting in heat illness, and fluid and electrolyte derangements. This should be discussed and monitored with
the athlete, parents, athletic trainers, and coaches, as appropriate.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 735 u General Considerations in Skeletal Dysplasias

Section 3

The Skeletal Dysplasias
Chapter 735

General Considerations in
Skeletal Dysplasias
Julie E. Hoover-­Fong and Daniah Albokhari
Genetic skeletal disorders include skeletal dysplasias, as well as metabolic bone conditions, dysostoses, and other skeletal malformations
(Table 735.1).

4333

The chondroosteodysplasias, also known as skeletal dysplasias or
bone dysplasias, are a genetically and clinically heterogeneous group
of disorders with an estimated prevalence of 1/4,000 births. The chondroosteodysplasias can be divided into the chondrodysplasias and
osteodysplasias. The former includes genetic disorders of cartilage
and results in deficient linear growth, typified by achondroplasia. The
osteodysplasias are marked by abnormal bone structure, with a classic
example of osteogenesis imperfecta (see Chapter 742). The clinical picture of the chondroosteodysplasias is dominated by generalized skeletal
abnormalities with frequent involvement of nonskeletal elements. The
disorders range in severity from lethal in utero to such mild features as
to go undetected. Metabolic bone conditions, such as rickets or hypophosphatasia, are because of abnormal bone mineralization, whereas
the dysostoses affect a single bone (e.g., craniosynostosis). Many complex genetic syndromes include skeletal malformations as part of the
overall phenotype.
The chondrodysplasias are distinguished from other forms of short
stature by skeletal disproportion between the length of the torso and
the limbs. There are two basic categories of skeletal dysplasias: those
with predominantly short limbs versus short trunks. Figure 735.1 notes
the importance of cartilage in bone formation. Efforts to define the
extent of clinical heterogeneity has resulted in the delineation of well

Table 735.1  Nosology of Genetic Skeletal Disorders: 2023
GROUP #

NAME

EXAMPLES*

01

FGFR3 chondrodysplasias

Achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia, thanatophoric dysplasia type 1, 2

02

Type 2 collagen disorders

Achondrogenesis (COL2A1), Kniest dysplasia, Stickler syndrome (COL2A1
related)

03

Type 11 collagen

Stickler syndrome (COL11A1, COL11A2), Marshall syndrome

04

Sulfation disorders

Achondrogenesis (SLC26A2), diastrophic dysplasia, spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia

05

Dysplasias with multiple joint dislocations

Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome types 1 and 2, SEMD with joint laxity

06

Filamins and related disorders

Frontometaphyseal dysplasias (multiple types), Larsen syndrome

07

Proteoglycan core protein disorders

Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasias (multiple types)

08

TRPV4 disorders

Metatropic dysplasia, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, SEMD

09

Pseudoachondroplasia and the multiple
epiphyseal dysplasias

Sticker syndromes (multiple types), MED (multiple types)

10

Skeletal disorders caused by abnormalities of
cilia or ciliary signaling

Short-­rib polydactyly syndromes (Jeune syndromes multiple types), Ellis-­Van-­
Creveld syndrome, Meckel syndrome

11

Metaphyseal dysplasias

Metaphyseal dysplasia (multiple types)

12

Spondylometaphyseal dysplasias

Spondylometaphyseal dysplasias (multiple types)

13

Spondyloepi(meta)physeal dysplasias

Multiple types

14

Severe spondylodysplastic dysplasias

Achondrogenesis (TRIP11), spondylometaphyseal dysplasia (GPX4, SBDS,
PAM16)

15

Mesomelic and rhizo-­mesomelic dysplasias

Robinow syndrome (multiple types), mesomelic dysplasia (multiple types)

16

Acromesomelic dysplasias

Multiple types

17

Acromelic dysplasias

Geleophysic dysplasias, acromicric dysplasias, Weill-­Marchesani syndrome
(multiple types)

18

Brachydactylies (isolated)

Multiple types

19

Brachydactylies (syndromic)

Multiple types, Coffin-­Siris syndrome (multiple types)

20

Bent bones dysplasias

Campomelic dysplasia, bent bone dysplasia

21

Primordial dwarfism and slender bones

Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism (multiple types)

22

Lysosomal storage diseases with skeletal
involvement

Mucopolysaccharidosis types 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 10

23

Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP)

Rhizomelic CDP (multiple types)
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4334 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 735.1  Nosology of Genetic Skeletal Disorders: 2023—cont’d
GROUP #

NAME

EXAMPLES*

24

Osteopetrosis and related osteoclast disorders

Osteopetrosis (multiple types)

25

Osteosclerotic disorders

Caffey disease and dysplasia, craniometaphyseal dysplasias

26

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) and bone
fragility

OI (multiple types), osteoporosis (multiple types)

27

Disorders of bone mineralization

Hypophosphatasia, hypophosphatemic rickets (multiple types)

28

Skeletal disorders of parathyroid hormone
signaling

Metaphyseal dysplasia (PTHR1, SIK3)

29

Osteolysis

Progeria, mandibuloacral dysplasias (multiple types)

30

Disorganized development of skeletal
components

Cherubism, fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva

31

Overgrowth and segmental overgrowth

Marfan syndrome, Loey-­Dietz syndrome, Sotos syndrome, Proteus syndrome

32

Genetic inflammatory or rheumatoid-­like
osteoarthropathies

Neonatal onset multisystem inflammatory disease

33

Cleidocranial dysplasias (CD)

CD (RUNX2, CBFB)

34

Syndromes with craniosynostosis

Carpenter syndromes, Crouzon syndromes, Pfeiffer syndromes

35

Craniofacial dysostosis

Treacher Collins syndrome (multiple types), frontonasal dysplasias;
mandibulofacial dysostosis (multiple types)

36

Vertebral and costa dysostosis

Spondylocostal dysostosis (multiple types), Klippel-­Feil syndrome (multiple
types)

37

Patellar dysostosis

Nail patella syndrome, Holt-­Oram syndromes

38

Limb hypoplasia (reduction defects)

Holt-­Oram, Cornelia de Lange syndrome (multiple types) Rothmund-­
Thompson syndrome, Poland syndrome, TAR syndrome

39

Split hand / foot ± other manifestations

Ectrodactyly-­ectodermal dysplasia-­cleft palate, split hand-­foot malformation
(multiple types)

40

Polydactyly-­syndactyly triphalangism

Preaxial polydactyly (multiple types), syndactyly types 1, 3, 4, 5

41

Defects in joint formation and synostosis

Multiple synostosis syndrome (multiple types), radio-­ulnar synostosis (multiple
types)

*Examples are not all inclusive; incomplete list.
SEMD, spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia; MED multiple epiphyseal dysplasia; ( ) gene notations in italics; TAR, thrombocytopenia absent radius.
Data from Unger S, Ferreira CR, Mortier GR, et al. Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision. Am J Med Genet 2023;1-46 (Table 1).

Mesenchyme
condensation

Vascular
invasion
Hypertrophic
chondrocytes

Proliferating
chondrocytes

Secondary
ossification
center

Epiphyseal
cartilage
Bone
Growth
plate
Cartilage
anlage

Bone

Fig. 735.1 The importance of cartilage in bone formation. (From Horton WA. Skeletal development: insights from targeting the mouse genome. Lancet. 2005;362:560.)

over 200 distinct entities (Table 735.2). Many of these disorders result
from pathogenic variants of a relatively small group of genes, the chondrodysplasia genes. The better-­defined chondrodysplasia groups, such
as the FGFR3 and type II collagenopathy groups, contain graded series
of disorders that range from severe to mild. This severity spectrum

is increasingly appreciated in other skeletal dysplasia groups as more
pathogenic variants have been discovered and their associated phenotypes defined. For some genes, such as COL2A1, pathogenic variants
are distributed throughout the gene, and the clinical phenotypes merge
into one another across a broad range. There is much less phenotypic
overlap in other genes, such as FGFR3, in which the distribution of
pathogenic variants is more discrete.
Most chondrodysplasias require the analysis of information from the
history, physical examination, skeletal radiographs, family history, and
laboratory testing to make a diagnosis. The process involves recognizing
complex patterns that are characteristic of the different disorders (Tables
735.3-735.6). Metaphyseal dysplasias, for example, often are characterized by short stature, bowing of the legs, and a waddling gait. Most
metaphyseal dysplasias have normal serum levels of calcium and phosphate, alkaline phosphatase activity, and vitamin D metabolites. In addition, subtypes of metaphyseal dysplasias exist and have their own unique
features. Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (Jansen type; see Chapter 737)
is typified by cupped and ragged metaphyses, which develop mottled
calcification at the distal ends of bone over time (Fig. 735.2). Hypercalcemia can occur. The Schmid type of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia
is less severe, although the radiographic appearance of the knees and
extreme bowing of the lower limbs resemble that in patients with familial hypophosphatemia. This condition is associated with defects in collagen type X (COL10A1), and the hip abnormalities are more debilitating
than in Jansen metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. Patients with both types
of metaphyseal chondrodysplasia have short stature.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 735 u General Considerations in Skeletal Dysplasias

4335

Table 735.2  Genetics of Some Skeletal Dysplasias
GENE LOCUS
COL2A1

ACG1

PROTEIN
Type II collagen α1 chain

Aggrecan

PROTEIN FUNCTION
Cartilage matrix protein

Cartilage matrix protein

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

INHERIT

Achondrogenesis II

AD*

Hypochondrogenesis

AD*

SED congenita

AD

Kniest dysplasia

AD

Late-­onset SED

AD

Stickler dysplasia

AD

SED Kimberley

AD

SEMD Aggrecan type

AR

SEDL

Sedlin

Intracellular transporter

X-­linked SED tarda

XLR

COL11A1

Type XI collagen α1 chain

Cartilage matrix protein

OSMEDA

AD

COL11A2

Type XI collagen α2 chain

Cartilage matrix protein

OSMEDB

AR

COMP

Cartilage oligomeric
matrix protein

Cartilage matrix protein

Pseudoachondroplasia

AD

EDM1 (MED)

AD

COL9A2

Type IX collagen α2 chain

Cartilage matrix protein

EDM2 (MED)

AD

COL9A3

Type IX collagen α3 chain

Cartilage matrix protein

EDM3 (MED)

AD

MATN3

Matrilin-3

Cartilage matrix protein

EDM5 (MED)

AD

COL10A1

Type X collagen α1 chain

Hypertrophic cartilage matrix
protein

Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia

AD

FGFR3

FGF receptor 3

Tyrosine kinase receptor for
FGFs

Thanatophoric dysplasia I

AD*

Thanatophoric dysplasia II

AD*

Achondroplasia

AD

Hypochondroplasia

AD

PTHR1

PTHrP receptor

G protein–coupled receptor for
PTH and PTHrP

Jansen metaphyseal chondrodysplasia

AD

DTDST

DTD sulfate transporter

Transmembrane sulfate
transporter

Achondrogenesis 1B

AR*

Atelosteogenesis II

AR*

Diastrophic dysplasia

AR

SOX9

SRY box 9

Transcription factor

Campomelic dysplasia

AD

RUNX2†

Runt-­related transcription
factor 2

Transcription factor

Cleidocranial dysplasia

AD

LMX1B

Transcription factor

Nail-­patella dysplasia

AD

CTSK

Cathepsin K

Enzyme

Pyknodysostosis

AR

RMPR

Mitochondrial
RNA-­processing
endoribonuclease

RNA-­processing enzyme

CHH

AR

DYNC2H1

Dynein, cytoplasmic two,
heavy chain 1

Cytoplasmic cilia-­related
protein

ATD

AR

SRPIII

AR

Calcium-­permeable TRP
ion channel

Transmembrane channel
protein

Brachyolmia type 3

AD

SMDK

AD

Metatropic dysplasia

AD

TRPV4

*Usually lethal.
†Also called CBFA1.

AD, Autosomal dominant; SED, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia; SEMD, spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia; AR, autosomal recessive; EDM (MED), multiple epiphyseal dysplasia; FGF,
fibroblast growth factor; OSMEDA, otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia autosomal dominant; OSMEDB, otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia autosomal recessive; PTHrP,
parathyroid hormone-­related protein; PTH, parathyroid hormone; DTD, diastrophic dysplasia; SRY, sex-­determining region of the Y chromosome; CHH, cartilage-­hair hypoplasia;
ATD, Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy; SRPIII, short rib polydactyly syndrome type III; TRPV4, transient receptor potential vanilloid family 4; SMDK, spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia Kozlowski type.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4336 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 735.3  Major Problems Associated with Skeletal
Dysplasias
PROBLEM

EXAMPLE

Table 735.4  Associated Anomalies in Skeletal Dysplasias
ANOMALY

EXAMPLE

Heart defects

Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome,
Jeune syndrome

Polydactyly

Short rib polydactyly, Majewski
type

Cleft palate

Diastrophic dysplasia

Ear cysts

Diastrophic dysplasia

Spinal cord compression

Achondroplasia

Lethality*

Thanatophoric dysplasia

Associated anomalies†

Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome

Short stature

Common to almost all

Cervical spine dislocations

Larsen syndrome

Severe limb bowing

Metaphyseal dysplasia, Schmid
type

Spine curvatures

Metatropic dysplasia

Encephalocele

Dyssegmental dysplasia

Clubfeet

Diastrophic dysplasia

Hemivertebrae

Dyssegmental dysplasia

Fractures

Osteogenesis imperfecta

Micrognathia

Campomelic dysplasia

Pneumonias, aspirations

Campomelic dysplasia

Nail dysplasia

Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome

Spinal cord compression

Achondroplasia

Conical teeth, oligodontia

Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome

Joint problems (hips, knees)

Most skeletal dysplasias

Multiple oral frenula

Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome

Hearing loss

Common (greatest with cleft
palate)

Dentinogenesis imperfecta

Osteogenesis imperfecta

Myopia/cataracts

Stickler syndrome

Pretibial skin dimples

Campomelic dysplasia

Immunodeficiency

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia, Schimke
immunoosseous dysplasia,
spondyloenchondromatosis,
pathogenic variants in PEM3,
EXTL3, ADA

Cataracts, retinal detachment

Stickler syndrome

Intestinal atresia

Saldino-­Noonan syndrome

Renal cysts

Saldino-­Noonan syndrome

Camptodactyly

Diastrophic dysplasia

Poor body image

Variable, but common to all

Craniosynostosis

Thanatophoric dysplasia

Sex reversal

Campomelic dysplasia

Ichthyosis

Chondrodystrophia punctata

Hitchhiker thumb

Diastrophic dysplasia

Sparse scalp hair

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia

Hypertelorism

Robinow syndrome

Comprehensive descriptions of disorders and references can be
found at the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) website
(http://omim.org/about), along with the most recent nosology for
genetic skeletal conditions.

Hypoplastic nasal bridge

Acrodysostosis

Clavicular agenesis

Cleidocranial dysplasia

Genital hypoplasia

Robinow syndrome

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Growth

Tail

Metatropic dysplasia

Omphalocele

Beemer-­Langer syndrome

Blue sclera

Osteogenesis imperfecta

*Mostly a result of severely reduced size of thorax.
†See Table 735.4.

The hallmark of the chondrodysplasias is disproportionate short stature. Although this refers to a disproportion between the limbs and
the trunk, most disorders exhibit some shortening of both, and subtle
degrees of disproportion may be difficult to appreciate, especially in
premature, obese, or edematous infants. Disproportionate shortening
of the limbs should be suspected if the upper limbs do not reach the
mid-­pelvis in infancy or the upper thigh after infancy. Disproportionate shortening of the trunk is indicated by a short neck, small chest, and
protuberant abdomen. Skeletal disproportion is usually accompanied
by short stature (length and height below the third percentile); these
measurements are occasionally within the low-­normal range early in
the course of certain conditions.
There may also be disproportionate shortening of different segments of the limbs; the specific pattern can provide clues for diagnoses.
Shortening is greatest in the proximal segments (upper arms and legs)
in achondroplasia; this is termed rhizomelic shortening. Disproportionate shortening of the middle segments (forearms and lower legs)
is called mesomelic shortening; acromelic shortening involves the
hands and feet.
With some exceptions, there is a strong correlation between the age
when shortening is appreciated and the clinical severity of the condition. Many of the lethal neonatal chondrodysplasias are evident during routine fetal ultrasound examinations performed at the end of the
first trimester of gestation (see Table 735.5). Gestational standards exist

for long-­bone lengths, and discrepancies are often detected between
biparietal diameter of the skull and long-­bone lengths. Many disorders
become apparent around the time of birth whereas others manifest
during the first year of life. A number of disorders manifest in early
childhood and a few in late childhood or later.

Non–­Growth-­Related Manifestations

Most patients also have problems unrelated to growth. Skeletal deformities, such as abnormal joint mobility, protuberances at and around
joints, and angular deformities, are common and usually symmetric.
Skeletal abnormalities can adversely affect nonskeletal tissues. Impaired
growth at the base of the skull and of vertebral pedicles reduces the size
of the spinal canal in achondroplasia and can contribute to spinal cord
compression. Short ribs reduce thoracic volume, which can compromise breathing in patients with short trunk chondrodysplasias. Cleft
palate (see Chapter 356) is common to many disorders, presumably
reflecting defective palatal growth.
Manifestations may be unrelated to the skeleton; they reflect
the expression of pathogenic gene variants in nonskeletal tissues. Examples include retinal detachment in spondyloepiphyseal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 735 u General Considerations in Skeletal Dysplasias
Table 735.5  Lethal Neonatal Skeletal Dysplasias
USUALLY FATAL*
Achondrogenesis (different types)
Thanatophoric dysplasia
Short rib polydactyly (different types)
Homozygous achondroplasia
Campomelic dysplasia
Dyssegmental dysplasia, Silverman-­Handmaker type
Osteogenesis imperfecta, type II
Hypophosphatasia (perinatal form)
Chondrodysplasia punctata (rhizomelic form)
OFTEN FATAL
Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia (Jeune syndrome)
OCCASIONALLY FATAL
Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome
Diastrophic dysplasia
Metatropic dwarfism
Kniest dysplasia
*A few prolonged survivors have been reported in most of these disorders.

Table 735.6  Usually Nonlethal Dwarfing Conditions
Recognizable at Birth or Within the First Few
Months of Life
MOST COMMON
Achondroplasia
Osteogenesis imperfecta (types I, III, IV)
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita
Diastrophic dysplasia
Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome
LESS COMMON
Chondrodysplasia punctata (some forms)
Kniest dysplasia
Metatropic dysplasia
Langer mesomelic dysplasia

A

B

4337

dysplasia congenita, sex reversal in campomelic dysplasia, congenital heart malformations in Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome, immunodeficiency in cartilage-­hair hypoplasia, and renal dysfunction
in asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia. These nonskeletal problems
provide valuable clues to specific diagnoses and must be managed
clinically (see Table 735.4).

Family and Reproductive History

A family history might identify relatives with the condition, and a
Mendelian inheritance pattern may be elicited. Because the presentation can vary in some disorders within and among families, features
that might be related to the disorder should be identified. Special attention should be given to mild degrees of short stature, disproportion,
deformities, and other manifestations (e.g., precocious osteoarthritis)
because they may be overlooked. Physical examination of relatives may
be useful, as may the review of their photographs, radiographs, and
medical and laboratory records.
A reproductive history might reveal previous stillbirths, fetal losses,
and other abnormal pregnancy outcomes resulting from a skeletal dysplasia. Pregnancy complications, such as polyhydramnios or reduced
fetal movement, are common in bone dysplasias, especially neonatal
lethal variants.
Even though most of the skeletal dysplasias are genetic, it is common for an affected individual to be the first in their family to have the
diagnosis. New pathogenic variants are common for autosomal dominant disorders, especially lethal disorders in the perinatal period (e.g.,
thanatophoric dysplasia, osteogenesis imperfecta). In achondroplasia,
the most common short stature skeletal dysplasia, ∼80% of all individuals have a new pathogenic variant in FGFR3. Germ cell mosaicism,
in which a parent has clones of mutant germ cells, has been observed
in osteogenesis imperfecta, achondroplasia, and in other dominant
disorders. A negative family history is usually seen in recessive disorders unless consanguinity is present. A few of the short stature skeletal
dysplasias are X-­linked in origin. Prenatal diagnosis is available for
disorders that have a known genetic etiology. Appropriateness of the
testing depends on many factors, and genetic counseling is warranted
for these families.

C

D

Fig. 735.2 Radiographic findings in Jansen-­type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. A, At age 1 yr, there is severe metaphyseal cupping and splaying

at the wrists and also in the hand bones. B, At age 7 yr, there is increasing metaphyseal change at the wrists with enlarged epiphysis; enlarged epiphyses with wide epiphyseal plates are also present in the hands. C, At age 1 yr, there are severe metaphyseal irregularities at the knees and ankles
(femur, tibia, and fibula) and enlarged, rounded epiphyses. D, At age 7 yr, there are severely fragmented, sclerotic metaphyses, wide epiphyseal
plates, and enlarged epiphyses. Radiographic findings in Jansen-­type metaphyseal chondrodysplasia. (From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2008.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4338 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Normal

Epiphsyeal
abnormality

Metaphyseal
abnormality

Diaphyseal
abnormality

Secondary
epiphysis

S. epiphysis

Secondary
epiphysis

Secondary
epiphysis

Metaphysis

Metaphysis

Metaphysis

Metaphysis

Diaphysis

Diaphysis

Diaphysis

Diaphysis

Normal
spondyloVertebrae

Spondyloabnormality
Lamina

Process

Vertebrae

Fig. 735.3 Demonstration of the different portions of the appendicuLamina

Process

Table 735.7  Dynamic Classification of Bone Dysplasias
I.	EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIAS
A.	Epiphyseal hypoplasias
1.	Failure of articular cartilage: spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
congenita and tarda
2. Failure of ossification center: multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
congenita and tarda
B. Epiphyseal hyperplasia
1.	Excess of articular cartilage; dysplasia epiphysealis hemimelica
II.	PHYSEAL DYSPLASIAS
A.	Cartilage hypoplasias
1.	Failure of proliferating cartilage: achondroplasia congenita
and tarda
2.	Failure of hypertrophic cartilage: metaphyseal dysostosis
congenita and tarda
B. Cartilage hyperplasias
1.	Excess of proliferating cartilage: hyperchondroplasia
2.	Excess of hypertrophic cartilage: enchondromatosis
III.	METAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIAS
A.	Metaphyseal hypoplasias
1.	Failure to form primary spongiosa: hypophosphatasia
congenita and tarda
2.	Failure to absorb primary spongiosa: osteopetrosis congenita
and tarda
3.	Failure to absorb secondary spongiosa: craniometaphyseal
dysplasia congenita and tarda
B. Metaphyseal hyperplasias
1.	Excessive spongiosa: multiple exostoses
IV.	DIAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIAS
A.	Diaphyseal hypoplasias
1.	Failure of periosteal bone formation: osteogenesis imperfecta
congenita and tarda
2.	Failure of endosteal bone formation: idiopathic osteoporosis
congenita and tarda
B. Diaphyseal hyperplasias
1.	Excessive periosteal bone formation: progressive diaphyseal
dysplasia
2.	Excessive endosteal bone formation: hyperphosphatasemia
From Rubin P. Classification of bone dysplasias. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers,
1964. p. 82.

Radiographic Features

Radiographic evaluation for a chondrodysplasia should include plain
films of the entire skeleton. Efforts should be made to identify which
bones and which parts of bones (i.e., epiphyses, metaphyses, diaphyses) are most affected (Figs. 735.3 and Fig. 735.4 and Table 735.7). If

lar skeleton that manifest radiographic abnormalities that aid in the
clinical classification of the skeletal dysplasias. (From Krakow D, Rimoin
DL. The skeletal dysplasias. Genet Med. 2010;12:327–341. Fig. 2.)

possible, films taken at different ages should be examined because the
radiographic changes evolve with time. Films taken before puberty are
generally more informative because pubertal closure of the epiphyses
obliterates many of the signs needed for a radiographic diagnosis. Prenatal diagnosis may also be possible with fetal ultrasound.

DIAGNOSIS

If an infant or child is short with disproportionate features, a diagnosis is established by matching the observed clinical picture (defined
primarily from clinical, family, and gestational histories; physical
examination; and radiographic evaluation) with clinical phenotypes of well-­documented disorders. A number of reference texts
and online databases provide information about the disorders and
comprehensive lists of current references (http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/books/NBK1116/). Consultation with experts in medical
genetics, orthopedics, endocrinology, or the bone dysplasia field is
recommended.
Genetic testing for chondrodysplasias is very useful, especially for
disorders in which recurrent pathogenic variants occur (typical achondroplasia has the same FGFR3 pathogenic variant). Pathogenic variant testing for achondroplasia is available, although the diagnosis can
be made clinically. The greatest utility for testing may be for prenatal
diagnosis for couples where both parents have typical (heterozygous)
achondroplasia. Their children are at a 25% risk of the much more
severe homozygous achondroplasia (also known as double dominant),
which can be detected by pathogenic variant analysis. Preimplantation
genetic testing can be used to identify zygotes with two pathogenic
variants in FGFR3. Another example of the utility of genetic testing is
in disorders resulting from pathogenic variants in DTDST. These disorders are inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, and a limited
number of mutant alleles have been found. If the pathogenic variants
are identified in the patient, they should be detectable in the parents
and potentially used for prenatal diagnosis. Pathogenic variant analysis is commercially available for many of the skeletal dysplasias and
is increasingly used to confirm clinical diagnosis and for future pregnancy planning.
Many of the chondrodysplasias have distinct histologic changes of
the skeletal growth plate. Sometimes, such tissues obtained at biopsy
or discarded from a surgical procedure are helpful diagnostically. It is
uncommon to make a diagnosis histologically if it was not already suspected on clinical or radiographic grounds.

MOLECULAR GENETICS OF SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS

A number of chondrodysplasia genes have been identified (see Table
735.2). They encode several categories of proteins, including cartilage
matrix proteins, transmembrane receptors, ion transporters, and transcription factors. The number of identified gene loci is smaller than
anticipated from the number of recognized clinical phenotypes. The
majority of patients have disorders that map to fewer than 10 loci, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 735 u General Considerations in Skeletal Dysplasias
Suspected skeletal dysplasia

Pathognomonic findings
• Osteoporosis, bowing, fracture  Osteogenesis imperfecta family
• Punctate calcifications  Punctata family
• Sclerotic bones  Osteopetrosis (generalized) or Focal sclerosing dysplasia
• Undermodeling, bowing  Otopalatodigital syndrome family (Filaminopathy A)

Spinal involvement

Dysostosis
multiplex

Interpediculate
distance
narrowing,
Trident ilia,
Proximal femoral
scooping

Severe
platyspondyly,
Overfaced
pedicles

No spinal involvement

Moderate
platyspondyly

Coronal cle fts,
Dumbbell
deformity of long
bones

Mucopolysaccharidosis and
mucolipidosis

Achondroplasia
family

Metatropic
dysplasia (TRPV4)
family

4339

Type II and XI
Collagenopathy
Stickler-Kniest
family

Pear-shaped
vertebral bodies,
Delayed
ossification of
juxtatruncal
bones

Type II
Collagenopathy
SEDC family

Short ribs

Epiphyseal
ossification
delayed and
irregular

Metaphyseal
irregularity

Cervical kyphosis,
Distal humeral
tapering

Skeletal
ciliopathies

Multiple
epiphyseal
dysplasia family

Skeletal
ribosomopathy
family

Joint contractures

Joint dislocations

Diastrophic
dysplasia family

Larsen syndrome
family
(Filaminopathy B)

Fig. 735.4 Diagnostic algorithm for the major skeletal dysplasias. TRPV4, transient receptor potential vanilloid 4. (From Handa A, Grigelioniene G,
Nishimura G: Skeletal dysplasia families: a stepwise approach to diagnosis. RadioGraphics 2023;43(5), Fig. 1.)

pathogenic variants at two loci (COL2A1 and FGFR3) account for more
than half of all cases. There may be a limited number of genes whose
function is critical to skeletal development, especially linear bone
growth, and pathogenic variants in these genes give rise to a wide range
of chondrodysplasia clinical phenotypes. New genes harboring pathogenic variants that cause chondrodysplasias continue to be identified
with advances in technology.
Pathogenic variants of COL2A1 and FGFR3 illustrate different
genetic characteristics. COL2A1 pathogenic variants are distributed
throughout the gene, with few instances of recurrence in unrelated
persons. In contrast, FGFR3 pathogenic variants are restricted to a
few locations within the gene, and the occurrence of new pathogenic
variants at these same sites in unrelated persons is the rule. There is a
strong correlation between clinical phenotype and pathogenic variant
site for FGFR3, but not COL2A1.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Chondrodysplasias are caused by pathogenic variants in genes that
encode abnormal proteins and disrupt normal endochondral ossification, the biologic process responsible for the development and
linear growth of the skeleton (see Fig. 735.1). These genetic variants
act through different mechanisms. Most pathogenic variants involving cartilage matrix proteins cause disease when only one of the two
copies (alleles) of the relevant gene is mutated. These pathogenic variants usually act through a dominant negative mechanism in which the
protein products of the mutant allele interfere with the assembly and
function of multimeric molecules that contain the protein products
of both the normal and mutant alleles. The type II collagen molecule
is a triple helix composed of three collagen chains, which are the
products of the type II collagen gene COL2A1. When chains from
both normal and mutant alleles are combined to form triple helices,
most molecules contain at least one mutant chain. It is not known
how many mutant chains are required to produce a dysfunctional
molecule, but, depending on the pathogenic variant, it theoretically
could be as few as one.

Pathogenic variants in the gene encoding type X collagen differ
from the model above. They map to the region of the chain that is
responsible for chain recognition; the chains must recognize each
other before they can assemble into collagen molecules. Disease-­
causing variants are thought to disrupt this process. As a result, none
of the mutant chains are incorporated into molecules. This mechanism
is haploinsufficiency because the products of the mutant allele are functionally absent, and the normal allele is insufficient for normal function. Genetic variants involving ion transport genes also act through
a loss of function of the transporters. Pathogenic variants of transmembrane receptors studied to date appear to act through a gain of
function; the mutant receptors initiate signals in a constitutive manner
independent of their normal ligands. A pathogenic variant in FGFR3
is another example of a gain of function mechanism of disease. At baseline, FGFR3 is a negative regulator of endochondral bone formation.
If the pathogenic variant associated with achondroplasia is present in
this gene, the clinical manifestations of this condition are caused by
enhanced inhibition of endochondral bone formation and growth,
independent of normal ligands.

TREATMENT

The first step is to establish the correct diagnosis. This allows one to
provide a prognosis and to anticipate the medical and surgical problems associated with a particular disorder. Establishing a diagnosis
helps to distinguish between lethal disorders and nonlethal disorders
in a premature or newborn infant (see Tables 735.5 and 735.6). A poor
prognosis for long-­term survival might argue against initiating extreme
lifesaving measures for thanatophoric dysplasia or achondrogenesis
types Ib or II, whereas such measures may be indicated for infants
with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita or diastrophic dysplasia,
which have a good prognosis if the infant survives the newborn period.
Overall, management of patients with short stature skeletal dysplasias is directed at preventing and correcting skeletal deformities (spinal
stenosis, kyphosis, scoliosis), treating nonskeletal complications (other
anomalies, immunodeficiencies), providing genetic counseling, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4340 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
helping patients and families learn to cope. Each disorder has its own
unique set of problems, and consequently, management must be tailored to each disorder.
There are a number of problems common to many chondrodysplasias for which general recommendations can be made. Children with
most chondrodysplasias should avoid contact sports and other activities that cause injury or stress to joints. Good dietary habits should
be established in childhood to prevent or minimize obesity in adulthood. Dental care should be started early to minimize the crowding
and malalignment of teeth. Children and relatives should be given the
opportunity to participate in support groups, such as the Little People
of America (http://www.lpaonline.org) and Human Growth Foundation (http://www.hgfound.org).
Three controversial approaches have been used to increase bone length.
Surgical limb lengthening has been employed for a few disorders. Its greatest success has been in achondroplasia in which nonskeletal tissues tend
to be redundant and easily stretched. The procedure is usually performed
during adolescence. Pharmacologic doses of human growth hormone
comparable to those used to treat Turner syndrome have also been tried
in several disorders; the results have been equivocal. Animal studies suggest that C-­type natriuretic peptide (CNP) promotes linear bone growth
in achondroplasia. One CNP analogue (vosoritide) is approved to increase
height in children with achondroplasia (≥5 years old) before the growth
plates are closed. Palovarotene is undergoing clinical trials for fibrodysplasia
ossificans and resveratrol for pseudoachondroplasia. Enzyme replacement
therapy is available for hypophosphatasia and Morquio A syndrome. Many
new therapies are based on the gene or pathway involved in the specific
disease (see Chapters 736-742). Clinicaltrials.gov is a resource to access
information about these and all other clinical trials.

epiphyses, the extent of which corresponds with clinical severity.
Most of the SEDs result from heterozygous pathogenic variants of
COL2A1 and are autosomal dominant disorders. The pathogenic
variants are dispersed throughout the gene with imperfect correlation between the variant location and resultant clinical phenotype.
Molecular testing/confirmation is readily available commercially.
Prenatal diagnosis is possible if the pathogenic variant is known.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

The Kniest dysplasia variant of SED manifests at birth with a short
trunk and limbs associated with a flat face, prominent eyes, enlarged
joints, cleft palate, and clubfoot (Fig. 736.1). Radiographs show
vertebral defects and short tubular bones with epiphyseal irregularities and metaphyseal enlargement that gives rise to a dumbbell
appearance.
Motor development is often delayed because of the joint deformities, although intelligence is normal. Hearing loss and myopia
commonly develop during childhood, and retinal detachment
is a common complication. Joint enlargement progresses during childhood and becomes painful. It is accompanied by flexion
contractures and muscle atrophy, which may be incapacitating by
adolescence.

Chapter 736

Disorders Involving
Cartilage Matrix Proteins
Daniah Albokhari and Julie E. Hoover-­Fong
Disorders of cartilage matrix proteins resulting in bone and joint
disorders can be classified according to the defective proteins: collagens (types 2, 9, 10, 11) and the noncollagenous proteins COMP
(cartilage oligomeric matrix protein), matrilin-3, and aggrecan. The
clinical phenotypes and clinical severity differ between and within
the groups, especially the spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (SED) group,
which is made up largely of type collagenopathies (see also Table
735.1).

TYPE 2 COLLAGENOPATHIES

The term spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia refers to a heterogeneous
group of disorders characterized by shortening of the trunk and,
to a lesser extent, the limbs. Severity ranges from most severe and
often lethal perinatally, such as achondrogenesis type II, hypochondrogenesis, and platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type, to severe/
moderately severe neonatal presentation, such as Kniest dysplasia
(which is apparent at birth and usually nonlethal) and SED congenita, to mild SED with premature-­onset arthrosis (which might not be
detected until adolescence or later) (Table 736.1). The radiographic
hallmarks are abnormal development of the vertebral bodies and of

Lethal Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasias

Achondrogenesis type II is characterized by severe shortening of the
neck and trunk and especially the limbs, and by a large, soft head. Fetal
hydrops and prematurity are common, and infants are stillborn or die
shortly after birth. Hypochondrogenesis refers to a clinical phenotype
intermediate between achondrogenesis type II and SED congenita.
It is typically lethal in the newborn period. Platyspondylic dysplasia, Torrance type is characterized by disproportionate short stature,
short limbs, and coarse facial features. The majority of infants die at or
shortly after birth.
The severity of radiographic changes correlates with clinical severity. These conditions manifest short, broad tubular bones with cupped
metaphyses. The cranial bones are not well mineralized, and the vertebral bodies are poorly ossified in the entire spine in achondrogenesis
type II, and in the cervical and sacral spine in hypochondrogenesis. In
both conditions, the pelvic bones are hypoplastic, and the pedicles are
ossified. In Torrance type, the platyspondyly is strikingly severe, with
iliac hypoplasia, short sacrosciatic notches, and preserved ossification
of the pubic bones. The three types can be detected prenatally and confirmed by molecular testing.

KNIEST DYSPLASIA

Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Congenita

The phenotype of this group, SED congenita, is apparent at birth.
The hands and feet are usually normal. Craniofacial features may
present, including malar hypoplasia, hypertelorism, and cleft palate. The neck is short, and the chest is barrel shaped (Fig. 736.2).
Kyphosis and exaggeration of the normal lumbar lordosis are common. The proximal segments of the limbs are shorter than the
hands and feet, which often appear normal. Some infants have clubfoot and/or exhibit hypotonia.
Skeletal radiographs of the newborn reveal short tubular bones,
delayed ossification of vertebral bodies, and proximal limb bone epiphyses (Fig. 736.3). Hypoplasia of the odontoid process, a short, square
pelvis with a poorly ossified symphysis pubis, and mild irregularity of
metaphyses are apparent.
Infants usually have normal developmental milestones with a waddling gait typically appearing in early childhood. Childhood complications include respiratory compromise from tracheomalacia, spinal
deformities, and spinal cord compression because of cervicomedullary
instability. The disproportion and shortening become progressively
worse with age, and adult heights range from 95-128 cm. Myopia is
typical; adults are predisposed to retinal detachment. Precocious
osteoarthritis (OA) occurs in early adulthood and requires surgical
joint replacement.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 736 u Disorders Involving Cartilage Matrix Proteins

4341

Mild Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia with Premature-­
Onset Arthrosis

Table 736.1  Collagen Disorders
DISORDER

INHERITANCE

GENE

TYPE 2 COLLAGEN DISORDERS
Achondrogenesis (formerly type 2,
type Langer-Saldino)

AD

COL2A1

Hypochondrogenesis

AD

COL2A1

Platyspondylic dysplasia, type
Torrance

AD

COL2A1

Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
congenita

AD, AR

COL2A1

Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia

AD

COL2A1

Kniest dysplasia

AD

COL2A1

Spondyloperipheral dysplasia

AD

COL2A1

SED with metatarsal shortening

AD

COL2A1

Stickler syndrome

AD

COL2A1

Dysplasia of the proximal femoral
epiphyses

AD

COL2A1

TYPE 11 COLLAGEN DISORDERS
Stickler syndrome

AD, MOS

COL11A1

Marshall syndrome

AS

COL11A1

Stickler syndrome (nonocular type)

AD

COL11A2

Fibrochondrogenesis

AR, AD

COL11A1

Fibrochondrogenesis

AR, AD

COL11A2

Otospondylomegaepiphyseal
dysplasia

AR

COL11A2

Otospondylomegaepiphyseal
dysplasia

AD

COL11A2

Data from Unger S, Ferreira CR, Mortier GR, et al. Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision. Am J Med Genet. 2023;191A:1164-1209 (Table 1, Group 2 and 3, pp
1166-1167).

Late-­onset SED is a mild clinical phenotype characterized by slightly
short stature, progressive joint pain, and diminished range of movement, associated with mild epiphyseal and vertebral abnormalities
on radiographs. It is typically detected during childhood or adolescence but can go unrecognized until adulthood when precocious OA
appears. The vision and hearing are usually normal. This designation
is nosologically distinct from SED tarda, which is clinically similar but results from pathogenic variant of the X-­linked gene SEDL
(TRAPPC2).

Stickler Syndrome/Dysplasia (Hereditary Progressive
Arthro-­Ophthalmopathy)

Short stature is not a feature of Stickler dysplasia. This condition resembles SED because of its joint and eye manifestations.
Pathogenic variants of genes encoding type II (COL2A1), type XI
(COL11A1, COL11A2), and type IX (COL9A1, COL9A2, COL9A3)
collagens have been identified in Stickler-­like disorders. Stickler
dysplasia is often identified in the newborn because of cleft palate and micrognathia (Pierre Robin anomaly; see Chapter 357). Of
patients with Stickler syndrome, 25% have Pierre Robin anomaly,
and 18% of patients with Pierre Robin anomaly have Stickler syndrome. Children with Stickler syndrome are often identified in
craniofacial clinics. Infants typically have severe myopia and additional ophthalmologic complications, including cataracts, glaucoma, and choroidoretinal and vitreous degeneration, with retinal
detachment common during childhood requiring multiple surgical interventions (Fig. 736.4). Special attention must be given to
eye complications even in childhood to preserve vision for these
individuals. Hearing loss is a common feature that arises during
adolescence. Sensorineural hearing loss is the most common form;
however, conductive hearing loss may also be seen. Osteoarticular
manifestations include joint hypermobility (especially hip), which
resolves in adulthood, metaphyseal broadening of the femoral
neck, hypoplastic iliac wings, Schmorl nodes, muscle hypotonia,
metaphyseal-­epiphyseal dysplasia, precocious progressive OA of
the spine and peripheral joints (which may require hip replacement
surgery before age 30 years), and decreased bone density. Similar
manifestations may be seen in other diseases with pathogenic variants in type II and XI collagen genes (Table 736.2).

PSEUDOACHONDROPLASIA AND MULTIPLE
EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA

Fig. 736.1 Patient with Kniest dysplasia. The trunk is short, the epi-

physes are broad, and there is contracture of the fingers. (From Traboulsi EI. Skeletal and connective tissue disorders with anterior segment
manifestations. In Krachmer JH, Mannis MJ, Holland EJ, eds. Cornea,
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2011. Fig. 60.9.)

Pseudoachondroplasia and the most common form of multiple
epiphyseal dysplasia (MED) are two distinct phenotypes that are
grouped together because they result from pathogenic variants of
the gene encoding COMP. The pathogenic variants are heterozygous in both, and they are autosomal dominant traits. The clinical phenotypes are restricted to musculoskeletal tissues. Newborns
with pseudoachondroplasia are average in size and appearance. Gait
abnormalities and short stature mainly affect the limbs and become
apparent in late infancy. Short stature becomes marked as the child
grows and is associated with generalized joint laxity (Fig. 736.5).
The hands are short, broad, and deviated in an ulnar direction; the
forearms are bowed. Developmental milestones and intelligence
are usually normal. Lumbar lordosis and deformities of the knee
develop during childhood; the latter often requires surgical correction. Pain is common in weight-­bearing joints during childhood
and adolescence, and OA develops late in the second decade of life,
which may require hip replacement by mid-30s. Adult height ranges
from 105-128 cm. Skeletal radiographs show distinctive abnormalities of vertebral bodies and of both epiphyses and metaphyses of
tubular bones (Fig. 736.6).
The MED phenotype has skeletal abnormalities that predominantly affect the epiphyses as noted on radiographs. Two forms, the
severe Fairbank type and the mild Ribbing type, are no longer used
in classification. Because of overlap in clinical features, and because
COMP pathogenic variants are found in both types, they are now
considered part of a clinical spectrum. The more severe clinical

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4342 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 736.2 Spondyloepiphyseal dys-

A

B

C

plasia congenita is shown in infancy
(A) and early childhood (B, C). Note
the short extremities, relatively normal
hands, flat facies, and exaggerated lordosis.

Fig. 736.3 Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. Platyspondyly, delayed epiphyseal ossification (especially femoral heads), dens hypoplasia. (From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal dysplasias. [Updated 2017 Jan 30]. In: De Groot LJ, Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al., eds. Endotext [internet]. South
Dartmouth, MA, 2000, MDText.com, Inc. Fig. 5. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279130/.)

phenotype of MED has its onset during childhood, with mild short-­
limbed short stature, pain in weight-­bearing joints, and a waddling
gait. Radiographs show delayed and irregular ossification of epiphyses. A typical finding is the double-­layered patella (pathognomonic).
In more mildly affected patients, the disorder might not be recognized until adolescence or adulthood. Radiographic changes may
be limited to the capital femoral epiphyses. In the latter case, mild
MED must be distinguished from bilateral Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease (see Chapter 719.3). Precocious OA of hips and knees is the
major complication in adults with MED. Adult heights range from
136-151 cm.
There are families with clinical and radiographic manifestations of MED
that are not caused by pathogenic variants of COMP. Pathogenic variants
in the genes encoding all three of the type IX collagen chains have been

reported. It has been suggested that COMP and type IX collagen interact
functionally in cartilage matrix, thus explaining why pathogenic variants
of different genes produce similar pictures. Pathogenic variants of the
genes coding for another cartilage matrix protein, matrilin-3 (MATN3),
and the diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (SLC26A) have also been
found in patients with autosomal dominant and recessive MED, respectively. For familial cases of pseudoachondroplasia and MED resulting
from pathogenic variant in COMP, prenatal diagnosis is available.

Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, Borochowitz-­
Cormier-­Daire type

Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, Borochowitz-­Cormier-­Daire type
is a rare more severe spondylo-­epi-­metaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD)-­
like phenotype characterized by short-­
limb dwarfism with spinal,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Daughter

Mother

Fig. 736.4 Face and profile of a mother
and daughter with Stickler syndrome type I.
Note in the daughter the flat nasal bridge,
the mild epicanthal folds, and discrete micrognathia. At first sight, the mother shows no
clear facial characteristics of Stickler syndrome.
(From Baijens LWJ, De Leenheer EMR, Weekamp HH, et al. Stickler syndrome type I and
Stapes ankylosis. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2004;68:1573–1580. Fig. 2.)
Table 736.2  Other Genetic Diseases Associated with
Pathogenic Variants in Type II and Type XI
Collagen Genes, with Clinical Presentations
Similar to That of Stickler Syndrome
PHENOTYPES ASSOCIATED WITH COL2A1 PATHOGENIC
VARIANTS
Achondrogenesis type II
Hypochondrogenesis
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita
Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, Strudwick type
Kniest dysplasia
Platyspondylic skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type
Spondyloperipheral dysplasia
Czech dysplasia
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, Stanescu type
Dysplasia with altered vertebral contours
Some of the juvenile joint diseases
PHENOTYPES ASSOCIATED WITH COL11A1 PATHOGENIC
VARIANTS
Marshall syndrome
Fibrochondrogenesis 1
Autosomal dominant deafness
PHENOTYPES ASSOCIATED WITH COL11A2 PATHOGENIC
VARIANTS
Otospondylometaphyseal dysplasia
Weissenbacher-­Zweymüller syndrome
Fibrochondrogenesis 2
Some cases of isolated sensorineural deafness
Table adapted from Couchouron T, Masson C. Early-­onset progressive osteoarthritis
with hereditary progressive ophthalmology or Stickler syndrome. Joint Bone Spine.
2011;78:45–49. Table 1, p. 48; with additional data from Mortier GR, Cohn DH,
Cormier-­Daire V, et al. Nosology and classification of genetic skeletal disorders: 2019
revision. Am J Med Genet A. 2019;179(12):2393–2419.

A

B

Fig. 736.5 Pseudoachondroplasia in an adolescent male. A, The facies and head circumference are normal. There is shortening of all extremities and bowing of the lower extremities. B, Photograph of hands,
demonstrating short stubby fingers.
epiphyseal, and metaphyseal abnormalities. There are only three families described in the literature caused by autosomal recessive pathogenic variant in the gene encoding matrilin-3 (MATN3). Radiographic
examination showed flat, ovoid vertebral bodies, short with a stocky
appearance, long tubular bones, wide metaphysis with lateral spurs,
irregular epiphysis of knee, unossified proximal femur epiphysis,
squaring of pelvis, and narrow greater sciatic notch.

SCHMID METAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA

Schmid metaphyseal dysplasia is one of several chondrodysplasias
in which metaphyseal abnormalities dominate the radiographic features. It typically manifests in early childhood with mild short stature, bowing of the legs, and a waddling gait (Fig. 736.7). Joints, such
as the wrist, may be enlarged. Radiographs show flaring and irregular
mineralization of the metaphyses of tubular bones of the proximal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4344 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

B

Fig. 736.6 A, Lateral thoracolumbar spine radiograph of a patient

with pseudoachondroplasia showing central protrusion (tonguing) of
the anterior aspect of upper lumbar and lower thoracic vertebrae. Note
reduced vertebral body heights (platyspondyly) and secondary lordosis.
B, Lower-­extremity radiograph of a patient with pseudoachondroplasia
showing large metaphyses, poorly formed epiphyses, and marked bowing of the long bones.

Fig. 736.8 Radiograph of lower extremities in Schmid metaphyseal

dysplasia showing short tubular bones and metaphyseal flaring and irregularities, abnormal capital femoral epiphyses, and femoral necks.
The epiphyses are normal. Coxa vara is present.

in the gene encoding type X collagen (COL10A1) as an autosomal
dominant condition. The distribution of type X collagen is restricted
to the region of growing bone in which cartilage is converted into
bone. This might explain why radiographic changes are confined to
the metaphyses.

Aggrecan-­Related Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasias

Fig. 736.7 Female patient with metaphyseal dysplasia, type Schmid.

The facies are normal, and the stature is mildly reduced. Mild tibia vara
is present.

limbs (Fig. 736.8). Coxa vara is usually present and can require surgical correction. Short stature becomes more evident with age and
affects the lower extremities more than the upper extremities. Overall, manifestations are limited to the skeleton. Schmid metaphyseal
chondrodysplasia is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants

Pathogenic variants of aggrecan have been detected in three SED-­
like conditions. SED-­Kimberley is relatively mild, with short stature, stocky build, and early-­
onset OA of weight-­
bearing joints.
Autosomal dominant pathogenic variants are etiologic. Autosomal
recessive pathogenic variants cause a more severe and generalized
clinical phenotype, spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia–aggrecan
type. Radiographic changes include irregular epiphyses and widened
metaphyses. A mild condition, familial osteochondritis dissecans,
is characterized by multiple osteochondritic lesions (separation of
cartilage and subchondral bone from the surrounding tissue and primarily affecting the knee, ankle, and elbow joints) in knees and/or
hips and/or elbows, disproportionate short stature, and early-­onset
OA. Autosomal dominant pathogenic variants have been found in
familial cases.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 737 u Disorders Involving Transmembrane Receptors 4345

Chapter 737

Disorders Involving
Transmembrane Receptors
Daniah Albokhari and Julie E. Hoover-­Fong
Heterozygous pathogenic variants of genes encoding FGFR3 (fibroblast
growth factor receptor 3) and PTHR1 (parathyroid hormone-1 receptor) result in disorders involving transmembrane receptors. The pathogenic variants cause the receptors to become activated in the absence
of physiologic ligands, which accentuates normal receptor function of
negatively regulating bone growth. The pathogenic variants act by gain
of negative function. In the FGFR3 pathogenic variant group, in which
the clinical phenotypes range from severe to mild, the severity appears
to correlate with the extent to which the receptor is activated. PTHR1
and especially FGFR3 pathogenic variants tend to recur in unrelated
individuals (Table 737.1; see also Table 735.1).

FGFR3 CHONDRODYSPLASIA GROUP

The achondroplasia group represents a substantial percentage of
patients with chondrodysplasias and contains thanatophoric dysplasia
(TD), the most common lethal chondrodysplasia, with a birth prevalence of 1 in 35,000 births and achondroplasia, the most common nonlethal chondrodysplasia, with a birth prevalence of 1 in 15,000–25,000
births. Also in this group are severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN), hypochondroplasia,
and camptodactyly, tall stature, and hearing loss syndrome (CATSHL).
All five have pathogenic variants in a small number of locations in the
FGFR3 gene. There is a strong correlation between the pathogenic variant site and the clinical phenotype.

Thanatophoric Dysplasia

Table 737.1

 

TD manifests before or at birth. In the former situation, ultrasonographic examination in mid-­
gestation or later reveals a large
head and very short limbs; the pregnancy is often accompanied by
FGFR3 Chondrodysplasia Group

GROUP/NAME OF
DISORDER

INHERITANCE

OMIM

GENE

Thanatophoric dysplasia
type I (TD I)

AD

187600

FGFR3

Thanatophoric dysplasia
type II (TD II)

AD

187601

FGFR3

Severe achondroplasia
with developmental
delay and acanthosis
nigricans (SADDAN)

AD

616482

FGFR3

Achondroplasia

AD

100800

FGFR3

Hypochondroplasia

AD

146000

FGFR3

Camptodactyly, tall
stature, and hearing
loss syndrome
(CATSHL)

AD

610474

FGFR3

Please also refer to group 33 from Mortier et al nosology for craniosynostoses
syndromes linked to FGFR3 pathogenic variants, as well as LADD syndrome in group
41 for another FGFR3-­related phenotype.
OMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (omim.org).
From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE: Skeletal dysplasias. [Updated 2017 Jan 30]. In: De
Groot LJ, Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al. (eds). Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth,
MA, 2000, MDText.com, Inc. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/N
BK279130/.

polyhydramnios and premature delivery. Very short limbs, short
neck, long narrow thorax, and large head with midfacial hypoplasia
dominate the clinical phenotype at birth (Fig. 737.1). The cloverleaf
skull deformity known as kleeblattschädel is sometimes found. If the
affected fetus survives pregnancy, the newborn will have severe respiratory distress because of the small thorax. Although this distress can
be treated by intense respiratory care, the long-­term prognosis is poor.
Skeletal radiographs distinguish two slightly different forms called
TD I and TD II. In the more common TD I, radiographs show large
calvarium with a small cranial base, marked thinning and flattening
of vertebral bodies (platyspondyly) visualized best on lateral view,
very short ribs, severe hypoplasia of pelvic bones, and very short and
bowed tubular bones with flared metaphyses (Fig. 737.2). The femurs
are curved and shaped like a telephone receiver. TD II differs mainly in
that there are longer and straighter femurs.
The TD II clinical phenotype is associated with pathogenic variants
that map to codon 650 of FGFR3, causing the substitution of a lysine
with glutamic acid. This activates the tyrosine kinase activity of a receptor that transmits signals to intracellular pathways. The pathogenic
variant of the same lysine 650 to methionine is also associated with
a clinical phenotype intermediate between TD and achondroplasia,
referred to as SADDAN (severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans), where affected cases often do not
require ventilatory support and survive beyond infancy. Pathogenic
variants of the TD I phenotype mainly map to two regions in the extracellular domain of the receptor, where they substitute cysteine residues
for other amino acids. Free cysteine residues are thought to form disulfide bonds promoting dimerization of receptor molecules, leading to
activation and signal transmission. TD I and TD II typically present as
new pathogenic variants in offspring born to unaffected, average stature parents. The recurrence risk is low. Because the variant codons in
TD are pathogenic for unknown reasons and because of the theoretical
risk of germ cell mosaicism, parents are offered prenatal diagnosis for
subsequent pregnancies.

Achondroplasia

Achondroplasia is the prototype chondrodysplasia. It typically
manifests at birth with short limbs, a long narrow trunk, and a
large head with midfacial hypoplasia and prominent forehead
(Fig. 737.3). The limb shortening is greatest in the proximal segments
(rhizomelia), and the fingers often display a trident configuration.
Most joints are hyperextensible, but extension is restricted at the elbow.
A thoracolumbar gibbus is typically found in newborns but improves
as they start walking with no intervention in 90% of the cases. Birth
length may be slightly less than normal but often plots within the low-­
normal range.

Diagnosis

Skeletal radiographs confirm the diagnosis (Fig. 737.4; see also Fig.
737.3). The calvarial bones are large, whereas the cranial base and facial
bones are small. The vertebral pedicles are short throughout the spine
as noted on a lateral radiograph. The interpedicular distance, which
normally increases from the first to the fifth lumbar vertebra, decreases
in achondroplasia. The iliac bones are short and round, and the acetabular roofs are flat. The tubular bones are short with mildly irregular and
flared metaphyses. The fibula is disproportionately long compared with
the tibia, which is often bowed, causing genu varum.

Clinical Manifestations

Infants usually exhibit delayed motor milestones, often not walking
alone until 18-24 months. This is because of hypotonia and mechanical
difficulty balancing the large head on a normal-­sized trunk and short
extremities. Intelligence is normal unless central nervous system complications develop. As the child begins to walk, the gibbus usually gives
way to an exaggerated lumbar lordosis.
Infants and children with achondroplasia progressively fall below
normal standards for length and height. They can be plotted against
standards established for achondroplasia. Adult heights typically are
118-145 cm for men and 112-136 cm for women. C-­type natriuretic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4346 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

Fig. 737.1 Identical twins with type I thanatophoric dysplasia. Disproportionately large head, bell-­shaped chest, and micromelia. (From
Gilbert-­Barness E, Kapur RP, Oligny LL, Siebert JR, eds. Potter’s Pathology of the Fetus, Infant and Child, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2007.
Fig. 20-47.)

B

C

Fig. 737.3 Achondroplasia phenotype at different ages. A, Infant

Fig. 737.2 Thanatophoric dysplasia type I. Severe platyspondyly,

very short ribs, narrow thorax, short broad pelvis, large skull, very
short and bent long bones. (From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal dysplasias. [Updated 2017 Jan 30]. In De Groot LJ, Chrousos G,
Dungan K, et al., eds. Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth, MA, 2000,
MDText.com, Inc., Fig. 1. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/books/NBK279130/.)

peptide analogue (vosoritide), administered as a daily subcutaneous
injection is the first approved treatment for children ≥5 years of age
with achondroplasia; treatment with vosoritide produced an increase
of annual growth velocity with no significant side effect. In addition,
vosoritide maintains this annual growth velocity up to 2 years along
with an improvement in body segment proportion. Clinical trials are
underway to study other compounds such as soluble FGFR3 decoy
receptors, and tyrosine kinase inhibitors, which may restore bone
growth in achondroplasia based on studies in animal models. Other
possible future treatments of achondroplasia include fibroblast growth
factor aptamers and meclizine, which showed improvement of the
skeletal phenotype of the mutant mice. Surgical limb lengthening and
human growth hormone treatment have been used to increase height;
however, both are controversial.
Virtually all infants and children with achondroplasia have large
heads, although only a fraction have true hydrocephalus. Head circumference should be carefully monitored using standards developed for
achondroplasia, as should neurologic function in general. The spinal
canal is stenotic, and spinal cord compression can occur at the foramen
magnum and in the lumbar spine. The former usually occurs in infants
and small children and may be associated with hypotonia, failure to

with achondroplasia with macrocephaly, frontal bossing, midface hypoplasia, small chest, rhizomelic shortening of all the limbs, redundant
skinfolds, and extreme joint laxity. Note the trident hand with short fingers and abducted hips. B, Typical radiographic findings from a child
with achondroplasia. All of the tubular bones are short, but the fibula
is relatively long compared with the tibia. There is protrusion of the
epiphysis into the metaphysis of the distal femur, creating the chevron deformity, and—to a lesser extent—of the proximal tibia. The iliac
bones are rounded, the acetabular roof is horizontal, and the sacrosciatic notches are small. C, A 3-­yr-­old with achondroplasia with the
typical features shown in (A). Note that the redundant skinfolds are no
longer present and that joint laxity has improved. Rhizomelic shortening of the extremities is more pronounced and accompanied by tibial
bowing. (From Horton WA, Hall JG, Hecht JT. Achondroplasia. Lancet.
2007;370:162–172.)

thrive, quadriparesis, central and obstructive apnea, and sudden death.
Surgical correction may be required for severe stenosis. Lumbar spinal stenosis usually does not occur until early adulthood. Symptoms
include paresthesias, numbness, and claudication in the legs. Loss of
bladder and bowel control may be late complications. Bowing of the
legs is common in patients with achondroplasia and might need to be
corrected surgically. Other common problems include dental crowding, articulation difficulties, obesity, and frequent episodes of otitis
media, which can contribute to hearing loss.

Genetics

All patients with typical achondroplasia have pathogenic variants at
FGFR3 codon 380. This pathogenic variant is located in the transmembrane domain of the receptor and is thought to stabilize receptor dimers that enhance receptor signals, the consequences of which
inhibit linear bone growth. Achondroplasia behaves as an autosomal
dominant condition; most cases arise from a new pathogenic variant to
average stature parents.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 738 u Disorders Involving Ion Transporters

4347

irregular growth of vertebrae. Intelligence is normal, although there
may be hearing loss.
Jansen metaphyseal chondrodysplasia is caused by activating pathogenic variants of PTHR1. This G-­
protein–coupled transmembrane
receptor serves as a receptor for both parathyroid hormone and parathyroid hormone-­
related peptide. Signaling through this receptor
serves as a brake on the terminal differentiation of cartilage cells at a
critical step in bone growth. Because the pathogenic variants activate
the receptor, they enhance the braking effect and thereby slow bone
growth. In contrast, loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants of PTHR1 are
observed in Blomstrand chondrodysplasia, whose clinical features are
the mirror image of Jansen metaphyseal chondrodysplasia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 737.4 Achondroplasia. Small rounded iliac bones, horizon-

tal acetabula, decreasing interpediculate distance, normal vertebral
body height, short ribs. (From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal
dysplasias. [Updated 2017 Jan 30]. In De Groot LJ, Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al., eds. Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth, MA, 2000,
MDText.com, Inc., Fig. 2. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/books/NBK279130/.)

Because of the high frequency of achondroplasia among short stature skeletal dysplasias, it is relatively common for adults with achondroplasia to marry. Such couples have a 50% risk of transmitting their
condition, heterozygous achondroplasia, to each offspring, as well as a
25% risk of homozygous achondroplasia. The latter condition exhibits intermediate severity between TD and heterozygous achondroplasia
and is usually lethal in the newborn period and is often referred to as
“double dominant” inheritance. Prenatal diagnosis is available and has
been used to diagnose homozygous achondroplasia. Preimplantation
genetic testing can be used to identify double dominant pathogenic
variants.

Hypochondroplasia

Hypochondroplasia resembles achondroplasia but is milder. Usually, it
is not apparent until childhood, when mild short stature affecting the
limbs becomes evident. Children have a stocky build, disproportionately short extremities, and slight frontal bossing of the head. Learning disabilities may be more common in this condition. Radiographic
changes are mild and consistent with the mild achondroplastic phenotype. Complications are rare; in some patients, the condition is never
diagnosed. Adult heights range from 131-154.5 cm for men and 124138 cm for women. An FGFR3 pathogenic variant at codon 540 is the
most pathogenic variant found in patients with more severe hypochondroplasia. Genetic heterogeneity exists in hypochondroplasia; that is,
SHOX pathogenic variants are associated with a very similar clinical phenotype. Recombinant growth hormone therapy may enhance
growth and improve body disproportion but is still considered controversial with limited evidence of increased final adult height.

JANSEN METAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA

Jansen metaphyseal chondrodysplasia is a rare, dominantly inherited
chondrodysplasia characterized by severe shortening of limbs associated with an unusual facial appearance (see Chapter 735). Sometimes
it is accompanied by clubfoot and hypercalcemia with serum calcium
values of 13-15 mg/dL. At birth, a diagnosis can be made from these
clinical findings, and radiographs that show short tubular bones with
characteristic metaphyseal abnormalities that include flaring, irregular mineralization, fragmentation, and widening of the physeal space.
The epiphyses are normal. The joints become enlarged and limited in
mobility with age. Flexion contractures develop at the knees and hips,
producing a bent-­over posture. The spine can also be deformed by the

Chapter 738

Disorders Involving Ion
Transporters
Daniah Albokhari and Julie E. Hoover-­Fong
Five genes related to ion transporters have been reported to be involved
in skeletal dysplasia conditions, including the SLC39A13 gene causing
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, spondylodysplastic type, the SLCO2A1 gene
causing hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (OA), the SLC10A7 gene causing multiple joint dislocations with amelogenesis imperfecta, and the
SLC34A3 gene causing hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria
(HHRH). This chapter will focus on pathogenic variants in the sulfate
transporter gene (SLC26A2), also known as diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (DTDST), which is the most common ion transporter
gene causing sulphation disorders skeletal dysplasia. It encompasses a
spectrum of both lethal and nonlethal chondrodysplasia, including, in
order of decreasing severity, achondrogenesis type 1B, atelosteogenesis type II, diastrophic dysplasia, and a rare recessive form of multiple
epiphyseal dysplasia (rMED). The gene product sulfate transporter is
important to uptake sulfate ions into cells and is important for cartilage cells that add sulfate moieties to newly synthesized proteoglycans destined for cartilage extracellular matrix. Matrix proteoglycans
are responsible for many of the properties of cartilage that allow it to
serve as a template for skeletal development. The clinical manifestations result from defective sulfation of cartilage proteoglycans (see also
Table 735.1).
A number of pathogenic alleles have been found for the DTDST
gene; they variably disturb transporter function. The disorders are
recessive traits requiring the presence of bi-­allelic pathogenic variants.
The phenotype is determined by the combination of abnormal alleles
with some alleles present in more than one disorder.

Achondrogenesis Type 1B and Atelosteogenesis
Type 2

Achondrogenesis type 1B and atelosteogenesis type 2 are rare recessive
lethal chondrodysplasias. The most serious is achondrogenesis type
1B, which demonstrates a severe lack of skeletal development usually
detected in utero or after a miscarriage. The limbs are extremely short,
the head is soft, the thorax is narrow, and the abdomen protuberant.
Skeletal radiographs show poor to missing ossification of skull bones,
vertebral bodies, fibulas, and ankle bones. The pelvis is hypoplastic, and
the ribs are short and slightly thin. The femurs are short and exhibit a
trapezoid shape with irregular metaphyses.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4348 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

Fig. 738.2 Radiograph of hands in diastrophic dysplasia. The meta-

carpals and phalanges are irregular and short. The first metacarpal is
ovoid.

Fig. 738.1 Child with diastrophic dysplasia. The extremities are dra-

matically shortened (top). Clubfoot is commonly observed (middle left).
The fingers are short, especially the index finger; the thumb characteristically is proximally placed and has a hitchhiker appearance (middle
right). The upper helix of the ears becomes swollen 3-4 wk postnatally
(lower left), and this inflammation spontaneously resolves, leaving a
cauliflower deformity of the pinnae (lower right).

Infants with atelosteogenesis type II are stillborn or die soon after
birth; prematurity is common. They exhibit very short limbs, especially
the proximal segments with normal size head and midface hypoplasia.
Clubfoot and dislocations of the elbows and knees may be detected.
Hypoplasia of vertebral bodies, especially in the cervical and lumbar
spine, and hypoplastic ilia with flat acetabulum are found on radiographs. The femora and humeri are hypoplastic and display a club-­
shaped appearance. The distal limb bones, including the ulna and
fibula, are poorly ossified.
Both disorders have a 25% recurrence risk and are potentially detectable in utero by pathogenic variant analysis if the mutant alleles are
identified in the parents. Prenatal diagnosis is possible with fetal imaging and/or pathogenic variant testing, which is commercially available.

Diastrophic Dysplasia

Diastrophic dysplasia is a well-­
characterized disorder recognized
at birth by the presence of very short extremities, normal head size,
clubfoot, and short hands, with proximal displacement of the thumb
producing a hitchhiker appearance (Fig. 738.1). The hands are usually
deviated in an ulnar direction. Bony fusion of the metacarpophalangeal joints (symphalangism) is common, as is restricted movement of
many joints, including the hips, knees, and elbows. The external ears
often become inflamed soon after birth. The inflammation resolves

spontaneously but leaves the ears fibrotic and contracted (cauliflower
ear deformity). Many newborns have a cleft palate.
Radiographs reveal short and broad tubular bones with flared
metaphyses and flat, irregular epiphyses (Fig. 738.2). The capital femoral epiphyses are hypoplastic, and the femoral heads are broad. The
ulnas and fibulas are disproportionately short. Carpal centers may be
developmentally advanced with the first metacarpal typically ovoid,
and the metatarsals twisted medially. There may be vertebral abnormalities, including clefts of cervical vertebral lamina and narrowing of
the interpedicular distances in the lumbar spine.
Complications are primarily orthopedic and tend to be severe
and progressive, leading to joint contractures, spine deformity and
early onset OA. The clubfoot deformity in the newborn resists usual
treatments, and multiple corrective surgeries are common. Scoliosis
typically develops during early childhood. It often requires multiple
surgical procedures to control, and it sometimes compromises respiratory function in older children. Despite the orthopedic problems,
patients typically have normal intelligence, have normal life span, and
reach adult heights in the 105-130 cm range, depending on the severity of scoliosis. Growth curves are available for diastrophic dysplasia.
Respiratory insufficiency may present in neonates because of the small
rib cage and tracheal instability and collapsibility. In these cases, supportive measures such as mechanical ventilation may be required.
Cervical kyphosis is seen in most newborns, which improves spontaneously in childhood. However, some may experience severe cervical
kyphosis leading to spinal cord compression.
Some patients are mildly affected and exhibit slight short stature
and joint contractures, no clubfoot or cleft palate, and correspondingly
mild radiographic changes. The mild phenotype tends to recur within
families. The recurrence risk of this autosomal recessive condition is
25%. Ultrasonographic examination can be employed for prenatal
diagnosis, but if DTDST pathogenic variants can be identified in the
patients or parents, molecular genetic diagnosis is possible.

AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE MULTIPLE EPIPHYSEAL
DYSPLASIA

Although previously regarded as a multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, according to the new nosology, rMED is now classified among other sulfation
disorders. rMED typically presents during adolescence with the gradual
onset of hip and knee pain that might resemble rheumatoid arthritis.
Later on, patients present with hand, feet, and knee deformities and scoliosis. Fifty percent of individuals present during infancy with club feet
and external ear abnormalities. Stature is normal during childhood, but
final height might be slightly decreased compared with unaffected siblings and ranges from 150-180 cm. Radiographic findings include flat
epiphysis, mild brachydactyly, and double-­layered patella. Diagnosis is
clinical, based on presentation and radiologic findings, but molecular
confirmation is available with a detection rate over 90%. Management
includes physical therapy, pain control, and orthopedic interventions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 739 u Disorders Involving Transcription Factors 4349

Chapter 739

Disorders Involving
Transcription Factors
Julie E. Hoover-­Fong and Daniah Albokhari
Fig. 739.1 Campomelic dysplasia. Bell-­shaped thorax, hypoplastic
Transcription factors are proteins that control the transcription
of DNA into RNA to make proteins essential for cellular function.
Pathogenic variants in the genes that make transcription factors
can result in disease by “turning on” or “turning off ” downstream
genes to result in disease. Of the estimated 1,500 known transcription factors in humans, four are associated with well-­delineated
bone dysplasias. Campomelic dysplasia (CD), cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD), and SHOX gene-­related conditions are considered
dysplasias, whereas nail-­patella syndrome (NPS) is classified as a
dysostosis (meaning a skeletal disorder limited to individual bones
or group of bone rather than the entire skeleton, as in a skeletal
dysplasia) (see also Table 735.1).
Pathogenic variants in genes that encode transcription factors
that cause disease are SOX9, RUNX2 (CBFA1), SHOX, and LMX1B,
respectively. SOX9 is a member of the SOX family of transcription
factors related to the SRY (sex-­determining region of the Y chromosome) gene; RUNX2 (CBFA1) belongs to the runt family of transcription factor genes; SHOX is part of the homeobox gene family;
and LMX1B is part of the LIM homeodomain gene family. Each
results in a disorder caused by haploinsufficiency of the respective
gene products. CD, CCD, and NPS are all autosomal dominant conditions, whereas SHOX-­related conditions are inherited in a pseudoautosomal fashion.

scapula, bowed femurs, widely spaced ischial bones. (From Campeau
P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal dysplasias [Fig. 12]. [Updated 2017 Jan 30].
In: De Groot LJ, Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al., eds. Endotext [internet].
South Dartmouth, MA, 2000, MDText.com, Inc. Fig 12. Available at
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279130/.)

A

B

CAMPOMELIC DYSPLASIA

Campomelic dysplasia is apparent in newborn infants and characterized by short, bowed long bones (especially in the lower legs), respiratory distress, cervical spine anomalies, Pierre-­Robin sequence,
and variable involvement of the central nervous system, heart, and
kidneys. In some cases, femoral bowing is minimal (i.e., acampomelic campomelic dysplasia). Additionally, 75% of XY individuals
have some degree of gonadal dysgenesis that ranges from normal
female phenotype through ambiguous genitalia and lack of determination of testicular tissue with undervirilization. 46,XX individuals
have an expected female phenotype with normal ovarian differentiation. Therefore karyotype analysis is indicated in every female with
campomelia. These features are because of the role of SOX9 in the
differentiation of testicular tissue downstream of SRY. Compared
with SOX9 haploinsufficiency, duplications cause gonadal tissue to
differentiate into testicular tissue in 46,XX individuals, highlighting
the dosage sensitivity of SOX9 in gonadal differentiation. Radiographs confirm long bone bowing and often show hypoplasia of the
scapulae and pelvic bones (Fig. 739.1). Affected infants often die
of respiratory distress in the neonatal period because of tracheomalacia, small thoracic volume, and early scoliosis. Complications
in children and adolescents who survive include cervical instability, short stature with progressive kyphoscoliosis, recurrent apnea
and respiratory infections, hearing loss, and learning difficulties.
Because of a deficiency of gonadal differentiation, 46,XY individuals with female genitalia often present with absent thelarche and
primary amenorrhea. Pathogenic variant testing is commercially
available and has a >95% detection rate. Nearly all individuals with
CD represent a de novo pathogenic variant in SOX9.

C
Fig. 739.2 Features of cleidocranial dysplasia displayed. A, The fore-

head is bulky with a central depression, the eyes are widely spaced, and
the jaw is pointed. The clavicle is misshapen (arrow). B, Note patency
of the anterior fontanelle. C, Hyperdontia pantomogram of an affected
male showing supernumerary teeth. (From Roberts T, Stephen L, Beighton P. Cleidocranial dysplasia: a review of the dental, historical, and
practical implications with an overview of the South African experience.
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2013;115[1]:46–55. Figs.
1, 4, and 6.)

CLEIDOCRANIAL DYSPLASIA

Cleidocranial dysplasia can be recognized in infants because of
sloping shoulders, wide fontanelles, and prominent forehead. Birth
length is normal, but mild short stature and dental abnormalities
are evident during childhood (Fig. 739.2). The shoulders of patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4350 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders

A

C

B

Fig. 739.3 Nail-­patella syndrome. A, Adolescent showing nail hypoplasia, especially of thumbs, and displacement of small patellae. B, Two af-

fected children showing nail dysplasia. C, Incomplete extension of the elbows. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable
Patterns of Human Malformation, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2013. Fig. 1, p. 574.)

with CD can collapse to meet in the midline because of hypoplasia
or absence of the clavicles. Radiographs will reveal the abnormal
clavicles, delayed ossification of cranial bones with multiple ossification centers (Wormian bones), and delayed ossification of pelvic
bones. The anterior fontanelle is wide and may remain open into
adulthood. The course is relatively uncomplicated except for dislocations and variable diffuse joint pain (especially of the shoulders),
dental anomalies (e.g., supernumerary and/or retained primary
teeth) that require dental treatment, and risk of hearing loss because
of infections. Affected individuals are shorter than unaffected siblings and have an increased risk of genu valgum, pes planus, and
scoliosis. Diagnosis is based on clinical and radiographic presentation, but molecular confirmation is available with a detection rate
of >70%. The proportion of cases caused by de novo pathogenic
variants is high. Management includes prevention of ear infections,
speech therapy, dental, and orthopedic interventions as indicated.

including absence, hypoplasia, clefts, ridged, thin, or hypertropic
nails, all of which may worsen in severity moving in the ulnar to
radial direction. Elbow abnormalities include limitation of movement, cubits valgus, and pterygium. The patella can be hypoplastic
or absent (Fig. 739.3). Iliac horns project posterior-­laterally from
the center of the iliac bone. A total of 30% of patients have nephritis
that resembles chronic glomerulonephritis that presents with proteinuria with or without hematuria; 5% of cases progress to end-­
stage renal disease. There is an increased risk of glaucoma for NPS
patients. NPS is often inherited with 12% of cases being de novo.
Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation, and molecular confirmation is available with a 95% detection rate. Management includes
treatment of orthopedic complications, surveillance and treatment
of renal disease, and ophthalmologic follow-­up.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

SHOX GENE-­RELATED CONDITIONS

The SHOX gene is located on the pseudoautosomal region of the X
and Y chromosomes (i.e., Xp22.33/Yp11.32). Because of crossover
during meiotic replication, a SHOX variant can segregate on both
sex chromosomes, thereby allowing inheritance to occur from male
to male, male to female, female to female, and female to male (i.e.,
sex chromosome gene location while appearing to have autosomal
inheritance; pseudoautosomal). Haploinsufficiency of the SHOX
gene (i.e., loss of one copy of the gene) through deletion, single
nucleotide variant, or abnormal regulation of adjacent genes causes
Leri-­Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and idiopathic short stature
(ISS) and contributes to Turner syndrome features when included
in the absent X-­chromosome material. Features of LWD include
short stature, mesomelia, and Madelung deformity of the wrists.
ISS does not have other phenotypic features of an abnormal SHOX
gene other than short stature. This distinguishes ISS from Turner
syndrome in which the entire X chromosome is typically missing
in affected females, causing short stature, pubertal delay/absence,
cardiac anomalies, nuchal folds, and other anomalies. Growth hormone injections can provide effective treatment for short stature
associated with a SHOX gene abnormality.

Chapter 740

Osteopetrosis and Other
Disorders Involving
Defective Bone
Resorption
Julie E. Hoover-­Fong and Daniah Albokhari

NAIL-­PATELLA SYNDROME

Dysplasia of the nails, absence or hypoplasia of the patella, abnormalities of the elbow, and spurs or “horns” extending from the
iliac bones characterize NPS, also called osteo-­onychodysostosis.
Penetrance is high, but clinical presentation is extremely variable
with a wide spectrum of severity. Some patients present in early
childhood, whereas others are asymptomatic as adults. Nail abnormalities are almost universal with a wide variety of manifestations,

Bone dysplasias displaying increased bone density are rare. Osteopetrosis, which has many subtypes, pycnodysostosis, and dysosteosclerosis
are the principal members of this disease category. The clinical features
and complications of these conditions are the result of abnormal osteoclast formation and function, resulting in defective bone resorption
(Table 740.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 740 u Osteopetrosis and Other Disorders Involving Defective Bone Resorption 4351
Table 740.1  	 Osteopetrosis and Related Osteoclast Disorders
GROUP / DISORDER

INHERITANCE

GENE OR LOCUS

Osteopetrosis, neonatal or infantile form

AR

TCIRG, CLCN, SNX10

Osteopetrosis, infantile form, with nervous system
involvement

AR

OSTM1

Osteopetrosis, infantile form, osteoclast-­poor with
immunoglobulin deficiency

AR

TNFRSF11A

Osteopetrosis, intermediate form

AR

TCIRG1, TNFSF11, PLEKHM1, CLCN7

Osteopetrosis, late-­onset, dominant form

AD

CLCN7

Osteopetrosis with renal tubular acidosis

AR

CA2

Osteopetrosis with ectodermal dysplasia and immune
defect (OLEDAID)

XL

IKBKG

Osteopetrosis, moderate form

AR

SLC4A2

Osteopetrosis, moderate form with defective leucocyte
adhesion

AR

FERMT3, RASGRP2

Osteosclerotic metaphyseal dysplasia

AR

LRRK1

Pyknodysostosis

AR

CTSK

Dysosteosclerosis

AR

SLC29A3, TNFRSF11A

Dysosteosclerosis with degenerative encephalopathy and
brain malformation

AR

CSF1R

Data from Unger S, Ferreira CR, Mortier GR, et al. Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision. Am J Med Genet 2023;191A:1164-1209 (Table 1, Group 24, pp 1184-1185).

OSTEOPETROSIS

The term osteopetrosis derives from the Greek root “osteo,” meaning bone, and “petrosis,” meaning stone. Osteopetrosis is marked
by increased bone mass caused by abnormal osteoclast formation
or function. The dense bone in osteopetrosis invades the marrow
space, causing anemia and pancytopenia, and impinges on nerves
traversing cranial and other skeletal foramina, causing deafness,
blindness, and palsies. Although the skeleton is dense in osteopetrosis, the bone quality is poor and may be prone to fracture because
of imbalanced bone turnover.
To date, genes known to cause osteopetrosis include: CLCN7,
TCIRG1, OSTM1, SNX10, CA2, PLEKHM1, TNFRSF11A, TNFSF11,
IKBKG, SLC4A2, FERMT3, and RASGRP2. Pathogenic variants in
CLCN7, TCIRG1, OSTM1, SNX10, CA2, and PLEKHM1 prevent
normal osteoclast function to resorb bone while TNFRSF11A,
TNFSF11 encode proteins (RANK and RANKL, respectively) that
are essential to the formation of osteoclasts. Pathogenic variants
in CLCN7 may cause disease in an autosomal dominant or recessive fashion and variants in IKBKG are X-linked, whereas all others here cause recessive osteopetrosis. CLCN7-­related autosomal
dominant osteopetrosis occurs in 1 in 20,000 births, while collectively, the recessive form of osteopetrosis occurs in 1 in 250,000
births. Pathogenic variants in CLCN7 are the most common cause
of osteopetrosis overall, causing a wide spectrum of disease severity
ranging from late childhood/adolescent-­onset autosomal dominant
osteopetrosis II (ADOII) to more involved intermediate autosomal
osteopetrosis (IAO) to the most severe autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (ARO) with onset at birth. In general, the other recessive
forms of osteopetrosis are also severe, usually detected in infancy
because of macrocephaly, hepatosplenomegaly, deafness, blindness,
and severe anemia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most of the manifestations of osteopetrosis are because of failure to
remodel growing bones. This leads to narrowing of cranial nerve
foramina and encroachment on marrow spaces, which results in
secondary complications, such as optic and facial nerve dysfunction, and anemia accompanied by compensatory extramedullary
hematopoiesis in the liver and spleen (Table 740.2). The unusually
dense bones are weak, leading to increased risk of fractures.
In the severe recessive infancy-­onset form, patients present with
macrocephaly, hepatosplenomegaly, deafness, blindness, and severe
anemia. Radiographs reveal diffuse bone sclerosis and hypocalcemia may be present. Later radiographs show the characteristic
bone-­within-­bone appearance throughout the skeleton (Figs. 740.1
and 740.2). With time, infants typically fail to thrive and show psychomotor delay and worsening of cranial neuropathies and anemia.
Dental problems, osteomyelitis of the mandible, and pathologic
fractures are common. The most severely affected patients die during infancy; less severely affected patients rarely survive beyond the
second decade but often only after treatment with bone marrow
transplant. Those who survive beyond infancy usually have learning disabilities but might have normal intelligence despite hearing
and vision loss.
The autosomal dominant form of osteopetrosis (Albers-­Schönberg
disease, osteopetrosis tarda, or marble bone disease) usually manifests during childhood or adolescence with fractures and mild anemia
and, less often, as cranial nerve dysfunction, dental abnormalities, or
osteomyelitis of the mandible. Skeletal radiographs reveal a generalized increase in bone density and clubbing of metaphyses. Alternating
lucent and dense bands produce a sandwich appearance to vertebral
bodies. The radiographic changes are sometimes incidental findings in
otherwise asymptomatic adolescents and adults.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4352 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 740.2  	 Complications of Osteopetrosis by Subspeciality
SUBSPECIALTY

COMPLICATION

Endocrinology

Osteopetrorickets
Hypocalcemia

Ophthalmology

Papilledema
Ptosis
Strabismus
Paralysis of extraocular muscles
Optic nerve atrophy
Exophthalmos
Nystagmus
Retinal degeneration
Tearing (from nasolacrimal duct obstruction)

Dentistry

Delay/failure of tooth eruption
Malformed crowns/roots
Periodontal ligament defects
Odontoma
Tooth agenesis
Enamel hypoplasia
Tooth decay/caries
Thickened lamina dura
Osteomyelitis (most frequently of the mandible)

Orthopedics

Skeletal deformities
Scoliosis
Spondylolisthesis
Fractures (particularly of the long bones)
Delayed union/nonunion
Degenerative arthritis
Spondylolysis

Neurology/ neurosurgery

Compressive cranial neuropathies (often optic and facial nerves, but can involve any of cranial nerves I–VIII)
Increased intracranial pressure
Craniosynostosis
Arnold–Chiari I malformation
Neuromuscular scoliosis
Developmental delay/regression, seizures (OSTM1 mutation)
Calcifications of the basal ganglia, thalami (CAII deficiency)
Hydrocephalus
Cerebrovascular stenosis/occlusion
Acquired encephalocele

Otolaryngology

Conductive hearing loss
Recurrent otitis media
Chronic congestion (poorly pneumatized sinuses)
Rhinorrhea
Choanal atresia
Rhinosinusitis
Obstructive sleep apnea

Hematology

Thrombocytopenia with bleeding
Anemia
Leukopenia with frequent infections
Hepatosplenomegaly
Transfusion dependence

Nephrology

Renal tubular acidosis, nephrocalcinosis, and nephrolithiasis (CAII deficiency)

From Wu CC, Econs MJ, DiMeglio LA, et al. Diagnosis and management of osteopetrosis: consensus guidelines from the osteopetrosis working group. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2017;102(9):3111-3123 (Table 2, p. 3116).

TREATMENT

Most of the bone manifestations in severe osteopetrosis caused by
intrinsic osteoclast defects can be prevented or reversed by hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), if carried out before
development of irreversible secondary complications, such as visual
impairment. RANKL replacement therapy may be useful in patients

with RANKL deficiency caused by TNFSF11 bi-­allelic pathogenic
variants, who do not benefit from HSCT. Interferon-γ is used to
delay progression in patients with severe malignant infantile osteopetrosis. Symptomatic care, such as dental care, transfusions for
anemia, and antibiotic treatment of infections, is important for
patients who survive infancy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 740 u Osteopetrosis and Other Disorders Involving Defective Bone Resorption 4353

Fig. 740.1 Osteopetrosis. Thick dense bones, alternating bands of sclerosis, and normal density bone in long bones, rugger jersey spine, dense
base of skull. (From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal dysplasias. [Updated 2017, Jan 30]. In De Groot LJ, Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al, eds.
Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth, MA, 2000, MDText.com, Inc. Fig. 14. Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK279130/.)

management of dental problems and fractures. Although some
patients have a persistently open anterior fontanelle (i.e., even into
adulthood), others with pycnodysostosis have craniosynostosis.
The overall prognosis for these patients is generally good, and they
typically reach 130-150 cm in height. Skeletal radiographs show a
generalized increase in bone density. In contrast to many disorders
in this group, the metaphyses are normal. Other changes include
wide sutures and Wormian bones in the skull, a small mandible,
and osteolysis of the distal phalanges. Homozygous or compound
heterozygous missense, nonsense, insertions, deletions, and splicing variants have been described in the gene CTSK, which encodes
cathepsin K. This is a lysosomal protease that is involved in bone
resorption and remodeling. CTSK is highly expressed in osteoclasts,
and pathogenic variants prevent degradation of bone matrix proteins (e.g., type I and II collagen), which is necessary for normal
bone remodeling and resorption. Growth hormone therapy has
been used to improve growth.
Fig. 740.2 Osteopetrosis. Right-­
hand radiograph obtained at 2

weeks of age. Note metaphyseal lucent bands in the distal ulna and
radius (arrows) and short tubular bones. (From Stark Z, Savarirayan R.
Osteopetrosis. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009;4:5.)

PYCNODYSOSTOSIS AND DYSOSTEOSCLEROSIS
Pycnodysostosis

An autosomal recessive bone dysplasia related to osteopetrosis,
pycnodysostosis manifests in early childhood with short limbs,
characteristic facies, an open anterior fontanel, a large skull with
frontal and occipital bossing, acroosteolysis, and dental abnormalities. The hands and feet are short and broad, and the nails may be
dysplastic. The sclerae may be blue. Minimal trauma often leads
to fractures. Treatment is symptomatic and focused mainly on the

Dysosteosclerosis

Dysosteosclerosis is another rare bone disease with generalized
increased bone density plus widening of tubular bones and vertebral
flattening. It is caused by pathogenic variants in three genes: SLC9A3,
CSF1R, and TNFRSF11A (which is allelic with osteopetrosis). Affected
individuals have short stature and cranial nerve involvement caused
by impingement of the foramina by the abnormally dense bone. No
disease-­specific treatment has been developed.
There are several other conditions marked by hyperostotic and fragile bones but also other anomalies or conditions distinguishing them
from osteopetrosis, pycnodysostosis, and dysosteosclerosis (Table
740.3).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4354 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 740.3  Other Conditions with Hyperostotic Fragile Bones
GENE

DISORDER

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS

FEATURES DISTINGUISHING THIS
DISORDER FROM CLCN7-­RELATED ARO

CA2

ARO w/renal tubular acidosis (RTA)
(OMIM 259730)

Generalized osteosclerosis. Cerebral
calcifications are typical and may be
associated with ID.

Onset of ARO with RTA is usually later
than in infantile malignant form of ARO
and disease course is milder.

OSTM1

OSTM1-­related ARO
(OMIM 259720)

∼4% of ARO is caused by pathogenic
variants in OSTM1. Extremely severe form
of ARO with CNS involvement that is
indistinguishable from most severe forms
of CLCN7-­related ARO.

OSTM1-­related ARO is frequently
associated with structural brain
anomalies.

PLEKHM1

PLEKHM1-­related ARO
(OMIM 611497)

Very rare, can look like ADOII.

PLEKHM1-­related ARO appears to be
very mild and can regress with ↑ age.
One person with PLEKHM1-­related ARO
caused by a heterozygous pathogenic
variant has been described.

SNX10

SNX10-­related ARO
(OMIM 615085)

∼4% of ARO is caused by pathogenic variants SNX10-­related ARO appears to be slightly
in SNX10; in particular, “Västerbottenian
less severe than CLCN7-­related ARO.
osteopetrosis” is caused by SNX10
pathogenic variants. Loss of vision, anemia,
and bone fragility are frequently observed,
warranting use of HSCT.

TCIRG1

TCIRG1-­related ARO
(OMIM 259700)

>50% of ARO is caused by pathogenic
variants in TCIRG1.

Higher frequency of neurodevelopmental
delay and seizures in CLCN7-­related
ARO than in TCIRG1-­related ARO.
Noncoding TCIRG1 variants can cause
milder phenotype that resembles ADOII.

TNFRSF11A

Osteoclast-­poor ARO
(OMIM 612301)

TNFSF11

Osteoclast-­poor ARO
(OMIM 259710)

Characterized by onset within first year of
life and typical ARO manifestations.
Investigation of bone biopsy is prerequisite
for reliable diagnosis.

TNFSF11 pathogenic variants cause a
slight T-­cell defect, and TNFRSF11A
pathogenic variants can lead to
hypogammaglobulinemia similar to a
common variable immune deficiency.
It is crucial to rule out TNFSF11-­ and
TNFRSF11A-­related ARO, as HSCT is not
successful in these persons.

ADOII, Autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type II; ARO, autosomal recessive osteopetrosis; CNS, central nervous system; ID, intellectual disability; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation
From Sobacchi C, Villa A, Schulz A, Kornak U. CLCN7-­Related Osteopetrosis. 2007 Feb 12 [updated 2022 Jan 20]. In: Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Pagon RA, et al., eds. GeneReviews
[Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993–2022.

Chapter 741

Other Inherited Disorders
of Skeletal Development
Julie E. Hoover-­Fong and Daniah Albokhari
Advances in understanding have led to the delineation of the genetic
basis of disorders that were previously poorly understood. Some of
these conditions are now classified into gene families based on their
molecular and clinical findings, as outlined in the most recent nosology and classification of genetic skeletal disorders and previous chapters. Additional important skeletal dysplasias that do not fit into one of
the previous categories are discussed in this chapter.

ELLIS-­VAN CREVELD SYNDROME

The Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome, also known as chondroectodermal
dysplasia, is a skeletal and an ectodermal dysplasia. This skeletal dysplasia presents at birth with short limbs, especially the middle and

distal segments, accompanied by postaxial polydactyly of the hands
and sometimes of the feet (Fig. 741.1). Nail dysplasia and dental anomalies (including neonatal, absent, premature loss of teeth, and upper
lip defects) constitute the ectodermal dysplasia. Additional common
manifestations include atrial septal defects and other congenital heart
defects.
Skeletal radiographs reveal short tubular bones with clubbed ends,
especially the proximal tibia and ulna (Fig. 741.2). Carpal bones display extra ossification centers and fusion; cone-­shaped epiphyses are
evident in the hands. A bony spur is often noted above the medial
aspect of the acetabulum.
Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition
that occurs with increased frequency in the Amish and Finnish
founder populations than in the general population. Pathogenic
variants have been identified in one of two genes, EVC (EVC1) or
EVC2 (LIMBIN), which map in a head-­to-­head configuration to
chromosome 4p. Disease-­causing variants of EVC2 are detected in
the allelic condition Weyers acrofacial dysostosis. EVC and EVC2
proteins are thought to influence hedgehog signaling in cilia by constitutively associating in a ringlike pattern in the ciliary transition
zone and transducing extracellular signals to the nucleus via hedgehog signaling. Fgf18 may also play a significant role. This disorder
is classified under the ciliopathies with major skeletal involvement
(see Chapter 101.3).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 741 u Other Inherited Disorders of Skeletal Development

A

B

Fig. 741.1 A, Ellis-­van Creveld syndrome in a young female. Note

short stature, joint contractures at the elbows, and marked genu valgum. B, Multiple digits (polydactyly) in a different patient with Ellis-­van
Creveld syndrome. (A from Zipes DP, Libby P, Bonow R, Braunwald E,
eds. Braunwald’s Heart Disease: a textbook of cardiovascular medicine,
7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004. Fig 70.6; B from Beerman
LB, Kreutzer J, Allada V. Cardiology. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk
AJ, eds. Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2012. Fig 5.6.)

Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy, or Jeune syndrome, is an autosomal recessive chondrodysplasia. Newborn infants present with a long,
narrow thorax and respiratory insufficiency associated with pulmonary hypoplasia. Neonates often die. Other neonatal manifestations
include slightly short limbs and postaxial polydactyly. This condition
results from a disturbance of primary cilia, most often from pathogenic variants of the gene encoding cytoplasmic dynein 2 heavy chain
1 (DYNC2H1). This disorder is classified under ciliopathies with major
skeletal involvement (see Chapter 101.3).
Skeletal radiographs show very short ribs with anterior expansion.
Tubular limb bones are short with bulbous ends; cone-­shaped epiphyses occur in hand bones. The iliac bones are short and square with a
spur above the medial aspect of the acetabulum (Fig. 741.3).
If infants survive the neonatal period, respiratory function usually improves as the rib cage grows. Surgery that produces lateral
thoracic expansion improves rib growth and enhances chest wall
dimensions. Progressive renal dysfunction often develops during
childhood. Intestinal malabsorption and hepatic dysfunction have
also been reported.

SHORT-­RIB POLYDACTYLY SYNDROMES

These conditions, which share the clinical features of constricted
thoracic cage, short ribs, polydactyly, very short extremities, lethality during the newborn period and autosomal recessive inheritance.
Pathogenic variants that map to cilia-­
related genes—DYNC2H1,
IFT80, IFT81, WDR34, WDR60, DYNC2LI1, NEK1, IFT122, WDR19,
INTU, TRAF3IP1—are found in this group of disorders.

CARTILAGE-­HAIR HYPOPLASIA-­ANAUXETIC
SPECTRUM DISORDERS

Fig. 741.2 Radiograph of lower extremities in Ellis-­van Creveld syn-

drome. Tubular bones are short, and proximal fibula is short. Ossification is retarded in lateral tibia epiphyses, causing a knock-­knee
deformity.

Approximately 30% of patients die of cardiac or respiratory problems during infancy. Life span is otherwise normal; adult heights range
from 119-161 cm.

ASPHYXIATING THORACIC DYSTROPHY
See also Chapter 467.3.

4355

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia (CHH), also known as metaphyseal chondrodysplasia–McKusick type, is part of a spectrum of disorders with
metaphyseal involvement that includes metaphyseal dysplasia without
hypotrichosis and anauxetic dysplasia. All disorders are characterized
by severe disproportionate short stature, which is usually recognized
at birth; the short limbs can lead to prenatal detection. They all show
autosomal recessive inheritance and are caused by pathogenic variants
in RMRP, a gene coding for a large untranslated RNA component of an
enzyme complex involved in processing mitochondrial RNA. Loss of
this gene product interferes with processing of both messenger RNA
and ribosomal RNA and correlates with the extent of bone dysplasia,
whereas loss of messenger RNA processing correlates with the degree
of hair hypoplasia, immunodeficiency, and hematologic abnormality.
Molecular testing confirms the diagnosis, and prenatal diagnosis is
available if the pathogenic variant is identified either in the patient or
the parents.
CHH is recognized during the second year because of growth deficiency affecting the limbs, accompanied by flaring of the lower rib cage,
a prominent sternum, and bowing of the legs. The hands and feet are
short, and the fingers are very short with extreme ligamentous laxity.
The hair is thin, sparse, and light colored; the nails are hypoplastic; and
the skin can be hypopigmented.
Radiographs show short tubular bones with flared, irregularly mineralized, and cupped metaphyses (Fig. 741.4). The knees are more
affected than are the hips, and the fibula is disproportionately longer
than the tibia. The metacarpals and phalanges are short and broad. Spinal radiographs reveal mild platyspondyly.
Nonskeletal manifestations associated with CHH include immunodeficiency (T-­cell abnormalities, neutropenia, leukopenia, and susceptibility to varicella zoster virus infections; children also may have
complications from smallpox and polio vaccinations), malabsorption,
celiac disease, and Hirschsprung disease. Adults are at risk for malignancy, especially non-­Hodgkin lymphoma and skin tumors. Adult
height ranges from 107-157 cm.
The highest birth prevalence is in the Amish and Finnish populations because of a founder effect. Carrier frequency in the Amish
is 1:19 with 1 per 1,300 births affected compared to a carrier frequency of 1:76 and 1 per 23,000 births affected in Finland. The
exact prevalence in the general population is not known, but CHH

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4356 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
is relatively rare. However, two allelic conditions, metaphyseal dysplasia without hypotrichosis and anauxetic dysplasia, expand the
phenotypic spectrum. Children with a growth disorder and abnormal hair should be evaluated for RMRP pathogenic variants.

TRPV4-­SPECTRUM DISORDERS

Pathogenic variants in TRPV4 cause a spectrum of conditions
including metatropic dysplasia, spondylometaphyseal dysplasia
(SMD), Kozlowski type, brachyolmia, and familial digital arthropathy with brachydactyly. Metatropic dysplasia and SMD, Kozlowski
type are expanded on next. Brachyolmia is dominated by progressive scoliosis and platyspondyly on x-­rays and familial digital
arthropathy with brachydactyly, which is characterized by deforming painful osteoarthritis of the interphalangeal, metacarpophalangeal, and metatarsophalangeal joints starting after the first decade
of life. The rest of the skeleton is unaffected in this condition. It
should also be noted that pathogenic variants in TRPV4 are also
responsible for a large group of neuromuscular disorders including Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease type 2C, scapuloperoneal spinal
muscular atrophy, and congenital distal spinal muscular atrophy.
Though there is considerable overlap of the phenotypes of the conditions within the skeletal group and the neuromuscular group,
there are only rare instances currently recognized of individual
patients with both features.

progressive musculoskeletal deformities. Adult heights range from
110-120 cm.
Skeletal radiographs show characteristic changes dominated by
severe platyspondyly and short tubular bones with expanded and
deformed metaphyses that exhibit a dumbbell appearance (Fig. 741.5).
The pelvic bones are hypoplastic and exhibit a halberd appearance
because of a small sacrosciatic notch and a notch above the lateral margin of the acetabulum.

METATROPIC DYSPLASIA

Metatropic dysplasia is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from heterozygous pathogenic variants of transient receptor
potential vanilloid family 4 (TRPV4), which encodes a calcium-­
permeable cation channel. Newborn infants present with a long
narrow trunk and short extremities. A tail-­like appendage sometimes extends from the base of the spine. Odontoid hypoplasia is
common and may be associated with cervical instability. Kyphoscoliosis appears in late infancy and progresses through childhood,
often becoming severe enough to compromise cardiopulmonary
function. The joints are large and become progressively restricted
in mobility, except in the hands. Contractures often develop in
the hips and knees during childhood. Although severely affected
infants can die at a young age from respiratory failure, patients usually survive, although they can become disabled as adults from the

Fig. 741.4 Radiograph of lower extremities in cartilage-­hair hypoplasia. The tubular bones are short, and the metaphyses are flared and
irregular. The fibula is disproportionately long compared with the tibia.
The femoral necks are short.

Fig. 741.3 Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy. Short ribs, long and narrow chest, small pelvis, trident acetabula, no platyspondyly (helps differentiate
from thanatophoric dysplasia), cystic renal disease. (From Campeau P, Schlesinger AE. Skeletal dysplasias. [Updated 2017 Jan 30]. In: De Groot LJ,
Chrousos G, Dungan K, et al., eds. Endotext [internet]. South Dartmouth, MA, 2000, MDText.com, Inc., Fig 6. Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.n
ih.gov/books/NBK279130/)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 741 u Other Inherited Disorders of Skeletal Development
SPONDYLOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA,
KOZLOWSKI TYPE

Kozlowski type of spondylometaphyseal dysplasia is an autosomal
dominant allelic disorder to metatropic dysplasia caused by TRPV4
variants.
Kozlowski type of spondylometaphyseal dysplasia manifests in early
childhood with mild short stature involving mostly the trunk and a
waddling gait. The hands and feet may be short and stubby. Radiographs show flattening of vertebral bodies. The metaphyses of tubular
bones are widened and irregularly mineralized, especially at the proximal femur. The pelvic bones manifest mild hypoplasia. Scoliosis can
develop during adolescence. The disorder is otherwise uncomplicated,
and manifestations are limited to the skeleton. Adults reach heights of
130-150 cm.

DISORDERS INVOLVING FILAMINS

Pathogenic variants of genes encoding filamin A and filamin B proteins
have been detected in diverse disorders of skeletal development: filamin A pathogenic variants in otopalatodigital syndromes type 1 and 2,
frontometaphyseal dysplasia, Melnick-­Needles syndrome and terminal
osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects and filamin B pathogenic
variants in Larsen syndrome and perinatal lethal atelosteogenesis types

A

B

Fig. 741.5 A, Radiograph of the lateral thoracolumbar spine in metatropic dysplasia showing severe platyspondyly. B, Radiograph of lower
extremities in metatropic dysplasia showing short tubular bones with
widened metaphyses. The femurs have a dumbbell appearance.

4357

1 and 3, spondylo-­carpal-­tarsal dysplasia and Boomerang dysplasia.
Filamins functionally connect extracellular to intracellular structural
proteins, thereby linking cells to their local microenvironment, which
is essential for skeletal development and growth.

JUVENILE OSTEOCHONDROSES

The juvenile osteochondroses are a heterogeneous group of disorders in which regional disturbances in bone growth cause noninflammatory arthropathies. Table 741.1 summarizes the juvenile
osteochondroses. Some have localized pain and tenderness (Freiberg disease, Osgood-­S chlatter disease [see Chapter 718.4], osteochondritis dissecans [see Chapter 718.3]), whereas others present
with painless limitation of joint movement (Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes
disease [see Chapter 719.3], Scheuermann disease [see Chapter
720.4]). Bone growth may be disrupted, leading to deformities. The
diagnosis is usually confirmed radiographically, and treatment is
symptomatic. The pathogenesis of these disorders is believed to
involve ischemic necrosis of primary and secondary ossification
centers. Although familial forms have been reported, these disorders usually occur sporadically.

CAFFEY DISEASE (INFANTILE CORTICAL
HYPEROSTOSIS)

This is a rare disorder of unknown etiology characterized by cortical hyperostosis with inflammation of the contiguous fascia and
muscle. It is often sporadic, but both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive forms have been reported. Pathogenic variants in
FAM111A and TBCE have been identified in the autosomal dominant
and recessive forms, respectively. Sanjad-Sakati syndrome (hypoparathyroidism, intellectual disability, dysmorphism) is also caused
by pathogenic variants in TBCE. Caffey dysplasia is classified in the
slender bone dysplasia group.
Prenatal and more often postnatal onsets have been described.
Prenatal onset may be mild (autosomal dominant) or severe (autosomal recessive). Severe prenatal disease is characterized by typical
bone lesions, polyhydramnios, hydrops fetalis, severe respiratory
distress, prematurity, and high mortality. Onset in infancy (younger
than 6 months; average: 10 weeks) is most common; manifestations
include the sudden onset of irritability, swelling of contiguous soft
tissue that precedes the cortical thickening of the underlying bones,
fever, and anorexia. The swelling is painful with a woodlike induration but with minimal warmth or redness; suppuration is absent.
There are unpredictable remissions and relapses; an episode can last
2 weeks to 3 months. The most common bones involved include the
mandible (75%) (Fig. 741.6), the clavicle, and the ulna. If swelling is
not prominent or visible, the diagnosis might not be evident.
Laboratory features include elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and serum alkaline phosphatase as well as, in some
patients, increased serum prostaglandin E levels. There may be

Table 741.1  Juvenile Osteochondroses
EPONYM

AFFECTED REGION

AGE AT PRESENTATION

Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease

Capital femoral epiphysis

3-12 yr

Osgood-­Schlatter disease

Tibial tubercle

10-16 yr

Sever disease

Os calcaneus

6-10 yr

Freiberg disease

Head of second metatarsal

10-14 yr

Scheuermann disease

Vertebral bodies

Adolescence

Blount disease

Medial aspect of proximal tibial epiphysis

Infancy or adolescence

Osteochondritis dissecans

Subchondral regions of knee, hip, elbow, and ankle

Adolescence

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4358 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
thrombocytosis and anemia. The radiographic features include
soft tissue swelling and calcification and cortical hyperostosis (Fig.
741.7). All bones may be affected except the phalanges or vertebral
bodies. The differential diagnosis includes other causes of hyperostosis such as chronic vitamin A intoxication, prolonged prostaglandin E infusion in children with ductal dependent congenital heart
disease, primary bone tumors, and scurvy.
Complications are unusual but include pseudoparalysis with limb
or scapula involvement, pleural effusions (rib), torticollis (clavicle),
mandibular asymmetry, bone fusion (ribs or ulna and radius), and
bone angulation deformities (common with severe prenatal onset).
Treatment includes indomethacin and prednisone (if there is a poor
response to indomethacin).

FIBRODYSPLASIA OSSIFICANS PROGRESSIVA

Fig. 741.6 Facies in infantile cortical hyperostosis. In almost all cases,

the changes have appeared before the fifth month of life. Unilateral
swelling of the left cheek and left side of the jaw in an infant 12 weeks
of age. (From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 11th
ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2008.)

A

B

Fig. 741.7 A, Radiograph of a 5-­mo-­old infant showing hyperostosis

of the mandible. B, Radiograph of a 5-­mo-­old infant showing hyperostosis of both legs. (From Kamoun-­Goldrat A, le Merrer M. Infantile
cortical hyperostosis [Caffey disease]: a review. J Oral Maxillofac Surg.
2008;66:2145–2150. Figs. 1 and 2.)

Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare and severely
disabling disorder characterized by progressive extraskeletal heterotopic bone formation in soft connective tissues including muscles,
tendons, ligaments, fascia, and aponeuroses. With the exception of
deformity of the large toes, infants are normal at birth. Episodes of
painful soft tissue swelling with inflammation usually begin in early
childhood initially involving the upper back and neck, and later the
entire trunk and extremities. Repeated episodes (flare-­ups) slowly
transform the soft tissues into bands or plates of bone that span
joints and progressively limit movement and mobility. Episodes
are often triggered by injury, intramuscular injections, and viral
infection. Most patients are wheelchair bound by their late teens.
The average life span is approximately 40 years, with death usually
resulting from complications of thoracic insufficiency.
FOP results from heterozygous activating pathogenic variants of
the gene (ACVR1) encoding the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
type I receptor, activin A receptor type I (ALK2). Patients with classic FOP have the same missense ACVR1 pathogenic variant, which
enhances BMP signaling, which, in turn, induces inflammation and
aberrant endochondral ossification through mechanisms that are
poorly understood. Environmental factors, such as injury, play an
important role in triggering these events. ACVR1 pathogenic variants usually occur sporadically, but autosomal dominant transmission has rarely been observed. FOP is classified in the disorganized
development of skeletal components group.
There is currently no definitive treatment for FOP. Supportive
care includes avoidance of injury-­prone physical activities, intramuscular injections including immunizations, and overstretching
of the jaw during dental procedures. Corticosteroids and other anti­
inflammatory agents reduce inflammation and pain during flare-­
ups but are unable to prevent heterotopic bone formation. Studies
in FOP animal models suggest that BMP type I kinase inhibitors and
retinoic acid receptor γ agonists, which block chondrogenesis—the
initial step in endochondral ossification—may be useful therapies
in the future. An animal FOP study has indicated that mutant ALK2
responds to activin A, induces canonical BMP signaling, and leads
to heterotopic bone formation, providing an additional possible
therapeutic target. The retinoic acid receptor γ agonist palovarotene
was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in 2023 for
treatment of FOP for females ages 8 years and older and for males
ages 10 years and older.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 742 u Osteogenesis Imperfecta 4359

Chapter 742

PATHOGENESIS

Structural or quantitative defects in type I collagen cause the full clinical spectrum of OI (types I-­IV). Defects in processing either the N-­or
C-­terminal propeptides of type I collagen cause distinctive bone fragility syndromes. Type I collagen is the primary component of the extracellular matrix of bone and skin. Between 15% and 20% of patients
clinically indistinguishable from OI do not have a molecular defect
in type I collagen. These cases are typically caused by defects in genes
whose protein products interact with type I collagen. One group of
patients has overmodified collagen, with similar biochemical findings
to those with collagen structural defects and severe or lethal OI bone
dysplasia. These cases are caused by recessive null pathogenic variants
in any of the three components of the collagen prolyl 3-­hydroxylation
complex, prolyl 3-­hydroxylase 1 (encoded by LEPRE1) or its associated
protein, CRTAP, or cyclophilin B (CyPB, encoded by PPIB). A second
set of cases without collagen defects have biochemically normal collagen. Defects in IFITM5 and SERPINF1 account for defects in mineralization in types V and VI OI, while pathogenic variants in SERPINH1,
encoding the collagen chaperone HSP47, and FKBP10, encoding the
peptidyl-­prolyl cis-­trans isomerase FKBP65, cause types X and XI
OI, respectively. Rare pathogenic variants in BMP1, the enzyme that
processes the C-­propeptide of type I collagen, also cause a recessive
form of OI (type XIII). The newest set of genes added to the recessive OI causative panel (SP7, type XII OI; TMEM38B, type XIV OI;
WNT1, type XV OI; CREB3L1, type XVI OI, SPARC, type XVII OI,
and MBTPS2, type XVIII OI) are not only involved in osteoblast differentiation but also affect collagen synthesis and cross linking. There
are currently very few individuals with OI whose genetic defect is not
in a known causative gene.

Type I collagen is a heterotrimer composed of two α1(I) chains and one
α2(I) chain. The chains are synthesized as procollagen molecules with
short globular propeptide extensions on both ends of the central helical domain. The helical domain is composed of uninterrupted repeats
of the sequence Gly-­X-­Y, where Gly is glycine, X is often proline, and
Y is often hydroxyproline. The presence of glycine at every third residue is crucial to helix formation because its small side chain can be
accommodated in the interior of the helix. The chains are assembled
into trimers at their carboxyl ends, and helix formation then proceeds
linearly in a carboxyl to amino direction. Concomitant with helix
assembly and formation, helical proline and lysine residues are hydroxylated by prolyl 4-­hydroxylase and lysyl hydroxylase 1, and some of the
hydroxylysine residues are subsequently glycosylated. After secretion,
the propeptides are cleaved in the pericellular space by specific N-­and
C-­terminal propeptidases.
Collagen structural defects are predominantly of two types: 80% are
pathogenic missense variants causing substitutions of helical glycine
residues or crucial residues in the C-­propeptide by other amino acids,
and 20% are single exon splicing defects. The clinically mild OI type I
has a quantitative defect, with null pathogenic variants in one α1(I) allele
leading to a reduced amount of normal collagen. Deficiency of type I
procollagen caused by a C-­propeptide removal causes a paradoxical high
bone mass form of OI with mild or severe skeletal fragility depending
on whether the defect is in the cleavage site or the cleaving peptidase.
Impaired removal of the N-­propeptide causes an overlap syndrome of
Ehlers-­Danlos and OI (OI/EDS) with variable skeletal fragility.
Glycine substitutions in the two α chains have distinct genotype-­
phenotype relationships, but there is also striking phenotype variability
caused by independent pathogenic variants at the same site. In general,
glycine substitutions in the α1 chain are more lethal than those in the
α2(I) chain. Two lethal regions in α1(I) align with major ligand binding
regions of the collagen helix.
Classical OI (Sillence types I-­IV) is an autosomal dominant disorder,
as is type V OI. Some familial recurrences of OI are caused by parental
mosaicism for dominant collagen pathogenic variants. Recessive OI
accounts for 10–15% of newly diagnosed OI in North America. Three
recessive types are caused by null pathogenic variants in the genes coding for the components of the collagen prolyl 3-­hydroxylation complex in the endoplasmic reticulum (LEPRE1, CRTAP, or PPIB). Murine
models indicate that it is the absence of the complex components,
rather than the absence of the Pro986 modification, that is critical for
development of OI. Other recessive types are caused by null pathogenic variants in genes whose products are involved in collagen folding (SERPINH1, FKBP10), bone mineralization (SERPINF1), or defects
in osteoblast differentiation and function (SP7, TMEM38B, WNT1,
CREB3L1, SPARC, MBTPS2).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Osteogenesis Imperfecta
Joan C. Marini
Osteoporosis is fragility of the skeletal system and a susceptibility to
fractures of the long bones or vertebral compressions from mild or
inconsequential trauma (see Chapter 749). Osteogenesis imperfecta
(OI) (brittle bone disease), the most common genetic cause of osteoporosis, is a generalized disorder of connective tissue. The spectrum of OI
is extremely broad, ranging from forms that are lethal in the perinatal
period to a mild form in which the diagnosis may be equivocal in an
adult (Table 742.1).

ETIOLOGY

The autosomal dominant forms of OI occur equally in all racial and
ethnic groups, whereas recessive forms occur predominantly in ethnic groups with consanguineous marriages or as a founder effect in an
isolated population. The West African founder pathogenic variant for
type VIII OI has a carrier frequency of 1 in 200-300 among Black individuals. The collective incidence of all types of OI detectable in infancy
is approximately 1 in 20,000. There is a similar incidence of the mild
form OI type I.

PATHOLOGY

The pathogenic structural collagen variants in OI cause the bones to
be globally abnormal. The bone matrix contains abnormal type I collagen fibrils and relatively increased levels of types III and V collagen.
Several noncollagenous proteins of bone matrix are also reduced. Bone
cells also contribute to OI pathology, with abnormal osteoblast differentiation and increased numbers of active bone resorbing osteoclasts.
The hydroxyapatite crystals deposited on this matrix are poorly aligned
with the long axis of fibrils, and there is paradoxical hypermineralization of bone.

Classical OI was described with the triad of fragile bones, blue sclerae,
and early deafness, although most cases do not have all three features.
The Sillence classification divides OI into four types based on clinical
and radiographic criteria. Types V and VI were later proposed based
on histologic distinctions. Subsequent types VII-­XVIII were based on
identification of the molecular defect, followed by clinical description.

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type I (Mild)

OI type I is sufficiently mild that it is often found in large pedigrees.
Many type I families have blue sclerae, recurrent fractures in childhood, and presenile (i.e., beginning in early adulthood) hearing loss
(30–60%). Both types I and IV are divided into A and B subtypes,
depending on the absence (A) or presence (B) of dentinogenesis
imperfecta, a type of dentin dysplasia resulting in discolored (often
blue-­gray or amber), translucent teeth that wear down rapidly or break.
Other possible connective tissue abnormalities include hyperextensible
joints, easy bruising, thin skin, joint laxity, scoliosis, wormian bones,
hernia, and mild short stature compared with family members. Fractures result from mild to moderate trauma but decrease after puberty.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4360 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 742.1  Osteogenesis Imperfecta
DISORDER

INHERITANCE

GENE

PREVIOUS NAMES / NOTATION

Osteogenesis imperfecta, non-deforming
(Sillence type 1)

AD

COL1A1, COL1A2

OMIM as OI type I

Osteogenesis imperfecta, severe perinatal form
(Sillence type 2)

AD

COL1A1, COL1A2

OMIM as OI type II

AR

CRTAP

OMIM as OI type VII

AR

P3H1

OMIM as OI type VIII

AR

PPIB

OMIM as OI type IX

AD

COL1A1, COL1A2, IFITM5

OMIM as OI type III

AD

SERPINF1

In OMIM as OI type VI

AR

CRTAP, P3H1

OMIM as OI type VII

AR

PPIB

OMIM as OI type IX

AR

SERPINH1

OMIM OI as type X

AR

FKBP10

OMIM as OI type XI

AR

TMEM38B

OMIM as OI type XIV

AR

BMP1

OMIM as OI type XIII

AR

WNT1

OMIM as OI type XV
Variants may result in AD
osteoporosis.

AR

CREB3L1

OMIM as OI type XVI
Ehlers-Danlos-like

AR

SPARC

OMIM as OI type XVII

AR

TENT5A

OMIM as OI type XVIII

XLR

MBTPS2

OMIM as OI type XIX

AR

MESD

OMIM as OI type XX

AR

KDELR2

OMIM as OI type XXL

AR

CCD134

OMIM as OI type XXII

AD

COL1A1, COL1A2, IFITM5

OMIM as OI type IV

AR

WNT1

OMIM as OI type XV

AR

CRTAP

OMIM as OI type VII

AD

PP1B

OMIM as OI type IX

AR

FKBP10

OMIM as OI type XI

AR

SP7

OMIM as OI type XII

Osteogenesis imperfecta with calcification of
interosseous membranes and/or hypertrophic callus
(OI type 5)

AD

IFITM5

May mimic progressively deforming
or moderate OI (Sillence types 3
and 4)

Osteogenesis imperfecta with craniosynostosis
(Cole- Carpenter syndrome)

AD

P4HB

Craniosynostosis is not well
documented.

AR

SEC24D

Most patients do not have
craniosynostosis but rather large
fontanels.

Osteoporosis – X-linked form

XL

MBTPS2

OMIM as OI type XIX

Osteoporosis – dominant form

AD

WNT1

OMIM as OI type XV

Osteogenesis imperfecta, progressively deforming
(Sillence type 3)

Osteogenesis imperfecta, moderate form
(Sillence type 4)

Data from Unger S, Ferreira CR, Mortier GR, et al: Nosology of genetic skeletal disorders: 2023 revision. Am J Med Genet 2023;191A:1164-1209 (Table 1, Group 26, pp. 1187-1190).

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type II (Perinatal Lethal)

Infants with OI type II may be stillborn or die in the first years of life.
Birthweight and length are small for gestational age. There is extreme
fragility of the skeleton and other connective tissues. There are multiple
intrauterine fractures of long bones, which have a crumpled appearance on radiographs. There are striking micromelia and bowing of

extremities; the legs are held abducted at right angles to the body in the
frogleg position. Multiple rib fractures create a beaded appearance, and
the small thorax contributes to respiratory insufficiency. The skull is large
for body size, with enlarged anterior and posterior fontanels. Sclerae are
dark blue-­gray. The cerebral cortex has multiple neuronal migration and
other defects (agyria, gliosis, periventricular leukomalacia).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 742 u Osteogenesis Imperfecta 4361

A

B

Fig. 742.2 Typical features of type III osteogenesis imperfecta radio-

graphs in a 6-­yr-­old child. A, Lower long bones are osteoporotic, with
metaphyseal flaring, “popcorn” formation at growth plates, and placement of intramedullary rods. B, Vertebral bodies are compressed and
osteoporotic.

Fig. 742.1 Infant with type III osteogenesis imperfecta displays short-

ened bowed extremities, thoracic deformity, and relative macrocephaly.

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type III (Progressive
Deforming)

OI type III is the most severe nonlethal form of OI and results in significant physical disability. Birthweight and length are often low normal. Fractures usually occur in utero. There is relative macrocephaly
and triangular facies (Fig. 742.1). Postnatally, fractures occur from
inconsequential trauma and heal with deformity. Disorganization of
the bone matrix results in a “popcorn” appearance at the metaphyses
(Fig. 742.2). The rib cage has flaring at the base, and pectus deformity
is frequent. Virtually all type III patients have scoliosis and vertebral
compression. Growth falls below the curve by the first year; all type III
patients have extreme short stature. Scleral hue ranges from white to
blue. Dentinogenesis imperfecta, hearing loss, and kyphoscoliosis may
be present or develop over time.

bone deformity because BMP1 has other substrates in addition to type
I collagen.
Defects in removal of the type I procollagen N-­propeptide cause a
distinctive combination of Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome and OI. Deletion
of exon six, containing the cleavage site, causes EDS type VII. Glycine
substitutions near the cleavage site impair processing by altering the
site configuration, causing hyperextensibility of large and small joints
and variable bone fragility.

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type V (Hyperplastic
Callus) and Type VI Hyperosteoidosis (Mineralization
Defect)

Patients with OI type IV can present at birth with in utero fractures
or bowing of lower long bones. They can also present with recurrent
fractures after ambulation and have normal to moderate short stature.
Most children have moderate bowing even with infrequent fractures.
Children with OI type IV require orthopedic and rehabilitation intervention, but they are usually able to attain community ambulation
skills. Fracture rates decrease after puberty. Radiographically, they are
osteoporotic and have metaphyseal flaring and vertebral compressions.
Scleral hue may be blue or white.

Types V and VI OI patients clinically have OI similar in skeletal severity to types IV and III, respectively, but they have distinct findings on
bone histology. Type V patients also usually have some combination
of hyperplastic callus, calcification of the interosseous membrane of
the forearm, and/or a radiodense metaphyseal band. They constitute
<5% of OI cases. All type V OI patients are heterozygous for the same
pathogenic variant in IFITM5, which generates a novel start codon for
the bone protein BRIL. Ligamentous laxity may be present; blue sclera
or dentinogenesis imperfecta are not present. Patients with type VI OI
have progressive deforming OI that does not manifest at birth. They
have distinctive bone histology with broad osteoid seams and fish-­scale
lamellation under polarized light, caused by deficiency of pigment epithelium derived factor, encoded by SERPINF1. Types V and VI are
connected in intracellular osteoblast pathways—SERPINF1 transcripts
are increased in type V OI, while IFITM5 transcripts are decreased in
type VI OI.

Defects in the Processing of Type I Procollagen
Propeptides

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Types VII, VIII, and IX
(Autosomal Recessive)

Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type IV (Moderately
Severe)

Autosomal dominant pathogenic variants in the C-­propeptide cleavage
site of procollagen or recessive defects in BMP1, the enzyme responsible for its cleavage, cause bone fragility with normal or elevated dual-­
energy x-­ray absorptiometry bone density z scores. Individuals with
dominant pathogenic variants have normal stature, white sclerae and
teeth, and mild to moderate OI. Null pathogenic variants in BMP1 lead
to a more severe skeletal phenotype with short stature, scoliosis, and

Types VII and VIII patients overlap clinically with types II and III
OI but have distinct features including white sclerae, rhizomelia, and
small to normal head circumference. Surviving children have severe
osteochondrodysplasia with extreme short stature and dual-­energy
x-­ray absorptiometry L1-­L2 z score in the −6 to −7 range. Type IX OI is
very rare; most cases are lethal, but some have moderate skeletal severity without rhizomelia, and white sclerae.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4362 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Osteogenesis Imperfecta Types X and XI (Autosomal
Recessive)

There have been several reports of severe to lethal type X OI caused
by defects affecting the serine-­type endopeptidase inhibitor domain
of HSP47. This domain is responsible for the HSP47 chaperone function that helps to maintain the folded state of procollagen heterotrimers. HSP47 and FKBP65, the protein responsible for type XI
OI, cooperate in collagen synthesis. Type XI OI is a more prevalent
recessive form with a moderate to severe skeletal phenotype, including white sclerae and normal teeth. Congenital contractures of large
joints may occur with the same pathogenic variants that cause only
skeletal fragility, even in sibships. At the opposite end of the spectrum, a deletion of a single tyrosine residue causes Kuskokwim syndrome, a congenital contracture disorder with very mild vertebral
findings and osteopenia. Defects in FKBP10 decrease collagen crosslinking in matrix because FKBP65 is the foldase for lysyl hydroxylase
2, which hydroxylates collagen telopeptide residues important for
cross linking.

Defects in Osteoblast Differentiation
(Types XIII-­XXII OI)

The most recent functional grouping of genes causing recessive OI
(types XIII to XXII) affect osteoblast differentiation and are collagen related. SP7 (type XIII OI) regulates osteoblast differentiation
and is critical for bone formation. TMEM38B (type XIV OI) defects
are clinically indistinguishable from type IV OI. TMEM38B encodes
the endoplasmic reticulum membrane cation channel TRIC-­B, which
affects calcium flux from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytoplasm. Since many enzymes involved in collagen metabolism are
calcium dependent, collagen synthesis is globally dysregulated in the
absence of TRIC-­B, with significant intracellular retention. Collagen
posttranslational modification is also impaired, leading to underhydroxylation of the collagen helix. Recessive WNT1 (type XV OI)
defects cause severe progressive deforming OI. Notably, Wnt signaling pathway activation through the Frizzled receptor on the osteoblast surface increases bone mass, and deficiency of Wnt decreases it.
SPARC (type XVII OI), also known as osteonectin, is a glycoprotein
component of extracellular matrix. Defects in residues important for
SPARC binding to collagen were reported in two cases of moderate
to severe OI.
The genes MBTPS2 and CREB3L1, causing types XVIII and XVI
OI, respectively, encode proteins involved in regulated intramembrane
proteolysis (RIP). MBTPS2 encodes the transmembrane Golgi protein
site-2 protease (S2P), that acts in succession with S1P to activate regulatory molecules in times of cell stress. OASIS, encoded by CREB3L1,
is an RIP substrate.
Interestingly, missense substitutions in S2P in OI patients result
in underhydroxylation of the collagen lysine residue important for
crosslinking of collagen in matrix, thus impairing bone strength.
In OASIS-­null mice, collagen transcription has been shown to be
impaired.
Defects in TENT5A, MESD, KDELR2, and CCDC134 have been
reported in small numbers of individuals with lethal or severe OI
skeletal phenotypes. The products of these genes are not known to
interact directly with collagen. TENT5A encodes FAM46A, a cytoplasmic poly(A) polymerase with an unexpected role in bone mineralization, likely related to its role as a binding partner for SMADs,
modulating BMP signaling. MESD acts along the Wnt pathway,
serving as an endoplastic reticulum chaperone for the low-density
lipoprotein receptors LRP5 and LRP6. Oligodontia and intellectual
disability occur in some patients. Bone histology shows enlarged
osteocytes and irregular matrix mineralization.
Pathogenic variants in KDELR2 cause neurodevelopmental and
severe skeletal defects. Pathogenic variants in CCDC134 add to the
skeletal effects by impacting the mitogen-activated protein kinase/
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK) pathway. Expression of type I collagen is reduced, as is osteoblast in vitro mineralization, but histomorphometry is atypical for OI.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

DNA sequencing is the first diagnostic laboratory test, and several
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)-­
certified
sequencing labs offer panels to test for dominant and recessive OI.
Pathogenic variant identification is useful to determine the type with
certainty and to facilitate family screening and prenatal diagnosis. It is
also possible to screen for type VI OI by the determination of serum
pigment epithelium-­derived factor level, which is severely reduced in
this type.
If dermal fibroblasts are obtained, they can be useful for determining
the level of transcripts of the candidate gene and for collagen biochemical
testing, which is positive for overmodification in most cases of types I-­IV
and IX OI, and in all cases of VII/VIII OI, and for undermodification in
type XIV. In OI type I, the reduced amount of type I collagen results in an
increase in the ratio of type III to type I collagen on gel electrophoresis.
Severe OI can be detected prenatally by level II ultrasonography as
early as 16 weeks of gestation. OI and thanatophoric dysplasia may be
confused. Fetal ultrasonography might not detect OI type IV and rarely
detects OI type I. For recurrent cases, chorionic villus biopsy can be
used for biochemical or molecular studies. Amniocytes produce false-­
positive biochemical studies but can be used for molecular studies in
appropriate cases.
In the neonatal period, the normal to elevated alkaline phosphatase
levels present in OI distinguish it from hypophosphatasia. During the
school-­age period, children with type VI OI have notably elevated
serum alkaline phosphatase.

COMPLICATIONS

The morbidity and mortality of OI are cardiopulmonary. Recurrent
pneumonias and declining pulmonary function occur in childhood,
and cor pulmonale is seen in adults.
Neurologic complications include basilar invagination, brainstem
compression, hydrocephalus, and syringohydromyelia. Many children
with OI types III and IV have basilar invagination, but brainstem compression is uncommon. Basilar invagination is best detected with spiral
CT of the craniocervical junction (Fig. 742.3).

TREATMENT

There is no cure for OI. For severe nonlethal OI, active physical rehabilitation in the early years allows children to attain a higher functional
level than orthopedic management alone. Children with OI type I and

Fig. 742.3 Typical feature of basilar invagination shown in the sagittal
MRI of an asymptomatic child with type III osteogenesis imperfecta.
There is invagination of the odontoid above the Chamberlain line, causing compression and kinking at the pontomedullary junction (arrow).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 743 u Marfan Syndrome 4363
some with type IV are spontaneous ambulators. Children with types
III, IV, V, VI, and XI OI benefit from gait aids and a program of swimming and conditioning. Severely affected patients require a wheelchair
for community mobility but can acquire transfer and self-­care skills.
Teens with OI can require psychologic support with body image issues.
Growth hormone improves bone histology in growth-­responsive children (usually types I and IV).
Orthopedic management of OI is aimed at fracture management
and correction of deformity to enable function. Fractures should be
promptly splinted or cast; OI fractures heal well, and cast removal
should be aimed at minimizing immobilization osteoporosis. Correction of long-­bone deformity requires an osteotomy procedure and
placement of an intramedullary rod.
A several-­
year course of treatment of children with OI with
bisphosphonates (IV pamidronate or oral olpadronate or risedronate) confers some benefits. Bisphosphonates decrease bone resorption by osteoclasts; OI patients have increased bone volume that still
contains the defective collagen. Bisphosphonates are more beneficial for vertebrae (trabecular bone) than long bones (cortical bone).
Treatment for 1-2 years results in increased L1-­L4 dual-­energy x-­ray
absorptiometry and, more importantly, improved vertebral compressions and area. However, follow-­up of bisphosphonate-­treated children has shown that the incidence of scoliosis is unchanged even in
children treated early, although there was a modest delay in progression in type III OI. The relative risk of long-­bone fractures is modestly decreased by several years of bisphosphonates. However, the
material properties of long bones are weakened by prolonged treatment and nonunion after osteotomy is increased. There is no effect of
bisphosphonates on mobility scores, muscle strength, or bone pain.
Limiting treatment duration to 2-3 years in mid-­childhood can maximize the benefits and minimize the detriment to cortical material
properties. Benefits appear to persist several years after the treatment
interval, and alternation of treatment intervals and drug holidays
may be beneficial. Side effects include abnormal long-­bone remodeling, increased incidence of fracture nonunion, and osteopetrotic-­like
brittleness to bone.
Antibodies to sclerostin and TGF-­β stimulate osteoblasts to produce
bone matrix. They have shown promise in murine models for OI and
are currently in trials for children with OI. TGF-beta signaling may
be a pathogenic mechanism in OI. Fresolimumab, a TGF-beta neutralizing antibody, treatment in adults with OI type IV demonstrated
increases in lumbar spine bone mineral density.

PROGNOSIS

OI is a chronic condition that may limit both life span and functional
level. Infants with OI type II usually die within months to 1 year
of life. An occasional child with radiographic type II and extreme
growth deficiency survives to the teen years. Persons with OI type III
have a reduced life span with clusters of mortality from pulmonary
causes in early childhood, the teen years, and the 40s. OI types I, IV,
and V OI are compatible with a full life span. The oldest reported
individuals with type VIII are in their third decade, and some with
type XI are in their fourth decade. The long-­term prognosis for most
recessive types is still emerging, and many adults with OI have not
had molecular testing.
Individuals with OI type III are usually wheelchair dependent. With
aggressive rehabilitation, they can attain transfer skills and household
ambulation. OI type IV children usually attain community ambulation
skills either independently or with gait aids.

GENETIC COUNSELING

For autosomal dominant OI, the risk of an affected individual passing
the gene to the individual’s offspring is 50%. An affected child usually
has about the same severity of OI as the parent; however, there is variability of expression, and the child’s condition can be either more or
less severe than that of the parent. The empirical recurrence risk to an
apparently unaffected couple of having a second child with OI is 5–7%;
this is the statistical chance that one parent has germline mosaicism.
The collagen pathogenic variant in the mosaic parent is present in some

germ cells and may be present in somatic tissues. If a parent is a mosaic
carrier, the risk of recurrence may be as high as 50%.
For recessive OI, the recurrence risk is 25% per pregnancy. No
known individual with severe nonlethal recessive OI has had a child.
For X-­linked type XVIII OI, the risk to male offspring of carrier women
is generally 50%.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 4

Connective Tissue
Disorders
Chapter 743

Marfan Syndrome
Jefferson J. Doyle and Harry C. Dietz III
Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an inherited systemic, connective tissue
disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the FBN1 gene encoding the
extracellular matrix (ECM) protein fibrillin-1. It is primarily associated with skeletal, cardiovascular, and ocular pathology. The diagnosis
is based on clinical findings, some of which are age dependent.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence is estimated at 1 in 10,000 live births, and approximately
25% of cases are sporadic. The disorder shows autosomal dominant
inheritance, with high penetrance but variable expression. Both interfamilial and intrafamilial clinical variation are common. There is no
racial or gender preference.

PATHOGENESIS

MFS is associated with abnormal production, matrix deposition, and/
or stability of fibrillin-1, a 350-­kd ECM protein that is the major constituent of microfibrils, with prominent disruption of microfibrils and
elastic fibers in diseased tissues. The fibrillin-1 (FBN1) gene is composed of 65 exons. Linkage analysis has suggested an absence of locus
heterogeneity, and the involvement of FBN1 is demonstrated in >90%
of cases, with more than 1,000 disease-­causing pathogenic variants
identified to date (the majority of which are pathogenic missense variants unique to a given family). With the exception of early-­onset and
severe presentations of the disease associated with pathogenic variants
in exons 26-27 and 31-32, no clear genotype-­phenotype correlation
has been identified. Given that there is considerable intrafamilial variability, genetic, epigenetic, environmental, or other unidentified factors
may influence expression of the disease.
The transforming growth factor beta (TGF-­β) family of cytokines
influences a diverse repertoire of cellular processes, including cell
proliferation, migration, differentiation, survival, and synthetic activity. The TGF-­β ligands (TGF-­β1, TGF-­β2, or TGF-­β3) are synthesized
as inactive precursor complexes and sequestered by ECM proteins,
including fibrillin-1. Mice heterozygous for a pathogenic variant in
the fibrillin-1 gene, typical of those that cause MFS in humans, display
many of the classic features of MFS, including aortic root aneurysm,
which associates with a tissue signature for increased TGF-­β signaling,
suggesting that pathogenic variants in fibrillin-1 lead to increased TGF-­
β activation and signaling. Furthermore, pharmacologic antagonism

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4364 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
of TGF-­β signaling initiated after the first few weeks of life ameliorates aortic aneurysm in mouse models of MFS, demonstrating that
high TGF-­β signaling is a cause rather than a consequence of disease
progression.
Increased TGF-­β signaling has been observed in other tissues in
MFS mice, including the developing lung, mitral valve, and skeletal
muscle. Treatment of these mice with agents that antagonize TGF-­β
attenuates or prevents pulmonary emphysema, myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve, and skeletal muscle myopathy. The prominent
role of TGF-­β dysregulation in the pathogenesis of MFS was further
validated by the discovery and characterization of another related
aortic aneurysm syndrome, Loeys-­Dietz syndrome (LDS), in which
patients have pathogenic variants in the genes encoding positive effectors of TGF-­β signaling, including the ligands TGF-­β2 or TGF-­β3,
either subunit of the TGF-­β receptor (TβRI or TβRII) or the intracellular signaling intermediates SMAD2 or SMAD3. Patients with LDS
share many overlapping clinical features with MFS (see the section on
“Differential Diagnosis”). This is further supported by data showing
that Shprintzen-­Goldberg syndrome (SGS), which shows phenotypic
overlap with both MFS and LDS, is caused by pathogenic variants in
SKI, a known repressor of the TGF-­β transcriptional response.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

MFS is a multisystem disorder, with cardinal manifestations in the
skeletal, cardiovascular, and ocular systems.

Skeletal System

Overgrowth of the long bones (dolichostenomelia) is often the most
obvious manifestation of MFS and may produce a reduced upper segment–to–lower segment ratio (UL/LS) or an arm span–to–height ratio
>1.05 times. Abnormal ratios are US/LS <1 for age 0-5 years, US/LS
<0.95 for 6-7 years, US/LS <0.9 for 8-9 years, and US/LS <0.85 above
age 10 years. Anterior chest deformity is likely the result of excessive
rib growth, pushing the sternum either outward (pectus carinatum)
or inward (pectus excavatum). Abnormal curvatures of the spine
(most commonly thoracolumbar scoliosis) may also partly result from
increased vertebral growth. Other skeletal features include an inward
bulging of the acetabulum into the pelvic cavity (protrusio acetabuli),
flat feet (pes planus), and joint hypermobility (Fig. 743.1) or joint contractures. Long and slender fingers in relation to the palm of the hand

B

A

C

(arachnodactyly) are generally a subjective finding. The combination
of arachnodactyly and hypermobile joints is examined by the Walker-­
Murdoch or wrist sign, which is positive if there is full overlap of the
distal phalanges of the thumb and fifth finger when wrapped around
the contralateral wrist (see Fig. 743.1), and the Steinberg or thumb sign,
which is present when the distal phalanx of the thumb fully extends
beyond the ulnar border of the hand when folded across the palm (see
Fig. 743.1). Contracture of the fingers (camptodactyly) and elbows is
commonly observed. A selection of craniofacial manifestations may be
present, including a long narrow skull (dolichocephaly), deeply set eyes
(enophthalmos), recessed lower mandible (retrognathia) or small chin
(micrognathia), flattening of the midface (malar hypoplasia), a high-­
arching palate, and downward-­slanting palpebral fissures (Fig. 743.2).

Cardiovascular System

Thickening of the atrioventricular valves is common and often associated with valvular prolapse. Variable degrees of regurgitation may be
present. In children with early-­onset and severe MFS, insufficiency of
the mitral valve can lead to heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, and
death in infancy. This manifestation is the leading cause of morbidity
and mortality in young children with the disorder. Supraventricular
arrhythmias may be seen in association with mitral valve dysfunction.
Ventricular dysrhythmias have also been described in children with
MFS, and there is an increased prevalence of prolonged QT interval.
Dilated cardiomyopathy occurs with increased prevalence in patients
with MFS, most often attributed to volume overload imposed by valve
regurgitation. Aortic valve dysfunction is generally a late occurrence
and attributed to stretching of the aortic annulus by an expanding aortic root aneurysm.
Aortic aneurysm, dissection, and rupture, principally at the level
of the sinuses of Valsalva (also known as the aortic root), remain the
most life-­threatening manifestations of MFS, prompting lifelong monitoring by echocardiography or other imaging modalities. In severe
cases, the aneurysm may be present in utero, but in mild examples it
may be absent or never exceed dimensions that require clinical intervention. Aortic dimensions must be interpreted in comparison to
age-­dependent nomograms. The most important risk factor for aortic
dissection is the maximal aortic root size and a positive family history.
The characteristic histologic findings from aortas of patients with MFS
include cystic medial necrosis of the tunica media and disruption of

D

E

Fig. 743.1 Marfan syndrome. Note the joint laxity (A), Steinberg thumb sign (B), ability to join thumb and fifth finger around the wrist (Walker-­
Murdoch sign) (C), pes planus (D), and striae over hips and back (E). (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of
Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022; Fig. 2, p. 664.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 743 u Marfan Syndrome 4365
Table 743.1  Diagnostic Criteria for Marfan Syndrome
IN THE ABSENCE OF A FAMILY HISTORY OF MFS, A DIAGNOSIS
CAN BE ESTABLISHED IN FOUR DISTINCT SCENARIOS:
1.	Aortic root z score ≥2 AND ectopia lentis*
2.	Aortic root z score ≥2 AND a bona fide FBN1 pathogenic variant
(see Table 743.2)
3.	Aortic root z score ≥2 AND a systemic score ≥7* (see Table 743.3)
4. Ectopia lentis AND a bona fide FBN1 pathogenic variant known
to cause aortic disease
IN THE PRESENCE OF A FAMILY HISTORY OF MFS, A DIAGNOSIS
CAN BE ESTABLISHED IN THE PRESENCE OF:
1.	Ectopia lentis
2.	A systemic score ≥7*
3.	Aortic root z score ≥2 if older than 20 years or ≥3 if younger than
20 years*
IN THE ABSENCE OF A FAMILY HISTORY OF MFS, ALTERNATIVE
DIAGNOSES INCLUDE:
1. Ectopia lentis ± systemic score AND FBN1 pathogenic variant not
known to associate with aortic aneurysm or no FBN1 pathogenic
variant = Ectopia lentis syndrome
2.	Aortic root z score <2 AND a systemic score ≥5 (with at least one
skeletal feature) without ectopia lentis = MASS phenotype
3. Mitral valve prolapse AND aortic root z score <2 AND a systemic
score <5 without ectopia lentis = Mitral valve prolapse syndrome
*Denotes caveat that features suggestive of an alternative diagnosis must be
excluded and appropriate alternative molecular testing should be performed. Other
syndromes include Shprintzen-­Goldberg, Loeys-­Dietz, or vascular Ehlers Danlos (see
Table 743.4 for genes).

Other Systems

Fig. 743.2 Marfan syndrome. Note the long slim limbs, pectus ex-

cavatum, narrow face, and reduced elbow extension. (From Jones KL,
Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human
Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022: Fig. 1A, p. 662.)

elastic lamellae. Cystic medial necrosis describes the focal apoptosis
and disappearance of vascular smooth muscle cells and elastic fibers
from the tunica media of the aortic wall, and subsequent deposition
of mucin-­like material in the cystic space. These changes produce a
thicker, less distensible and stiffer aorta, which is more prone to aortic
dissection. Most patients experiencing acute aortic dissection present
with classic symptoms, including sudden-­onset, severe, tearing chest
pain, often radiating into the back. The dissection typically starts at the
aortic root and may remain confined to the ascending aorta (type II) or
continue into the descending aorta (type I). Acute-­onset heart failure
may occur if aortic valve function is compromised, and patients may
suffer cerebrovascular injury, depending on the involvement of the
carotid arteries. Involvement of the coronary arteries may herald sudden cardiac death, secondary to myocardial infarction or rupture into
the pericardial sac with subsequent pericardial tamponade. Chronic
aortic dissection usually occurs more insidiously, often without chest
pain. Dilatation of the main pulmonary artery is common but does not
typically cause any clinical sequelae. Enlargement of the descending
thoracic or abdominal aorta can also occur, although relatively rarely.

Ocular System

Dislocation of the ocular lens (ectopia lentis, EL) occurs in around
60–70% of patients, although it is not unique to the disorder. Other
ocular manifestations include early and severe myopia, thin and flat
cornea, increased axial length of the globe, and iris dilator muscle
hypoplasia, which results in poor dilation (miosis). Patients are also
predisposed to retinal detachment, early cataracts, glaucoma, strabismus, and amblyopia.

There is an increased incidence of pulmonary disease in MFS; progressive
anterior chest deformity or thoracic scoliosis may contribute to a restrictive pattern of lung disease. Furthermore, a widening of the distal airspaces
predisposes patients to spontaneous pneumothorax, which occurs in up to
15% of patients. Assessment of pulmonary volumes and function should
account for long-­bone overgrowth affecting the lower extremities, which
can lead to a reduction in the normalized forced vital capacity and total
lung capacity. If normalized to thoracic size or sitting height, pulmonary
function testing is often normal in patients with the disorder.
MFS patients typically have normal skin texture and elasticity. The
most common skin finding is stretch marks—pinkish, scarlike lesions that
later become white (striae atrophicae), which occur in about one third of
patients (Fig. 743.1). These may occur in the absence of obesity, rapid gain
in muscle mass, or pregnancy, and at sites not associated with increased
skin distention (i.e., the anterior shoulder or lower back). Another common manifestation is congenital or acquired inguinal hernia. There is
also an increased risk of surgical and recurrent hernias in the Marfan
population.
Widening of the dural sac or root sleeves (dural ectasia) is present in
63–92% of MFS patients. Although dural ectasia can result in lumbar
back pain, it is often asymptomatic and should be assessed by lumbosacral imaging with CT or MRI.

DIAGNOSIS

Given the complexity of the clinical examination in MFS and the relevant
differential diagnoses, evaluation should be coordinated by a professional
with extensive experience, such as a geneticist, cardiologist, or ophthalmologist. The diagnosis is based on a defined set of clinical criteria drawn
up by an international panel of experts (the revised Ghent nosology for the
MFS; Table 743.1).
In the absence of a conclusive family history of MFS, the diagnosis
can be established in four distinct scenarios:
1.	The presence of either aortic root dilatation when standardized to
age and body size (an aortic root z score ≥2) or aortic dissection
combined with ectopia lentis allows for the unequivocal diagnosis of
MFS, irrespective of the presence or absence of any systemic features
(see Table 743.1), except when these are indicative of an alternative
diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4366 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 743.2  Criteria for Causal FBN1 Pathogenic Variant
• Pathogenic variant previously shown to segregate in a Marfan
family
• Any one of the following de novo pathogenic variants (with
proven parentage and absence of disease in parents):
• Nonsense pathogenic variant
• In-­frame and out-­of-­frame deletion/insertion
• Splice site pathogenic variants affecting canonical splice
sequence or shown to alter splicing on mRNA/cDNA level
• Missense pathogenic variant affecting/creating cysteine
residues
• Missense pathogenic variant affecting conserved residues
of the EGF consensus sequence ((D/N)X(D/N)(E/Q)Xm(D/N)
Xn(Y/F) with m and n representing variable number of residues;
D aspartic acid, N asparagine, E glutamic acid, Q glutamine, Y
tyrosine, F phenylalanine)
• Other missense pathogenic variants: segregation in family
if possible AND absence in 400 ethnically matched control
chromosomes; if no family history, absence in 400 ethnically
matched control chromosomes
• Linkage of haplotype for n ≥ 6 meioses to the FBN1 locus
From Loeys BL, Dietz HC, Braverman AC, et al. The revised Ghent nosology for the
Marfan syndrome. J Med Genet. 2010;47:476–485.

without documented evidence of a bona fide FBN1 pathogenic variant,
the term “nonspecific connective tissue disorder” is recommended. In
those instances in which an FBN1 pathogenic variant is identified, the
term potential MFS should be used instead.
In an individual with a positive family history of MFS (in which a
family member has been independently diagnosed using the previously
described criteria), the diagnosis can be established in the presence of:
1.	Ectopia lentis
2.	A systemic score ≥7 points (see Table 743.3)
3.	Aortic root dilatation with z score ≥2 in adults (≥20 years old) or z
score ≥3 in individuals <20 years old
In the case of scenarios 2 and 3, previously, features suggestive of an
alternative diagnosis must again be excluded and appropriate alternative molecular testing should be performed.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of MFS includes disorders with aortic aneurysm (LDS, familial thoracic aortic aneurysm syndrome, and SGS),
ectopia lentis (ectopia lentis syndrome, Weil-­Marchesani syndrome,
and homocystinuria), or systemic manifestations of MFS (congenital
contractural arachnodactyly [CCA] and mitral valve, aorta, skin, skeletal [MASS] phenotype); Table 743.4).

Aortic Aneurysm Syndromes
Table 743.3  Scoring of Systemic Features in Points
• Wrist AND thumb sign = 3 (wrist OR thumb sign = 1)
• Pectus carinatum deformity = 2 (pectus excavatum or chest
asymmetry = 1)
• Hind foot deformity = 2 (plain pes planus = 1)
• Pneumothorax = 2
• Dural ectasia = 2
• Protrusio acetabuli = 2
• Reduced US/LS AND increased arm/height AND no severe
scoliosis = 1
• Scoliosis or thoracolumbar kyphosis = 1
• Reduced elbow extension = 1
• Facial features (3/5) = 1 (dolichocephaly, enophthalmos, downslanting palpebral fissures, midface hypoplasia, retrognathia)
• Skin striae = 1
• Myopia >3 diopters = 1
• Mitral valve prolapse (all types) = 1
Maximum total: 20 points; score ≥7 indicates systemic involvement.
US/LS, Upper segment/lower segment ratio.

2.	The presence of aortic root dilatation (z score ≥2) or aortic dissection and the identification of a bona fide FBN1 pathogenic variant
(Table 743.2) are sufficient to establish the diagnosis even if ectopia
lentis is absent.
3.	When aortic root dilatation (an aortic root z score ≥2) or aortic dissection is present, but ectopia lentis is absent and the FBN1 status is
either unknown or negative, the diagnosis may be confirmed by the
presence of sufficient systemic findings (a systemic score ≥7 points;
Table 743.3). However, features suggestive of an alternative diagnosis
must be excluded, and the appropriate alternative molecular testing
should be performed.
4.	In the presence of ectopia lentis, but absence of aortic root dilatation or aortic dissection, an FBN1 pathogenic variant, which has
previously been associated with aortic disease, is required before the
diagnosis can be made. If the FBN1 pathogenic variant is not unequivocally associated with cardiovascular disease in either a related
or unrelated proband, the patient should be classified as “isolated ectopia lentis syndrome” (see the section on “Differential Diagnosis”).
Despite these diagnostic criteria, on occasion sporadic cases in individuals <20 years old may not fit in one of the four proposed scenarios
detailed above. If insufficient systemic features (systemic score <7)
and/or borderline aortic root measurements (z score <3) are present

LDS is a systemic connective tissue disorder characterized by the
triad of arterial tortuosity and aggressive aneurysm disease, hypertelorism, and bifid uvula or cleft palate, as well as many of the craniofacial and skeletal features found in MFS. Distinction between
MFS and LDS is important because aneurysms tend to dissect at
younger ages and smaller dimensions in LDS patients, necessitating more aggressive management. LDS was originally classified into
type 1 or type 2, depending on whether the pathogenic variant is
present in the TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 gene, which encode the type
1 or type 2 TGF-­β receptor subunits, respectively. LDS type 3 is
caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the gene encoding
the TGF-­
β–dependent intracellular signaling molecule SMAD3.
LDS type 4 is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the
extracellular TGF-­β receptor ligand TGF-­β2, whereas LDS type 5
is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the extracellular
TGF-­β receptor ligand TGF-­β3. LDS type 6 is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the gene encoding the TGF-­β–dependent intracellular signaling molecule SMAD2. As a general rule, the
severity of disease associated with the different forms of LDS can
be summarized: LDS1 = LDS2 > LDS3 > LDS4 = LDS5 > LDS6.
There are exceptions to this rule, mandating careful monitoring of
all patients with LDS. Notably, there can be wide clinical variation
within each subtype, including between family members harboring
the identical pathogenic variant.
Like MFS, familial thoracic aortic aneurysm syndrome segregates as an autosomal dominant trait characterized by aortic root
aneurysm and dissection. However, other systemic manifestations
of MFS are typically absent, and the disorder has reduced penetrance. Disease-­causing heterozygous pathogenic variants have been
identified in several genes with roles in the vascular smooth muscle contractile apparatus, including MYH11, ACTA2, and MYLK,
which encode smooth muscle myosin heavy chain 11, vascular
smooth muscle α-­actin, and myosin light chain kinase. However,
these genes account for only a fraction of cases of nonsyndromic
familial thoracic aortic aneurysm. In most cases, the management
principles that have been generated for MFS have proved effective
for this form of familial aortic aneurysm.
SGS is a systemic connective tissue disorder that includes virtually all the craniofacial, skeletal, skin, and cardiovascular manifestations of MFS and LDS, with the additional findings of developmental
delay and severe skeletal muscle hypotonia. Most cases are caused
by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the SKI gene, which encodes
an intracellular repressor of TGF-­β signaling. Vascular involvement
tends to be less prevalent and less severe when compared with MFS
or LDS.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 743 u Marfan Syndrome 4367
Table 743.4  Differential Diagnosis of Marfan Syndrome
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS (GENES)

CARDIAC FEATURES

AORTIC ANEURYSM SYNDROMES
Loeys-­Dietz syndromes (types I-­V)
(OMIM: 609192)
TGFBR1, TGFBR2, SMAD3, TGFB2,
TGFB3

• Patent ductus
arteriosus
• Atrial septal defect
• Bicuspid aortic valve

• Aortic root aneurysm
• Arterial tortuosity
• Widespread aneurysms
• Vascular dissection at relatively
young ages and small aortic
dimensions

• Hypertelorism
• Cleft palate
• Broad or bifid uvula
• Craniosynostosis
• Midface hypoplasia
• Blue sclerae
• Arachnodactyly
• Pectus deformity
• Scoliosis
• Joint hypermobility
• Pes planus
• Rarely easy bruising
• Dystrophic scars
• Translucent skin
• Rarely developmental delay

Familial thoracic aortic aneurysm
(OMIM: 132900)
TGFBR2, ACTA2, others

• Generally none
• Rare forms with patent
ductus arteriosus

• Aortic root aneurysm
• Ascending aortic aneurysm

• Generally none
• Rarely livedo reticularis and iris
flocculi

Shprintzen-­Goldberg syndrome
(OMIM: 182212)
SKI, unknown others

None

Aortic root aneurysm

• Hypertelorism
• Craniosynostosis
• Arched palate
• Arachnodactyly
• Pectus deformity
• Scoliosis
• Joint hypermobility
• Developmental delay

Bicuspid aortic valve with aortic
aneurysm (OMIM: 109730)
ACTA2

Bicuspid aortic valve

• Aortic root aneurysm
• Ascending aortic aneurysm

Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, type IV
(OMIM: 130050)
COL3A1

Mitral valve prolapse

• Aneurysm and rupture of any
medium to large muscular artery
• No predisposition for aortic root
enlargement

• Joint hypermobility
• Atrophic scars
• Translucent skin
• Easy bruising
• Hernias
• Rupture of hollow organs

None

None

Nonspecific skeletal features

Mitral valve prolapse

Intravascular thrombosis

• Tall stature
• Ectopia lentis
• Long-­bone overgrowth
• Developmental delay

Borderline or nonprogressive

• Nonspecific skin and skeletal
findings
• Myopia

ECTOPIA LENTIS SYNDROMES
Familial ectopia lentis (OMIM: 129600)
FBN1, LTBP2, ADAMTSL4
Homocystinuria (OMIM: 236200)
CBS

SYNDROMES WITH SYSTEMIC MANIFESTATIONS OF MFS
MASS (mitral valve, aorta, skeleton, skin) Mitral valve prolapse
phenotype (OMIM: 604308)
FBN1

Ectopia Lentis Syndromes

Both ectopia lentis syndrome and Weill-­Marchesani syndrome
(WMS) may also be caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in
FBN1. Compound heterozygous or homozygous pathogenic variants at a second locus, ADAMTSL4 cause ectopia lentis syndrome
associated with slightly younger age at diagnosis. Interestingly,
some FBN1 pathogenic variants can be associated with classic MFS,
ectopia lentis syndrome, and ectopia lentis combined with skin, but
not cardiovascular, manifestations of MFS, suggesting that these
presentations are part of a spectrum of clinical features of the same
disease, and highlighting the potential contribution of genetic modifiers of disease.
WMS is a systemic connective tissue disorder characterized by skin, skeletal, and ocular abnormalities, including

VASCULAR FEATURES

SYSTEMIC FEATURES

microspherophakia, ectopia lentis, and myopia. Features inconsistent with the diagnosis of MFS include short stature and brachydactyly. In addition to FBN1 pathogenic variants (type 2), the syndrome
may be caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in ADAMTS10 (type
1) or in LTBP2 (type 3), which encode ADAM metallopeptidase
with thrombospondin type 1 motif 10 and latent TGF-­β binding
protein 2, respectively.
Homocystinuria is a metabolic disorder caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the gene
encoding cystathionine β-­synthase, which leads to increases in both
homocysteine and methionine. The clinical features of untreated
homocystinuria include ectopia lentis and skeletal abnormalities resembling MFS. However, in contrast to MFS, affected persons often suffer from developmental delay, a predisposition to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4368 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
thromboembolic events, and a high incidence of coronary artery
disease. Patients with homocystinuria are not at increased risk for
aortic aneurysm.

Syndromes with Systemic Manifestations of MFS

Congenital contractural arachnodactyly (CCA) is a connective
tissue disorder caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in the
gene encoding fibrillin-2 (FBN2). There are a number of clinical
features overlapping with MFS, including dolichostenomelia, anterior chest deformity, scoliosis, joint contractures, and arachnodactyly, as well as some craniofacial malformations, including highly
arched palate and retrognathia. In addition, both may suffer from
severe cardiovascular abnormalities leading to premature death, but
the specific cardiac anomalies are different; valvular insufficiency
and aortic root dilation are common with MFS, whereas congenital
heart defects are more common in CCA. Patients with CCA also suffer from crumpled auricular helices (a hallmark of this condition).
Many patients referred for possible MFS are found to have evidence of a systemic connective tissue disorder, including long
limbs, deformity of the thoracic cage, striae atrophicae, mitral valve
prolapse, and borderline but nonprogressive dilatation of the aortic
root, but do not meet diagnostic criteria for MFS. This constellation of features is referred to by the acronym MASS phenotype,
emphasizing the mitral, aortic, skin, and skeletal manifestations.
The MASS phenotype can segregate in large pedigrees and remain
stable over time. The diagnosis is particularly challenging in the
context of a young, sporadic patient in whom careful follow-­up is
needed to distinguish MASS phenotype from early MFS. Familial
mitral valve prolapse syndrome can also be caused by pathogenic
variants in the gene encoding fibrillin-1 and include subdiagnostic
systemic manifestations.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory studies should document a negative urinary cyanide
nitroprusside test or specific amino acid studies to exclude cystathionine β-­synthase deficiency (homocystinuria). Although it is
estimated that most, if not all, people with classic MFS have a FBN1
pathogenic variant, the large size of this gene and the extreme allelic
heterogeneity in MFS have frustrated efficient molecular diagnosis.
The yield of pathogenic variant screening varies based on technique
and clinical presentation. It remains unclear whether the “missing”
pathogenic variants are simply atypical in character or location
within FBN1 or located in another gene. Other differential diagnoses, such as MASS phenotype, EL, and WMS have been associated
with pathogenic variants in the FBN1 gene. Furthermore, it is often
difficult or impossible to predict the phenotype from the nature
or location of a FBN1 pathogenic variant in MFS. Hence molecular genetic techniques can contribute to the diagnosis, but they do
not substitute for comprehensive clinical evaluation and follow­up. Consequently, the absence or presence of a FBN1 pathogenic
variant is not sufficient to exclude or establish the diagnosis,
respectively.

MANAGEMENT

Management focuses on preventing complications and genetic
counseling. Referral to a multidisciplinary center where a geneticist with experience in MFS works in concert with subspecialists
to coordinate a rational approach to monitoring and treatment is
advisable, given the complex nature of some patients’ disease. Yearly
evaluations for cardiovascular disease, scoliosis, or ophthalmologic
problems are imperative.

CURRENT THERAPIES

Most therapies currently available or under investigation aim to diminish cardiovascular complications, which can be categorized into activity restrictions, aortic surgery, endocarditis prophylaxis, and current
pharmacologic approaches.

Activity Restrictions

Physical therapy can improve cardiovascular performance, neuromuscular tone, and psychosocial health, and so aerobic exertion in
moderation is recommended. However, strenuous physical exertion,
competitive or contact sports, and particularly isometric activities such
as weightlifting, which invoke a Valsalva maneuver, should be avoided.

Aortic Surgery

Surgical outcome is more favorable if undertaken on an elective rather
than an urgent or emergent basis (mortality of 1.5% vs 2.6% and 11.7%,
respectively). Therefore aortic surgery should be recommended for adult
patients when their aortic root diameter approaches 50 mm, and early
intervention should be considered for those with a rapid rate of enlargement (>5-10 mm/yr) or a family history of early aortic dissection. There
are no definitive criteria guiding the timing of surgery in children in
whom dissection is extremely rare, irrespective of aortic size. This has
prompted many centers to adopt the adult criterion of 50 mm, although
early surgery may be undertaken in the presence of a rapid rate of growth
(>10 mm/yr) or the emergence of significant aortic regurgitation. Preserving the native aortic valve at the time of repair is desirable to avoid
the need for lifelong anticoagulation. Mitral valve repair or replacement
is advised for severe mitral valve regurgitation with associated symptoms
or progressive left ventricular dilatation or dysfunction.

Pregnancy

There is higher risk of aortic dissection during pregnancy and particularly in the early postpartum period in women with MFS. However,
improved awareness and data have indicated the risk is low in patients
with an aortic root diameter <40 mm. Prophylactic aortic root replacement can minimize the risk of aortic dissection and death in women
with MFS who wish to become pregnant, but the risk of more distal
ascending or descending aortic dissection would not be modified by
this intervention. Work in mouse models of MFS and other vascular
connective tissue disorders has associated postpartum aortic rupture
with lactation and specifically the activity of the hormone oxytocin.
This complication can be diminished or even avoided in some mouse
models by avoiding lactation through pup removal or a pharmacologic
antagonist of the oxytocin receptor. Although more work needs to be
done in this area, we discuss the potential negative implications of lactation with women with MFS that choose to become pregnant and are
deemed to be at particularly high risk based on the personal or family
history.

Endocarditis Prophylaxis

The Professional Advisory Board of the National Marfan Foundation
believes that patients with MFS should continue to receive prophylaxis
for bacterial endocarditis, in part because it remains unknown, but
possible, that the myxomatous valves typical of MFS are a preferred
substrate for bacterial infection.

Current Pharmacologic Approaches
β-­Blockers

β-­Adrenergic receptor blockers have historically been considered the
standard of care in MFS, and multiple small observational studies have
suggested there is a protective effect on aortic root growth, with the
dose typically titrated to achieve a heart rate <100 beats/min during
submaximal exercise. Given the putative role of hemodynamic stress in
aortic dilatation and aortic dissection in MFS, these effects are attributed to the negative inotropic and chronotropic effects of β-­blockade.

Angiotensin II Receptor Type 1 Blockers

There is extensive evidence linking angiotensin II signaling to TGF-­β
activation and signaling. In a mouse model of MFS, the angiotensin II
receptor type 1 blocker (ARB) losartan was shown to completely prevent pathologic aortic root growth and to normalize both aortic wall
thickness and architecture, findings that were absent in placebo-­treated
and propranolol-­treated mice. These data suggest the potential for productive aortic wall remodeling in MFS after TGF-­β inhibition.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 744 u Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome
In support of its relevance to humans, a retrospective study assessing
the effect of ARBs in a small cohort of pediatric patients with MFS who
had severe aortic root enlargement despite previous alternative medical therapy, showed that ARBs significantly slowed the rate of aortic
root and sinotubular junction dilatation (both of which occur in MFS),
whereas the distal ascending aorta (which does not normally become
dilated in MFS) remained unaffected. Further evidence of a beneficial
effect from losartan therapy has been provided by three prospective
clinical trials demonstrating that losartan treatment alone or in combination with β-­blockade slowed the progression of aortic root dilation
in patients with MFS.
A comparison clinical trial assessing the therapeutic benefit of
losartan versus atenolol in patients with MFS concluded that both
drugs provided significant protection against aortic growth, with no
significant difference in therapeutic effect between the two drugs
despite the use of conventional dose losartan (FDA-­approved dose
for hypertension) and an atypically high dose of atenolol (average
dose of atenolol was 1.5 times and the maximum dose was 2 times
the FDA approved upper limit for the treatment of hypertension).
Both treatment arms in this trial showed a very slow rate of aortic root growth and a significant decline in aortic root z score over
time, a performance superior to that observed in untreated Marfan
patients or in patients treated with conventional dose atenolol (1–2
mg/kg/day). These data strongly suggest that both modalities have
therapeutic roles in patients with MFS.
Additional prospective studies have demonstrated therapeutic
benefit of ARBs. A meta-­analysis integrating seven randomized
prospective trials and over 1,500 patients concluded that ARBs
are both efficacious and safe in MFS, either when used alone (in
comparison to placebo) or in combination with β-­blockers (in comparison to β-­blockers alone). An 8-­year follow-­up of a Dutch study
exploring the use of ARBs in adults with MFS suggested that this
treatment not only suppressed pathologic aortic growth but also
positively influenced important patient outcomes, including risk of
surgery, aortic dissection, and all-­cause mortality.

PROGNOSIS

The major cause of mortality is aortic root dilatation, dissection,
and rupture, with the majority of fatal events occurring in the third
and fourth decades of life. A reevaluation of life expectancy in
MFS suggested that early diagnosis and refined medical and surgical management has greatly improved the prognosis for patients
with the condition. Nevertheless, MFS continues to be associated
with significant morbidity, and selected subgroups are refractory
to therapy and continue to show early mortality. In a review of 54
patients diagnosed during infancy, 89% had serious cardiac pathology, and cardiac disease was progressive despite standard care (22%
died during childhood, 16% before age 1 year). In the classic form
of MFS, it is estimated that more than 90% of individuals will have
a cardiovascular event during their lifetime, placing both physical
and mental stresses on patients and their families. Awareness of
these issues and referral for support services can facilitate a positive
perspective toward the condition.

GENETIC COUNSELING

The heritable nature of MFS makes recurrence risk (genetic) counseling mandatory. Fathers of these sporadic cases are, on average,
7-10 years older than fathers in the general population. This paternal age effect suggests that these cases represent new dominant
pathogenic variants with minimal recurrence risk to additional
future offspring of the normal parents. Owing to rare reports of
gonadal mosaicism in a phenotypically normal parent, the recurrence risk for parents of a sporadic case can be reported as low but
not zero. Each child of an affected parent, however, has a 50% risk
of inheriting the MFS pathogenic variant and thus being affected.
Recurrence risk counseling is best accomplished by professionals
with expertise in the issues surrounding the disorder.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

4369

Chapter 744

Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome
Donald Basel
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous group of heritable connective tissue disorders that are grouped into three broad
pathoetiologic categories and more specifically divided into fourteen subtypes (Table 744.1). Affected individuals are considered to
have an overlapping phenotype of abnormally soft, extensible skin,
which often heals poorly, in association with joint hypermobility
and occasional instability believed to be rooted in a disruption of
normal collagen function (Tables 744.2 and 744.3). All organ systems contain connective tissue elements, and many of these elements are involved in supporting the function of feedback receptors
such as mechanoreceptors in lumen or vessel walls or stretch receptors in tendons. The myriad of symptoms, variability of expression,
modes of inheritance, and unique phenotypic elements distinguish
the subtypes from one another while establishing their common
origins. The hypermobility type (hEDS) is the most common form
and has no clear molecular etiology.
The connective tissue matrix is complex (Fig. 744.1), and the
interplay of cells, collagen and elastin fibers, proteins, and cell
signaling molecules remains poorly understood. However, dysfunction at both structural and functional levels more than likely
explains the complex medical associations typically encountered in
this population, with complaints ranging from joint instability and
tissue fragility to chronic pain, autonomic dysfunction, and chronic
fatigue (see Table 744.3).

CLASSIFICATION OF THE SIX MOST COMMON
SUBTYPES OF EHLERS-­DANLOS SYNDROME
Classic (Genes: COL5a1, COL5a2, COL1a1;
Previously EDS Type I—Gravis, EDS Type II—Mitis)

Classic EDS is the second most common form of EDS and is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder characterized by skin
hyperelasticity (Fig. 744.2), widened atrophic scars (skin fragility),
and joint hypermobility. Other features include easy bruising, which
is often associated with hemosiderin staining of the tissues (particularly over regions exposed to frequent trauma, like the shins). The
skin is “velvet” to the touch and is particularly fragile, with minor
lacerations forming gaping wounds that leave broad, atrophic, papyraceous (“cigarette paper”) scars (Fig. 744.3; see also Table 744.2).
Additional cutaneous manifestations include molluscoid pseudotumors over pressure points from accumulations of connective tissue
and piezogenic papules (Fig. 744.4). Joints are hypermobile, often
with joint instability (Fig. 744.5). Scoliosis frequently presents in
adolescence, and mitral valve prolapse is common. Life expectancy
is generally not reduced, although rare rupture of large arteries has
been reported. Similar noncutaneous nonarticular comorbidities,
as seen in hypermobile EDS, are found, in particular pain and gastrointestinal dysfunction (see Table 744.3). Premature birth caused
by rupture of membranes of an affected offspring is not uncommon. The diagnosis is made by clinical findings and sequencing of
COL5A1 and COL5A2 genes.

Hypermobile (Cause Unknown, Previously EDS Type III)

Hypermobile EDS (hEDS) is the most prevalent form of EDS
with an estimated population frequency of between 0.75–3%. It
is an autosomal dominant disorder, but the causative molecular
pathoetiology remains elusive. Fewer than 3% of patients with a
hEDS phenotype are associated with heterozygous tenascin X gene
loss of function, and likewise, only a minority of cases are linked to
other findings, such as the association with mosaic type 1 collagen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4370 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 744.1  Classification of Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome
TYPE

GENE

Classic

COL5A1, COL5A2 (usually
haploinsufficiency)

SKIN FINDINGS

JOINT CHANGES

Hyperextensibility,
Hypermobility and
bruising, velvety skin,
its complications,
widened atrophic scars,
joint dislocations
molluscoid pseudotumors,
spheroids

COL1A1
Specific pathogenic
variant; c.934C>T

INHERITANCE

OTHER COMMENTS

AD

Mitral valve prolapse,
hernias

AD

Blue sclerae, short stature,
osteopenia/fractures; may
have late arterial rupture

AR

Severe cardiac valve issues
as adult

CLASSIC VARIANTS
Cardiac valvular

Biallelic loss of function
for COL1A2

Classic EDS features

Periodontal

C1R
C1S

Can have classic EDS
features

Can have
hypermobility

AD

Periodontitis, marfanoid
habitus, prominent eyes,
short philtrum

Classic-­like

TNXB

Hyperextensibility, marked
hypermobility, severe
bruising, velvety skin, no
scarring tendency
Joint hypermobility,
extensible and redundant
skin, abnormal scarring

Hypermobility

AR

Hypermobility

AR

Parents (especially mothers)
with one TNXB pathogenic
variant; can have joint
hypermobility
Biallelic loss of function
variants. Highly variable.

AEBP1

Hypermobility

Unknown

Mild hyperextensibility,
scarring, textural change

Hypermobility,
chronic joint
pain, recurrent
dislocations

AD

Sometimes confused with
joint hypermobility
syndrome

Vascular

COL3A1
Rare variants in COL1A1

Thin, translucent skin,
bruising, early varicosities, acrogeria

Small joint
hypermobility

AD

Abnormal type III collagen
secretion; rupture of bowel,
uterus, arteries; typical
facies; pneumothorax

Kyphoscoliosis

PLOD (deficient lysyl
hydroxylase)
FKBP14

Soft, hyperextensible skin,
bruising, atrophic scars

Hypermobility

AR

Severe congenital muscle
hypotonia that improves a
little in childhood; congenital
kyphoscoliosis, scleral fragility
and rupture, marfanoid
habitus, osteopenia,
sensorineural hearing loss

AR

Spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia; can have bone
fragility and severe progressive kyphoscoliosis without
congenital hypotonia;
moderate short stature,
loose facial skin, wrinkled
palms with thenar and
hypothenar atrophy, blue
sclerae, curly hair, alopecia

VARIANTS WITH KYPHOSCOLIOSIS
Spondylocheirodysplastic form

SLC39A13, which
encodes the ZIP13 zinc
transporter
B4GALT7 or B3GALT6,
encoding galactosyltransferase I or II,
key enzymes in GAG
synthesis

Similar to kyphoscoliotic
form

Brittle cornea
syndrome

ZNF469 or PRDM5

Skin hyperextensibility

Joint
hypermobility

AR

Kyphoscoliosis; characteristic thin, brittle cornea,
ocular fragility, blue sclera,
keratoconus

Musculocontractural

CHST14 (encoding
dermatan
4-­O-­sulfotransferase)
DSE (encoding dermatan
sulfate epimerase)

Fragile, hyperextensible
skin with atrophic scars
and delayed wound
healing

Hypermobility

AR

Progressive kyphoscoliosis;
adducted thumbs in infancy,
clubfoot, arachnodactyly,
contractures, characteristic
facial features, hemorrhagic
diathesis

Myopathic

COL12A1

Soft, hyperextensible

Hypermobile small
joints, large joint
contractures (hip,
knees, elbows)

AD or AR

Characterized by muscle
hypotonia and weakness

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 744 u Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome

4371

Table 744.1  Classification of Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome—cont’d
TYPE

GENE

SKIN FINDINGS

Arthrochalasis

Exon 6 deletion of
COL1A1 or COL1A2

Hyperextensible, soft skin
with or without abnormal
scarring

Dermatosparaxis

Type I collagen N-­
peptidase ADAMTS2

Severe fragility, sagging,
redundant skin

JOINT CHANGES

INHERITANCE

Marked
hypermobility
with recurrent
subluxations

AD

Congenital hip dislocation,
arthrochalasis, multiplex
congenita, short stature

OTHER COMMENTS

AR

Also occurs in cattle

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; EDS, Ehlers–Danlos syndrome; GAG, glycosaminoglycan.
From Malfait F, Francomano C, Byers P, et al. The 2017 International Classification of the Ehlers–Danlos syndromes. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2017;175(1):8–26.

Table 744.2  Common and Uncommon Features of
Classic Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome

Table 744.3  Associated Features in Ehlers-­Danlos/
Hypermobility Spectrum Disorders

SKIN
Hyperextensible
Velvety
Fragile, thin, poor tensile strength
Atopic scarring (“cigarette-­paper” scars)
Striae
Bruising and bleeding (hemosiderin staining of skin)
Piezogenic papules, subcutaneous sphenoids
Wound dehiscence/incisional hernia

AUTONOMIC AND NEUROLOGIC DYSFUNCTION
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS)
Dizziness
Palpitations
Gastroparesis
Diarrhea
Constipation
Sleep dysfunction
Chronic fatigue
Headache (migraine, new daily headache)
Urinary stress incontinence
Somatosensory amplification
Irritable bowel syndrome
Neuropathic pain

MUSCULOSKELETAL/JOINTS
Hypermobile ± joint dislocations
Pes planus
Chronic musculoskeletal pain, sprains
Late walking, hypotonia
OTHER ORGAN INVOLVEMENT
Chiari type I malformation
Gastrointestinal (nausea, reflux, constipation)
Umbilical hernia
Hiatal hernia
Mitral valve prolapse
Aortic root dilation
CSF leak/headache
Pelvic organ prolapse
Premature rupture of fetal membranes
Cervical incompetence
Stress incontinence
Hyperkyphosis
Scoliosis
High arched palate
Femur anteversion (“W” sitting position)
Hollow organ rupture, diverticula
Occipitoatlantoaxial hypermobility

defects. There are currently no diagnostic biomarkers, and the
inter-­and intrafamilial variation has clouded the ability to clearly
define large study populations with sufficient phenotypic alignment. An editorial highlighted the impact of sex hormones and
associations of certain symptom complexes to environmental exposures or “trigger events,” which begs the question of a more complex
gene-­environment or epigenetic influence.
The primary clinical finding in hEDS is generalized joint hypermobility with less prominent skin manifestations. There is inconsistency in the literature as to what defines hypermobility, but
generally a score of ≥6 on the Beighton hypermobility scale (Fig.
744.6, Table 744.4) would qualify as hypermobility in prepubertal
children and adolescents, ≥5 for postpubertal individuals up to
the age of 50, and ≥4 for all adults beyond the age of 50. Children
<6 years of age generally tend toward a hypermobile state, and the
Beighton score may not be a reliable indicator of connective tissue
laxity in these children (Table 744.5). Joint instability with frequent

MUSCULOSKELETAL PAIN
Chronic regional pain syndrome
Fibromyalgia

dislocations is common but not universal; joints are predisposed to
osteoarthritis in adults.
Patients with hEDS have significant nonarticular comorbidities
associated with functional disorders. These present as complex pain,
dysautonomia, chronic fatigue, anxiety, and sleep dysfunction (see
Table 744.3). The complexity of hEDS most likely originates from the
fact that it is genetically heterogeneous and represents an overlapping
spectrum of disorders. Although joint hypermobility is the common
denominator, symptoms may range from isolated familial joint hypermobility to the extreme multisystem disorder, which significantly
impacts daily quality of life. Life expectancy is not reduced. Mild aortic root dilatation has been reported in up to 20% of affected adults.
However, this mild dilatation is nonprogressive and not associated with
aortic root dissection.

Vascular (vEDS) (Gene: COL3A1; Previously EDS
Type IV)

vEDS is an autosomal dominant disorder that shows the most pronounced dermal thinning of all types of EDS. Consequently, the
skin is translucent, and the underlying venous network is prominent, most notably over the chest region. The skin has minimal
hyperextensibility but has a “velvet” texture and is often described as
“doughy.” The joints show increased mobility, often with instability.
Congenital club foot and hip dislocation are frequently associated.
Tissue fragility and arterial rupture cause significant morbidity and
mortality. The majority of affected individuals experience a major
vascular event before 20 years of age. Premature birth, extensive
ecchymoses from trauma, a high incidence of bowel rupture (especially the colon), uterine rupture during pregnancy (∼5% risk), rupture of the great vessels (80% by 40 years of age), dissecting aortic
aneurysm, and stroke all contribute to the increased morbidity and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4372 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Loose connective tissue

Amorphous matrix

Collagen fibers
Fibroblast
Macrophage
Lymphocyte
Elastic fibers
Monocyte

Reticular
fibers

Mast cell
Capillary

Fat cells

Erythrocyte
Macrophage

Endothelial
cell
Eosinophil
Plasma cell

Pericyte

Fig.

744.1 Complex connective tissue macroenvironment illustrated by intermingled collagen and elastin fibers, nerves, mast cells, and
capillaries. Both structure and function can be
impacted by an abnormal connective tissue matrix. (Courtesy Netter Images, Image ID 13192.
https://netterimages.com/loose-­connective-­tissue-­
ovalle-­histology-­figure-31-­labeled-­ovalle-­histology-­
frank-­h-­netter-13192.html)

Fig. 744.2 Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (EDS). Skin hyperextensibility on
the arm. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric
Dermatology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2016: Fig. 6.1, p. 121.)

Fig. 744.4 Piezogenic papules on the medial aspects of the heels in
a 41-­yr-­old patient with Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (top) and his 2-­yr-­old
daughter (bottom). (From Poppe H, Hamm H. Piezogenic papules in
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome. J Pediatr. 2013;63:1788.)

Fig. 744.3 Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (EDS). The Gorlin sign is 5 times
more common in EDS than in normal individuals. Note the scars on the
forehead. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric
Dermatology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2016: Fig. 6.2, p. 121.)

shortened life span associated with this condition. The median age
of death is estimated at 50 years. Patients are generally counseled
regarding the risks associated with pregnancy and advised to avoid
activities that raise intracranial or intrathoracic pressure as a result
of a Valsalva maneuver (such as weight training or trumpet playing). Skin protection in childhood is important to minimize trauma
(shin guards). Celiprolol, a β1 antagonist and a β2 agonist (vasodilator), may reduce vascular events but is not approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in the United
States. The diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by gene sequencing
of COL3A1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 744 u Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome
Kyphoscoliosis (Gene: PLOD [Lysyl Hydroxylase
Deficiency]; Previously EDS Type VI)

The kyphoscoliotic form of EDS is distinguished by the severe
kyphoscoliosis that develops early in childhood. It is an autosomal recessive disorder with phenotypic overlap with the classical
type of EDS in that the skin is soft and fragile, joints are hyperextensible, and easy bruising is notable from a young age. Unique

4373

characteristics include marked hypotonia and keratoconus, with
corneal fragility and globe rupture also reported. In addition, there
is a higher risk for rupture of medium-­sized arteries. The severity of
the kyphoscoliosis may lead to restrictive lung disease with secondary pulmonary hypertension and reduced life expectancy. The diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by urine screening for an increased
ratio of deoxypyridinoline to pyridinoline cross linking as well as
gene sequencing of PLOD.

Arthrochalasia (Gene: COL1a1, COL1a2; Previously
EDS Types VIIA and B)

This type of EDS is inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder and
characterized by severe joint instability in infancy. Joints show marked
hyperextensibility with painless dislocation; the skin bruises easily and
is soft and hyperextensible. Congenital hypotonia with gross motor
delay is common, and kyphoscoliosis can develop in childhood. The
diagnosis is clinical and confirmed by gene sequencing of COL1A1 and
COL1A2.

Dermatosparaxis (Type 1 Collagen N-­Peptidase;
Previously EDS Type VIIC)

Fig. 744.5 Despite joint hyperextensibility, this patient does not meet
Beighton score criteria for the extreme hypermobility seen with hypermobile Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome.

1. Passive dorsiflexion of the fifth metacarpophalangeal joint. Score is positive if  90°

2. Passive hyperextension of the elbow.
Score is positive if  10°

This type of EDS is a rare autosomal recessive condition characterized by redundant skin that is soft, fragile, and bruises easily.
Affected children often have a characteristic facial appearance,
with skin sagging into jowls and fullness around the eyes (“puffy”).
Premature rupture of membranes is common; closure of fontanels is delayed. Additional unique features reported in this group
include short limbs with brachydactyly (short fingers), frequent

4. Passive apposition of the thumb to the flexor side of the forearm, while shoulder is 90° flexed,
elbow extended and hand pronated. Score is positive if the whole thumb touches the flexor side of
the forearm.

Score: Positive

Score: Negative

5. Forward flexion of the trunk, with the knees straight. Score is positive if the
hand palms rest easily on the floor.

3. Passive hyperextension of the knee.
Score is positive if  10°

*Males positive if  180° for measure 2. and 3. Score: Positive

Score: Negative

Fig. 744.6 Beighton score. The range of motion of several key small and large joints is measured to provide an overview of joint hypermobility.

Instability is not assessed. Scoring: 2 points for each bilateral measure in Nos. 1 to 4 and 1 point for No. 5, equaling a total possible score of 9.
Hypermobility is considered significant with a score of ≥6 between the ages of 6 and 35. (Modified from Smits-­Engelsman B, Klerks M, Kirby A.
Beighton Score: a valid measure for generalized hypermobility in children. J Pediatr 2011;158:119–123.e4.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4374 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 744.4  The Nine-­Point Beighton Hypermobility
Score

Table 744.6  Genetic / Mendelian Conditions Presenting
with Joint Hypermobility

THE ABILITY TO:

RIGHT

LEFT

1. Passively dorsiflex the fifth
metacarpophalangeal joint to ≥90 degrees

1

1

2.	Oppose the thenar aspect of the thumb to
the volar aspect of the ipsilateral forearm

1

1

3.	Hyperextend the elbow to ≥10 degrees

1

1

HEREDITARY (SOFT/NONOSSIFIED) CONNECTIVE TISSUE
DISORDERS
Ehlers-­Danlos syndromes and related disorders
Fibrillinopathies (Marfan and Beals syndromes) and other disorders
of the transforming growth factor-­b pathway (e.g., Loeys-­Dietz
syndrome, Shprintzen-­Goldberg syndrome)
Hereditary cutis laxae

4.	Hyperextend the knee to ≥10 degrees

1

1

5.	Place hands flat on the floor without bending
the knees

1
Total: 9

One point may be gained for each side for maneuvers 1-4, so the hypermobility score
will have a maximum of 9 points if all are positive.
From Hakim A, Grahame R. Joint hypermobility. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol.
2003;17:989–1004, Table 1.

Table 744.5  A Five-­Part Questionnaire for Identifying
Hypermobility
1.	Can you now (or could you ever) place your hands flat on the floor
without bending your knees?
2.	Can you now (or could you ever) bend your thumb to touch your
forearm?
3.	As a child did you amuse your friends by contorting your body
into strange shapes or could you do the splits?
4.	As a child or teenager did your shoulder or kneecap dislocate on
more than one occasion?
5.	Do you consider yourself double-­jointed?
Answers in the affirmative to two or more questions suggest
hypermobility with sensitivity 80–85% and specificity 80–90%.

SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS
Achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia
Dysplasias with multiple dislocations (e.g., Larsen and Desboquis
syndromes, CST3-­related and gPAPP-­related disorders)
Some spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasias
Some COL2A1-­related and COL11-­related disorders
Diastrophic dysplasia
Trichorhinophalangeal dysplasia
HEREDITARY MYOPATHIES
COL6-­related disorders
SEPN1-­related and RYR1-­related disorders
MYH7-­related and TTN-­related disorders
Limb girdle muscular dystrophy 2E with joint hypermobility and
contractures
CHROMOSOMAL AND GENOMIC DISORDERS
Trisomy 21
47,XXY and 47,XXX
Some microdeletion and microduplication syndromes
MULTIPLE CONGENITAL ANOMALIES/INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
DISORDERS (SELECTED)
RASopathies
Kabuki syndrome
FG syndrome
Fragile X syndrome
From Castori M, Hakim A. Contemporary approach to joint hypermobility and related
disorders. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2017;29:640–649. Table 3.

From Hakim A, Grahame R. Joint hypermobility. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol.
2003;17:989–1004. Table 3.

hernias (umbilical, inguinal), blue sclerae, and bladder rupture.
Joints are hypermobile. The diagnosis is confirmed by sequencing
of ADAMTS2.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

EDS represents a portion of the hereditary connective tissue disorders, many of which have unique features that enable clinical
differentiation. The primary differential diagnosis would include
Loeys-­Dietz syndrome, which has features of both vEDS and Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743). EDS has also been confused with
MASS syndrome (mitral valve prolapse, aortic root dilation, skeletal
changes, skin changes), cutis laxa (see Chapter 745), and pseudoxanthoma elasticum. In general, the skin of patients with cutis laxa
hangs in redundant folds, whereas the skin of those with EDS is
hyperextensible and snaps back into place when stretched. Other
disorders that impact the integrity of the connective tissues—such
as exposure to corticosteroids and osteogenesis imperfecta or mild
myopathic disorders (Bethlem myopathy, Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy)—can be indistinguishable in the early stages of
disease (Table 744.6).

GENERAL APPROACH TO MANAGEMENT

In addition to the EDS type-­specific therapies discussed under each
disease, there are general approaches to help improve symptoms and
avoid complications.

Musculoskeletal pain, which initially involves the joints, eventually may become generalized and requires a combination of physical
therapy and nonpharmacologic approaches (Fig. 744.7). Physical
therapy should focus on enhancing the strength of the muscles supporting the affected joints. With severe recurrent sprains or dislocations, bracing may be necessary. Pain medication for low-­to
moderate-­intensity pain could include nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (however, their platelet-­inhibiting action may increase
the risk of cutaneous bleeding). Higher-­intensity pain may require
other agents, such as selective serotonin receptor inhibitors or low-­
dose tricyclic antidepressants. Muscle relaxants or antiepileptic
agents should be avoided because they may increase fatigue. Surgery for joint dislocations should be avoided if possible as should
prolonged periods of inactivity (which result in rapid muscle deconditioning) (Table 744.7). If surgery is needed for any complication,
the sutures should approximate the margins, suture tension should
be avoided, and the sutures should be retained longer than usual.
Other approaches to pain include cognitive behavioral therapy, acupuncture, and transepidermal electrical nerve stimulation (TENS).
Chronic fatigue should be approached by supporting good sleep
hygiene and avoiding sedating medications (see Table 744.7). Patients
at risk for arterial bowel or uterine rupture should be counseled about
preventive measures, appropriate medications (see specific subtype),
and early warning signs of organ rupture.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 745 u Cutis Laxa 4375

Young age
Joint hypermobility
Multiple trauma
Dislocations
Growing pain
Predominantly nociceptive pain

Widespread musculoskeletal pain
arthralgias/myalgias
Enthesopathies: Tenditis,
tenosynovitis, fasciitis
Non-articular pain: Gastrointestinal,
pelvic, or headache

Neuropathic pain: Nerve
entrapment syndromes
Peripheral paresthesias and signs
similar to complex regional pain
syndromes
Signs of central sensitization:
hyperalgesia, allodynia,
hypersensitivity

Pain with severe fatigue
Visceral complications of EDS
Cardiac and autonomic
disturbances

Fig. 744.7 Characteristics of pain in Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome that progress in clinical stages. (From Zhou Z, Rewari A, Shanthanna H. Management
of chronic pain in Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome. Medicine. 2018;97:e13115.)

Table 744.7  Lifestyle Recommendations for Hypermobile
Ehlers-­Danlos Syndrome
Promote regular aerobic fitness
Promote fitness support with strengthening, gentle stretching, and
proprioception exercise
Promote postural and ergonomic hygiene, especially during sleep,
at school, and in the workplace
Promote weight control (body mass index [BMI] <25)
Promote daily relaxation activities
Promote lubrication during sexual intercourse
Promote early treatment of malocclusion
Avoid high-­impact sports/activities
Avoid low environmental temperatures
Avoid prolonged sitting positions and prolonged recumbency
Avoid sudden head-­up postural change
Avoid excessive weightlifting/carrying
Avoid large meals (especially of refined carbohydrates)
Avoid hard foods intake and excessive jaw movements (e.g., ice,
gums)
Avoid bladder irritant foods (e.g., coffee and citrus products)
Avoid nicotine and alcohol intake
Note: these recommendations are intended as flexible indications for ameliorating
quality of life and do not represent lifesaving solutions.
Adapted from Castori M, Morlino S, Celletti C, et al. Management of pain and fatigue
in the joint hypermobility syndrome (aka Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, hypermobility
type): principles and proposal for a multidisciplinary approach. Am J Med Genet.
2012;158:2055–2070.

Chapter 745

Cutis Laxa
Leah Lalor
Cutis laxa syndromes encompass a group of rare multisystem disorders
that include loose redundant skinfolds as hallmark clinical feature (Fig.
745.1). Cutis laxa results from impaired elastic fiber assembly and homeostasis, and the known underlying gene defects affect different extracellular
matrix proteins, intracellular trafficking, or cellular metabolism.
Cutis laxa (CL) may present in autosomal recessive (ARCL1A,
ARCL1B, ARCL1C, ARCL2A, ARCL2B), autosomal dominant (ADCL),

Fig. 745.1 Pendulous folds of skin of an infant with cutis laxa.

X-­linked or acquired forms (Fig. 745.2, Tables 745.1 and 745.2). Acquired
CL may develop after a febrile illness, inflammatory skin diseases such
as lupus erythematosus or erythema multiforme, amyloidosis, urticaria,
angioedema, hypersensitivity reactions to penicillin, or in neonates born
to women who were taking penicillamine.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

CL may demonstrate widespread folds of loose skin, or changes may
be mild and limited in extent, resembling anetoderma. Patients with
severe cutis laxa have characteristic facial features; they present with
an aged appearance with sagging jowls (“bloodhound” appearance;
see Fig. 745.1), a hooked nose with everted nostrils, a short columella, a long upper lip, and everted lower eyelids. The skin is also
lax elsewhere on the body and has been described as resembling an
ill-­fitting suit. Hyperelasticity and hypermobility of the joints as seen
in the Ehlers-­Danlos syndromes are not present. Many infants have
a hoarse cry, probably as a result of laxity of the vocal cords. Tensile
strength of the skin is normal. Other features are noted in Table 745.3.
The autosomal dominant form of CL (ADCL) is typically caused by
pathogenic variants in ELN, which encodes elastin, an essential extracellular matrix protein responsible for maintenance of skin elasticity.
ADCL has predominant skin involvement but can have risk for aortic
aneurysm and emphysema. It typically manifests in infancy; it may be
associated with intrauterine growth restriction, ligamentous laxity, and
delayed closure of the fontanels.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4376 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Cutis laxa syndromes
ARCL
ADCL

X-linked CL
ARCL type 1

Predominant skin
involvement
Risk for aortic
aneurysm and
emphysema

Progeroid
Cataract
Athetoid
movements
Corpus callosum
agenesis

Emphysema
Genitourinary/
gastrointestinal
diverticula

ARCL type 2

Arterial tortuosity
Aneurysms

Glycosylation
defects
“Cobblestone”-like
cortical brain
malformations

Related
disorders

ARCL type 3

Aortic root
dilatation
Cardiomyopathy
Pneumothorax

Progeroid
Cataract
Athetoid
movements
Corpus callosum
agenesis

Occipital horns
Genitourinary
diverticula

ATS
SLC2A10
GO
SCYL1BP1

ELN

ARCL type
1a/c

ARCL type 1b

ARCL type 2a/b

ARCL type 2c/d

ARCL type 3a/b

FBLN5
LTBP4

FBLN4

ATP6V0A2
PYCR1

ATP6V1E1
ATP6V1A

PYCR1
ALDH18A1

ALDH18A1

MACS
ATP7A

RIN2

Fig. 745.2 The spectrum of cutis laxa disorders. ADCL, Autosomal dominant cutis laxa; ARCL, autosomal recessive cutis laxa; ATS, arterial tortu-

osity syndrome; GO, geroderma osteodysplasticum; MACS, macrocephaly-­alopecia-­cutis laxa-­scoliosis. (From Beyens A, Boel A, Symoens S, et al.
Cutis laxa: a comprehensive overview of clinical characteristics and pathophysiology. Clin Genet. 2021;99:53–66. Fig.1.)

Table 745.1  Disorders to Consider in the Differential Diagnosis of Cutis Laxa
CLINICAL FINDINGS
DISEASE NAME

GENE SYMBOL

MIM #

INHERITANCE

CUTIS LAXA

EMPHYSEMA ANEURYSMS

DEVELOP­MENTAL
DELAY

ALDH18A1-­related
cutis laxa

ALDH18A1

612652

AR

+

−

−

++

FBLN5 -­related cutis
laxa

FBLN5

219100

AR

+++

+++

−

−

EFEMP2 -­related cutis
laxa

EFEMP2 (FBLN4)

219100

AR

++

++

+++

−

Autosomal recessive
cutis laxa type 2A

ATP6V0A2

278250
219200

AR

++

−

−

++

Autosomal dominant
cutis laxa

ELN or FBLN5

123700

AD

+

+

+

−

Gerodermia
osteodysplastica

GORAB

231070

AR

++

−

−

−

De Barsy syndrome
(PYCR1 -­related
progeroid syndrome)

PYCR1

219150

AR

+

−

−

+++

Autosomal recessive
cutis laxa type 2B

PYCR1

612940

AR

+

−

_

+++

LTBP4 -­related cutis laxa

LTBP4

613177

AR

+

++

+

+

RIN2 -­related cutis laxa

RIN2

613075

AR

+

−

−

±

Reproduced with permission from Van Maldergem L, Dobyns W, Kornak U. ATP6V0A2-­Related Cutis Laxa. 2009 Mar 19 [Updated 2011 May 10]. In: Pagon RA, Bird TD, Dolan CR,
et al., eds. GeneReviews[Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993. Available from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK5200/

Pathogenic variants in ALDH18A1, which encodes delta-1-­
pyrroline-5-­
carboxylate synthetase (P5CS), a key enzyme in the
synthesis of proline (an abundant amino acid in elastin), can cause
autosomal dominant or recessive CL. Notably, pathogenic variants in PYCR1, which encodes pyrroline-­carboxylate reductase 1,
another enzyme in this pathway, cause recessive CL (ARCL3). Each
of these proline synthesis-­related CL subtypes can also present with

progeroid features, cataracts, athetoid movements, and corpus callosum anomalies.
Autosomal recessive CL is divided into three general subtypes: type
1 (ARCL1), with cardiopulmonary complications, type 2 (ARCL2), with
CNS and skeletal anomalies, and type 3 (ARCL3; de Barsy syndrome),
which adds ocular findings to the type 2 features. Overall, these individuals can present with multiple hernias, rectal prolapse, diaphragmatic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 746 u Bone Structure, Growth, and Hormonal Regulation 4377
Table 745.2  Associations with Acquired Cutis Laxa
Infections
Toxocara canis (cat-­scratch)
Treponema pallidum (syphilis)
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease)
Onchocerca volvulus (onchocerciasis)
Medications
Isoniazid
Penicillins
D-­penicillamine
Inflammatory diseases
Celiac disease
Sarcoidosis
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Sweet syndrome
Rheumatic disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis
Others
α1-­antitrypsin deficiency
Mastocytosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Amyloidosis
Malignancy
From Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022: Box 6.6, p. 151.

Table 745.3  Most Common Other Features of Cutis Laxa
• Facial dysmorphism
• Aortic dilatation
• Pulmonary artery stenosis
• Pulmonary emphysema
• Diverticulae: gastrointestinal, genitourinary
• Uterine or rectal prolapse
• Ventral, hiatal, inguinal hernias
Modified from Paller AS, Mancini AJ. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022: Box 6.4, p. 148.

atony, diverticula of the gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts, cor
pulmonale, emphysema, pneumothoraces, peripheral pulmonary
artery stenosis, and aortic dilation. Characteristic facial features include
downward-­slanting palpebral fissures, a broad, flat nose, and large ears.
Skeletal anomalies, dental caries, growth retardation, and developmental
delay also occur. Such patients often have a shortened life span.
ARCL1 is comprised of three subtypes. Subtypes ARCL1a and
ARCL1c (Urban-­Rifkin-­Davis syndrome), caused by dominant pathogenic variants in FBLN5 and LTPB4, respectively, are similar disorders
and, in addition to skin findings, more frequently develop emphysematous lung changes and mechanical insufficiency of the gastrointestinal
and genitourinary tract wall. Subtype ARCL1b, caused by pathogenic
variants in FBLN4, in addition to skin findings, typically develops
elongation, tortuosity, and aneurysms of the large-­and middle-­sized
arteries.
ARCL2 often presents with delays in neuromotor development and can
include epilepsy and cortical or cerebellar malformations. Recessive pathogenic variants in ATP6V0A2 (ARCL 2a) are more common and include
N-­or O-­glycosylation defects and pathogenic variants PYCR1 (ARCL2b).
ARCL2 with recessive pathogenic variants in ATP6V1E1 (ARCL2c)
and ATP6V1A (ARCL2d), genes encoding key enzymes in acidification of intracellular organelles, can include N-­or O-­glycosylation
defects and demonstrate increased frequency of aortic root dilatation,
cardiomyopathy, and pneumothorax.
X-­linked CL, also referred to as occipital horn syndrome, is caused
by pathogenic variants of ATP7A that encodes a Cu2+-­transporting
adenosine triphosphatase, α-­polypeptide. This clinical presentation is
allelic with Menkes disease (see Chapter 639.5) but is at the milder end
of that spectrum.

Cutis laxa–like skin changes may also be seen in association with
multiple other syndromes, including Lenz-­
Majewski syndrome,
hyperostotic dwarfism, SCARF (skeletal abnormalities, cutis laxa, craniostenosis, ambiguous genitalia, retardation, facial abnormalities)
syndrome, wrinkling skin syndrome, arterial tortuosity syndrome
(ATS), gerodermia osteodysplasia, macrocephaly alopecia cutis laxa
scoliosis syndrome (MACS), and Costello syndrome.

HISTOLOGY

Histologically, elastic tissue is reduced throughout the dermis, with
fragmentation, distention, and clumping of the elastic fibers. This often
results in bare microfibrils of random directionality. The light microscopic
appearance of elastic fibers in CL patients is typically not able to discern
between different subtypes as they appear reduced and fragmented in all.

TREATMENT

Treatment of the skin findings in cutis laxa is largely supportive,
although textural improvement and symptomatic relief using resurfacing lasers for acquired CL has been reported.
Regarding medical management, as a general rule, unrelated to the
underlying subtype, elastic fiber defects warrant regular assessment of
pulmonary, cardiovascular, and urinary systems. Yearly echocardiography is recommended in dominant CL, ARCL1a/c, and ARCL2c.
More intensive echocardiographic follow-­up is needed in ARCL1b and
ATS (every 3 months in ARCL1b; every 3 months until the age of 5 in
ATS), while in the remaining subtypes an examination every 3-5 years
is sufficient. In ARCL1, MRI head-­to-­pelvis should be repeated yearly
(ARCL1b) or every 3-5 years (ARCL1a/c and ATS).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 5

Metabolic Bone Disease
Chapter 746

Bone Structure, Growth,
and Hormonal Regulation
Rebecca J. Gordon and
Catherine M. Gordon
See also Chapters 69 and 610.
Bone is a rigid organ but metabolically active in that it is constantly
being formed (modeled) and reformed (remodeled). It is capable of
rapid turnover, bearing weight, and withstanding the stresses of various physical activities. Bone is the major body reservoir for calcium,
phosphorus, and magnesium. Other functions of bone include organ
protection, structure, movement, and sound transmission. It is also an
endocrine organ that produces fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23),
which regulates renal phosphate handling. Disorders that affect this
organ and the process of mineralization are designated metabolic
bone diseases.
The human skeleton consists of a protein matrix, largely composed
of a collagen-­
containing protein, osteoid, on which is deposited a
crystalline mineral phase. Collagen-­
containing osteoid accounts for
90% of bone protein; other proteins, including osteocalcin, which

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4378 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
contains γ-­carboxyglutamic acid, are also present. Synthesis of osteocalcin depends on vitamin K and vitamin D; in states with high bone turnover, serum osteocalcin values are often elevated. Osteocalcin appears to
enhance insulin secretion and sensitivity and reduce fat stores.
The microfibrillar matrix of osteoid permits deposition of highly
organized calcium phosphate crystals, including hydroxyapatite
[Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2] and octacalcium phosphate [Ca8H2(PO4)6⋅5H2O],
plus less-­organized amorphous calcium phosphate, calcium carbonate,
sodium, magnesium, and citrate. Hydroxyapatite is deep within bone
matrix, whereas amorphous calcium phosphate coats the surface of newly
formed or remodeled bone.
Because bone growth and turnover rates are high during childhood,
many clinical and osseous features of metabolic bone diseases are more
prominent in children than in adults. The growth pattern of bones is an
acceleration of bone growth (length) of the limbs during prepubescence,
increased growth (length) of the trunk (spine) during early adolescence,
and increased bone mineral deposition in late adolescence.
The use of dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry (DXA) or quantitative
CT permits measurement of both mineral content and bone density in
healthy subjects and children with metabolic bone disease. DXA exposes
the patient to less radiation than a chest radiograph and significantly less
than quantitative CT and is therefore most commonly used in clinical
practice (see Chapter 749). Bone growth occurs in children by the process of calcification of the cartilage cells present at the ends of bone. In
accord with the prevailing extracellular fluid calcium and phosphate concentrations, mineral is deposited in chondrocytes or cartilage cells set to
undergo mineralization. The main function of the vitamin D–parathyroid
hormone (PTH)–FGF23–endocrine axis is to maintain the extracellular
fluid calcium and phosphate concentrations at appropriate levels to permit
mineralization.
Other hormones also appear to regulate the growth and mineralization of cartilage, including growth hormone acting through insulin-­
like growth factors, thyroid hormones, insulin, leptin, ghrelin, and
androgens and estrogens during the pubertal growth spurt. Supraphysiologic concentrations of glucocorticoids impair cartilage function and
bone growth and augment bone resorption.
Rates of bone formation are coordinated with alterations in mineral
metabolism in both the intestine and kidneys, where a number of hormones
regulate the processes. Inadequate dietary intake or intestinal absorption of
calcium causes a fall in serum levels of calcium and its ionized fraction. This
decrease serves as the signal for PTH synthesis and secretion, resulting in
greater bone resorption (which raises the serum calcium level) and enhanced
distal tubular reabsorption of calcium. It also promotes higher rates of renal
synthesis of 1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH)2D] or calcitriol, the most
active metabolite of vitamin D (Fig. 746.1). Calcium homeostasis is thus
controlled by the intestine because the availability of 1,25(OH)2D ultimately
determines the fraction of ingested calcium that is absorbed.
Phosphate homeostasis is regulated by the kidneys because intestinal
phosphate absorption is nearly complete, and renal excretion determines
the serum level of phosphate. Excessive intestinal phosphate absorption causes a fall in serum levels of ionized calcium and a rise in PTH
secretion, resulting in phosphaturia, thus lowering the serum phosphate
level and permitting the calcium level to rise. Hypophosphatemia blocks
PTH secretion and promotes renal 1,25(OH)2D synthesis. This latter
compound also promotes greater intestinal phosphate absorption. The
important role of FGF23 in phosphate homeostasis is described later.
Vitamin D can be synthesized in the skin under the influence of ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, or it can be absorbed from the diet. It is converted
to 25(OH)D3 (vitamin D3) in the liver and then further converted by the
kidney. The skin contains 7-­dehydrocholesterol, which is converted to
vitamin D3 [25(OH)D3] by UV radiation; other inactive vitamin D sterols are also produced (see Chapter 69). Vitamin D3 is then transported
in the bloodstream to the liver by a vitamin D–binding protein (DBP);
DBP binds all forms of vitamin D. The plasma concentration of free or
non­bound vitamin D is much lower than the level of DBP-­bound vitamin
D metabolites.
Vitamin D also can enter the metabolic pathway by ingestion of dietary
vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) or vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol), the latter of
which is more potent, and both of which are absorbed from the intestine
because of the action of bile salts. After absorption, ingested vitamin D is

FGF23

()

()
UV

CYP27B

()

D3

25-D3

1, 25-D3

Diet

24, 25-D3

1, 24, 25-D3

()

CYP24

()

VDR

Transcription
of 200 proteins

Transcriptional
regulation
- Ca2 homeostasis
- cell proliferation
- cell differentiation
- immune function

Fig. 746.1 Vitamin D metabolism. Vitamin D can be synthesized in

the skin under the influence of ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, or it can be
absorbed from the diet. It is converted to 25(OH)D3 (vitamin D3) in the
liver and then further converted by the kidney. The enzyme cytochrome
P450 (CYP) 27B converts 25(OH)D3 to 1α,25-­(OH)2D3. 1,25(OH)2D3
binds to vitamin D receptor (VDR), which, after transport to the nucleus,
acts to induce the transcription of more than 200 proteins. The functions of some of the proteins are indicated. VDR activation leads to productions of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23). FGF23 induces phosphaturia (not shown), upregulates CYP 24, and downregulates CYP 27B.

transported by chylomicrons to the liver, where, along with skin-­derived
vitamin D3, it is converted to 25-­hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D]. The
25(OH)D is next transported by DBP to the kidneys, where it undergoes
further metabolism. 25(OH)D is the main circulating vitamin D metabolite in humans (Table 746.1). Because the synthesis of 25(OH)D is weakly
regulated by feedback, its plasma level rises in summer and decreases during winter. High vitamin D intake raises the plasma level of 25(OH)D to
many times above normal, but the parent vitamin D compound itself is
absorbed by adipose tissue.
In the kidneys, 25(OH)D undergoes further hydroxylation, depending
on the prevailing serum concentration of calcium, phosphate, PTH, and
FGF23. If the calcium or phosphate level is reduced or the PTH level is elevated, the enzyme 25(OH)D-1-­hydroxylase is activated and 1,25(OH)2D is
formed. 1,25(OH)2D3 binds to a vitamin D receptor, which after transport
to the nucleus, acts to induce the transcription of 200-400 proteins and
peptides. The functions of some of the proteins are known.
Another class of proteins important in the regulation of mineral balance and vitamin D synthesis are the phosphatonins. Among these are
FGF23, sFRP-4 (secreted Frizzled-­related protein 4), and MEPE (matrix
extracellular phosphoglycoprotein). Overexpression of FGF23 results in
hypophosphatemia, phosphaturia, reduced serum 1,25(OH)2D values,
and some forms of rickets. Disorders of phosphate balance, including
hyper-­and hypophosphatemia, can relate to loss or gain of function of
these phosphatonins (see Fig. 746.1).
Vitamin D receptor activation by 1,25(OH)2D leads to production of
FGF23. FGF23 is produced by osteocytes and targets another organ, the
kidney, to promote phosphaturia. FGF23 reduces expression/insertion of
two sodium phosphate transporters into the renal proximal tubule, resulting in higher levels of urinary phosphate excretion. This bone-­derived hormone also inhibits renal hydroxylase activity (CYP 27B1) and promotes
24-­hydroxylase activity, with resultant decrease in 1,25(OH)2D levels.
The active metabolite, 1,25(OH)2D, circulates at a level that is only
0.1% of the level of 25(OH)D (see Table 746.1) and acts on the intestine to
increase the active transport of calcium and stimulate phosphate absorption. Because 1α-­hydroxylase is a mitochondrial enzyme that is tightly
feedback regulated, the synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D declines after serum
calcium or phosphate values return to normal. Excessive 1,25(OH)2D
is converted to an inactive metabolite. In the presence of normal or elevated serum calcium or phosphate concentrations, the renal 25(OH)
D-24-­
hydroxylase is activated, producing 24,25-­
dihydroxyvitamin D
[24,25(OH)2D], which is a pathway for the removal of excess vitamin D;
serum levels of 24,25(OH)2D (1-5 ng/mL) increase after ingestion of large
amounts of vitamin D (see Fig. 746.1) or in the presence of increased concentrations of FGF23. Although hypervitaminosis D and production of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 746 u Bone Structure, Growth, and Hormonal Regulation 4379
Table 746.1  Vitamin D Metabolic Values in Plasma of
Normal Healthy Subjects
METABOLITE

PLASMA VALUE

Vitamin D2

1-2 ng/mL

Vitamin D3

1-2 ng/mL

25(OH)D2

4-10 ng/mL

25(OH)D3

26-70 ng/mL

TOTAL 25(OH)D

20-80 ng/mL*

24,25(OH)2D

1-4 ng/mL

1,25(OH)2D
Infancy

70-100 pg/mL

Childhood

30-50 pg/mL

Adolescence

40-80 pg/mL

Adulthood

20-35 pg/mL

*The Institute of Medicine states that a value of 25(OH)D of 20 ng/mL is the lower limit
of normal for the general population. In contrast, the Endocrine Society defines
vitamin D deficiency as having a serum level of less than 20 ng/mL, and insufficiency
as a serum level between 21-29 ng/mL.

inactive metabolites can occur after oral dosing, extensive skin exposure
to sunlight does not usually produce toxic levels of 25(OH)D3, suggesting
natural regulation of the production of this metabolite in cutaneous tissue.
Serum 1,25(OH)2D levels are higher in children than in adults, are
not as subject to seasonal variability, and peak during the first year of
life and again during the adolescent growth spurt. These values must be
interpreted in light of the prevailing serum calcium, phosphate, and PTH
values, and with regard to the entire vitamin D metabolite profile.
Mineral deficiency prevents the normal process of bone mineral
deposition. If mineral deficiency occurs at the growth plate, growth
slows and bone age is retarded, a condition called rickets. Poor mineralization of trabecular bone resulting in a greater proportion of unmineralized osteoid is the condition of osteomalacia. Rickets is found only
in growing children before fusion of the epiphyses, whereas osteomalacia is present at all ages. All patients with rickets have osteomalacia,
but not all patients with osteomalacia have rickets. These conditions
should not be confused with osteoporosis, a condition of equal loss of
bone volume and mineral (see Chapter 749).
Rickets may be classified as calcium-­deficient or phosphate-­deficient
rickets. Because both calcium and phosphate ions constitute bone mineral, the insufficiency of either type in the extracellular fluid that bathes
the mineralizing surface of bone results in rickets and osteomalacia.
The two types of rickets are distinguishable by their clinical manifestations (Table 746.2). Rickets can also occur in the face of mineral

Table 746.2  Clinical Variants of Rickets and Related Conditions
SERUM
CALCIUM
LEVEL

ALKALINE
PHOSPHATASE
ACTIVITY

URINE
CONCENTRATION
OF AMINO ACIDS

GENETICS

GENE
DEFECT
KNOWN

CALCIUM DEFICIENCY WITH SECONDARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM*
Lack of Vitamin D
Lack of exposure to sunlight
N or L
L

E

E

Dietary deficiency of vitamin D

N or L

L

E

E

Congenital

N or L

L

E

E

Other Deficiencies
Malabsorption of vitamin D

N or L

L

E

E

Liver diseases

N or L

L

E

E

Anticonvulsant drug

N or L

L

E

E

Renal osteodystrophy

N or L

E

E

V

L

N or L

E

PRIMARY PHOSPHATE DEFICIENCY (NO SECONDARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM)
Genetic primary hypophosphatemia
N
L
E

E

AR

Y

N

XL, AD, AR

Y

X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets

XL

Y

Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic
rickets

AD

Y

Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic
rickets

AR

Y

TYPE

Vitamin D–dependent type I

SERUM
PHOSPHORUS
LEVEL

Fanconi Syndrome
Cystinosis

N

L

E

E

AR

Y

Tyrosinosis

N

L

E

E

AR

Y

Lowe syndrome

N

L

E

E

XL

Y

Acquired

N

L

E

E

Phosphate Deficiency or Malabsorption
Parenteral hyperalimentation

N

L

E

N

Low phosphate intake

N

L

E

N
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4380 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Table 746.2  Clinical Variants of Rickets and Related Conditions—cont’d
SERUM
CALCIUM
LEVEL

SERUM
PHOSPHORUS
LEVEL

ALKALINE
PHOSPHATASE
ACTIVITY

URINE
CONCENTRATION
OF AMINO ACIDS

Renal tubular acidosis, type II proximal

N

L

E

N

Y

Tumor-­induced osteomalacia

N

L

E

N

Y

END-­ORGAN RESISTANCE TO 1,25(OH)2D3
Vitamin D-­dependent type II (several
variants)

L

L or N

E

E

AR

Y

RELATED CONDITIONS RESEMBLING RICKETS
Hypophosphatasia
N

N

L

Phosphoethanolamine elevated

AR

Y

Metaphyseal Dysostosis
Jansen type

E

N

E

N

AD

Y

Schmid type

N

N

E

N

AD

Y

TYPE

GENETICS

GENE
DEFECT
KNOWN

Other

*Deficiency of vitamin D; low 25(OH)D and no stimulation of higher 1,25(OH)2D values.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; E, elevated; L, low; N, normal; V, variable; XL, X-­linked; Y, yes.

deficiency, despite adequate vitamin D stores. True dietary calcium
deficiency rickets are found in some parts of Africa but rarely in North
America or Europe. A form of phosphate-­deficiency rickets can occur
in infants, given prolonged administration of phosphate-­sequestering
aluminum salts as a treatment for colic or gastroesophageal reflux. This
results in the phosphate depletion syndrome.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 747

Hypophosphatasia
Nourah N. Almutlaq and Linda A. DiMeglio
Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare inborn error of metabolism in
which tissue-­nonspecific (liver, bone, kidney) alkaline phosphatase
isoenzyme (TNSALP) activity is deficient, although activity of the
intestinal and placental isoenzymes is normal. Decreased serum
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) concentrations are the hallmark of HPP.
Pathogenic variants in the ALPL gene reduce the TNSALP enzyme
activity to below the level essential for normal bone and teeth mineralization. More than 340 variants have been identified to date.
Missense variants are the most common; however, splice-­site, small
deletions, and frameshift variants also have been found. The high
heterogeneity of the disease is related to the inheritance pattern and
different missense variants’ varied TNSALP activity effects. Although
the genotype/phenotype correlation is not very consistent, the more
severe forms are recessively inherited and milder disease is dominantly inherited.
The clinical spectrum of HPP ranges from a very severe, typically lethal, perinatal form to a mild form with late-­adult onset
presenting with nonpathognomonic symptoms such as arthropathy and musculoskeletal pain. A nosology describing seven forms
of the condition, ranging from neonatal lethal disease to odontohypophosphatasia, which only affects teeth with no skeletal deformities, is employed. (Subtypes and features of HPP are shown in
Table 747.1.) The most common signs across subtypes are bone

demineralization and premature loss of teeth with intact roots in
the setting of low ALP.
The most severe perinatal HPP cases are lethal in utero or
shortly after birth in untreated newborns. Infants have profound
skeletal hypomineralization with short bones that lead to chest
deformities and subsequent hypoplastic lungs. Infants may also
have anemia with intracranial hemorrhage, periodic apnea, and
pyridoxine-­dependent seizures (Fig. 747.1A). Infantile HPP is next
on the continuum. These infants present before 6 months of age
with overlapping symptoms to perinatal HPP, including respiratory
distress from severe lung hypoplasia. They can also have irritability and failure to thrive explained by the hypercalcemia/hypercalciuria (leading to nephrocalcinosis) and premature craniosynostosis
(can lead to increased intracranial pressure). X-­rays reveal irregular
ossification, punched-­out areas, and metaphyseal cupping. Before
the availability of enzyme replacement therapy with asfotase alfa,
mortality was estimated at 50% and survivors had significant disability. This subset of patients can also improve spontaneously as
affected children mature, although early death from renal failure or
flail chest leading to pneumonia can occur.
Of note, a benign prenatal form of hypophosphatasia also exists. It
is seen in newborns with low ALP and skeletal abnormalities in utero
or at birth that improve spontaneously over time.
The next category of hypophosphatasia manifests in childhood (after
6 months of life) or late adolescence (hypophosphatasia tarda) (see Fig.
747.1B). These children present with premature exfoliation of primary
teeth (with the root intact because of poorly mineralized dental cementum), mild skeletal deformities, fracture, and variable short stature. Some
children have symptoms of skeletal pain and muscle weakness. Long
bones can have characteristic “tongues” of radiolucency (Fig. 747.2).
An adult hypophosphatasia form manifests in middle age (although
some patients recount a history of early deciduous tooth loss or rickets). It is characterized by nonspecific symptoms and a milder course
than pediatric forms. This form may be diagnosed after affected individuals present with osteopenia/osteoporosis, recurrent metaphyseal
stress fractures (particularly of the metatarsals and tibiae), and femoral
pseudofractures. Affected individuals can also have psychiatric symptoms (depression/anxiety) chondrocalcinosis, osteoarthritis, myopathy,
nephrocalcinosis, and permanent tooth loss between 40-60 years of age.
Rarely, patients presenting with identical clinical and radiographic
patterns have normal serum alkaline phosphatase activity but increased
concentrations of phosphoethanolamine, inorganic phosphate, and
pyridoxal-5-­phosphate. Their disease has been labeled pseudohypophosphatasia and might represent the presence of a variant alkaline

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 747.1  Hypophosphatasia Main Subtypes and Features
SUBTYPE

ONSET

INHERITANCE

CLINICAL FEATURES

Perinatal severe

Perinatal

Recessive

• Lethal in all cases without enzyme replacement
• Prenatal US: absent skeletal mineralization, bowed/short long bones,
fractures, osteochondral spurs, and pretibial dimpling
• Death from respiratory distress from chest deformities and lung
hypoplasia
• Vitamin B6-­dependent seizures

Prenatal benign

Perinatal

Dominant and
recessive

• Skeletal deformity in utero without fractures (“bent not broken”)
• Improves spontaneously, benign course

Infantile

≤ 6 mo

Recessive

• Lethal in approximately 50% of cases without enzyme replacement
• Appear normal at birth
• Severe bone demineralization leads to rachitic chest deformities and
resultant pulmonary hypoplasia
• Hypercalcemic hypercalciuria (leads to nephrocalcinosis)
• Craniosynostosis

Childhood

6 mo-18 yr

Dominant and
recessive

• Premature loss of deciduous teeth with root intact in children <5 yr
• Rickets/fractures/skeletal deformities
• “Tongues” of radiolucency on x-­ray
• Chronic joint/bone pain
• Short stature

Adult

Adulthood

Dominant and
recessive

• Mild
• Osteoporosis
• Stress fractures, osteomalacia, and chondrocalcinosis

Odontohypophosphatasia

Childhood

Dominant and
recessive

• Mildest form of HPP
• No skeletal deformities; premature exfoliation of primary and/or
permanent teeth
• Severe dental caries

Osteopenia

Metaphyseal
fraying

Metadiaphyseal
sclerosis

A

Tongue of
radiolucency

A

B

Irregularity of
the provisional
zone of
calcification

Distal metaphyseal
demineralization

Fig. 747.1 A, Fetus with congenital lethal hypophosphatasia showing

thin wavy ribs, platyspondyly, missing cervical vertebrae, ossification,
and bent femurs. B, A 7-­yr-­old with hypophosphatasia tarda showing
osteopenia, bent tibias, and punched-­out metaphyseal lesions.

Transverse subphyseal
band of lucency
Apparent physeal
widening

phosphatase isoenzyme that catalyzes artificial substrates in an alkaline
environment (e.g., a test tube), but not in vivo with natural substrates.
Because of the heterogenous clinical manifestations of HPP, which often
mimics other skeletal disorders, delays and misdiagnosis are common. Clinical features and radiologic findings in the setting of low ALP for age or other
biomarkers of the disorder should raise suspicion. Initially the diagnosis
might be suspected in the presence of a low serum ALP (adjusted for age and
natal sex) and supported with an increased urinary phosphoethanolamine
PEA level or high vitamin B6 concentrations. However, other etiologies for
low ALP should be ruled out (Fig. 747.3 and Table 747.2).

B
Fig. 747.2 Skeletal features of untreated hypophosphatasia. Untreated,

the radiographic features of hypophosphatasia of the wrist (A) and knee (B)
in children include osteopenia, metaphyseal fraying, metaphyseal flaring,
metadiaphyseal sclerosis, characteristic “tongues” of radiolucency, irregularity of the provisional zone of calcification, distal metaphyseal demineralization, transverse subphyseal band of lucency, and apparent physeal widening. (From Whyte MP, Madson KL, Phillips D, et al. Asfotase alfa therapy
for children with hypophosphatasia. JCI Insight.2016;1:e85971, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4382 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
ALP activity below normal for age and sex

Blood sample contaminated with EDTA/citrate?

Yes

No

Indicated by generally low
levels of potassium, calcium
and magnesium

Severely or chronically ill or calorie deplete?
No
Symptoms of hypophosphatasia?
Respiratory failure
Vitamin B6 responsive seizures
Elevated serum calcium or phosphate
and/or nephrocalcinosis
Failure to thrive, short stature
Fractures and bone pain
Craniosynostosis (e.g. scaphocephalus)
Chest deformity
Delayed walking, waddling gait
Premature loss of teeth, late dentition
Hypophosphatasia unlikely,
carrier status possible
Repeat PLP & PEA analysis,
or further investigation of
symptoms

Odonto-hypophosphatasia
or carrier status likely
If no dental abnormalities,
further investigations incl.
genetic testing

No

Exclude other causes of low ALP
activity by measuring:
Zinc, Magnesium, Thyroid function,
Full blood count,
Renal and liver function,
Parathyroid hormone,
Vitamin B12, C & D,
Celiac antibodies
Serum ceruloplasmin
No abnormalities
detected

Yes
PLP & PEA normal

Hypophosphatasia likely
Confirm with Plasma PLP + Urinary PEA

Possibility of a mild form of
hypophosphatasia or carrier?

PLP ± PEA elevated

Radiographs not
suggestive of
hypophosphatasia

X-ray of Knee, Lateral + AP Skull
(± Skeletal survey)
Assess characteristic signs of
hypophosphatasia such as
low level of mineralization,
radiolucent projections from the
epiphyseal plate into the metaphysis,
craniosynostosis

Radiographs
suggestive of
hypophosphatasia

Diagnosis of
hypophosphatasia
Refer to Pediatric Bone
Specialist/Endocrinologist
Genetic testing

Fig. 747.3 Diagnostic algorithm for the investigation of children presenting with low ALP activity and/or symptoms of hypophosphatasia. For
patients with low ALP, other conditions such as nutritional deficiencies (protein/calorie, zinc, folic acid, magnesium, vitamins B6, B12, and C), vitamin D excess, hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, celiac disease, recent significant blood transfusions, renal osteodystrophy, cardiac surgery and
cardiopulmonary bypass, posthepatic resection and transplantation, achondroplasia, and Wilson disease need to be excluded. AP, Anteroposterior;
PEA, phosphoethanolamine; PLP, pyridoxal-5’-­phosphate. (From Saraff V, Narayanan VK, Lawson AJ, et al. A diagnostic algorithm for children with
low alkaline phosphatase activities: lessons learned from laboratory screening for hypophosphatasia. J Pediatr. 2016;172:181–186. Fig. 3.)

Table 747.2  Causes of Hypophosphatasemia
Cardiac bypass surgery
Celiac disease
Clofibrate therapy
Cleidocranial dysplasia
Cushing syndrome
Hypophosphatasia
Hypothyroidism
Improperly collected blood
(oxalate, EDTA)
Inappropriate reference range
Massive transfusion

Milk-­Alkali syndrome
Multiple myeloma
Osteogenesis imperfecta, type II
Pernicious or profound anemia
Radioactive heavy metals
Starvation
Vitamin C deficiency
Vitamin D intoxication
Wilson’s disease
Zn++ or Mg++ deficiency

Some mild HPP forms require only symptomatic and supportive
treatment. The primary treatment for more severe HPP is enzyme
replacement therapy with recombinant human TNSALP (asfotase
alfa). This therapy decreases the mortality rate in prenatal HPP and
improves skeletal healing and mineral content, pulmonary status,
and overall physical activity in other symptomatic forms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

EDTA, Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
From Whyte MP. Hypophosphatasia: an overview for 2017. Bone. 2017;102:15–25.
Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 749 u Osteoporosis 4383

Chapter 748

Hyperphosphatasia
Nourah N. Almutlaq and Linda A. DiMeglio
Hyperphosphatasia is a set of conditions characterized by hyperphosphatasemia (elevated serum alkaline phosphatase [ALP]). Increases
in alkaline phosphatase are most commonly because of hepatobiliary
disease or bone disorders characterized by high osteoblast activity,
including nutritional rickets. Distinguishing liver from bone etiologies
requires fractionating alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes or measuring
bone-­specific alkaline phosphatase as well as other laboratory assessments of liver function and bone turnover/vitamin D status. ALP activity varies by age and gender; therefore, specific reference ranges should
be employed. It is usually higher in pediatric populations than adults,
peaking at times of high bone formation including in the first 6 months
and during pubertal growth.
In children younger than 5 years, marked increases in alkaline phosphatase without clinical or laboratory evidence of liver or bone disease is most often because of benign transient hyperphosphatasemia
generally detected as an incidental finding during screening laboratory
evaluations or evaluations performed to assess a specific complaint.
The cause may be related to excess sialylation of alkaline phosphatase, which slows clearance. Cases often follow viral illness, including
SARS-­CoV-2 infection. Serum alkaline phosphatase values as high as
3,000-6,000 IU/L may be encountered. Liver and bone isoenzyme fractions are both elevated; there are no other clinical or laboratory signs
of hepatic or bone disease. Diagnosis is confirmed by a careful clinical
history plus laboratory assessments of calcium, phosphorus, creatine,
AST, ALT, GGT, bilirubin, PTH, and 25-­hydroxyvitamin D. A CBC
should also be drawn to rule out oncologic processes. Alkaline phosphatase should be followed serially (every 2-3 months) until resolution
is documented. The condition usually resolves within 16 weeks without
intervention and does not recur.
Juvenile Paget disease (familial hyperphosphatasemia, idiopathic
hyperphosphatasia or IHH) is a rare autosomal recessive bone disease hallmarked biochemically by marked serum ALP activity elevation. Most cases are because of loss-­of-­function variants in the tumor
necrosis factor receptor superfamily, member 11B gene (TNFRSF11B)
that encodes osteoprotegerin (OPG). OPG inhibits osteoclastogenesis
and osteoclast activity by preventing receptor activator of nuclear factor κ-­B (RANK) ligand (RANKL) from binding to its receptor RANK.
Affected children are asymptomatic at birth and gradually develop progressive long bone deformity (including kyphoscoliosis), bone pain,
and significant fractures. X-­rays show bowing and diaphyseal thickening, along with osteopenia (Fig. 748.1). Radiographically, the bony texture is variable; dense areas (showing a teased cotton-­wool appearance)
are interspersed with radiolucent areas and general demineralization.
Long bones appear cylindrical, lose metaphyseal modeling, and contain pseudocysts that show a dense, bony halo. Children with juvenile
Paget disease have short stature, large skulls with a thickened cranium
(widened diploë) that may be deformed, and progressive and profound
hearing loss. There is substantial phenotype variability; some cases are
diagnosed in infancy and others in late childhood. This disorder is distinct from adult Paget disease (osteitis deformans) because bone histology reveals a lack of normal cortical bone remodeling and an absence
of the classic mosaic pattern of lamellar bone found in the adult condition. Given the rarity of this disorder, there is no strong evidence
surrounding optimal clinical management; however, antiresorptive
therapy with bisphosphonates is associated with clinical, biochemical,
and radiographic improvement.

Fig. 748.1 Juvenile Paget disease showing bowing and thickening

of the diaphyses and osteopenia. (From Slovis T, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2008. Fig. 167–226,
p. 2744.)

Other rare forms of hyperphosphatasia include expansile skeletal hyperphosphatasia (ESH) caused by dominant variants in the
TNFRSF11A gene encoding receptor activator of RANK, which regulates osteoclastogenesis, and hyperphosphatasia-­mental retardation
syndrome caused by recessive variants in PIGV in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-­anchor biosynthesis pathway.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 749

Osteoporosis
Rebecca J. Gordon and
Catherine M. Gordon
Osteoporosis, the most common bone disorder in adults, is relatively
uncommon in children and adolescents; the criteria that underlie this
diagnosis in young patients are a source of debate. This disorder is
characterized by diminished bone volume and a marked increase in
the prevalence of fractures. In contrast to osteomalacia, which shows
undermineralization and normal bone volume, histologic sections of
bone in all forms of osteoporosis reveal a normal degree of mineralization but a reduction in the volume of bone, especially trabecular
bone (vertebral bone). The diagnosis of osteoporosis in children and
adolescents requires evidence of skeletal fragility with: (1) a clinically
significant fracture history, which is defined as at least two long bone
fractures in children less than 10 years old, at least three long bone fractures by 19 years old, or any vertebral fractures; and (2) low bone density, with age, sex, and ancestry-­matched bone mineral density (BMD)
Z-score ≤ –2.0, assessed by dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry (DXA).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

