Cancer and Benign Tumors
Chapter 540

Epidemiology of
Childhood and Adolescent
Cancer
Barbara L. Asselin
Cancer in patients younger than 20 years is uncommon, with an
age-­adjusted annual incidence of 19.6 per 100,000 children age 0-­19
years, representing only approximately 1% of all new cancer cases
in a year in the United States, or an estimated 16,000 new cases in
2021. This translates to nearly a 1 in 300 chance of developing cancer by age 20 years. Although the relative 5-­year survival rates have
improved from 61% in 1975–1977 to 85.1% in 2011–2017 in all age-­
groups 0-­19 years (Fig. 540.1), malignant neoplasms remain the
leading cause of disease-­related (noninjury) mortality (9%) among
persons 1-­19 years of age, with 1,800-­1,900 cancer-­related deaths
annually in the United States among children and adolescents
0-­19 years of age. The relative contribution of cancer to the overall
mortality in infants 0-­1 year old and adolescents 15-­19 years old
is lower than for children age 1-­14 years. The impressive improvements in survival over the last four decades are attributed primarily
to advances in treatment, supportive care, and enrollment in clinical trials for the majority of patients. Ongoing multi-­institutional
cooperative clinical trials are investigating novel therapies and ways
to improve survival rates further while decreasing treatment-­related

90
5-yr survival rate (%)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

13
20
14
–1
8

06
20

06
–

01
20

02
–

98
19

99
–

95
19

96
–

92
19

93
–

89
19

90
–

86
19

87
–

83
19

84
–

80
19

81
–

77

78
–

19

75
–

19

0

Year of diagnosis

Fig. 540.1 The 5-­year relative survival rates (%) by year of diagnosis of

all cancers in children ≤19 years old. The difference between the periods 1975–1977 and 2014–2018 is statistically significant (p < .05). Rates
based on follow-­up of patients into 2018 from Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database. (Data compiled from Howlader
N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al., eds. SEER Cancer Statistics Review,
1975-­2018. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute. https://seer.canc
er.gov/csr/1975_2018/. Based on November 2020 SEER data submission, posted to the SEER website, April 2021.)

PART

XX

long-­term complications. Because increasingly more patients survive their disease, clinical investigations also are focusing on the
quality of life among survivors and the late outcomes of therapy
for pediatric and adult survivors of childhood cancer. The National
Cancer Institute (NCI; https://www.cancer.gov/types/childhood-­
cancers/) estimated that as of January 1, 2018, there were approximately 483,000 persons alive (in all age-­groups) who had survived
childhood cancer (diagnosed at ages 0-­19 years). Given the overall
improvement in survival rates coupled with the increased incidence
of childhood cancer observed in recent decades, the number of survivors will continue to increase.
Pediatric malignancies differ greatly from adult malignancies
in both prognosis and distribution by histology and tumor site.
Lymphohematopoietic cancers (i.e., acute lymphoblastic leukemia, myeloid leukemia, Hodgkin and non-­Hodgkin lymphomas)
account for approximately 40%, central nervous system cancers
for approximately 30%, and embryonal tumors and sarcomas for
approximately 10% among the broad categories of childhood cancers (Table 540.1). In contrast, the epithelial tumors (or adenocarcinomas) of organs such as lung, colon, breast, and prostate often
seen among adults, are rare malignancies in children. Incidence
patterns in the pediatric age-­group show two peaks, in early childhood and in adolescence (Fig. 540.2). During the first year of life,
embryonal tumors such as neuroblastoma, nephroblastoma (Wilms
tumor), retinoblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, hepatoblastoma, and
medulloblastoma are most common (Figs. 540.3 and 540.4). These
tumors are much less common in older children and adults after
cell differentiation processes have slowed considerably. Embryonal tumors, acute leukemias, non-­Hodgkin lymphomas, and gliomas peak in incidence from 2-­5 years of age. As children age, bone
malignancies, Hodgkin disease, gonadal germ cell malignancies
(testicular and ovarian carcinomas), and other carcinomas increase
in incidence. Adolescence is a transitional period between the common early childhood malignancies and characteristic carcinomas of
adulthood (see Fig. 540.4).
Incidence rates also vary by gender (generally higher in males
vs females), ethnicity (leukemia more common in Hispanic children than White or Black children; brain tumors more common
in White children), and between countries (data assembled by the
International Agency for Research in Cancer in Lyon, France, htt
p://www.iarc.who.int/). These variations are not fully understood
but likely reflect differences in genetic susceptibility and environmental exposures related to both known and unknown causes and
risk factors for cancer (Table 540.2). Over the past four decades,
1975–2018, the U.S. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
Program (SEER) data show some increases in the incidence of children and adolescents diagnosed with cancer (annual percent change
about 1%), particularly in occurrence of leukemia, brain, and lymphoma and among adolescents. Interestingly, a similar increased
incidence of malignancies diagnosed in childhood was observed
between 1980 and 2010 in an international population-­based registry study involving 62 countries. Reasons postulated to explain
these increases include, but are not limited to, improved diagnosis,
better record keeping, and development of data registries. Further
analysis of trends among subpopulations, geographic variations,
and incidence rates in high-­income vs low-­income countries are
needed to clarify the role of genetic ancestry, environmental factors,
and technology as explanations of these time trends in cancer in
children.

3073
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3074 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 540.1  	 Age-­Adjusted Incidence and Survival Rates of Malignant Neoplasms by Tumor Type in U.S. Children
ANNUAL INCIDENCE RATES PER 1 MILLION CHILDREN, 2014–2018
AGE 10-­14
YR

AGE 15-­19
YR

5-­YR SURVIVAL
(%), AGE ≤19 YR
AT DIAGNOSIS,
2011–2017

AGE <1
YR

AGE 1-­4
YR

AGE 5-­9
YR

All malignancies combined

265

227

137

164

252

85.1

All Leukemias (ALL/AML)

51 (18/20)

93 (78/11)

4.5 (37/4)

36 (24/8)

37 (19.5/10)

85 (89/68)

Lymphoma (Hodgkin)

— (—)

9 (1)

17 (3.5)

28 (13)

54 (33)

94 (98)

CNS tumors

46

54

50

52

64

74

Neuroblastoma

56

21

4

1

1

82

Nephroblastoma/Wilms
(renal cell carcinoma)

16 (—)

19 (—)

6 (—)

1 (1)

— (1.5)

93

Bone

—

2

7

16

15

71

Soft tissue sarcomas

14

11

9

13

17

74

Retinoblastoma

31.5

8

—

—

—

96

Hepatoblastoma (hepatic
carcinoma)

14 (—)

6 (—)

0.8 (—)

0.4 (0.7)

— (1.5)

82

Germ cell tumors

20

4

3

9

29

92

Malignant epithelial cancer

2.5

2

6

24

68.5

94

Thyroid / melanoma

–*/–†

–*/1†

2*/2†

11*/3†

35*/9†

(99*/94†)

*Thyroid carcinoma.
†Malignant melanoma.
—, Indicates that the rate could not be calculated with <16 cases for the time interval.
ALL, Acute lymphoid leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; CNS, central nervous system.
Data compiled from Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al., eds. SEER cancer statistics review, 1975-­2018. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute, 2020. Based on November
2020 SEER data submission, posted to SEER website, April 2021.
Based on the International Classification of Childhood Cancer (ICCC). Rates are per 1 million children and are age-­adjusted to the 2000 U.S. standard population.

250
200
150

100

100

90

50

80

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Age at diagnosis (yr)

Fig. 540.2 Age-­specific cancer incidence rates per 1 million children

within the United States. (Rates based on data from 2000–2017 from
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results [SEER] database http://s
eer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2018/ and data compiled from Marcotte EL,
Domingues AM, Sample JM, et al. Racial and ethnic disparities in pediatric cancer incidence among children and young adults in the United
States by single year of age. Cancer 2021;127[19]:3651–3663. http://se
er.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2018/.)
Acute lymphoid
leukemia
Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma
Glioma

Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
Retinoblastoma
Primitive
neuroectodermal
tumor (PNET)
Birth

5

10
Age (yr)

Sarcomas
Osteosarcoma
Ewing sarcoma
Soft tissue sarcoma
Hodgkin disease
Testicular cancer
Ovarian cancer
18

Fig. 540.3 Generalized incidence of the most common types of cancer in children by age. The cumulative incidence of all cancers is shown
as a dashed green line. (Courtesy Archie Bleyer, MD.)

Rate/1 million children

Rate/1 million children

300

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
<1

1 to 4

5 to 9
10 to 14
Age at diagnosis (yr)

Leukemia
Lymphoma
CNS
Neuroblastoma
Renal

15 to 19

Hepatic
Bone
Soft tissue sarcomas
Germ cell
Carcinomas and melanoma

Fig. 540.4 Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) can-

cer incidence rates per 1 million children by International Classification
of Childhood Cancer (ICCC) and age <20 years. CNS, Central nervous system. (Data compiled from Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho
M, et al., eds. SEER cancer statistics review, 1975-­2018. Bethesda, MD:
National Cancer Institute, 2020. http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2018/.
Based on November 2020 SEER data submission, posted to the SEER
website, April 2021.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 540 u Epidemiology of Childhood and Adolescent Cancer

3075

Table 540.2  	 Known Risk Factors for Selected Childhood Cancers
CANCER TYPE

RISK FACTOR

Acute lymphoid
leukemia

Ionizing radiation

Therapeutic irradiation for cancer treatment

Ethnicity

Hispanic children have higher incidence compared with White or Black children
White children have a higher rate than Black children

Immunodeficiency

SCID, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome

Genetic factors*

Down syndrome is associated with an estimated 10-­20–fold increased risk
NF1
Li-­Fraumeni syndrome (TP53 pathogenic variants)
Noonan syndrome
Chromosome breakage syndromes
Bloom syndrome
Ataxia-­telangiectasia

Acute myeloid
leukemias/
myelodysplastic
syndrome

Chemotherapeutic agents

Alkylating agents and epipodophyllotoxins associated with risk of secondary leukemia

Genetic factors*

Down syndrome (particularly acute megakaryocytic leukemia)
NF1
Fanconi anemia and other inherited marrow failure syndromes
Li-­Fraumeni syndrome
GATA2 deficiency
Noonan syndrome
Familial monosomy 7 and other chromosomal pathogenic variants

Brain cancers

Therapeutic ionizing
radiation to the head

Radiation therapy as part of cancer treatment

Genetic factors*

NF1 is strongly associated with optic gliomas, and, to a lesser extent, with other
central nervous system tumors
Li-­Fraumeni syndrome
Tuberous sclerosis
Noonan syndrome
Von Hippel-­Landau syndrome
FAP syndrome

Family history

Monozygotic twins and siblings of cases are at increased risk

Infections

EBV is associated with increased risk

Immunodeficiency

Congenital immunodeficiency disorders (e.g., SCID and Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome)
Immunosuppressive therapy for other conditions associated with increased risk

Infections

EBV is associated with Burkitt lymphoma
PTLD-­EBV plays role in development of B-­cell lymphoproliferative disease seen in
immunocompromised hosts, especially those on immunosuppression following
organ transplantation

Ionizing radiation

Cancer radiation therapy

Chemotherapy

Alkylating agents increase risk

Genetic factors*

Li-­Fraumeni syndrome
Second malignancy in hereditary retinoblastoma with RB1 pathogenic variant

Ethnicity

White children have about a ninefold higher incidence rate than Black children in the
United States

Hodgkin disease

Non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma

Osteosarcoma

Ewing sarcoma
Neuroblastoma

COMMENTS

Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Li-­Fraumeni

Retinoblastoma

Genetic factors*

Familial; pathogenic variant of RB1 without other syndromic features—also with high
risk of second malignancies

Wilms tumor

Genetic factors*

WAGR syndrome WT1 germline pathogenic variant
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Li-­Fraumeni syndrome

Ethnicity

Asian children reportedly have about half the rates of White and Black children

Genetic factors*

Li-­Fraumeni syndrome
NF1
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
DICER1 syndrome
Gorlin syndrome

Rhabdomyosarcoma

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3076 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 540.2  	 Known Risk Factors for Selected Childhood Cancers—cont’d
CANCER TYPE

RISK FACTOR

Hepatoblastoma

Genetic factors*

Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome
Gardner syndrome; FAP

COMMENTS

Malignant germ cell
tumors

Cryptorchidism

Cryptorchidism is a risk factor for testicular germ cell tumors

*See Chapter 541 for additional information.
SCID, Severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome; NF1, neurofibromatosis type1; FAP, familial adenomatous polyposis; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; PTLD, posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder; WAGR, Wilms, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and retardation syndrome.
From Ripperger T, Bielack SS, Borkhardt A, et al. Childhood cancer predisposition syndromes – a concise review and recommendations by the Cancer Predisposition Working Group
of the Society for Pediatric Oncology and Hematology. Am J Med Genet. 2017;173:1017–1037, with data compiled from Porter CC, Druley TE, Erez A, et al. Recommendations for
surveillance for children with leukemia-­predisposing conditions. Clin Cancer Res. 2017;23(11):e14–e22.

Childhood cancer includes a diverse array of malignant tumors,
termed “cancers,” and nonmalignant tumors arising from disorders of genetic processes involved in control of cellular growth
and development. Although many genetic conditions are associated with increased risks for childhood cancer, such conditions are
believed to account for 8–10% of all occurrences (see Chapter 541).
The most notable germline genetic conditions that impart susceptibility to childhood cancer are Li-­Fraumeni (P53) syndrome, neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2, Down syndrome, Beckwith-­Wiedemann
syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, von Hippel-­L andau disease, Noonan
syndrome, ataxia-­telangiectasia, and familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome and associated conditions (see Table 540.2). Consensus guidelines for surveillance screening in pediatric cancer
predisposition syndromes were developed during a workshop of
the Pediatric Cancer Working Group of the American Association
for Cancer Research (AACR) and are available online through the
AACR Open Access journal website (http://clincancerres.aacrjourn
als.org/content/23/11).
Compared with adult epithelial tumors, an extremely small fraction of pediatric cancers appears to be explained by known environmental exposures (see Table 540.2). Ionizing radiation exposure
and several chemotherapeutic agents explain only a small number
of pediatric cases (see Chapter 758). The association between fetal
exposures and pediatric cancer is largely not established, with the
exception of maternal diethylstilbestrol intake during pregnancy
and subsequent vaginal adenocarcinoma in adolescent daughters.
Environmental exposures that have been studied without convincing evidence for a causal role include nonionizing power frequency
electromagnetic fields, pesticides, parental occupational chemical
exposures, dietary factors, in vitro fertilization, and tobacco smoke
exposure. Viruses associated with certain pediatric cancers include
polyomaviruses (BK, JC, SV40) associated with brain cancer and
Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) associated with certain subtypes of non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma.
The etiology of cancer in children still is poorly understood,
and epidemiology studies demonstrate that the likely mechanisms
are multifactorial, possibly resulting from potential interactions
between genetic susceptibility traits and environmental exposures.
Ongoing studies are investigating the role of polymorphisms
of genes encoding enzymes, which function in the activation or
metabolism of xenobiotics, protection of cells against oxidative
stress, DNA repair, and/or immune modulation.

Curative therapy with chemotherapy, radiation, and/or surgery can adversely affect a child’s development and result in serious long-­term medical and psychosocial effects in childhood and
adulthood. Potential adverse late effects include subsequent second malignancy, early mortality, infertility, reduced stature, cardiomyopathy, pulmonary fibrosis, osteoporosis, neurocognitive
impairment, affective disorders, and altered social functioning (see
Chapter 542). Much has been learned about the incidence of late
effects from large, multisite cohort studies such as the Childhood
Cancer Survivor Study, an ongoing study of medical and psychosocial outcomes in survivors, which has provided data for the development of clinical care guidelines for survivors (http://www.surviv
orshipguidelines.org).
Given the relative rarity of specific types of childhood cancer
and the sophisticated technology and expertise required for diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring of late effects, all children with
cancer should be treated with standardized clinical protocols in
pediatric clinical research settings whenever possible. Promoting
such treatment, the Children’s Oncology Group is an international
multi-­institutional research consortium that facilitates cooperative clinical, biologic, and epidemiologic research in more than 200
affiliated institutions in the United States, Canada, and other countries (http://childrensoncologygroup.org/). Coordinated participation in such research trials has been a major factor in the increased
survival for many children with cancer.

INFLUENCING THE INCIDENCE OF CANCER

There are only a few recognized environmental causes of childhood
cancer that can be avoided or counteracted. One example is immunization against hepatitis B, which decreases the risk of hepatocellular
carcinoma in adolescence and adulthood, and human papillomavirus
vaccination, which prevents cervical cancer and HPV-­positive oropharyngeal cancers and anal cancers. Associations between cumulative
radiation exposure from common diagnostic radiologic tests such as
CT scans and an increased risk of malignancy later in life are of great
concern for pediatricians. Guidelines to ensure the safe clinical use of
diagnostic imaging are being evaluated (http://www.imagegently.org/).
An objective of pediatric medicine is to teach children how to adopt
healthy lifestyles to reduce their risk of cancer during adulthood, such as
avoiding tobacco, alcohol, high-­fat diets, and obesity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 541 u Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer

Chapter 541

Molecular and Cellular
Biology of Cancer
Kristopher R. Bosse and Stephen P. Hunger
Cancer is a complex of diseases arising from alterations that can occur
in a wide variety of genes. Multiple pathogenic gene variants and other
genetic aberrations, some germline but most acquired (somatic), are
required for cells to become fully malignant. These genetic changes
lead to alterations in normal cellular processes that control cell proliferation and survival, including signal transduction, cell-­cycle control,
DNA repair, cellular growth and differentiation, translational regulation, senescence, and apoptosis (programmed cell death).

GENES INVOLVED IN ONCOGENESIS

Two major classes of genes are implicated in the development of cancer: oncogenes and tumor-­suppressor genes. Protooncogenes are cellular genes that are important for normal cellular function and code for
various proteins, including transcription factors, growth factors, and
growth factor receptors. These proteins are vital components in the
networks of signal transduction that regulate cell growth, division, and
differentiation. Protooncogenes can be altered to form oncogenes—
genes that, when translated, can contribute to malignant transformation of a cell.
Oncogenes can be divided into five different classes based on their
mechanisms of action. Changes in any of these normal cellular components can result in unchecked cell growth. Some oncogenes code for
growth factors that bind to a receptor and stimulate the production of
a protein. Other oncogenes code for growth factor receptors, which
are proteins on the cell surface. When growth factors bind to a growth
factor receptor, they can turn the receptor on or off. Pathogenic genetic
variants or posttranslational modifications of the receptor can result in
it being permanently turned on, with consequent unregulated growth.
Signal transducers or effectors make up another class. Signal transducers are responsible for taking the signal from the cell surface receptor to the cell nucleus. Transcription factors are molecules that bind to
specific areas of the DNA and control transcription. MYC and MYCN
are examples of transcription factors that when activated by pathogenic variants or amplification cause overstimulation of cell division.
The final class of oncogenes interferes with apoptosis, or programmed
cell death. Cells that no longer respond to the signal to die can lead to
uncontrolled cell proliferation.
The three main mechanisms by which protooncogenes are activated
are amplification, pathogenic variants, and translocation or interstitial deletion (Table 541.1). MYC or MYCN, which code for proteins
that regulate transcription, are examples of protooncogenes that are
activated by amplification. Patients with neuroblastoma in which the
MYCN gene is amplified 10-­300–fold have a poorer clinical outcome.
Point pathogenic genetic variants can also activate protooncogenes.
The NOTCH1 protooncogene codes for a membrane-­bound receptor
integral to cell fate and differentiation pathways during normal development that undergoes proteolytic cleavage on ligand-­induced activation, so that the protein can enter the nucleus and activate target gene
transcription. NOTCH1 has pathogenic variants in approximately 75%
of T-­cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias (ALLs), resulting in a constitutively activated protein important in leukemogenesis.
The third mechanism by which protooncogenes become activated is
chromosomal translocation or interstitial deletion. In some leukemias
and lymphomas, transcription factor–controlling sequences are relocated adjacent to transcriptionally active T-­cell receptors or immunoglobulin genes, resulting in dysregulated transcription of these genes
and leukemogenesis. A prominent example are translocations that

3077

bring c-­MYC under control of the immunoglobulin heavy-­chain gene
(IGH) or kappa (IGκ) or lambda (IGλ) light-­chain genes in Burkitt
lymphoma. Chromosomal translocations that join genes from two
different chromosomes or interstitial deletions or inversions within
a chromosome can also result in fusion genes; transcription of the
fusion gene results in production of a chimeric protein with new and
potentially oncogenic activity. Examples of cancers associated with
fusion genes include the childhood solid tumors Ewing sarcoma
[t(11;22)] and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma [t(2;13) or t(1;13)].
These translocations result in novel messenger RNA transcripts that
are useful as diagnostic markers. The best-­described translocation in
leukemia is the Philadelphia chromosome t(9;22), which produces
the BCR-­ABL1 protein found in chronic myelogenous leukemia and
specific subtypes of ALL. BCR-­ABL1 is a constitutively active tyrosine
kinase. In addition, the protein is localized to the cytoplasm instead of
the nucleus, exposing the kinase to a new spectrum of substrates.
Alteration in the regulation of tumor-­suppressor genes is another
mechanism involved in oncogenesis. Tumor-­
suppressor genes are
important regulators of cellular growth and apoptosis. They have been
called recessive oncogenes because the inactivation of both alleles of a
tumor-­suppressor gene is typically required for expression of a malignant phenotype.
Knudson’s “2-­hit” model of cancer development was based on the
eye tumor retinoblastoma developing at a significantly younger age
in children with the familial versus the sporadic form of the disease,
and that tumors were often multifocal in familial cases but were almost
always unifocal in sporadic cases. Knudson postulated that sporadic
cases of retinoblastoma required somatic pathogenic variants to inactivate both copies of a gene, whereas in familial cases, children must
inherit an inactivated allele from one parent and consequently only
require the somatic inactivation of the remaining normal allele. This
hypothesis was confirmed 15 years later following the discovery of the
RB tumor-­suppressor gene.
Another major tumor-­suppressor protein is TP53, which is known
as the “guardian of the genome” because it detects the presence of chromosomal damage and prevents the cell from dividing until repairs have
been made. In the presence of damage beyond repair, TP53 initiates
apoptosis and the cell dies. More than 50% of all tumors have abnormal
TP53 proteins. Pathogenic variants in the TP53 gene are important in
many cancers, including breast, colorectal, lung, esophageal, stomach,
ovarian, and prostatic carcinomas, as well as gliomas, sarcomas, and
some leukemias.

SYNDROMES PREDISPOSING TO CANCER

Several syndromes are associated with an increased risk of developing malignancies, which can be characterized by different mechanisms
(Table 541.2). One mechanism involves the inactivation of tumor-­
suppressor genes such as RB in familial retinoblastoma. Interestingly,
patients with retinoblastoma in which one of the alleles is inactivated
throughout the patient's body are also at a very high risk for developing osteosarcoma. A familial syndrome, Li-­Fraumeni syndrome, in
which one TP53 pathogenic variant allele is inherited, also has been
described in patients who develop sarcomas, leukemias, adrenocortical
carcinoma, and cancers of the breast, bone, lung, and brain. Neurofibromatosis (NF) is a condition characterized by the proliferation of
cells of neural crest origin. NF patients are at a higher risk of developing nervous system tumors, breast cancer, leukemia, pheochromocytomas, and other tumors. NF is inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner, although 50% of cases present without a family history and
occur secondary to the high rate of spontaneous pathogenic variants
of the NF1 gene.
A second mechanism responsible for an inherited predisposition to
develop cancer involves defects in DNA repair. Syndromes associated with
an excessive number of broken chromosomes caused by repair defects
include Bloom syndrome (short stature, photosensitive telangiectatic
erythema), ataxia-­telangiectasia (childhood ataxia with progressive
neuromotor degeneration, ocular telangiectasias), and Fanconi anemia
(short stature, skeletal and renal anomalies, pancytopenia). As a result
of the decreased ability to repair chromosomal defects, cells accumulate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3078 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 541.1  	 Oncogene Activators of Pediatric Tumors
MECHANISM

CHROMOSOME

Chromosomal
translocation

Gene amplification

Point pathogenic
gene variant

GENES

PROTEIN FUNCTION

TUMOR

t(9;22)

BCR::ABL1

Chimeric tyrosine kinase

CML, ALL

t(1;19)

TCF3 (E2A)::PBX1

Chimeric transcription factor

ALL

t(8;14)

MYC::IGH

Transcription factor

Burkitt lymphoma

t(15;17)

PML::RARA

Chimeric transcription factor

APML

11q23 and others (over
50 fusions partners)

KMT2A (MLL)

Regulation of gene expression

Infant leukemia, ALL, AML,
treatment-­related leukemias

t(12;21)

ETV6::RUNX1

Chimeric protein

ALL

t(2;13) or t(1;13)

PAX3 or PAX7::FOXO1

Transcription factor

Rhabdomyosarcoma

t(11;22)

EWS::­FLI1

Transcription factor

Ewing sarcoma

2p

MYCN

Transcription factor

Neuroblastoma

7p

EGFR

Growth factor receptor, tyrosine kinase

Glioblastoma, lung cancer

1p or 12p

NRAS or KRAS

Guanosine triphosphatase

AML, ALL, JMML,
rhabdomyosarcoma,
neuroblastoma

10q

RET

Tyrosine kinase

MEN2

2p

ALK

Tyrosine kinase

Neuroblastoma

9q

NOTCH1

Transmembrane receptor

ALL

ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; APML, acute promyelocytic leukemia; CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia; JMML, juvenile myelomonocytic
leukemia; MEN2, multiple endocrine neoplasia, type 2.

Table 541.2  	 Familial or Genetic Susceptibility to Malignancy
DISORDER

TUMOR/CANCER

CHROMOSOMAL DELETION/ANEUPLOIDY SYNDROMES
Chromosome 11p13 deletion
Wilms tumor
syndrome

COMMENT
Also known as WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia,
genitourinary abnormalities, mental retardation); deletion
typically includes WT1 gene

Chromosome 13q14 deletion
syndrome

Retinoblastoma, sarcoma

Associated with intellectual disability, characteristic craniofacial
abnormalities; deletion typically includes RB1 gene

Trisomy 21

ALL, AML, AMKL, TMD

Risk of ALL is increased 20-­fold, risk of AMKL is increased
500-­fold; high cure rates; more prone to chemotherapy
toxicity; AMKL associated with GATA1 pathogenic variants

Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY)

Breast cancer, extragonadal germ cell tumors

Trisomy 8

Myeloid neoplasms

Monosomy 5 or 7

AML, MDS

CHROMOSOMAL INSTABILITY SYNDROMES
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Basal cell and squamous cell carcinomas,
melanoma

Most commonly mosaic trisomy 8

Autosomal recessive; failure to repair UV-­damaged DNA; XP/
POLH pathogenic variants

Fanconi anemia

AML, MDS, rare head, neck, and skin tumors,
GI and GU cancers

Autosomal recessive; chromosome fragility; positive
diepoxy­butane (DEB) test result; pathogenic variants in
FANCX gene family (includes at least 21 members)

Bloom syndrome

AML, MDS, ALL, lymphoma, and solid tumors

Associated with growth deficiency, malar rash; autosomal
recessive; increase sister chromatid exchange (SCE);
pathogenic variants in BLM gene; member of the RecQ
helicase gene (unwinds DNA)

Ataxia-­telangiectasia

Lymphoma, leukemia, less often central
nervous system and other solid tumors

Associated with progressive ataxia, oculocutaneous
telangiectasias; autosomal recessive; sensitive to
radiation-­induced DNA damage; increased risk of
treatment-­related morbidity; biallelic pathogenic variant in
ATM tumor-­suppressor gene

Nijmegen breakage syndrome

Leukemia, lymphoma

Associated with microcephaly, characteristic facies,
immunodeficiency; biallelic pathogenic variants in NBN gene

Werner syndrome (progeria)

Soft tissue sarcomas, osteosarcoma,
melanoma

Associated with accelerated aging; autosomal recessive;
pathogenic variants in WRN gene

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 541 u Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer

3079

Table 541.2  	 Familial or Genetic Susceptibility to Malignancy—cont’d
DISORDER

TUMOR/CANCER

IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROMES
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Lymphoma, leukemia

COMMENT
Associated with thrombocytopenia, eczema, and recurrent
infections; X-­linked recessive; WASP pathogenic variants

X-­linked lymphoproliferative
syndrome (XLP)

B-­cell lymphoproliferative disease,
lymphomas, HLH

Associated with fulminant and often fatal EBV infection;
X-­linked; pathogenic variants in the SH2D1A gene

X-­linked agammaglobulinemia
(XLA)

Lymphoproliferative disorders, colorectal
cancer

Associated with absence of B cells; X-­linked; pathogenic
variants in BTK gene

Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)

Leukemia, lymphoma

X-­linked or autosomal recessive; pathogenic variants in IL2RG
and ADA genes

SYNDROMES ARISING FROM PATHOGENIC VARIANTS IN TUMOR SUPRESSORS OR ONCOGENES
Neurofibromatosis 1
Neurofibroma, optic glioma, acoustic
Associated with café-­au-­lait macules, axillary/inguinal freckling,
neuroma, astrocytoma, meningioma,
Lisch nodules; autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in
pheochromocytoma, rhabdomyosarcoma,
tumor-­suppressor gene NF1
MPNST, neuroblastoma, leukemias
Neurofibromatosis 2

Bilateral acoustic neuromas, meningiomas

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in tumor-­suppressor
gene NF2

Tuberous sclerosis

Facial angiofibromas, renal cell carcinoma,
renal angiomyolipomas, myocardial
rhabdomyoma

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in tumor-suppressor
gene TSC1 or TSC2

Noonan syndrome

JMML, ALL, neuroblastoma, brain tumors

Associated with distinct facial features, short stature, and heart
defects; autosomal dominant; caused by RAS/MAPK pathway
pathogenic variants (most frequently PTPN11)

Gorlin-­Goltz syndrome (nevoid
basal cell carcinoma
syndrome)

Multiple basal cell carcinomas,
medulloblastoma

Associated with odontogenic keratocysts, skeletal and skin
anomalies; autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in
PTCH1 or SUFU gene

Li-­Fraumeni syndrome

Osteosarcoma, soft tissue sarcoma, acute
leukemias, breast and brain cancer, adrenal
cortical tumors

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in TP53
tumor-­suppressor gene

Beckwith-­Wiedemann
syndrome (BWS)

Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma

Associated with macrosomia, macroglossia, hemihypertrophy,
omphalocele; epigenetic/genomic alterations of
chromosome 11p15

Von Hippel-­Landau syndrome

Hemangioblastomas of the brain and retina,
pheochromocytoma, renal cell carcinoma

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants of tumor-­suppressor
VHL gene

Multiple endocrine neoplasia,
type 1 (Wermer syndrome)

Parathyroid, pancreatic islet cell and pituitary
tumors

Associated with hyperparathyroidism, ZES; autosomal
dominant; pathogenic variants in MEN1 tumor-suppressor gene

Multiple endocrine neoplasia
syndrome, type 2A (Sipple
syndrome)

Medullary thyroid carcinoma, parathyroid
tumors, pheochromocytoma

Associated with hyperparathyroidism; autosomal dominant;
pathogenic variants in RET gene

Multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 2B (multiple mucosal
neuroma syndrome)

Mucosal neuromas, pheochromocytoma,
medullary thyroid carcinoma

Associated with Marfan habitus, neuropathy; autosomal
dominant; pathogenic variants in RET gene

Familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP)

Colorectal, thyroid, stomach and small
intestinal cancer, hepatoblastoma

Associated with multiple colon polyps; autosomal dominant;
pathogenic variants in APC gene

Juvenile polyposis syndrome

Colorectal, stomach, small intestinal and rectal
cancer

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in BMPR1A and
SMAD4 gene

Hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer (HNPCC,
Lynch syndrome)

Colorectal cancer, endometrial and stomach
cancer, many other cancers

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in DNA mismatch
repair genes MSH2, MLH1, PMS1, PMS2, and MSH6

Turcot syndrome

Colorectal cancer, brain tumors (glioblastoma,
medulloblastoma)

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in APC or MLH1
gene

Gardner syndrome

Colorectal cancer, other tumors similar to FAP

Subtype of FAP; autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in
APC gene

Constitutional mismatch repair
deficiency syndrome
(CMMRD)

Many different types of hematologic
malignancies and brain and CNS tumors,
colorectal carcinomas, and several other rare
tumors

Autosomal recessive; homozygous germline pathogenic
variants in the MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, or PMS2 genes; tumors
with very high variant burden, pathogenic variants of only
one allele of the same genes results in Lynch syndrome

Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome

Breast cancer, colorectal cancer, pancreatic
cancer

Associated with hamartomatous polyps of GI tract; freckling of
mouth, lips, fingers, and toes; autosomal dominant;
pathogenic variants in STK11 gene
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3080 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 541.2  	 Familial or Genetic Susceptibility to Malignancy—cont’d
DISORDER

TUMOR/CANCER

COMMENT

Hereditary hemochromatosis

Hepatocellular carcinoma

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in the HFE gene;
malignancy associated with cirrhotic liver

Glycogen storage disease
type 1 (von Gierke disease)

Hepatocellular carcinoma, liver adenomas

Autosomal recessive; pathogenic variants in G6PC or SLC37A4
gene

Diamond-­Blackfan anemia
(DBA)

Colorectal and other GI cancers, AML, MDS,
osteogenic sarcoma

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in the small or large
subunit-­associated ribosomal protein genes (most often RPS19)

Shwachman-­Diamond
syndrome

AML, MDS

Associated with neutropenia, diarrhea, and failure to thrive;
autosomal recessive; pathogenic variants in SBDS gene

DICER1 syndrome

Pleuropulmonary blastoma (PPB), cystic
nephromas, ovarian Sertoli-­Leydig tumors,
multinodular goiter

Autosomal dominant; associated with pathogenic variants in
DICER1 gene

Familial neuroblastoma

Neuroblastoma

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in ALK or PHOX2B
gene

Hereditary paraganglioma-­
pheochromocytoma
syndrome (PGL/PCC)

PGL, PCCs

Autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in the mitochondrial
enzyme succinate dehydrogenase protein family (SDHA, B,
C, or D)

Severe congenital or cyclic
neutropenia

AML, MDS

Associated with increased bacterial infections; typically autosomal dominant; pathogenic variants in ELANE or HAX1
(Kostmann syndrome) gene

Rhabdoid predisposition
syndrome 1 and 2

Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors, rhabdoid
tumor of kidney, medulloblastoma, choroid
plexus tumor

SMARCB1/SMARCA4 tumor suppression genes

Predisposition to
medulloblastoma

Medulloblastoma

SUFU, tumor suppression gene

Rothmund-­Thomson
syndrome

Skin, bone

ANAPC1/RECQL4 stability gene

Multiple exostosis

Chondrosarcoma

EXT1/EXT2, tumor suppression gene

PTEN
Hamartoma tumor syndromes:
Cowden, Bannayan-­Riley-­
Ruvalcaba, proteus,
proteus-­like syndromes

Breast, thyroid, renal, colon, melanoma

PTEN, AKT1, PIK3CA, AKT3, PIK3R2, WWP1 germline or
somatic pathogenic variants

BRCA1/2

Brain, solid tumors in children

Heterozygous pathogenic variants increase risk

ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; AMKL, acute megakaryocytic leukemia; CNS, central nervous system; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; GI, gastrointestinal; GU, genitourinary; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; JMML, juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia; MAPK, mitogen-­activated protein kinase; MDS, myelodysplastic
syndrome; MPNST, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog; TMD, transient myeloproliferative disorder; UV, ultraviolet; ZES, Zollinger-­
Ellison syndrome.

abnormal DNA that results in significantly increased rates of cancer, especially leukemia. Xeroderma pigmentosum likewise increases the risk of
skin cancer because of defects in repair to DNA damaged by ultraviolet
light. Constitutional mismatch repair deficiency syndrome (CMMRD)
is a disorder that results from the loss of both alleles of genes integral in
repairing errors that occur during DNA replication, leading to the accumulation of multiple potentially pathogenic genetic alterations. These disorders display an autosomal recessive pattern.
The third category of inherited cancer predisposition is characterized by defects in immune surveillance. This group includes patients
with Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, severe combined immunodeficiency, common variable immunodeficiency, and the X-­linked lymphoproliferative syndrome. The most common types of malignancy
in these patients are lymphoma and leukemia. Cure rates for immunodeficient children with cancer are much poorer than for immunocompetent children with similar malignancies, suggesting a role for the
immune system in cancer treatment as well as in cancer prevention.
Genome-­wide association studies (GWAS) in a diverse array of childhood tumors, including ALL and neuroblastoma, have defined common
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes that are associated
with cancer predisposition and collectively define regions of the genome
that are critical in tumorigenesis. These alterations may occur in the coding or noncoding regions of the genome and typically lead to a relatively

modest increase in cancer risk (2-­10–fold over background) compared to
the cancer susceptibility syndromes previously discussed, which may be
associated with a lifetime risk of 50–100% of developing cancer. Furthermore, whole genome sequencing efforts across diverse pediatric cancers
have identified that at least 8% of children who develop malignancy have a
germline cancer-­predisposing gene pathogenic variant. Many of these predisposing pathogenic variants occur in children without a family history of
cancer or a known cancer predisposition syndrome.

OTHER FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH
ONCOGENESIS
Viruses

Several viruses have been implicated in the pathogenesis of malignancy. The association of the Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) with Burkitt
lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma was identified more than
40 years ago, although EBV infection alone is not sufficient for malignant transformation. EBV is also associated with mixed cellularity and
lymphocyte-­depleted Hodgkin disease, as well as some T-­cell lymphomas, which is particularly intriguing because EBV normally does not
infect T lymphocytes. The most conclusive evidence for a role of EBV
in lymphogenesis is the direct causal role of EBV for B-­cell lymphoproliferative disease in immunocompromised persons, especially those
with HIV infection or those receiving immunosuppression after organ

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 542 u Principles of Cancer Diagnosis
transplantation. Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-­8) is associated with the
development of Kaposi sarcoma.
Children who are chronically infected with hepatitis B virus (hepatitis B surface antigen positive) have a 100-­fold increased risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma. In adults the latency period between viral
infection and development of hepatocellular carcinoma approaches 20
years. However, in children who acquire the viral infection through perinatal transmission, the latency period can be as short as 6-­7 years. The
additional factors that are required for the malignant transformation of
virally infected hepatocytes are not clear. Hepatitis C virus infection is
another risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma and is also associated with
a subset of B-­cell non-­Hodgkin lymphomas such as splenic lymphoma.
Almost all cervical carcinomas are caused by human papillomaviruses
(HPVs). High-­risk HPVs include types 16 and 18 but also types 31, 33, 34,
45, 52, and 58, which together cause >90% of cervical cancers. Vaccines
against the major oncogenic subtypes are now available and are likely to
save hundreds of millions of lives worldwide. The low-­risk HPVs, including 6 and 11, which are commonly found in genital warts, are almost never
associated with malignancies. Like other virus-­associated cancers, the
presence of HPV alone is not sufficient to cause malignant transformation.
The mechanism by which the HPV-­associated oncoproteins HPV E6 and
E7 induce malignant transformation is thought to involve both the TP53
and the RB tumor-­suppressor proteins, as well as other pathways that are
critical in cell cycle progression, maintenance of telomerase and genomic
stability, and apoptosis.

Radiation

Children who are exposed to ionizing radiation, either via environmental factors or from medical diagnostics or treatment, are also at
an increased of developing cancer over their lifetime, especially leukemias, brain, breast, skin, or thyroid malignancies. This increased pediatric cancer risk is likely due both to the enhanced radiosensitivity of
the developing organs of children and their longer postexposure life
expectancy. Diagnostic imaging (e.g., CT scans) and therapeutic radiation for children with cancer are a major source of childhood radiation
exposure. However, CT scan dose-­reduction strategies, the increased
use of MRI in pediatric medical centers, and the shift in therapeutic
practice in oncology to proton radiotherapy all have been integral in
lowering the exposure of children to ionizing radiation.

Genomic Imprinting

The development of cancer has also been linked to genomic imprinting,
which is the selective inactivation of one of two alleles of certain genes
depending on parental origin. Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS)
(see Chapter 113), the most commonly identified imprinting disorder, is
an overgrowth syndrome characterized by macrosomia, macroglossia,
hemihypertrophy, omphalocele, and renal anomalies that is also associated
with an increased risk of Wilms tumor, hepatoblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, and adrenocortical carcinoma. This increased risk
in developing cancer is directly associated with changes in the promoter
methylation patterns (or loss of heterozygosity) of imprinted genes on
chromosome 11p15.5. Normally, the maternally derived IGF2 (insulin-­
like growth factor receptor 2) allele at this genomic locus is inactivated,
thus suppressing IGF2 expression. However, children with BWS show a
gain of methylation in this promoter region, which allows for expression
from both maternal and paternal IGF2 alleles, leading to growth factor
overexpression. Concurrently, the neighboring maternal H19 gene (which
encodes ncRNA and miRNA critical in growth suppression) is silenced by
this hypermethylation, ultimately resulting in a progrowth phenotype and
predisposition to tumor development.

Telomerase

Telomeres are a series of tens to thousands of TTAGGG DNA sequence
repeats at the ends of chromosomes that are important for stabilizing
the chromosomal ends and limiting breakage, translocation, and loss
of DNA material. With DNA replication there is a progressive shortening of telomere length, which is a hallmark of cellular aging and acts
as a replicative senescence signal. In a majority of cancers, telomerase
(encoded by the TERT gene), an enzyme that adds telomeres to the

3081

ends of chromosomes, becomes activated, usually through pathologic
variants in the TERT promoter. The telomerase-­driven maintenance of
telomere length in tumors enables unrestrained cellular proliferation
by relieving a main checkpoint to cellular life span.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 542

Principles of Cancer
Diagnosis
Julia C. Meade, Erika D. Friehling, and
A. Kim Ritchey
Childhood cancer is uncommon and can manifest with symptoms
seen with nonmalignant illnesses. The challenge for the pediatrician
is to be alert to the clues suggesting a diagnosis of cancer. In addition
to the classic manifestations, any persistent, unexplained symptom or
sign should be evaluated as potentially emanating from a cancerous or
precancerous condition.

SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

The symptoms and signs of cancer are variable and nonspecific in pediatric patients. The types of cancer that occur during the first 20 years of
life vary dramatically as a function of age—more so than at any other
comparable age range (see Chapter 540). Unlike cancers in adults,
childhood cancers usually originate from the deeper, visceral structures and from the parenchyma of organs rather than from the epithelial layers that line the ducts and glands of organs and compose the
skin. In children, dissemination of disease at diagnosis is common, and
presenting symptoms or signs are often caused by systemic involvement. Pain was one of the initial presenting symptoms in >50% of
children with cancer in one study. Infants and young children cannot
express or localize their symptoms well.
Solid tumors may produce mass effects that are nonspecific, such as
compression of the thoracic airways or superior vena cava (lymphoma),
the optic chiasm and hypothalamic-­
pituitary region (craniopharyngioma), and the fourth ventricle (cerebellar astrocytoma). Another factor is the variability in the physiology and biology of the host related to
growth and development during infancy, childhood, and adolescence.
The signs of cancer in children are often attributed to other causes
before the malignancy is recognized. Delays in diagnosis are particularly problematic during late adolescence and are the result of a variety of factors prominent in this age-­group, including historic lack and
complexity of health insurance coverage.
Although there is no clearly established set of warning signs of cancer in young people, the most common cancers in children suggest
some guidelines that may be helpful in early recognition of signs and
symptoms of cancer (Table 542.1). Most of the symptoms and signs
are not specific and might represent other possibilities in a differential
diagnosis. Nonetheless, these clues encompass the common cancers of
childhood and have been very useful in early detection.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Physical examination findings in a child with malignancy are dependent on whether the cancer is systemic or localized. The cancers most
common in children involve the lymphoid and hematopoietic system.
When the bone marrow is compromised by malignancy (e.g., leukemia, disseminated neuroblastoma), typical findings include pallor
from anemia; bleeding, petechiae, or purpura from thrombocytopenia
or coagulopathy; cellulitis or other localized infection from leukopenia; and skin nodules (especially in infants) and hepatosplenomegaly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3082 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 542.1  	 Common Manifestations of Childhood Malignancies
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
Constitutional/
systemic

POTENTIAL ETIOLOGY AND POSSIBLE DIAGNOSIS

Fever, persistent or recurrent infection, neutropenia

Bone marrow infiltration from leukemia, neuroblastoma

Fever of unknown origin, weight loss, night sweats

Hodgkin and non-­Hodgkin lymphoma

Painless, persistent lymphadenopathy

Leukemia, Hodgkin lymphoma, non-­Hodgkin lymphoma, Burkitt
lymphoma, thyroid carcinoma

Hypertension

Renal or adrenal tumor such as neuroblastoma, pheochromocytoma,
or Wilms tumor

Soft tissue mass

Ewing sarcoma, osteosarcoma, neuroblastoma, thyroid carcinoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Pain

Bone marrow involvement (ALL) or metastatic disease
(neuroblastoma), primary bone tumors, Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Headache with emesis, visual disturbances, ataxia,
papilledema, cranial nerve palsies

Increased intracranial pressure from primary brain tumor or
metastasis

Leukocoria (white pupil)

Retinoblastoma

Periorbital ecchymosis

Neuroblastoma

Miosis, ptosis, heterochromia

Horner syndrome: compression of cervical sympathetic nerves from
neuroblastoma

Opsoclonus myoclonus, ataxia

Paraneoplastic syndrome from neuroblastoma

Exophthalmos, proptosis

Mass effect from rhabdomyosarcoma, lymphoma, or Langerhans
cell histiocytosis

Cough, stridor, pneumonia, tracheal-­bronchial
compression; superior vena cava syndrome

Anterior mediastinal mass due to germ cell tumor, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, or Hodgkin lymphoma

Vertebral or nerve root compression; dysphagia

Posterior mediastinal mass from neuroblastoma or Ewing sarcoma

Abdominal mass

Neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor, lymphoma

Diarrhea

Vasoactive intestinal peptide secretion from neuroblastoma,
ganglioneuroma

Pallor, anemia

Bone marrow infiltration from leukemia, neuroblastoma

Petechiae, thrombocytopenia

Bone marrow infiltration from leukemia, neuroblastoma

Musculoskeletal

Bone pain, limp, arthralgia

Osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, leukemia, metastatic neuroblastoma

Endocrine

Diabetes insipidus

Pituitary tumor, Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Poor growth

Diencephalic syndrome from hypothalamic tumor

Galactorrhea

Pituitary tumor/prolactinoma

Precocious puberty

Germ cell tumor (cranial or extracranial), adrenocortical carcinoma,
hepatoblastoma

Neurologic/
ophthalmologic

Respiratory/
thoracic

Gastrointestinal

Hematologic

ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Adapted from Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011. p. 588.

from malignant leukocytosis. Abnormalities found in lymphatic
malignancies include peripheral adenopathy (Fig. 542.1) and signs
of superior vena cava syndrome from an anterior mediastinal mass
(Fig. 542.2), including respiratory distress, and facial and neck plethora and edema. Enlargement of cervical lymph nodes is common in
children, but when persistent, progressive, and painless, it often suggests lymphoma. Supraclavicular adenopathy suggests underlying
malignancy.
Abnormalities of the central nervous system (CNS) that can
indicate cancer include headaches, vomiting, cranial nerve palsies,
ataxia, afebrile seizures, ptosis, decreased visual activity, neuroendocrine deficits, and increased intracranial pressure, which may be
diagnosed by the presence of papilledema (Fig. 542.3). Any focal
neurologic deficit in the motor or sensory system, especially a

decrease in cranial nerve function, should prompt further investigation for malignancy.
Ophthalmologic presentation of malignancy includes a white
pupillary reflex (Fig. 542.4) rather than the usual red reflection
from incident light. A white pupillary reflex is essentially pathognomonic for retinoblastoma, although some benign conditions can
mimic this finding. Proptosis can be produced by rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, lymphoma, and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. In the few first years of life, Horner syndrome, periorbital
ecchymosis, iris heterochromia, and opsoclonus-­myoclonus all suggest a diagnosis of neuroblastoma.
Abdominal masses can be divided into upper and lower locations.
Malignancies in the upper abdomen include Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, and hepatoblastoma. Enlargement of the liver or spleen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 542 u Principles of Cancer Diagnosis

N

Fig. 542.1 Cervical lymphadenopa-

thy. Manifestations on physical examination (A), and ultrasound examination
(B). N, Abnormally enlarged lymph
nodes. (From Sinniah D, D’Angio GJ,
Chatten J, et al. Atlas of Pediatric Oncology. London: Arnold; 1996.)

3083

N

N
N

A

B

B

A

C

Fig. 542.2 Anterior upper mediastinal mass from non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma. A, Plain chest radiograph. B, CT
scan. C, PET scan.

Fig 542.4 White pupillary reflex in the left eye. (From Sinniah D,

D’Angio GJ, Chatten J, et al. Atlas of Pediatric Oncology. London: Arnold; 1996.)

Fig. 542.3 Papilledema on fundoscopic examination. (From Sinniah
D, D’Angio GJ, Chatten J, et al. Atlas of Pediatric Oncology. London:
Arnold; 1996.)

from leukemia can be mistaken for an upper abdominal mass. Lower
abdominal masses non-­Hodgkin lymphoma, neuroblastoma, germ cell
tumors (ovarian), and sarcomas.
Rhabdomyosarcoma can occur as an extremity mass, particularly in
adolescents, but also as a mass in the head and neck region (e.g., orbit,
nasopharynx, and others). These tumors can be deceptively benign in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3084 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
appearance, but as with all unexplained masses, require immediate
attention. Sacrococcygeal masses in neonates are usually teratomas,
which are usually benign but can undergo malignant transformation
if not removed promptly. Neuroblastoma can present as “blueberry
muffin” spots on the skin of neonates or as periorbital ecchymosis in
older children.

AGE-­RELATED MANIFESTATIONS

Because various types of cancer in children occur at specific ages,
the physician should tailor the history and physical examination
based on the age of the child. The embryonal tumors, including
neuroblastoma, retinoblastoma, and hepatoblastoma usually occur
during the first 2 years of life (see Fig. 540.4). The peak age for presentation of Wilms tumor is 3-­4 years. Two thirds of patients with
rhabdomyosarcoma present before age 6 with another smaller peak
in adolescence. From 1-­4 years of age, acute lymphoblastic leukemia peaks in incidence. Brain tumors have a peak incidence in
the first decade of life. Non-­Hodgkin lymphomas are uncommon
earlier than 5 years of age but steadily increase thereafter. During
adolescence, bone tumors, Hodgkin lymphoma, and gonadal and
soft tissue sarcomas predominate. Hence, for infants and toddlers,
special attention should be paid to the possibility of embryonal
and intraabdominal tumors. Preschool-­age and early school-­age
children showing compatible signs and symptoms should be specifically evaluated for leukemia. School-­age children might present
with lymphoma or with brain tumors. Adolescents require assessment for bone and soft tissue sarcomas and gonadal malignancies,
as well as for Hodgkin lymphoma.

EARLY DETECTION

The prognosis of malignancy in children depends primarily on
tumor type, extent of disease at diagnosis, and rapidity of response
to treatment. Early diagnosis helps to ensure that appropriate therapy is given in a timely manner and thus optimizes the chances of
cure. Because most physicians in general practice rarely encounter
children with undiagnosed cancer, they should remember to investigate the possibility of malignancy, especially when they encounter
an atypical course of a common childhood condition, unusual manifestations that do not fit common conditions, and any persistent
symptom that defies diagnosis. It is also good practice to obtain a
three-­generation family pedigree with specific attention to a family
history of cancer. A strong family history of cancer would suggest a
referral for a cancer predisposition evaluation.
Delays in diagnosis are particularly likely in certain clinical situations. The cardinal symptom of both osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma is localized and usually persistent pain. Because these tumors
occur during the second decade of life, a time of increased physical
activity, patients often assume the pain results from trauma. Prompt
radiologic evaluation can help confirm the diagnosis. Lymphoma,
especially during adolescence, often manifests as an anterior
mediastinal mass. Symptoms such as chronic cough, unexplained
shortness of breath, or “new-­onset asthma” are typical with this presentation and are often overlooked. Tumors of the nasopharynx or
middle ear can mimic infection. Prolonged, unexplained ear pain,
nasal discharge, retropharyngeal swelling, and trismus should be
investigated as possible signs of malignancy.
Early symptoms of leukemia may be limited to prolonged or
unexplained low-­grade fever. Bone and joint pain may present with
refusal to walk. Blood counts with abnormalities in two or more
cell lines might indicate the need for bone marrow examination,

even when leukemic blast cells are not seen in the blood smear (see
Table 542.1).
Mass screening for children with malignancy is not feasible. A
screening program to detect early-­stage neuroblastoma was successful in documenting more cases of the disease but had no impact
on overall outcome. However, certain children are at increased risk
for cancer and require an individualized plan to ensure early detection of malignancy. Select examples include children with certain
chromosome abnormalities, such as Down syndrome, Klinefelter
syndrome, and WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genital abnormalities, mental retardation); children with overgrowth
syndromes, such as Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome or hemihypertrophy; and children with certain inherited single-­gene disorders, including hereditary retinoblastoma, Li-­Fraumeni syndrome,
familial adenomatous polyposis, and neurofibromatosis (see Table
541.2).

ENSURING THE DIAGNOSIS

When a malignant neoplasm is suspected, the immediate goal is
to confirm the diagnosis. A tentative diagnosis can often be established based on the patient’s age, symptoms, and location of masses.
Selected imaging techniques and tumor markers can facilitate the
diagnostic approach (Table 542.2 and Fig. 542.5). Especially when
a solid tumor is present, the pediatric oncologist, surgeon, and
pathologist should work as a team to determine the site of biopsy,
amount of tissue required, and whether percutaneous image-­guided
biopsy, incisional biopsy, or excisional biopsy and tumor resection
are indicated. For select situations, at the time of the initial diagnostic procedure, plans for bone marrow aspiration and biopsy and
placement of central venous access may be appropriate.
Pathologic evaluation of pediatric malignancies requires appropriate handling of tissue so that multiple different techniques can
be used to obtain a diagnosis. It is important that some fresh tissue not be placed in formalin. Along with routine light microscopy,
pathologic evaluation may include immunochemistry, flow cytometry, cytogenetics, molecular genetic studies (e.g., fluorescence in
situ hybridization, tumor whole exome sequencing, and evaluation
of circulating tumor genes with cell-free DNA detection in blood).
Additional technologies include DNA microarray analysis and cancer genome sequencing that can identify specific gene expression
patterns and sequences in tumors, which can facilitate more accurate classification and treatment.

STAGING

Once a specific diagnosis is confirmed, studies to define the extent
of the malignancy are necessary to determine prognosis and treatment. Table 542.2 outlines the minimum evaluation required for
common pediatric malignancies. In addition, for many tumors
(e.g., Wilms tumor, neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma), a surgical
staging system is used. Surgical stage can be determined at the time
of the initial diagnostic procedure or subsequently. For example,
a patient who has abdominal surgery for possible Wilms tumor
should have careful evaluation and biopsy of all adjacent lymph
nodes. A child with rhabdomyosarcoma can require a subsequent
biopsy of sentinel lymph nodes as determined by scintigraphy or
dye injection adjacent to the primary tumor. The pathologist facilitates staging by examining margins of the specimen to determine
residual tumor.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 542 u Principles of Cancer Diagnosis

3085

Table 542.2  	 Workup of Common Pediatric Malignancies to Assess Primary Tumor and Potential Metastases
BONE MARROW
ASPIRATE OR
BIOPSY

CHEST
X-­RAY
FILM

CT
SCAN

MRI

PET
SCAN

BONE
SCAN

CSF
ANALYSIS

SPECIFIC
MARKERS

OTHER
TESTS

Leukemia

Yes (includes
flow cytometry,
cytogenetics,
molecular
studies)

Yes

—

—

—

—

Yes

—

—

Non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma

Yes (includes
flow cytometry,
cytogenetics,
molecular
studies)

Yes

Yes

—

Yes

Yes
(selected
cases)

Yes

—

—

Hodgkin
lymphoma

Yes (in advanced
stage)

Yes

Yes

—

Yes

—

—

—

—

CNS tumors

—

—

—

Yes

—

—

Yes (selected
cases)

Yes
(selected
cases)

—

Neuroblastoma

Yes (includes
cytogenetics,
molecular
studies)

—

Yes

Yes

—

—

—

Urine VMA,
HVA

MIBG or PET
scan; bone
x-­rays

Wilms tumor

—

Yes

Yes

—

—

—

—

—

—

Rhabdomyosarcoma

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes (select
sites)

—

Yes
(selected
cases)

Yes (for
parameningeal tumors
only)

—

—

Osteosarcoma

—

Yes

Yes (of
chest)

Yes (for
primary
tumors)

—

Yes
(selected
cases)

—

—

—

Ewing
sarcoma

Yes (selected
cases)

Yes

Yes (of
chest)

Yes (for
primary
tumors)

Yes

Yes
(selected
cases)

—

—

—

Germ cell
tumors

—

Yes

Yes

Consider
MRI of
brain

—

—

—

AFP, HCG

—

Liver tumors

—

Yes

Yes

—

—

—

—

AFP, HCG

—

Retinoblastoma

Selected cases

—

Yes

Yes (includes
brain)

—

Yes
(selected
cases)

—

—

MALIGNANCY

Selected
cases

AFP, α-­Fetoprotein; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; HCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; HVA, homovanillic acid; MIBG, metaiodobenzylguanidine; VMA,
vanillylmandelic acid.
Modified from Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011. p. 589.

CT

MRI

PET-CT

PET-MRI

Fig. 542.5 Neuroblastoma PET/CT sagittal fused image demonstrated partial mis-­registration of avid disease, occult on the low-dose noncontrast
CT. PET/MRI sagittal fused image demonstrated correct image co-­registration with corresponding T2-­weighted hyperintensity in L3 vertebra,
confirming L3 marrow involvement, delineated on the MR and not on the CT (arrow). (From Sepehrizadeh T, Jong I, DeVeer M, Malhotra A. PET/MRI
in paediatric disease. Eur J Radiol. 2021;144:109987. Fig. 2.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3086 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

Chapter 543

Principles of Cancer
Treatment
Erika D. Friehling, Julia C. Meade,
Archie Bleyer, and A. Kim Ritchey
Treatment of children with cancer begins with an absolute requirement for
the correct diagnosis (including subtype), proceeds through accurate and
thorough staging of the extent of disease and determination of prognostic
subgroup, provides appropriate multidisciplinary and usually multimodal
therapy, and requires assiduous evaluation for possible recurrent disease
and late effects of the disease and the therapies rendered. Throughout
treatment, every child with cancer should have the benefit of the expertise
of specialized teams of providers of pediatric cancer care, including pediatric oncologists, pathologists, radiologists, surgeons, radiation oncologists,
nurses, and support staff, including nutritionists, social workers, psychologists, pharmacists, other medical specialists, and teachers trained to work
with seriously ill children.
The best chance for cure of cancer is during the initial course of treatment; the cure rates for patients with recurrent disease are much lower
than those for patients with primary disease. All patients with cancer
should be referred to an appropriate specialized center as soon as possible when the diagnosis of cancer is suspected. All such centers in North
America are identified on the Children’s Oncology Group website (http:/
/www.childrensoncologygroup.org) and on the National Cancer Institute
(NCI) cancer trials website (http://www.clinicaltrials.gov). In the United
States, the NCI’s Clinical Trials Cooperative Groups Program is associated
with a >80% reduction in the incidence of mortality from childhood cancer over 40 years despite an overall increase in cancer incidence during
this interval (Fig. 543.1). After what appeared to be a plateau in the rate of
decline in mortality in the early 2000s, there is evidence that the mortality
rate continues to decline. Notably, a greater decline in mortality has been
seen in the adolescent and young adult population when compared with
children <15 years old, reversing prior trends (Fig. 543.2). The most current information on treatment of all types of childhood cancer is available
in the PDQ (Physician Data Query) on the NCI website (http://www.canc
er.gov/cancertopics/pdq/pediatrictreatment).

DIAGNOSIS AND STAGING

Accurate diagnosis and staging of the extent of disease are imperative
because the nature of therapy depends strongly on the type of cancer. In
addition, prognostic subgroups based on the stage of disease have been
established for most cancers that occur in children. Accordingly, children
with a better prognosis are treated with less intensive therapy, including
lower doses of chemotherapy or radiation therapy, a shorter duration of
treatment, or elimination of at least one treatment modality (radiation
therapy, chemotherapy, surgery). Accurate staging thus reduces the risk of
excessive acute toxicity and long-­term effects of therapy in patients whose
prognosis indicates that less therapy is required for cure. Overtreatment
of patients with a more favorable prognosis is a definite risk if the patient
is not referred to a cancer treatment center. Conversely, undertreatment
also is a clear risk if the diagnosis and stage are not correct, resulting in a
compromise of an otherwise high potential for cure.
Diagnostic imaging is a critical phase of evaluation in most children with solid tumors. MRI, CT, ultrasonography, scintigraphy
(nuclear medicine scans), positron emission tomography (PET), and
spectroscopy, as appropriate, all serve a clear purpose in the evaluation
of children with cancer, not only before treatment to determine the
extent of disease and the appropriate therapy but also during follow-­up
to determine whether the therapy was effective (see Chapter 542). In
addition, response to treatment as determined by imaging techniques
is being increasingly used to guide changes in the therapy.

Expertise in pathology and laboratory medicine provides critical
diagnostic support and guides therapy in most children with cancer.
Relatively noninvasive methods of obtaining tumor tissue such as percutaneous image-­guided biopsy can be performed in pediatric centers
with appropriate expertise in diagnostic imaging, interventional radiology, cytology, and anesthesia support. Sentinel node mapping is helpful in the staging of some children’s cancers. Determining the adequacy
of surgery by evaluating frozen sections of the surgical margins for
tumor cells is essential in many tumor operations.

A MULTIMODAL, MULTIDISCIPLINARY APPROACH

Many pediatric subspecialists are involved in the evaluation, treatment,
and management of children with cancer, including provision of primary therapy and supportive care services (Fig. 543.3). More than two
of the primary modalities are often used together, with chemotherapy
the most widely used, followed in order of use by surgery, radiation
therapy, and biologic agent therapy (Fig. 543.4).
The leukemias that occur in childhood usually are managed with chemotherapy alone, with a small proportion of patients receiving cranial
radiation therapy to prevent or treat overt central nervous system (CNS)
leukemia. Children with non-­Hodgkin lymphoma also are treated with
chemotherapy alone, except for radiation therapy for CNS involvement.
Localized therapy with surgery or irradiation, or both, is an important component of treatment of most solid tumors, including Hodgkin
lymphoma, but systemic multiagent chemotherapy usually is necessary
because tumor dissemination generally is present even if undetectable.
Chemotherapy alone usually is not adequate to eradicate gross residual
tumors. Therefore it is not unusual for children with malignant tumors to
require treatment with all three modalities (see Fig. 543.4). Unfortunately,
most treatments that are effective in children with cancer have a narrow
therapeutic index (a low ratio of efficacy to toxicity). The acute and late
effects of these treatments can be minimized but not entirely avoided.
Biologic agent therapy is an important modality in a few childhood
cancers (see Fig. 543.4). This type of treatment generally refers to immunotherapy, biologic response modifiers, or endogenously occurring molecules that have therapeutic effects in supraphysiologic doses. Examples are
retinoic acid therapy in acute promyelocytic leukemia, monoclonal antibody therapy for neuroblastoma and certain non-­Hodgkin lymphomas,
tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as imatinib mesylate for chronic myelogenous and Philadelphia chromosome–positive leukemias, and radioactive
metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) therapy for neuroblastoma. In addition, immune therapy directed at tumor cell antigens with modification
of T-­cell receptors (TCRs) or chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) have
improved survival in patients with chemotherapy-­resistant diseases (leukemia, lymphoma) and have shown promise in solid tumors and brain
tumors.
Chemotherapy is used more widely in children than in adults
because children better tolerate the acute adverse effects, and the
malignant diseases that occur in childhood are more responsive to chemotherapy than are malignant diseases of adults. Radiation therapy
is used sparingly in children because of its association with growth
impairment and with the development of second malignant neoplasms.
Whenever possible, treatment is given on an outpatient basis. Children
should remain living at home and in school as much as possible throughout
treatment. Increasingly, pediatric cancer therapies are being administered
to ambulatory patients, with the advent of such innovations as programmable infusion pumps, oral chemotherapeutic regimens, early discharge
from hospital with intensive outpatient supportive care, and home healthcare services. Some patients miss a considerable amount of school in the
first year after diagnosis because of the intensity of therapy or its adverse
effects and the ensuing complications of the disease or therapy. Tutoring
should be encouraged so that children do not fall behind in their schooling; counseling should be provided as appropriate. In-­hospital school services should be provided for patients who must spend much of their time
as inpatients receiving therapy for disease or for managing adverse effects.
Upon completion of therapy, referral for pediatric neuropsychiatric testing
in a specialized center is often recommended to ensure they are well supported in their education.
De novo or acquired resistance to chemotherapy and radiation therapy
remains an obstacle to cure. Ongoing discoveries of molecular and cellular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 543 u Principles of Cancer Treatment

selumetinib, fall into this category (Table 543.1). Complementary and
alternative therapies are increasingly being provided by parents to their
children with cancer, with or without knowledge of the medical professionals entrusted with the child’s care (see Chapter 7). Collaboration with
the family and a pharmacist specializing in chemotherapy can minimize
unwanted interactions from supplements.

mechanisms that explain the cancer process have led to increasingly specific antineoplastic therapies, generally referred to as molecularly targeted
therapies. Their most prominent feature is a relative lack of normal tissue
toxicity, such that the additional therapeutic benefit occurs with minimum
additional toxicity. Many biologic agent therapies, such as imatinib and
16

Rate per 100,000, Age Adjusted

14

DISCUSSING THE TREATMENT PLAN WITH THE
PATIENT AND FAMILY

U.S. SEER Cancer Incidence
Among Children 15 Yr

12

C hi

10

The diagnostic and treatment plan must be carefully explained to parents
and, if the child is old enough to understand, to the patient. Children
should be given as much information as they can understand and would
be useful to them. All questions should be answered openly and honestly.
Effects of treatment, such as loss of hair during chemotherapy, the possible
need to amputate a limb, and possible temporary or permanent functional
impairment, must be anticipated and fully discussed. The possibility and
probability of death from cancer should be covered in an age-­appropriate
manner. It usually is necessary to repeat explanations several times before

ldr e n’ s

Oncology
Group

8
6
4
2
0

3087

U.S. Cancer Mortality Rate
Among Children 15 Yr

Deaths per 100,000
3
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000
1975-1983 APC = –1.0*
95% Cl = –1.7 to –0.2

Children’s Oncology Group

2.5

Children’s Cancer Group

1983-1986 APC = –4.2
95% Cl = –11.6 to 3.8
1975-1983 APC = –1.0*
95% Cl = –1.7 to –0.2
1997-2003 APC = 0.2
95% Cl = –1.6 to 2.1

Pediatric Oncology Group
Southwest Oncology Group

2

Cancer and Acute Leukemia Group B
National Wilms Tumor Study Group
Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma

1.5

Fig. 543.1 Reduction in the national cancer mortality rate among chil-

dren younger than 15 years of age (triangles) in the United States as a
direct consequence of the National Cooperative Group Program sponsored by the National Cancer Institute and compared with the rising
incidence of cancer before age 15 (circles). The horizontal bars indicate
the duration of the existence of the national pediatric cancer cooperative groups, beginning with the Children’s Cancer Group in 1955.
Other groups are the Pediatric Oncology Group, which was derived
from the Pediatrics Divisions of the Southwest Oncology Group and the
Cancer and Acute Leukemia Group B; the National Wilms Tumor Study
Group; and the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group. In 2000
the four pediatric cooperative groups merged into the Children’s Oncology Group. (Incidence and mortality rate data from Ries LAG, Eisner
MP, Kosary CL, et al., eds. SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–2002.
Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/19
75_2002/, based on November 2004 SEER [Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results] data submission. The mortality rate data are national
rates, and the incidence data are derived from the SEER program, representing approximately 15% of the United States. The most current
information on treatment of all types of childhood cancer is available in
the PDQ [Physician Data Query] on the NCI website, http://www.cance
r.gov/cancertopics/pdq/pediatrictreatment.)

2003-2010 APC = –2.0*
95% Cl = –3.1 to –0.8

1975-1999 APC = –3.7*
95% Cl = –3.8 to –3.5

1

1999-2002 APC = –0.4
95% Cl = –8.3 to 8
2002-2010 APC = –3.7*
95% Cl = –4.6 to –2.7

0.5

0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Psychosocial
care

Child life
care
Blood
products

Antibiotics

Surgery
Antiemetics
Fine-needle
biopsy
Nutrition

The inner circle designates primary modalities, and the
outer ring identifies supportive care elements to which all
children with cancer have access.

2010

among children <20 yr old in the United States from 1975 through
2010, along with annual percentage changes (APCs) for join point segments. Asterisk indicates that the slope of the join point segment is
statistically different from zero (p < .05). The green line indicates leukemias and lymphomas, and the blue line indicates all other cancer
sites; CI, confidence interval. (From Smith MA, Altekruse SF, Adamson
PC, et al. Declining childhood and adolescent cancer mortality. Cancer.
2014;120:2497–2506.)

Vascular
access

Fig. 543.3 Multidisciplinary care of children with cancer.

2005

Fig. 543.2 Age-­adjusted mortality trends for all malignant cancers

Chemotherapy
Pathology
Diagnostic
imaging

Parenteral
alimentation

Nursing

Child
with
cancer
Molecular
biology

Radiotherapy
Pharmacy
Stem cell
transplantation

Growth
factors
Sedatives,
anesthetics

Analgesics

Dental care

Cytokines

Supportive care

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3088 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

Dasatinib,
nilotinib

BCR-­ABL

CML
Philadelphia chromosome–positive
ALL

topoisomerase inhibitors (Table 543.2). The increased metabolic and cell
cycle activity of malignant cells makes them more susceptible to the cytotoxic effects of these types of agents (Fig. 543.5).
Because most antineoplastic agents are cell cycle dependent, their
adverse effects usually are related to the proliferation kinetics of individual
cell populations. Most susceptible are tissues or organs with high rates of
cell turnover: bone marrow, oral and intestinal mucosa, epidermis, liver,
and spermatogonia. The most common acute adverse effects are myelosuppression (with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia the most problematic), immunosuppression, nausea and vomiting, hepatic dysfunction,
upper and lower gastrointestinal mucositis, dermatitis, and alopecia. Fortunately, the tissues affected also recover relatively quickly, so that the acute
adverse effects are usually reversible. Life-­threatening effects of many chemotherapy agents include severe neutropenia with infection, fungemia, or
fungal pneumonia as a result of immunosuppression, and septicemia, not
infrequently linked to indwelling intravascular devices (Table 543.3; see
Chapters 223 and 224). Cardiomyopathy caused by anthracyclines (e.g.,
doxorubicin, daunorubicin) and renal failure from platinum-­containing
agents also may be life-­threatening or disabling. Assistance from a supportive care team can also provide safe and effective support for toxicities
associated with chemotherapy, such as pain and nausea.
Least susceptible to chemotherapy and radiation therapy are cells that
do not replicate or that replicate slowly, such as neurons, muscle cells, connective tissue, and bone. Children are not exempt from toxicities of these
tissues, probably because they are still undergoing proliferation, although
at a slower pace than other tissues, during growth and growth spurts.
Physically, children can endure the acute adverse effects of chemotherapy better than adults can in many ways. The maximum tolerated dosage in
children, when expressed based on body surface area or body weight, typically is greater than that in adults. A comparison of anticancer drugs tested
in phase I trials in both adult and pediatric patients showed that the maximum tolerated dosage in children was greater than that in adults for 70%
of the agents, equal to that in adults for 15%, and less than the adult dose
for only 15% of the agents. For all the drugs that were compared, the mean
pediatric maximum tolerated dosage was greater than the adult mean.

Brentuximab

CD30

Hodgkin lymphoma

Pharmacogenomics

Rituximab

CD20

Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma

Selumetinib

MAPK/MEK

Plexiform neurofibroma
Low-­grade glioma

Bevacizumab

VEGFR-­1, -­2

Low-­grade glioma

Crizotinib,
lorlatinib

ALK/ROS

Neuroblastoma
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma
Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor

Dinutuximab

GD2

Neuroblastoma

Blinatumomab

CD19

Leukemia
Lymphoma

Biologic
agents

Radiotherapy

Surgery

Chemotherapy

Fig. 543.4 The primary modalities of therapy used in the treatment of
children with cancer. The relative sizes of the circles designate the approximate proportion of overall role in the management of pediatric cancers.

Table 543.1  Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors and Monoclonal
Antibodies for Pediatric Cancers
AGENT
Imatinib

TARGET
BCR-­ABL

PDGFRα
cKIT

MALIGNANCY
CML
Philadelphia chromosome–positive
ALL
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Gastrointestinal stromal tumor

ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia; CML, chronic myelogenous leukemia.

distraught family members fully understand. Throughout treatment, parents, patients, siblings, and medical staff will all need help in expressing
feelings of anxiety, depression, guilt, and anger. The pediatrician, pediatric
oncologist, and nurses should call on experienced professionals, including pediatric social workers, child psychologists and psychiatrists, child life
specialists, and teachers with special expertise in managing students with
cancer, to assist when needed.

TREATMENTS
Chemotherapy

The most widely used modality in pediatric cancer therapy is chemotherapy (see Fig. 543.4). Therapy usually involves a combination of drugs with
different mechanisms of action and non­overlapping toxicities. Sequential single-­drug therapy rarely results in complete responses, and partial
responses usually are infrequent, transient, and grow progressively shorter
in duration with each drug used. Most of the cytotoxic drugs for childhood cancer are selected from several classes of agents, including alkylating agents, antimetabolites, antibiotics, hormones, plant alkaloids, and

Interindividual variability in the response to similar doses of a given
medication is an inherent characteristic of both adult and pediatric
populations. Variations in the germline genome can lead to differences
in drug response at the level of individual patients. Pharmacogenomics represents the combination of pharmacology and genomics and is
defined as the broader application of genetic testing strategies to identify
factors predictive of drug efficacy and risk of adverse drug reactions.
Thiopurine S-­methyltransferase (TPMT) is an enzyme that catalyzes
the methylation of the chemotherapy 6-­mercaptopurine (6MP) used in
the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). To exert its cytotoxic effects, 6MP requires metabolism to thioguanine nucleotides, and
this reaction is prevented by TPMT. Of the general population, 89% has
normal TPMT activity, 11% has intermediate activity, and 0.3% has low
activity. In patients with low or intermediate activity variants of TPMT,
there is accumulation of cytotoxic thioguanine nucleotides (Fig. 543.6).
These patients are at increased risk for severe myelosuppression if treated
with routine doses of thiopurines and require a 10-­15–fold reduction in
dose to minimize this risk.
TPMT genotype is not the only determinant of intolerance to thiopurines; genetic variation in NUDT15, a nucleotide diphosphatase that
reduces the incorporation of thioguanine into DNA, may also be involved.
Reduction or loss of NUDT15 activity results in increased cytotoxicity.
Patients who have inherited reduced-­function NUDT15 alleles tolerate
thiopurine doses that are much lower (10%) than normal. It is reasonable
to expect that both TPMT and NUDT15 genotypes will need to be considered for individualized thiopurine treatment, identifying patients who
will benefit from specific dosing regimens and those who will be at risk for
short-­term and long-­term toxicities.

Immunotherapy

Tumor-­directed immune therapies employ and enhance the patient’s
immune system to kill malignant cells. Tumor antigen–specific monoclonal antibodies have been incorporated into the standard therapy of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 543.2  Common Chemotherapeutic Agents Used in Pediatric Cancer
MECHANISM OF
ACTION OR
CLASSIFICATION

DRUG

INDICATION(S)

ADVERSE REACTIONS
(PARTIAL LIST)

COMMENTS

Methotrexate

Folic acid antagonist;
inhibits dihydrofolate
reductase

ALL, non-­Hodgkin
Myelosuppression, mucositis,
lymphoma, osteosarcoma,
stomatitis, dermatitis, hepatitis
Hodgkin lymphoma,
With long-­term administration,
medulloblastoma
osteopenia and bone fractures
With high-­dose administration, renal
and CNS toxicity
With intrathecal administration,
arachnoiditis, leukoencephalopathy,
and leukomyelopathy

Systemic administration
may be PO, IM, or IV;
also may be
administered
intrathecally
Plasma methotrexate
levels must be
monitored with
high-­dose therapy
and when low doses
are administered to
patients with renal
dysfunction, and
leucovorin rescue
applied accordingly

6-­Mercaptopurine
(Purinethol)

Purine analog; inhibits
purine synthesis

ALL

Myelosuppression, hepatic necrosis,
mucositis; allopurinol increases
toxicity

Allopurinol inhibits
metabolism

Cytarabine (cytosine
arabinoside; Ara-­C)

Pyrimidine analog;
inhibits DNA
polymerase

ALL, AML, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, Hodgkin
lymphoma

Nausea, vomiting, myelosuppression,
conjunctivitis, mucositis, CNS
dysfunction
With intrathecal administration,
arachnoiditis, leukoencephalopathy,
and leukomyelopathy

Systemic administration
may be PO, IM, or IV;
may also be
administered
intrathecally

Cyclophosphamide
(Cytoxan)

Alkylates guanine;
inhibits DNA synthesis

ALL, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, Hodgkin
lymphoma, soft tissue
sarcoma, Ewing sarcoma,
Wilms tumor,
neuroblastoma

Nausea, vomiting, myelosuppression,
hemorrhagic cystitis,
pulmonary fibrosis, inappropriate
ADH secretion, bladder cancer,
anaphylaxis

Requires hepatic
activation and thus is
less effective in
presence of liver
dysfunction
Mesna prevents
hemorrhagic cystitis

Ifosfamide (IFEX)

Alkylates guanine;
inhibits DNA synthesis

Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma,
Wilms tumor, soft tissue
sarcoma

Nausea, vomiting, myelosuppression,
hemorrhagic cystitis, pulmonary
fibrosis, inappropriate ADH
secretion, CNS dysfunction,
cardiac toxicity, anaphylaxis

Mesna prevents
hemorrhagic cystitis

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), daunorubicin
(Cerubidine), and
idarubicin (Idamycin)

Binds to DNA,
intercalation

ALL, AML, osteosarcoma,
Ewing sarcoma, Hodgkin
lymphoma, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, neuroblastoma

Nausea, vomiting, cardiomyopathy,
red urine, tissue necrosis on
extravasation, myelosuppression,
conjunctivitis, radiation dermatitis,
arrhythmia

Dexrazoxane reduces
risk of cardiotoxicity

Dactinomycin

Binds to DNA, inhibits
transcription

Wilms tumor,
rhabdomyosarcoma,
Ewing sarcoma

Nausea, vomiting tissue necrosis on
extravasation, myelosuppression,
radiation dermatitis, mucosal
ulceration

Bleomycin (Blenoxane)

Binds to DNA, cleaves
DNA strands

Hodgkin disease,
non-­Hodgkin lymphoma,
germ cell tumors

Nausea, vomiting, pneumonitis,
stomatitis, Raynaud phenomenon,
pulmonary fibrosis, dermatitis

Vincristine (Oncovin)

Inhibits microtubule
formation

ALL, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, Hodgkin
disease, Wilms tumor,
Ewing sarcoma,
neuroblastoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma

Local cellulitis, peripheral
neuropathy, constipation, ileus, jaw
pain, inappropriate ADH
secretion, seizures, ptosis,
minimal myelosuppression

IV administration only;
must not be allowed
to extravasate

Vinblastine (Velban)

Inhibits microtubule
formation

Hodgkin lymphoma,
non-­Hodgkin lymphoma,
Langerhans cell
histiocytosis, CNS tumors

Local cellulitis, leukopenia

IV administration only;
must not be allowed
to extravasate

l-­Asparaginase

Depletion of
l-­asparagine

ALL; AML, when used in
combination with
cytarabine

Allergic reaction pancreatitis,
hyperglycemia, platelet
dysfunction and coagulopathy,
encephalopathy

Pegaspargase now
preferred to
l-­asparaginase

ALL

Indicated for prolonged asparagine
depletion and for patients with
allergy to l-­asparaginase

Pegaspargase (Oncaspar) Polyethylene glycol
Calaspargase-­pegol-­mknl
conjugate of
l-­asparagine
(Asparlas)

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3090 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 543.2  Common Chemotherapeutic Agents Used in Pediatric Cancer—cont’d
MECHANISM OF
ACTION OR
CLASSIFICATION

DRUG

ADVERSE REACTIONS
(PARTIAL LIST)

INDICATION(S)

COMMENTS

Prednisone and
dexamethasone
(Decadron)

Lymphatic cell lysis

ALL; Hodgkin lymphoma,
non-­Hodgkin lymphoma

Cushing syndrome, cataracts,
diabetes, hypertension,
myopathy, osteoporosis,
avascular necrosis, infection,
peptic ulceration, psychosis

Carmustine (BiCNU)

Carbamylation of
DNA; inhibits DNA
synthesis

CNS tumors, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, Hodgkin
lymphoma

Nausea, vomiting, delayed
myelosuppression (4-­6 wk);
pulmonary fibrosis, carcinogenic
stomatitis

Phenobarbital increases
metabolism, decreases
activity

Carboplatin and
cisplatin (Platinol)

Inhibits DNA synthesis

Osteosarcoma,
neuroblastoma, CNS
tumors, germ cell tumors

Nausea, vomiting, renal
dysfunction, myelosuppression,
ototoxicity, tetany, neurotoxicity,
hemolytic-­uremic syndrome,
anaphylaxis

Aminoglycosides may
increase nephrotoxicity

Etoposide (Vepesid)

Topoisomerase
inhibitor

ALL, non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma, germ cell
tumor, Ewing sarcoma

Nausea, vomiting, myelosuppression,
secondary leukemia

Tretinoin (all
trans-­retinoic acid)
and isotretinoin
(cis-­retinoic acid;
Accutane)

Enhances normal
differentiation

Acute promyelocytic
leukemia; neuroblastoma

Dry mouth, hair loss, pseudotumor
cerebri, premature epiphyseal
closure, birth defects

ADH, Antidiuretic hormone; ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML, acute myelogenous leukemia; CNS, central nervous system; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PO, oral.

Etoposide
Teniposide
Topotecan
Irinotecan

Dactinomycin
Doxorubicin
Daunomycin
Idarubicin
Mitoxantrone

Doxorubicin
Daunomycin
Idarubicin
Bleomycin

Topoisomerasemediated
Intercalation
Strand Breaks

Cytarabine
CMP

Free Radical
Damage

dCMP
dTMP
FH2

Replication

DNA

Alkylation
Transcription

Fluorouracil
FH4

Purines

dUMP

Fluorouracil

Mercaptopurine
Thioguanine

Methotrexate

Mechlorethamine
Cyclophosphamide
Ifosfamide
Melphalan
Carboplatin
Cisplatin
Nitrosoureas
Busulfan
Dacarbazine
Temozolomide
Procarbazine

RNA
Translation
De Novo
Synthesis

Salvage
Pathway
Protein

Drug inhibits this step
Drug incorporated into
macromolecule

Tubulin

neuroblastoma (anti–ganglioside GD2). The antiangiogenic agent bevacizumab (monoclonal antibody against vascular endothelial growth
factor A) is used in the treatment of low-­grade gliomas.
Chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-­T cells) are genetically
engineered to make new TCRs that can recognize and attach to an
antigen on the tumor cell. This results in T-­cell proliferation, cytolysis, and cytokine release with subsequent tumor cell death (Fig. 543.7).

Asparaginase
Vincristine
Vinblastine
Vinorelbine
Paclitaxel
Docetaxel

Fig. 543.5 Site of action of the commonly used anticancer drugs. CMP,
Cytidine monophosphate; dCMP, deoxycytidine monophosphate; dTMP,
deoxythymidine
monophosphate;
dUMP, deoxyuridine monophosphate;
FH2, dihydrofolate; FH4, tetrahydrofolate. (Redrawn from Adamson PC,
Balis FM, Blaney SM. General principles of chemotherapy. In: Pizzo PA,
Poplack DG, eds. Principles and Practice of Pediatric Oncology. 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2011: p. 283.)

The B-­cell antigen CD19 is the antigen targeted in children with ALL
and some adults with lymphoma. The response to therapy in children
with chemotherapy-­resistant ALL is dramatic. Other antigens may be
targeted, including CD22, CD30 (lymphomas), CD171, GD2 (neuroblastoma), EGFR, and HER2 (glioblastoma).
Side effects of CAR-­T therapy are common and potentially serious
and are caused by the cytokine release syndrome (CRS). Manifestations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 543 u Principles of Cancer Treatment

3091

Table 543.3  Infectious Complications of Malignancy
PREDISPOSING FACTOR
Neutropenia

ETIOLOGY

SITE OF INFECTION

Chemotherapy,
bone marrow
infiltration

INFECTIOUS AGENTS

Sepsis, shock, pneumonia, soft tissue,
proctitis, mucositis

Viridans group streptococcus, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Candida, Aspergillus, anaerobic oral and rectal bacteria

Immunosuppression,
Chemotherapy,
lymphopenia, lymphocyte-­
corticosteroid
monocyte dysfunction

Pneumonia, meningitis,
disseminated viral
infection

Pneumocystis jiroveci, Cryptococcus neoformans, Mycobacterium,
Nocardia, Listeria monocytogenes, Candida, Aspergillus, Strongyloides, Toxoplasma, varicella-­zoster virus, cytomegalovirus,
herpes simplex

Indwelling central venous
catheter

Line sepsis, tract of
tunnel, exit site

S. epidermidis, S. aureus, Candida albicans, P. aeruginosa, Aspergillus, Corynebacterium, Enterococcus faecalis, Mycobacterium
fortuitum, Propionibacterium acnes

Nutrition,
administration of
chemotherapy

Modified from Kliegman RM, Marcdante KJ, Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011.

Active drug
TPMT function

Azathioprine or
6-mercaptopurine
dose

Normal function

Expected drug
effect

Decreased function

Risk of
hematologic
toxicity

No function

High risk of
hematologic
toxicity

Fig. 543.6 The impact of variable pharmacokinetic gene function on

the effect of bioactivation of prodrug versus inactivation of an active
drug. (From Roden DM, McLeod HL, Relling MV, et al. Pharmacogenomics. Lancet. 2019;394[10197]:521–532. Fig. 2)

of CRS include hypotension, vascular leak, myalgias, cerebral edema, seizures, and confusion. Symptoms correlate with the extent of the tumor
burden and require supportive care. Tocilizumab, an anti–interleukin-­6
receptor monoclonal antibody, is the treatment of choice for CRS. B-­cell
aplasia may also develop and requires immune globulin replacement.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors are drugs (monoclonal antibodies)
which enhance the ability of T-­cells to attack cancer cells. Checkpoints
on T-­cells and cancer cells include PD-­1/PD-­L1 (programed death protein and programed death ligand-­1), which normally dampen the T-­cell
response. CTLA-4 and LAG-3 are additional immune checkpoint molecules. Thus checkpoint inhibitors allow the T-­cell to kill the cancer cells
more effectively. Immune-related adverse events (irAEs) due to activated
T cells include autoimmune-like disorders affecting many tissues including skin, liver, lung, CNS, and gastrointestinal and endocrine organs.

Surgery

Superb pediatric surgical and anesthesia services are indispensable for
children with cancer. The pediatric surgeon’s role varies depending on
the type of tumor. For solid tumors, complete resection with documented evidence of negative margins often is required for cure or long-­
term control. Considerable prolongation of life usually depends on the
tumor’s resectability and the actual extent of resection.
Except for pontine gliomas and retinoblastoma, all solid tumors in children require a tissue diagnosis; therefore biopsy of the suspected neoplasm
is paramount. Staging with sentinel node biopsies has become the standard
of care for several pediatric malignancies. Surgical expertise is essential for
implantation of vascular access devices and removal and replacement of
such devices when infection or thrombosis supervenes (see Chapter 224).
Minimally invasive endoscopic surgical techniques are being used
when indicated and, if the patient’s condition permits, for biopsy and
resection of tumor, direct ascertainment of residual disease and assessment of response, lysis of adhesions, and splenectomy.

Radiation Therapy

Radiation therapy is used sparingly in children, who are more susceptible
than adults to the adverse delayed effects of ionizing radiation. A major
advance in pediatric radiation therapy is the application of conformal

radiation to children with cancer. This technique, most often applied as
intensity-­modulated radiation therapy, spares normal tissue by conforming the radiation volume to the shape of the tumor, thereby enabling
delivery of higher doses to the tumor with lower exposure of normal tissue
adjacent to the tumor or in the path of the radiation beam. Another example is proton-­beam radiotherapy. With more focused beams and better
sedation and immobilization techniques, radiation therapy is becoming
more common in children. Acute adverse effects from radiation therapy
depend on which part of the body is irradiated and the means of administration. Dermatitis is the most common general adverse effect because
skin is always in the treatment field. Nausea and diarrhea are common
subacute adverse effects with abdominal radiation therapy. Mucositis
typically occurs to some extent whenever oral or intestinal mucosa is in
the treatment volume. Somnolence is common with cranial irradiation.
Alopecia occurs where hair is in the radiation field.
Most radiation therapy schedules require treatment 5 days per week for
4-­7 weeks, depending on the dose needed to control the tumor and the
amount and nature of normal tissue in the field. Most adverse effects are
not noted until the second half of the course of irradiation. Late effects
can occur months to years after radiation therapy and usually are dose-­
dependent manifestations. The type of delayed toxicity also depends on
the site of irradiation. Examples are impaired growth resulting from cranial or vertebral irradiation, endocrine dysfunction from hypothalamic
irradiation, pulmonary or cardiac insufficiency from chest irradiation,
strictures and adhesions from abdominal irradiation, and infertility from
pelvic irradiation. Second malignancy can also develop in the radiation
field, such as breast cancer from chest irradiation and brain tumors from
CNS irradiation.

ACUTE TOXIC EFFECTS AND SUPPORTIVE CARE

Adverse treatment effects that occur early in therapy can result in
oncologic emergencies. These include metabolic disorders, bone
marrow suppression, and compression by tumors on vital structures
(Table 543.4). In tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), uric acid, phosphate,
and potassium are released in the circulation in large quantities from
death of tumor cells. Hyperuricemia can lead to impairment of renal
function, which further exacerbates the metabolic abnormalities. TLS
can occur before therapy in patients with a large tumor burden (e.g.,
Burkitt lymphoma, lymphoblastic lymphoma, and leukemia presenting
with a high white blood cell count), but it is usually seen within 12-­48
hours of initiating chemotherapy. TLS is infrequently reported in other
tumors (Hodgkin lymphoma, neuroblastoma, hepatoblastoma). Before
therapy is initiated, the serum levels of uric acid, electrolytes, calcium,
phosphorus, and creatinine should be measured, and adequate hydration ensured. Allopurinol (a xanthine oxidase inhibitor) should be
started to prevent further accumulation of uric acid. In patients with
established TLS with high uric acid levels or those at high risk for
TLS, rasburicase (an enzyme that degrades uric acid) should be given.
Symptomatic hyperkalemia and hyperphosphatemia with subsequent
hypocalcemia can develop in the setting of inadequate renal function.
Virtually all chemotherapy regimens can produce myelosuppression,
as can malignancies that invade and replace bone marrow. Anemia can

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3092 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
CAR T-Cell Therapy

CAR
protein

Make CAR T
2 cells in the lab
Insert gene
for CAR
CAR T cell

Grow millions

3 of CAR T cells
T cell

Fig. 543.7 Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-­cell therapy. CAR
Infuse

4 CAR T cells

1 Remove blood from
patient to get T cells

5

into patient

CAR T cells bind
to cancer cells
and kill them
Cancer cell

Antigen

T-­cell therapy is a type of treatment in which a patient’s T cells are
genetically engineered in the laboratory so they will bind to specific proteins (antigens) on cancer cells and kill them. (1) A patient’s
T cells are removed from their blood. Then (2) the gene for a special receptor called a chimeric antigen receptor is inserted into the
T cells in the laboratory. The gene encodes the engineered CAR
protein that is expressed on the surface of the patient’s T cells,
creating a CAR T cell. (3) Millions of CAR T cells are grown in the
laboratory. (4) They are then given to the patient by intravenous infusion. (5) The CAR T cells bind to antigens on the cancer cells and
kill them. (Courtesy National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. https://www.cancer.gov/about-­
cancer/treatment/research/car-­t-­cell-­therapy-­infographic)

Table 543.4  Oncologic Emergencies
CONDITION

MANIFESTATIONS

ETIOLOGY

MALIGNANCY

TREATMENT

METABOLIC
Hyperuricemia

Uric acid nephropathy

Tumor lysis syndrome

Lymphoma, leukemia

Allopurinol, hydration, rasburicase

Hyperkalemia

Arrhythmias, cardiac arrest

Tumor lysis syndrome

Lymphoma, leukemia

Kayexalate, sodium bicarbonate,
calcium gluconate, glucose, and
insulin; check for pseudohyperkalemia from leukemic cell lysis in
test tube

Hyperphosphatemia

Hypocalcemic tetany; metastatic
calcification, photophobia,
pruritus

Tumor lysis syndrome

Lymphoma, leukemia

Hydration, forced diuresis; stop
alkalinization; oral aluminum
hydroxide to bind phosphate

Hyponatremia

Seizure, lethargy (may also be
asymptomatic)

SIADH; fluid, sodium
losses in vomiting

Leukemia, CNS tumor

Restrict free water for SIADH;
replace sodium if depleted

Hypercalcemia

Anorexia, nausea, polyuria,
pancreatitis, gastric ulcers;
prolonged PR, shortened QT
interval

Bone resorption;
ectopic parathormone, vitamin D, or
prostaglandins

Metastasis to bone,
rhabdomyosarcoma,
leukemia

Hydration and furosemide diuresis;
corticosteroids; calcitonin, bisphosphonates

HEMATOLOGIC
Anemia

Pallor, weakness, heart failure

Bone marrow suppression or infiltration;
blood loss

Any with chemotherapy

Packed red blood cell transfusion

Thrombocytopenia

Petechiae, hemorrhage

Bone marrow suppression or infiltration

Any with chemotherapy

Platelet transfusion

Disseminated
intravascular
coagulation

Shock, hemorrhage

Sepsis, hypotension,
tumor factors

Promyelocytic leukemia, others

Fresh-­frozen plasma; platelets,
cryoprecipitate, treat underlying
disorder

Neutropenia

Infection

Bone marrow suppression or infiltration

Any with chemotherapy

If febrile, administer broad-­
spectrum antibiotics, and filgrastim (G-­CSF) if appropriate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 543 u Principles of Cancer Treatment

3093

Table 543.4  Oncologic Emergencies—cont’d
CONDITION

MANIFESTATIONS

ETIOLOGY

Hyperleukocytosis
(>100,000/mm3)

Hemorrhage, thrombosis;
pulmonary infiltrates, hypoxia;
tumor lysis syndrome

Leukostasis; vascular
occlusion

Leukemia

Leukapheresis; chemotherapy;
hydroxyurea

Graft versus host
disease

Dermatitis, diarrhea, hepatitis

Immunosuppression
and nonirradiated
blood products;
bone marrow
transplantation

Any with
immunosuppression

Corticosteroids; cyclosporine;
tacrolimus; antithymocyte globulin

Metastasis to vertebra
and extramedullary
space

Neuroblastoma,
ewing, glioma

Corticosteroids, surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy

SPACE-­OCCUPYING LESIONS
Spinal cord
Back pain ± radicular
compression
Cord above T10: symmetric
weakness, increased deep
tendon reflex; sensory level
present; toes up
Conus medullaris (T10-­L2):
symmetric weakness, increased
knee reflexes; decreased ankle
reflexes; saddle sensory loss;
toes up or down
Cauda equina (below L2):
asymmetric weakness; loss
of deep tendon reflex and
sensory deficit; toes down

MALIGNANCY

TREATMENT

Increased
intracranial
pressure

Confusion, coma, emesis,
headache, hypertension,
bradycardia, seizures,
papilledema, hydrocephalus;
cranial nerve III and VI palsies

Primary or metastatic
brain tumor

Medulloblastoma,
glioma

Corticosteroids, ventriculostomy,
radiotherapy, chemotherapy

Superior vena cava
syndrome

Distended neck veins, plethora,
edema of head and neck,
cyanosis, Horner syndrome

Superior mediastinal
mass

Lymphoma
Germ cell tumor

Chemotherapy, radiotherapy

Tracheal
compression

Respiratory distress

Mediastinal mass compressing trachea

Lymphoma
Neuroblastoma

Radiation, corticosteroids

CNS, Central nervous system; G-­CSF, granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion.
Adapted from Kliegman RM, Marcdante KJ, Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011. p. 590.

be corrected by transfusions of packed erythrocytes, and thrombocytopenia can be corrected by platelet infusions. Patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy should receive irradiated blood products to prevent
graft-­versus-­host disease and leukoreduced blood products to prevent
transfusion-­associated reactions and infections. Neutropenia (neutrophil counts <500/μL) poses a risk of life-­threatening infection. Patients
with febrile neutropenia should be hospitalized and treated with empirical
broad-­spectrum intravenous antimicrobial therapy pending the results of
appropriate cultures of blood, urine, or any obvious sites of infection (see
Chapter 223). Treatment is continued until fever resolves and the neutrophil count rises. If fever persists for more than 3-­5 days while the patient
is receiving broad-­spectrum antibiotics, the possibility of fungal infection
must be considered. Fungal infections caused by Candida and Aspergillus are common in immunosuppressed patients. Opportunistic organisms
such as Pneumocystis jiroveci can produce fatal pneumonia. Prophylactic
treatment with trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole is given when severe or
prolonged immunosuppression is anticipated.
Viruses of low pathogenicity can produce serious disease in the setting
of immunosuppression caused by malignancy or its treatment. Patients
should not be given live-­virus vaccines. Children who are receiving chemotherapy and who are exposed to chickenpox should receive varicella-­
zoster immunoglobulin, or if varicella-­zoster immunoglobulin is not
available, oral acyclovir should be considered. If clinical disease develops,
the child should be hospitalized and treated with intravenous acyclovir.
Depending on the type of cancer therapy, patients can lose >10% body
weight. Patients sometimes reduce their food intake because of temporary, treatment-­
associated nausea, stomatitis, and vomiting. Appetite
loss is not a cause for alarm. Malnutrition is a particular risk in patients
receiving radiation therapy involving the abdomen or the head and
neck, intensive chemotherapy, or total body irradiation and high-­dose

chemotherapy before marrow transplantation. If oral supplementation
proves inadequate, such patients may require enteral tube feedings or parenteral hyperalimentation.
Adequate pain management is critical. The World Health Organization
(WHO) guidelines are particularly useful in the management of pain associated with cancer and cancer therapy (see Chapter 93). Assistance from a
supportive care team can provide safe and effective support for toxicities
associated with chemotherapy, such as pain and nausea.

LATE EFFECTS

Late effects of therapy can cause substantial morbidity (Table 543.5). The
type of late effects depends on the child’s age at treatment, the location(s)
of the cancer, and the therapy administered. These effects can be either
from the tumor or its treatment. For example, a brain or spinal tumor
can leave the child with a permanent paresis or autonomic dysfunction;
anthracycline-­induced cardiomyopathy usually produces refractory cardiac dysfunction; and the leukoencephalopathy caused by intrathecal
methotrexate and CNS radiation therapy often is only partially reversible.
Successful surgical resection can result in loss of important functional
structures. Irradiation can produce irreversible organ damage, with symptoms and functional limitations depending on the organ involved and the
severity of the damage. Many problems related to radiation therapy do
not become obvious until the patient is fully grown, such as asymmetry
between irradiated and nonirradiated areas or extremities. Irradiation of
fields that include endocrine organs can cause hypothyroidism, pituitary
dysfunction, or infertility. In sufficient doses, cranial irradiation can produce neurologic dysfunction, and spinal irradiation can produce growth
deficiency.
Chemotherapy also carries the risk of long-­
lasting organ damage. Of particular concern are leukoencephalopathy after high-­dose

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3094 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
methotrexate therapy; infertility in patients treated with alkylating agents (e.g., cyclophosphamide); myocardial damage caused by
anthracyclines; pulmonary fibrosis caused by bleomycin; renal dysfunction caused by ifosfamide, nitrosourea, or platinum agents; and
hearing loss from cisplatin. Development of these sequelae may
be dose related and usually is irreversible. Appropriate baseline and

intermittent testing should be performed before these drugs are administered to ensure that there is no preexisting damage to the organs likely
to be affected and to permit monitoring of the effects of treatment-­
induced changes.
Perhaps the most serious late effect is the occurrence of second
cancers in patients successfully cured of a first malignancy. The risk

Table 543.5  Late Effects and High-­Risk Features of Childhood Cancer and Its Treatment
LATE EFFECTS

EXPOSURE

SELECTED HIGH-­RISK FACTORS

AT-­RISK DIAGNOSTIC GROUPS

Chemotherapy:
• Methotrexate
Radiation affecting brain:
• Cranial
• Ear/infratemporal
• Total body irradiation (TBI)

Age <3 yr old at time of treatment
Female
Supratentorial tumor
Premorbid or family history of
learning or attention problems
Radiation doses >24 Gy
Whole-­brain irradiation

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Brain tumor
Sarcoma (head and neck or
osteosarcoma)

Chemotherapy:
• Cisplatin
• Carboplatin
Radiation affecting hearing:
• Cranial
• Infratemporal
• Nasopharyngeal

Higher cisplatin dose (360 mg/m2)
Higher radiation dose impacting
ear (>30 Gy)
Concurrent radiation and cisplatin

Brain tumor
Germ cell tumor
Sarcoma (head and neck)
Neuroblastoma
Hepatoblastoma

Hearing loss, conductive
Tympanosclerosis
Otosclerosis
Eustachian tube dysfunction

Radiation affecting hearing:
• Cranial
• Infratemporal
• Nasopharyngeal

Higher radiation dose affecting
ear (>30 Gy)

Brain tumor
Sarcoma (head and neck)

Visual impairment
Cataracts
Lacrimal duct atrophy
Xerophthalmia
Retinopathy
Glaucoma

Chemotherapy:
• Busulfan
• Glucocorticoids
Radiation affecting eye:
• Cranial
• Orbital/eye
• TBI

Higher radiation dose impacting eye (≥15 Gy for cataracts;
>45 Gy for retinopathy and visual
impairment)

Brain tumor
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Retinoblastoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma (orbital)
Allogeneic HSCT

Peripheral neuropathy, sensory

Chemotherapy:
• Vincristine
• Vinblastine
• Cisplatin
• Carboplatin
Brentuximab vedotin

Higher cisplatin dose
(≥300 mg/m2)

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Brain tumor
Hodgkin lymphoma
Germ cell tumor
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Sarcoma
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
Carcinoma

NEUROCOGNITIVE
Neurocognitive deficits
Functional deficits in:
• Executive function
• Sustained attention
• Memory
• Processing speed
• Visual-­motor integration
Learning deficits
Diminished IQ
Behavioral change
NEUROSENSORY
Hearing loss, sensorineural

NEUROMOTOR
Peripheral neuropathy, motor

ENDOCRINE
GH deficiency
Precocious puberty

Chemotherapy:
• Vincristine
• Vinblastine
Brentuximab vedotin

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Sarcoma
Brain tumor
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor

Radiation affecting HPA:
• Cranial
• Orbital/eye

Female
Radiation dose to HPA >18 Gy

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Sarcoma (facial)
Carcinoma (nasopharyngeal)

Obesity

Ear/infratemporal
Nasopharyngeal

Female
Younger age (<4 yr)

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia

Hypothyroidism, central
Gonadotropin deficiency
Adrenal insufficiency, central

TBI

Radiation dose to HPA >18 Gy

Brain tumor
Sarcoma (facial)
Carcinoma (nasopharyngeal)

Hypothyroidism, primary

Neck, mantle irradiation

Radiation dose to thyroid >20 Gy

Hodgkin lymphoma

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 543 u Principles of Cancer Treatment

3095

Table 543.5  Late Effects and High-­Risk Features of Childhood Cancer and Its Treatment—cont’d
LATE EFFECTS
REPRODUCTIVE
Gonadal dysfunction
Delayed or arrested puberty
Premature menopause
Germ cell dysfunction or failure
Infertility

CARDIAC
Cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmias

Cardiomyopathy
Arrhythmias
Pericardial fibrosis
Valvular disease
Myocardial infarction
Atherosclerotic heart disease
PULMONARY
Pulmonary fibrosis
Interstitial pneumonitis
Restrictive lung disease
Obstructive lung disease

GASTROINTESTINAL
Chronic enterocolitis
Strictures
Bowel obstruction

HEPATIC
Hepatic fibrosis
Cirrhosis

RENAL
Renal insufficiency
Hypertension
Glomerular injury
Tubular injury

EXPOSURE

SELECTED HIGH-­RISK FACTORS

AT-­RISK DIAGNOSTIC GROUPS

Chemotherapy, alkylating:
• Busulfan
• Carmustine (BiCNU)
• Chlorambucil
• Cyclophosphamide
• Ifosfamide
• Lomustine (CCNU)
• Mechlorethamine
• Melphalan
• Procarbazine
Radiation affecting reproductive
system:
• Whole abdomen (females)
• Pelvic
• Lumbar/sacral spine (females)
• Testicular (males)
• TBI

Higher alkylating agent dose
Alkylating agent conditioning for
HSCT
Radiation dose ≥15 Gy in prepubertal females
Radiation dose ≥10 Gy in pubertal
females
For germ cell failure in males, any
pelvic irradiation
For androgen insufficiency,
gonadal irradiation, ≥20-­30 Gy
in males

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia,
high risk
Brain tumor
Hodgkin lymphoma, advanced or
unfavorable
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma,
advanced or unfavorable
Sarcoma
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor, advanced
Autologous or allogeneic HSCT

Chemotherapy:
• Daunorubicin
• Doxorubicin
• Idarubicin

Female
Age <5 yr old at time of treatment
Higher doses of chemotherapy
(≥300 mg/m2)
Higher doses of cardiac radiation
(≥30 Gy)
Combined-­modality therapy with
cardiotoxic chemotherapy and
irradiation

Hodgkin lymphoma
Leukemia
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Sarcoma
Wilms tumor
Neuroblastoma

Chemotherapy:
• Bleomycin
• Busulfan
• Carmustine (BiCNU)
• Lomustine (CCNU)
Radiation impacting lungs:
• Mantle
• Mediastinum
• Whole lung
• TBI

Higher doses of chemotherapy
Combined modality therapy with
pulmonary toxic chemotherapy
and irradiation

Brain tumor
Germ cell tumor
Hodgkin lymphoma
Sarcoma (chest wall or intrathoracic)
Autologous or allogeneic HCST

Radiation affecting GI tract
(≥30 Gy)
Abdominal surgery

Higher radiation dose to bowel
(≥45 Gy)
Combined modality therapy
with abdominal irradiation and
radiomimetic chemotherapy
(dactinomycin or anthracyclines)
Combined modality therapy with
abdominal surgery and irradiation

Sarcoma (retroperitoneal or pelvic
primary)

Radiation affecting liver

Higher radiation dose or treatment volume (20-­30 Gy to entire
liver or ≥40 Gy to at least one
third of liver)

Sarcoma
Neuroblastoma

Chemotherapy:
• Ifosfamide
• Cisplatin
• Carboplatin
Radiation affecting kidneys:
• Whole abdomen
• Upper abdominal fields
• TBI

Higher ifosfamide dose (≥60 g/m2)
Higher cisplatin dose (≥200 mg/m2)
Renal radiation dose (≥15 Gy)
Combined modality therapy with
above agents

Brain tumor
Germ cell tumor
Sarcoma
Wilms tumor
Neuroblastoma
Hepatoblastoma
Carcinoma
Autologous or allogeneic HSCT

Radiation affecting heart:
• Chest
• Mantle
• Mediastinum
• Axilla
• Spine
• Upper abdomen

GH, Growth hormone; HPA, hypothalamic-­pituitary-­adrenal axis; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; IQ, intelligence quotient.
From Kurt BA, Armstrong GT, Cash DK, et al. Primary care management of the childhood cancer survivor. J Pediatr. 2008;152:458–466.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3096 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Risk-Stratified Shared Care Model for Cancer Survivors

Pre
CA

CA
Dx

5 Yrs
Off Rx

10 Yrs
Off Rx
Noncancer-related care
Shared-care

Pre
CA

CA
Dx

b

c

c

c

Off
Rx

1–2 Yrs
Off Rx

5 Yrs
Off Rx

10 Yrs
Off Rx
Noncancer-related care

PCP

Shared-care
Oncology
Care*

a

Pre
CA

CA
Dx

b

c

c

Off
Rx

1–2 Yrs
Off Rx

5 Yrs
Off Rx

c

c

10 Yrs
Off Rx
Noncancer-related care

PCP

Shared-care
Oncology
Care*

High Risk:
Any of the following:
• High dose alkylating agent,
anthracycline, bleomycin,
or epipodophyllotoxin
• High dose radiation
• Allogenic stem cell transplant
• High risk of recurrence
• Multi-organ persistent toxicity
of therapy

1–2 Yrs
Off Rx

PCP

a

Moderate Risk:
Any of the following:
• Low or moderate dose alkylating
agent, anthracycline, bleomycin,
or epipodophyllotoxin
• Low to moderate dose radiation
• Autologous stem cell transplant
• Moderate risk of recurrence
• Moderate persistent toxicity
of therapy

Off
Rx

Oncology
Care*

Low Risk:
All of the following:
• Surgery only or chemotherapy that
did not include alkylating agent,
anthracycline, bleomycin,
or epipodophyllotoxin
• No radiation
• Low risk of recurrence
• Mild or no persistent toxicity
of therapy

a

b

c

d

d

Communication Points with Primary Care Physician
a Cancer diagnosis and planned therapeutic approach, brief overview of chemotherapy, radiation therapy and/or surgery.
b Survivorship Care Plan: cancer diagnosis, cancer therapy, surveillance recommendations, contact information.
c Periodic update with changes in surveillance recommendations, and new information regarding potential late effects.
d Periodic update of survivor’s health for primary care physician’s record.

Abbreviations:
Ca=cancer; Dx=diagnosis; Off Rx=completion of cancer therapy; PCP=primary care physician; LTFU=long-term follow-up (survivor) program; Onc=oncologist.
Primary responsibility for cancer-related care; PCP continues to manage noncancer comorbidities and routine preventative health maintenance.
*Cancer Center or Oncologist/oncology group practice; if there is not an LTFU/Survivor Program available, care in the
box is provided by the primary oncologist.

Fig. 543.8 Proposed risk-­stratified shared care model for childhood cancer survivors. Purple solid line denotes primary responsibility cancer-­
related care; risk stratification is based on determination of the long-­term follow-­up staff. (Adapted from McCabe MS, Partridge A, Grunfeld, E,
Hudson MM. Risk-­based health care, the cancer survivor, the oncologist, and the primary care physician. Semin Oncol. 2013;40:804–812; with data
from Oeffinger KC, McCabe MS. Models for delivering survivorship care. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24:5117–5124.)

appears to be cumulative, increasing by approximately 0.5% per year,
resulting in approximately a 12% incidence at 25 years after treatment.
Patients who have been treated for childhood cancer should be examined annually with particular attention to possible late effects of therapy, including second malignancies (Fig. 543.8).
Risk-­stratified therapy over the past few decades has been shown to
reduce late morbidity and mortality. A good resource for the pediatrician, patient, and family who must anticipate the possibilities is available at http://www.survivorshipguidelines.org.

PALLIATIVE CARE

At all stages of caring for children with cancer, principles of palliative
care should be applied to relieve pain and suffering and to provide comfort (see Chapter 8). Early involvement of palliative or supportive care
teams is beneficial. Pain is a serious cause of suffering among patients
with cancer. It may be the result of organ obstruction or compression or
bone metastasis, or it may be neuropathic. Pain should be managed in

a stepwise manner, as recommended by the WHO, in accordance with
the principles of selecting the appropriate analgesic, prescribing the
appropriate dosage, administering the drug by the appropriate route,
and choosing an appropriate dosing schedule to prevent persistent pain
and to relieve breakthrough pain (see Chapter 93). In addition, the dosage should be titrated aggressively while attempts are made to prevent,
anticipate, and manage side effects. Adjuvant drugs and sequential trials of analgesic drugs should be considered.
The goals in the care of dying patients are to avoid distress for the
patient, family, and caregivers; to provide care consistent with the
patient’s and family’s wishes; and to comply with and advocate for clinical, cultural, and ethical standards.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 544 u The Leukemias

Chapter 544

The Leukemias
A. Kim Ritchey, Erika D. Friehling,
Julia C. Meade, David G. Tubergen, and
Archie Bleyer
INTRODUCTION

The leukemias are the most common malignant neoplasms in childhood, accounting for approximately 31% of all malignancies that
occur in children younger than 15 years old. Each year, leukemia is
diagnosed in approximately 3,100 children and adolescents <20 years
old in the United States, an annual incidence of 4.8 cases per 100,000
children. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) accounts for approximately 77% of cases of childhood leukemia, acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) for approximately 11%, chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML) for 2–3%, and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) for
1–2%. The remaining cases consist of a variety of acute and chronic
leukemias that do not fit classic definitions for ALL, AML, CML, or
JMML.
The leukemias may be defined as a group of malignant diseases in
which genetic abnormalities in a hematopoietic cell give rise to an
unregulated clonal proliferation of cells. The progeny of these cells
have a growth advantage over normal cellular elements because of
their increased rate of proliferation and a decreased rate of spontaneous apoptosis. The result is a disruption of normal marrow function and, ultimately, marrow failure. The clinical features, laboratory
findings, and responses to therapy vary depending on the type of
leukemia.

544.1 Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Erika D. Friehling, A. Kim Ritchey, Julia C. Meade, and
Archie Bleyer
Leukemia (ALL) was the first disseminated cancer shown to be curable.
It is a heterogeneous group of malignancies with distinctive genetic
abnormalities that result in varying clinical behaviors and responses
to therapy.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia is diagnosed in approximately 3,100
children and adolescents <20 years old in the United States each year.
It has a striking peak incidence at 2-­3 years of age and occurs more
in males than in females at all ages. The disease is more common in
children with certain chromosomal abnormalities, such as Down
syndrome, Li-­Fraumeni, Bloom syndrome, and ataxia-­telangiectasia.
Among identical twins, the risk to the second twin if one twin develops leukemia is greater than that in the general population. The risk
is >70% if ALL is diagnosed in the first twin during the first year of
life and the twins shared the same (monochorionic) placenta. If
the first twin develops ALL by 5-­7 years of age, the risk to the second twin is at least twice that of the general population, regardless of
zygosity.

ETIOLOGY

In virtually all cases, the etiology of ALL is unknown, although several genetic and environmental factors are associated with childhood leukemia (Table 544.1). Most cases of ALL are thought to
be caused by post-­conception somatic pathogenic gene variants
in lymphoid cells. However, the identification of the leukemia-­
specific fusion-­gene sequences in archived neonatal blood spots
of some children who develop ALL at a later date indicates the

3097

importance of in utero events in the initiation of the malignant process in some cases. The long lag period before the onset of the disease in some children, reported to be as long as 14 years, supports
the concept that additional genetic modifications are required for
disease expression. Moreover, those same pathogenic variants have
been found in neonatal blood spots of children who never go on to
develop leukemia.
Exposure to medical diagnostic radiation both in utero and in childhood is associated with an increased incidence of ALL (see Chapter
758). In addition, published descriptions and investigations of geographic clusters of cases have raised concern that environmental factors can increase the incidence of ALL. Thus far, no such factors other
than radiation have been identified in the United States. In certain
developing countries, there is an association between B-­cell ALL (B-­
ALL) and Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) infections.

CELLULAR CLASSIFICATION

The classification of ALL depends on characterizing the malignant
cells in the bone marrow to determine the morphology, phenotype as
measured by cell membrane markers, and cytogenetic and molecular
genetic features. Morphology is usually adequate alone to establish a
diagnosis, but the other studies are essential for disease classification,
which can have a major influence on the prognosis and the choice
of appropriate therapy. The current system used is the World Health
Organization (WHO) classification of leukemias. Phenotypically, surface markers show that approximately 85% of cases of ALL are classified
as B-­lymphoblastic leukemia (previously termed precursor B-­ALL or
pre–B-­ALL), approximately 15% are T-­lymphoblastic leukemia, and
approximately 1% are derived from mature B cells. The rare leukemia
of mature B cells is termed Burkitt leukemia and is one of the most
rapidly growing cancers in humans, requiring a different therapeutic
approach than other subtypes of ALL. A small percentage of children
with leukemia have a disease characterized by surface markers of both
lymphoid and myeloid derivation.
Chromosomal abnormalities are used to subclassify ALL into
prognostic groups (Table 544.2). Many genetic alterations, including
inactivation of tumor-­suppressor genes and pathogenic gene variants
that activate the JAK-­STAT or RAS pathways, have been discovered
(Fig. 544.1).
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) techniques offer the ability to pinpoint molecular genetic abnormalities and can be used to detect small numbers
of malignant cells at diagnosis as well as during follow-­up (minimal
residual disease [MRD], see later) and are of proven clinical utility.
DNA microarray and whole genome sequencing make it possible to
analyze the expression of thousands of genes in the leukemic cell.

Table 544.1  Predisposing Factors of Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia
GENETIC SUSCEPTIBILITY
Congenital syndromes: Down syndrome, Fanconi anemia, ataxia
telangiectasia, Bloom syndrome, Nijmegen breakage syndrome
Inherited gene variants: ARID5B, IKZF1, CEBPE, CDKN2A, or CDKN2B, PIP4K2A, ETV6
Constitutional Robertsonian translocation between chromosomes
15 and 21, rob(15;21)(q10;q10)
Single nucleotide polymorphisms: rs12402181 in miR-­3117 and
rs62571442 in miR-­3689d2
ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
Pesticide exposure
Ionizing radiation
Childhood infections
From Malard F, Mohty M. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet. 2020;395:1146–1158.
Panel, p. 1147.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3098 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The initial presentation of ALL usually is nonspecific and relatively brief.
Anorexia, fatigue, malaise, irritability, and intermittent low-­grade fever
are often present. Bone or joint pain, particularly in the lower extremities, may be present. Less often, symptoms may be of several months’
duration, may be localized predominantly to the bones or joints, and
may include joint swelling. Bone pain is severe and can wake the patient
at night. As the disease progresses, signs and symptoms of bone marrow
failure become more obvious with the occurrence of pallor, fatigue, exercise intolerance, bruising, oral mucosal bleeding or epistaxis, and fever,
which may be caused by infection or the leukemia. Organ infiltration can
cause lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, testicular enlargement, or
central nervous system (CNS) involvement (cranial neuropathies, headache, seizures). Respiratory distress may be caused by severe anemia or
mediastinal node compression of the airways.
On physical examination, findings of pallor, listlessness, purpuric and petechial skin lesions, or mucous membrane hemorrhage can
reflect bone marrow failure (see Chapter 542). The proliferative nature
of the disease may be manifested as lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly,
or, less often, hepatomegaly. Patients with bone or joint pain may have
exquisite tenderness over the bone or objective evidence of joint swelling and effusion. Nonetheless, with marrow involvement, deep bone
pain may be present, but tenderness will not be elicited. Rarely, patients
show signs of increased intracranial pressure that indicate leukemic
involvement of the CNS. These include papilledema (see Fig. 542.3),
Table 544.2

retinal hemorrhages, and cranial nerve palsies. Respiratory distress
usually is related to anemia but can occur in patients as the result of
a large anterior mediastinal mass (e.g., in the thymus or nodes). This
problem is most frequently seen in adolescent males with T-­cell ALL
(T-­ALL). T-­ALL also usually has a higher leukocyte count.
B-­lymphoblastic leukemia is the most common immunophenotype,
with onset at 1-­10 years of age. The median leukocyte count at presentation is 33,000/μL, although 75% of patients have counts <20,000/μL;
thrombocytopenia is seen in 75% of patients and hepatosplenomegaly
in 30–40% of patients. In all types of leukemia, CNS symptoms are
seen at presentation in 5% of patients. Leukemia cells can be seen in
the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 10–15% of patients, but only 3–5%
are diagnosed with CNS leukemia, defined as >5 WBCs/μL with blasts
present. Testicular involvement is rarely evident at diagnosis, but prior
studies indicate occult involvement in 25% of males. There is no indication for testicular biopsy.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of ALL is strongly suggested by peripheral blood findings that indicate bone marrow failure. Anemia and thrombocytopenia are seen in most patients. Leukemic cells might not be reported
in the peripheral blood in routine laboratory examinations. Many
patients with ALL present with total leukocyte counts of <10,000/μL.
In such cases, the leukemic cells often are reported initially to be “atypical lymphocytes,” and it is only on further evaluation that the cells are

Main Genetic Subtypes of B-­Cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
FREQUENCY

PATHOGENIC VARIANTS

PROGNOSIS

High hyperdiploid
(gain of ≥5 chromosomes)

25% children; 3% AYAs and adults

RTK-­RAS signaling pathway, histone
modifiers

Favorable

Near-­haploid
(24-­31 chromosomes)

2% children; <1% AYAs and adults

RAS-­activating, IKZF3

Poor

Low-­hypodiploid
(32-­39 chromosomes)

<1% children; 5% AYAs; >10%
adults

TP53, IKZF2, RB1

Very poor

MLL (KMT2A) rearrangements

>80% infants; <1% children; 4%
AYAs; 15% adults

MLL (KMT2A) rearrangement, few
additional pathogenic variants (PI3K-­
RAS signaling pathway)

Very poor

ETV6-­RUNX1 translocation, t(12;21)
(q13;q22)

30% children; <5% AYAs and adults

ETV6-­RUNX1

Favorable

TCF3-­PBX1 translocation, t(1;19)
(q23;p13)

5% children, AYAs and adults

TCF3-­PBX1

Favorable

TCF3-­HLF variant of t(1;19)(q23;p13)

<1% acute lymphoblastic leukemia

TCF3-­HLF

Poor

BCR-­ABL1 Philadelphia chromosome, t(9;22)(q34;q11)

2–5% children, 6% AYAs; >25%
adults

BCR-­ABL1 fusion gene, common
deletions of IKZF1, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, and PAX5

Poor (improved with tyrosine
kinase inhibitors)

Philadelphia chromosome-­like
acute lymphoblastic leukemia

10% children; 25–30% AYAs; 20%
adults

Rearrangements of CRLF2 (about
50%), ABL-­class tyrosine kinase genes
(12%) and JAK2 (10%); pathogenic
variants of EPOR (3–10%); pathogenic
variants activating JAK-­STAT (10%)
and RAS (2–8%) signaling pathways

Poor

DUX4 and ERG-­deregulated acute
lymphoblastic leukemia

5–10% acute lymphoblastic
leukemia

DUX4 rearrangement and
overexpression, ERG deletions

Favorable, including if
coexistence of IKZF1
pathogenic variants
(about 40% of patients)

MEF2D-­rearranged acute
lymphoblastic leukemia

4% children; 7% AYAs and adults

MEF2D is fused to BCL9 (most frequent
fusion event), HNRNPUL1, SS18,
FOXJ2, CSF1R, or DAZAP1

Poor

ZNF384-­rearranged acute
lymphoblastic leukemia

5% children; 10% AYAs and adults

ZNF384 rearranged with a tranIntermediate
scriptional regulator or chromatin
modifier (EP300, CREBBP, TAF15, SYNRG, EWSR1, TCF3, ARID1B, BMP2K,
or SMARCA2)

AYAs, Adolescents and young adults.
From Malard F, Mohty M. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet. 2020;395:1146–1158. Table 1, p. 1148.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 544 u The Leukemias

ETP
2%

LYL1
1.4%

100
Relapse-free survival (%)

TLX3
2.3%

TLX1
0.3%
Others (T-ALL)
2%
ETV6-RUNX1
22%

TAL1
7%
Others (B-ALL)
10%
ERG
(Other)
3%
5.5%
(CRLF2)
3.5%
CRLF2
4%

Hyperdiploid
20%

60
40

Number at risk
High hyperdiploidy
ETV6-RUNX1
t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)
iAMP21
MLL translocations
Abnormal17p
Loss of 13q
Other

High hyperdiploidy
ETV6-RUNX1
t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)
iAMP21
MLL translocations

20

Abnormal17p
Loss of 13q
Other

0

2

4
6
Years from diagnosis

8

10

551
365
42
28
30
18
24
644

529
355
22
21
20
15
19
567

470
331
19
14
16
9
17
483

249
167
8
1
9
7
9
258

98
47
2
0
1
2
4
105

434
301
14
6
14
8
15
440

Fig. 544.3 Kaplan-­Meier analysis of relapse-­free survival according to

Fig. 544.1 Estimated frequency of specific genotypes in childhood

acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Teal wedges refer to B-­cell ALL
(B-­ALL), orange to recently identified subtypes of B-­
ALL, and red
wedges to T-­cell ALL (T-­ALL). (From Mullighan CG. Genomic characterization of childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Semin Hematol.
2013;50:314–324.)
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Probability

80

0

MLL
rearrangements
6%
TCF3-PBX1
iAMP21
1%
BCR-ABL1 4%
Hypodiploid Dicentric 2%
1%
3%

0.6

biologic subtype of leukemia. (From Moorman AV, Ensor HM, Richards
SM, et al. Prognostic effect of chromosomal abnormalities in childhood
B-­cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: Results from the UK
Medical Research Council ALL97/99 randomised trial. Lancet Oncol.
2010;11:429–438.)

meningeal leukemia is present. This finding reflects a poorer stage and
indicates the need for additional CNS and systemic therapies. The staging lumbar puncture (LP) may be performed in conjunction with the
first dose of intrathecal chemotherapy, if the diagnosis of leukemia was
previously established from bone marrow evaluation. An experienced
proceduralist should perform the initial LP, because a traumatic LP is
associated with an increased risk of CNS relapse.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

0.5
0.4
1–9 yr (n = 598)

0.3

>15 yr (n = 78)

0.2

10–15 yr (n = 153)

0.1

<12 mo (n = 18)

0.0
0
Number
at risk
<12 mo

3099

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

Yr from diagnosis
18

11

8

8

6

1

1

0

0

1–9 yr 598

528

378

295

213

149

85

31

4

10–15 yr 153

130

100

77

50

26

11

6

1

>15 yr

60

40

29

20

7

1

0

0

78

Meier estimates of event-­
free survival accordFig. 544.2 Kaplan-­

ing to age at diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. (From Pui
CH, Robinson LL, Look AT. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet.
2008;371:1030–1042.)

The diagnosis of leukemia is readily made in the patient with typical
signs and symptoms, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated WBC
count with blasts present on smear. Elevation of the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is often a clue to the diagnosis of ALL. When pancytopenia is present without peripheral blasts, aplastic anemia (congenital
or acquired), marrow infiltration from metastatic disease, and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis should be considered. Failure of a
single cell line, as seen in transient erythroblastopenia of childhood,
immune thrombocytopenia, and congenital or acquired neutropenia, is rarely the presenting feature of ALL. A high index of suspicion is required to differentiate ALL from infectious mononucleosis
in patients with acute onset of fever and lymphadenopathy and from
juvenile idiopathic arthritis in patients with fever, bone pain but often
no tenderness, and joint swelling. These presentations also can require
bone marrow examination.
ALL must be differentiated from AML and other malignant diseases
that invade the bone marrow and can have clinical and laboratory findings similar to ALL, including neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma,
Ewing sarcoma, and retinoblastoma.

TREATMENT
found to be part of a malignant clone. When the results of an analysis
of peripheral blood suggest the possibility of leukemia, flow cytometry
can rapidly facilitate the diagnosis. The bone marrow should be examined promptly to confirm the diagnosis. It is important that all studies
necessary to confirm a diagnosis and adequately classify the type of
leukemia be performed, including bone marrow aspiration and biopsy,
flow cytometry, cytogenetics, and molecular studies.
ALL is diagnosed by a bone marrow evaluation that demonstrates
>25% of the bone marrow cells as a homogeneous population of lymphoblasts. Initial evaluation also includes CSF examination. If lymphoblasts are found and the CSF leukocyte count is elevated, overt CNS or

The single most important prognostic factor in ALL is the treatment:
without effective therapy, the disease is fatal. Considerable progress has
been made in overall survival for children with ALL through use of
multiagent chemotherapeutic regimens, intensification of therapy, and
selection of treatment based on relapse risk. Survival is also related to
age (Fig. 544.2) and biologic subtype (Fig. 544.3).
Risk-­stratified therapy is the standard of current ALL treatment
and accounts for age at diagnosis, initial WBC count, immunophenotypic and cytogenetic characteristics of blast populations, rapidity
of early treatment response (i.e., how quickly the leukemic cells can
be cleared from the marrow or peripheral blood), and assessment
of MRD at the end of induction therapy (Table 544.3). Different

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3100 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 544.3

Prognostic Factors for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
FAVORABLE FACTOR

ADVERSE FACTOR

DEMOGRAPHIC AND CLINICAL FEATURES
Age
1 year to <10 years
Sex
Female
Ethnicity
White, Asian

<1 year or ≥10 years
Male
Black, Hispanic

CLINICAL, BIOLOGIC, OR GENETIC FEATURES OF LEUKEMIA
CNS involvement
No
Blood count at diagnosis
Low blood count; <50 × 109 cells/L for
B-­cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and
<100 × 109 cells/L for T-­cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia
Immunophenotype
B-­cell lineage
Cytogenetic features
Hyperdiploidy, ETV6-­RUNX, TCF3-­PBX1, and
trisomy of chromosomes 4, 10, or 17
Genomic features

DUX4-­rearrangement (ERG deletion)

RESPONSE TO TREATMENT
Minimal residual disease at
specified time points

Low minimal residual disease <10−3 nucleated
cells or undetectable

Yes
High blood count; ≥50 × 109/L for B-­cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia and ≥100 × 109 cells/L for T-­cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia
T-­cell lineage
Hypodiploidy, BCR-­ABL1 Philadelphia chromosome-­
positive, MLL rearrangements, TCF3-­HLF, and complex
karyotype (≥5 chromosomal abnormalities)
IKZF1 deletions or pathogenic variants, Philadelphia
chromosome-­like, MEF2D-­rearrangement
Persistence of minimal residual disease ≥10−3 nucleated
cells, the higher this value the worse the prognosis

From Malard F, Mohty M. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet. 2020;395:1146–1158. Table 2, p. 1150.

study groups use various factors to define risk, but age 1-­10 years
and a leukocyte count <50,000/μL are used by the National Cancer
Institute (NCI) to define standard risk. Children who are younger
than 1 year or older than 10 years or who have an initial leukocyte count of >50,000/μL are considered to be high risk. Additional
characteristics that adversely affect outcome include T-­cell immunophenotype or a slow response to initial therapy. Chromosomal
abnormalities, including hypodiploidy, the Philadelphia chromosome, and KMT2A (MLL) gene rearrangements, portend a poorer
outcome. Other genetic pathogenic variants, such as in the IKZF1
gene, have been shown to be associated with a poor prognosis
and may become important in treatment algorithms in the future.
More favorable characteristics include a rapid response to therapy,
hyperdiploidy, trisomy of specific chromosomes (4, 10, and 17),
and rearrangements of the ETV6-­RUNX1 (formerly TEL-­AML1)
genes.
The outcome for patients at higher risk can be improved by
administration of more intensive therapy despite the greater toxicity of such therapy. Infants with ALL, along with patients who
present with specific chromosomal abnormalities, such as t(4;11),
have an even higher risk of relapse despite intensive therapy. However, the poor outcome of Philadelphia chromosome–positive
ALL with t(9;22) has been dramatically changed by the addition of
imatinib to an intensive chemotherapy backbone. Imatinib is an
agent specifically designed to inhibit the BCR-­A BL kinase resulting from the translocation. With this approach, the event-­f ree survival has improved from 30% to 70%. Clinical trials demonstrate
that the prognosis for patients with a slower response to initial
therapy may be improved by therapy that is more intensive than
the therapy considered necessary for patients who respond more
rapidly.
Most children with ALL are treated in clinical trials conducted
by national or international cooperative groups. Standard treatment
involves chemotherapy for 2-­3 years, and most achieve remission at
the end of the induction phase. Patients in clinical remission can
have MRD that can only be detected with specific molecular probes
to translocations and other DNA markers contained in leukemic
cells or specialized flow cytometry. MRD can be quantitative and
can provide an estimate of the burden of leukemic cells present in
the marrow. Higher levels of MRD present at the end of induction

suggest a poorer prognosis and higher risk of subsequent relapse.
MRD of >0.01% on the marrow on day 29 of induction is a significant risk factor for shorter event-­free survival for all risk categories, compared with patients with negative MRD. Therapy for ALL
intensifies treatment in patients with evidence of MRD at the end
of induction.
Initial therapy, termed remission induction, is designed to eradicate the leukemic cells from the bone marrow. During this phase,
therapy is given for 4 weeks and consists of vincristine weekly, a corticosteroid such as dexamethasone or prednisone, and usually a single
dose of a long-­acting, pegylated asparaginase preparation. Patients at
higher risk also receive daunorubicin at weekly intervals. With this
approach, 98% of patients are in remission, as defined by <5% blasts
in the marrow and a return of neutrophil and platelet counts to near-­
normal levels after 4-­5 weeks of treatment. Intrathecal chemotherapy
is always given at the start of treatment and at least once more during
induction.
The second phase of treatment, consolidation, focuses on intensive
CNS therapy in combination with continued intensive systemic therapy to prevent later CNS relapses. Intrathecal chemotherapy is given
repeatedly by LP. The likelihood of later CNS relapse is thereby reduced
to <5%, from historical incidence as high as 60%. A small percentage
of patients with features that predict a high risk of CNS relapse may
receive irradiation to the brain in later phases of therapy. This includes
patients who at diagnosis have lymphoblasts in the CSF and either an
elevated CSF leukocyte count or physical signs of CNS leukemia, such
as cranial nerve palsy.
Subsequently, many regimens provide 14-­28 weeks of therapy,
with the drugs and schedules used varying depending on the risk
group of the patient. This period of treatment is often termed
intensification and includes phases of aggressive treatment
(delayed intensification) as well as relatively less toxic phases
of treatment (interim maintenance). Multiagent chemotherapy,
including such medications as cytarabine, methotrexate, asparaginase, and vincristine, is used during these phases to eradicate
residual disease.
Finally, patients enter the maintenance phase of therapy, which
lasts for 2-­3 years, depending on the protocol used. Patients are
given daily mercaptopurine and weekly oral methotrexate, usually
with intermittent doses of vincristine and a corticosteroid.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 544 u The Leukemias
Event-free Survival (EFS)
CCG (n  197)
CALGB (n  124)

1.0

7-yr EFS

RHR

Log Rank p

63% (CI:24–44%)
34% (CI:55–72%)

2.2 (CI:1.6–3.0)

0.0001

Estimated EFS probability

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
At Risk
140
124
66

117
47

2

4

0.1 197
0.0

0

A

92
34

55
27

19
21

2 (CCG)
6 (CALGB)

6

8

10

12

Log Rank p

14

Yr followed
Overall Survival
CCG
CALGB

Estimated survival probability

1.0

RHR
1.9 (CI:1.3–2.7)

98
48

57
37

19
30

2 (CCG)
8 (CALGB)

6

8

10

12

0.0002

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
At Risk
151
124
84

131
63

2

4

0.1 197
0.0

B

7-yr survival
67% (CI:58–75%)
46% (CI:36–56%)

0.9

0.2

0

results in accumulation of a toxic metabolite of mercaptopurine and
severe myelosuppression, requiring dose reductions of the chemotherapy (see Chapter 543).

Treatment of Relapse

0.9

0.2

3101

14

Yr followed

Fig. 544.4 Comparison of event-­free survival (A) and overall survival

(B) among Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) (adult protocol,
green line) and Children's Cancer Group (CCG) (pediatric protocol, red
line) patients. CI, Confidence interval; EFS, event-­free survival; RHR,
relative hazard rate. (From Stock W, La M, Sanford B, et al. What determines the outcomes for adolescents and young adults with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia treated on cooperative group protocols? A
comparison of Children’s Cancer Group and Cancer and Leukemia
Group B studies. Blood. 2008;112:1646–1654.)

A small number of patients with particularly poor prognostic
features, such as those with induction failure or extreme hypodiploidy, may undergo bone marrow transplantation during the first
remission.
Adolescents and young adults with ALL have a poor prognosis
compared to children <15 years old. They often have adverse prognostic factors and require more intensive therapy. Patients in this age-­
group have a superior outcome when treated with pediatric rather than
adult treatment protocols (Fig. 544.4). Although the explanation for
these findings may be multifactorial, it is important that these patients
be treated with pediatric treatment protocols, ideally in a pediatric cancer center.
Genetic polymorphisms of enzymes important in drug metabolism may impact both the efficacy and the toxicity of chemotherapeutic medications. Pharmacogenetic testing of the thiopurine
S-­methyltransferase (TPMT) gene, which encodes one of the metabolizing enzymes of mercaptopurine, can identify patients with varying
levels of TPMT enzyme activity. Decreased TPMT enzyme activity

The major impediment to a successful outcome is relapse of the disease. Outcomes remain poor among those who relapse, with the most
important prognostic indicators being time from diagnosis and site of
relapsed disease. In addition, other factors, such as immunophenotype
(T-­ALL worse than B-­ALL) and age at initial diagnosis, have prognostic significance.
Relapse occurs in the bone marrow in 15–20% of patients with ALL
and has the most serious implications, especially if it occurs during
or shortly after completion of therapy. Intensive chemotherapy with
agents not previously used in the patient followed by allogeneic stem
cell transplantation can result in long-­term survival for some patients
with bone marrow relapse (see Chapter 177). Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-­cell technology will have an increasing role in the treatment of patients who have experienced a relapse of ALL (see Chapter
543). In addition, therapy targeted to the possible underlying pathogenic pathways (tyrosine kinase inhibitors) or cell receptors (blinatumomab) have demonstrated promising results in patients with relapsed
or refractory disease (Fig. 544.5)
The incidence of CNS relapse has decreased to <5% since introduction of preventive CNS therapy. CNS relapse may be discovered
at a routine LP in the asymptomatic patient. Symptomatic patients
with relapse in the CNS usually present with signs and symptoms
of increased intracranial pressure and can present with isolated cranial nerve palsies. The diagnosis is confirmed by demonstrating the
presence of leukemic cells in the CSF. The treatment includes intrathecal medication and cranial or craniospinal irradiation. Systemic
chemotherapy also must be used, because these patients are at high
risk for subsequent bone marrow relapse. Most patients with leukemic relapse confined to the CNS do well, especially those in whom
the CNS relapse occurs longer than 18 months after initiation of
chemotherapy.
Testicular relapse occurs in <2% of males with ALL, usually after
completion of therapy. Such relapse occurs as painless swelling of one
or both testes. The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of the affected
testis. Treatment includes systemic chemotherapy and possibly local
irradiation. A high proportion of males with a testicular relapse can be
successfully retreated, and the survival rate of these patients is good.
The most current information on treatment of childhood ALL is
available in the PDQ (Physician Data Query) on the NCI website (htt
p://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/childALL/healthprof
essional/).

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Close attention to the medical supportive care needs of the patients
is essential in successfully administering aggressive chemotherapeutic programs. Patients with high WBC counts are especially prone to
tumor lysis syndrome as therapy is initiated. The kidney failure associated with very high levels of serum uric acid can be prevented or
treated with allopurinol or urate oxidase. Chemotherapy often produces severe myelosuppression, which can require erythrocyte and
platelet transfusion and always requires a high index of suspicion and
aggressive empirical antimicrobial therapy for sepsis in febrile children
with neutropenia. Patients must receive prophylactic treatment for
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia during chemotherapy and for several
months after completing treatment.
The successful therapy of ALL is a direct result of intensive and often
toxic treatment. However, such intensive therapy can incur substantial academic, developmental, and psychosocial costs for children with
ALL and considerable financial costs and stress for their families. Both
long-­term and acute toxicity effects can occur. An array of cancer care
professionals with training and experience in addressing the myriad of
problems that can arise is essential to minimize the complications and
achieve an optimal outcome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3102 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Rituximab
Ofatumumab
Blinatumomab
CAR T cell
CAR T cell

CD20

Daratumumab

CD38
CD19

NOTCH1

CD22

Ph+(BCR-ABL1)

γ-secretase inhibitors

t (9:22)

Fig. 544.5 New targeted therapy for

CAR T cell

acute lymphoblastic leukemia. CAR, Chimeric antigen receptor. (From Malard F,
Mohty M. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.
Lancet. 2020;395:1146–1158. Fig. 2, p.
1153.)

Tyrosine kinase inhibitors
Epratuzumab

Therapeutic targets
Inotuzumab ozogamicin
Moxetumomab pasudotox

544.2 Acute Myelogenous Leukemia

1.0
Overall survival (probability)

B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia

Julia C. Meade, Erika D. Friehling, A. Kim Ritchey,
David G. Tubergen, and Archie Bleyer

0.8

EPIDEMIOLOGY
0.6

0.4
1990-1994 (n  7,304)
1995-1999 (n  7,169)
2000-2005 (n  7,153)

0.2
P  0.0001
0.0
0

5

10

15

Times (yr)

Fig. 544.6 Overall survival probabilities by treatment era for patients

with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in Children’s Oncology Group
trials in 1990–1994, 1995–1999, and 2000–2005. (From Hunger SP, Lu
X, Devidas M, et al. Improved survival for children and adolescents with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia between 1990 and 2005: a report from
the Children’s Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:1663–1669.)

PROGNOSIS

Improvements in therapy and risk stratification have resulted in significant increases in survival rates, with current data showing overall 5-­year
survival of approximately 90% (Fig. 544.6). Although survivors are more
likely to experience significant chronic medical conditions compared
with siblings, including musculoskeletal, cardiac, and neurologic conditions, risk-­adapted therapy has resulted in a decrease in late effects.
Overall, long-­term management following ALL should be conducted in
a clinic where children and adolescents can be followed by a variety of
specialists to address the challenges of these unique patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

AML accounts for 11% of the cases of childhood leukemia in the
United States; it is diagnosed in approximately 370 children annually.
The relative frequency of AML increases in adolescence, representing
36% of cases of leukemia in 15-­19 year olds. Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype that is more common in certain regions of
the world, but the incidence of the other types is generally uniform.
Environmental risk factors have been identified, including ionizing
radiation, chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., alkylating agents, epipodophyllotoxin), and organic solvents (benzene). Approximately 10% of
children with AML are found to have a germline pathogenic variant
predisposing them to leukemia. Certain syndromes are also known
to increase the risk of leukemia: Down syndrome, Fanconi anemia,
Bloom syndrome, Kostmann syndrome, Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome, Diamond-­
Blackfan syndrome, Li-­
Fraumeni syndrome, and
neurofibromatosis type 1 (see Table 544.1).

CELLULAR CLASSIFICATION

The characteristic feature of AML is that >20% of bone marrow cells
on bone marrow aspiration or biopsy touch preparations constitute
a fairly homogeneous population of blast cells, with features similar
to those that characterize early differentiation states of the myeloid-­
monocyte-­
megakaryocyte series of blood cells. Current practice
requires the use of flow cytometry to identify cell surface antigens and
use of chromosomal and molecular genetic techniques for additional
diagnostic precision and to aid the choice of therapy. The WHO has
proposed a new classification system that incorporates morphology,
chromosome abnormalities, and specific gene pathogenic variants.
This system provides significant biologic and prognostic information
(Table 544.4).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The production of symptoms and signs of AML is a result of replacement of bone marrow by malignant cells and caused by secondary bone

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 544 u The Leukemias
marrow failure. Patients with AML can present with any or all of the
findings associated with marrow failure in ALL. In addition, patients
with AML may present with signs and symptoms that are uncommon in ALL, including subcutaneous nodules or “blueberry muffin”
lesions (especially in infants), infiltration of the gingiva (especially in
monocytic subtypes), signs and laboratory findings of disseminated
intravascular coagulation (especially indicative of APL), and discrete
masses, known as chloromas or granulocytic sarcomas. These masses
can occur in the absence of apparent bone marrow involvement and
typically are associated with a t(8;21) translocation. Chloromas also
may be seen in the orbit and epidural space.

DIAGNOSIS

Analysis of bone marrow aspiration and biopsy specimens of patients
with AML typically reveals the features of a hypercellular marrow

Table 544.4  WHO Classification of Acute Myeloid
Neoplasms
Acute myeloid leukemia with recurrent genetic abnormalities
• AML with t(8;21)(q22;q22.1); RUNX1-­RUNX1T1
• AML with inv(16)(p13.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22); CBFB-­MYH11
• APL with PML-­RARA
• AML with t(9;11)(p21.3;q23.3); MLLT3-­KMT2A
• AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34.1); DEK-­NUP214
• AML with inv(3)(q21.3q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21.3;q26.2); GATA2,
MECOM
• AML (megakaryoblastic) with t(1;22)(p13.3;q13.3); RBM15-­MKL1
• Provisional entity: AML with BCR-­ABL1
• AML with variant NPM1
• AML with biallelic pathogenic variants of CEBPA
• Provisional entity: AML with variant RUNX1
AML with myelodysplasia-­related changes
Therapy-­related myeloid neoplasms
Acute myeloid leukemia, not otherwise specified
• AML with minimal differentiation
• AML without maturation
• AML with maturation
• Acute myelomonocytic leukemia
• Acute monoblastic/monocytic leukemia
• Pure erythroid leukemia
• Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
• Acute basophilic leukemia
• Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis
Myeloid sarcoma
Myeloid proliferations related to Down syndrome
• Transient abnormal myelopoiesis
• Myeloid leukemia associated with Down syndrome
Blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasm
AML, Acute myelogenous leukemia; APL, acute promyelocytic leukemia.
Adapted from Arber DA, Orazi A, Hasserjian R, et al. The 2016 revision to the World
Health Organization classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia. Blood.
2016;127:2391–2405.

Table 544.5

3103

consisting of a monotonous pattern of cells. Flow cytometry and
special stains assist in identifying myeloperoxidase-­containing cells,
thus confirming both the myelogenous origin of the leukemia and
the diagnosis. Some chromosomal abnormalities and molecular
genetic markers are characteristic of specific subtypes of disease
(Table 544.5).

PROGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Aggressive multiagent chemotherapy is successful in inducing remission in approximately 85–90% of patients. Survival has increased dramatically since the 1970s, when only 15% of newly diagnosed patients
survived, compared with a current survival rate of 60–70% with modern therapy (Fig. 544.7). Various induction chemotherapy regimens
exist, typically including an anthracycline in combination with high-­
dose cytarabine. Targeting therapy to genetic markers may be beneficial (see Table 544.5). Up to 5% of patients die of either infection or
bleeding before a remission can be achieved. Post-­remission therapy
is chosen based on a combination of cytogenetic and molecular markers of the leukemia as well as the response to induction chemotherapy (MRD assessment). Selected patients with favorable prognostic
features [t(8;21); t(15;17); inv(16); NPM1 pathogenic variants] and
robust response to induction chemotherapy have improved outcomes
with chemotherapy alone, with stem cell transplantation only recommended after a relapse. However, patients with unfavorable prognostic features (e.g., monosomies 7 and 5, 5q−, and 11q23 abnormalities)
who have inferior outcomes with chemotherapy might benefit from
stem cell transplant in first remission. With improvements in supportive care, there is no longer a substantial difference in mortality when
comparing matched-­related stem cell transplants to matched-­unrelated
stem cell transplants for AML.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia, characterized by a gene rearrangement involving the retinoic acid receptor [t(15;17); PML-­
RARA], is very responsive to all-­trans-­
retinoic acid (ATRA,
tretinoin) combined with anthracyclines and cytarabine. The success of this therapy makes marrow transplantation in first remission
unnecessary for patients with this disease. Arsenic trioxide is an
effective noncytotoxic therapy for APL. Data from trials in adults
and children show that the use of combined ATRA and arsenic
without cytotoxic drugs for initial therapy for selected patients is
feasible and highly effective.
Increased supportive care is needed in patients with AML
because the intensive therapy they receive produces prolonged bone
marrow suppression with a very high incidence of serious infections, especially viridans streptococcal sepsis and fungal infection.
These patients require prolonged hospitalization and prophylactic
antimicrobials.
The most current information on treatment of AML is available in
the PDQ (Physician Data Query) on the NCI website (http://www.ca
ncer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/childAML/healthprofessional/).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Prognostic Implications of Common Chromosomal Abnormalities in Pediatric Acute Myelogenous Leukemia

CHROMOSOMAL
ABNORMALITY

GENETIC ALTERATION

USUAL MORPHOLOGY

PROGNOSIS

t(8;21)

RUNX1-­RUNX1T1

Myeloblasts with differentiation

Favorable

inv(16)

CBFB-­MYHII

Myeloblasts plus abnormal eosinophils
with dysplastic basophilic granules

Favorable

t(15;17)

PML-­RARA

Promyelocytic

Favorable

11q23 abnormalities

KMT2A(MLL) rearrangements

Monocytic

Unfavorable

FLT3 alterations

FLT3-­ITD

Any

Unfavorable

del(7q), −7

Unknown

Myeloblasts without differentiation

Unfavorable

Adapted from Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and Childhood. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003: p. 1177.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3104 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
1.0

0.8
Overall survival

21c

(2003-2005)
(2000-2002)
(1989-1995)
(1985-1989)
(1979-1983)
(1975-1977)

21 21 21

Expansion of fetal
liver progenitors

Age 1-5 yr
Window or
opportunity for
GATA1 variants

0.6

0.4
TL

0.2

In 5% of DS
newborns

Fetal liver
hematopoiesis

0.0
0

5

10
15
Yr from study entry

20

80% of patients survive
without developing ML DS

25

Fig. 544.7 Overall survival showing incremental improvements over

the last 40 years in Children’s Oncology Group and legacy trials in childhood acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). (From Gamis AS, Alonzo
TA, Perentesis JP, Meshinchi S. On behalf of the COG Acute Myeloid
Leukemia Committee: Children’s Oncology Group’s 2013 blueprint for
research: acute myeloid leukemia. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013;60:964–
971.)

544.3 Down Syndrome and Acute
Leukemia and Transient
Abnormal Myelopoiesis
A. Kim Ritchey, Julia C. Meade, Erika D. Friehling,
David G. Tubergen, and Archie Bleyer
Acute leukemia occurs about 15-­20 times more frequently in children with Down syndrome than in the general population (see
Chapters 57 and 541). The ratio of ALL to AML in patients with
Down syndrome is the same as that in the general population. The
exception is during the first 3 years of life, when AML is more common. In children with Down syndrome who have ALL, the expected
outcome of treatment has been slightly inferior to that for other
children, a difference that can be partially explained by a lack of
good prognostic characteristics, such as ETV6-­RUNX1 and trisomies, as well as the presence of genetic abnormalities associated with
an inferior prognosis, such as IKZF1. However, studies of patients
with Down syndrome and standard risk ALL show a 94% 10-­year
event-­free survival. Patients with Down syndrome demonstrate a
remarkable sensitivity to methotrexate and other antimetabolites,
resulting in substantial toxicity if standard doses are administered.
However, in the case of AML, patients with Down syndrome have
much better outcomes than children without Down syndrome,
with a >90% long-­term survival rate. After induction therapy, these
patients receive therapy that is less intensive to decrease toxicity
while maintaining excellent cure rates.
Approximately 10% of neonates with Down syndrome develop
a transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM), a unique myeloproliferative disorder characterized by high leukocyte counts, blast cells
in the peripheral blood, and associated anemia, thrombocytopenia,
jaundice, and hepatosplenomegaly. Hydrops fetalis is an uncommon manifestation of TAM and is associated with pleural effusions,
ascites, cardiac infiltration, hepatic dysfunction, and anemia. Mortality is rare from TAM but is associated with hyperleukocytosis,

ML DS

20% of
• Spontaneous patients Additional genetic
resolution or
aberrations?
treatment
• 10-15% death
Bone marrow
due to TL or other
causes

Fig. 544.8 Stepwise development of myeloid leukemia in Down

syndrome (ML DS) following transient leukemia (TL). TL arises from
expanded fetal liver progenitors as a result of constitutional trisomy
21, providing a window of opportunity for the occurrence of acquired
mutations in the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1. In most
cases, TL spontaneously disappears, but some children need treatment because of severe TL-­related symptoms. Approximately 20%
of children with TL subsequently develop ML DS, which requires additional hits. (From Zwaan MC, Reinhardt D, Hitzler J, Vyas P. Acute
leukemias in children with Down syndrome. Pediatr Clin North Am.
2008;55:53–70.)

prematurity, ascites, coagulopathy, and renal or hepatic dysfunction. These features usually resolve within the first 3 months of
life. Although these neonates can require temporary transfusion
support, they usually do not require chemotherapy. Low-­dose cytarabine has been used to decrease mortality in patients with high
WBC counts and life-­threatening complications. Patients who have
Down syndrome and who develop TAM require close follow-­up,
because 20–30% will develop typical leukemia (often acute megakaryocytic leukemia) by 3 years of age (mean onset, 16 months).
GATA1 variants (a transcription factor that controls megakaryopoiesis) are present in blasts from patients with Down syndrome who
have TAM and also in those with leukemia (Fig. 544.8). The presence of flow cytometry minimal residual disease at 3 months after a
diagnosis of TAM is a risk factor for the development of myeloid
leukemia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

544.4 Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
Erika D. Friehling, Julia C. Meade, A. Kim Ritchey,
David G. Tubergen, and Archie Bleyer
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a clonal disorder of
the hematopoietic tissue that accounts for 2–3% of all cases of
childhood leukemia. Approximately 99% of the cases are
characterized by a specific translocation, t(9;22)(q34;q11), known
as the Philadelphia chromosome, resulting in a BCR-­ABL fusion
protein.
The presenting symptoms of CML are nonspecific and can
include fever, fatigue, weight loss, and anorexia. Splenomegaly also
may be present, resulting in pain in the left upper quadrant of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 544 u The Leukemias
abdomen. The diagnosis is suggested by a high WBC count with
myeloid cells at all stages of differentiation in the peripheral blood
and bone marrow. It is confirmed by cytogenetic and molecular
studies that demonstrate the presence of the characteristic Philadelphia chromosome and the BCR-­ABL gene rearrangement. This
translocation, although characteristic of CML, is also found in a
small percentage of patients with ALL.
The disease is characterized by an initial chronic phase in which
the malignant clone produces an elevated leukocyte count with a
predominance of mature forms but with increased numbers of
immature granulocytes. In addition to leukocytosis, blood counts
can reveal mild anemia and thrombocytosis. Typically, the chronic
phase terminates 3-­4 years after onset, when the CML moves into
the accelerated or “blast crisis” phase. At this point, the blood
counts rise dramatically, and the clinical picture is indistinguishable
from acute leukemia. Additional manifestations can occur, including neurologic symptoms from hyperleukocytosis, which causes
increased blood viscosity with decreased CNS perfusion.
Imatinib (Gleevec), an agent designed specifically to inhibit the
BCR-­ABL tyrosine kinase, has been used in adults and children
and has shown an ability to produce major cytogenetic responses
in >70% of patients (see Table 542.1). Experience in children suggests it can be used safely with results comparable to those seen
in adults. Second-­generation tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such as
dasatinib and nilotinib, have improved remission rates in adults
and are now included in the first-­line therapy in that population.
Both agents have been studied in children and have been found to
be effective and safe. While waiting for a response to the tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, disabling or threatening signs and symptoms of
CML can be controlled during the chronic phase with hydroxyurea,
which gradually returns the leukocyte count to normal. Treatment
with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor is the current standard for pediatric CML. Although not considered curative at this time, prolonged responses can be seen, and studies in adults have shown that,
in select cases, treatment with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor can be
stopped. The role of potentially curative human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-­matched family donor stem cell transplant in management
of pediatric CML is debated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

544.5 Juvenile Myelomonocytic Leukemia
Julia C. Meade, Erika D. Friehling, A. Kim Ritchey,
David G. Tubergen, and Archie Bleyer
JMML, formerly termed juvenile chronic myelogenous leukemia,
is a clonal proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells that typically
affects children <2 years old. JMML is rare, constituting <1% of
all cases of childhood leukemia. Patients with this disease do not
have the Philadelphia chromosome characteristic of CML. Patients
with JMML present with rashes, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly,
and hemorrhagic manifestations. Analysis of the peripheral blood
often shows an elevated leukocyte count with increased monocytes, thrombocytopenia, and anemia with the presence of erythroblasts. The bone marrow shows a myelodysplastic pattern, with
blasts accounting for <20% of cells. Most patients with JMML have
been found to have pathogenic variants that lead to activation of
the RAS oncogene pathway. About 90% have molecular changes in

3105

NRAS, KRAS, NF1, CBL, and PTPN11. Patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 and Noonan syndrome have a predilection for this
type of leukemia because they have germline mutations involved
in RAS signaling. JMML in the setting of Noonan syndrome and
CBL syndrome is unique, with most patients having a spontaneous
resolution. However, for other patients with JMML, stem cell transplantation offers the best opportunity for cure, although outcomes
are still poor.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

544.6 Infant Leukemia
A. Kim Ritchey, Erika D. Friehling, Julia C. Meade,
David G. Tubergen, and Archie Bleyer
The incidence of infant acute leukemia is about 40 cases per million, or about 160 cases per year in the United States. Approximately
2% of cases of childhood leukemia occur before age 1 year. In contrast to the situation in older children, the ratio of ALL in infants to
AML is 2:1. Leukemic clones have been noted in cord blood at birth
before symptoms appear, and in one case, the same clone was noted
in maternal cells (maternal-­to-­fetal transmission). Chromosome
translocations can also occur in utero during fetal hematopoiesis,
leading to malignant clone formation.
Several unique biologic features and a particularly poor prognosis are characteristic of ALL during infancy. Almost all are B
cell with infrequent T cell. Seventy to 80% of the cases demonstrate rearrangements of the KMT2A (MLL) gene, found at the
site of the 11q23 band translocation, the majority of which are the
t(4;11). This subset of patients largely accounts for the very high
relapse rate. These patients often present with hyperleukocytosis
and extensive tissue infiltration producing organomegaly, including CNS disease. Subcutaneous nodules, known as leukemia cutis,
and tachypnea caused by diffuse pulmonary infiltration by leukemic cells are observed more often in infants than in older children.
The leukemic cell morphology is usually that of large, irregular lymphoblasts, with a phenotype negative for the CD10 (common ALL
antigen) marker (pro-­B), unlike most older children with B-­ALL,
who are CD10+.
Very intensive chemotherapy programs, including stem cell
transplantation, are being explored in infants with KMT2A (MLL)
gene rearrangements, but none has yet proved satisfactory. Infants
defined as high risk (KMT2A, age <6 months and WBC ≥300,000)
have survival of only 30%, whereas infants with the KMT2A without
other high-­risk features have survival of 58%. Infants with leukemia
who lack the KMT2A rearrangement have a prognosis somewhat
inferior to that of older children with ALL.
Infants with AML often present with CNS or skin involvement
and have a subtype known as acute myelomonocytic leukemia.
The treatment may be the same as that for older children with
AML, with similar outcome. Meticulous supportive care is necessary because of the young age and aggressive therapy needed in
these patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3106 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

Chapter 545

Lymphoma
Jessica Hochberg, Stanton C. Goldman,
and Mitchell S. Cairo
INTRODUCTION

Lymphoma is the third most common cancer among U.S. children (≤14
years old), with an annual incidence of 15 cases per 1 million children.
It is the most common cancer in adolescents, accounting for >25% of
newly diagnosed cancers in those 15-­19 years old. The two broad categories of lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and non-­Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), have different clinical manifestations and treatments.*

545.1 Hodgkin Lymphoma
Stanton C. Goldman, Jessica Hochberg, and
Mitchell S. Cairo
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a malignant process involving the lymphoreticular system that accounts for 6% of childhood cancers. In the
United States, HL accounts for approximately 5% of cancers in children
≤14 years old; it accounts for approximately 15% of cancers in adolescents (15-­19 years), making HL the most common malignancy in this
age-­group.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The worldwide incidence of HL is approximately 2-­4 new cases per
100,000 population per year. There is a bimodal age distribution, with
peaks at 15-­35 years of age and again after 50 years. HL is the most
common cancer seen in adolescents and young adults and the third
most common in children <15 years old. In developing countries, the
early peak tends to occur before adolescence. A male predominance
is found among young children but lessens with age. Infectious agents
may be involved, such as human herpesvirus 6, cytomegalovirus, and
Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV). The role of EBV is supported by prospective serologic studies. Infection with EBV confers a fourfold higher risk
of developing HL and may precede the diagnosis by years. EBV antigens have been demonstrated in HL tissues, particularly type II latent
membrane proteins 1 and 2. Some studies have suggested that elevated
copies of EBV by polymerase chain reaction correspond to worse prognosis. The EBV antigens latent membrane protein 1 and 2 have been
used as targets for cytotoxic T-­lymphocyte therapy in patients with
relapsed/refractory HL.

PATHOGENESIS

The Reed-­Sternberg (RS) cell, a pathognomonic feature of HL, is a
large cell (15-­45 μm in diameter) with multiple or multilobulated
nuclei. This cell type is considered the hallmark of HL, although similar
cells are seen in infectious mononucleosis, NHL, and other conditions.
The RS cell is clonal in origin and arises from the germinal center B
cells but typically has lost most B-­cell gene expression and function.
There is no single simple genetic aberration that leads to malignant
transformation of the RS cell; rather, a combination of somatic pathogenic variants, chromosomal instability, and complex chromosomal
rearrangements has been reported with no particular pattern or frequency. This typically leads to cell regulation defects such as constitutive activation of the nuclear factor (NF)-­κB pathway or abnormal
regulation of the Bcl-­2 family of proteins. HL is characterized by a
variable number of RS cells surrounded by an inflammatory infiltrate
* The views expressed are the result of independent work and do not necessarily represent
the views or findings of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or the United States.

of lymphocytes, macrophages, plasma cells, and eosinophils in different proportions, depending on the HL histologic subtype. The interaction between the RS cell and these background inflammatory cells
with their associated cytokine release is important in the development
and progression of HL. Reactive infiltration of eosinophils and CD68+
macrophages and increased concentrations of cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-­1 and IL-­6 and tumor necrosis factor, are all associated
with an unfavorable prognosis. Other factors associated with a worse
prognosis include advanced stage, the presence of systemic symptoms,
decreased response to therapy, and slow response to therapy. In addition, evidence of CD8+ T cells surrounding the RS cell offers evidence
of an important role in T-­cell promotion of malignant cell survival,
perhaps through the CD30 and CD40 ligands found on RS cells as well
as immune checkpoint inhibition pathways. Other features that distinguish the histologic subtypes include various degrees of fibrosis and the
presence of collagen bands, necrosis, or malignant reticular cells (Fig.
545.1). The distribution of subtypes varies with age.
The Revised World Health Organization Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasms includes two modifications of the older Rye system.
HL appears to arise in lymphoid tissue and spread to adjacent lymph
node areas in a relatively orderly manner (Table 545.1). Hematogenous
spread also occurs, leading to involvement of the liver, spleen, bone,
bone marrow (BM), or brain, and is usually associated with systemic
symptoms.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Patients typically present with painless, nontender, firm, rubbery cervical or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy and usually some degree of
mediastinal involvement. Clinically detectable hepatosplenomegaly
may be encountered. Depending on the extent and location of nodal
and extranodal disease, patients may present with symptoms and signs
of airway obstruction (dyspnea, hypoxia, cough), pleural or pericardial effusion, hepatocellular dysfunction, or BM infiltration (anemia,
neutropenia, or thrombocytopenia). Systemic symptoms, classified as
B symptoms, that are considered important in staging are unexplained
fever >38°C (100.4°F), weight loss >10% total body weight over 6
months, and drenching night sweats. Less common and not considered
of prognostic significance are symptoms of pruritus, lethargy, anorexia,
or pain. Patients also exhibit immune system deficiencies that often
persist during and after therapy.

DIAGNOSIS

Any patient with persistent, unexplained lymphadenopathy unassociated with an obvious underlying inflammatory or infectious process
should undergo chest radiography to identify the presence of a large
mediastinal mass before undergoing lymph node biopsy (Fig. 545.2).
Formal excisional biopsy is preferred over needle biopsy to ensure that
adequate tissue is obtained, both for light microscopy and for appropriate immunohistochemical and molecular studies. Once the diagnosis
of HL is established, extent of disease (stage) should be determined
to allow selection of appropriate therapy (Table 545.2). Evaluation
includes history, physical examination, and imaging studies, including
chest radiograph; CT scans of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis;
and PET scan (Fig. 545.3). Laboratory studies should include a CBC to
identify abnormalities that might suggest marrow involvement, ESR,
and measurement of serum ferritin, which is of some prognostic significance and, if abnormal at diagnosis, serves as a baseline to evaluate the
effects of treatment. A chest radiograph is particularly important for
measuring the size of the mediastinal mass in relation to the maximal
diameter of the thorax (see Fig. 545.2). This determines “bulk” disease
and becomes prognostically significant. Chest CT more clearly defines
the extent of a mediastinal mass if present and identifies hilar nodes
and pulmonary parenchymal involvement, which may not be evident
on chest radiographs (see Fig. 545.3). BM aspiration and biopsy should
be performed to rule out advanced disease. Bone scans are performed
in patients with bone pain and/or elevation of alkaline phosphatase.
Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET imaging has advantages over traditional gallium scanning, with higher resolution, better dosimetry, less
intestinal activity, and the potential to quantify disease (Table 545.3).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 545 u Lymphoma

D

C

B

A

G

F

E

3107

Fig. 545.1 Histologic subtypes of Hodgkin lymphoma. A, Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains of nodular lymphocyte–predominant Hodgkin

lymphoma (NLPHL) demonstrating a nodular proliferation with a moth-­eaten appearance. B, High-­power view demonstrating the neoplastic L and
H cells found in NLPHL. C, Classic Hodgkin lymphoma, nodular sclerosis subtype. Large mononuclear and binucleate Reed-­Sternberg cells are
seen admixed in the inflammatory cell background. D, Classic Hodgkin lymphoma, mixed cellularity subtype, demonstrating increased numbers of
Reed-­Sternberg cells in a mixed inflammatory background without sclerotic changes. E, High-­power view of a classic Reed-­Sternberg cell showing
binucleate cells with prominent eosinophilic nucleoli and relatively abundant cytoplasm. F, Few CD68+ macrophages in a patient with successful
treatment. G, Many CD68+ macrophages in a treatment failure patient.

Table 545.1  New World Health Organization/Revised
­European–American Classification of ­Lymphoid
Neoplasms for Hodgkin Lymphoma
Nodular lymphocyte predominance
Classical Hodgkin lymphoma
Lymphocyte rich
Mixed cellularity
Nodular sclerosis
Lymphocyte depletion
From Harris NL, Jaffe ES, Diebold J, et al. The World Health Organization classification
of neoplastic diseases of the haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues: report of the Clinical Advisory Committee Meeting, Airlie House, Virginia, November 1997. Histopathology. 2000;36:69–87.

Table 545.2  Lugano Classification for Hodgkin Lymphoma*
STAGE

EXTRANODAL
STATUS

INVOLVEMENT

I

One node or group of adjacent
nodes

Single extranodal
­lesions without
nodal involvement

II

Two or more nodal groups
on the same side of the
diaphragm

Stage I or II by nodal
extent with limited
contiguous extra­
nodal involvement

II bulky

II as above with “bulky” disease

Not applicable

III

Nodes on both sides of the
diaphragm; nodes above
the diaphragm with spleen
involvement

Not applicable

IV

Additional noncontiguous
­extralymphatic involvement

Lung, liver, bone
marrow, bone
­marrow, bone

*The absence or presence of fever >38°C (100.4°F) for 3 (some suggest 7) consecutive
days, drenching night sweats, or unexplained loss of >10% of body weight in the 6
months preceding admission are to be denoted in all cases by the suffix letter A or B,
respectively.
From Cheson BD, Fisher RI, Barrington SF, et al. Recommendations for initial evaluation, staging and response assessment of Hodgkin and non-­Hodgkin lymphoma: the
Lugano classification. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(27):3059–3067.

A

B

Fig. 545.2 A, Anterior mediastinal mass in a patient with Hodgkin

disease before therapy. B, After 2 months of chemotherapy, the mediastinal mass has disappeared.

PET scans are essential as a prognostic tool in HL, enabling therapy to
be reduced in those predicted to have a good outcome and identifying
those at risk of relapse.
The staging classification currently used for HL was initially adopted
at the Ann Arbor Conference in 1971 and was revised in 1989. The
Lugano classification was developed in 2014 and incorporates

standardized staging and response criteria for FDG-­PET–avid lymphomas (see Table 545.2). HL can be subclassified into A or B categories: A is used to identify asymptomatic patients, and B is used for
patients who exhibit any B symptoms. Extralymphatic disease resulting
from direct extension of an involved lymph node region is designated
by category E. A complete response in HL is defined as the complete
resolution of disease on clinical examination and imaging studies, or
at least 70–80% reduction of disease and a change from initial positivity to negativity on PET scanning, reflecting residual fibrosis, which is
common.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3108 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
TREATMENT

A

A

A

*
*
B
Fig. 545.3 Hodgkin lymphoma in a young individual. A, CT shows

a homogeneous anterior mediastinal mass (arrows). The arrowhead
points to the superior vena cava. B, PET/CT in the coronal plane. The
mass shows marked fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) activity (arrows). Note
the associated left neck mass (arrowhead). The left ventricle activity (asterisks) is normal. A, Ascending aorta. (From Haaga JR, Boll DT, et al.,
eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body [Vol, 1]. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2017: Fig. 38-­89, p. 1065.)

Table 545.3  TEP Evaluation After Two Chemotherapy
­Cycles Using Deauville Criteria 5-­Point Scale
18F-­FDG UPTAKE

1

No uptake

2

Uptake lower than or equal to that of mediastinal
blood pool

3

Uptake higher than that of mediastinum and lower
than or equal to that of the liver

4

Uptake moderately higher than that of the liver at
any site

5

Uptake markedly higher than that of the liver at any
site or at new sites of disease, or both

X

New areas of uptake unlikely to be related to
lymphoma

18F-­FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose F18; TEP, technical expert panel.

From Brice P, de Kerviler E, Friedberg JW. Classical Hodgkin lymphoma. Lancet.
2021;398:1518–1526. Table 2.

Multiple agents allow different mechanisms of action to have nonoverlapping toxicities so that full doses can be given to each patient.
Chemotherapy and radiation therapy are both effective in the treatment of HL. Treatment of HL in pediatric patients is risk adapted
and involves the use of combined chemotherapy with or without
low-­dose involved-­field radiation therapy based on response. Treatment is determined largely by disease stage, presence or absence of
B symptoms, and the presence of bulky nodal disease. The development of effective multiagent combination chemotherapy and immunotherapy is a major milestone in the treatment of HL, resulting
in a complete response rate of 70–80% and cure rate of 40–50% in
patients with advanced-­stage disease. However, this regimen also led
to significant acute and long-­term toxicity. The desire to reduce side
effects and morbidity has stimulated attempts to reduce the intensity
of chemotherapy, as well as radiation dose and volume. Combinations of chemotherapy have reduced the risk of secondary cancers.
Also, current radiation therapy uses lower amounts of overall radiation in addition to narrowing the radiation treatment field to either
involved-­field or even involved-­node irradiation. The current Children’s Oncology Group and other trials are investigating whether
radiation therapy can be eliminated altogether in patients who have a
very good rapid early response to induction chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy agents used to treat children and adolescents with
HL include cyclophosphamide, procarbazine, vincristine or vinblastine, prednisone or dexamethasone, doxorubicin, bleomycin,
dacarbazine, etoposide, methotrexate, and cytosine arabinoside.
The combination chemotherapy regimens in current use are based
on COPP (cyclophosphamide, vincristine [Oncovin], procarbazine,
and prednisone) or ABVD (doxorubicin [Adriamycin], bleomycin,
vinblastine, and dacarbazine), with the addition of prednisone, cyclophosphamide, and etoposide (ABVE-­PC and BEACOPP) or BAVD
(brentuximab vedotin, doxorubicin [Adriamycin], vincristine, dacarbazine) in various combinations for intermediate-­and high-­risk
groups (Table 545.4). Risk-­adapted protocols are based on both staging criteria and rapidity of response to initial chemotherapy. The aim
is to reduce total drug doses and treatment duration and to eliminate
radiation therapy, if possible.
Agents such as those that disrupt the NF-­κB pathway or monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that target RS tumor cells, as well as the benign
reactive cells that surround them, are being investigated. Ongoing
clinical trials report encouraging results with anti-­CD20 antibody
(rituximab), particularly in nodular lymphocyte-­predominant HL, for
which trials in relapsed disease have shown an overall response rate of
94%. In addition, anti-­CD30 agents are being used that target the RS
cells themselves, where CD30 is abundantly expressed. Brentuximab
vedotin is an antibody–drug conjugate approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration to treat HL. It combines the chimeric anti-­CD30
antibody brentuximab linked to the antimitotic agent monomethyl
auristatin E. This agent shows impressive efficacy as single-­agent therapy in refractory HL and is being tested as part of up-­front therapy
combined with chemotherapy in patients with newly diagnosed disease
where pediatric trials incorporating brentuximab to replace vincristine
in the OEPA/COPDac backbone have demonstrated overall safety, tolerability, and efficacy with 97% event-­free survival (EFS) and the ability
to limit radiation to involved node radiation sites only. Furthermore,
the combination of both brentuximab and rituximab, together with
AVD chemotherapy in newly diagnosed patients, has shown 100% efficacy while allowing for the elimination of toxic alkylator agents, topoisomerase inhibitors, bleomycin, and any radiation in the majority of
patients. EBV-­specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) can also be
generated from allogeneic donors for patients with advanced HL. In
clinical trials, these cells show promising results, with enhanced antiviral activity and stabilization of disease. EBV-­CTLs have been developed
and are currently being investigated. These enhanced EBV-­CTLs are
designed to be latent membrane protein 1 and 2 specific and can be
generated from second-­party (in the case of BM transplant recipients)
or even third-­party donors for patients with refractory disease. These
approaches represent an exciting direction in adoptive cellular tumor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 545 u Lymphoma
Table 545.4  Chemotherapy Regimens for Children,
Adolescents, and Young Adults with Hodgkin
Lymphoma
CHEMOTHERAPY
REGIMEN

CORRESPONDING AGENTS

ABVD

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin,
­vinblastine, dacarbazine

ABVD-­Rituxan

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin,
­vinblastine, dacarbazine, rituximab

ABvVD

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), brentuximab,
vinblastine, dacarbazine

ABvVD-­R

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), brentuximab,
vinblastine, dacarbazine, rituximab

AEPA/CAPDac

Brentuximab, etoposide, prednisone, and
doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide, ­
brentuximab, prednisone, and ­dacarbazine

ABVE (DBVE)

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin,
­vincristine, etoposide

VAMP

Vincristine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
methotrexate, prednisone

OPPA ± COPP
(females)

Vincristine (Oncovin), prednisone,
­procarbazine, doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin),
prednisone, procarbazine

OEPA ± COPP (males)

Vincristine (Oncovin), etoposide,
­prednisone, doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin),
prednisone, procarbazine

COPP/ABV

Cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin),
prednisone, procarbazine, doxorubicin
(Adriamycin), bleomycin, vinblastine

BEACOPP
(advanced stage)

Bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin
(Adriamycin), cyclophosphamide, ­vincristine
(Oncovin), prednisone, ­procarbazine

COPP

Cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin),
prednisone, procarbazine

CHOP

Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
vincristine (Oncovin), ­prednisone

ABVE-­PC (DBVE-­PC)

Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin,
vincristine, etoposide, prednisone,
­cyclophosphamide

ICE ± (Brentuximab)

Ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide ±
­brentuximab

Ifos/Vino ±
(Brentuximab)

Ifosfamide, vinorelbine ± brentuximab

immunology, and it remains to be determined whether CTLs will have
improved cytotoxicity that can overcome inhibitory signals.

RELAPSE

Most relapses occur within the first 3 years after diagnosis, but relapses
as late as 10 years have been reported. Relapse cannot be predicted
accurately with this disease. Poor prognostic features include tumor
bulk, stage at diagnosis, extralymphatic disease, and presence of B
symptoms. Patients who achieve an initial chemosensitive response
but relapse or progress before 12 months from diagnosis are candidates
for myeloablative chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation (SCT), with or without radiation therapy. Retrospective studies
show a significant decrease in relapse in patients with HL following
allogeneic vs autologous SCT. Reduced-­intensity conditioning or nonmyeloablative regimens are successful at reducing regimen-­related

3109

morbidity and mortality associated with myeloablative allogeneic SCT
while still achieving a strong graft versus HL effect. For more difficult-­
to-­treat refractory cases, radioimmunotherapy agents such as Zevalin
and Bexxar are being trialed, often in combination with SCT strategies. Both are monoclonal anti-­CD20 antibodies to which a radioactive isotope is directly linked. Clinical trials show each to be more
effective than rituximab in NHL patients, and there is some interest in
studying their use in the CD20 subpopulation of HL patients. Tumors
can evade the host immune system by exploiting immune checkpoint pathways, such as the CTL-­associated protein four (CTLA-­4)
and programmed-­death protein 1 (PD-­1) pathways. PD-­1 is a negative co-­stimulatory receptor with increased expression reported on T
cells. PD-­1 is critical for suppression of T-­cell activation, with binding
of programmed-­death ligand 1 (PD-­L1) resulting in “T-­cell exhaustion.” Blockade of this interaction renders previously anergic T cells
responsive to antigen. Evidence has shown that antitumor immune
responses can be improved by blocking immune checkpoint inhibitors
in the tumor microenvironment. Phase I trials of the PD-­1 blocking
mAbs nivolumab and pembrolizumab have shown significant promise in refractory patients. Phase II clinical trials suggest that combining
immunotherapy such as rituximab or brentuximab with PD-­1 checkpoint blockade will be highly effective against relapsed lymphomas
and well tolerated, without treatment-­related adverse events. With the
success seen in relapsed or refractory patients, PD-­1 blockade likely
will have a role in frontline therapy as well where studies have shown
promise in combination with chemotherapy in adults, with pediatric
trials currently under investigation.

PROGNOSIS

With the use of current therapeutic regimens, patients with favorable
prognostic factors and early-­stage disease have an EFS of 85–90% and
an overall survival (OS) at 5 years of >95%. Patients with advanced-­stage
disease have slightly lower EFS (80–85%) and OS (90%), respectively,
although OS has approached 100% with dose-­intense chemotherapy
(Table 545.5). Prognosis after relapse depends on the time from completion of treatment to recurrence, site of relapse (nodal vs extranodal),
and presence of B symptoms at relapse. Patients whose disease relapses
>12 months after chemotherapy alone or combined-­modality therapy
have the best prognosis, and their relapses usually respond to additional standard therapy, resulting in a long-­term survival of 60–70%.
A myeloablative autologous SCT in patients with refractory disease or
relapse within 12 months of therapy results in a long-­term survival rate
of only 40–50%. Allogeneic SCT has shown promise in patients with
poor-­risk features at relapse/progression.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

545.2 Non-­Hodgkin Lymphoma
Stanton C. Goldman, Jessica Hochberg, and Mitchell
S. Cairo
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) accounts for approximately 60% of
lymphomas in children and is the second most common malignancy
between ages 15 and 35 years. The annual incidence of pediatric NHL
in the United States is 750-­800 cases per year. In contrast to adult NHL,
which is predominantly indolent, pediatric NHL is usually high grade.
Although >70% of patients present with advanced disease, the prognosis has improved dramatically, with survival rates of 90–95% for localized disease and 80–95% for advanced disease.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although most children and adolescents with NHL present with de
novo disease, a small number of patients have NHL secondary to specific etiologies, including inherited or acquired immunodeficiencies
(e.g., severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome, Wiskott-­Aldrich
syndrome), virus-­associated malignancy (e.g., HIV, EBV), and as part
of genetic syndromes (e.g., ataxia-­telangiectasia, Bloom syndrome).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3110 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 545.5  Treatment Regimens and Outcome by Disease Staging
Hodgkin lymphoma

Treatment

Prognosis

LOCALIZED/LOW STAGE

INTERMEDIATE

POG study 9426/GPOH-­HD 95:
ABVD-­type therapy ± IFRT
(risk adapted based on early
response to chemotherapy)

Stanford/DAL-­HD-­90:
COPP-­based or dose-­intense
multiagent chemotherapy +
low-­dose RT
POG 9426/CCG 5942:
ABVD-­type therapy ± IFRT (risk
adapted)
ABvVD-­R
Stanford/DAL-­HD-­90:
5-­yr EFS: 89–92%

5-­yr EFS: 85–90%
5-­yr OS: 95%

POG 9426/CCG 5942:
5-­yr EFS: 84%
5-­yr OS: 91%
ABvVD-­R:
5-­yr EFS/OS: 100%

Burkitt lymphoma
and diffuse large
B-­cell lymphoma

Treatment

Prognosis

Lymphoblastic
lymphoma

4-­yr EFS:
98% (CI95 94-­99.5%)
4-­yr OS: 99% (CI95 96-­99.9%)

FAB/LMB 96 Group B therapy:
Reduced cyclophosphamide
and no maintenance therapy
COG ANHL01P1:
FAB/LMB Group B therapy +
rituximab
FAB/LMB96:
4-­yr EFS: 92% (CI95 90–94%)
4-­yr OS: 95% (CI95 93–96%)
*PMB DLBCL has worse
prognosis (EFS/OS: 66/73%)
COG ANHL01P1:
3-­yr EFS 93% (CI95 79-­98%)
3-­yr OS 95% (CI95 83–99%)

NHL-­BFM86/90/95:
Two cycles of ALL-type therapy
COG A5971:
ALL-­type therapy × 2 yr without
prophylactic cranial RT
COG A5971:
5-­yr EFS: 90 (CI95 78–96%)
5-­yr OS: 96 (CI95 84–99%)

No intermediate group;
disease classified as localized
(stages I/II) or advanced
(stages III/IV)

Treatment

EICHNL ALCL 99: Short intensive
chemotherapy + HD MTX
Completely resected stage I
disease may be treated with
surgery alone

Prognosis

EICHNL database:
5-­yr PFS: 89% (CI95 82–96%)
5-­yr OS: 94% (CI95 89–99%)

No intermediate group;
disease classified as standard
risk (no skin, visceral, or
mediastinal involvement)
or high risk (presence of
skin, mediastinal, or visceral
involvement)
No intermediate group; see
above

Treatment

Prognosis

Anaplastic large
cell lymphoma

FAB/LMB 96 Group A therapy:
Complete surgical resection
followed by two cycles of
chemotherapy

No intermediate group; see
above

ADVANCED
POG 8725/DAL-­HD-­90:
Dose-­intense multiagent
chemotherapy + low-­dose RT
HD9/HD12/CCG 59704:
Dose-­intense BEACOPP ± IFRT
AEPA/CAPDac
ABvVD-­R
POG 8725:
5-­yr EFS:
72–89% (age-­based)
DAL-­HD-­90:
5-­yr EFS: 86%
5-­yr OS: 85–90%
HD9/HD12/CCG 59704:
5-­yr EFS/OS: 88-­93/∼100%
AEPA/CAPDac:
3 yr EFS/OS: 97.4%/98.7%
ABvVD-­R:
5-­yr EFS/OS: 100%
FAB/LMB 96 standard-­intensity
Group C therapy:
Reduction, induction, intensification,
and maintenance therapy
COG ANHL01P1:
FAB/LMB Group C therapy +
rituximab
FAB/LMB96:
4-­yr FS:BM−/CNS−: 91% ±
3%BMCNS+: 85% ± 6%BM+/
CNS+: 66% ± 7%
COG ANHL01P1:
3-­yr EFS/OS:BM+ or CNS+: 90%
(CI95 75–96%)
CNS+: 93% (CI95 61–99%)
NHL-­BFM86/90/95:
ALL-­type therapy × 2 yr ± px CRT
CCG 5941:
Intensive chemotherapy × 1 yr +
cranial RT if CNS + at diagnosis
NHL-­BFM95:
5-­yr EFS: 90% ± 3% (III), 95 ± 5% (IV)
CCG 5941:
5-­yr EFS/OS: 78% ± 5%/85% ± 4%
ALCL 99, CCG 5941:
Short intensive chemotherapy +
HD MTX
COG ANHL0131: APO (doxorubicin, prednisone, vincristine) ±
vinblastine
ALCL 99:
2-­yr EFS: 71% (CI95 75–77%)
2-­yr OS: 94% (CI95 89-­95%)
COG 5941:
5-­yr EFS 68% (CI95 57–78%)
5-­yr OS: 80% (CI95 69–87%)
COG ANHL0131:
2-­yr EFS 79% (CI95 71–88%)
2-­yr OS 89% (CI95 83–95%)

ABVD, Doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine; ABvVD-R, doxorubicin (adriamycin), bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine rituximab; AEPA/CAPDac, Adcetris (brentuximab vedotin), etoposide, prednisone, doxorubicin (adriamycin), cyclophosphamide, adcetris (brentuximab vedotin), prednisone, cacarbazine; ALCL, anaplastic large cell lymphoma;
ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; ANHL, Children’s Oncology Group non-hodgkin lymphoma study; BEACOPP, bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), cyclophosphamide,
vincristine (Oncovin), prednisone, procarbazine; BM, bone marrow (involvement); CCG, Children’s Cancer Group; CI95, 95% confidence interval; CNS, central nervous system (involvement); COG, Children’s Oncology Group; COPP, cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin), prednisone, procarbazine; CRT, chemoradiotherapy; DAL-HD, German-Austrian Lymphoma
Froup Hodgkin 90 Study; EFS, event-­free survival; EICHNL, European Intergroup for Childhood Non-­Hodgkin Lymphoma; FAB, French-­American-­British; HD MTX, high-­dose methotrexate; IFRT, involved-­field radiation therapy; LMB, Lymphome Malins de Burkitt; MTX, methotrexate; NHL-­BFM, non-­Hodgkin lymphoma Berlin-­Frankfurt-­Munster; OS, overall survival;
PFS, progression-­free survival; PMB DLBCL, primary mediastinal B-­cell diffuse large B-­cell lymphoma; POG, Pediatric Oncology Group; px, prophylactic; RT, radiation therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 545 u Lymphoma
However, most children in North America and Europe in whom NHL
develops have no obvious genetic or environmental etiology.

PATHOGENESIS

Three most prevalent subtypes of childhood and adolescent NHL with
different treatment approaches are lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL),
mature B-­
cell lymphoma, and anaplastic large cell lymphoma
(ALCL; Figs. 545.4 and 545.5). LBL arises from precursor T lymphocytes and less often from precursor B lymphocytes, with biology and
treatment approaches similar to acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Mature
B-­cell lymphomas comprise two main pathologies, Burkitt lymphoma
(BL) and diffuse large B-­cell lymphoma (DLBCL). DLBCL is further
divided into several subtypes: the germinal center B-­cell–like subtype,
which carries a favorable prognosis and accounts for most pediatric
cases of DLBCL, and the subtypes with poorer prognosis, including
activated B-­cell–like and primary mediastinal B-­cell subtypes. Primary
mediastinal B-­cell subtype of DLBCL shares molecular signature more

Burkitt
38%

Follicular
1%

DLBCL
20%

Burkitt
21%

Other
6%

ALCL
10%

Other
2%

A

Lymphoblastic
29%

DLBCL
37%

Lymphoblastic
19%

ALCL
17%

B

Fig. 545.4 Incidence of non-­Hodgkin lymphoma subtypes. A, In 0- to

14-­yr-­old children. B, In 15- to 19-­yr-­old adolescents. ALCL, Anaplastic
large cell lymphoma; DLBCL, diffuse large B-­cell lymphoma. (Adapted from Hochberg J, Waxman IM, Kelly KM, et al. Adolescent non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma and Hodgkin lymphoma: state of the science. Br J
Haematol. 2008;144:24–40.)

A

akin to HL then germinal center–derived DLBCL. Most cases of ALCL
are of mature T-­cell origin, with a smaller percentage of null-­cell and
B-­cell origin. Cellular surface markers can aid in differentiating NHL
subtypes and present opportunities for specific antibody-­
targeted
treatments. BL and DLBCL express the mature B-­cell antigens CD20
(the target of rituximab) and CD22, whereas ALCL expresses the
CD30 antigen (the target of the antibody conjugate brentuximab vedotin). Some pathologic subtypes have specific cytogenetic aberrations.
Children with BL frequently have a driver genetic change involving the
MYC gene juxtaposed to an immunoglobulin chain in the form of translocations: t(8;14) (90%) or, less often, a t(2;8) or t(8;22) translocation
(10%). Children with BL who have additional chromosomal aberrations such as 13q deletion or complex karyotype have a poorer prognosis. Unlike adult DLBCL, a higher proportion of pediatric DLBCL may
also have c-­myc dysregulation with t(8;14) translocation (30%) and
often have a complex (80%) and aneuploid (80%) karyotype. In recent
years a Burkitt morphology lymphoma (Burkitt-­like) that lacks a c-­myc
driver has been categorized by findings of 11q aberrations and several
target genes such as chromatin remodeling complex pathogenic variants (INO80) that likely contribute to lymphomagenesis (Fig. 545.6).
Patients with ALCL usually have a driver t(2;5) translocation (90%),
which results in the formation of a fusion gene encoding the constitutively active nucleophosmin–anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
tyrosine kinase and can be targeted by the oral agent, crizotinib. T-­cell
LBL harbors many of the same cytogenetic abnormalities as T-­cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-­ALL), including rearrangements with
breakpoints at 14q11.2 involving the T-­cell receptor and multiple other
rearranged genes. Loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 6q defines a
poor-­risk subgroup of T-­LBL patients.
Genomic studies have offered insights into NHL pathogenesis as
well as elucidated potential targets for novel therapies. Gene expression profiling of T-­LBL and T-­ALL has implicated the activation of
oncogenic transcription factors as a result of aberrant T-­cell receptor gene rearrangement. One of the most frequently activated signaling pathways is NOTCH1, which may be amenable to therapeutic
targeting with γ-­secretase inhibitors. In BL and DLBCL, extensive
genomic work has identified unique gene expression signatures that

D

C

B

8
CD30

CD20

E

F

3111

G

14
H

Fig. 545.5 Histologic subtypes of childhood and adolescent non-­Hodgkin lymphoma. A-­D, Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains showing morphol-

ogy of Burkitt lymphoma (A, high power), diffuse large B-­cell lymphoma (B, high power), precursor T-­lymphoblastic lymphoma (C, high power), and
anaplastic large cell lymphoma (D, high power). E and F, Characteristic surface markers for anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) (CD30; E) and BL
(CD20; F). G and H, Cytogenetic analysis of Burkitt lymphoma (BL) demonstrating t(8;14). G, Karyotype showing the conventional t(8;14)(q24;q32).
H, Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization showing a balanced translocation involving MYC and immunoglobulin (Ig) H loci. The chromosome
eight centromere is labeled with spectrum aqua, MYC probe is labeled with spectrum orange, and IgH is labeled with spectrum green. Two fusion
signals are seen, as well as one red and one green, representing the normal chromosomes. (A-­D from Cairo MS, Raetz E, Lim MS, et al. Childhood
and adolescent non-­Hodgkin lymphoma: new insights in biology and critical challenges for the future. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005;45:753–769;
E-­H from Giulino-­Roth, Cesarman E. Molecular biology of Burkitt lymphoma. In Robertson ES, ed. Burkitt’s Lymphoma. New York: Springer; 2012.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3112 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
MYC- Burkitt lymphoma
(mnBLL, 11q,)
CD20+
11q
GNA13
NFRKB

MYC+ Burkitt lymphoma
CD20+
MYC-IGH
MYC-IGL
TCF
ID3
TP53
SMARCA4
DLEU1

Follicular lymphoma
CD20+
t(14;18) (IGH-BCL2)
CXCR4
TNFRSF14
CREBBP
MLL2
EZH2

T cell
Somatic
hypermutation
(SHM)

Antigen

Follicular
dendritic cell

Plasma cell

Centrocyte

Centroblast
Naive B cell

Memory B cell

Plasmablast
Dark
zone

Light zone

*GCB DLBCL
CD20+
TNFRSF14
CREBBP
BCL2
β2M
EZH2

Germinal center

*Unclassified DLBCL
CD20+
NOTCH2
BCL6

*ABC DLBCL
CD20+
CDKN2A
PIM1
MYD88
PRDM1

Fig. 545.6 Germinal center–derived B-­cell lymphomagenesis. *Diffuse large B-­cell lymphoma (DLBCL), recently subclassified as MCD, BNS, N1,
and EZB subgroups. (From Cairo, MS. A new Burkitt “look-­alike” lymphoma. Blood. 2019;133[9]:889–891.)

differentiate these two mature B-­cell neoplasms. In addition, next-­
generation sequencing of BL has identified genetic lesions in TCF3
and ID3, which lead to activation of the AKT/PI3 kinase pathway.
Other genetic lesions that have been described in BL include loss of
function of the chromatin remodeling genes ARID1A and SMARCA4.
Importantly, many of these alterations are potentially targetable by
agents that are in development.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical manifestations of childhood and adolescent NHL depend
primarily on pathologic subtype and sites of involvement. The current revised staging system used for NHL is the International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging System (IPNHLSS), which
reflects our increasing ability to diagnose lower levels of organ involvement with disease. For instance, the older staging system (St. Jude/
Murphy classification) did not account for molecular or flow cytometry involvement of BM, which is now reflected in the new system
(Tables 545.6 and 545.7). Patients are further classified based on risk
categories according to pediatric international cooperative group trials. Approximately 70% of patients with NHL present with advanced
disease (stage III or IV), including extranodal disease with BM and
CNS involvement. B symptoms of fever, weight loss, and night sweats
can be seen, particularly in ALCL, but unlike HL, are not prognostic.
The primary site of tumor involvement and the pattern of metastasis
vary by pathologic subtype. LBL typically manifests as a symptomatic

mediastinal mass and also has a predilection for spreading to the BM,
CNS, and testes in males. BL commonly manifests as a diffuse leukemia presentation or massive abdominal (sporadic type) or head and
neck (endemic type) tumor and can metastasize to the BM or CNS.
DLBCL usually manifests as either an abdominal or a mediastinal
primary tumor and, rarely, disseminates to the BM or CNS. ALCL
manifests either as a primary cutaneous manifestation (10%) or as
systemic disease (90%) with dissemination to liver, spleen, lung, or
mediastinum. BM or CNS disease is rare in ALCL. Site-­specific manifestations of NHL include painless, rapid lymph node enlargement;
cough or dyspnea with thoracic involvement; superior mediastinal
syndrome; ascites, increased abdominal girth or intestinal obstruction with an abdominal mass; nasal congestion, earache, hearing loss,
or tonsil enlargement with Waldeyer ring involvement; and localized
bone pain.
NHL can present as a life-­threatening oncologic emergency. These
manifestations are important to recognize because these patients
require intensive supportive care and, in some cases, alternative treatment. Superior mediastinal syndrome can occur as a consequence of
a large mediastinal mass causing obstruction of blood flow or respiratory airways. Spinal cord tumors can cause cord compression and
acute paraplegias requiring emergent radiation therapy. Tumor lysis
syndrome (TLS) can occur from rapid cell turnover, which is especially common in BL. TLS can result in severe metabolic abnormalities, including hyperuricemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperkalemia, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 545 u Lymphoma
Table 545.6  International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin
­Lymphoma Staging System (IPNHLSS)*
STAGE I
• A single tumor with the exclusion of the mediastinum and ­abdomen
(N: nodal; EN: extranodal; bone (B) or skin (S): EN-­B, EN-­S)
STAGE II
• A single extranodal tumor with regional node involvement
• Two or more nodal areas on the same side of the diaphragm
• A primary gastrointestinal tract tumor (usually in the ­ileocecal
area), with or without involvement of associated mesenteric
nodes, that is completely resectable (if malignant ascites or
­extension of the tumor to adjacent organs, it should be regarded
as stage III)
STAGE III
• Two or more extranodal tumor(s) (including bone or skin: EN-­B,
EN-­S) above and/or below the diaphragm
• Two or more nodal areas above and below the diaphragm
• Any intrathoracic tumor (mediastinal, hilar, pulmonary, pleural, or
thymic)
• Intraabdominal and retroperitoneal disease, including liver,
spleen, kidney, and/or ovary localizations, regardless of degree of
resection (except a primary gastrointestinal tract tumor [usually in
the ileocecal region], with or without involvement of associated
mesenteric nodes, that is completely resectable)
• Any paraspinal or epidural tumor, whether or not other sites are
involved
• Single bone lesion with concomitant involvement of extranodal
and/or nonregional nodal sites
STAGE IV
• Any of the previous findings with initial involvement of the central
nervous system (stage IV CNS), bone marrow (stage IV BM), or
both (stage IV combined) based on conventional methods, see
Table 545.7
• For each stage, type of examination and degree of BM and CNS
involvement should be specified, using the abbreviations listed in
Table 545.7 to identify involvement
*Based on the classification proposed by Murphy (Murphy SB. Classification, staging
and end results of treatment of childhood non-­Hodgkin’s lymphomas: dissimilarities
from lymphomas in adults. Semin Oncol. 7:332–339, 1980.)
From Rosolen A, Perkins SL, Pinkerton CR, et al. Revised International Pediatric Non-­
Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging System. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(18):2112–2118.

hypocalcemia. This can rapidly lead to renal insufficiency/failure, as
well as cardiac abnormalities, if not aggressively treated.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Recommended laboratory and radiologic testing includes CBC; measurements of electrolytes, lactate dehydrogenase, uric acid, calcium,
phosphorus, BUN, creatinine, bilirubin, alanine aminotransferase, and
aspartate aminotransferase; BM aspiration and biopsy; lumbar puncture with cerebrospinal fluid cytology, cell count, and protein; chest
radiographs; and abdominal ultrasound for initial diagnosis. Staging
relies on more detailed anatomic imaging, with CT for neck, chest,
abdomen, and pelvic imaging and MRI the preferred modality for suspected CNS disease of brain and spine (Fig. 545.7). PET scan, usually
with radioactive FDG for functional imaging, is more sensitive and has
replaced gallium imaging. It is also an excellent modality for judging
treatment response to therapy. Tumor tissue (i.e., biopsy, BM, cerebrospinal fluid, pleurocentesis/paracentesis fluid) should be tested by flow
cytometry for immunophenotypic origin (T, B, or null) and cytogenetics (karyotype). Additional tests might include fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) or quantitative reverse-­transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-­PCR) for specific genetic translocations, T-­and
B-­cell gene rearrangement studies, and molecular profiling by oligonucleotide microarray or next-­generation sequencing.

TREATMENT

The primary modality of treatment for childhood and adolescent
NHL is multiagent systemic chemotherapy and/or immunotherapy with

3113

Table 545.7  Additional IPNHLSS Information*
BONE MARROW (BM) INVOLVEMENT
Stage IV disease, caused by BM involvement, is currently defined by
morphologic evidence of ≥5% blasts or lymphoma cells by bone
marrow aspiration. This applies to any histologic subtype and will
be maintained in the IPNHLSS.
However, for each stage, type and degree of BM involvement (by
bone marrow aspiration) should be specified, using the abbreviations
below to identify involvement:
BMm = BM positive by morphology (specify % lymphoma cells).
BMi = BM positive by immunophenotypic methods (immunohistochemical/flow cytometry analysis) (specify % lymphoma cells).
BMc = BM positive by cytogenetic/FISH analysis (specify %
­lymphoma cells).
BMmol = BM positive by molecular techniques (PCR based)
(specify level of involvement).
Same approach should be used for peripheral blood (PB) involvement
(i.e., PBm, PBi, PBc, PBmol).
Note: Definition of BM involvement should be obtained from analysis
of bilateral BM aspirates and BM biopsy.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (CNS) INVOLVEMENT
CNS is considered involved in case of:
1.	Any CNS tumor mass (identified by imaging techniques; i.e., CT,
MRI).
2.	In case of cranial nerve palsy that cannot be explained by extradural lesions.
3.	In case of blasts morphologically identified in the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF).
Condition that defines CNS positivity should be specified: CNS
­positive/mass; CNS positive/palsy; CNS positive/blasts.
CSF status: CSF positivity is based on morphologic evidence of
lymphoma cells.
CSF should be considered positive when any number of blasts is
detected.
CSF unknown (e.g., not performed, technical difficulties).
Similar to BM, type of CSF involvement should be described
­whenever possible:
CSFm = CSF positive by morphology (specify the number of blasts
per microliter).
CSFi = CSF positive by immunophenotype methods (immunohistochemical/flow cytometry analysis) (specify % lymphoma cells).
CSFc = CSF positive by cytogenetic/FISH analysis (specify %
­lymphoma cells).
CSFmol = CSF positive by molecular techniques (PCR based)
(specify level of involvement).
*Until sufficient data are available, PET should be used with caution for staging, and
PET results should be compared and discussed in light of other, more consolidated
imaging approaches.
IPNHLSS, International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging System Information;
FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.
From Rosolen A, Perkins SL, Pinkerton CR, et al. Revised International Pediatric Non-­
Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging System. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(18):2112–2118.

intrathecal chemotherapy (see Table 545.5). An international pediatric
NHL response classification has been developed (IPNHLRC) (Tables
545.8 and 545.9). Surgery is used mainly for diagnosis. Radiation
therapy is used only in special circumstances, such as CNS involvement in LBL or the presence of acute superior mediastinal syndrome
or paraplegias. Newly diagnosed patients, especially those with BL or
LBL, are at high risk for TLS. These patients require vigorous hydration, frequent electrolyte monitoring, and either a xanthine oxidase
inhibitor (e.g., allopurinol, 10 mg/kg/day orally in three divided doses
daily) or a recombinant urate oxidase (e.g., rasburicase, 0.2 mg/kg/day
intravenously once daily for up to 5 days). Recombinant urate oxidase
is preferred in patients with a high risk of tumor lysis but is contraindicated in patients with a history of G6PD deficiency.

Burkitt Lymphoma and Diffuse Large B-­Cell
Lymphoma

Pediatric BL and DLBCL (except mediastinal primary B cell) are treated
with the same mature B-­
cell NHL chemoimmunotherapy regimens

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3114 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

A

B

C

D

Fig. 545.7 Lymphoma. Coronal postcontrast CT images demonstrate extensive cervical (A) and mediastinal (B) lymphadenopathy (arrows). C,

Sonographic image demonstrates two enlarged lymph nodes with abnormal internal morphology (arrow). D, PET scan demonstrates metabolically
active conglomeration of right-­sided cervical lymph nodes (arrow). (From Haaga JR, Boll DT, et al., eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body (Vol. 1).
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 26-­15, p. 768.)

Table 545.8  International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin
­Lymphoma Response Criteria (IPNHLRC)
Complete Response (CR): disappearance of all disease (three
­designations)
1.	Complete (CR):
a.	CT or MRI reveals no residual disease or new lesions.
b.	Resected residual mass that is pathologically (morphologically)
negative for disease (detection of disease with more sensitive
techniques, as described in “supporting data,” Table 545.9).
c.	Bone marrow (BM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) morphologically
free of disease (detection of disease with more sensitive
techniques, as described in Table 545.9).
2.	Complete Response, biopsy negative (CRb):
a.	Residual mass has no morphologic evidence of disease from
limited or core biopsy (detection of disease with more
sensitive techniques, as described in Table 545.9) with no new
lesions by imaging examination.
b.	BM and CSF morphologically free of disease (detection of
disease with more sensitive techniques, as described in Table
545.9).
c.	No new and/or progressive disease elsewhere.
3.	Complete Response, unconfirmed (CRu):
a.	Residual mass is negative by FDG-­PET; no new lesions by
imaging examination.
b.	BM and CSF morphologically free of disease (detection of
disease with more sensitive techniques, as described in Table
545.9).
c.	No new and/or progressive disease elsewhere.
Partial Response (PR): 50% decrease in the sum of the product of the
greatest perpendicular diameters (SPD) on CT or MRI. FDG-­PET
may be positive (Deauville score of 4 or 5 with reduced lesional
uptake compared with baseline). No new and/or PD. Morphologic
evidence of disease may be present in the BM or CSF if present at
diagnosis (detection of disease with more sensitive techniques, as
described in Table 545.9); however, there should be a 50% reduction in the percentage of lymphoma cells.
Minor Response (MR): Decrease in SPD is >25% but <50% on CT or
MRI. No new and/or PD. Morphologic evidence of disease may be
present in the BM or CSF if present at diagnosis (detection of disease
with more sensitive techniques, as described in Table 545.9);
however, there should be a 25–50% reduction in the percentage of
lymphoma cells.
No Response (NR): For those who do not meet CR, PR, MR, or PD
criteria.
Progressive Disease (PD): For those with >25% increase in the SPD
on CT or MRI, Deauville score 4 or 5 on FDG-­PET with an increase
in lesional uptake from baseline, or the development of new morphologic evidence of disease in the BM or CSF.
FDG-­PET, Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography.
From Sandlund JT, Guillerman RP, Perkins SL, et al. International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin
Lymphoma Response Criteria. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(18):2106–2111.

Table 545.9  Supporting IPNHLRC Data
BONE MARROW (BM) INVOLVEMENT
BM involvement is currently defined by morphologic evidence of
lymphoma cells. This applies to any histologic subtypes.
Type and degree of BM involvement should be specified, using the
following abbreviations:
BMm = BM positive by morphology (specify % lymphoma cells).
BMi = BM positive by immunophenotypic methods (histochemical/
flow cytometry analysis) (specify % lymphoma cells).
BMc = BM positive by cytogenetic/FISH analysis (specify %
­lymphoma cells).
BMmol= BM positive by molecular techniques.
Same approach should be used for peripheral blood (PB) involvement (i.e., PBm, PBi, PBc, PBmol).
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (CNS) INVOLVEMENT
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) status: CSF positivity is based on morphologic evidence of lymphoma cells.
CSF should be considered positive when any number of blasts is
detected.
CSF unknown (e.g., not performed, technical difficulties).
Similar to BM, type of CSF involvement should be described
­whenever possible:
CSFm = CSF positive by morphology (specify the number of
blasts/μL).
CSFi = CSF positive by immunophenotypic methods (histochemical/
flow cytometry analysis) (specify % lymphoma cells).
CSFc = BM positive by cytogenetic/FISH analysis (specify %
­lymphoma cells).
CSFmol = CSF positive by molecular techniques.
RESIDUAL MASS (RM)
RMm = Tumor detected by standard morphologic evaluation.
RMi = Tumor detected by immunophenotypic methods (immunohisto­
chemical or flow cytometry analysis).
RMc = Tumor detected by cytogenetic/FISH analysis.
RMmol = Tumor detected by molecular techniques.
FISH, Fluorescence in situ hybridization.
From Sandlund JT, Guillerman RP, Perkins SL, et al. International Pediatric Non-­Hodgkin
Lymphoma Response Criteria. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(18):2106–2111.

based on stage and risk stratification. For patients with localized disease, multiagent chemotherapy is given over 6 weeks, and the prognosis
is excellent. In the international French-­American-­British Lymphoma,
mature B cell [FAB/LMB 96] trial, patients with localized, completely
resected disease received two cycles of COPAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, and doxorubicin), resulting in a 4-­year OS of 99%.
Advanced disease is usually treated with a 4-­to 6-­month regimen of multiagent chemoimmunotherapy, such as FAB/LMB 96 protocol therapy or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 545 u Lymphoma
NHL-­Berlin-­Frankfurt-­Mulnster-­95 (BFM 95) protocol therapy with the
addition of rituximab, with an OS of 79–90%. A subset of patients who
likely require a different treatment approach have primary mediastinal
B-­cell lymphoma (PMBCL). PMBCL is a histologic subtype that represents 2% of mature B-­NHLs. Pediatric patients with PMBCL had an
inferior outcome when treated with standard mature B-­NHL protocols
(EFS of only 66%). Alternative treatment strategies, including prolonged
infusional chemotherapy, rituximab, and chimeric antigen receptor T cells
expressing anti-­CD19 mAbs, may benefit this group (see Chapter 543).
Rituximab is a mAb directed at CD20 that, when combined with standard chemotherapy, improves outcomes in adult patients with aggressive
B-­NHL (usually DLBCL). A window study of rituximab given to pediatric
patients with newly diagnosed BL and DLBCL demonstrated its activity as
a single agent with a response rate of 41%. Additionally, a Children’s Oncology Group study examined the safety and pharmacokinetics of rituximab
when added to standard chemotherapy for intermediate-­risk patients.
Rituximab was found to be safe, and survival in this cohort was the best
reported to date (3-­year OS of 95%). In a similar cohort of CNS-­positive
patients, the addition of rituximab to the chemotherapy backbone resulted
in a 93% EFS. Based on this pilot data, an international randomized study
of rituximab added to standard multiagent chemotherapy in advanced-­
stage pediatric patients enrolled over 300 patients. The randomized trial
demonstrated that the addition of rituximab markedly prolonged EFS and
OS. The EFS at 3 years was 94% compared to 82% in patients who received
chemotherapy alone. As expected with an antibody to a protein on the surface of normal mature B cells, there was a higher incidence of low immunoglobulin levels in rituximab-­treated patients up to 1 year poststudy
entry. Rituximab is standard-of-care therapy for pediatric mature B-­NHL
with advanced disease at presentation. These patients make up roughly
∼30% of all mature B-­NHL. A study of dose substitution of anthracycline
(doxorubicin) intensity with rituximab in children and adolescents with
good-­risk mature B-­cell lymphoma noted reduction of anthracycline dramatically reduced mucositis and febrile admissions during the intensive
induction phases of therapy and was associated with 100% EFS and OS.
With the success of rituximab in pediatric mature B-­NHL and the poor
outcome of recurrent or refractory disease, there is interest in improving
immunotherapy in up-­front patients. Polatuzumab vedotin is a CD79b-­
directed antibody conjugated to an antimitotic agent. The therapy has
been approved in conjunction with rituximab and chemotherapy for adult
refractory DLBCL. A study to determine the feasibility and safety of the
addition of polatuzumab vedotin in combination with rituximab and FAB
chemotherapy in patients with intermediate and high-­risk mature B-­NHL
is in progress.

Lymphoblastic Lymphoma

Localized or advanced LBL requires 12-­24 months of therapy, including
chemotherapy, intrathecal therapy, and cranial radiation in CNS-­positive
lymphomas. The best results in advanced LBL have been obtained using
therapeutic approaches mirroring those for childhood acute leukemia,
including induction, consolidation, interim maintenance, and reinduction (advanced disease only) phases, as well as a year-­long maintenance
phase with 6-­
mercaptopurine and methotrexate. For patients with
relapsed disease, the outcome is poor (OS of 10%), and novel treatments
are needed. Nelarabine, a purine analog with significant T-­lymphocyte
toxicity, has completed testing in primary therapy for T-­LBL in conjunction with a much larger cohort of T-­ALL patients. Nelarabine was
demonstrated in the trial to improve disease-­free survival at 4 years and
to reduce the risk of CNS relapses. The smaller subset of patients with
advanced LBL did not have a benefit demonstrated to nelarabine, but
this subset was underpowered, and most U.S. centers are now including
nelarabine in the up-­front treatment of all T-­LBL patients.

Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma

For patients who present with localized disease, surgical resection alone
is sufficient. The majority of patients, however, have advanced disease,
which requires multiagent chemotherapy. Various chemotherapy regimens have been studied, with similar outcomes and survival of 70–79%.
CNS prophylaxis consists of intrathecal chemotherapy, although this
may be omitted with the substitution of high-­dose methotrexate.

3115

Two novel targeted agents have shown substantial promise in
early-­phase trials in ALCL. The CD30 antibody–drug conjugate brentuximab vedotin and the ALK inhibitor crizotinib both have impressive activity and minimal toxicity in patients with relapsed ALCL. A
trial piloted the addition of brentuximab vedotin in newly diagnosed
advanced ALCL patients with impressive 2-­year EFS of 79% and OS of
97% among ∼70 patients. There were no toxic deaths with combination
brentuximab and chemotherapy and no severe neurotoxicity.

Relapsed Non-­Hodgkin Lymphoma

Patients with NHL in whom progressive or relapsed disease develops require reinduction chemotherapy and may require either allogeneic or autologous SCT. A notable exception is ALCL, where low-­dose
approaches such as prolonged vinblastine have been efficacious for
some patients. The specific reinduction regimen or transplantation type
depends on the pathologic subtype, previous therapy, site of reoccurrence, and stem cell donor availability. Novel reinduction approaches are
being investigated, including a type II CD20 antibody, obinutuzumab,
alone and in combination with chemotherapy, ibrutinib, a BTK inhibitor
alone and in combination with chemotherapy, and idelalisib, a PI3K delta
inhibitor alone and in combination with chemotherapy. Although there
are no randomized trials examining autologous versus allogeneic SCT
for relapsed NHL, data from retrospective studies suggest that outcomes
are similar, with the exception of LBL and ALCL, for which allogeneic
SCT is superior, perhaps because of a graft versus lymphoma effect.
Native (autologous) patient T cells have been genetically manipulated to produce a T-­cell vs leukemia or lymphoma response. Tisagenlecleucel (Kymriah) is a CD19-­
directed genetically modified
autologous T-­cell immunotherapy first approved for patients under
25 years with precursor B-­
ALL. The immunotherapy has been
approved in adults with relapsed mature DLBCL after two prior lines
of systemic therapy. An additional CD19-­directed immunotherapy,
axicabtagene ciloleucel, has been approved for recurrent adult mature
B-­NHL. The responses have been less impressive in adult DLBL to
those seen in childhood adolescent and young adult ALL, but continued work with different target antigens and genetic manipulation of
the constructs is ongoing. These T-­cell–modified products, although
autologous, can lead to a cytokine release syndrome and CNS toxicities that can be severe.
Because relapsed NHL can be difficult to treat, efforts have been made
to identify patients at higher risk of relapse to tailor initial therapy. The
measurement of minimal residual disease may serve as a prognostic
marker and aid in risk stratification. Minimal residual disease is prognostic in ALCL and LBL. In ALCL, there is also evidence that a humoral
response to the ALK kinase can be used to predict outcome, with a superior outcome in patients who mount an antibody titer to ALK.

COMPLICATIONS

Patients receiving multiagent chemotherapy for advanced disease are
at acute risk for mucositis, infections, cytopenias that require red blood
cell and platelet blood product transfusions, electrolyte imbalances, and
poor nutrition. Long-­term complications include the risk of growth retardation, cardiac toxicity, gonadal toxicity with infertility, and secondary
malignancies.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis is excellent for most forms of childhood and adolescent
NHL (see Table 545.5). Patients with localized disease have a 90–100%
survival rate, and those with advanced disease have an 80–95% survival
rate. Because outcomes for pediatric patients with NHL have improved
substantially, the focus has now shifted to minimizing the long-­term toxicity of therapy. Novel targeted agents are desirable because they have the
potential to improve outcomes and decrease the reliance on toxic conventional chemotherapy. An ongoing multi-­institutional study is testing
the reduction of anthracycline to decrease short-­term (mucositis) and
long-­term (cardiac health) complications of therapy by incorporation of
immunotherapy in mature B-­NHL, with promising results to date.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3116 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

545.3 Late Effects in Children and
Adolescents with Lymphoma

Chapter 546

Jessica Hochberg, Stanton C. Goldman, and
Mitchell S. Cairo
The majority of patients with newly diagnosed HL and NHL have OS
rates >90%. There are approximately 270,000 survivors of childhood
cancer in the United States, or about one of every 640 adults between
ages 20 and 40. However, this survival has often been achieved at
the expense of an increased relative risk of long-­term complications,
including solid tumors, leukemia, cardiac disease, pulmonary complications, thyroid disease, and infertility. An analysis of >1,000 long-­
term childhood NHL survivors found increased rates of death >20
years after treatment. A review of the National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results data over a 25-­year follow­up demonstrates that the relative survival curves do not plateau after
10 years following diagnosis of HL, but rather accelerate. This finding highlights the importance of late morbidity and mortality among
survivors of lymphoma. The incidence of Grade 3-­5 adverse health
conditions is >15% in adult survivors of childhood HL treated with
chemoradiotherapy regimens. Radiation therapy has been shown to
further compound the risk for late mortality, obesity, and organ dysfunction with worsening effects on cardiovascular, pulmonary, and
thyroid function. The first Childhood Cancer Survivor Study, a retrospective cohort study of 10,397 cancer survivors, shows that 62.3% of
survivors report at least one chronic condition, with 27.5% reporting
severe or life-­threatening conditions. The survivor’s adjusted relative
risk of a severe or life-­threatening chronic condition, compared with
that of a sibling, was 8.2 (95% confidence interval, 6.9-­9.7). Studying
disease-­specific health outcomes, both HL and NHL were found to be
associated with a cumulative incidence of chronic health conditions
approaching 70–80%, with severe conditions reported in ∼50% of
HL survivors (Fig. 545.8).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Wafik Zaky
Primary central nervous system (CNS) tumors are a heterogeneous
group of diseases that are, collectively, the most common malignancy
in childhood and adolescence. The overall mortality among this
group approaches 30%. Patients with CNS tumors have the highest
morbidity, primarily neurologic, of all children with malignancies.
Outcomes have improved with innovations in neurosurgery, imaging, and radiation therapy as well as the introduction of chemotherapy and biologic agents as a therapeutic modality. The treatment
approach for the majority of these tumors is multimodal. Surgery
with complete resection, if feasible, is the foundation, with radiation therapy and chemotherapy utilized according to the diagnosis,
patient age, and other factors.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of pediatric CNS tumors is not well defined. An overall
female predominance exists in the incidence of CNS tumors, but male
predominance is noted in the incidence of high-­grade tumors like glioblastoma multiforme, medulloblastoma, and ependymoma. Familial
syndromes associated with an increased incidence of brain tumors
account for approximately 5% of cases (Table 546.1). Cranial exposure to ionizing radiation also is associated with a higher incidence of
CNS tumors. There are sporadic reports of CNS tumors within families
without evidence of a heritable syndrome.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

90

Approximately 5,550 primary brain tumors are diagnosed each year in
children and adolescents in the United States, with an average annual
age adjusted incidence rate of 5.65 per 100,000 population. It is the
most common cancer in patients 0-­14 years of age and the leading
cause of cancer-­related death in this age-­group.

80

PATHOGENESIS

100

Attributable proportion
of overall mortality risk, %

Central Nervous System
Tumors in Childhood

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10

20

30
40
50
Time since diagnosis (yr)

60

Background mortality
Excess other causes of mortality
Excess pulmonary mortality
Excess cardiac mortality
Excess subsequent cancer mortality
Late-recurrence mortality

Fig. 545.8 Percentage of attributable proportions of overall mortality risk in survivors of childhood cancer. (Adapted from Yeh JM,
Nekhlyudov L, Goldie SJ, et al. A model-­based estimate of cumulative excess mortality in survivors of childhood cancer. Ann Intern Med.
2010;152[7]:409– 417.)

More than 100 histologic categories and subtypes of primary brain
tumors are described in the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors of the CNS. In children 0-­14 years of age, the
most common tumors are pilocytic astrocytomas (PAs) and embryonal tumors (i.e., medulloblastoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors
[PNETs]). In adolescents (15-­19 years), the most common tumors are
pituitary/craniopharyngeal tumors and PAs (Fig. 546.1).
There is a slight predominance of infratentorial tumor location
(43.2%), followed by the supratentorial region (40.9%), spinal cord
(4.9%), and multiple sites (11%) (Fig. 546.2, Table 546.2). There are
age-­related differences in the primary location of tumor. During the
first year of life, supratentorial tumors predominate and include, most
commonly, choroid plexus complex tumors and germ cell tumors. In
children 1-­10 years of age, infratentorial tumors predominate, due
to the high incidence of juvenile PA and medulloblastoma. After 10
years of age, supratentorial tumors predominate, with diffuse astrocytomas (DAs) most common. Tumors of the optic pathway and hypothalamus region, the brainstem, and the pineal–midbrain region are
more common in children and adolescents than in adults. Additionally, some tumors are more common in males (astrocytic and germ
cell tumors), whereas meningioma and craniopharyngiomas are
more common in females. Malignant tumors are more common in
White children (embryonal and astrocytic neoplasms), whereas low-­
grade tumors are more common in Black children (meningiomas and
craniopharyngiomas).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3116 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

545.3 Late Effects in Children and
Adolescents with Lymphoma

Chapter 546

Jessica Hochberg, Stanton C. Goldman, and
Mitchell S. Cairo
The majority of patients with newly diagnosed HL and NHL have OS
rates >90%. There are approximately 270,000 survivors of childhood
cancer in the United States, or about one of every 640 adults between
ages 20 and 40. However, this survival has often been achieved at
the expense of an increased relative risk of long-­term complications,
including solid tumors, leukemia, cardiac disease, pulmonary complications, thyroid disease, and infertility. An analysis of >1,000 long-­
term childhood NHL survivors found increased rates of death >20
years after treatment. A review of the National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results data over a 25-­year follow­up demonstrates that the relative survival curves do not plateau after
10 years following diagnosis of HL, but rather accelerate. This finding highlights the importance of late morbidity and mortality among
survivors of lymphoma. The incidence of Grade 3-­5 adverse health
conditions is >15% in adult survivors of childhood HL treated with
chemoradiotherapy regimens. Radiation therapy has been shown to
further compound the risk for late mortality, obesity, and organ dysfunction with worsening effects on cardiovascular, pulmonary, and
thyroid function. The first Childhood Cancer Survivor Study, a retrospective cohort study of 10,397 cancer survivors, shows that 62.3% of
survivors report at least one chronic condition, with 27.5% reporting
severe or life-­threatening conditions. The survivor’s adjusted relative
risk of a severe or life-­threatening chronic condition, compared with
that of a sibling, was 8.2 (95% confidence interval, 6.9-­9.7). Studying
disease-­specific health outcomes, both HL and NHL were found to be
associated with a cumulative incidence of chronic health conditions
approaching 70–80%, with severe conditions reported in ∼50% of
HL survivors (Fig. 545.8).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Wafik Zaky
Primary central nervous system (CNS) tumors are a heterogeneous
group of diseases that are, collectively, the most common malignancy
in childhood and adolescence. The overall mortality among this
group approaches 30%. Patients with CNS tumors have the highest
morbidity, primarily neurologic, of all children with malignancies.
Outcomes have improved with innovations in neurosurgery, imaging, and radiation therapy as well as the introduction of chemotherapy and biologic agents as a therapeutic modality. The treatment
approach for the majority of these tumors is multimodal. Surgery
with complete resection, if feasible, is the foundation, with radiation therapy and chemotherapy utilized according to the diagnosis,
patient age, and other factors.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of pediatric CNS tumors is not well defined. An overall
female predominance exists in the incidence of CNS tumors, but male
predominance is noted in the incidence of high-­grade tumors like glioblastoma multiforme, medulloblastoma, and ependymoma. Familial
syndromes associated with an increased incidence of brain tumors
account for approximately 5% of cases (Table 546.1). Cranial exposure to ionizing radiation also is associated with a higher incidence of
CNS tumors. There are sporadic reports of CNS tumors within families
without evidence of a heritable syndrome.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

90

Approximately 5,550 primary brain tumors are diagnosed each year in
children and adolescents in the United States, with an average annual
age adjusted incidence rate of 5.65 per 100,000 population. It is the
most common cancer in patients 0-­14 years of age and the leading
cause of cancer-­related death in this age-­group.

80

PATHOGENESIS

100

Attributable proportion
of overall mortality risk, %

Central Nervous System
Tumors in Childhood

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
10

20

30
40
50
Time since diagnosis (yr)

60

Background mortality
Excess other causes of mortality
Excess pulmonary mortality
Excess cardiac mortality
Excess subsequent cancer mortality
Late-recurrence mortality

Fig. 545.8 Percentage of attributable proportions of overall mortality risk in survivors of childhood cancer. (Adapted from Yeh JM,
Nekhlyudov L, Goldie SJ, et al. A model-­based estimate of cumulative excess mortality in survivors of childhood cancer. Ann Intern Med.
2010;152[7]:409– 417.)

More than 100 histologic categories and subtypes of primary brain
tumors are described in the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors of the CNS. In children 0-­14 years of age, the
most common tumors are pilocytic astrocytomas (PAs) and embryonal tumors (i.e., medulloblastoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors
[PNETs]). In adolescents (15-­19 years), the most common tumors are
pituitary/craniopharyngeal tumors and PAs (Fig. 546.1).
There is a slight predominance of infratentorial tumor location
(43.2%), followed by the supratentorial region (40.9%), spinal cord
(4.9%), and multiple sites (11%) (Fig. 546.2, Table 546.2). There are
age-­related differences in the primary location of tumor. During the
first year of life, supratentorial tumors predominate and include, most
commonly, choroid plexus complex tumors and germ cell tumors. In
children 1-­10 years of age, infratentorial tumors predominate, due
to the high incidence of juvenile PA and medulloblastoma. After 10
years of age, supratentorial tumors predominate, with diffuse astrocytomas (DAs) most common. Tumors of the optic pathway and hypothalamus region, the brainstem, and the pineal–midbrain region are
more common in children and adolescents than in adults. Additionally, some tumors are more common in males (astrocytic and germ
cell tumors), whereas meningioma and craniopharyngiomas are
more common in females. Malignant tumors are more common in
White children (embryonal and astrocytic neoplasms), whereas low-­
grade tumors are more common in Black children (meningiomas and
craniopharyngiomas).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 546 u Central Nervous System Tumors in Childhood

3117

Table 546.1  	 Familial Syndromes Associated with Pediatric Brain Tumors
SYNDROME

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM MANIFESTATIONS

CHROMOSOME

GENE

Neurofibromatosis type 1
(autosomal dominant)

Optic pathway gliomas, astrocytoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumors, neurofibromas

17q11

NF1

Neurofibromatosis type 2
(autosomal dominant)

Vestibular schwannomas, meningiomas, spinal cord ependymoma,
spinal cord astrocytoma, hamartomas

22q12

NF2

von Hippel-­Lindau (autosomal
dominant)

Hemangioblastoma

3p25-­26

VHL

Tuberous sclerosis (autosomal
dominant)

Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma, cortical tubers

Li-­Fraumeni (autosomal dominant)

9q34

TSC1

16q13

TSC2

Astrocytoma, primitive neuroectodermal tumor

17q13

TP53

Cowden (autosomal dominant)

Dysplastic gangliocytoma of the cerebellum (Lhermitte-­Duclos disease)

10q23

PTEN

Turcot (autosomal dominant)

Medulloblastoma

5q21

APC

Glioblastoma

3p21

hMLH1

7p22

hPSM2

9q31

PTCH1

Nevoid basal cell carcinoma
Gorlin (autosomal dominant)

Medulloblastoma

Modified from Kleihues P, Cavenee WK. World Health Organization Classification of Tumors: Pathology and Genetics of Tumors of the Nervous System. Lyon: IARC Press, 2000.
Ages 15–19 years (n=7,259)

Ages 0–14 years (n=17,273)
Meninglomas
1.7%
Glloblastomas
2.9%

Oligodendrogliomas
1.5%
Craniopharyngiomas
2.4%
Ependymal tumors
3.3%

Pilocytic astrocytomas
17.9%

Germ cell tumors
3.7%
Craniopharynglomas
3.9%

Glioma malignant, NOS
13.8%

Embryonal tumors
3.3%

Nerve sheath tumors
5.0%
Tumors of the pituitary
5.2%

Medulloblastoma
62.4%

Ependymal tumors
5.7%

Embryonal tumors
13.3%

Neuronal and mixed
neuronal-glial tumors
7.0%
Other astrocytomas
8.1%

All others
11.7%

Tumors of the pituitary
29.0%

ATRT 16.6%
PNET 11.8%
All other
embryonal
tumors
9.2%

Glioblastomas
3.5%
Germ cell tumors
3.7%
Meningiomas
5.1%

All others
12.7%

Glioma malignant, NOS
5.6%
Nerve sheath tumors
5.8%
Other astrocytomas
7.1%

Pilocytic astrocytomas
9.0%
Neuronal and mixed
neuronal-glial tumors
8.0%

Fig. 546.1 Distribution of childhood primary brain and central nervous system (CNS) tumors by histology. ATRT, Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor;
NOS, not otherwise specified; PNET, primitive neuroectodermal tumor. (From Ostrom QT, Patil N, Cioffi G, et al. CBTRUS Statistical Report: Primary
Brain and Other Central Nervous System Tumors Diagnosed in the United States in 2013-­2017. Neuro Oncol. 2020;30;22:iv1–iv96.)
Hemispheric

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Gliomas: 37%
Low-grade astrocytomas: 23%
High-grade astrocytomas: 11%
Other: 3%
Midline:
1. Chiasmal gliomas: 4%
2. Craniopharyngiomas: 8%
3. Pineal region tumors: 2%

3

2
1

1

2

Posterior fossa:
1. Brainstem gliomas: 15%
2. Medulloblastomas: 15%
3. Ependymomas: 4%
4 4. Cerebellar astrocytomas: 15%

3

Fig. 546.2 Childhood brain tumors occur at any location within the
central nervous system. The relative frequency of brain tumor histologic
types and the anatomic distribution are shown. (Redrawn from Albright
AL. Pediatric brain tumors. CA Cancer J Clin 1993;43:272–288.)

The clinical presentation of the patient with a brain tumor depends
on the tumor location, the tumor type, and the age of the child. Signs
and symptoms are related to obstruction of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
drainage paths by the tumor, leading to increased intracranial pressure (ICP) or causing focal brain dysfunction. In young children, the
diagnosis of a brain tumor may be delayed because the symptoms are
similar to those of more common illnesses, such as gastrointestinal
disorders, with associated vomiting. Infants with open cranial sutures
may present with signs of increased ICP, such as vomiting, lethargy,
and irritability, as well as the later finding of macrocephaly. The classic triad of headache, nausea, and vomiting as well as papilledema
is associated with midline or infratentorial tumors. Disorders of
equilibrium, gait, and coordination occur with infratentorial tumors.
Torticollis may occur in cases of cerebellar tonsil herniation. Blurred
vision, diplopia, and nystagmus also are associated with infratentorial tumors. Tumors of the brainstem region may be associated with
gaze palsy, multiple cranial nerve palsies, and upper motor neuron
deficits (e.g., hemiparesis, hyperreflexia, and clonus). Supratentorial tumors are more commonly associated with focal motor weakness, focal sensory changes, language disorders, focal seizures, and
reflex asymmetry. Infants with supratentorial tumors may present

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3118 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 546.2  	 Posterior Fossa Tumors of Childhood
TUMOR

RELATIVE INCIDENCE
(%)

PRESENTATION

DIAGNOSIS

PROGNOSIS

Medulloblastoma

35-­40

2-­3 mo of headaches, vomiting,
truncal ataxia

Heterogeneously or
homogeneously enhancing
fourth ventricular mass; may
be disseminated

65–85% survival;
dependent on stage/type;
poorer (20–70%) in infants

Cerebellar
­astrocytoma

35-­40

3-­6 mo of limb ataxia; secondary
headaches, vomiting

Cerebellar hemisphere mass,
usually with cystic and solid
(mural nodule) components

90–100% survival in totally
resected pilocytic type

Brainstem glioma

10-­15

1-­4 mo of double vision,
unsteadiness, weakness, and
cranial nerve dysfunction,
including facial weakness,
swallowing dysfunction, and
oculomotor abnormalities

Diffusely expanded, minimally
or partially enhancing mass
in 80%; 20% more focal
tectal or cervicomedullary
lesion

>90% mortality in diffuse
tumors; better in
localized

Ependymoma

10-­15

2-­5 mo of unsteadiness,
headaches, double vision, and
facial asymmetry

Usually enhancing, fourth
ventricular mass with
cerebellopontine
predilection

>75% survival in totally
resected lesions

Atypical teratoid/
rhabdoid

5–10% of infantile
­malignant tumors

As in medulloblastoma, but
primarily in infants; often
associated facial weakness and
strabismus

As in medulloblastoma,
but often more laterally
extended

≤20% survival in infants

Modified from Packer RJ, MacDonald T, Vezina G. Central nervous system tumors. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2008;55:121–145.

with premature hand preference. Optic pathway tumors manifest
as visual and/or afferent oculomotor disturbances, such as decreased
visual acuity, Marcus Gunn pupil (afferent pupillary defect), nystagmus, and/or visual field defects. Suprasellar region tumors and third
ventricular region tumors may manifest initially as neuroendocrine
deficits, such as subacute development of obesity, abnormal linear
growth velocity, diabetes insipidus, galactorrhea, precocious puberty,
delayed puberty, and hypothyroidism. In fact, signs of endocrine
dysfunction preceded symptoms of neuroophthalmologic dysfunction by an average of 1.9 years, and their recognition as a possible
sign of hypothalamic or pituitary neoplasm can hasten diagnosis and
improve outcome. The diencephalic syndrome, which manifests as
failure to thrive but normal linear growth, emaciation despite normal caloric intake, and inappropriately normal or happy (euphoric)
affect, occurs in infants and young children with tumors (most often
low-­grade hypothalamic or thalamic glioma). Parinaud syndrome
is seen with pineal region tumors and is manifested by paresis of
upward gaze, pupillary caliber reactive to accommodation but not
to light (pseudo-­Argyll Robertson pupil), nystagmus to convergence
or retraction, and eyelid retraction. Spinal cord tumors and spinal
cord dissemination of brain tumors may manifest as long nerve tract
motor and/or sensory deficits often localized to below a specific spinal level, bowel and bladder deficits, resistance to back flexion, scoliosis, bowel and bladder dysfunction, and back or radicular pain.
The signs and symptoms of meningeal metastatic disease from brain
tumors or leukemia include head or back pain and symptoms referable to compression of cranial nerves or spinal nerve roots.

DIAGNOSIS

The evaluation of a patient when a CNS tumor is suspected is an emergency. Initial evaluation should include a complete history (including endocrine), physical (including ophthalmic) examination, and
full neurologic assessment with neuroimaging. For primary brain
tumors, MRI with and without gadolinium is the neuroimaging standard. Tumors in the pituitary/suprasellar region, optic pathway, and
infratentorium are better delineated with MRI than with CT. Patients
with tumors of the midline and the pituitary/suprasellar/optic chiasmal region should undergo evaluation for neuroendocrine dysfunction. Formal ophthalmologic examination is beneficial in patients with
optic path region tumors to document the impact of the disease on

Fig. 546.3 Axillary T1 weighted MR image with gadolinium of a
10-­yr-­old male presenting with mixed germ cell tumor of the pineal region, with early onset of puberty, headaches, and elevated α-­fetoprotein
and β-­human chorionic gonadotropin in the spinal fluid and serum.
oculomotor function, visual acuity, and fields of vision. The suprasellar and pineal regions are preferential sites for germ cell tumors (Fig.
546.3). Both serum and CSF measurements of β-­human chorionic
gonadotropin and α-­fetoprotein can assist in the diagnosis of germ
cell tumors. In tumors with a propensity for spreading to the leptomeninges, such as medulloblastoma/PNET, ependymoma, and germ
cell tumors, lumbar puncture with cytologic analysis of the CSF is
indicated; lumbar puncture is contraindicated in individuals with
newly diagnosed hydrocephalus secondary to CSF flow obstruction, in
tumors that cause supratentorial midline shift, and in individuals with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 546 u Central Nervous System Tumors in Childhood

3119

pathway region (Fig. 546.5A-­B). The classic but not exclusive neuroradiologic finding in PA is the presence of a contrast-­enhancing nodule
within the wall of a cystic mass (Fig. 546.5A). The microscopic findings
include the biphasic appearance of bundles of compact fibrillary tissue interspersed with loose microcystic, spongy areas. The presence of
Rosenthal fibers, which are condensed masses of glial filaments occurring in the compact areas, with low mitotic potentials helps establish
the diagnosis. A small proportion of these tumors can progress and
develop leptomeningeal spread, particularly in the optic path region
and very rarely transform to higher grade aggressive type. A PA of
the optic nerve and chiasmal region is a relatively common finding in
patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (15% incidence). Molecularly,
PA has activation of the MAPK pathway in the form of BRAF fusion
or duplication and less commonly BRAF pathogenic variant (V600E)
(see Fig. 546.4). Other low-­grade tumors occurring in the pediatric
age-­group with clinic pathologic characteristics similar to PA include
pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma, pilomyxoid astrocytoma, and subependymal giant cell astrocytoma.

infratentorial tumors. Lumbar puncture in these individuals may lead
to brain herniation, resulting in neurologic compromise and death.
Therefore, in children with newly diagnosed intracranial tumors and
signs of increased ICP, the lumbar puncture usually is delayed until
surgery or shunt placement.

SPECIFIC TUMORS
Astrocytoma

Astrocytomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors that account for
approximately 40% of pediatric CNS malignancies. These tumors
occur throughout the CNS.
Low-­
grade astrocytomas (LGAs), the predominant group of
astrocytomas in childhood, are characterized by an indolent clinical
course. PA is the most common astrocytoma in children, accounting
for approximately 15.2% of all brain tumors (Fig. 546.4). Based on
clinicopathologic features using the WHO Classification System, PA is
classified as a WHO grade I tumor. Although PA can occur anywhere
in the CNS, the classic sites are the cerebellum followed by the optic

FGFR1 NRTK1

P
P
P

P
P
P

PTPN11

KRAS

KIAA1549
BRAF Fus

BRAF

Other BRAF
Fusions

MEK

NF1

MAPK Alterations

BRAF
V600E

(67%)
KIAA1549-BRAF
Other BRAF or C-RAF Fusion (5-10%)
(5-10%)
BRAF V600E
(5-10%)
NF1
FGFR1
(5%)
NRTK1
(<3%)
(<2%)
KRAS

CRAF
Fusions

PTPN11

(<2%)

ERK

Fig. 546.4 A, Schematic of the frequen-

cy of MAPK pathway alterations detected
by biopsy of pilocytic astrocytomas. This
underestimates the frequency of NF1
pathogenic variants among children with
low-­
grade gliomas (LGGs) because the
tumors in patients affected by NF1 often
do not undergo biopsy. Although BRAF fusions (BRAF Fus) constitute the majority of
alterations in pilocytic astrocytoma, BRAF
pathogenic variants are more commonly
observed in pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas and gangliogliomas. B, Frequency
of the different BRAF abnormalities as a
function of tumor location and histological diagnosis. (From Pollack IF, Agnihotri
S, Broniscer A. Childhood brain tumors:
current management, biological insights,
and future directions. J Neurosurg Pediatr.
2019;23:261–273. Fig. 1.)

TF
Cell Growth

A
BRAF alterations per location
and histology
8

Pilocytic Astrocytoma

7
1

6
9
3

5

B

4

2

Pleomorphic
xanthoastrocytoma

KIAA1549:BRAF
1. Cerebral Cortex:
25%
2. Optic Pathways:
50%
3. Brain Stem:
60%
4. Spinal Cord:
55%
5. Posterior Fossa: 80%
6. Deep Gray Matter: 40%

BRAF V600E
8. Cerebral Cortex: 60%

Pilocytic Astrocytoma
BRAF V600E
7. Cerebral Cortex: 12%

Ganglioglioma
BRAF V600E
9. Temporal Lobe: 25%

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3120 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
The second most common astrocytoma is DA, which consists of a
group of tumors characterized by a pattern of diffuse infiltration of
tumor cells amidst normal neural tissue. Histologically, these low-­
grade tumors demonstrate greater cellularity, with few mitotic figures,
nuclear pleomorphism, and microcysts. They occur anywhere in the
CNS with predilection to supratentorial location. The characteristic
MRI finding is a lack of enhancement after contrast agent infusion.
Molecular genetic abnormalities found in DA include pathogenic
variants of P53 and overexpression of platelet-­derived growth factor
receptor-­α. Evolution of DA into malignant astrocytoma is associated with cumulative acquisition of multiple molecular abnormalities.
Overactivation of the MAPK pathway has been detected in DA in the
form of the BRAF V600E pathogenic variant and FGFR1 duplication.
Pilomyxoid astrocytoma occurs most commonly in the hypothalamic/optic chiasmic region and carries a high risk of local as well as
cerebrospinal spread. This astrocytoma affects young children and
infants. It is classified as a WHO grade II tumor.
The clinical management of LGAs focuses on a multimodal approach
incorporating surgery if feasible as the primary treatment as well as
radiation therapy and chemotherapy. With complete surgical resection,
the overall survival approaches 80–100%. In patients with partial resection, overall survival varies from 50–95%, depending on the anatomic
location of the tumor. In the patient who has undergone partial tumor
resection and has stable neurologic status, the current approach is to
follow the patient closely by examination and imaging. With evidence
of progression, a second surgical resection should be considered. In
patients in whom a second procedure was less than complete or is not
feasible, radiation therapy is beneficial. Radiation therapy is delivered to
the tumor bed at a total cumulative dose ranging from 50-­55 Gy. Modern surgical techniques and innovative radiation therapy methodology,
including proton-­beam radiation, may have a positive impact on the survival and clinical outcome of these patients. Chemotherapy for LGAs has
become the standard of care for progressive LGAs. Because of concerns
regarding morbidity from radiation therapy in young children, several
chemotherapy approaches have been evaluated, especially in children
younger than 10 years of age. Complete response to chemotherapy is
uncommon; however, these approaches have yielded durable control of
disease in 70–100% of patients with clinical improvement. Patients with
midline tumors in the hypothalamic/optic chiasmatic region (see Fig.
546.5B) have tended to do less well. The chemotherapy approaches have
permitted delay and, potentially, avoidance of radiation therapy. Chemotherapy agents given singly or in combination for LGA include carboplatin, vincristine, lomustine, procarbazine, temozolomide, and vinblastine.
Observation is the primary approach in clinical management of selected
patients with LGAs that are biologically indolent (neurofibromatosis

A

B

Fig. 546.5 A, Gadolinium-­enhanced axial T1-­weighted MR image in

a 4-­yr-­old child with cerebellar pilocytic astrocytoma presenting with
headaches, emesis, and ataxia demonstrates a predominantly cystic
mass with enhancement of the solid component and enhancement of
the capsule. B, Gadolinium-­enhanced coronal view of a cystic juvenile
pilocytic astrocytoma of the suprasellar region from a 4-­yr-­old child presenting with visual loss and headaches.

type 1 and tectal gliomas and indolent LGA variants like angiocentric
gliomas). Astrocytomas associated with tuberous sclerosis have responded
to everolimus, a mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor.
Malignant astrocytomas are less common in children and adolescents than in adults, accounting for 7–10% of all childhood brain
tumors. Among this group, anaplastic astrocytoma (WHO grade III;
Fig. 546.6) is more common than glioblastoma multiforme (WHO
grade IV). The histopathology of anaplastic astrocytomas demonstrates
greater cellularity than that of LGA, with cellular and nuclear atypia,
and the presence of mitoses. Characteristic histopathologic findings in
glioblastoma multiforme include dense cellularity, high mitotic index,
microvascular proliferation, and foci of tumor necrosis with pseudopalisading. Genome-­wide DNA methylation patterns have identified
five molecular subgroups of pediatric high-­grade glioma. These subgroups appear to have distinct cellular origins and biological drivers.
Common genetic alterations include gene pathogenic variants in histone H3.3 or H3.1, p53, and BRAF in addition to focal amplifications
of oncogene (PDGFRA and EGFR) and deletions of tumor-suppressor
genes (CDKN2A, CDKN2B, PTEN).
Optimal therapeutic approaches for malignant astrocytomas have
yet to be defined. Standard therapy continues to be surgical resection followed by involved-­field radiation therapy with evolving role of
maintenance alkylator chemotherapy (temozolomide ± lomustine). A
study of adult glioblastoma showed significantly better survival with
temozolomide during and after irradiation than with irradiation alone.
Current therapeutic approaches incorporate novel chemotherapeutic
agents with radiation therapy.
Oligodendrogliomas are uncommon tumors of childhood. These
infiltrating tumors occur predominantly in the cerebral cortex and
originate in the white matter. Histologically, oligodendrogliomas
consist of rounded cells with little cytoplasm and microcalcifications.
Observation of a calcified cortical mass on CT in a patient presenting with a seizure is suggestive of oligodendroglioma. The definition
of oligodendroglioma requires two diagnostic genotypic features:
pathogenic gene variants in isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) and the
co-­deletions of the short arm of chromosome 1 (1p) and the long arm
of chromosome 19 (19q). Treatment approaches are similar to those for
infiltrating astrocytomas.

Ependymal Tumors

Ependymal tumors are derived from the ependymal lining of the ventricular system. Cellular ependymoma (WHO grade II) is the most
common of these neoplasms, accounting for 5% of childhood CNS
tumors. Approximately 70% of ependymomas in childhood occur in the
posterior fossa. The mean age of patients is 6 years, with approximately

A

B

Fig. 546.6 A, Nonenhanced axial T2-­weighted MR image of grade III

astrocytoma of the right thalamus demonstrating diffuse hyperintensity
and area of necrotic cyst formation. B, Gadolinium-­enhanced sagittal
T1-­weighted MR image showing slight enhancement and hypodensity
of grade III astrocytoma of the thalamus. This 14-­yr-­old child presented
with left arm and leg numbness and weakness and right-­sided headaches.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 546 u Central Nervous System Tumors in Childhood
40% of cases occurring in children younger than 4 years of age. The
incidence of leptomeningeal spread approaches 10% overall. Clinical presentation can be insidious and often depends on the anatomic
location of the tumor. MRI demonstrates a well-­circumscribed tumor
with variable and complex patterns of gadolinium enhancement, with
or without cystic structures (Fig. 546.7). These tumors usually are
noninvasive, extending into the ventricular lumen and/or displacing
normal structures, sometimes leading to significant obstructive hydrocephalus. Histologic characteristics include perivascular pseudorosettes, ependymal rosettes, monomorphic nuclear morphology, and
occasional nonpalisading foci of necrosis. Other histologic subtypes
include anaplastic ependymoma (WHO grade III), which is much less
common in childhood and is characterized by a high mitotic index and
histologic features of microvascular proliferation and pseudopalisading necrosis. Myxopapillary ependymoma (WHO grade II) is a slow-­
growing tumor arising from the filum terminale and conus medullaris
and appears to be a biologically different subtype. Preliminary studies
suggest that there are genetically distinct subtypes of ependymoma,
exemplified by an association between alterations in the NF2 gene
and spinal ependymoma. Surgery is the primary treatment modality,
with extent of surgical resection a major prognostic factor. Two other
major prognostic factors are age, with younger children having poorer
outcomes, and tumor location, with localization in the posterior fossa,
which often is seen in young children, associated with poorer outcomes. Surgery alone is rarely curative. Multimodal therapy incorporating irradiation with surgery has resulted in long-­term survival in
approximately 40% of patients with ependymoma undergoing gross
total resection. Recurrence is predominantly local. The role of chemotherapy in multimodal therapy of ependymoma is still unclear. Current
investigations are directed toward identification of optimal radiation
dose, surgical questions addressing the use of second-­look procedures
after chemotherapy, and further evaluation of classic as well as novel
chemotherapeutic agents. Genome-­wide DNA methylation patterns
have identified nine molecular subgroups in these tumors across three
anatomic compartments including supratentorial (ST), posterior fossa
(PF), and the spinal locations (Fig. 548.8). Two subgroups (group A
and B) of PF ependymoma have been identified with distinct molecular and clinical characteristics, and the use of targeted chemotherapy
against these subtypes is being evaluated.

Choroid Plexus Tumors

Choroid plexus tumors account for 2–4% of childhood CNS tumors.
They are the most common CNS tumors in children younger than 1
year of age and account for 10–20% of CNS tumors in infants. These

546.7 A, Sagittal T1-­
weighted MR image of a 6-­yr-­old
patient
with
ependymoma,
demonstrating a hypointense
mass within the fourth ventricle
compressing the brainstem. B,
Gadolinium-­
enhanced axial T1-­
weighted image of an ependymoma showing an enhancing
mass within the fourth ventricle.

tumors are intraventricular epithelial neoplasms arising from the choroid plexus. Children present with signs and symptoms of increased
ICP. Infants may present with macrocephaly and focal neurologic deficits. In children, these tumors predominantly occur supratentorially
in the lateral ventricles. The group of choroid plexus tumors is made
up of choroid plexus papillomas (WHO grade I), atypical choroid
plexus papillomas (WHO grade II), and choroid plexus carcinomas
(WHO grade III). Choroid plexus papilloma, the most common of
this group, is a well-­circumscribed lesion with focal calcification on
neuroimaging. Choroid plexus carcinoma is a malignant tumor with
metastatic potential to seed into the CSF pathways. This malignancy
has the following histologic characteristics: nuclear pleomorphism,
high mitotic index, necrosis, and increased cell density. MRI typically
demonstrates a large, hyperdense, contrast-­enhancing, intraventricular mass with peritumoral edema, hemorrhage, and hydrocephalus.
The tumor suppressor p53 is crucially involved in the biology of this
cancer and may contribute to aggressive tumor behavior. Molecular
data subclassify choroid plexus tumors into three distinct subgroups
with different molecular aberrations and clinical outcomes. These
tumors are associated with the Li-­Fraumeni syndrome. After complete surgical resection, the frequency of cure for choroid plexus papilloma approaches 100%, whereas the frequency of cure for choroid
plexus carcinoma approaches 20–40%. Reports suggest that radiation
therapy and/or chemotherapy may lead to better disease control for
choroid plexus carcinoma.

Embryonal Tumors

Embryonal tumors or primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs)
are one of the most common groups of malignant CNS tumors of childhood, accounting for approximately 9% of pediatric CNS tumors. They
have the potential to metastasize to the neuraxis and extracranial tissues. The group includes medulloblastoma, supratentorial PNET, atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor, and other rare embryonal tumors, all of
which are histologically classified as WHO grade IV tumors.
Medulloblastoma, which accounts for ∼62% of embryonal CNS
tumors, is a cerebellar tumor occurring predominantly in males and
at a median age of 5-­7 years. CT and MRI demonstrate a solid, homogeneous, contrast medium–enhancing mass in the PF causing fourth
ventricular obstruction and hydrocephalus (Fig. 546.9). Up to 30% of
patients with medulloblastoma present with neuroimaging evidence of
leptomeningeal spread. Among a variety of diverse histologic patterns
of this tumor, the most common is a monomorphic sheet of undifferentiated cells classically noted as small, blue round cells. Neuronal differentiation is more common among these tumors and is characterized

Fig.

A

3121

B

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3122 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Supratentorial (ST-)
ST-SE

Median Age (y):
Prognosis:

ST-EPN-YAP1 ST-EPN-RELA

Subependymoma

(Anaplastic)
Ependymoma

(Anaplastic)
Ependymoma

Balanced
genome

YAP1 Fusion

RELA Fusions
Chromothripsis

WHO grade I

WHO grade II/III

WHO grade II/III

40
Good

1.5
Good

8
Poor

Posterior Fossa (PF-)
PF-SE

Median Age (y):
Prognosis:

PF-EPN-A

PF-EPN-B

Subependymoma

(Anaplastic)
Ependymoma

(Anaplastic)
Ependymoma

Balanced
genome

Balanced
genome

Chromosomal
instability

WHO grade I

WHO grade II/III

WHO grade II/III

59
Good

3
Poor

30
Good

Spinal (SP-)

Fig. 546.8 A, Illustration of the nine recognized subsets of

ependymomas. Only four of these subsets (ST-­
EPN-­
YAP1, ST-­
EPN-­RELA, PF-­EPN-­A, and PF-­EPN-­B) typically occur during the
childhood years. The subependymoma (SE) groups typically affect middle-­age or older adults, and the spinal lesions, although
occasionally encountered in children, are largely seen in adults.
B, Estimate of the overall frequency of the different subtypes of
ependymomas. (From Pollack IF, Agnihotri S, Broniscer A. Childhood brain tumors: current management, biological insights, and
future directions. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2019;23:261–273. Fig. 3.)

A

Median Age (y):
Prognosis:

SP-SE

SP-MPE

SP-EPN

Subependymoma

Myxopapillary
Ependymoma

(Anaplastic)
Ependymoma

6q Deletion

Chromosomal
instability

Chromosomal
instability

WHO grade I

WHO grade I

WHO grade II/III
40
Good

49
Good

32
Good

Subgroup Occurrence
4% ST-SE
3% ST-EPN-YAP1
18% ST-EPN-RELA

7% PF-SE
48% PF-EPN-A
10% PF-EPN-B

1% SP-SE
5% SP-MPE
4% SP-EPN

B

Fig.

A

B

histologically by the presence of Homer Wright rosettes and by immunopositivity for synaptophysin. An anaplastic variant is often more
aggressive and may be associated with poorer prognosis. Patients present with signs and symptoms of increased ICP (i.e., headache, nausea,
vomiting, blurring of vision, mental status changes, and hypertension)

546.9 A, Sagittal T1-­
weighted MR image shows hypointense mass involving the cerebellar hemisphere in a 6-­yr-­old
child with desmoplastic variant
of medulloblastoma. B, Axial T2-­
weighted image of the same child
shows hyperintense mass involving the cerebellar hemisphere.

and cerebellar dysfunction (i.e., ataxia, poor balance, dysmetria, dysarthria). Clinical staging evaluation includes MRI of the brain and spine,
both preoperatively and postoperatively, as well as lumbar puncture
after the increased ICP has resolved. Clinical features that have consistently demonstrated prognostic significance include age at diagnosis,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 546 u Central Nervous System Tumors in Childhood
Subgroup

WNT

SHH

Group 3

Group 4

Incidence

10%

30%

25%

35%

Subtype

WNT α WNT β

SHH α

SHH β

SHH γ

3123

SHH δ Group 3α Group 3β Group 3γ Group 4α Group 4β Group 4γ

Gender

Subtype
proportion

α

β γ

β

α

3β
3α

δ

4β
3γ

4α

4γ

Age

3-17

>10

3-17

0-3

0-3

>17

0-10

3-17

0-10

3-17

3-17

3-17

Metastases

9%

21%

20%

33%

9%

9%

43%

20%

40%

40%

40%

40%

5 year
survival

97%

100%

70%

70%

90%

90%

65%

55%

40%

65%

75%

80%

Copy Number
Changes

6-

MYCN amp,
GLI2 amp,
YAP1 amp

PTEN
Loss

TP53
variants

Other events
Histology

Balanced 10q22-, 7*, 8-, 10- OTX2 gain,
amp,
MYC amp MYCN
SNCAIP CDK6 amp
CDK6 amp
genome 11q23.3 11 , i17q DDX3 loss
dup

Classic, LCA(rare)

TERT
promotor
variants

High
GFI1/1B
expression
Classic, LCA

Desmoplastic, Nodular
Classic, LCA

Classic, LCA

Classic

Desmoplastic/
Nodular

Extensive
nodularity

LCA

40x

20x

10x

20x

Fig. 546.10 Schematic (upper) depicting the four WHO-­recognized subgroups of medulloblastoma, as well as the additional subtypes noted more

recently and their distinguishing characteristics in terms of amplifications (amp) and duplications (dup). The figure (lower) also depicts the histological diversity of medulloblastomas: WNT tumors most commonly have a classic histology, whereas SHH tumors have desmoplastic histology with
varying degrees of nodularity. Large cell/anaplastic (LCA) histology is most commonly seen in group 3 and less commonly in group 4 tumors. (From
Pollack IF, Agnihotri S, Broniscer A. Childhood brain tumors: current management, biological insights, and future directions. J Neurosurg Pediatr.
2019;23:261–273. Fig. 2.)

extent of disease, and extent of surgical resection. Patients younger
than 4 years of age have a poor outcome, partly as the result of a higher
incidence of disseminated disease on presentation and past therapeutic
approaches that have used less intense therapies. Patients with disseminated disease at diagnosis (M > 0), including positive CSF cytologic
result alone (M1), have a markedly poorer outcome than those patients
with no dissemination (M0). Similarly, patients with gross residual disease after surgery have poorer outcomes than those in whom surgery
achieved gross total resection of disease.
Cytogenetic and molecular genetic studies have demonstrated
multiple abnormalities in medulloblastoma (Fig. 546.10). The most
common abnormality involves chromosome 17p deletions, which
occur in 30–40% of all cases. Several signaling pathways have been
shown to be active in medulloblastomas, including the sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway, predominately associated with the desmoplastic variants, and the WNT pathway, which can occur in up to 15%
of cases and has been associated with improved survival. Integrative genomic studies have identified at least four distinct molecular
subgroups of medulloblastoma—WNT, SHH, group 3, and group
4—that exhibit highly discriminate transcriptional, cytogenetic,
and mutational spectra, in addition to divergent patient demographics and clinical behavior (see Fig. 546.10). These prognostic
groups still must be validated in larger prospective studies, though
the WNT subgroup is known to have the most favorable outcome.
A multimodal treatment approach is pursued in medulloblastoma,
with surgery as the starting point of treatment. Medulloblastoma
is sensitive to both chemotherapy and radiation therapy. With

technologic advances in neurosurgery, neuroradiology, and radiation therapy, as well as identification of chemotherapy as an effective modality, the overall outcome among all patients approaches
60–70%. Standard radiation treatment in standard risk medulloblastoma incorporates craniospinal radiation at a total cumulative
dose of 24 Gy, with a cumulative dose of 50-­55 Gy to the tumor
bed. Craniospinal radiation at this dose in children younger than
3 years of age results in severe late neurologic sequelae, including
microcephaly, learning disabilities, cognitive impairment, neuroendocrine dysfunction (growth failure, hypothyroidism, hypogonadism, and absence/delay of puberty), and/or second malignancies.
Similarly, in older children, late sequelae, such as learning disabilities, neuroendocrine dysfunction, and/or second malignancies, can occur. These observations have resulted in stratification
of treatment approaches into the following three strata: (1) patients
younger than 3 years of age, (2) standard-­risk patients older than 3
years of age with surgical total resection and no disease dissemination (M0), and (3) high-­risk patients older than 3 years of age with
disease dissemination (M > 0) and/or bulky residual disease after
surgery. With the risk-­based approach to treatment, children with
high-­risk medulloblastoma receive high-­dose cranial–spinal radiation (36 Gy) with chemotherapy during and after radiation therapy.
As the dose of radiation depends on the risk stratification, complete
staging with MRI of the spine before starting treatment is essential
for the best chance of survival. Approaches in young children (usually younger than 3 years of age) incorporate high-­dose chemotherapy with peripheral stem cell reinfusion to avoid radiation therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3124 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Overall survival in children with nonmetastatic medulloblastoma
and gross total tumor resection approaches 85%. The presence of
bulky residual tumor (56% survival) or metastases (38% survival)
confers a poor prognosis. The molecular classification is being
evaluated to stratify risk groups and tailor therapy accordingly. The
WNT subgroup and nonmetastatic group 4 tumors are recognized
as low-­risk tumors that may qualify for reduced therapy. High-­risk
groups were defined as patients with metastatic SHH or group 4
tumors, where intensification of therapy is being profiled.
Supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumors (SPNETs) account
for approximately 1% of childhood CNS tumors, primarily in children
within the first decade of life. These tumors are similar histologically to
medulloblastoma and are composed of undifferentiated or poorly differentiated neuroepithelial cells. Historically, patients with SPNETs have
had poorer outcomes than those with medulloblastoma after combined-­
modality therapy. Children with SPNETs are considered among the high-­
risk group and receive dose-­
intense chemotherapy with craniospinal
radiation therapy.
Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor is a very aggressive embryonal
malignancy that occurs predominantly in children younger than 5
years of age and can occur at any location in the neuraxis. The histology
demonstrates a heterogeneous pattern of cells, including rhabdoid cells
that express epithelial membrane antigen and neurofilament antigen.
The characteristic cytogenetic pattern is partial or complete deletion
of chromosome 22q11.2 that is associated with pathogenic variants in
the INI1 gene. The relation between this variant and tumorigenesis is
unclear. Though the overall prognosis remains poor, intensive chemotherapy, focal radiation, and high-­dose chemotherapy with stem cell
rescue have shown a trend toward improved survival. This is noted
more in patients who undergo complete resection of tumor and focal
radiation.

Pineal Parenchymal Tumors

The pineal parenchymal tumors are the most common malignancies
after germ cell tumors that occur in the pineal region. These include
pineoblastoma, occurring predominantly in childhood, pineocytoma,
and the mixed pineal parenchymal tumors. The therapeutic approach
in this group of diseases is multimodal. There was significant concern
regarding the location of these masses and the potential complications
of surgical intervention. With developments in neurosurgical technique and surgical technology, the morbidity and mortality associated
with these approaches have markedly decreased. Stereotactic biopsy
of these tumors may be adequate to establish diagnosis; however,
consideration should be given to total resection of the lesion before
institution of additional therapy. Pineoblastoma, the more malignant
variant, is considered a subgroup of childhood PNETs. Chemotherapy
regimens incorporate cisplatin, cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), etoposide (VP-­16), and vincristine and/or lomustine. The survival outcome
of combined chemotherapy and radiation therapy in pineal-­region
PNETs approaches 70% at 5 years. Pineocytoma usually is approached
with surgical resection.

Craniopharyngioma

Craniopharyngioma (WHO grade I) is a common tumor of childhood, accounting for 3–10% of all CNS childhood tumors. Two
histological subtypes have been identified, adamantinomatous and
papillary craniopharyngiomas (CP), each with specific origin and
genetic alterations. BRAFV600E pathogenic variants are solely
found in the papillary CP subgroup, which is the common type
in adults, whereas CTNNB1 pathogenic variants are exclusively
detected in adamantinomatous CP, which is common in children.
Children with CP often present with endocrinologic abnormalities (growth failure and delayed sexual maturation) and/or visual
changes (decreased acuity or visual field abnormalities). These
tumors are often large and heterogeneous, displaying both solid and
cystic components, and occur within the suprasellar region. They
are minimally invasive, adhere to adjacent brain parenchyma, and
engulf normal brain structures. MRI demonstrates the solid tumor
with cystic structures containing fluid of intermediate density,

and CT may show calcifications. Surgery is the primary treatment
modality, with gross total resection being curative. Controversy
exists regarding the relative roles of surgery and radiation therapy
in large, complex tumors. Significant morbidity (panhypopituitarism, growth failure, visual loss) is associated with these tumors and
their therapy, owing to the anatomic location.

Germ Cell Tumors

Germ cell tumors of the CNS are a heterogeneous group of tumors
that are primarily tumors of childhood, arising predominantly in
midline structures of the pineal and suprasellar regions (see Fig.
546.3). They account for 3–5% of pediatric CNS tumors. The peak
incidence of these tumors is in children 10-­12 yr of age. Overall,
there is a male preponderance, although there is a female preponderance for suprasellar tumors. Germ cell tumors occur multifocally
in 5–10% of cases. This group of tumors is much more prevalent
in Asian populations than European populations. Delays in diagnosis can occur because these tumors have a particularly insidious
course; the initial presenting symptoms may be subtle. Similar to
peripheral germ cell tumors, the analysis of protein markers, α-­
fetoprotein, and β-­human chorionic gonadotropin may be useful
in establishing the diagnosis and monitoring treatment response.
Surgical biopsy is recommended to establish the diagnosis; however,
secreting germinomas and nongerminomatous germ cell tumors
may be diagnosed based on protein marker elevations. Therapeutic approaches to germinomas and nongerminomatous germ cell
tumors are different. The survival proportion among patients with
pure germinoma exceeds 90%. The postsurgical treatment of pure
germinomas is somewhat controversial in defining the relative roles
of chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Clinical trials have investigated the use of chemotherapy and reduced-dose radiation and field
after surgery in pure germinomas. The therapeutic approach to
nongerminomatous germ cell tumors is more aggressive, combining
more intense chemotherapy regimens with craniospinal radiation
therapy. Survival rates among patients with these tumors are markedly lower than those noted in patients with germinoma, ranging
from 70–80% at 5 years. Trials have shown the benefit of the use of
high doses of chemotherapy with peripheral blood stem cell rescue
specially at metastatic and relapse groups.

Tumors of the Brainstem

Tumors of the brainstem are a heterogeneous group of tumors that
account for 10.9% of childhood primary CNS tumors. Outcome
depends on tumor location, imaging characteristics, and the patient’s
clinical status. Patients with these tumors may present with motor
weakness, cranial nerve dysfunction, cerebellar dysfunction, and/
or signs of increased ICP. On the basis of MRI evaluation and clinical findings, tumors of the brainstem can be classified into four types:
focal (5–10% of patients), dorsally exophytic (5–10%), cervicomedullary (5–10%), and diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG) (70–85%)
(Fig. 546.11). Surgical resection is the primary treatment approach for
focal and dorsally exophytic tumors and leads to a favorable outcome.
Histologically, these two groups usually are low-­grade gliomas. Cervicomedullary tumors, because of their location, may not be amenable
to surgical resection but are sensitive to radiation therapy. DIPG, characterized by the diffuse infiltrating grade II-­IV glioma, is associated
with a very poor outcome independent of histologic diagnosis. These
tumors are not amenable to surgical resection. Biopsy in children in
whom MRI shows DIPG is controversial and is not recommended
unless there are atypical radiographic findings suspicious for another
diagnosis, such as infection, vascular malformation, myelination disorder, or metastatic tumor. Studies have identified the unique genetic
makeup of this fatal brain cancer, with nearly 80% found to harbor
pathogenic variants in histone H3.3 or H3.1 (H3-­K27M) and 20%
pathogenic variants affecting the activin receptor gene (ACVR1); three
molecularly distinct subgroups have been identified (H3-­K27M, silent
and MYCN).
The standard treatment approach has been palliative radiation therapy, and median survival with this treatment is 12 months, at best. Use

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 547 u Neuroblastoma 3125

Chapter 547

Neuroblastoma
Fiorela N. Hernandez Tejada and
Douglas J. Harrison
Neuroblastomas are embryonal cancers of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system with heterogeneous clinical presentation and
course, ranging from tumors that undergo spontaneous regression
to very aggressive tumors unresponsive to very intensive multimodal
therapy. The causes of most cases remain unknown. Advances have
been made in the treatment of children with these tumors, which
have improved outcomes, although many with aggressive forms
of neuroblastoma still succumb to their disease despite intensive
therapy.
Fig. 546.11 T2-­weighted sagittal MR image of a diffuse infiltrating

pontine glioma in a 5-­yr-­old child presenting with headaches, left facial
droop, and lethargy.

of chemotherapy, including high-­dose chemotherapy with peripheral
blood stem cell rescue, has not yet been of survival benefit in this group
of patients. Experimental approaches have included the use of immunotherapy with oncolytic herpes simplex virus (HSV) or adenoviruses.

Metastatic Tumors

Metastatic spread of other childhood malignancies to the brain is
uncommon. Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia and non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma can spread to the leptomeninges, causing symptoms of communicating hydrocephalus. Chloromas, which are
collections of myeloid leukemia cells, can occur throughout the neuraxis. Rarely, brain parenchymal metastases occur from lymphoma,
neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, osteosarcoma,
and clear cell sarcoma of the kidney. Therapeutic approaches are based
on the specific histologic diagnosis and may incorporate radiation
therapy, intrathecal administration of chemotherapy, and/or systemic
administration of chemotherapy. Medulloblastoma is the childhood
brain tumor that most commonly metastasizes extraneurally. Less
commonly, extraneural metastases from malignant glioma, PNET,
and ependymoma can occur. Ventriculoperitoneal shunts have been
known to allow extraneural metastases, primarily within the peritoneal
cavity but also systemically.

COMPLICATIONS AND LONG-­TERM MANAGEMENT

Data from the National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results Program indicate that more than 70% of patients with
childhood brain tumors will be long-­term survivors. At least 50% of
these survivors will experience chronic problems as a direct result of
their tumors and treatment. These problems include chronic neurologic deficits such as focal motor and sensory abnormalities, seizure
disorders, neurocognitive deficits (e.g., developmental delays, learning
disabilities), and neuroendocrine deficiencies (e.g., hypothyroidism,
growth failure, delay or absence of puberty). These patients are also at
significant risk for secondary malignancies, hearing deficit, and early
cataract from radiation therapy. Supportive multidisciplinary interventions for children with brain tumors both during and after therapy may
help improve the ultimate outcome. Optimal seizure management,
physical therapy, endocrine management with timely growth hormone
and thyroid replacement therapy, tailored educational programs, and
vocational interventions may enhance the childhood brain tumor survivor’s quality of life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor in children and is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy in the first year
of life. Approximately 600 new cases are diagnosed each year in the
United States, accounting for 8–10% of childhood malignancies and
one-­third of cancers in infants. Neuroblastoma accounts for >15% of
the mortality from cancer in children. The median age of children at
diagnosis of neuroblastoma is 18 months, and 90% of cases are diagnosed in children who are <10 years of age. The incidence is slightly
higher in males and in the White population.

PATHOLOGY

Neuroblastoma tumors, which are derived from primordial neural
crest cells, form a spectrum with variable degrees of neural differentiation, ranging from tumors with primarily undifferentiated small round
cells (neuroblastoma) to tumors consisting of mature and maturing
Schwannian stroma with ganglion cells (ganglioneuroblastoma or
ganglioneuroma). The tumors may resemble other small, round blue
cell tumors, such as rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma. The prognosis of children with neuroblastoma
varies with the histologic features of the tumor as dictated by the presence and amount of Schwannian stroma, the degree of tumor cell differentiation, and the mitosis-­karyorrhexis index.

PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of neuroblastoma in most cases remains unknown.
Familial neuroblastoma is rare but accounts for 1–2% of all cases,
is associated with a younger age at diagnosis, and is linked to germline
gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the ALK gene. The BARD1
gene has also been identified as a major genetic contributor to neuroblastoma risk. Germline gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in
PHOX2B predisposes to most of the syndromic neuroblastoma cases,
including Hirschsprung disease and central congenital hypoventilation syndrome. Neuroblastoma is associated with other neural crest
disorders, such as neurofibromatosis type 1, and potentially congenital cardiovascular malformations (Table 547.1). Children with
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome and hemihypertrophy also have a
higher incidence of neuroblastoma. Increased incidence of neuroblastoma is associated with some maternal and paternal occupational
chemical exposures, maternal drug use, farming, and work related
to electronics, although no single environmental exposure has been
shown to directly cause neuroblastoma.
Genetic characteristics of neuroblastoma tumors that are of prognostic importance include amplification of the MYCN (N-­myc) protooncogene and tumor cell DNA content, or ploidy (Tables 547.2-­547.4).
Amplification of MYCN is strongly associated with advanced tumor
stage and poor outcomes. Other genetic alterations have been identified

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 547 u Neuroblastoma 3125

Chapter 547

Neuroblastoma
Fiorela N. Hernandez Tejada and
Douglas J. Harrison
Neuroblastomas are embryonal cancers of the peripheral sympathetic nervous system with heterogeneous clinical presentation and
course, ranging from tumors that undergo spontaneous regression
to very aggressive tumors unresponsive to very intensive multimodal
therapy. The causes of most cases remain unknown. Advances have
been made in the treatment of children with these tumors, which
have improved outcomes, although many with aggressive forms
of neuroblastoma still succumb to their disease despite intensive
therapy.
Fig. 546.11 T2-­weighted sagittal MR image of a diffuse infiltrating

pontine glioma in a 5-­yr-­old child presenting with headaches, left facial
droop, and lethargy.

of chemotherapy, including high-­dose chemotherapy with peripheral
blood stem cell rescue, has not yet been of survival benefit in this group
of patients. Experimental approaches have included the use of immunotherapy with oncolytic herpes simplex virus (HSV) or adenoviruses.

Metastatic Tumors

Metastatic spread of other childhood malignancies to the brain is
uncommon. Childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia and non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma can spread to the leptomeninges, causing symptoms of communicating hydrocephalus. Chloromas, which are
collections of myeloid leukemia cells, can occur throughout the neuraxis. Rarely, brain parenchymal metastases occur from lymphoma,
neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, osteosarcoma,
and clear cell sarcoma of the kidney. Therapeutic approaches are based
on the specific histologic diagnosis and may incorporate radiation
therapy, intrathecal administration of chemotherapy, and/or systemic
administration of chemotherapy. Medulloblastoma is the childhood
brain tumor that most commonly metastasizes extraneurally. Less
commonly, extraneural metastases from malignant glioma, PNET,
and ependymoma can occur. Ventriculoperitoneal shunts have been
known to allow extraneural metastases, primarily within the peritoneal
cavity but also systemically.

COMPLICATIONS AND LONG-­TERM MANAGEMENT

Data from the National Cancer Institute Surveillance, Epidemiology,
and End Results Program indicate that more than 70% of patients with
childhood brain tumors will be long-­term survivors. At least 50% of
these survivors will experience chronic problems as a direct result of
their tumors and treatment. These problems include chronic neurologic deficits such as focal motor and sensory abnormalities, seizure
disorders, neurocognitive deficits (e.g., developmental delays, learning
disabilities), and neuroendocrine deficiencies (e.g., hypothyroidism,
growth failure, delay or absence of puberty). These patients are also at
significant risk for secondary malignancies, hearing deficit, and early
cataract from radiation therapy. Supportive multidisciplinary interventions for children with brain tumors both during and after therapy may
help improve the ultimate outcome. Optimal seizure management,
physical therapy, endocrine management with timely growth hormone
and thyroid replacement therapy, tailored educational programs, and
vocational interventions may enhance the childhood brain tumor survivor’s quality of life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor in children and is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy in the first year
of life. Approximately 600 new cases are diagnosed each year in the
United States, accounting for 8–10% of childhood malignancies and
one-­third of cancers in infants. Neuroblastoma accounts for >15% of
the mortality from cancer in children. The median age of children at
diagnosis of neuroblastoma is 18 months, and 90% of cases are diagnosed in children who are <10 years of age. The incidence is slightly
higher in males and in the White population.

PATHOLOGY

Neuroblastoma tumors, which are derived from primordial neural
crest cells, form a spectrum with variable degrees of neural differentiation, ranging from tumors with primarily undifferentiated small round
cells (neuroblastoma) to tumors consisting of mature and maturing
Schwannian stroma with ganglion cells (ganglioneuroblastoma or
ganglioneuroma). The tumors may resemble other small, round blue
cell tumors, such as rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma. The prognosis of children with neuroblastoma
varies with the histologic features of the tumor as dictated by the presence and amount of Schwannian stroma, the degree of tumor cell differentiation, and the mitosis-­karyorrhexis index.

PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of neuroblastoma in most cases remains unknown.
Familial neuroblastoma is rare but accounts for 1–2% of all cases,
is associated with a younger age at diagnosis, and is linked to germline
gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the ALK gene. The BARD1
gene has also been identified as a major genetic contributor to neuroblastoma risk. Germline gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants in
PHOX2B predisposes to most of the syndromic neuroblastoma cases,
including Hirschsprung disease and central congenital hypoventilation syndrome. Neuroblastoma is associated with other neural crest
disorders, such as neurofibromatosis type 1, and potentially congenital cardiovascular malformations (Table 547.1). Children with
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome and hemihypertrophy also have a
higher incidence of neuroblastoma. Increased incidence of neuroblastoma is associated with some maternal and paternal occupational
chemical exposures, maternal drug use, farming, and work related
to electronics, although no single environmental exposure has been
shown to directly cause neuroblastoma.
Genetic characteristics of neuroblastoma tumors that are of prognostic importance include amplification of the MYCN (N-­myc) protooncogene and tumor cell DNA content, or ploidy (Tables 547.2-­547.4).
Amplification of MYCN is strongly associated with advanced tumor
stage and poor outcomes. Other genetic alterations have been identified

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3126 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 547.1  Syndromes Due to or Associated with Neuroblastoma
EPONYM

FEATURES

SYNDROMES CAUSED BY NEUROBLASTOMA
Pepper syndrome
Massive involvement of the liver with metastatic disease with or without respiratory distress
Horner syndrome

Unilateral ptosis, myosis, and anhidrosis associated with a thoracic or cervical primary tumor; symptoms do
not resolve with tumor resection

Hutchinson syndrome

Limping and irritability in young child associated with bone and bone marrow metastases

Opsoclonus-­myoclonus-­ataxia
syndrome

Myoclonic jerking and random conjugate eye movements with or without cerebellar ataxia; often associated
with a biologically favorable and differentiated tumor; the condition is likely immune mediated, may not
resolve with tumor removal, and often exhibits progressive neuropsychologic sequelae

Kerner-­Morrison syndrome

Intractable secretory watery diarrhea due to tumor secretion of vasointestinal peptides; tumors are generally
biologically favorable

ROHHAD

Approximately 40% may have neural crest-­derived tumors. Obesity and neurologic issues may be part of a
paraneoplastic syndrome

SYNDROMES PREDISPOSING TO NEUROBLASTOMA
Neurocristopathy syndrome
Neuroblastoma associated with other neural crest disorders, including congenital hypoventilation syndrome
or Hirschsprung disease; germline pathogenic variants in the paired homeobox gene PHOX2B have been
identified in a subset of patients with this disease
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome

Macrosomia, hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, omphalocele

Costello syndrome (faciocutaneo­
skeletal syndrome)

Autosomal dominant, pathogenic variant in HRAS, intellectual disability, delayed development,
cardiomyopathy

Familial pheochromocytoma/
paraganglioma syndrome

Autosomal dominant, pathogenic variant in MAX and other genes

Fanconi anemia

Autosomal recessive, congenital anomalies, aplastic anemia, pathogenic variants in FANCA, FANCC, FANCG

Neurofibromatosis type 1

NF1 pathogenic variants

Noonan syndrome

Ras-­MAPK pathway (RASopathies) pathogenic variant

Turner syndrome

Partial or complete deletion of X chromosome, short-­webbed neck, short stature

ROHHAD, Rapid-­onset obesity, hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation, autonomic dysregulation.
Modified from Park JR, Eggert A, Caron H. Neuroblastoma: biology, prognosis, and treatment. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2008;55:97–120.

Table 547.2  Children’s Oncology Group Neuroblastoma Risk Stratification
RISK GROUP

STAGE

AGE

Low

1

Any

Low

2A/2B

Any

High

2A/2B

Any

Intermediate

3

Intermediate

3

High

3

Any

High

3

High
Intermediate

MYCN
AMPLIFICATION STATUS

PLOIDY

SHIMADA

Any

Any

Any

Not amplified

Any

Any

Amplified

Any

Any

<547 days

Not amplified

Any

Any

≥547 days

Not amplified

Any

FH

Amplified

Any

Any

≥547 days

Not amplified

Any

UH

4

<365 days

Amplified

Any

Any

4

<365 days

Not amplified

Any

Any

High

4

365 to <547 days

Amplified

Any

Any

High

4

365 to <547 days

Any

DNA index = 1

Any

High

4

365 to <547 days

Any

Any

UH

Intermediate

4

365 to <547 days

Not amplified

DNA index > 1

FH

High

4

≥547 days

Any

Any

Any

Low

4S

<365 days

Not amplified

DNA index > 1

FH

Intermediate

4S

<365 days

Not amplified

DNA index = 1

Any

Intermediate

4S

<365 days

Not amplified

Any

UH

High

4S

<365 days

Amplified

Any

Any

FH, Favorable histology; UH, unfavorable histology.
Data from Irwin MS, Naranjo A, Zhang FF, et al. Revised neuroblastoma risk classification system: a report From the Children’s Oncology Group. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(29):3229–3241.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 547 u Neuroblastoma 3127
Table 547.3  International Neuroblastoma Staging System
STAGE

DEFINITION

INCIDENCE (%)

SURVIVAL AT 5 YR* (%)

1

Localized tumor with complete gross excision, with or without microscopic
residual disease; representative ipsilateral lymph nodes negative for tumor
microscopically (nodes attached to and removed with the primary tumor
may be positive)

5

≥90

2A

Localized tumor with incomplete gross excision; representative ipsilateral
nonadherent lymph nodes negative for tumor microscopically

10

70-­80

2B

Localized tumor with or without complete gross excision, with ipsilateral
nonadherent lymph nodes positive for tumor; enlarged contralateral
lymph nodes must be negative microscopically

10

70-­80

3

Unresectable unilateral tumor infiltrating across the midline,† with or without
regional lymph node involvement; or localized unilateral tumor with contralateral regional lymph node involvement; or midline tumor with bilateral
extension by infiltration (resectable) or by lymph node involvement

25

40-­70

4

Any primary tumor with dissemination to distant lymph nodes; bone, bone
marrow, liver, skin, and other organs (except as defined for stage 4S)

60

85-­90¶
30-­40#

4S

Localized primary tumor (as defined for stage 1, 2A, or 2B), with dissemination limited to skin, liver, and bone marrow‡ (limited to infants <1 yr of age)

5

>80

*Survival is influenced by other characteristics, such as MYCN amplification. Percentages are approximate.
†The midline is defined as the vertebral column. Tumors originating on one side and crossing the midline must infiltrate to or beyond the other side of the vertebral column.
‡Marrow involvement in stage 4S should be minimal (i.e., <10% of total nucleated cells identified as malignant on bone marrow biopsy or on marrow aspirate). More extensive mar-

row involvement would be considered stage 4. Results of the metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scan (if performed) should be negative in the marrow.
¶If age at diagnosis is <18 mo.
#If age at diagnosis is >18 mo.

Modified from Kliegman RM, Marcdante KJ, Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics. 5th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2006. p 746; and Brodeur GM, Pritchard J,
Berthold F, et al. Revisions of the international criteria for neuroblastoma diagnosis, staging, and response to treatment. J Clin Oncol. 1993;11:1466–1477.

Table 547.4  Phenotypic and Genetic Features of Neuroblastoma, Treatment, and Survival According to Prognostic Category
PROGNOSTIC CATEGORY*
VARIABLE

LOW RISK

INTERMEDIATE RISK

HIGH RISK

TUMOR STAGE 4S

Pattern of
disease

Localized tumor

Localized tumor with loco­
regional lymph node extension; metastases to bone
marrow and bone in infants

Metastases to bone marrow and bone
(except in infants)

Metastases to liver and
skin (with minimal bone
marrow involvement) in
infants

Tumor
genomics

Whole-­chromosome
gains

Whole-­chromosome gains

Segmental chromosomal aberrations

Whole-­chromosome gains

Treatment

Surgery†

Moderate-­intensity chemotherapy; surgery†

Dose-­intensive chemotherapy, surgery, and
external-­beam radiotherapy to primary
tumor and resistant metastatic sites;
myeloablative chemotherapy with autologous
hematopoietic stem cell rescue; isotretinoin
with anti-­ganglioside GD2 immunotherapy

Supportive care‡

Survival rate

>98%

90–95%

40–50%

>90%

*Patients are assigned to prognostic groups according to risk, as described by the Children’s Oncology Group, with the level of risk defining the likelihood of death from disease.
Stage 4S disease is considered separately here because of the unique phenotype of favorable biologic features and relentless early progression but ultimately full and complete
regression of the disease.
†The goal of surgery is to safely debulk the tumor mass and avoid damage to surrounding normal structures while obtaining sufficient material for molecular diagnostic studies. Some
localized tumors may spontaneously regress without surgery.
‡Low-­dose chemotherapy or radiation therapy, or both, is used in patients with life-­threatening hepatic involvement, especially in infants <2 mo of age, who are at much higher risk
for life-­threatening complications from massive hepatomegaly.
From Maris JM. Recent advances in neuroblastoma. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:2202–2210.

in patients with neuroblastoma using whole genome sequencing such
as loss of function in ATRX and TERT. Hyperdiploidy confers better
prognosis if the child is younger than 18 months of age at diagnosis
if amplification of MYCN is not present. Other chromosomal abnormalities, including loss of heterozygosity of 1p, 11q, and 14q, and gain
of 17q, may be found in neuroblastoma tumors and have been associated with worse outcomes. In addition, many other biologic factors are
associated with neuroblastoma outcomes, including tumor vascularity and the expression levels of nerve growth factor receptors (TrkA,
TrkB), ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase, ganglioside GD2, neuropeptide

Y, chromogranin A, CD44, multidrug resistance–associated protein,
and telomerase.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Neuroblastoma may develop at any site of sympathetic nervous system tissue. Approximately half of neuroblastoma tumors arise in the
adrenal glands, and most of the remainder originate in the paraspinal sympathetic ganglia. Metastatic spread, which is more common in
children older than 1 year of age at diagnosis, occurs via local invasion
or distant hematogenous or lymphatic routes. The most common sites

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3128 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
of metastasis are the regional or distant lymph nodes, long bones and
skull, bone marrow, liver, and skin. Lung and brain metastases are rare,
occurring in less than 3% of cases.
The signs and symptoms of neuroblastoma reflect the tumor site
and extent of disease and may mimic other disorders, which can
result in a delayed diagnosis. Metastatic disease can cause a variety of signs and symptoms, including fever, irritability, failure to
thrive, bone pain, cytopenias, bluish subcutaneous nodules, orbital
proptosis, and periorbital ecchymoses (Fig. 547.1). Localized disease can manifest as an asymptomatic mass or can cause symptoms due to mass effect, which can in certain cases result in spinal
cord compression, bowel obstruction, and superior vena cava
syndrome.
Children with neuroblastoma can also present with associated
neurologic signs and symptoms (see Table 547.1). Neuroblastoma
originating in the superior cervical ganglion can result in Horner
syndrome. Paraspinal neuroblastoma tumors can invade the neural

foramina, causing spinal cord and nerve root compression. Neuroblastoma can also be associated with a paraneoplastic syndrome
of autoimmune origin, termed opsoclonus-­myoclonus-­ataxia syndrome, in which patients experience rapid, uncontrollable jerking eye and body movements, poor coordination, and cognitive
dysfunction. Some tumors produce catecholamines that can cause
increased sweating and hypertension, and some release vasoactive
intestinal peptide, causing a profound secretory diarrhea. Children
with extensive tumors can also experience tumor lysis syndrome
and disseminated intravascular coagulation. Infants younger than
18 months of age also can present in unique fashion, termed stage
MS (previously 4S; see later), with widespread subcutaneous tumor
nodules, massive liver involvement, limited bone marrow disease,
and a small primary tumor without bone involvement or other
metastases. The stage MS disease can spontaneously regress. The
enigmatic characteristics of neuroblastoma with paraneoplastic
syndromes and spontaneous regression under some circumstances
have led some researchers to suggest that neuroblastoma may originate as a neurodevelopmental disorder.

DIAGNOSIS

Fig. 547.1 Neuroblastoma. Periorbital ecchymosis, proptosis, and

subconjunctival hemorrhage of the left eye. (From Mota EB, Penna
CRR, Marchiori E. Metastatic dissemination of a neuroblastoma. J Pediatr. 2017;189:232–232.e1. Fig. 1.)

A

Neuroblastoma is usually discovered as a mass or multiple masses on
plain radiography, CT, or MRI (Fig. 547.2A). The mass often contains
calcification and hemorrhage that can allow it to be appreciated on
plain radiography or CT (Fig. 547.3). Prenatal diagnosis of perinatal
neuroblastoma on maternal ultrasound scans is sometimes possible.
Tumor markers, including catecholamine metabolites homovanillic
acid and vanillylmandelic acid, are elevated in the urine of approximately 95% of cases and help to confirm the diagnosis. A pathologic
diagnosis is established from tumor tissue obtained by biopsy. Neuroblastoma can be confirmed without a primary tumor biopsy if
small, round, blue tumor cells are observed in bone marrow samples
(Fig. 547.4) and the levels of vanillylmandelic acid or homovanillic acid
are elevated in the urine.
Evaluations for metastatic disease should include CT or MRI of the
chest and abdomen, bone scans to detect cortical bone involvement,
and at least two independent bone marrow aspirations and biopsies
to evaluate for marrow disease. Iodine-­123 metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-­MIBG) studies should be used when available to better
define the extent of disease. Some centers use gallium-­68 dotatate
PET/MRI or CT scans, especially if the MIBG scan is negative (Fig.
547.5). MRI of the spine should be performed in cases with suspected
or potential spinal cord compression, but imaging of the brain with

B

C

Fig. 547.2 A, CT scan of an abdominal neuroblastoma with central necrosis at diagnosis. B, Coronal fused CT and metaiodobenzylguanidine

(MIBG) image of the same child with extensive retroperitoneal mass and central necrosis, probably an adrenal primary with extensive lymph node
involvement. C, MIBG avid neuroblastoma with increased uptake of radiolabeled tracer can be detected in multiple sites of disease, including bone
and soft tissue.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 547 u Neuroblastoma 3129
either CT or MRI is not routinely performed unless dictated by the
clinical presentation.
The International Neuroblastoma Risk Group (INRG) Staging
System (INSS) is currently used to stage patients with neuroblastoma and is based on the extent of disease as determined by imaging
at diagnosis. Extent of locoregional disease is based on specific local
image-­defined risk factors (IDRFs) (see Table 547.3). L1 tumors (previously classified as INSS stage 1) are localized and confined to one body
compartment without any IDRFs. L2 tumors (previously classified as
INSS stages 2 and 3) refer to localized tumors with the presence of
IDRFs. Disseminated tumors with metastases to bones, bone marrow, liver, distant lymph nodes, and/or other organs are staged as M
(previously classified as INSS stage 4). Stage MS (previously stage

A

4S) refers to neuroblastoma in children younger than 18 months of
age with dissemination to liver, skin, and/or bone marrow without
bone involvement and with a primary tumor that would otherwise
be staged as L1 or L2. This new INSS was recently developed to
allow for more effective comparisons of treatments and outcomes
worldwide.

TREATMENT

Treatment strategies for neuroblastoma have changed with significant
reduction in treatment intensity for children who have localized low-­
risk tumors and with continued increased treatment intensity and the
addition of novel agents for treatment of children who have high risk
or recurrent disease. The patient’s age and tumor stage are combined
with cytogenetic and molecular features of the tumor to determine
the treatment risk group and estimated prognosis for each patient (see

B

Fig. 547.3 Neuroblastoma. CT images of the abdomen with coro-

nal (A) and sagittal (B) reconstructions showing a large low-­density
tumor in the right suprarenal region (arrowheads). Note the neoplastic calcifications inside the mass. (From Mota EB, Penna CRR,
Marchiori E. Metastatic dissemination of a neuroblastoma. J Pediatr.
2017;189:232–232.e1. Fig. 3.)

Fig. 547.4 Neuroblastoma cells aspirated from the bone marrow.

Clumps of cells often contain ≥3 cells with or without evidence of rosette formation. Rosettes of cells surrounding an inner mass of fibrillary
material are characteristic of neuroblastoma.

B

A

D

C

Fig. 547.5 Neuroblastoma. MRI and gallium-­68 DOTANOC PET/CT scan of chest and abdomen reveal a mass in left posterior mediastinum (likely
neuroblastoma). A, Coronal T1-­weighted postcontrast image (A) and axial T2-­weighted image (B) reveal a well-­defined isointense lesion (42 × 26 ×
27 mm) in the left posterior mediastinum extending from D7-­D11 vertebrae. C, PET/CT maximum intensity projection image shows increased uptake
in left lower thoracic paraspinal region. D, Axial fused PET-­CT image shows somatostatin-­receptor expressing mass (maximum standardized uptake
value, 21; arrow in A–D) in the same location. (From Kaur A, Bhagwat C, Madaan P, et al. Dancing eyes. J Pediatr. 2019;214:231.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3130 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Tables 547.2-­547.4). Treatment for children with low-­risk neuroblastoma typically includes surgery for stages L1 and L2 and observation
for asymptomatic stage MS with cure rates generally >90% without
further therapy. Treatment with chemotherapy or radiation for the
rare child with local recurrence can still be curative. Children with
spinal cord compression at diagnosis may require urgent treatment
with chemotherapy, surgery, or radiation to avoid neurologic damage.
Stage MS neuroblastomas have a very favorable prognosis, and many
regress spontaneously without therapy. Chemotherapy or resection of
the primary tumor does not improve survival rates, but for infants with
massive liver involvement and respiratory compromise, chemotherapy
or radiation is used to alleviate symptoms. For children with stage 4S
neuroblastoma who require treatment for symptoms, the survival rate
is 81%.
Treatment of intermediate-­risk neuroblastoma includes surgery,
chemotherapy, and, in some cases, radiation therapy. The chemotherapy usually includes moderate doses of cisplatin or carboplatin,
cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and doxorubicin given over several
months. Radiation therapy is used for tumors with incomplete
response to chemotherapy. Children with intermediate-­risk neuroblastoma, including children with L2 disease and infants with
M disease both with favorable characteristics, have an excellent
prognosis and >90% survival with this moderate treatment. In this
intermediate-­risk group, obtaining adequate diagnostic material for
determination of the underlying biologic features of the tumor, such
as the Shimada pathologic classification and MYCN gene amplification, is critical, so that children with unfavorable characteristics can
receive more-­aggressive treatment and those with favorable features
can be spared excessive toxic therapy.
Children with high-­
risk neuroblastoma historically have had
poor long-­term survival rates of 25–35% despite intensive treatment consisting of induction chemotherapy, high-­
dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue, surgery, radiation, and
13-­cis-­
retinoic acid. Induction chemotherapy for children with
high-­risk neuroblastoma includes combinations of cyclophosphamide, topotecan, doxorubicin, vincristine, cisplatin, and etoposide. After completion of induction chemotherapy, resection of the
residual primary tumor is followed by high-­dose chemotherapy
with autologous stem cell rescue and focal radiation therapy to
tumor sites. A national cooperative group trial demonstrated significantly better survival with chemotherapy plus autologous stem
cell rescue than with chemotherapy alone. The further addition of
the differentiating agent, 13-­cis-­retinoic acid, following autologous
stem cell transplantation, resulted in further improvements in survival rates. In addition, a national clinical trial has demonstrated
an increase in short-­term survival rates with the addition of the
monoclonal antibody ch14.18 (dinutuximab) to 13-­
cis-­retinoic
acid therapy. This monoclonal antibody targets a disialoganglioside, GD2, which has ubiquitous expression on neuroblastoma cells.
In this large, randomized, clinical trial of high-­risk neuroblastoma
patients sponsored by the Children’s Oncology Group, incorporation of the antibody into consolidative therapy following autologous
stem cell transplant improved the 2-­year event-­free survival from
46.5–66.5%. The incorporation of tandem autologous stem cell
transplant (two separate autologous stem cell transplants with differing conditioning regimens) may further improve outcomes for
patients with high-­risk disease.
Cases of high-­risk neuroblastoma are associated with frequent
relapses, and children with recurrent neuroblastoma have a <50%
response rate to alternative chemotherapy regimens. New treatment
strategies and agents are needed for children with both high-­risk
and recurrent neuroblastoma. Therapies currently under investigation include new chemotherapeutic agents as well as novel therapies
directed against critical intracellular signaling pathways, radiolabeled targeted agents (such as therapeutic 131I-­MIBG), immunotherapy, and antitumor vaccines.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 548

Neoplasms of the Kidney
548.1 Wilms Tumor
Najat C. Daw and Dristhi S. Ragoonanan
Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) is the most common primary malignant renal tumor of childhood. It is the second most common malignant abdominal tumor in childhood after neuroblastoma. The most
common sites of metastases are the lungs, regional lymph nodes, and
liver. Histologically, the classic Wilms tumor is made up of varying
proportions of blastemal, stromal, and epithelial cells, recapitulating stages of normal renal development. The use of multimodality
treatment and multi-­institutional cooperative group trials has dramatically improved the cure rate of Wilms tumor from <30% to >90%
(Table 548.1).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Wilms tumor accounts for 6% of pediatric malignancies and >95% of
kidney tumors in children. In the United States, incidence of Wilms
tumor is approximately 7 cases per 1 million children <15 years of age
per year, and about 650 new cases are diagnosed each year. Approximately 75% of the cases occur in children <5 years old, with a peak
incidence at 2-­3 years. It can arise in one or both kidneys; the incidence of bilateral Wilms tumors is 7%. The male/female ratio is 0.92
to 1 in unilateral disease and 0.6 to 1 in bilateral disease. Most cases
are sporadic, but approximately 2% of patients have a family history.
In 8–10% of patients, Wilms tumor is observed in the context of hemihypertrophy, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and a variety of rare
syndromes, including Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and
Denys-­Drash syndrome (Table 548.2). An earlier age at diagnosis and
an increased incidence of bilateral disease are generally observed in
syndromic and familial cases.

ETIOLOGY: GENETICS AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

Wilms tumor is thought to be derived from incompletely differentiated
renal mesenchyme, and tumors are typically composed of cells reminiscent of the undifferentiated and partially differentiated cells that
normally arise from renal mesenchyme. Foci of benign, undifferentiated mesenchyme (nephrogenic rests) that persist abnormally in the
kidney into postnatal life are observed in approximately 1% of children in the general population but are present in up to 90% of children
who have a family history of Wilms tumor, develop bilateral tumors,
or display features of Wilms tumor–related syndromes. Nephrogenic
rests usually regress or differentiate, but those that persist can become
malignant.
Wilms tumor has been associated with genetic abnormalities. The
first identified Wilms tumor gene, WT1, located at 11p13, is a homozygous gene variant in 10–15% of tumors, resulting in loss of function
of the encoded zinc finger transcription factor. The majority of WT1
pathogenic variants are somatic; however, WT1 pathogenic variants
can also be germline. The type of WT1 pathogenic variant affects the
disease phenotype. Germline truncating variants are usually associated
with Wilms tumor in the context of genitourinary anomalies or the
WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies,
mental retardation) as it involves the deletion of several contiguous
genes at 11p13. Missense germline variants are usually observed in
children with Denys-­Drash syndrome, resulting in early-­onset renal
failure. In instances of germline variant, the wild-­type allele present
in the germline is altered or lost in the tumor, resulting in loss of WT1
function.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3130 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Tables 547.2-­547.4). Treatment for children with low-­risk neuroblastoma typically includes surgery for stages L1 and L2 and observation
for asymptomatic stage MS with cure rates generally >90% without
further therapy. Treatment with chemotherapy or radiation for the
rare child with local recurrence can still be curative. Children with
spinal cord compression at diagnosis may require urgent treatment
with chemotherapy, surgery, or radiation to avoid neurologic damage.
Stage MS neuroblastomas have a very favorable prognosis, and many
regress spontaneously without therapy. Chemotherapy or resection of
the primary tumor does not improve survival rates, but for infants with
massive liver involvement and respiratory compromise, chemotherapy
or radiation is used to alleviate symptoms. For children with stage 4S
neuroblastoma who require treatment for symptoms, the survival rate
is 81%.
Treatment of intermediate-­risk neuroblastoma includes surgery,
chemotherapy, and, in some cases, radiation therapy. The chemotherapy usually includes moderate doses of cisplatin or carboplatin,
cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and doxorubicin given over several
months. Radiation therapy is used for tumors with incomplete
response to chemotherapy. Children with intermediate-­risk neuroblastoma, including children with L2 disease and infants with
M disease both with favorable characteristics, have an excellent
prognosis and >90% survival with this moderate treatment. In this
intermediate-­risk group, obtaining adequate diagnostic material for
determination of the underlying biologic features of the tumor, such
as the Shimada pathologic classification and MYCN gene amplification, is critical, so that children with unfavorable characteristics can
receive more-­aggressive treatment and those with favorable features
can be spared excessive toxic therapy.
Children with high-­
risk neuroblastoma historically have had
poor long-­term survival rates of 25–35% despite intensive treatment consisting of induction chemotherapy, high-­
dose chemotherapy with autologous stem cell rescue, surgery, radiation, and
13-­cis-­
retinoic acid. Induction chemotherapy for children with
high-­risk neuroblastoma includes combinations of cyclophosphamide, topotecan, doxorubicin, vincristine, cisplatin, and etoposide. After completion of induction chemotherapy, resection of the
residual primary tumor is followed by high-­dose chemotherapy
with autologous stem cell rescue and focal radiation therapy to
tumor sites. A national cooperative group trial demonstrated significantly better survival with chemotherapy plus autologous stem
cell rescue than with chemotherapy alone. The further addition of
the differentiating agent, 13-­cis-­retinoic acid, following autologous
stem cell transplantation, resulted in further improvements in survival rates. In addition, a national clinical trial has demonstrated
an increase in short-­term survival rates with the addition of the
monoclonal antibody ch14.18 (dinutuximab) to 13-­
cis-­retinoic
acid therapy. This monoclonal antibody targets a disialoganglioside, GD2, which has ubiquitous expression on neuroblastoma cells.
In this large, randomized, clinical trial of high-­risk neuroblastoma
patients sponsored by the Children’s Oncology Group, incorporation of the antibody into consolidative therapy following autologous
stem cell transplant improved the 2-­year event-­free survival from
46.5–66.5%. The incorporation of tandem autologous stem cell
transplant (two separate autologous stem cell transplants with differing conditioning regimens) may further improve outcomes for
patients with high-­risk disease.
Cases of high-­risk neuroblastoma are associated with frequent
relapses, and children with recurrent neuroblastoma have a <50%
response rate to alternative chemotherapy regimens. New treatment
strategies and agents are needed for children with both high-­risk
and recurrent neuroblastoma. Therapies currently under investigation include new chemotherapeutic agents as well as novel therapies
directed against critical intracellular signaling pathways, radiolabeled targeted agents (such as therapeutic 131I-­MIBG), immunotherapy, and antitumor vaccines.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 548

Neoplasms of the Kidney
548.1 Wilms Tumor
Najat C. Daw and Dristhi S. Ragoonanan
Wilms tumor (nephroblastoma) is the most common primary malignant renal tumor of childhood. It is the second most common malignant abdominal tumor in childhood after neuroblastoma. The most
common sites of metastases are the lungs, regional lymph nodes, and
liver. Histologically, the classic Wilms tumor is made up of varying
proportions of blastemal, stromal, and epithelial cells, recapitulating stages of normal renal development. The use of multimodality
treatment and multi-­institutional cooperative group trials has dramatically improved the cure rate of Wilms tumor from <30% to >90%
(Table 548.1).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Wilms tumor accounts for 6% of pediatric malignancies and >95% of
kidney tumors in children. In the United States, incidence of Wilms
tumor is approximately 7 cases per 1 million children <15 years of age
per year, and about 650 new cases are diagnosed each year. Approximately 75% of the cases occur in children <5 years old, with a peak
incidence at 2-­3 years. It can arise in one or both kidneys; the incidence of bilateral Wilms tumors is 7%. The male/female ratio is 0.92
to 1 in unilateral disease and 0.6 to 1 in bilateral disease. Most cases
are sporadic, but approximately 2% of patients have a family history.
In 8–10% of patients, Wilms tumor is observed in the context of hemihypertrophy, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and a variety of rare
syndromes, including Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and
Denys-­Drash syndrome (Table 548.2). An earlier age at diagnosis and
an increased incidence of bilateral disease are generally observed in
syndromic and familial cases.

ETIOLOGY: GENETICS AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

Wilms tumor is thought to be derived from incompletely differentiated
renal mesenchyme, and tumors are typically composed of cells reminiscent of the undifferentiated and partially differentiated cells that
normally arise from renal mesenchyme. Foci of benign, undifferentiated mesenchyme (nephrogenic rests) that persist abnormally in the
kidney into postnatal life are observed in approximately 1% of children in the general population but are present in up to 90% of children
who have a family history of Wilms tumor, develop bilateral tumors,
or display features of Wilms tumor–related syndromes. Nephrogenic
rests usually regress or differentiate, but those that persist can become
malignant.
Wilms tumor has been associated with genetic abnormalities. The
first identified Wilms tumor gene, WT1, located at 11p13, is a homozygous gene variant in 10–15% of tumors, resulting in loss of function
of the encoded zinc finger transcription factor. The majority of WT1
pathogenic variants are somatic; however, WT1 pathogenic variants
can also be germline. The type of WT1 pathogenic variant affects the
disease phenotype. Germline truncating variants are usually associated
with Wilms tumor in the context of genitourinary anomalies or the
WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies,
mental retardation) as it involves the deletion of several contiguous
genes at 11p13. Missense germline variants are usually observed in
children with Denys-­Drash syndrome, resulting in early-­onset renal
failure. In instances of germline variant, the wild-­type allele present
in the germline is altered or lost in the tumor, resulting in loss of WT1
function.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 548 u Neoplasms of the Kidney

3131

Table 548.1  Treatment and Four-­Year Outcomes for Patients with Wilms Tumor
STUDY

EFS (%)

OS (%)

NWTS-­5

Stage I or II FH; no LOH

STAGE/HISTOLOGY

Regimen EE4A

91

98

COG AREN0532

Stage I FH (age <24 mo, tumor
weight <550 g)

Nephrectomy alone

90

100

Stage I or II FH; +LOH

Regimen DD4A

87

100

Stage III FH; no LOH

Regimen DD4A
Flank radiation*

88

97

Stage III or IV FH; +LOH

Regimen M
Radiation to flank per local stage
Radiation to metastatic sites

90

96

Stage IV FH with lung metastases only and complete
response at 6 weeks; no LOH

Regimen DD4A
Radiation to flank per local stage
Omit radiation to whole lung

80

96

Stage IV FH with lung metastases only and incomplete
response at 6 weeks; no LOH

Regimen M
Radiation to flank per local stage
Radiation to whole lung

89

95

COG AREN0534

Stage V FH

Chemotherapy
Radiation per local stage

82

95

COG AREN0321

Stage I FA + DA

Regimen DD4A
Radiation to flank

100

100

Stage II DA

Regimen UH-­1
Radiation to flank

87

86

Stage III DA

Regimen UH-­1
Radiation to flank*

81

89

Stage IV DA

Regimen UH-­1/UH-­2
Radiation to flank per local stage
Radiation to metastatic sites

42

49

Stage V DA

Chemotherapy
Radiation to flank per local stage
Radiation to metastatic sites

58

68

Unilateral Wilms tumor with
bilateral predisposition

EE4A followed by treatment per stage/
histology
Radiation to flank per local stage

94

100

COG AREN0533

COG AREN0534

TREATMENT

*Whole-­abdomen radiation therapy indicated for patients with diffuse intraperitoneal tumor rupture, peritoneal tumor seeding, and cytology-­positive ascites
NWTS-­5, National Wilms Tumor Study-­5; COG, Children’s Oncology Group; EFS, event-­free survival; OS, overall survival; FH, favorable histology; LOH, loss of heterozygosity at both
1p and 16q; FA, focal anaplasia; DA, diffuse anaplasia; EE4A, vincristine/dactinomycin × 19 weeks; DD4A, vincristine/dactinomycin/doxorubicin × 25 weeks; M, vincristine/dactinomycin/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide/etoposide × 31 weeks; revised UH-­1, vincristine/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide/carboplatin/etoposide × 30 weeks; revised UH-­2, revised
UH-­1 with vincristine/irinotecan × 36 weeks.

Table 548.2  Wilms Tumor Predisposing Conditions
SYNDROME

GENETIC LESION

WT1-­ASSOCIATED WILMS TUMOR PREDISPOSITION SYNDROMES
Denys-­Drash syndrome (DDS)
WT1 pathogenic variant affecting
exon 8 or 9

ESTIMATED WT RISK

PHENOTYPE

∼75%

Ambiguous genitalia, diffuse mesangial
sclerosis

Frasier syndrome

WT1 pathogenic variant affecting
intron 9 donor splice site

Low; 1 case reported

Ambiguous genitalia, streak gonads, focal
segmental glomerulosclerosis

WAGR syndrome (Wilms tumor,
aniridia, genital anomalies,
retardation)

Deletion of 11p13 containing WT1

∼50%

Aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, delayed-­
onset renal failure

WT1-­associated WT
predisposition

WT1 pathogenic variant

∼30%

Median age at WT diagnosis is 1.3 yr (range:
0.6-­4.5)

OTHER SYNDROMES THAT PREDISPOSE TO WILMS TUMOR
Beckwith-­Wiedemann
LOM at maternal IC2 at 11p15.5
syndrome (BWS)
GOM at maternal IC1 at 11p15.5
Paternal UPD at 11p15.5
Pathogenic variant in CDKN1C
Negative molecular test

∼0.2%
∼24%
∼8%
∼1.4%
∼4%

Organomegaly, large birth weight, macroglossia,
omphalocele, hemihypertrophy, ear pits and
creases, neonatal hypoglycemia

Bloom syndrome

∼3%

Short stature, microcephaly, growth deficiency,
immune abnormalities, sensitivity to sunlight

Biallelic BLM pathogenic variants

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3132 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 548.2  Wilms Tumor Predisposing Conditions—cont’d
SYNDROME

GENETIC LESION

ESTIMATED WT RISK

PHENOTYPE

Fanconi anemia

Biallelic BRCA2 or PALB2
pathogenic variants

20–40%

Short stature, abnormal skin pigmentation,
skeletal malformations, microcephaly, bone
marrow failure

Hyperparathyroid-­jaw tumor
syndrome

CDC73 pathogenic variant

∼3%

Primary hyperparathyroidism, ossifying
fibroma of the maxilla and/or mandible

Mosaic variegated aneuploidy

Biallelic BUB1B or TRIP13
pathogenic variants

>85%

Microcephaly, growth deficiency, developmental
delay, eye anomalies, mild dysmorphism

Perlman syndrome

Biallelic DIS3L2 pathogenic
variants

∼65%

Organomegaly, large birth weight,
developmental delay

Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel syndrome

GPC3 pathogenic variant

4–9%

Overgrowth, congenital heart defects

CLOVES syndrome

PIK3CA pathogenic variant

<5%

Congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular
malformations, epidermal nevi, scoliosis/
skeletal/spine anomalies

Sotos syndrome

NSD1 pathogenic variant

<5%

Cerebral giantism, macrocephaly,
intellectual disability, advanced bone age,
poor coordination

Trisomy 18

Trisomy 18

<5%

Cognitive impairment, hypertonia,
overlapping fingers, congenital heart
disease, micrognathia

GENETIC VARIANTS THAT PREDISPOSE TO NONSYNDROMIC WILMS TUMOR
CTR9-­associated WT
CTR9 pathogenic variant
4 families reported;
predisposition
9/14 individuals with a
pathogenic CTR9
variant developed WT

Median age at WT diagnosis is 1.3 yr (range:
0.6-­3.3). All reported variants are paternally
inherited

DICER1 syndrome

DICER1 pathogenic variant

Low; 5 families in which
6/22 individuals with a
pathogenic DICER1
variant developed WT

Lung cysts, cystic nephroma, nodular
hyperplasia of the thyroid, nasal
chondromesenchymal hamartoma, ciliary
body medulloepithelioma and increased
cancer risks including pleuropulmonary
blastoma (PPB), ovarian sex cord-­stromal
tumors, pineoblastoma, and pituitary blastoma

Li-­Fraumeni syndrome (LFS)

TP53 pathogenic variant

Low; 12 cases reported

Around 50% of individuals with LFS develop
cancer by the age of 30 yr, with a lifetime risk
of >70% The tumors most closely associated
with LFS include soft tissue sarcomas,
osteosarcoma, premenopausal breast cancer,
brain tumors, and adrenocortical carcinoma

REST-­associated WT
predisposition

REST pathogenic variant

4 families reported;
7/14 individuals with
a pathogenic REST
variant developed WT
Ten presumed sporadic
cases reported

Median age at WT diagnosis is 3 yr (range:
0.5-­6)
Other clinical features reported include
primary ovarian failure, café-­au-­lait macules,
and mild developmental delay

TRIM28-­associated WT
predisposition

TRIM28 pathogenic variant

9 families reported; 18/24
individuals with a pathogenic TRIM28 variant
developed WT; however,
few unaffected family
members were tested
17 presumed sporadic
cases reported

Median age at WT diagnosis is 1.1 yr (range:
0.4-­9.8)
All reported variants are maternally inherited
Histology is frequently epithelial type

GOM, Gain of methylation; IC, imprinting center; LOM, loss of methylation; UPD, uniparental disomy; WT, Wilms tumor.
Modified from Maciaszek JL, Oak N, Nichols KE. Recent advances in Wilms’ tumor predisposition. Hum Mole Genetics. 2020;29(R2):R138–R149. Table 1, p. R139–R140.

Consistent with the etiology of Wilms tumor being grounded in
aberrant kidney development, genes that regulate the proliferation
and differentiation of kidney progenitors have been identified to be
mutated in tumors. One class of genes that encodes proteins essential
for the biogenesis of mature miRNAs are altered in one fifth to one
third of Wilms tumors. These include DROSHA missense variants that
occur in approximately 10% of tumors, and DICER, DGCR8, XPO5, and

TARBP2 variants. Of note, germline DICER1 variants are observed,
albeit infrequently, in Wilms tumor families and, more frequently, in
families with pleuropulmonary blastoma (see Table 548.2).
The Wnt signaling pathway plays a critical role in regulating the
differentiation of the fetal kidney. Somatic pathogenic variants in
CTNNB1 and WTX, both of which play a role in the Wnt pathway regulation, are observed in approximately 15% and 20% of Wilms tumors,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 548 u Neoplasms of the Kidney

3133

Table 548.3  Differential Diagnosis of Abdominal and Pelvic Tumors in Children
TUMOR

PATIENT AGE

CLINICAL SIGNS

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Wilms tumor

Preschool

Unilateral flank mass, aniridia,
hemihypertrophy

Hematuria, polycythemia, thrombocytosis,
elevated partial thromboplastin time

Neuroblastoma

Preschool

Gastrointestinal/genitourinary obstruction,
raccoon eyes, myoclonus-­opsoclonus,
diarrhea, skin nodules

Increased urinary vanillylmandelic acid,
homovanillic acid, or ferritin; stippled
calcification in the mass

Non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma

>1 yr

Intussusception in >2 yr old

Increased lactate dehydrogenase; blood
cytopenia caused by bone marrow involvement

Rhabdomyosarcoma

All

Gastrointestinal/genitourinary obstruction,
abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding,
paratesticular mass

Hypercalcemia; blood cytopenia caused by
bone marrow involvement

Germ cell tumor/
teratoma

Preschool, teenage

Females: Abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding
Males: Testicular mass, new-­onset hydrocele,
sacrococcygeal mass/dimple

Increased β-­human chorionic gonadotropin,
increased α-­fetoprotein

Hepatoblastoma

Birth-­3 yr

Right upper quadrant mass, jaundice
Early puberty in males

Increased α-­fetoprotein

Hepatocellular
carcinoma

School age, teenage

Right upper quadrant mass, jaundice, hepatitis
B, cirrhosis

Increased α-­fetoprotein

respectively. Somatic variants in genes that are critical for regulating
progenitor proliferation and differentiation (MYCN, SIX1, and SIX2)
are observed in approximately 10% of tumors. Other somatic variants,
including MLLT1, ARID1A, and SMARCA4, occur at a frequency of
approximately 4–5% each. Importantly a somatic variant of the p53
gene, TP53, is observed in approximately 5% of tumors and is associated with anaplastic tumor histology, a poor prognostic feature of
Wilms tumor.
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH; usually copy number neutral) or loss
of imprinting at imprinted loci at 11p15 is observed in approximately
70% of Wilms tumors. This epigenetic alteration often results in biallelic
expression of IGF2, a normally imprinted gene that encodes insulin-­
like growth factor 2, in addition to the loss of imprinting of other 11p15
genes. BWS, a somatic overgrowth syndrome with predisposition to
embryonal tumors (including Wilms tumor), has been linked to 11p15,
and microdeletions within the IGF2 imprinting control region are
present in BWS families in whom Wilms tumor is observed.
Allelic imbalances have been identified in Wilms tumors, particularly LOH at 1p and 16q, which has been associated with increased risk
of recurrence. Gain of chromosome 1q was found to be associated with
inferior survival in unilateral favorable-­histology Wilms tumor.
In patients with a family history of Wilms tumor, predisposition
is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance. Predisposition to other tumor types or other phenotypes is not
observed in most of these families. Germline pathogenic variants have
been identified in a minority of families, and each of those genes identified (e.g., WT1, DICER1, MYCN, REST, BRCA2) is altered in <5% of
Wilms tumor families.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

The most common initial clinical presentation for Wilms tumor is the
incidental discovery of an asymptomatic abdominal mass by parents
while bathing or clothing an affected child or by a physician during a
routine physical examination (Table 548.3). At presentation, the mass
can be quite large, because retroperitoneal masses can grow unhampered by strict anatomic boundaries. Functional defects in paired
organs such as the kidney, with good functional reserve, are also
unlikely to be detected early. Physical exam findings include a firm,
nontender, smooth abdominal mass that rarely crosses the midline.
Care should be taken to avoid vigorous palpation to prevent the risk
of renal capsule rupture. Children with direct access to pediatricians
vs generalists as primary caregivers are more likely to be diagnosed
early and to have smaller tumors and less advanced stage at diagnosis.

Hypertension is present in about 25% of patients at presentation and
has been attributed to increased renin activity. Abdominal pain (40%),
gross painless hematuria (18%), and constitutional symptoms such as
fever, anorexia, and weight loss are other findings at diagnosis. Occasionally, rapid abdominal enlargement and anemia occur because of
bleeding into the renal parenchyma or pelvis. Wilms tumor thrombus
extends into the inferior vena cava (IVC) in 4–10% of patients and
rarely into the right atrium; dislodgment of the intravascular tumor
may produce a fatal occlusive pulmonary embolism. Patients might
also have microcytic anemia from iron deficiency or anemia of chronic
disease, polycythemia, elevated platelet count, and acquired deficiency
of von Willebrand factor or factor VII deficiency.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

An abdominal mass in a child should be considered malignant until
diagnostic imaging, laboratory findings, and pathology can define its
true nature (see Table 548.3). Imaging studies include plain abdominal radiography, abdominal ultrasonography (US), and CT of the
abdomen to define the intrarenal origin of the mass and differentiate
it from adrenal masses (e.g., neuroblastoma) and other masses in the
abdomen. Abdominal US helps differentiate solid from cystic masses.
Wilms tumor might show focal areas of necrosis or hemorrhage and
hydronephrosis because of obstruction of the renal pelvis by the tumor.
US with Doppler imaging of renal veins and the IVC is a useful first
study to identify Wilms tumor, evaluate the collecting system, and
demonstrate tumor thrombi in the renal veins and IVC. However, its
routine use after CT has been performed is not required.
CT is useful to define the extent of the disease, integrity of the contralateral kidney, and metastasis (Figs. 548.1 and 548.2). MRI requires
sedation in young children and is not routinely used. However, MRI
may be helpful in defining an extensive tumor thrombus that extends
up to the level of the hepatic veins, or even into the right atrium, and
to distinguish Wilms tumor from nephrogenic rests. Chest CT is more
sensitive than chest radiography to screen for pulmonary metastasis and is preferably performed before surgery because effusions and
atelectasis can confound the interpretation of postoperative imaging
studies. A bone scan is performed if the histologic diagnosis confirms
clear cell sarcoma of the kidney (CCSK) or rhabdoid tumor of the kidney, to look for bone metastasis. Brain imaging with CT or MRI is also
obtained in cases of clear cell sarcoma or rhabdoid tumor of the kidney
because these tumors can spread to the brain.
Wilms tumor lesions are metabolically active and concentrate fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). Regional spread and metastatic lesions can

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3134 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 548.4  Children’s Oncology Group Staging of Wilms
Tumor
STAGE

Tumor confined to the kidney and completely resected
Renal capsule or sinus vessels not involved
Tumor not ruptured or biopsied
Regional lymph nodes examined and negative

II

Tumor extends beyond the kidney but is completely
resected with negative margins and lymph nodes
At least one of the following has occurred: (a) penetration of renal capsule, (b) invasion of renal sinus vessels

III

Residual tumor present following surgery confined to
the abdomen, including gross or microscopic tumor;
spillage of tumor preoperatively or intraoperatively;
biopsy prior to nephrectomy, regional lymph node
metastases; tumor implants on the peritoneal surface;
extension of tumor thrombus into the inferior vena
cava, including thoracic vena cava and heart

IV

Hematogenous metastases (lung, liver, bone, brain,
etc.) or lymph node metastases outside the
abdominopelvic region

V

Bilateral renal involvement by tumor

Fig. 548.1 Large heterogeneous Wilms tumor in left kidney. The re-

sidual renal parenchyma is displaced medially (arrows). (From Haaga
JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body. 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 54-­84, p. 1816.)

Fig. 548.2 Multicentric and bilateral Wilms tumors. The tumors have a

low density and compress residual enhancing renal tissue. (From Haaga
JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body. 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 54-­86, p. 1817.)

be visualized on PET/CT scanning. The diagnosis is usually made by
imaging studies and confirmed by histology at the time of nephrectomy. Although biopsy is a reliable diagnostic tool, it is discouraged
because it results in disease upstaging according to the Children’s
Oncology Group (COG) staging system. A core needle biopsy obtained
through a posterior approach (to limit contamination of the peritoneal cavity) should be performed in cases of unusual presentation (>10
years old, signs of infection, inflammation) or unusual imaging findings (significant adenopathy, no renal parenchyma seen, intratumoral
calcification).
Patients with Wilms tumor associated syndromes should undergo
routine screening with serial abdominal US to allow for early detection
and treatment.

TREATMENT

The COG protocols and the International Society of Pediatric Oncology (SIOP) protocols differ in their initial treatment approach. COG
advocates upfront surgery prior to initiating treatment, whereas SIOP
recommends preoperative chemotherapy. Each approach has advantages
and limitations, but they have similar outcomes. Early surgery provides
accurate diagnosis and staging and can facilitate risk-­adapted therapy.
Preoperative chemotherapy can make surgery easier and reduces the
risk of intraoperative tumor rupture and hemorrhage. Surgery entails

DESCRIPTION

I

a radical nephrectomy, with meticulous dissection to avoid rupture
of the tumor capsule, and lymph node sampling despite the absence
of abnormal nodes on preoperative imaging studies or intraoperative
assessment. Partial nephrectomy is performed in patients with bilateral
disease or those with unilateral Wilms tumor and predisposing syndrome such as the Denys-­Drash and WAGR syndromes to minimize
the risk of future renal failure.
Prognostic factors for risk-­adapted therapy include age, stage, histology, tumor weight, LOH at chromosomes 1p and 16q, and metastatic lung nodule response (Table 548.4). Histology plays a major role
in risk stratification of Wilms tumor. Absence of anaplasia is considered a favorable histologic finding. Presence of anaplasia is further
classified as focal or diffuse, both of which are unfavorable histologic
findings.
The COG has very specific drug dose and schedule recommendations
for risk-­adapted treatment of Wilms tumor. Patients with favorable-­
histology Wilms tumor have a good outcome and are generally treated
in the outpatient setting. Nephrectomy alone is sufficient for patients
with very low risk disease (<2 years old with stage I disease and a tumor
weight <550 g), resulting in a 4-­year event-­free survival of 90% and
a 4-­year overall survival of 100%. Patients with stage I and II disease
receive chemotherapy with two drugs, vincristine and actinomycin D
(also called dactinomycin), every 1-­3 weeks for a total of 18 weeks (regimen EE4A). Patients with stage III or stage IV disease receive chemotherapy with three drugs (vincristine, doxorubicin, and actinomycin
D) every 1-­3 weeks for a total of 24 weeks (regimen DD4A) and radiation therapy. Patients with regional lymph node metastases, residual
disease after surgery, or tumor rupture receive radiation therapy to
the flank or abdomen, and those with lung metastases receive radiation therapy to the lungs. Rapid response of lung metastases to chemotherapy may eliminate the need for lung radiation. In patients with
stage III or stage IV disease and LOH at both 1p and 16q or in those
with lung metastases only who have incomplete response at 6 weeks of
DD4A, therapy is augmented by adding cyclophosphamide/etoposide
to DD4A (Regimen M). The LOH of both 1p and 16q and gain of 1q
confers an adverse prognosis and deserves treatment intensification.
For patients with bilateral Wilms tumor, three-­drug preoperative
chemotherapy, surgical resection within 12 weeks of diagnosis, and
histology-­
based postoperative therapy improves survival outcomes
and feasibility of nephron-­sparing surgery.
Anaplastic histology (focal and diffuse) accounts for approximately
11% of Wilms tumor cases. Patients with diffuse anaplasia have worse
outcome than patients with favorable histology and receive more

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 548 u Neoplasms of the Kidney
intensive therapy. Patients with stage 1 anaplastic Wilms tumor treated
with regimen DD4A and flank radiation had excellent survival outcomes. Patients with stage II-­IV disease are treated more intensively
with multiagent chemotherapy including vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, etoposide, carboplatin, and irinotecan, in addition
to radiotherapy. Despite some improvement in survival outcomes,
patients with stage IV disease continue to fare poorly.

RECURRENT DISEASE

Approximately 15% of favorable-­
histology and 50% of anaplastic-­
histology Wilms tumors relapse; most relapses occur early (within 2
years of diagnosis). Factors associated with a favorable outcome after
relapse include low stage (I/II) at diagnosis, treatment with vincristine and actinomycin D only, no prior radiotherapy, favorable histology, relapse to lung only, and interval from nephrectomy to relapse
≥12 months. Patients with recurrent Wilms tumor who previously
received only vincristine and actinomycin D had a 4-­year survival of
approximately 80%, whereas those who previously received the three-­drug
regimen of vincristine, actinomycin D, and doxorubicin had a 4-­year
survival of only 50%. Other agents used to treat recurrent Wilms tumor
include doxorubicin, carboplatin, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, etoposide, irinotecan, and topotecan. Metachronous Wilms tumor may
not represent tumor relapse but development of a new tumor in the
opposite kidney.

PROGNOSIS

Despite some adverse risk factors that decrease prognosis (presence of
metastasis, unfavorable histology, recurrent disease, incomplete lung
nodule response at 6 weeks of chemotherapy, LOH of both 1p and 16q
and gain of 1q), most children with Wilms tumor have a very favorable
prognosis. Overall survival of children with Wilms tumor exceeds 90%,
with some prognostic factors (low stage, favorable histology, young
age, low tumor weight) conferring even better outcomes. Wilms tumor
tops the list of common pediatric solid tumors in terms of favorable
outcome.

LATE EFFECTS

Current strategies are successful with relatively few long-­term effects
of therapy. Generally, late complications are a consequence of treatment type and intensity; the use of radiotherapy and anthracyclines
increase the risk of these complications. Clinically significant late
sequelae include musculoskeletal effects, cardiac toxicity, pulmonary
disease, reproductive problems, renal dysfunction, and development of
second malignant neoplasms such as leukemia and cancer of the digestive organs and breast (in females).

548.2 Other Pediatric Renal Tumors
Najat C. Daw and Dristhi S. Ragoonanan

MESOBLASTIC NEPHROMA

Mesoblastic nephroma is the most common solid renal tumor identified in the neonatal period and the most frequent benign renal tumor in
childhood. It represents approximately 5% of all pediatric renal tumors.
ETV6-­NTRK3 fusion pathogenic variant is the most common molecular alteration seen in these tumors. Many cases are diagnosed with prenatal US and can manifest as polyhydramnios, hydrops, and premature
delivery. Most patients are diagnosed before 3 months of age, whereas
Wilms tumor is rarely diagnosed before 6 months. Male/female ratio is
1.5:1. Radical nephrectomy is the treatment of choice and may be sufficient by itself. Local recurrence is uncommon. Although rare, malignant variants do occur, marked by metastases to the lung, liver, heart,
and brain.

3135

CLEAR CELL SARCOMA OF THE KIDNEY

CCSK is an uncommon renal neoplasm of childhood, with approximately 20 new cases diagnosed each year in North America. Peak incidence is between 1 and 4 years of age with a male/female ratio of 2:1. It
usually presents with abdominal distention, abdominal mass, or gross
hematuria. Gene expression profiles of CCSK suggest the cell of origin to be a renal mesenchymal cell with neural markers, and BCOR
gene duplication is the most common molecular alteration seen. Bone
is the most common site of distant metastasis, followed by lung, abdomen, retroperitoneum, brain, and liver. Therefore the staging workup
should include a bone scan. With modern therapy, patients with stage
I and II disease have an excellent prognosis (4-­year overall survival of
97–100%), whereas those with stage III and IV disease have a 4-­year
overall survival of 89% and 45%, respectively.

RHABDOID TUMOR OF THE KIDNEY

Malignant rhabdoid tumor of the kidney (MRTK) has rhabdomyoblast-­
like morphology and is a rare but aggressive cancer. The median age
of presentation is 11 months, and hematuria is a common presenting
feature. Both rhabdoid tumor of the kidney and central nervous system
(CNS) atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors have deletions and pathogenic variants of the SMARCB1/hSNF5/INI1 gene and are considered
related. Germline pathogenic variants in SMARCA4 or SMARCB1 have
been linked to rhabdoid tumor predisposition syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder that results in the increased risk of developing
rhabdoid tumors predominantly in infants and children younger than
3 years of age. MRTKs tend to metastasize to the lungs and brain. Prognosis is poor with current therapeutic protocols. Younger age at diagnosis, advanced-­stage disease, and CNS involvement are associated
with a worse prognosis. The outcome of patients with MRTK is poor.
Both the 4-­year relapse-­free survival and overall survival for patients
treated on the National Wilms Tumor Study-­5 (NWTS-­5) were 50% for
stage I, 33% for stages II and III, and 21% for stage IV.

RENAL CELL CARCINOMA

Although renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most prevalent renal
tumor in adults, it is extremely rare in children, accounting for <10%
of pediatric renal tumors. The annual incidence rate is approximately
four cases per 1 million children. Although Wilms tumor is the predominant renal tumor in childhood, it is rare past early childhood, and
RCC is the most prevalent renal malignancy during the second decade
of life. Several genetic disorders are associated with a predisposition
to RCC, including von Hippel-­Lindau disease, tuberous sclerosis, and
hereditary leiomyomatosis. The most common subtype of RCC in children, the translocation-­type RCC, is characterized by translocations
most frequently involving the TFE3 gene on chromosome Xp11.2 or
the TFEB gene on chromosome 6p21. Renal medullary carcinoma is
seen typically in young patients with sickle cell trait.
Children with RCC may present with frank hematuria, flank pain,
and/or a palpable mass, although RCC can be asymptomatic and
detected incidentally. RCC has a propensity to metastasize to the lungs,
liver, and bone. Although local lymph node involvement is a poor
prognostic indicator in adult RCC, the importance of nodal status in
pediatric RCC is controversial. Nephrectomy alone may be adequate
for early-­stage RCC. Along with surgery, there is no established optimal treatment for childhood RCC; neither chemotherapy nor radiation therapy has demonstrated significant activity. Localized pediatric
RCC has an excellent outcome without adjuvant therapy; however,
the outcomes remain poor for metastatic RCC and renal medullary
carcinoma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3136 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Pathogenesis

Chapter 549

Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Wendy A. Allen-­Rhoades and
Carola A.S. Arndt
The annual incidence of soft tissue sarcomas is 11 cases per 1 million
children younger than 14 years of age and 17.4 cases per 1 million adolescents age 15-­19 years. Rhabdomyosarcoma accounts for more than
50% of soft tissue sarcomas. The prognosis most strongly correlates with
age and extent of disease at diagnosis, primary tumor site and histology,
and presence of translocations involving the FOXO1 and PAX genes.

RHABDOMYOSARCOMA
Epidemiology

The most common pediatric soft tissue sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma,
accounts for approximately 3.5% of childhood cancers. These tumors
may occur at any anatomic site (Table 549.1) including the head and
neck, orbit, genitourinary tract, and extremities; retroperitoneal and
other sites account for the remainder of primary sites. The incidence
at each anatomic site is related to both patient age and tumor type.
Extremity lesions are more likely to occur in older children and to have
alveolar histology and harbor a fusion oncoprotein. Rhabdomyosarcoma occurs with increased frequency in patients with neurofibromatosis, Costello syndrome, and other family cancer predisposition
syndromes such as Li-­Fraumeni syndrome (Table 549.2).
Table 549.1  	Common Presenting Signs and Symptoms
by Primary Site
PRIMARY SITE (%)

SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS

Head and neck (40%)

Painless or painful swelling
Proptosis
Ptosis
Ophthalmoplegia
Headache
Vomiting
Cranial nerve palsy
Other cranial nerve palsies
Nasal discharge
Nasal/sinus congestion
Trismus
Systemic hypertension

Limbs/trunk (30%)

Asymptomatic swelling

Genitourinary tract/pelvis (20%)

Painless scrotal lesions
Hematuria
Urinary retention/dribbling
Vulval nodule
Polypoid vaginal lesions
Vaginal bleeding/discharge
Constipation

Abdomen/liver/biliary (∼10%)

Metastatic disease (20% at
diagnosis)
Bone
Bone marrow
Lung
Lymph nodes

Asymptomatic swelling
Abdominal pain
Intestinal obstruction
Jaundice
Cholangitis
Otherwise unexplained:
Poor feeding
Seizures
Pain
Irritability
Pancytopenia

Modified from Rogers TN, Dasgupta R. Management of rhabdomyosarcoma in pediatric patients. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2021;30(2):339–353. Table 2.

Rhabdomyosarcoma is thought to arise from the same embryonic
mesenchyme as striated skeletal muscle although a large percentage of these tumors arise in areas lacking skeletal muscle (e.g., bladder, prostate, vagina). On the basis of light microscopic appearance,
it belongs to the general category of small, round, blue cell tumors
that includes Ewing sarcoma, neuroblastoma, and non-­
Hodgkin
lymphoma. Definitive diagnosis of a pathologic specimen requires
immunohistochemical studies using antibodies to skeletal muscle
(desmin, muscle-­specific actin, myogenin) and reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction, next generation sequencing, or fluorescent in situ hybridization for FOXO1 rearrangements.
Determination of the specific histologic subtype and fusion status is important in treatment planning and assessment of prognosis.
There are four recognized histologic subtypes. The embryonal type
accounts for approximately 60% of all cases and does not typically
harbor a genetic translocation. The rare spindle/sclerosing subtype
that accounts for approximately 3–4% of all children with rhabdomyosarcoma. It is characterized by a sclerosing (microalveolar) pattern that can mimic the alveolar subtype, but it does not harbor the
characteristic PAX/FOXO translocation seen in the alveolar subtype.
The alveolar type accounts for approximately 25–40% of cases and is
characterized by the presence of a chromosomal translocation. Over
80% of FOXO1 translocations in the alveolar subtype involve a translocation between FOXO1 and PAX3, but other rare variants exist such
as PAX3-­NCOA2. The tumor cells tend to grow in nests that often
have cleft-­like spaces resembling alveoli. Alveolar tumors occur most
often in the trunk and extremities and carry the poorest prognosis.
The pleomorphic type (adult form) is rare in childhood, accounting
for <1% of cases.

Table 549.2  	Genetic Disorders Associated with
Rhabdomyosarcoma
DISORDER

GENETIC VARIANTS

Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome

Deletions and loss of heterozygosity at chromosome 11p15,
particularly affecting IGF2, CDKAIC, H19, and/or LIT1

Gorlin syndrome (basal cell
nevus syndrome)

PTCH

Costello syndrome

H-­RAS

Neurofibromatosis 1

NF1

Li-­Fraumeni syndrome

TP53

Mosaic variegated aneuploidy
syndrome

BUB1B

Nijmegen breakage syndrome
(ataxia-­telangiectasis syndrome
variant 1)

NBS

Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome

CREBBP

Constitutional mismatch-­repair/
deficiency syndrome

PSM2

Adenomatous polyposis coli

APC

Hereditary retinoblastoma

RB1

Familial pleuropulmonary
­blastoma syndrome

DICER1

Noonan syndrome

PTPN11

Werner syndrome

RECOL2

From Parham DM, Alaggio R, Coffin CM. Myogenic tumors in children and adolescents.
Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2012;15(1):S211–S236. Table 3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 549 u Soft Tissue Sarcomas
Clinical Manifestations

The most common presenting feature of rhabdomyosarcoma is a mass
that may or may not be painful. Symptoms are caused by displacement
or obstruction of normal structures. Origin in the nasopharynx may
be associated with nasal congestion, mouth breathing, epistaxis, and
difficulty with swallowing and chewing. Regional extension into the
cranium can produce cranial nerve paralysis, blindness, and signs of
increased intracranial pressure with headache and vomiting. When the
tumor develops in the face or cheek, there may be swelling, pain, trismus, and, as extension occurs, paralysis of cranial nerves. Tumors in
the neck can produce progressive swelling with neurologic symptoms
after regional extension. Orbital primary tumors are usually diagnosed
early in their course because of associated proptosis, periorbital edema,
ptosis, change in visual acuity, and local pain. When the tumor arises
in the middle ear, the most common early signs are pain, hearing loss,
chronic otorrhea, or a mass in the ear canal; extensions of the tumor
produce cranial nerve paralysis and signs of an intracranial mass on
the involved side. An unremitting croupy cough and progressive stridor can accompany rhabdomyosarcoma of the larynx. Because most of
these signs and symptoms also are associated with common childhood
conditions, clinicians must be alert to the possibility of tumor.
Rhabdomyosarcoma of the trunk or extremities often is first noticed
after trauma and initially may be regarded as a hematoma. If the swelling
does not resolve or increases, malignancy should be suspected. Involvement of the genitourinary tract can produce hematuria, obstruction of
the lower urinary tract, recurrent urinary tract infections, incontinence,
or a mass detectable on abdominal or rectal examination. Paratesticular tumor usually manifests as a painless, rapidly growing mass in the
scrotum. Vaginal rhabdomyosarcoma may manifest as a grapelike mass
of tumor tissue bulging through the vaginal orifice, known as sarcoma
botryoides, and can cause urinary tract or large bowel symptoms. Vaginal bleeding or obstruction of the urethra or rectum may occur. Similar
findings can be noted with tumors arising from the uterus.

3137

Tumors in any location may disseminate early and cause symptoms
of pain or respiratory distress associated with pulmonary metastases.
Extensive bone involvement can produce symptomatic hypercalcemia or
bony pain. In such cases, it may be difficult to identify the primary lesion.

Diagnosis

Early diagnosis of rhabdomyosarcoma requires a high index of suspicion.
The microscopic appearance is that of a small, round blue cell tumor. Neuroblastoma, lymphoma, and Ewing sarcoma also are small, round blue
cell tumors from which suspected rhabdomyosarcomas must be differentiated. The differential diagnosis depends on the site of presentation.
Definitive diagnosis is established by biopsy, microscopic appearance,
and results of immunohistochemical stains and analysis of PAX/FOXO1
expression. A lesion in an extremity may be thought to be a hematoma or
hemangioma, an orbital lesion resulting in proptosis may be treated as an
orbital cellulitis, or bladder-­obstructive symptoms may be missed. Adolescents may ignore or be embarrassed to mention paratesticular lesions
for a long time. Unfortunately, several months often elapse between initial symptoms and biopsy. Diagnostic procedures are determined mainly
by the area of involvement. CT or MRI is necessary for evaluation of the
primary tumor site. With signs and symptoms in the head and neck area,
MRI should be performed to identify intracranial extension or meningeal
involvement and also to reveal bony involvement or erosion at the base of
the skull. For abdominal and pelvic tumors, CT with a contrast agent or
MRI can help delineate the tumor (Figs. 549.1 and 549.2). A radionuclide
bone or fluorodeoxyglucose PET (FDG-­PET) scan, chest CT, and bilateral
bone marrow aspiration and biopsy should be performed to evaluate the
patient for the presence of metastatic disease and to plan treatment. Some
low-­risk patients may not need bone marrow evaluation. The most critical
element of the diagnostic workup is examination of tumor tissue by an
experienced sarcoma pathologist, which includes the use of special histochemical stains and immunostains along with molecular genetics to detect
fusion transcripts as described earlier. Lymph nodes also should be sampled for the presence of disease spread, especially in tumors of the extremities and in males older than 10 years of age with paratesticular tumors.

Treatment

A

B

Fig. 549.1 A, Pelvic CT scan of a child with a bladder rhabdomyosarcoma. B, MR image of a child with a parameningeal rhabdomyosarcoma.

A

B

Treatment is multidisciplinary and includes the pediatric oncologist,
pediatric surgeon or other surgical subspecialist, and often a radiation oncologist. Only if the tumor is able to be completely resected,
with negative margins, without loss of function or major cosmetic
deformity, should this be attempted initially. Unfortunately, most
rhabdomyosarcomas are not completely resectable at initial diagnosis. Treatment is based on risk classification of the tumor, which is
determined by the stage of tumor, the tumor histology and/or fusion
status, and the amount of tumor that was surgically resected prior to
chemotherapy (“surgical group”). Stage is dependent on primary site

C

Fig. 549.2 Rhabdomyosarcoma. A, Axial contrast-­enhanced CT scan at the level of the nasal cavity demonstrates a large, enhancing aggressive

soft tissue mass involving the right maxillary sinus and the infratemporal fossa (arrows). Axial MR image (B) and coronal contrast-­enhanced T1-­
weighted MR image (C) demonstrate an infiltrative mass involving the pharyngeal mucosal space, left infratemporal masticator space, skull base,
and sphenoid sinus (arrows). (From Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of the Whole Body. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 26-­16, p. 769.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3138 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
(favorable vs unfavorable), tumor invasiveness (T1 or T2), lymph node
status, tumor size, and presence of metastasis. Favorable sites include
female genital, paratesticular, and head and neck (nonparameningeal)
regions; all other sites are considered unfavorable. Table 549.3 shows
the Children’s Oncology Group staging system for rhabdomyosarcoma.
Patients should be offered enrollment in clinical trials. Table 549.4
shows current risk stratification and outcome based on results of
recent studies. Patients with low-­risk disease can be cured with minimal therapy consisting of vincristine and actinomycin with or without
lower doses of cyclophosphamide; radiation therapy can be used in
the case of residual disease after initial surgery. Treatment for patients
with intermediate-­risk disease consists of vincristine, actinomycin, and
cyclophosphamide along with radiation. The addition of irinotecan has
recently been studied in intermediate risk rhabdomyosarcoma, and
the current trial for patients with intermediate risk disease is exploring the role of maintenance chemotherapy. For patients with high-­risk
disease, approaches using intensive multiagent chemotherapy have not
improved the outcome and new approaches are being investigated.

Some examples of late effects include infertility from cyclophosphamide,
late effects in the radiation field such as bladder dysfunction, infertility,
cataracts, impaired bone growth, and secondary malignancies.

OTHER SOFT TISSUE SARCOMAS

The nonrhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue sarcomas constitute a heterogeneous group of tumors that account for 3% of all childhood malignancies
(Table 549.5). Because they are relatively rare in children, much of the
information about their natural history and treatment has been derived
from studies in adult patients. In children, the median age at diagnosis is
12 years, with a male:female ratio of 2.3:1. These tumors commonly arise
in the trunk or lower extremities. The most common histologic types are
synovial sarcoma (42%), fibrosarcoma (13%), malignant fibrous histiocytoma (12%), and neurogenic tumors (10%). Molecular genetic studies often prove useful in diagnosis, because several of these tumors have
characteristic chromosomal translocations. Tumor size, stage (clinical
group), invasiveness, and histologic grade correlate with survival.
Surgery remains the mainstay of therapy, but a careful search for
lung and bone metastases should be undertaken before surgical excision. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy should be considered for
large, high-­grade, and/or unresectable tumors. The role of chemotherapy for nonrhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue sarcomas is not as well
defined as for rhabdomyosarcoma. Patients with large (>5 cm) high-­
grade, or unresectable or metastatic disease are treated with multi­
agent chemotherapy in addition to irradiation and/or surgery. Patients
with completely resected small (<5 cm) tumors are generally treated
with surgery alone and can be expected to have an excellent outcome
regardless of whether the tumor is high or low grade.

Prognosis

Prognostic factors include age, stage, histology/fusion status, and primary site. Among patients with resectable tumor and favorable histology, 80–90% have prolonged disease-­free survival. Unresectable tumor
localized to certain favorable sites, such as the orbit, also has a high
likelihood of cure. Approximately 65–70% of patients with incompletely
resected tumor also achieve long-­term disease-­free survival. Patients
with disseminated disease have a poor prognosis; only approximately
50% achieve remission, and fewer than 50% of these are cured. Older
children have a poorer prognosis than younger children. For all patients,
surveillance for late effects of cancer treatment is extremely important.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 549.3  	 Staging System for Rhabdomyosarcoma
STAGE

SITE

T STAGE

SIZE

NODE STATUS

METASTASIS

1

Favorable

T1 or T2

a or b

N0 or N1 or Nx

M0

2

Unfavorable

T1 or T2

a

N0 or Nx

M0

3

Unfavorable

T1 or T2

a
b

N1
N0 or N1 or Nx

M0

4

Any

T1 or T2

a or b

N0 or N1 or Nx

M1

T1, confined to anatomic site of origin; T2, extension and/or fixative to surrounding tissue.
Size: a, <5 cm in diameter; b, ≥5 cm in diameter.
Nodes: N0, regional nodes not involved; N1, regional nodes involved; Nx, regional node status unknown.
Metastases: M0, no distant metastases; M1, metastases present (includes positive cytology in cerebrospinal, pleural, or peritoneal fluid).

Table 549.4  Risk Groups and Outcome for Rhabdomyosarcoma, Children’s Oncology Group
RISK GROUP

STAGE

CLINICAL GROUP

MOLECULAR FINDINGS

AGE

LONG-­TERM EFS (%)*

Very Low

1

I

FOXO1 -­, wildtype P53, wildtype MYOD1

Any

92

Low

1

II, III (orbit only)

FOXO1-­, wildtype P53, wildtype MYOD1

Any

87

Low

2

I, II

FOXO1 -­, wildtype P53, wildtype MYOD1

Any

87

Intermediate

1

III (non orbit)

FOXO1-­

Any

70-­85

Intermediate

1, 2, 3

I, II, III

FOXO1+

Any

63-­93

Intermediate

2, 3

III

FOXO1 -­

Any

63-­93

Intermediate

3

I, II

FOXO1-­

Any

63-­93

Intermediate

4

IV

FOXO1-­

<10 yr

60-­64

High

4

IV

FOXO1-­

≥10 yr

35

High

4

IV

FOXO1+

Any

9†

*4–5-­year EFS based on D9602, D9803, ARST0331, ARST0431, and ARST0531 studies.
†From Rudzinski ER, Anderson JR, Chi YY, et al. Histology, fusion status, and outcome in metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma: A report from the Children’s Oncology Group. Pediatr Blood Cancer.
2017;64(12):10.1002/pbc.26645.
EFS, event-­free survival,
Modified from Oberoi, S, Crane, JN, Haduong, JH, et al. Children’s Oncology Group’s 2023 blueprint for research: Soft tissue sarcomas. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2023;70(Suppl. 6):e30556.
https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.30556.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 549 u Soft Tissue Sarcomas

3139

Table 549.5  Clinical and Biological Features of the Nonrhabdomyosarcoma Soft Tissue Sarcomas
CELL ORIGIN AND
CYTOGENETICS/
PRODUCT

TUMOR*

COMMON
SITES

COMMON AGES

GOOD
PROGNOSTIC
FACTORS†

OUTCOME

THERAPY

Stages I and II,
70%; stages III
and IV, poor

WLE with/without
RT chemo: ifosfamide/doxorubicin

Synovial sarcoma

Mesenchymal cells/t(X;18)
(p11q11)/SSX1–
SYT (seen in biphasic
tumors) SSX2–SYT (seen
in monophasic tumors)/
translocation present in
>90%, MYCN over­
expression

Extremities
(lower twice
as common
as upper
extremity)

Adolescence/
young adulthood, accounts
for 30% of pediatric NRSTS

Age ≤14 years,
size <5 cm,
calcification,
chemosensitive

Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP)

Dermis/t(17;22)
(q21;q13) ring
chromosome/COL1A1–
PDGFB

Trunk and
proximal
limbs, rare
head and
neck

20-­50 years, rare in
childhood

Complete excision, local
recurrence
60% with
incomplete
resection

MFH aka undifferentiated
pleomorphic
sarcoma

Unknown/19p+, complex
abnormalities

Lower
extremity,
trunk, head
and neck

In children, 10-­20
years, 40-­60
years common
radiation-­
induced sarcoma

Extremity site

5-­year survival,
27–53%

WLE chemo:
ifosfamide/
doxorubicin

Angiomatoid
fibrous histiocytoma

Fibroblast/t(2;22)(q34;q12)
t(12;16)(q13;p11) t(12;22)
(q13;q12)/EWSR1–
CREB1 TLS–ATF1
EWSR1–ATF1

Extremity,
trunk
and head
and neck
(subcutis
may infiltrate
dermis or
muscle)

Young children and
young adults

Much less
aggressive
than MFH

Excellent with
surgery alone

WLE

MPNST

Schwann cell or
fibroblast/17q;22q
loss or rearrangement,
complex abnormalities
in high-­grade tumors

Extremity,
retroperitoneum trunk

Younger patients
with neurofibromatosis
(NF1) develop
in 10% patients
with NF1 and
20–60% cases of
MPNST occur
in association
with NF1

Size <5 cm,
no NF1

53% survival
without NF,
16% with NF

WLE with/without RT
chemo:
neoadjuvant role,
ifosfamide/
doxorubicin

Fibrosarcoma

Fibroblast/t(X;18), t(2;5),
t(7;22)

Truncal/proximal site

Adolescence

5-­year survival
34–60%

WLE with/without
RT chemo: no
established role

Infantile fibro­
sarcoma

Fibroblast/t(12;15)
(p13;q25)/ETV6–NTRK3

Distal
­extremity

Most <2 years

5-­year survival
84%

WLE, RT/chemo if
WLE not possible
historically, neoadjuvant chemotherapy (with VA
± C). However, the
use of molecular
targeting with
NTRK inhibitor for
up to 26 cycles
has had dramatic
results and should
be considered
first-­line therapy

<5 years

WLE (3 cm) margin
pseudopod-­like
projections with
Mohs micrographic
surgery; RT
has been used
when WLE not
possible, imatinib
for unresectable;
locally advanced,
recurrent, or
metastatic disease

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 549.5

Clinical and Biological Features of the Nonrhabdomyosarcoma Soft Tissue Sarcomas—cont’d
CELL ORIGIN AND
CYTOGENETICS/
PRODUCT

COMMON
SITES

Leiomyosarcoma

Deletion 1p, other
complex abnormalities, smooth muscle-­
uterine t(12;14)
(q15;q24); HMGA2
rearrangement

Retro­
peritoneum
GI tract, any
soft-­tissue
or vascular
area

40-­70 years, when
in children, any
age, associated with human
­immunodeficiency
virus related
to EBV infection, reported
in patients who
received RT for
retinoblastoma
and Carney triad‡

<5 cm

33% disease-­free
survival at 1-­5
years

WLE chemo:
ifosfamide/
doxorubicin or
gemcitabine/
docetaxel

Alveolar soft part
sarcoma

der(17)t(X;17)
(p11;25)/ASPSCR1–TFE3

Orbit, head
and neck,
lower
extremity

15-­35 years

Young age,
orbital site,
<5 cm

5-­year survival
27–59%
(indolent; death
from disease
after 10-­20
years) 79%
metastatic
disease,
including brain

WLE chemo or RT
only after
recurrence chemo:
no clear role
Possible role of
vascular
endothelial growth
factor inhibitors
being explored

Hemangiopericytoma infantile
form (<1 year of
age)

Pericytes/t(12;19)
(q13;q13)/t(13;22)
(q22;q11)

Extremity,
retroperitoneum head
and neck
extremity,
trunk

20-­70 years, when
in children, 10-­20
years rare, but
typically 1 year

Low stage,
<5 cm,
infantile form

Stages I and II,
30–70% 5-­year
survival with adjuvant therapy
stages III and IV,
poor infantile—
excellent with
surgery alone

WLE, with/without
RT chemo: no
­established
role but can be
chemoresponsive,
infantile form
responds more
favorably to
chemotherapy

Liposarcoma
(myxoid)

Primitive
mesenchyme/t(12;16)
(q13p11)/FUS–DDIT3

Extremity,
retroperitoneum

0-­2 years and
second decade;
sixth decade
most common

Child, myxoid
type

Very good with
WLE, rarely
metastasizes

WLE, with/without RT
RT important in
retroperitoneal
lesion chemo: no
established role

Clear cell
­sarcoma

Mesoderm, melanin
deposits t(12;22)(p13;
q12)/EWSR1–ATF1

Tendons and
aponeuroses
of lower
extremity

Young adults,
females

<5 cm, no
necrosis,
­nonmetastatic

Adverse
prognosis;
5-­year survival
rates of 60–
70%. However,
only 30–40%
are long-­term
survivors due
to late
recurrences

WLE with sentinel
node biopsy
no clear role
for adjuvant
chemotherapy
Potential role for
immunotherapy
(e.g., translocation-­
targeted vaccines,
interferon, GM-­
CSF-­secreting
vaccine)

Epithelioid
­sarcoma

Inactivation of INI1
(hSNF5/SMAR CB1)
located on chromosome
22q11.2

Distal
extremities
(especially
hands)

Young adult

Younger age,
distal tumor
location, no
necrosis or
vascular
invasion,
negative nodal
status, and
microscopic
complete
resection

Tumor is highly
WLE with sentinel
aggressive and
lymph node
has a propensity
biopsy ± RT
for lymph node
and/or chemo:
metastases
ifosfamide/
Localized smaller
doxorubicin
tumors have
Clinical trial for use
better progof tazemetostat
nosis
recently
completed
Approval for patients
with metastatic or
locally advanced
epithelioid
sarcoma not
eligible for
complete resection

TUMOR*

COMMON AGES

GOOD
PROGNOSTIC
FACTORS†

OUTCOME

THERAPY

*Listed in order of decreasing incidence.
†Low histologic grade and low stage are good prognostic factors.
‡Carney triad: A condition consisting of gastric epithelioid leiomyosarcoma, pulmonary chondroma, functioning extraadrenal paraganglioma.
NRST, Nonrhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue sarcoma; GI, gastrointestinal; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; MFH, malignant fibrous histiocytoma; MPNST, malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor; NF, neurofibromatosis; V, vincristine; C, cyclophosphamide; NTRK, neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase; RT, radiation therapy; WLE, wide local excision; GM-­CSF,
granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating factor.
From Amin S, Levy CF. Rhabdomyosarcoma and other soft-­tissue sarcomas. In: Fish JD, Lipton JM, Lanzkowsky P, eds. Lanzowsky’s Manual of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology.
7th ed. London: Elsevier; 2022: Table 25.1, p. 543–544.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 550 u Neoplasms of Bone

Chapter 550

Neoplasms of Bone
550.1 Malignant Tumors of Bone
Wendy A. Allen-­Rhoades and Carola A.S. Arndt
The annual incidence of malignant bone tumors in the United States is
approximately 8.2 cases per 1 million children younger than 14 years
and 14.7 per 1 million for adolescents age 15-­19. Osteosarcoma is the
most common primary malignant bone tumor in children and adolescents, followed by Ewing sarcoma (Table 550.1, Fig. 550.1). In children
<10 years old, Ewing sarcoma is more common than osteosarcoma.
Both tumor types are most likely to occur in the second decade of life.

OSTEOSARCOMA
Epidemiology

The annual incidence of osteosarcoma in the United States is 5.7 cases
per 1 million children 0-­19 years old. The highest risk period for
development of osteosarcoma is during the adolescent growth spurt,
suggesting an association between rapid bone growth and malignant
transformation. Patients with osteosarcoma are taller than their peers
of similar age.

Pathogenesis

Although the cause of osteosarcoma is unknown, certain genetic or
acquired conditions predispose patients to development of osteosarcoma.
Patients with hereditary retinoblastoma have a significantly increased
risk for development of osteosarcoma. The sites of osteosarcoma in these
patients include previously irradiated areas but also sites far from the
original retinoblastoma radiation field. Predisposition to development of
osteosarcoma in these patients may be related to loss of heterozygosity
of the RB gene. Osteosarcoma also occurs in Li-­Fraumeni syndrome,
which is a familial cancer syndrome associated with germline pathogenic

3141

variants of the P53 gene. Kindreds with Li-­Fraumeni syndrome have a
spectrum of malignancies in first-­degree relatives, including carcinoma
of the breast, soft tissue sarcomas, brain tumors, leukemia, adrenocortical
carcinoma, and other malignancies. Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome is
a rare condition associated with short stature, skin telangiectasia, small
hands and feet, hypoplasticity or absence of the thumbs, and a high
risk of osteosarcoma. Diamond-­Blackfan anemia is also a risk factor
for osteosarcoma. Osteosarcoma can also be induced by irradiation for
Ewing sarcoma, craniospinal irradiation for brain tumors, or high-­dose
irradiation for other malignancies. Other benign conditions that can be
associated with malignant transformation to osteosarcoma include Paget
disease, enchondromatosis, multiple hereditary exostoses, and fibrous
dysplasia (see Chapter 550.2).
The pathologic diagnosis of osteosarcoma is made by demonstration of a highly malignant, pleomorphic, spindle cell neoplasm associated with the formation of malignant osteoid and bone. There are
four pathologic subtypes of conventional high-­grade osteosarcoma:
osteoblastic, fibroblastic, chondroblastic, and telangiectatic. No significant differences in outcome are associated with the various subtypes, although the chondroblastic component of that subtype may not
respond as well to chemotherapy.
Telangiectatic osteosarcoma may be confused with aneurysmal bone
cyst (ABC) because of its lytic appearance on radiography. High-­grade
osteosarcoma typically arises in the diaphyseal region of long bones and
invades the medullary cavity. It also may be associated with a soft tissue
mass. Two variants of osteosarcoma, parosteal and periosteal, should be
distinguished from conventional osteosarcoma because of their characteristic clinical features. Parosteal osteosarcoma is a low-­grade, well-­
differentiated tumor that does not invade the medullary cavity and most
frequently is found in the posterior aspect of the distal femur. Surgical
resection alone often is curative in this lesion, which has a low propensity for metastatic spread. Periosteal osteosarcoma is a rare variant that
arises on the surface of the bone but has a higher rate of metastatic spread
than the parosteal type and an intermediate prognosis.

Clinical Manifestations

Pain, limp, and swelling are the most common presenting manifestations of osteosarcoma. Because these tumors occur most often in active

Table 550.1  Comparison of Features of Osteosarcoma and the Ewing Family of Tumors
FEATURE

EWING FAMILY OF TUMORS*

OSTEOSARCOMA

Age

Second decade

Second decade

Ethnicity

All

Primarily Whites

Sex (M:F)

1.5:1

1.5:1

Predisposition

Retinoblastoma, Li-­Fraumeni syndrome,
Rothmund-Thomson syndrome, Paget disease,
radiotherapy

None known

Site

Metaphyses of long bones

Diaphyses of long bones, flat bones, soft tissues

Presentation

Local pain and swelling; often history of injury;
pathologic fracture

Local pain and swelling; fever, palpable mass, pathologic
fracture

Radiographic findings

Sclerotic destruction (less often lytic); sunburst
pattern, Codman triangle

Primarily lytic, multilaminar periosteal reaction
(“onion-­skinning”), “moth-­eaten,” Codman triangle

Differential diagnosis

Ewing sarcoma, osteomyelitis, hematoma

Osteomyelitis, eosinophilic granuloma, lymphoma,
neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, FUO

Metastasis

Lungs, bones

Lungs, bones, bone marrow

Treatment

Chemotherapy

Chemotherapy

Ablative surgery of primary tumor

Radiotherapy and/or surgery of primary tumor

Without metastases, 70% cured; with metastases at
diagnosis, ≤20% survival

Without metastases, 65–75% cured; with metastases at
diagnosis, 20–30% survival

Outcome
FUO, Fever of unknown origin.

*Ewing family of tumors includes: (1) Ewing sarcoma of bone; (2) extraosseous (extraskeletal) Ewing tumor; (3) peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PPNET). A PPNET arising

from the chest wall is an Askin tumor.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3142 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Osteosarcoma

24
21

Males
949
Females 700
Total
1649

Percent

18
15
12

Jaw

9

35

127
61
11
20
48
8
8
3
3
8 2
3
27
14 2
11
15
4
18
119
88
18
8 74
248

6

22
33

3
0

A

1

2

3

4
5
6
Age in decades

32

7

8

508
1
38
3
8
16
2
3

9

33
30
27
24
21
18
15
12
9
6
3
0

Ewing Sarcoma

Males
303
Females 209
Total
512

Percent

27

B

24
4

10

3
2
13
4
1
1
13
21

41
33

2

3

4
5
6
Age in decades

7

66
46

10

39

3

26
18
10

11
11

8
9

27

1

33
12
8
4
3
4
1

4

8

Fig. 550.1 A, Age and skeletal distribution of 1,649 cases of osteosarcoma in the Mayo Clinic files. B, Age and skeletal distribution of 512 cases of
Ewing sarcoma in the Mayo Clinic files. (From Unni KK, ed. Dahlin’s Bone Tumors: General Aspects and Data on 11,087 Cases. 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-­Raven; 1996. Reprinted by permission of the Mayo Foundation.)

adolescents, initial complaints may be attributed to a sports injury or
sprain; any bone or joint pain not responding to conservative therapy
within a reasonable time should be investigated thoroughly. Additional
clinical findings may include limitation of motion, joint effusion,
tenderness, and warmth. Results of routine laboratory tests, such as
a complete blood cell count and chemistry panel, are usually normal,
although alkaline phosphatase or lactate dehydrogenase values may be
elevated.

Diagnosis

Bone tumor should be suspected in a patient who presents with
deep bone pain, often causing nighttime awakening, and has a palpable mass with radiographs that demonstrate a lesion. The lesion
may be mixed lytic and blastic in appearance, but new bone formation is usually visible. The classic radiographic appearance of osteosarcoma is the sunburst pattern (Fig. 550.2). When osteosarcoma is
suspected, the patient should be referred to a center with experience
in managing bone tumors. The biopsy and the surgery should be
performed by the same surgeon so that the incisional biopsy site can
be placed in a manner that will not compromise the definitive surgical procedure. Tissue usually is obtained for molecular and biologic
studies at the time of the initial biopsy. Before biopsy, MRI of the
primary lesion and the entire bone should be performed to evaluate
the tumor for its proximity to nerves and blood vessels, soft tissue and joint extension, and skip lesions. The metastatic workup
includes CT of the chest and radionuclide bone scanning or positron emission tomography (PET) scan to evaluate for lung and bone
or soft tissue metastases, respectively. The differential diagnosis
of a lytic bone lesion includes histiocytosis, Ewing sarcoma, lymphoma, and bone cyst.

Treatment

Fig. 550.2 Radiograph of an osteosarcoma of the femur with typical

With chemotherapy and surgery, 5-­year disease-­free survival of
patients with nonmetastatic extremity osteosarcoma is 65–75%.
Complete surgical resection of the tumor is important for cure.
The current approach is to treat patients with preoperative chemotherapy in an attempt to facilitate limb salvage operations and to
treat micrometastatic disease immediately. Up to 80% of patients
are able to undergo limb salvage operations after initial chemotherapy. It is important to resume chemotherapy as soon as possible after surgery. Lung metastases present at diagnosis should be
resected by thoracotomies at some time during treatment. Active
agents in use in multidrug chemotherapy regimens for conventional osteosarcoma include doxorubicin, cisplatin, methotrexate,
and ifosfamide.
One of the most important prognostic factors in osteosarcoma is the histologic response to chemotherapy; a poor histologic
response is ≥10% viable tumor (<90% necrosis in resected tissue). MAP (methotrexate, doxorubicin, cisplatin) is the standard

sunburst appearance of bone formation.

chemotherapy regimen for osteosarcoma. After limb salvage surgery, intensive rehabilitation and physical therapy are necessary
to ensure maximal functional outcome. Intensification of therapy
by addition of ifosfamide and etoposide in patients with poor histologic response after induction chemotherapy with MAP has not
improved outcome.
For patients who require amputation, early prosthetic fitting
and gait training are essential to enable patients to resume normal
activities as soon as possible. Before definitive surgery, patients
with tumors on weight-­bearing bones should be instructed to use
crutches to avoid stressing the weakened bones and causing pathologic fracture. The role of chemotherapy in parosteal and periosteal
osteosarcomas is not well defined, and chemotherapy is generally
reserved for use in patients with tumors that have a high-­grade
microscopic appearance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 550 u Neoplasms of Bone

3143

Prognosis

Surgical resection alone is curative only for patients with low-­grade parosteal osteosarcoma. Conventional high-­grade osteosarcoma requires
multiagent chemotherapy. Up to 75% of patients with nonmetastatic
extremity osteosarcoma are cured with current multiagent treatment protocols. The prognosis is not as favorable for patients with pelvic tumors
as for those with primary tumors in the extremities. From 20–30% of
patients who have limited numbers of pulmonary metastases also can
be cured with aggressive chemotherapy and resection of lung nodules.
Patients with bone metastases and those with widespread lung metastases have an extremely poor prognosis. Long-­term follow-­up of patients
with osteosarcoma is important to monitor for late effects of chemotherapy, such as cardiotoxicity from anthracycline and hearing loss from
cisplatin. Patients in whom late, isolated lung metastases develop may be
cured with surgical resection of the metastatic lesions alone.

EWING SARCOMA
Epidemiology

The incidence of Ewing sarcoma in the United States is 3.1 cases per 1
million children ages 0-­19 years. It is rare among Black children. Ewing
sarcoma, an undifferentiated sarcoma of bone, also may arise from soft
tissue. Treatment protocols for these tumors are the same whether the
tumors arise in bone or soft tissue. Anatomic sites of primary tumors
arising in bone are distributed evenly between the extremities and the
central axis (pelvis, spine, and chest wall). Primary tumors arising in
the chest wall are often referred to as Askin tumors.

Pathogenesis

Immunohistochemical staining assists in the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma to differentiate it from small, round, blue cell tumors such as
lymphoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and neuroblastoma. Histochemical
stains may react positively with certain neural markers on tumor cells
(neuron-­specific enolase and S-­100), especially in peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumors. Reactivity with muscle markers (e.g., desmin, actin) is absent. Additionally, MIC-­2 (CD99) staining is usually
positive. A specific chromosomal translocation, t(11;22) (q24;q12), or a
variant is found in most of the Ewing sarcoma family of tumors. Analysis for the translocation by next generation sequencing, fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH), or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis for the chimeric fusion gene products EWS/FLI1 or EWS/ERG (or
other variants) are used routinely in diagnosis.

Fig. 550.3 Radiograph of tibial Ewing sarcoma showing periosteal
elevation or “onion-­skinning.”

Clinical Manifestations

Symptoms of Ewing sarcoma are similar to those of osteosarcoma.
Pain, swelling, limitation of motion, and tenderness over the involved
bone or soft tissue are common presenting symptoms. Patients with
large chest wall primary tumors may present with respiratory distress.
Patients with paraspinal or vertebral primary tumors may present with
symptoms of cord compression. Ewing sarcoma often is associated
with systemic manifestations, such as fever and weight loss, and may
be accompanied by elevated inflammatory markers; patients may have
undergone treatment for a presumptive diagnosis of osteomyelitis or
a fever of unknown origin. Patients also may have a delay in diagnosis when their pain or swelling is attributed to a sports injury. Biopsy
and tissue diagnosis should be considered for patients presenting with
suspicious bone lesions, because even the gross appearance of Ewing
sarcoma can appear similar to infection and the time course can be
rapid. Surgical procedures for treatment of infection can contaminate
the surgical field and impact treatment outcomes.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma should be suspected in a patient who
presents with pain and swelling, with or without systemic symptoms,
and with a radiographic appearance of a primarily lytic bone lesion
with periosteal reaction, the characteristic onion-­skinning (Fig.
550.3). A large, associated soft tissue mass often is visualized on MRI
or CT (Fig. 550.4). The differential diagnosis includes osteosarcoma,

Fig. 550.4 MR image of tibial Ewing sarcoma showing a large associated soft tissue mass.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3144 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
osteomyelitis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, primary lymphoma of
bone, metastatic neuroblastoma, or rhabdomyosarcoma in the case of
a pure soft tissue lesion. Patients should be referred to a center with
experience in managing bone tumors for evaluation and biopsy. Thorough evaluation for metastatic disease includes CT of the chest, radionuclide bone scan, or PET scan. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy
specimens from at least two sites are generally required but can be
omitted for certain lower risk patients. MRI of the tumor and the entire
length of involved bone should be performed to determine the exact
extension of the soft tissue and bony mass and the proximity of tumor
to neurovascular structures. Studies are also using fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) PET to evaluate response to therapy.
To avoid compromising an ultimate potential for limb salvage by
a poorly planned biopsy incision, the same surgeon should perform
the biopsy and the surgical procedure. CT-­guided biopsy of the lesion
often provides diagnostic tissue. It is important to obtain adequate tissue for special stains and molecular studies.

Treatment

Tumors of the Ewing sarcoma family are best managed with a
comprehensive multidisciplinary approach in which the surgeon,
chemotherapist, and radiation oncologist plan therapy. Multiagent
chemotherapy is important because it can shrink the tumor rapidly and is usually given before local control is attempted. In North
America, standard chemotherapy for nonmetastatic Ewing sarcoma
includes vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and
ifosfamide. Chemotherapy usually causes dramatic shrinkage of the
soft tissue mass and rapid, significant pain relief. Patients with nonmetastatic Ewing sarcoma have a better outcome when treated on a
14-­day rather than on a 21-­day schedule. An international cooperative group trial found that myeloablative chemotherapy and stem cell
rescue was not superior to chemotherapy with lung irradiation for
patients with pulmonary metastases.
Ewing sarcoma is considered a radiosensitive tumor, and local control may be achieved with irradiation or surgery. Radiation therapy
is associated with a risk of radiation-­induced second malignancies,
especially osteosarcoma, as well as failure of bone growth in skeletally
immature patients. It is important to provide the patient with crutches
if the tumor is in a weight-­bearing bone to avoid a pathologic fracture
before definitive local control. Many centers prefer surgical resection,
if possible, to achieve local control. Chemotherapy should be resumed
as soon as possible after surgery.

Prognosis

Patients with small, nonmetastatic, distally located extremity tumors
have the best prognosis, with a cure rate of up to 75%. Patients
with pelvic tumors have, until recently, had a much worse outcome.
Patients with metastatic disease at diagnosis, especially bone or
bone marrow metastases, have a poor prognosis, with <30% surviving long term.
Long-­term follow-­up of patients with Ewing sarcoma is important because of the potential for late effects of treatment, such as
anthracycline-­induced cardiotoxicity, infertility, and second malignancies, especially in the radiation field, and late relapses, even as long as
10 years after initial diagnosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

550.2 Benign Tumors and Tumor-­Like
Processes of Bone
Carola A.S. Arndt and A. Noelle Larson
Benign bone lesions in children are common compared with the relatively rare malignant neoplasms of bone. A broad range of diagnostic
possibilities must be considered when the physician is confronted with
an undiagnosed bone lesion (Table 550.2). Some, although histologically

benign, can be life-­threatening, while others can be locally destructive
to bone. Many represent an incidental finding that, if asymptomatic, can
be observed. A group of benign characteristic lesions including osteochondroma, nonossifying fibroma, unicameral bone cyst, and enchondroma may occur in 19% of children in a historic cohort of children and
can readily be diagnosed on standard radiographs without additional
imaging studies. Other conditions require further study to determine
a diagnosis where no single element in the history or diagnostic test is
sufficient to rule out malignancy. Benign lesions are usually painless but
may be painful, especially if the lesion is causing local bone destruction
or there is an impending pathologic fracture. Night pain that awakens a
child suggests malignancy, but relief of such pain with aspirin is common
with osteoid osteomas. Rapidly enlarging lesions usually are associated
with malignancy, but several benign lesions, such as ABCs, can enlarge
faster than most malignancies. Several conditions, such as osteomyelitis,
can simulate the appearance of bone tumors.
Many benign bone tumors are diagnosed incidentally or after pathologic fracture. Initial management of these fractures is similar to that of
nonpathologic fractures in the same location. It is unusual for benign
bone tumors to interfere with fracture healing, but the area of weakness
typically remains, and refracture is common. Fractures rarely result in
resolution of the tumor, which usually is treated after the fracture has
healed. Fractures around the hip, however, frequently require immediate treatment to stabilize the femoral neck and restore anatomic
alignment.
Radiographs of any suspected bone lesion should always be obtained
in two planes. Additional studies may be necessary to help arrive at
the correct diagnosis and to guide treatment. Although these lesions
are benign, selected lesions require intervention. If biopsy is performed, both microbiology and pathology evaluations should always
be obtained.
Osteochondroma (exostosis) is one of the most common benign
bone tumors in children. Because many are completely asymptomatic
and unrecognized, the true incidence of this lesion is unknown. Osteochondromas develop in childhood, arising from the metaphysis of a
long bone, particularly the distal femur, proximal humerus, and proximal tibia. The lesion enlarges with the child until skeletal maturity.
Children commonly present at 5-­15 years of age, when the child or parent notices a bony, nonpainful mass. Some are discovered because they
are irritated by soft tissues rubbing over the lesion during athletic or
other activities. Fracture is rare. Osteochondromas appear radiographically as stalks or broad-­based projections from the surface of the bone,
usually in a direction away from the adjacent joint (Fig. 550.5A). The
bone is in continuity with the medullary canal. Invariably, the lesion is
radiographically smaller than suggested by palpation because the cartilage cap covering the lesion is not seen. This cartilage cap may be up
to 1 cm thick. Both the cortex of the bone and the marrow space of the
involved bone are continuous with the lesion. Malignant degeneration
of a chondrosarcoma is rare in children but occurs in as many as 1%
of adults. Routine removal is not performed unless the lesion is large
enough to cause symptoms, such as pain or nerve compression, most
commonly presenting as foot drop. Osteochondromas can be diagnosed by radiographs alone, and unless patients present with unusual
symptoms such as night pain, further studies such as CT or MRI are
not typically indicated. Patients should be referred to an orthopedic
practice for counseling, but routine radiographic follow-­up and treatment should be based on symptoms.
Multiple hereditary osteochondrosis (exostoses) is a related but
rare condition characterized by the presence of multiple osteochondromas (see Fig. 550.5B). This is an autosomal dominant disorder due to
pathogenic variants in EXT1 or EXT2. Severely involved children can
have short stature, limb-­length inequality, premature partial physeal
arrests, deformity of both the upper and lower extremities including
genu valgum, dislocation of the radial head at the elbow, and neurovascular impingement or entrapment in areas adjacent to the tumor
and neurovascular compartments. These children must be monitored
carefully during growth by a pediatric orthopedist. Malignant transformation may occur but is rare. Screening MRI of the entire spine is recommended during childhood to detect bony lesions growing into the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 550 u Neoplasms of Bone

3145

Table 550.2  Features of Pediatric Benign Bone Tumors
LESION

TYPICAL COURSE

MOST COMMON WORKUP
TO CONFIRM DIAGNOSIS

Fibroma (nonossifying fibroma, fibrous
cortical defect, metaphyseal fibrous
defect)

Observation; surgery to treat fracture/impending
fracture (rare, large lesions)

Radiographs

Enchondroma

Observation; treat if symptomatic

Radiographs, occasionally MRI

Osteochondroma

Observation; excise if symptomatic

Radiographs

Subungual exostosis

Symptoms warrant excision for most patients

Radiographs

Unicameral/simple bone cyst

Observation; treat if fracture occurs to prevent
further fractures

Radiographs, occasionally MRI

Osteoid osteoma

NSAIDs; but symptoms warrant percutaneous
ablation for most patients

Radiographs, CT

Heterotopic ossification

Observation; if symptomatic, excise after bone is
mature (>6 mo)

Radiographs, ± MRI, CT

Fibrous dysplasia

Observation; treat if pain or bony deformities

Radiographs, ± MRI, ± biopsy

Chronic regional multifocal osteomyelitis
(reactive bone condition)

Observation; medical treatment available if
symptomatic; pathology is identical to
osteomyelitis

Radiographs, MRI; bone scan to look for other
lesions; antibiotics to rule out osteomyelitis;
biopsy

Langerhans cell histiocytosis

Variable; depends on extent of disease

Skeletal survey, MRI, biopsy, workup to rule out
systemic disease

Infection

Treat with prolonged antibiotics, typically some
intravenously; surgery for joint/growth plate
involvement, abscess, and chronic disease

CRP, sedimentation rate, CBC with differential,
blood cultures, radiographs, ± MRI, ± biopsy

Osteoblastoma

Locally aggressive, treat

Radiographs, CT, MRI, biopsy

Aneurysmal bone cyst

Locally aggressive, treat

Radiographs, MRI, biopsy

Chondroblastoma

Locally aggressive, treat

Radiographs, MRI, biopsy

Chondromyxoid fibroma

Locally aggressive, treat

Radiographs, MRI, biopsy

Osteofibrous dysplasia

Possibly locally aggressive; variable

Radiographs, MRI, biopsy

Adamantinoma

Malignant, treat

Radiographs, MRI, biopsy

CBC, Complete blood count; CRP, C-­reactive protein; CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.

canal, which can result in spinal cord compression which may occur in
up to 20–30% of patients (see Fig. 550.5C).

SUBUNGUAL EXOSTOSIS

This lesion is an osteochondroma that forms underneath the nailbed
in an otherwise healthy child. The nailbed may become discolored
or raised, and the condition is typically painful (Fig. 550.6). It can be
differentiated from a paronychia or ingrown toenail by findings of an
osteochondroma on radiographs. Radiographs should be taken, which
will show a bony protuberance under the nailbed. Treatment should
be nailbed removal and surgical excision with nailbed repair. Despite
surgical excision, recurrence can occur up to 5% of the time.
Enchondroma is a benign lesion of hyaline cartilage that occurs
centrally in the bone. These lesions are asymptomatic and frequently
occur in the hands. Most are discovered incidentally, although pathologic fractures often lead to the diagnosis. Radiographically, the lesions
occupy the medullary canal, are radiolucent, and are sharply marginated. Punctate or stippled calcification may be present within the lesion,
but this is much more common in adults than in children. Almost all
enchondromas in children are solitary and small. Most can simply be
observed, with curettage and bone grafting reserved for lesions that are
symptomatic or large enough to weaken the bone structurally. Large
lesions with extensive involvement may represent low-grade chondrosarcoma. Multifocal involvement is referred to as Ollier disease
and can result in bone dysplasia, short stature, limb-­length inequality,
and joint deformity. Surgery may be necessary to correct or prevent
such deformities. When multiple enchondromas are associated with

angiomas of the soft tissue, the condition is referred to as Maffucci
syndrome. A high rate of malignant transformation has been reported
in both of these multifocal conditions.
Chondromyxoid fibroma is an uncommon benign bone tumor in
children. This metaphyseal lesion usually causes pain and local tenderness. The lesion occasionally is asymptomatic. Chondromyxoid
fibroma appears radiographically as eccentric, lobular metaphyseal
radiolucency with sharp, sclerotic, and scalloped margins. The lower
extremity is involved most often. Treatment usually consists of curettage and bone grafting or en bloc resection.
Osteoid osteoma is a small benign bone tumor typically found in
the proximal tibia and femur and the posterior elements of the spine.
Most of these tumors are diagnosed between 5 and 20 years of age. The
clinical pattern is characteristic, consisting of unremitting and gradually
increasing pain that often is worst at night and is relieved by NSAIDs.
Boys are affected more often than girls. Vertebral lesions can cause
scoliosis or symptoms that mimic a neurologic disorder. Examination
can reveal a limp, atrophy, and weakness when the lower extremity is
involved. Palpation and range of motion do not alter the discomfort.
Radiographs may show cortical thickening, and CT shows distinctive findings, with a round or oval metaphyseal or diaphyseal lucency
(0.5-­1.0 cm in diameter) surrounded by dense sclerotic bone (Fig.
550.7). The central lucency, or nidus, shows intense uptake on bone
scan. Approximately 25% of osteoid osteomas are not visualized on
plain radiographs but can be identified with CT. Because of the small
size of the lesion and its location adjacent to thick cortical bone, MRI
is poor at diagnosing osteoid osteomas, revealing only extensive T2

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3146 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

A

A

B

Fig. 550.7 MRI and CT in 15-­yr-­old female with left tibial night pain.

A, Coronal T2 weighted MR of the bilateral tibias shows increased T2
signal change in the left tibia diaphysis. B, Sagittal CT scan shows cortically based lesion <1 cm typical for osteoid osteoma. Patient was treated with percutaneous radiofrequency ablation.

B

C

Fig. 550.5 A, Lateral radiograph of the right humerus showing iso-

lated osteochondroma. Bone lesion is in continuity with the medullary
canal and points away from the growth plate. B, Hip-­to-­ankle radiograph in a child with multiple hereditary exostoses (MHE) showing many
osteochondromas about the knees and ankles. C, Sagittal T2 weighted
MR image of the cervical spine in a 15-­yr-­old female with MHE who underwent routine cervical screening MRI, which detected asymptomatic
spinal stenosis caused by C6 osteochondroma. She underwent urgent
decompression.

A

B

Fig. 550.6 A, Photograph of the great toe showing nailbed abnor-

mality. B, Lateral and oblique views of the left great toe showing subungual exostosis. These lesions are typically painful and require surgical
removal.

signal change throughout the region. Treatment is directed at removing the lesion. Patients may be treated with NSAIDs, and the symptoms
typically resolve within 1-­2 years. Most patients and families elect for
treatment. Percutaneous treatments such as radiofrequency ablation
and cryoablation have become the standard of care for routine lesions.
There is still an occasional role for open surgical resection, if there is
concern for osteomyelitis (Brodie’s abscess), or the lesion is in close
proximity to articular cartilage or neurovascular structures.
Osteoblastoma is a locally destructive, progressively growing
lesion of bone with a predilection for the vertebrae, although almost
any bone may be involved. Most patients note the insidious onset of
dull aching pain, which may be present for months before patients
seek medical attention. Spinal lesions can cause neurologic symptoms
or deficits. The radiographic appearance is variable and less distinctive than that of other benign bone tumors. CT or MRI is indicated.
Approximately 25% show features suggesting a malignant neoplasm,
making biopsy necessary in many cases. Expansile spinal lesions
often involve the posterior elements. Treatment involves curettage
and bone grafting or en bloc excision; care must be taken to preserve
nerve roots when treating spinal lesions. Surgical stabilization of the
spine may be necessary.
Fibromas (nonossifying fibroma, fibrous cortical defect, metaphyseal fibrous defect) are fibrous lesions of bone that occur in up to
40% of children older than 2 years of age. They most likely represent
a defect in ossification rather than a neoplasm and usually are asymptomatic. Most are discovered incidentally when radiographs are taken
for other reasons, usually to rule out a fracture after trauma. Occasional pathologic fractures can occur through large lesions. Physical
examination usually is unrevealing. Radiographs show a sharply marginated eccentric lucency in the metaphysis or metaphyseal cortex
(Fig. 550.8). Lesions may be multilocular and expansile, with extension
from the cortex into the medullary bone. The long axis of the lesion
runs parallel to that of the bone. Approximately 50% are bilateral or
multiple. Because of the characteristic radiographic appearance, most
lesions do not require axial imaging, biopsy, or treatment. If the child
is asymptomatic, no further monitoring is needed for characteristic
lesions. Spontaneous regression can be expected after skeletal maturity. Curettage and bone grafting may be considered for symptomatic
lesions or lesions occupying >50% of the bone diameter due to the risk
of a pathologic fracture.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 550 u Neoplasms of Bone

Fig. 550.8 Anteroposterior radiograph of the knee showing nonossifying fibroma, which was discovered incidentally.

3147

are typically treated due to the risk of pathologic fracture. Treatments
include aspiration and injection with methylprednisolone or calcium
phosphate. A randomized controlled trial (RCT) showed 42% healing
rate with steroid injections (1-­3, mean 1.7 injections) compared with
injection of bone marrow aspirate (23% healing rate, 1-­3 injections,
2.1 mean). Open biopsy and bone grafting with or without internal
fixation can also be performed. Recurrence is common despite surgical
treatment. Repeat injections are frequently necessary to treat recurrent
lesions. Healing rates are higher with injection or surgical treatment
compared with observation, and internal fixation is recommended for
proximal femoral lesions given the high risk of fracture.
Fibrous dysplasia is a developmental abnormality characterized
by fibrous replacement of cancellous bone. Lesions may be solitary or
multifocal (polyostotic). Lesions may progress over time or may be
stable. Some children are asymptomatic, although others have bone
pain. Those with skull involvement might have swelling or exophthalmos. Pain and limp are characteristic of proximal femoral involvement,
which also may indicate impending pathologic fracture. Limb-­length
discrepancy, bowing of the tibia or femur, and pathologic fractures may
be presenting complaints. The triad of polyostotic disease, precocious
puberty, and cutaneous pigmentation is known as McCune-­Albright
syndrome. Radiographic features of fibrous dysplasia include a lytic
or ground-­glass expansile lesion of the metaphysis or diaphysis. The
lesion is sharply marginated and often is surrounded by a thick rim of
sclerotic bone. Bowing, especially of the proximal femur, may be present. Treatment usually involves observation for asymptomatic lesions.
Surgery is indicated for patients with progressive deformity, pain, or
impending pathologic fractures. Bone grafting is not as successful in
the treatment of fibrous dysplasia, because the lesion recurs within the
grafted bone. Reconstructive surgical techniques with metal implants
often are necessary to provide stability and treat pain, particularly in
the proximal femur. In addition to surgical stabilization, bisphosphonate therapy has been used to treat bone pain, although a recent RCT
showed improvement in regional bone mineral density but no change
in pain scores.

LOCALLY AGGRESSIVE LESIONS

Fig. 550.9 External rotation view of the left humerus in a 9-­yr-­old fe-

male who presented with pain after falling off her bicycle. Imaging is
consistent with simple bone cyst.

Unicameral bone cysts can occur at any age in childhood but are
rare in children younger than 3 years of age and after skeletal maturity.
The cause of these fluid-­filled lesions is unknown. Spontaneous resolution after skeletal maturity is expected, although pathologic fracture
can be a significant problem in the interim. Diagnosis usually follows a
pathologic fracture (Fig. 550.9). Such fractures can occur with relatively
minor trauma, such as with throwing or catching a ball. Unicameral
bone cysts appear radiographically as solitary, centrally located lesions
within the medullary portion of the bone. These cysts are most common in the proximal humerus or femur. They often extend to (but not
through) the physis and are sharply marginated. The cortex expands,
but that does not exceed the width of the adjacent physis. Treatment involves allowing the pathologic fracture to heal. Subsequently,
humerus lesions can be observed or treated. Proximal femoral lesions

Aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC) is a reactive lesion of bone seen in persons younger than 20 years of age. The lesion is characterized by cavernous spaces filled with blood and solid aggregates of tissue. Although the
femur, tibia, and spine are commonly involved, this progressively growing, expansile lesion can develop in any bone. Radiographs show eccentric lytic destruction and expansion of the metaphysis surrounded by
a thin sclerotic rim of bone. Expansion of the bone frequently extends
beyond the diameter of the physis. Pain and swelling are common. Spinal involvement can lead to cord or nerve root compression and associated neurologic symptoms, including paralysis. Posterior elements of
the spine are involved more commonly than the vertebral body. Unlike
most other benign bone tumors, which usually are confined to a single
bone, ABCs can involve adjacent vertebrae. Spinal lesions can require
stabilization after excision. As with other benign tumors, attempts are
made to preserve nerve roots and other vital structures. Rapid growth
is characteristic and can lead to confusion with malignant neoplasms
(Fig. 550.10). ABCs can occur with concomitantly with neoplasms,
confounding pathology results from biopsy. Treatment consists of percutaneous injection, curettage and bone grafting, or excision. Recurrence after surgical treatment occurs in 20–30% of patients, is more
common in younger than older children, and usually occurs in the first
1-­2 years after treatment. Treatment approaches also include percutaneously treatment with polidocanol or doxycycline, which targets the
specific matrix metalloproteinase upregulation pathway seen in ABCs
and has shown promising results.

CHARACTERISTIC LESIONS OF THE TIBIA

Osteofibrous dysplasia affects the tibia in children. Most children present with anterior swelling or enlargement of the leg. Radiographs show
solitary or multiple lucent cortical diaphyseal lesions surrounded by
sclerosis. Anterior bowing of the tibia often is present, and pathologic
fracture can occur. The radiographic appearance closely resembles that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3148 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

A

B

C

D

E

Fig. 550.10 Aneurysmal bone cyst. A, A 10-­yr-­old female presents with right tibia pain after playing softball. PA radiograph of the right proximal
tibia reveals an eccentric, lytic lesion. B, Repeat imaging 4 months later shows rapid expansion. C, Coronal T2 MR image. D, Sagittal T2 MR image
shows fluid-­fluid levels classically seen with aneurysmal bone cysts. E, The patient was treated with curettage, bone grafting, and plate fixation to
prevent fracture.

Table 550.3  Summary of Prognosis and Treatment of Vascular Bone Tumors
CLASSIFICATION

ENTITY

PROGNOSIS

TREATMENT

Benign

Hemangioma

100% survival, 0% metastasis

Treat symptoms

Intermediate

Epithelioid hemangioma

100% survival, 2% metastases, 9%
local recurrence

Curettage or marginal excision

Pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma

Limited follow-­up, stable or
progressive osseous disease

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma

85% survival, 25% metastases

Wide resection

Angiosarcoma

30% survival

Wide resection, consider systemic
therapy

Malignant

From van IJzendoorn DGP, Bovee JVMG. Vascular tumors of bone: the evolvement of a classification based on molecular developments. Surg Pathol Clin. 2017;10:621–635. Table 1.

of adamantinoma, a malignant neoplasm, making biopsy more common than with other benign bone tumors. Some believe osteofibrous
dysplasia is a precursor lesion to adamantinoma. Treatment options
include observation, excision and bone grafting, or wide resection.
Adamantinoma is a rare malignancy, typically found in adults,
but occasionally in children. In contrast to osteofibrous dysplasia, the
lesion involves the medullary canal. Resection is indicated, as there are
no known benefits to radiation or chemotherapy for this slow-­growing
tumor.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis is a monostotic or polyostotic disease
that can also involve the skin, liver, or other organs. Single-­site disease
should be distinguished from the other forms of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (Hand-­Schüller-­Christian or Letterer-­Siwe variants), which
can have a less favorable prognosis (see Chapter 556.1). Langerhans cell
histiocytosis usually occurs during the first 3 decades of life and is most
common in males 5-­10 years of age. The skull is commonly affected,
but any bone may be involved. Patients usually present with local pain
and swelling. Marked tenderness and warmth often are present in the
area of the involved bone. Spinal lesions can cause pain, stiffness, and
occasional neurologic symptoms. Vertebra plana with uniform compression or flattening of the vertebral body is commonly but not always
associated with Langerhans cell histiocytosis. The radiographic appearance of the skeletal lesions is similar in all forms of Langerhans cell
histiocytosis but is variable enough to mimic many other benign and

malignant lesions of bone as well as infection. The radiolucent lesions
have well-­defined or irregular margins with expansion of the involved
bone and periosteal new bone formation. A skeletal survey is warranted
as lesions may not be apparent on bone scan. Polyostotic involvement
and the typical skull lesions strongly suggest the diagnosis of eosinophilic granuloma. Biopsy often is necessary to confirm the diagnosis
because of the broad radiographic differential diagnosis. Treatment for
isolated bone lesions includes curettage and bone grafting, or observation for asymptomatic lesions because most osseous lesions heal
spontaneously and do not recur. All children with bone lesions should
be evaluated for visceral involvement because multisystem organ disease may exist with the bone lesion and may not be obvious. Treatment of multisystem disease is more complex and often systemic and
may require chemotherapy. For multisystem disease, bone lesions frequently improve with systemic chemotherapy, and operative treatment
may not be necessary.

VASCULAR TUMORS OF BONE

There is a wide spectrum of vascular bone tumors (Table 550.3), which,
depending on severity, may produce local sclerosis or osteopenia (see
also Chapter 554). More severe lesions are locally aggressive and result
in cortical destruction.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 551 u Retinoblastoma 3149

Chapter 551

Retinoblastoma
Cynthia E. Herzog
Retinoblastoma is an embryonal malignancy of the retina and the most
common intraocular tumor in children. Although the survival rate of
children with retinoblastoma in the United States and developed countries is extremely high, retinoblastoma progresses to metastatic disease
and death in >40% of children in low income countries. Furthermore,
the associated loss of vision and side effects of therapy are significant
problems that remain to be addressed.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Approximately 200-300 new cases of retinoblastoma are diagnosed each
year in the United States, with no known racial or gender predilection.
The cumulative lifetime incidence of retinoblastoma is approximately 1
in 20,000 live births, and retinoblastoma accounts for 2% of all pediatric malignancies. The median age at diagnosis is approximately 2 years,
and >90% of cases are diagnosed in children <5 years old. Overall,
66–75% of children with retinoblastoma have unilateral tumors, with
the remainder having bilateral retinoblastoma. Bilateral involvement
is more common in younger children, particularly in those diagnosed
before age 1 year, and is always heritable. Risk of retinoblastoma may
be increased in children conceived by in vitro fertilization.
Retinoblastoma can be either hereditary or sporadic. Hereditary
cases usually are diagnosed at a younger age and are multifocal and
bilateral, whereas sporadic cases are usually diagnosed in older children who tend to have unilateral, unifocal involvement. The hereditary
form is associated with loss of function of the retinoblastoma gene
(RB1) via a pathogenic variant or deletion. RB1 is located on chromosome 13q14 and encodes the retinoblastoma protein, a tumor-­
suppressor protein that controls cell cycle phase transition and has
roles in apoptosis and cell differentiation. Children with 13q deletion
syndrome are at increased risk to develop retinoblastoma. Many different causative pathogenic variants have been identified, including
translocations, deletions, insertions, point pathogenic variants, and
epigenetic modifications such as gene methylation. The nature of the
predisposing pathogenic variant can affect the penetrance and expressivity of retinoblastoma development.
According to Knudson's “2-­
hit” model of oncogenesis, two
pathogenic variant events are required for retinoblastoma tumor
development (see Chapter 541). In the hereditary form of retinoblastoma, the first pathogenic variant in RB1 is inherited through
germinal cells, and a pathogenic variant occurs subsequently in
somatic retinal cells. Second pathogenic variants that lead to retinoblastoma often result in the loss of the normal allele and concomitant loss of heterozygosity. Parents and siblings of a child with
a germline pathologic genetic variant should be referred to a genetic
specialist for testing; most children with hereditary retinoblastoma
have spontaneous new germinal pathogenic variants, and both parents have wild-­type retinoblastoma genes. All first-­degree relatives
of children with known or suspected hereditary retinoblastoma
should have retinal examinations to identify retinomas or retinal
scars, which may suggest hereditary retinoblastoma even though
malignant retinoblastoma did not develop. In the sporadic form of
retinoblastoma, the two pathogenic variants occur in somatic retinal
cells. Heterozygous carriers of oncogenic RB1 pathogenic variants
demonstrate variable phenotypic expression.

PATHOGENESIS

Histologically, retinoblastoma appears as a small, round blue cell tumor
with rosette formation (Flexner-­Wintersteiner rosettes). It may arise
in any of the nucleated layers of the retina and exhibit various degrees

of differentiation. Retinoblastoma tumors tend to outgrow their blood
supply, resulting in necrosis and calcification.
Endophytic tumors arise from the inner surface of the retina and
grow into the vitreous and can also grow as tumors suspended within
the vitreous itself, known as vitreous seeding. Exophytic tumors grow
from the outer retinal layer and can cause retinal detachment. Diffuse
infiltrating tumors grow intraretinally and remain flat; these are less
common and can cause iris neovascularization. Tumors can also be
both endophytic and exophytic. These tumors can also spread by direct
extension to the choroid or along the optic nerve beyond the lamina
cribrosa to the central nervous system, or by hematogenous or lymphatic spread to distant sites, including bones, bone marrow, and lungs.

SCREENING

Children with a positive family history of retinoblastoma should
undergo a dilated eye examination under general anesthesia early in
life and at regular intervals until genetic testing is performed and results
are available. Infants with a negative genetic test require no further
screening; infants with a positive genetic test require regular screening
ophthalmologic examinations until age 7 years.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Retinoblastoma classically presents with leukocoria, a white pupillary reflex, which often is first noticed when a red reflex is not present
at a routine newborn or well-­child examination or in a flash photograph of the child (Fig. 551.1). Strabismus often is an initial presenting complaint. Decreased vision, orbital inflammation, hyphema, and
pupil irregularity can occur with advancing disease. Pain can occur if
secondary glaucoma is present. Only about 10% of retinoblastoma
cases are detected by routine ophthalmologic screening in the context
of a positive family history.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis is established by the characteristic ophthalmologic findings of a chalky, white-­gray retinal mass with a soft, friable consistency.
Imaging studies are not diagnostic, and biopsies are contraindicated.
Indirect ophthalmoscopy with slit-­lamp evaluation can detect retinoblastoma tumors, but a complete evaluation requires an examination

A

B
Fig. 551.1 A, Leukocoria noted in the left eye of a child presenting

with retinoblastoma. B, A large white tumor mass noted within the posterior chamber of the enucleated eye. (From Shields JA, Shields CL.
Current management of retinoblastoma. Mayo Clin Proc. 1994;69:50–
56.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3150 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
PROGNOSIS

Fig. 551.2 Axial contrast-­enhanced CT scan shows calcified retinoblastoma of the left eye. (From Haaga JR, Boll DT, eds. CT and MRI of
the Whole Body. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017. Fig. 20-­32.)

under general anesthesia by an experienced ophthalmologist to obtain
complete visualization of both eyes, which also facilitates photographing and mapping of the tumors. Retinal detachment or vitreous hemorrhage can complicate the evaluation.
Orbital ultrasonography, CT, or MRI is used to evaluate the extent
of intraocular disease and extraocular spread (Fig. 551.2). In approximately 5% of cases, a pineal area (primitive neuroectodermal) tumor is
detected in a child with hereditary and bilateral retinoblastoma, a phenomenon known as trilateral retinoblastoma. MRI allows for better
evaluation of optic nerve involvement. Metastatic disease is rarely present at diagnosis; evaluation of the cerebrospinal fluid and bone marrow
for tumor metastasis and radionuclide bone scan are required only if
indicated by other clinical, laboratory, or imaging findings.
The differential diagnosis of retinoblastoma includes other causes
of leukocoria, including persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous,
Coats disease, vitreous hemorrhage, cataract, endophthalmitis from
Toxocara canis, choroidal coloboma, retinopathy of prematurity, and
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy.

TREATMENT

Treatment is determined by the size and location of the tumors, if the
disease is localized to the eye or has spread either to the brain or to the
rest of the body, and whether the child has hereditary or sporadic disease. The primary goal of treatment is always cure; the secondary goals
include preserving vision and the eye itself and decreasing the risk of
late side effects, mainly secondary malignancies. With current modalities for local control of intraocular tumors and more effective systemic
chemotherapy, primary enucleation is being performed less often.
Most unilateral disease presents with a solitary, large tumor. Enucleation is performed if useful vision cannot be salvaged. With bilateral
disease, chemoreduction in combination with focal therapy (laser photocoagulation or cryotherapy) has replaced the traditional approach
of enucleation of the more severely affected eye and irradiation of
the remaining eye. If feasible, small tumors can be treated with focal
therapy with careful follow-­up for recurrence or new tumor growth.
Larger tumors often respond to multiagent chemotherapy, including
carboplatin, vincristine, and etoposide given intravenously. However,
systemic therapy is generally reserved for patients with unilateral disease when high-­risk features are noted after enucleation, or in very
young patients with bilateral disease that are at higher risk of complications with intraarterial chemotherapy. The delivery of chemotherapy
via the ophthalmic artery is becoming more common, as is delivery
of intravitreal chemotherapy. If these approaches fail, external-­beam
irradiation should be considered, although this approach may result
in significant orbital deformity and increased incidence of second
malignancies in patients with germline RB1 pathologic genetic variants. Brachytherapy, or episcleral plaque radiotherapy, is an alternative
with less morbidity. Enucleation may be required for unresponsive or
recurrent tumors. Intense multiagent chemotherapy with autologous
stem cell rescue may be used for patients with metastatic disease.

Approximately 95% of U.S. children with retinoblastoma are cured
with modern treatment. Current efforts using chemotherapy in combination with focal therapy are intended to preserve useful vision and
avoid external-­beam radiation or enucleation. Unfortunately, the diagnosis of retinoblastoma in many children from resource-­poor countries is delayed, resulting in spread of the tumor outside the orbit. The
prognosis for children with retinoblastoma that has spread outside the
eye is poor. Trilateral retinoblastoma, disease involving both eyes and
the pineal region, is almost universally fatal.
Children with germline RB1 pathologic genetic variants are at significant risk for development of second malignancies, especially osteosarcoma, as well as soft tissue sarcomas and malignant melanoma. The
risk of second malignancies is further increased by the use of radiation
therapy. Other radiation-­related late adverse effects include cataracts,
orbital growth deformities, lacrimal dysfunction, and late retinal vascular injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 552

Gonadal and Germ Cell
Neoplasms
Cynthia E. Herzog and Winston W. Huh
EPIDEMIOLOGY

Malignant germ cell tumors (GCTs) and gonadal tumors are rare, with
an incidence of 12 cases per 1 million persons younger than 20 years.
Most malignant tumors of the gonads in children are GCTs. The incidence varies according to age and sex, although the incidence of GCTs
in adolescent males has increased over time. Sacrococcygeal tumors
occur predominantly in infant females. Testicular GCTs occur predominantly before age 4 years and after puberty. Klinefelter syndrome
is associated with an increased risk of mediastinal GCTs. Trisomy 21,
undescended testes, infertility, testicular atrophy, testicular microlithiasis, testicular dysgenesis syndrome, and inguinal hernias are associated with an increased risk of testicular cancer. The risk of testicular
cancer in patients with cryptorchidism is reduced but not eliminated
if orchiopexy is performed before 13 years of age. The risk of testicular
GCT is increased in first-­degree relatives and is highest among monozygotic twins.

PATHOGENESIS

The GCTs and non-­GCTs arise from primordial germ cells and coelomic epithelium, respectively. Testicular and sacrococcygeal GCTs
arising during early childhood characteristically have deletions at chromosome arms 1p and 6q and gains at 1q, and they lack the isochromosome 12p that is highly characteristic of malignant GCTs of adults.
Testicular GCTs also may demonstrate loss of imprinting. Ovarian
GCTs from older females characteristically have deletions at 1p and
gains at 1q and 21. Dysregulation of microRNAs have been linked to
GCTs. Because GCTs may contain benign and mixed malignant elements in different areas of the tumor, extensive sectioning is essential
to confirm the correct diagnosis. The many histologically distinct subtypes of GCTs include teratoma (mature and immature), endodermal
sinus tumor, and embryonal carcinoma (Fig. 552.1). Non-­GCTs of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 552 u Gonadal and Germ Cell Neoplasms

3151

Normal germ cell development
Migration of PGCs to
genital ridge
then gonads

Inner cell mass

Sertoli cells

PGCs

Blastocyst

Spermatogenesis

A

Seminiferous tubules

Migration
Seminomas
Teratomas

TGCT
development

?
(Embryonic)

Seminiferous
tubule

Embryonal carcinomas
Choriocarcinomas
IGCNU

B

Combined
tumors

(Extra-embryonic)
Invasion

Yolk sac
tumors

Table 552.1  Main Histologic Types of Testicular Germ Cell
Tumors*
NONINVASIVE GERM CELL NEOPLASIA
Germ cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS; previous synonyms: carcinoma in
situ testis, intratubular germ cell neoplasia unclassified)
Gonadoblastoma (in patients with disorders of sex development;
tumor also contains sex cord–stromal elements)
GERM CELL TUMORS DERIVED FROM GCNIS
Seminoma
Nonseminoma (nonseminomatous germ cell tumors)
Embryonal carcinoma
Teratoma (postpubertal type)
Yolk sac tumor (postpubertal type)
Choriocarcinoma and other trophoblastic tumors
GERM CELL TUMORS UNRELATED TO GCNIS
Childhood tumors
Teratoma (prepubertal type)
Yolk sac tumor (prepubertal type)
Spermatocytic tumor (median age at diagnosis: approximately 50 yr)
*Based on updated WHO classification of tumors of the testis and paratesticular tissue.
Adapted from Raypert-­De Meyts E, McGlynn KA, Okamoto, et al. Testicular germ cell
tumours, Lancet 2016;387:1762–1770.

ovary include epithelial (serous and mucinous) and sex cord–stromal
tumors; non-­GCTs of the testicle include sex cord–stromal (e.g., Leydig
cell, Sertoli cell) tumors. DICER1 pathogenic variants have been observed
in nonepithelial ovarian cancers, especially in Sertoli-­Leydig tumors.
Table 552.1 provides a histologic classification of testicular GCTs.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

The clinical presentation of germ cell neoplasms depends on location
(Table 552.2). Ovarian tumors often are quite large by the time they
are diagnosed (Fig. 552.2). Extragonadal GCTs occur in the midline,
including the suprasellar region, pineal region, neck, mediastinum,
and retroperitoneal and sacrococcygeal areas (Fig. 552.3). Symptoms

Nonseminomas

Fig. 552.1 A, Normal germ cell de-

velopment. B, Model for the origin and
histogenesis of different subtypes of
testicular germ cell tumors. IGCNU, Intratubular germ cell neoplasia unclassified; PGCs, primary germ cells; TGCT,
testicular germ cell tumor.

relate to mass effect, but the intracranial GCTs often present with anterior and posterior pituitary deficits (see Chapter 546).
The serum α-­fetoprotein (AFP) level is elevated with endodermal
sinus tumors and may be minimally elevated with teratomas (Table
552.3). Infants normally have higher levels of AFP, which usually falls
to normal adult levels by about age 8 months; consequently, high AFP
levels must be interpreted with caution in this age-­group. Elevation of
the β subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (β-­hCG), which is
secreted by syncytiotrophoblasts, is seen with choriocarcinoma and
germinomas. Lactate dehydrogenase, although nonspecific, may be a
useful marker. If elevated, these markers provide important confirmation of the diagnosis and provide a means for risk stratification and to
monitor the patient for tumor response and recurrence. Both serum
and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) should be assayed for these markers in
patients with intracranial lesions. MicroRNA-­371 is a superior tumor
marker in GCT, but its use is still limited.
Diagnosis begins with physical examination and imaging studies,
including plain radiographs of the chest and ultrasonography of the
abdomen. CT or MRI can further delineate the primary tumor. If germ
cell malignancy is strongly suggested, preoperative staging with CT of
the chest and bone scan is appropriate. Primary surgical resection is
indicated for tumors deemed resectable. For older patients with testicular tumors, ipsilateral retroperitoneal lymph node sampling may be
required to determine extent of the disease and aid in treatment planning. Ovarian tumors also require detailed surgical evaluation, including lymph node removal and pelvic washings for cytologic analysis for
peritoneal spread. Diagnosis of intracranial lesions can be established
with imaging and AFP or β-­hCG determinations of serum and CSF.
Gonadoblastomas often occur in patients with gonadal dysgenesis
and all or parts of a Y chromosome. Gonadal dysgenesis is characterized by failure to fully masculinize the external genitalia. If this syndrome is diagnosed, imaging of the gonad with ultrasonography or CT
is performed, and surgical resection of the tumor usually is curative.
Prophylactic resection of dysgenetic gonads at the time of diagnosis
is recommended, because gonadoblastomas, some of which contain
malignant GCT elements, often develop. Gonadoblastomas may produce abnormal amounts of estrogen.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3152 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 552.2  Clinical Features of Germ Cell Tumors
CLINICAL FEATURES
TUMOR TYPE

FEMALE

MALE

Mature/immature teratoma

Abdominal pain, abdominal mass
10% bilateral
Gliomatosis peritonei does not affect prognosis

Nontender scrotal mass
Excellent survival with surgery alone in prepubertal
males

Dysgerminoma/seminoma

Rapidly developed intraabdominal mass
20% bilateral
14–25% mixed with other germ cell elements

Virtually not seen in children, most common testicular
tumor in adult males. Most patients present in their
30s

YST

Most common malignant histology
75% stage I

Most common malignant histology, most pediatric
tumors are pure YST
85% stage I

Embryonal carcinoma

Associated with precocious puberty, amenorrhea, and
hirsutism

Higher incidence of metastatic disease at presentation,
patients can present with retroperitoneal mass

Choriocarcinoma

Rare in children, when present in infants related to
maternal metastatic disease

Frequent pulmonary metastatic disease at presentation,
patients can present with hemoptysis due to
hemorrhage of metastases

Gonadoblastoma

Associated with gonadal dysgenesis
Presents mostly in phenotypical females with a
Y chromosome

Very rare

YST, Yolk sac tumor.
Modified from Fonseca A, Olson TA. Extracranial germ cell tumors. In: Fish JD, Liptin JM, Lanzkowsky P, eds. Lanzkowsky’s Manual of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology. 7th ed.
London: Elsevier; 2022: Table 28.2, p. 600.

Table 552.3  Serum Tumor Marker Levels for Pediatric
GCTs
AFP

β-­hCG

MT

-­

-­

-­

IT

+/–

-­

+/–

Seminoma/dysgerminoma

-­

-­

+

Yolk sac tumor

+

-­

-­

Choriocarcinoma

-­

+

-­

Embryonal carcinoma

+

+

+/–

GCT TYPE

Teratoma

B

A

Fig. 552.2 A, Postnatal MR image showing a left ovarian teratoma

with bony calcification. B, Massive ovarian teratoma. (From Lakhoo K.
Neonatal teratomas. Early Hum Dev. 2010;86:643–647.)

Internal

External
A Sacrococcygeal teratoma

B

Fig. 552.3 A, Prenatal MR image showing sacrococcygeal teratoma

with a small internal and large external component. B, Postnatal large,
bleeding sacrococcygeal teratoma. (From Lakhoo K. Neonatal teratomas. Early Hum Dev. 2010;86:643–647.)

LDH

+, Usually elevated; +/–, may be elevated; -­, usually not elevated.
GCT, Germ cell tumor; AFP, α-­fetoprotein; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LDH,
lactate dehydrogenase; MT, mature teratoma; IT, immature teratoma.
From Weil BR, Billmire DF. Management of germ cell tumors in pediatric patients. Surg
Oncol Clin N Am. 2021;30:325–338. Table 1.

Teratomas occur in many locations, presenting as masses. They
are not associated with elevated markers unless malignancy is present. The sacrococcygeal region is the most common site for teratomas.
Sacrococcygeal teratomas occur most commonly in infants and may
be diagnosed in utero or at birth, with most found in girls. The rate
of malignancy in this location varies, ranging from <10% in children
younger than 2 months to >50% in children older than 4 months.
Germinomas occur intracranially, in the mediastinum, and in the
gonads. In the ovary, they are called dysgerminomas, and in the testis,
they are called seminomas. They usually are tumor-­marker–negative
masses despite being malignant. Endodermal sinus or yolk sac tumor
and choriocarcinoma appear highly malignant by histologic criteria.
Both occur at gonadal and extragonadal sites. Embryonal carcinoma
most often occurs in the testes. Choriocarcinoma and embryonal carcinoma rarely occur in the pure form and are usually found as part of
a mixed malignant GCT.
Non–germ cell gonadal tumors are very uncommon in pediatrics
and occur predominantly in the ovary. Epithelial carcinomas (usually an adult tumor), Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumors, and granulosa cell

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 553 u Neoplasms of the Liver
tumors may occur in children. Carcinomas account for ∼30% of ovarian tumors in females <20 years old; most of these occur in older teens
and are of the serous or mucinous subtype. Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumors
and granulosa cell tumors produce hormones that can cause virilization, feminization, or precocious puberty, depending on pubertal stage
and the balance between Sertoli cells (estrogen production) and Leydig cells (androgen production). Diagnostic evaluation usually focuses
on the chief complaint of inappropriate sex steroid effect and includes
hormone measurements, which reflect gonadotropin-­independent sex
steroid production. Appropriate imaging also is performed to rule out
a functioning gonadal tumor. Surgery usually is curative. No effective
therapy for nonresectable disease has been found.

TREATMENT

Complete surgical excision of the tumor usually is indicated, except for
patients with intracranial tumors, for whom the primary therapy consists of radiation therapy and chemotherapy. For testicular tumors, an
inguinal approach is indicated, and complete resection should include
the entire spermatic cord. When complete excision cannot be accomplished, preoperative chemotherapy is indicated, with second-­
look
surgery, especially if retroperitoneal lymph node enlargement persists.
For teratomas, both mature and immature, and completely resected
malignant tumors of the testes and ovary, surgery alone is the treatment. For ovarian tumors, unless the contralateral ovary is obviously
also involved by tumor, a fertility-­sparing surgery should be performed.
Cisplatin-­based chemotherapy regimens usually are curative in GCTs
that cannot be completely resected, even if metastases are present.
However, sex cord–stromal tumors tend to be refractory to chemotherapy. Except for GCTs of the central nervous system, radiation therapy is
limited to those tumors that are not amenable to complete excision and
are refractory to chemotherapy. High-­dose chemotherapy followed by
autologous stem cell rescue is an option in those with refractory disease.

PROGNOSIS

The overall cure rate for children with GCTs is >80%. Age is the most
predictive factor of survival for extragonadal GCTs. Children >12 years
old have a fourfold higher risk of death and a sixfold higher risk if the
tumor is thoracic. Histology has minimal effect on prognosis. Patients
with nonresected extragonadal GCTs have a slightly worse prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 553

Neoplasms of the Liver
Fiorela N. Hernandez Tejada and
Cynthia E. Herzog
Hepatic tumors are rare in children. Primary tumors of the liver account
for approximately 1% of malignancies in children younger than 15
years, with an annual incidence of 1.5 cases per 1 million children in the
United States (Table 553.1). Between 50% and 60% of hepatic tumors in
children are malignant, with >65% of these malignancies being hepatoblastomas and most of the remainder being hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). Rare hepatic malignancies include embryonal sarcoma,
angiosarcoma, malignant germ cell tumor, rhabdomyosarcoma of the
liver, and undifferentiated sarcoma. More common childhood malignancies, such as neuroblastoma, Wilms tumor, and lymphoma, can
metastasize to the liver. Benign liver tumors, which usually present
in the first 6 months of life, include hemangiomas, hamartomas, and
hemangioendotheliomas.

3153

Table 553.1  Pediatric Liver Tumors Consensus
­Classification
Epithelial tumors
Hepatocellular

Biliary

Benign: Hepatocellular adenoma,
focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH),
regenerative nodules, and dysplastic nodules
Malignant: Hepatoblastoma (various
types), hepatocellular carcinoma
(classic HCC and fibrolamellar
HCC), hepatocellular malignant
neoplasm not otherwise specified
(NOS)
Benign: Bile duct adenoma, biliary
hamartoma
Malignant: Cholangiocarcinoma,
combined HCC-­
cholangiocarcinoma

Mesenchymal tumors

Benign: Hemangioma, mesenchymal hamartoma
Malignant: Embryonal sarcoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, malignant
vascular tumors (epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma,
angiosarcoma)

Other rare malignancies

Malignant rhabdoid tumor, germ
cell tumors, desmoplastic small
round cell tumor, peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor

Metastases (and secondary)

From solid tumors: neuroblastoma,
Wilms, acute myeloid leukemia,
Langerhans cell histiocytosis,
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis

Modified from Chavhan GB, Siddiqui I, Ingley KM, Gupta AA. Rare malignant liver
tumors in children. Pediatr Radiol. 2019;49:1404–1421. Table 1.

HEPATOBLASTOMA
Epidemiology

Approximately 100 new cases of hepatoblastoma are diagnosed
each year in the United States. The incidence of hepatoblastoma has
increased over the last 30 years by as much as 2.7% per year, probably related to increasing survival of very low birthweight premature
infants. Hepatoblastoma occurs predominantly in children <3 years
old, and the median age of diagnosis is 1 year. The etiology is unknown.
Hepatoblastomas are associated with familial adenomatous polyposis. Alterations in the antigen-­presenting cell/β-­catenin pathway have
been found in most of the tumors evaluated. Hepatoblastomas are also
associated with Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), hemihyperplasia, and other somatic overgrowth syndromes. Increased expression
of insulin-­like growth factor 2 secondary to genetic pathogenic variants
or epigenetic changes is implicated in hepatoblastoma development in
patients with BWS. All children with BWS or hemihyperplasia should be
routinely screened with α-­fetoprotein (AFP) levels and abdominal ultrasounds. Prematurity/low birthweight is associated with increased incidence of hepatoblastoma, with the risk increasing as birthweight decreases.
Aicardi syndrome, trisomy 18, other trisomies, Li-­Fraumeni syndrome,
Prader-­Willi syndrome, Alagille syndrome, glycogen storage disease (type
1), Simpson-­Golabi-­Behmel syndrome, and fetal alcohol syndrome have
also been associated with increased risk of hepatoblastoma.

Pathogenesis

Hepatoblastoma arises from precursors of hepatocytes and is histologically
classified as whole epithelial type, containing fetal or embryonal malignant
cells (either as a mixture or as pure elements), and mixed type, containing
both epithelial and mesenchymal elements. Histologic classification has a
direct correlation with clinical outcome. Pure fetal histology and low mitotic
activity predicts the best outcome, and the small cell undifferentiated subtype associated with normal AFP levels predicts the worse outcome.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3154 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

A

B

C

D

Fig. 553.1 Hepatoblastoma in a 3-­yr-­old child. A, Pre-

contrast CT scan shows well-­demarcated, heterogeneous hypodense mass (arrow). B, Postcontrast CT scan
shows heterogeneous internal enhancement (arrow). C
and D, The mass (arrow) demonstrates heterogeneous
hypointensity on T1-­weighted (C) and hyperintensity on
T2-­weighted (D) MR images.

Clinical Manifestations

Hepatoblastoma usually presents as a large, asymptomatic abdominal
mass, with no associated systemic symptoms. Jaundice is uncommon. It
arises from the right lobe three times more often than the left and usually is
unifocal. When the disease progresses, fatigue, fever, weight loss, anorexia,
vomiting, and abdominal pain may ensue. Rarely, hepatoblastoma presents with hemorrhage secondary to trauma or spontaneous rupture. Metastatic spread of hepatoblastoma most often involves regional lymph nodes
and the lungs.

Child with liver mass

Cross-sectional imaging of
the abdomen and chest
using CT or MRI
Serum level of AFP

Diagnosis

A biopsy of liver tumors is necessary to establish the diagnosis. A valuable serum tumor marker, AFP, is used in the diagnosis and monitoring
of hepatic tumors. AFP is normally elevated in the newborn period and
then declines to <10 ng/mL by 1 year of age. The AFP levels are elevated
in almost all hepatoblastomas. Bilirubin and liver enzymes usually are
normal. Anemia is common, and thrombocytosis occurs in approximately 30% of patients. Serologic testing for hepatitides B and C should
be performed, but the results usually are negative in hepatoblastoma.
Diagnostic imaging should include plain radiographs and ultrasonography of the abdomen to characterize the hepatic mass. US can differentiate malignant hepatic masses from benign vascular lesions. Either
CT or MRI is an accurate method of defining the extent of intrahepatic
tumor involvement and the potential for surgical resection. Evaluation
for metastatic disease should include CT of the chest (Fig. 553.1).

Treatment

Resectable
by standard lobectomy

No

Treatment is guided by the degree of local tumor burden determined by
the pre-­and posttreatment extent of disease. In general, the cure of malignant hepatic tumors in children depends on complete resection of the
primary tumor (Fig. 553.2); as much as 85% of the liver can be resected,
with hepatic regeneration noted within 3-­4 months after surgery. Treatment of hepatoblastoma is based on surgery and systemic chemotherapy using cisplatin in combination with vincristine and 5-­fluorouracil
(5-­FU), and for intermediate-­and high-­risk patients, doxorubicin is also
used. The role of radiation therapy is questionable, because the effective
antitumor dose exceeds the hepatic tolerance. Radiation therapy may
have a role in shrinking unresectable disease or managing incompletely
resected tumors. In 30% of cases, tumors are resectable at diagnosis; a
safe attempt for initial gross total resection should be made, followed
by adjuvant chemotherapy. Unresectable tumors with or without metastatic disease at presentation usually respond to chemotherapy; preresection chemotherapy is indicated, and excision of the primary tumor and

Yes

Biopsy to confirm diagnosis

Resect

Chemotherapy

Histology of lesion

Restudy every 2 cycles
CT scan and AFP

Chemotherapy
unless pure fetal
histology

Resectable by conventional
surgery after 4 cycles of
chemotherapy

No

Yes

List for liver transplant*

Resect

Transplant

Complete chemotherapy

Chemotherapy – 2 cycles
*Consider continuation of chemotherapy or living-related liver transplantation
if cadaveric liver transplant not available in a timely fashion

Fig. 553.2 Algorithm for the management of a child who presents

with a hepatoblastoma. AFP, α-­Fetoprotein. (From Tiao GM, Bobey N,
Allen S, et al. The current management of hepatoblastoma: a combination of chemotherapy, conventional resection, and liver transplantation.
J Pediatr. 2005;146:204–211.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 553 u Neoplasms of the Liver
extrahepatic disease should be attempted as soon as it becomes feasible,
followed by additional chemotherapy. Orthotopic liver transplant is a
viable option for unresectable primary hepatic malignancies and results
in good long-­term survival. The pretransplant medical condition is an
important predictor of outcome, and thus transplant is much more effective as the primary surgery than as salvage therapy. Alternative treatment
options currently under investigation include other systemic chemotherapy agents such as carboplatin, ifosfamide, etoposide, irinotecan,
and temsirolimus. Other treatment approaches include transarterial
chemoembolization, cryoablation, and radiofrequency ablation (RFA).

Prognosis

In low-­stage tumors, survival rates >90% can be achieved with multimodal treatment, including surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy. With
tumors unresectable at diagnosis, survival rates of approximately 60%
can be obtained. Metastatic disease further reduces survival, but complete regression of disease often can be obtained with chemotherapy
and surgical resection of the primary tumor and isolated pulmonary
metastatic disease, resulting in survival rates of approximately 25%.
Treatment-­related long-­term adverse effects include cardiac toxicity
with doxorubicin and renal and ototoxicity with cisplatin.

Glycogen storage diseases
Types 1 and 3
Poor metabolic control
Size and number of adenomas
Malignant transformation in adenoma
Congenital portosystemic shunts
Complete absence of PV (Type 1a)
Presence of NRH, adenoma,
dysplasia

3155

HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA
Epidemiology

HCC occurs mostly in adolescents and often is associated with perinatal acquired hepatitis B infection and tyrosinemia. It is more common in
East Asia and other areas where hepatitis B is endemic; the incidence has
decreased following the introduction of hepatitis B vaccination. In these
areas, HCC also tends to occur in a bimodal pattern, with the younger
age peak overlapping the age of hepatoblastoma presentation. HCC also
occurs in the chronic form of glycogen storage disease, α1-­antitrypsin deficiency, biliary atresia, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis, Alagille
syndrome, congenital portosystemic shunts, Budd-­Chiari syndrome, status postirradiation for liver metastatic Wilms tumor, and with other liver
diseases producing chronic inflammation or cirrhosis (Fig. 553.3).

Pathogenesis

Pediatric HCC arises in cirrhotic and noncirrhotic backgrounds and
presents as a multicentric, invasive tumor consisting of large pleomorphic cells of epithelial origin. Compared to adults, cirrhosis in children is less common, and congenital liver disorders are more common.
HCCs are classified as classical or fibrolamellar. The fibrolamellar
variant occurs more often in adolescent and young adult patients, is
not associated with cirrhosis, and represents one fourth of the pediatric

Hepatitis-B infection2

Tyrosinemia

Perinatal acquisition
Immunoclearance state
Early seroconversion (< 3 yr)
HBeAg negative (Precore mutants)
Genotype B >>> C
High HBV-DNA
Persistent DNA positivity
Male gender
Maternal HBeAg positivity
Family history of HCC
Absent or incomplete HBV vaccination

Nonusage of NTBC
Late introduction of NTBC (after 1 mo of
age)
Familial intrahepatic cholestasis:
BSEP deficiency
Non-D482G pathogenic variants
Presence of 2 protein-truncating pathogenic
variants
TJP2 pathogenic variants
MDR3 deficiency

HVOTO/BCS
Long standing obstruction
Presence of NRH
IVC obstruction
Male gender
Factor-V Leiden pathogenic variant

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency
PiZZ phenotype
Male gender

Other metabolic derangements

Biliary atresia

Acute intermittent porphyria1
Porphyria cutaneous tarda1
Hypercitrullinemia1

Alagille syndrome

Genetic syndromes
Ataxia-telangiectasia
Fanconi anemia
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Neurofibromatosis

Other associations:
HCC
without
cirrhosis

HCC
with
cirrhosis

Autoimmune hepatitis1
Glycogen storage disease Type 4
Wilson disease1
Hereditary hemochromatosis1

Sporadic HCC
33%-50% of Pediatric HCC

Fig. 553.3 Risk factors for pediatric hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). 1Conditions cause HCC in adults, and very rarely in children; 2Hepatitis B virus
(HBV)-­related HCC may occur in the presence or absence of cirrhosis. BCS, Budd-­Chiari syndrome; HVOTO, hepatic venous outflow tract obstruction; IVC, inferior vena cava; NRH, nodular regenerative hyperplasia; BSEP, bile salt export pump; MDR3, multidrug resistance protein-­3; NTBC, [2
-­(2-­nitro4-­trifluoromethylbenzoyl)-­1,3-­cyclohexanedione (Nitisinone); PiZZ, homozygous PiZ phenotype of α1-­antitrypsin; PV, Portal vein; TJP: tight
junction protein. (From Khanna R, Verma SK. Pediatric hepatocellular carcinoma. World J Gastroenterol. 2018;24[35]:3980–3999. Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3156 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
HCC cases. This variant has been reported to have a distinct translocation, DNAJB1-­PRKACA. A rare subtype called transitional liver
tumor occurs in older children and has clinical and histopathologic
findings of both hepatoblastoma and HCC.

Clinical Manifestations

HCC usually presents as a hepatic mass with abdominal distention and
symptoms of anorexia, weight loss, jaundice, and abdominal pain. HCC
can present as an acute abdominal crisis with rupture of the tumor and
hemoperitoneum. Metastatic spread usually involves regional lymph
nodes and the lungs. The AFP level is elevated in approximately 60%
of children with conventional HCC, but not in the fibrolamellar variant. Evidence of hepatitis B usually is found in endemic areas but not in
Western countries or with the fibrolamellar type. Liver enzymes may be
abnormal.
Diagnostic imaging should include plain radiographs and US of the
abdomen to characterize the hepatic mass. US can differentiate malignant hepatic masses from benign vascular lesions. Either CT or MRI
is an accurate method of defining the extent of intrahepatic tumor
involvement and the potential for surgical resection. Evaluation for
metastatic disease should include CT of the chest.

Treatment

Complete tumor resection is crucial for curative treatment. Because of
the multicentric origin of HCC and underlying liver disease, complete
resection is accomplished in only 20–30% of cases. A gross total resection should be attempted at diagnosis when possible; if not, neoadjuvant chemotherapy should be given to convert nonresectable tumors
into resectable ones. Combination chemotherapy following surgery is
necessary. For unresectable tumors, chemotherapy followed by surgical assessment is essential, and liver transplant should be decided
individually for each patient with HCC. Chemotherapy, including
cisplatin, carboplatin, doxorubicin, and etoposide, has shown activity
against this tumor, but improved long-­term outcome has been difficult to achieve if tumor is not completed resected. Sorafenib, a small
inhibitor of several tyrosine protein kinase showed antitumoral activity
in adult patients with HCC, and initial studies have been published in
the pediatric population with encouraging results. Other techniques
are under study in adults, including cryosurgery, RFA, transarterial
chemoembolization, and radiation therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 554

Complex Vascular
Anomalies
Alexandra J. Borst and Denise M. Adams
Vascular anomalies in children encompass a spectrum of disorders
that may be divided into vascular malformations and vascular tumors
(Tables 554.1-­554.4; see Chapter 691). Vascular malformations are
developmental disorders of blood vessel formation. Malformations do
not regress; rather, they slowly enlarge. They should be named after the
predominant vessel(s) forming the lesion: arterial, capillary, lymphatic,
or venous, or combinations of these (see Table 554.1). Vascular tumors
exhibit endothelial cell hyperplasia and proliferation. The International
Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies (ISSVA) continues to update
the classification structure for vascular disorders as new disorders are

identified and as the biology and genetic causes for established disorders are found. The complete classification, associated syndromes,
and causative pathogenic variants can be found at www.issva.org. The
discovery of the molecular basis of many vascular malformations
and tumors has allowed for improved understanding of the etiology
of these disorders as well as new targeted therapeutic approaches for
management.

GENETIC BASIS FOR VASCULAR ANOMALIES

Two key intracellular signaling pathways have been implicated in
the pathogenesis of most vascular malformations, syndromes, and
tumors. The RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways are crucial for cell cycle regulation, proliferation, and migration (Fig. 554.1).
Pathogenic, somatic variants in the PIK3CA gene have been identified
in patients with venous malformations, lymphatic malformations,
and several vascular anomalies and overgrowth syndromes (see Table
554.4). Pathogenic variants in the RAS/MAPK pathway have been
identified in capillary and arteriovenous malformations (AVMs),
central conducting lymphatic anomalies, as well as many of the vascular tumors.
Discovery of the molecular basis for vascular malformations and
tumors has led to the ability to find targeted therapies for management of these conditions. Sirolimus has been utilized successfully in
vascular malformations and tumors. The identification of the crucial
role of PIK3CA pathogenic variants in vascular anomalies has led to
the investigation of PI3K inhibitors as important targeted therapies.
Agents that target the RAS/MAPK pathway, such as MEK inhibitors,
have also been trialed in complicated AVMs as well as Kaposiform
lymphangiomatosis (KLA).

COMPLEX LYMPHATIC ANOMALIES

Lymphatic anomalies represent a rare disease entity, with an estimated
incidence of 1:10,000 for the most common form of lymphatic malformations, but with only a few hundred case reports in the literature
for complex lymphatic anomalies. Lymphatic anomalies arise from
developmental defects in lymphangiogenesis. They carry significant
risk for comorbidities, including pain, infection, disfigurement, and
life-­threatening organ dysfunction. Lymphatic anomalies encompass
a broad range of developmental and functional defects in lymphatic
vessels that range from discrete malformations to complex anomalies
(generalized lymphatic anomaly [GLA], KLA, and Gorham-­Stout disease [GSD]) and primary lymphedema syndromes.
Most lymphatic anomalies are thought to arise from somatic pathogenic variants in genes involved in lymphangiogenesis, but germline
predispositions also exist. Pathogenic variants in the PIK3CA/AKT/
mTOR and VEGFC/VEGFR3 pathways have been found in many isolated lymphatic malformations; variants in the RAS/MAPK pathway
have been identified in patients with complex lymphatic anomalies (Fig.
554.2). However, most patients remain without a genetic diagnosis.

Generalized Lymphatic Anomaly

Previously known as lymphangiomatosis, GLA is characterized by a
nonneoplastic, multicentric proliferation of dilated lymphatic vessels,
with multiple sites resembling common lymphatic malformations (Fig.
554.3). The lesions are present since birth but generally become clinically apparent within the first 2 decades of life. The lesions can affect the
bones, liver, spleen, mediastinum, lung, and soft tissues. Bone involvement is typically osteolytic, with punched out lesions and intact cortex. Clinical response depends on location and extent of disease, with
thoracic involvement having the poorest prognosis. Patients with GLA
most commonly have pathogenic somatic variants in PIK3CA leading
to overactivity in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway and disrupted lymphatic development and growth. Many patients have been successfully
managed with sirolimus.

Gorham-­Stout Disease

GSD (also known as vanishing bone disease) has significant clinical
overlap with GLA but tends to involve a single site or adjacent sites.
Patients may present with adjacent soft tissue mass or small areas of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 554 u Complex Vascular Anomalies
Table 554.1

3157

Overview of Vascular Anomalies
VASCULAR MALFORMATIONS

VASCULAR TUMORS

SIMPLE

COMBINED*

Benign

Capillary malformations
Lymphatic malformations

CMV, CLM
LVM, CLVM

Locally aggressive or
borderline

Venous malformations
Arteriovenous malformations†

CAVM†
CLAVM†

Malignant

Arteriovenous fistula†

Others

OF MAJOR NAMED
VESSELS

ASSOCIATED WITH
OTHER ANOMALIES

See Table 554.2

See Table 554.3

*Defined as two or more vascular malformations found in one lesion.
†High-­flow lesions.

A list of casual genes and related vascular anomalies is available in Tables 554.3 and 554.4
CVM, Capillary venous malformation; CLM, capillary lymphatic malformation, LVM, lymphatic venous malformation, CLVM, capillary lymphatic venous malformation, CAVM, capillary
arteriovenous malformation; CLAVM, capillary lymphatic arteriovenous malformation.
From ISSVA Classification for Vascular Anomalies (Approved at the 20th ISSVA Workshop, Melbourne, April 2014, last revision May 2018) https://www.issva.org/UserFiles/file/ISSVA-­
Classification-­2018.pdf

Lymphatics

life-­threatening, and frequently hemorrhagic, pleural effusions (Fig.
554.5). Patients often have a coagulopathy at presentation due to
the same Kasabach-­Merritt phenomenon (KMP) seen in patients
with Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma. Patients typically present
at a younger age than those with GLA or GSD; the mortality has been
reported as high as 50–60% prior to the introduction of sirolimus.

Veins

Central Conducting Lymphatic Anomaly

Table 554.2  Anomalies of Major Named Vessels (Also
Known as “Channel Type” or “Truncal”
Vascular Malformations)
Affect

Diameter (aplasia, hypoplasia, stenosis, ectasia / aneurysm)

Central conducting lymphatic anomaly (CCLA), also known as lymphangiectasia, is classified as a channel-­type lymphatic anomaly. CCLA
is caused by lymphatic channel dysmotility and distal obstruction/malformation affecting lymphatic drainage and leading to recurrent effusions (Fig. 554.6). Patients with other complex lymphatic anomalies
may have a component of CCLA. Pathogenic variants in EPHB4 and
ARAF have been identified in patients with CCLA and both mTOR
and MEK inhibition have been used in its management with mixed
success. Patients frequently needed targeted interventional procedures
to embolize abnormal lymphatic vessels.

Valves

Treatment of Complex Lymphatic Anomalies

Arteries
Anomalies of
Origin
Course
Number
Length

Communication (AVF)
Persistence (of embryonal vessel)
AVF, Arteriovenous fistula.
From ISSVA Classification for Vascular Anomalies (Approved at the 20th ISSVA Workshop, Melbourne, April 2014, last revision May 2018) https://www.issva.org/UserFiles/file
/ISSVA-­Classification-­2018.pdf

microcystic lymphatic malformation. The upper axial skeleton is commonly affected, and there is osteolysis of both the medullary and cortical bone (Fig. 554.4). This osteolysis can be profound and result in
significant morbidity, including dysfunction of an appendage or even
spinal column instability. Some molecular findings in patients with
GSD have suggested that somatic activating variants in KRAS and dysfunction of the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway drive the pathogenesis
of GSD. Many patients have been treated with sirolimus with adjunctive bisphosphonate therapy.

Kaposiform Lymphangiomatosis

KLA has been considered an aggressive subtype of GLA but is histologically and molecularly distinct. Many patients with KLA harbor
somatic activation variants in the RAS pathway, rather than the PI3K/
AKT/mTOR pathway identified as causative in GLA. KLA presents
with distinct foci of spindled endothelial cells on a background of
malformed lymphatic vessels. KLA can affect multiple organs and sites
but primarily affects the thoracic cavity with patients presenting with

Management of complex lymphatic anomalies is principally aimed at
control, not cure. This can include a variety of medical, surgical, and
interventional procedures to control symptoms and prevent morbidity.
Sirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, has been shown to decrease symptoms
of lymphatic leak such as lymphatic blebs, decrease the size of macrocystic and microcystic malformations, decrease chylous production,
and may slow the pathologic dissolution of bone by lymphatic malformation. MEK inhibition has shown promise in the management of
KLA and CCLA, both found to be driven more by perturbations affecting RAS/MAPK signaling. Adjunctive therapy with bisphosphonates
is often used in GSD and in patients with GLA and KLA with bony
vertebral lesions.

COMPLEX VENOUS ANOMALIES

Venous anomalies are slow-­flow lesions that represent abnormal or
excessive growth of venous structures. Venous malformations are the
most common vascular malformations with an incidence of 1 in 5,000
to 10,000. Due to the slow and sometimes turbulent flow, they commonly are associated with pain, swelling, and intralesional thrombosis.
Venous malformations have been found to have somatic pathogenic
variants in both PIK3CA and TIE2/TEK, an endothelial cell–specific
tyrosine kinase receptor that functions through the PI3K/AKT/mTOR
pathway (see Fig. 554.1).

Blue Rubber Bleb Nevus Syndrome

Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome (BRBNS) is characterized by multiple
cutaneous and internal venous malformations, primarily hepatic and intestinal (Fig. 554.7). Many cases have been found to be due to gain-­of-­function

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3158 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 554.3

Vascular Malformations Associated with Other Anomalies

SYNDROME

LESIONS

GENES

Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome*:

CM + VM +/− LM + limb overgrowth

PIK3CA

Parkes-­Weber syndrome:

CM + AVF + limb overgrowth

RASA1

Servelle-­Martorell syndrome:

limb VM + bone undergrowth

Sturge-­Weber syndrome:

facial + leptomeningeal CM + eye anomalies
+/− bone and/or soft tissue overgrowth

Limb CM + congenital nonprogressive limb
overgrowth
Maffucci syndrome:

GNAQ
GNA11

VM +/− spindle-­cell hemangioma +
enchondroma

IDH1/IDH2

Macrocephaly-­CM (M-­CM/MCAP)*

PIK3CA

Microcephaly-­CM (MICCAP)

STAMBP

CLOVES syndrome*:

LM + VM + CM +/– AVM + lipomatous
overgrowth

PICK3CA

Proteus syndrome:

CM, VM, and/or LM + asymmetrical somatic
overgrowth

AKT1

Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba syndrome:

AVM + VM + macrocephaly, lipomatous
overgrowth

PTEN

CLAPO syndrome*:

lower lip CM + face and neck LM + asymmetry
and partial/generalized overgrowth

PIK3CA

*These lesions belong to the PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum (PROS)
CM, Capillary malformation; VM, venous malformation; LM, lymphatic malformation; AVF, arteriovenous fistula; M-­CM, macrocephaly-­capillary malformation; MCAP, megalocephaly-­
capillary-­malformation-­polymicrogyria; MICCAP, microcephaly-­capillary malformation; CLOVES, congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevi,
skeletal/scoliosis/spinal anomalies; CLAPO, lower lip CM + face and neck LM + asymmetry and partial/generalized overgrowth.
From ISSVA Classification for Vascular Anomalies (Approved at the 20th ISSVA Workshop, Melbourne, April 2014, last revision May 2018) https://www.issva.org/UserFiles/file/ISSVA-­
Classification-­2018.pdf

Table 554.4

PIK3CA-­Related Overgrowth Spectrum

PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum (PROS) group lesions with
heterogeneous segmental overgrowth phenotypes with or without
vascular anomalies due to somatic PIK3CA activating variants.
This spectrum includes:
• Fibroadipose hyperplasia or overgrowth (FAO)
• Hemihyperplasia multiple lipomatosis (HHML)
• Congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations,
epidermal nevi, scoliosis/skeletal, and spinal (CLOVES) syndrome
• Macrodactyly
• Fibroadipose infiltrating lipomatosis/facial infiltrative lipomatosis
• Megalencephaly-­capillary malformation (MCAP or M-CM )
• Dysplastic megalencephaly (DMEG)
• Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome
From ISSVA Classification for Vascular Anomalies (Approved at the 20th ISSVA Workshop, Melbourne, April 2014, last revision May 2018) https://www.issva.org/UserFiles/file
/ISSVA-­Classification-­2018.pdf

TIE2/TEK pathogenic variants; both sporadic and autosomal dominant
inheritance have been described. Significant morbidity can arise due to
intestinal venous malformations, which can lead to severe bleeding and
secondary iron deficiency anemia. Patients must be monitored closely for
signs and symptoms of bleeding. The mainstay of management is control
of disease with sirolimus and supportive care for anemia.

Glomuvenous Malformation (Glomangioma)

Glomuvenous malformations, also known as glomangiomas or glomus
tumors, are one of the rare germline conditions in vascular anomalies. Glomuvenous malformations result from an autosomal dominant

loss-­of-­function variant in the GLMN gene, which encodes a protein
essential for normal vascular development. Patients present with multiple superficial cutaneous lesions with a cobblestone appearance (Fig.
554.8). There is 100% penetrance but variable expressivity. Painful
lesions can be treated with surgical resection, laser, or sclerotherapy.

SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH VASCULAR
ANOMALIES
PIK3CA-­Related Overgrowth Spectrum Disorders

PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum (PROS) encompasses a group
of disorders caused by somatic mosaic mutations in the PI3K/AKT/
mTOR pathway (see Table 554.4). The PIK3CA (phosphatidylinositol-­
4,5-­bisphosphate 3-­kinase catalytic subunit α) gene encodes a group of
lipid kinases (PI3 kinases) that are key to regulating cell proliferation and
survival via the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Patients with PROS present
with a wide spectrum of clinical phenotypes, but progressive segmental
overgrowth and vascular malformations are key components.

Klippel-­Trenaunay Syndrome

Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome (KTS) is characterized by overgrowth of
one lower extremity in combination with combined slow-­flow vascular malformation (capillary, venous, and/or lymphatic). Complications
include lymphatic overgrowth, infection, oozing and/or bleeding from
lymphatic blebs, and thromboembolism (Fig. 554.9). Patients with
KTS have an anomalous venous return system composed of dilated and
incompetent veins, often with a larger marginal vein. The deep venous
system may also be poorly developed. Patients can have lymphatic
involvement of the skin, musculature, and intestinal tract. Venous
malformation may affect the bladder and urethra. Due to variability in
diagnostic criteria and identification of KTS over the years, the genetic
etiology of KTS is not completely confirmed, but many patients have
been identified to have a somatic variants in PIK3CA; KTS is considered part of PROS disorders. Surgical and interventional procedures
may be important for some patients with KTS. Medical management
currently includes sirolimus and anticoagulation therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 554 u Complex Vascular Anomalies

HHT2
ALK1

VM
VMCM
BRBN
MVM

TIE2 INHIBITOR

HHT1
endoglin

THALIDOMIDE

VEGF
TIE2/RTK

VEGFR2
PAZOPANIB

CM-AVM1

RASA1
GNAQ/11

PTEN
PG
KLA
GSD

PHTS
ALPELISIB

SMADs
1/5/8

Integrin
VEcadherin

CM-AVM2

PIP3

PIP2

EphB4

PIK3CA

VM
LM
CLOVES
KTS
MCAP
(PROS)

AKT
JPHT

RICH
NICH
PG
CM

RAS

PG

BRAF

VEMURAFENIB

AVM

MEK1

TRAMETINIB
SULMETINIB

ICAP1
KRIT1 HCCVM
CCM1

Malcavernin CCM2
PDCD10 CCM3

MAP3K3

SMAD4

β-catenin

BEVACIZUMAB
HHT5
BMP9/10

Integrin signaling

VVM
RAPAMYCIN/EVEROLIMUS
EC migration,
proliferation,
vessel
formation

mTOR

3159

EC

ERK

Proliferation, cell growth,
differentiation, angiogenesis

TGFβ
HGF

TGFβR
migration

FKBP12
SMAD

PI3K

vSMC/
EC

RAPAMYCIN?
glomulin
p70S6K

vSMC differentiation
GVM

Fig. 554.1 PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling and RAS/MAPK signaling in vascular anomalies. Red, gain of function; blue, loss of function; black, en-

hanced signaling; gray, decreased signaling. (From Queisser A, Seront E, Boon LM, Vikkula M. Genetic basis and therapies for vascular anomalies.
Circ Res. 2021;129[1]:155–173. Fig. 3.)

CLOVES

CLOVES, or congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevi, and scoliosis/spinal/skeletal anomalies, is
a disorder that results from an early embryonic pathogenic variant in PIK3CA. In addition to extremity hypertrophy, patients can
have significant fatty lipomatous overgrowth (Fig. 554.10). Spinal
involvement is common. Patients with vascular malformations usually have a combination of capillary, venous, and lymphatic malformations. AVMs are less common but have been reported with spinal
involvement. Deep venous anomalies increase the risk for venous
thromboembolism. Patients with CLOVES have an increased risk
of Wilms tumor and require serial monitoring with abdominal
ultrasonography in early childhood. Patients may require sclerotherapy, surgery, and other interventional procedures depending on
symptoms. Patients have also been successfully managed with
sirolimus.

Macrocephaly-­Capillary Malformation

Macrocephaly-­capillary malformation (M-­CM) syndrome is a PROS
disorder characterized by macrocephaly, brain abnormalities, CM
(often in a reticular pattern), overgrowth, and developmental delays
(Fig. 554.11). Neurologic manifestations can include hydrocephalus,
cortical dysplasia, polymicrogyria, and posterior fossa crowding with
cerebellar tonsillar herniation. Patients require supportive care for

overgrowth and other vascular anomalies, as well as close monitoring
of brain growth and development.

AKT-­RELATED OVERGROWTH SPECTRUM
Proteus Syndrome

Proteus is an overgrowth disorder caused by a somatic mosaic
pathogenic variant in the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway. Clinical features include overgrowth (including lipomatous), bony abnormalities, cerebriform connective tissue nevus, vascular malformations
(capillary, venous, lymphatic), epidermal nevi, cerebral abnormalities and accompanying intellectual disability, and increased risk for
secondary neoplasms and venous thromboembolism. Management
of proteus disorders has primarily been supportive, although use of
AKT1 inhibition is currently being evaluated.

RASopathies

RASopathies refers to a group of medical conditions caused by
pathogenic variants in the RAS/MAPK pathway. It includes both
germline conditions, as well as somatic variants. The RAS/MAPK
pathway is important in cell cycle regulation, proliferation, migration, and stress response. RAS/MAPK pathway pathogenic variants
have been identified in patients with solitary CMs and AVMs, GLA,
KLA, verrucous venous malformation, cerebral CM, pyogenic granuloma (PG), and congenital hemangiomas.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3160 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors

Kaposiform
lymphangiomatosis
Central
conducting
lymphatic
anomaly

TKR
VEGFR2/3
PDGFR
TIE1/TIE2

Primary lymphedema
Generalized
lymphatic
anomaly

RAS
PIK3CA
Lymphatic
malformations
RAF
AKT

MEK
mTOR

ERK
Vascular
growth and
differentiation

Fig. 554.2 Molecular pathways identified in lymphatic anomalies.

A

Capillary Malformation-­Arteriovenous Malformation
Syndrome

Capillary malformation-­arteriovenous malformation (CM-­AVM) is an
autosomal dominant disorder characterized by diffuse, circumscribed
CMs and increased risk for intra-­or extracranial AVMs. AVMs are
found in ∼80% of patients. The CMs have a distinct appearance with
a round or ovoid shape and surrounding pale halo. Most cases of CM-­
AVM are caused by a loss-­of-­function pathogenic variant in RASA1, but
variants in EPHB4 have also been reported (CM-­AVM type 2). Familial
penetrance is high, and screening is important due to the high risk for
life-­threatening complications from AVMs. AVMs may require treatment with a combination of interventional and surgical procedures.

Parkes-­Weber Syndrome

Parkes-­Weber syndrome (PKWS) is associated with pathogenic variants in RASA1. The syndrome includes multiple microscopic arteriovenous fistulae in association with a CM. PKWS is also associated with
soft tissue and bony overgrowth of an extremity.

KAPOSIFORM HEMANGIOENDOTHELIOMA

Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KHE) is a rare and potentially
life-­threatening vascular tumor. KHE classically presents as a red
to purple firm plaque on the lateral neck, axilla, trunk, or extremities. Visceral tumors occur as well. Lesions may occasionally get
smaller over time but rarely resolve completely. Tufted angioma,
once thought to be a separate tumor on the same clinical spectrum as KHE, is considered under the umbrella term of KHE (Fig.
554.12). The main complication of these tumors is the development
of KMP, which may be fatal; therefore early diagnosis and treatment is important. Retroperitoneal or intrathoracic lesions in the
absence of cutaneous lesions are uncommon but are often associated with KMP.

B
Fig. 554.3 A, MRI imaging of vertebral body lymphatic malforma-

tions in a patient with generalized lymphatic anomaly (GLA). B, Splenic and vertebral body lesions in a patient with GLA. (B from Joshi M,
Phansalkar DS. Simple lymphangioma to generalized lymphatic anomaly: role of imaging in disclosure of a rare and morbid disease. Case Rep
Radiol. 2015;2015:603859.)

Kasabach-­Merritt Phenomenon

KMP is a life-­threatening combination of a rapidly enlarging KHE, thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and an acute or chronic
consumption coagulopathy. The clinical manifestations are usually evident
during early infancy. The vascular lesion is usually cutaneous and is only

Fig. 554.4 Osteolytic destruction of the left scapula in a patient with
Gorham-­Stout disease (GSD). Axial CT image of the left scapula demonstrates intramedullary lucent lesions with cortical thinning.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 554 u Complex Vascular Anomalies

3161

Fig. 554.5 A, Large hemorrhagic pleural effusion in a patient with Kaposiform lymphangiomatosis (KLA). B, Abnormal lymphatic fluid
distribution and central lymphatic drainage in a
patient with KLA.

B

A

Fig. 554.6 MR lymphangiography study showing a dilated and mal-

formed thoracic duct and central lymphatics with retrograde flow into
the mediastinum and pericardium (arrows) in a patient with central conducting lymphatic anomaly (CCLA).

rarely located in viscera. The associated thrombocytopenia may lead to
precipitous hemorrhage accompanied by ecchymoses, petechiae, and a
rapid increase in the size of the vascular lesion. Severe anemia from hemorrhage or microangiopathic hemolysis may ensue. The thrombocytopenia
has been attributed to sequestration or increased destruction of platelets
within the lesion. Hypofibrinogenemia and decreased levels of consumable clotting factors are relatively common (see Chapter 533.6). KMP is
seen in KHE or tufted angioma, as well as to a milder extent in very large
congenital and hepatic hemangiomas but not in infantile hemangiomas.
Treatment includes surgical excision of small lesions, although this is
often difficult because of coagulopathy and the infiltrative nature of the
tumor. Additional pharmacologic treatments include systemic steroids
with or without vincristine as first-­line therapy in most cases. mTOR
inhibition with sirolimus has been found to be successful as an alternative
first-­line treatment for KHE. The optimal initial combination of medical

B
Fig. 554.7 Multiple venous malformations on the tongue (A) and
subcutaneous tissues of the foot (B) in a patient with blue rubber bleb
nevus syndrome (BRBNS).

therapies is not yet known. Antiplatelet, antifibrinolytic, and other chemotherapeutic agents have been used with mixed results. The mortality rate
overall once patients have KMP is high.

OTHER RARE VASCULAR TUMORS
Benign Tumors (Other Than Infantile Hemangiomas)
(see Chapter 691)
Epithelioid Hemangiomas

Epithelioid hemangioma (EH) is a very rare vascular tumor, usually
occurring in the skin or subcutaneous tissues, but occasionally occurring

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3162 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
PGs are benign but a nuisance because they bleed easily with trauma
and may recur if incompletely removed. Numerous satellite papules
have developed after surgical excision of PGs from the back, particularly in the interscapular region. Small lesions may regress after
cauterization with silver nitrate; larger lesions require excision and
electrodesiccation of the base of the granuloma. Small (<5 mm) lesions
may be treated successfully with pulsed dye laser therapy.

Spider Angioma

Fig. 554.8 Cobblestoned appearance of a patient with a glomangi-

oma, or glomuvenous malformation, caused by a germline pathogenic
variant in the glomulin gene (GLMN). Family members all with similar
appearing lesions.

A vascular spider (nevus araneus) consists of a central feeder artery
with many dilated radiating vessels and a surrounding erythematous
flush, varying from a few millimeters to several centimeters in diameter (see Fig. 691.17). Pressure over the central vessel causes blanching;
pulsations visible in larger nevi are evidence for the arterial source of
the lesion. Spider angiomas are associated with conditions in which
there are increased levels of circulating estrogens, such as cirrhosis and
pregnancy, but they also occur in up to 15% of normal preschool-­age
children and 45% of school-­age children. Sites of predilection in children are the dorsum of the hand, forearm, nose, infraocular region,
lips, and ears. Lesions often regress spontaneously after puberty. If
removal is desired, pulsed dye laser therapy is the mode of choice; resolution is achieved in 90% of cases with a single treatment.

Maffucci Syndrome

The association of spindle cell hemangiomas with nodular enchondromas
in the metaphyseal or diaphyseal cartilaginous portion of long bones is
known as Maffucci syndrome. Maffucci syndrome is caused by somatic
mosaic pathogenic variants in the IDH1 and IDH2 genes. Vascular lesions
are typically soft, compressible, asymptomatic blue to purple subcutaneous
masses that grow in proportion to a child’s growth and stabilize by adulthood. Mucous membranes or viscera may also be involved. Onset occurs
during childhood. Bone lesions may produce limb deformities and pathologic fractures. Malignant transformation of enchondromas (chondrosarcoma, angiosarcoma) or primary malignancies (ovarian, fibrosarcoma,
glioma, pancreatic) may be a complication (see Chapter 550).

LOCALLY AGGRESSIVE RARE VASCULAR TUMORS
Retiform Hemangioendothelioma

Retiform hemangioendothelioma (RHE) is an intermediate, or rarely
metastasizing, vascular tumor. They usually present as a slow-­growing
mass with plaque-­like or nodular appearance. They can involve the entire
dermis and extend into the subcutaneous tissue. Histologically, hobnail
endothelial cells are found, but only variably lymphatic endothelial cell
markers. Treatment is with surgical excision, though local recurrence is
common and regional lymph node metastases have been reported.

Papillary Intralymphatic Angioendothelioma
Fig. 554.9 Overgrown right lower extremity with capillary-­venous-­
lymphatic malformation in a patient with Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome.

in other sites such as bone. They may be mistaken for infantile hemangiomas or PGs and can be reactive due to trauma or infection. EHs are
well-­circumscribed proliferations of capillaries that stain for endothelial
cell and lymphatic markers but are without any cytologic atypia or mitoses. Primary treatment is with surgical excision, though they can recur
locally. FOS gene rearrangements have been identified in some EHs.

Pyogenic Granuloma (Lobular Capillary Hemangioma)

A PG is a small red, glistening, sessile, or pedunculated papule that often
has a discernible epithelial collarette (see Fig. 691.16). The surface may be
weeping and crusted or completely epithelialized. PGs initially grow rapidly, may ulcerate, and bleed easily when traumatized because they consist
of exuberant granulation tissue. They are relatively common in children,
particularly on the face, arms, and hands. Such a lesion located on a finger
or hand may appear as a subcutaneous nodule. PGs may arise at sites of
injury, but a history of trauma often cannot be elicited.

Papillary intralymphatic angioendothelioma (PILA), also referred to
as Dabska tumor, is a locally aggressive hemangioendothelioma. PILA
occur within the dermis and superficial soft tissues of the head, neck,
trunk, or extremities. On occasion they have been reported to arise from
preexisting lymphatic or venolymphatic malformations, or within an
extremity affected by lymphedema. They appear as violaceous nodules
similar to RHE but histologically appear similar to lymphatic malformations and contain hobnail endothelial cells. Primary treatment is with
excision, but regional lymph node metastasis and even death due to distant metastasis have been reported. Systemic chemotherapy based on
sarcoma treatment may be used in recurrent or refractory cases.

Composite Hemangioendothelioma

Composite hemangioendotheliomas (CHE) contain overlapping histologic features with epithelioid, retiform, and spindle-­cell hemangioendotheliomas. Some also contain angiosarcoma-­like features within the same
tumor. Fewer than 40 cases have been reported in the literature, and they
can present at any age and in association with other vascular anomalies.
Treatment options include surgical excision, chemotherapy, and radiation
therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 554 u Complex Vascular Anomalies

3163

Fig. 554.10 A, Soft tissue and bony overgrowth of the digits of

A

B

the bilateral hands in a patient with CLOVES. Also noted is overlying capillary malformation (CM). B, Overgrowth of digits of the
feet and right sandal-­toe gap deformity in a patient with CLOVES.
Also noted are CM and dilated venous pattern from underlying
bilateral venous malformation of the lower extremities.

A

Fig. 554.11 Infant with macrocephaly, prominent forehead, de-

pressed nasal bridge, short neck, bluish white iris, and reticulated port-­
wine stains over body, consistent with macrocephaly-­capillary malformation (M-­CM). (From Panigrahi I, Bhushan M, Yadav M, Khandelwal
N, Singhi P. Macrocephaly-­capillary malformation syndrome: three new
cases. J Neurol Sci. 2012;313:178–181. Fig. 5.)

Pseudomyogenic Hemangioendothelioma (Epithelioid Sarcoma-­Like Hemangioendothelioma)

Pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma (PMH) is a rare vascular
tumor that presents more commonly in males than females (4:1 predominance) and usually in young adulthood (<40 years). The typical
presentation is multifocal presentation within one extremity, and it
does frequently have bony involvement. Histologically, it shares some
features with epithelioid sarcoma, with myoid-­appearing spindle cells,
but has very low metastatic potential. Primary treatment is with surgical resection, but local recurrence is common, and mTOR inhibition
with sirolimus has shown promise in its management.

MALIGNANT TUMORS
Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE) is variant of angiosarcoma,
which is locally aggressive and has metastatic potential. It usually
occurs in middle-­age adults and presents as a solitary mass in the soft
tissues, viscera, or bone, with liver as the most common site. Thirty

B
Fig. 554.12 A, Patient with Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma

(KHE) of the thigh who presented with Kasabach-­Merritt phenomenon
(KMP) with thrombocytopenia and hypofibrinogenemia unresponsive
to all therapy until introduction of sirolimus. B, Premature infant with
KHE of the arm who presented with KMP.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3164 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
percent present with metastases, and occasionally patients present with
hemolytic anemia or consumptive coagulopathy. EHE is characterized
by the WWTR1/CAMTA1 translocation, with some also expressing a
YAP1-­TFE3 gene fusion. Histologically, EHE are epithelioid tumors
arranged in nests or cords. They may contain spindle endothelial cells
and express Fli-­1 and CD31. Treatment depends on location and metastatic pattern but includes surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy.
Overall survival for those with progressive disease is quite poor.

Angiosarcoma

Angiosarcomas account for ∼2% of all soft tissue sarcomas, occur
mostly in adults, and very rarely affect children. In children, they may
be cutaneous or in the deep tissues or viscera. Angiosarcomas present
as rapidly enlarging purplish plaques or nodules that ulcerate and can
leak serosanguinous fluid. Necrosis and hemorrhage within the tumor
are common. Due to risk for rapid progression and metastasis, multimodal therapy including resection and intensive chemotherapy is generally pursued. Combined treatment with mTOR and MEK inhibition
has shown some promise, but progression-­free and overall survival
remain very poor.
Hepatic angiosarcomas appear to be a distinct subtype of angiosarcoma, presenting in earlier childhood, usually between age 1 and
5 years (Fig. 554.13). There is sometimes a history of infantile hepatic
hemangioma, although cutaneous infantile hemangiomas do not
appear to progress to angiosarcoma. Patients can present with anemia
and thrombocytopenia due to intratumoral bleeding. Liver function
tests may be abnormal, but α-­fetoprotein is normal or only minimally
elevated. Risk of local invasion and metastasis is quite high, so rapid
diagnosis, surgical resection, and initiation of sarcoma-­based chemotherapy is important. Unfortunately, complete cure is very rare.
Lymphangiosarcoma is a distinct subtype of angiosarcoma arising
from the lymphatic endothelium of a site of lymphedema. Lymphangioma
resembles angiosarcoma both clinically and histologically and appears to
harbor the same c-­myc amplification seen in postradiation angiosarcoma
of the breast. Similar to the “hemangiosarcoma” form of angiosarcoma,
lymphangiosarcomas are managed similarly and have similar overall poor
prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 554.13 Angiosarcoma of the liver. (From Potanos KM, Hodgkinson N, Fullington NM, et al. Long-­term survival in pediatric hepatic angiosarcoma (PHAS): a case report and review of the literature. J Pediatr
Surg Case Rep. 2015;3:410–413. Fig. 1.)

Chapter 555

Rare Tumors
555.1 Thyroid Tumors
Jonathan D. Wasserman
See Chapter 607.

BENIGN THYROID TUMORS

Benign thyroid tumors represent approximately 75% of all thyroid nodules presenting in the pediatric population and generally
require no treatment unless they result in compressive symptoms or
thyroid hormone hypersecretion. The workup of a suspected thyroid nodule includes the laboratory assessment of thyroid function
(thyroid-­stimulating hormone [TSH]), ultrasound (US) to assess
characteristics of the nodule(s) and regional lymph nodes, and US-­
guided fine-­needle aspiration biopsy (of the primary nodule and
suspicious lymph nodes) for cytopathologic diagnosis if imaging is
suspicious for malignancy. Nuclear scintigraphy using radioactive
iodine (123I) or technetium 99m (99mTc)-­pertechnetate are not recommended in the initial diagnostic evaluation, except in the event
of a suppressed TSH level.

MALIGNANT THYROID TUMORS

Pediatric thyroid malignancies are rare tumors that include medullary
thyroid carcinoma (MTC) and the differentiated thyroid carcinomas
(DTCs), namely, papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and follicular thyroid carcinoma. Findings suggestive of a thyroid malignancy are noted
in Table 555.1.
PTC represents the majority of thyroid cancers in children. The
incidence of pediatric thyroid cancer has been rising, with the highest rate in adolescence, and a female predominance emerges around
the time of puberty. With few exceptions, children with PTC have a
highly favorable prognosis, with anticipated survival over decades,
even in the presence of distally metastatic disease at diagnosis.
The major established risk factor for development of PTC is exposure to ionizing radiation, typically in the context of antineoplastic
therapy.
MTC is an uncommon disease in childhood that usually occurs
in the context of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2a (MEN2A)
or type 2b (MEN2B), autosomal dominant, hereditary endocrine
tumor syndromes that arise secondary to activating variants in
the RET proto-oncogene. In addition to the almost complete penetrance of MTC in patients with the most common RET variants,
patients with MEN2A and MEN2B have up to a 50% lifetime risk of
developing pheochromocytomas (PHEOs). Up to 20% of MEN2A
patients also develop primary hyperparathyroidism. Patients with
MEN2B do not develop hyperparathyroidism but have a distinct
clinical phenotype that includes a characteristic facial appearance,
marfanoid body habitus, aerodigestive tract ganglioneuromatosis,
and oral and ocular mucosal neuromas (Fig. 555.1). The diagnosis of MEN2B is often delayed (usually after the MTC has already
metastasized) because its pathognomonic features are not apparent in very early childhood, although an inability to cry tears (alacrimia) and constipation represent the earliest clues to diagnosis.
MTC may be sporadic or familial without features of MEN 2A or
2B; it may also be associated with Hirschsprung disease.
Children with sporadic DTC typically present with an asymptomatic thyroid mass and/or cervical lymphadenopathy. Lymph node
metastases are present in most PTC cases, and lung metastases are
identified in up to 20% of patients, primarily in those children with a
high burden of neck disease. In contrast, children with MEN2-­related
MTC are often diagnosed only after a positive genetic test result or, in
the case of MEN2B, after the clinical phenotype is recognized. When

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 555 u Rare Tumors 3165
Table 555.1  Clinical Findings Associated with Malignant
Thyroid Nodules
HISTORIC FEATURES
Neck irradiation during childhood or adolescence
Rapid growth
Recent, persistent changes in speaking, breathing, or swallowing
Family history of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Firm, fixed, and irregular consistency of nodule
Vocal cord paralysis or hoarseness
Persistent regional lymph adenopathy
Modified from Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of
Endocrinology. 14th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 14.3, p. 439.

Fig. 555.1 Classic appearance of oral mucosal neuromas on the

tongue in a boy with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2b (MEN2B)
secondary to the typical M918T variant in the RET protooncogene.

a family history is known, presymptomatic surveillance may identify
MTC at earlier stages. As with PTC, MTC also frequently metastasizes to cervical lymph nodes.
There are well-­
documented genotype-­
phenotype correlations
in MEN2, and the biologic aggressiveness of MTC depends on
the hereditary setting in which it develops. With the availability
of genetic testing for RET variants, MTC has become one of the
few malignancies that can be prevented by prophylactic
thyroidectomy.
The age at which prophylactic thyroidectomy is recommended is
determined based on the specific RET variant, serum calcitonin levels,
and parent and child preference.
The primary therapy for thyroid cancer, regardless of histologic type, is thyroidectomy and, if there is evidence of lymph node
metastasis, a compartment-­oriented lymph node dissection performed by a highly experienced thyroid cancer surgeon. In DTC,
adjuvant radioactive iodine (131I) may be used postoperatively to
treat iodine-­avid distant metastasis and unresectable residual neck
disease. The use of 131I is limited to children at higher risk for residual or recurrent disease who are most likely to benefit from treatment. Children with MTC do not require 131I therapy.
In children with DTC, the TSH level is initially suppressed by giving supraphysiologic levothyroxine, because TSH may stimulate DTC
tumor growth; the TSH level is kept normal in MTC.
Oral multikinase inhibitors and oncogene-­targeted therapy (for children with tumors driven by BRAF, RET, or NTRK substitutions or oncogenic fusions) have demonstrated benefit for the treatment of advanced
MTC and DTC in adults. These are rarely indicated in pediatric patients
but may be considered for symptomatic and/or progressive disease.

Long-­term follow-­up of thyroid cancer survivors involves monitoring of tumor markers (thyroglobulin/thyroglobulin antibody in DTC,
calcitonin/carcinogenic embryonic antigen in MTC) and routine
imaging, primarily neck US.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

555.2 Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma
Cynthia E. Herzog
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is rare in the pediatric population, but
it is one of the most common nasopharyngeal tumors in pediatric
patients. In adults, the incidence is highest in South China, but it is
also high among the Inuit people and in North Africa and Northeast
India. In China, this diagnosis is rare in the pediatric population,
but in other populations, a substantial proportion of cases occur
in the pediatric age-­group, primarily in adolescents. It occurs in
males twice as often as in females and is more common in Black
people. In the pediatric population, the tumors are more frequently
of undifferentiated histology and associated with Epstein-­Barr
virus (EBV). Nasopharyngeal carcinoma is associated with specific
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) types; other genetic factors may
play a role, especially in low-­incidence populations.
Most pediatric patients present with advanced locoregional
disease manifesting as cervical lymphadenopathy. Epistaxis, trismus, and cranial nerve deficits also may be present. The diagnosis
is established from biopsy of the nasopharynx or cervical lymph
nodes. In most cases the lactate dehydrogenase level is elevated, but
this finding is nonspecific. CT or MRI evaluation of the head and
neck is performed to determine the extent of locoregional disease.
Chest radiography, CT, bone scan, and liver scan are used to evaluate for metastatic disease. PET scans appear to be useful for monitoring primary disease and looking for metastases. EBV DNA levels
correlate with disease stage, have prognostic value, and can be used
to monitor for recurrence.
Treatment is a combination of chemotherapy and irradiation.
Cisplatin, given concurrently with radiation, with either neoadjuvant or adjuvant cisplatin-­based chemotherapy, is the standard
treatment. The outcome depends on the extent of disease; patients
with distant metastases have a very poor prognosis. Using intensity-­
modulated radiation therapy improves local control and reduces
the late adverse effects associated with radiation therapy, including
hormonal dysfunction, dental caries, fibrosis, and second malignancies. Use of proton therapy may result in further reduction of
adverse effects.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

555.3 Adenocarcinoma of the Colon and
Rectum
Cynthia E. Herzog and Winston W. Huh
Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is rare in the pediatric population,
with an estimated incidence rate of approximately one case per 1
million. Even in patients with predisposing conditions, CRC usually
does not present until late adolescence or adulthood; only 35–40%
of CRC in this age-­group are association with a known predisposition factor. Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC)
(Lynch Syndrome) is an autosomal dominant disorder, with germline pathogenic variants in DNA mismatch repair genes (MMR)
causing DNA repair errors and microsatellite instability (MSI).
MYH-­associated polyposis, Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome, and juvenile
polyposis also predispose to CRC.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3166 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Genetic testing is available, and screening for cancer in HNPCC
and familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) should begin during
childhood or adolescence. Likewise, genetic evaluation for these
conditions should be pursued in young patients presenting with
colon cancer, even when there is no history of predisposing genetic
conditions.
Presenting symptoms include bloody stools or melena, abdominal pain, weight loss, and changes in bowel patterns. In many cases,
signs are vague, often resulting in a delay in diagnosis, sometimes
not until the disease has reached an advanced stage. The histologic subtype differs from that seen in adults, with most pediatric
tumors being either mucinous adenocarcinoma or signet ring cell
carcinoma. Pediatric patients tend to have tumors with MSI and
tend to present with more advanced disease. Treatment is based on
guidelines used in adults with CRC and consists of surgical resection when possible with chemotherapy for unresectable tumors.
Adequate lymph node removal should be performed at surgical
resection of primary tumor. Radiation therapy is useful in select
cases. Pediatric patients have a worse overall prognosis compared
with adult patients, but the reasons for this discrepancy are not
clear.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

PGL syndromes (1, 2, 3, 4) caused by variants in the succinate
dehydrogenase (SDHx) genes. MEN2 (types 2A and 2B) and neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) are also included in the differential diagnosis but are more often associated with a PHEO diagnosis during
adulthood (Table 555.2). Overall, germline pathogenic variants in
at least 16 different genes have been associated with predisposition
to PHEO/PGL. PHEO/PGL is also associated with congenital cyanotic heart disorders (somatic gain-­of-­function variant in EPAS1).
Hypertension is usually sustained in pediatric patients with PHEO/
PGL, who may also lack the triad of intermittent headache, palpitations, and diaphoresis typically seen in adults. Nonetheless, PHEO/
PGL accounts for <1% of pediatric hypertension. Additional manifestations may include chest pain, pallor, tremor, fever, cardiomyopathy, or exacerbations with exercise; flushing is not typical of
PHEO/PGL. The differential diagnosis is noted in Table 555.3. The
most appropriate screening test for PHEO/PGL is measurement
of fractionated plasma and/or urine metanephrine levels. Initial
imaging studies, when metanephrine levels are elevated, include
CT or MRI. When indicated, to confirm abnormal biochemistry
and/or cross-sectional imaging, 18F-­D OPA and 68Ga-­D OTATATE
(DOTA-­octreotate) PET/MRIs are the functional imaging modalities of choice given greater sensitivity and specificity than earlier
radioisotopes (Fig. 555.2). 131I-Metaiodobenzyguanidine (MIBG)
imaging may also be considered in such circumstances.

555.4 Adrenal Tumors
Jonathan D. Wasserman
See Chapters 617-­621.
The adrenal gland is comprised of two embryologically distinct
layers, the steroid-­secreting outer cortex and the catecholamine-­
secreting inner medulla. Adrenocortical tumors (ACTs) arise
from the cortex, whereas pheochromocytomas (PHEOs) derive
from the chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla. Additionally,
catecholaminergic tumors arising from the parasympathetic and
sympathetic ganglia outside the adrenal medulla are called paragangliomas (PGLs). Both ACTs and PHEOs are strongly associated with hereditary tumor predisposition syndromes, and thus
diagnosis of either in childhood should initiate a thorough family
history and referral to an expert in cancer genetics for counseling
and germline testing.
ACTs are very rare and, in children, tend to present before age 10
years. They have a female predominance and are functional (hormone secreting) in >90% of cases, primarily producing androgens
and/or glucocorticoids and causing clinically apparent virilization
with or without Cushing syndrome (see Chapter 619). ACTs may
also present as an abdominal mass or pain. In children, ACTs are
most frequently associated with Li-­Fraumeni syndrome (germline inactivating variants in the TP53 tumor-­suppressor gene) and
Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (BWS), but they can also be seen
in hemihyperplasia other than that seen as part of BWS, MEN1,
McCune-­Albright syndrome, FAP, and very rarely, congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Unusual causes of bilateral nodular adrenocortical disease, which also typically present with Cushing syndrome,
include the Carney complex and macronodular adrenocortical
hyperplasia.
PHEOs/PGLs are rare tumors that are more likely to be bilateral, malignant, and secondary to a heritable tumor syndrome
when diagnosed in childhood compared with adulthood (see Chapter 621). Von Hippel-­L indau disease is the most common genetic
association in the pediatric population, followed by the familial

Fig. 555.2 Appearance of pheochromocytoma on functional imag-

ing (18F-­l -­dihydroxyphenylalanine [18F-­DOPA] PET/CT). Focal uptake is
seen in the left suprarenal fossa. (From Duh QY, Livhits M, Yeh MW. The
adrenal glands. In: Mattox KL, Townsend CM, Beauchamp RD, Evers
BM, eds. Sabiston Textbook of Surgery. 21st ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2022. Fig. 40.18A.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 555.2  Germline Pathogenic Variants Associated with Pheochromocytoma and Paraganglioma
SYNDROME/NAME

GENE

TYPICAL TUMOR LOCATION AND OTHER ­ASSOCIATIONS

HYPOXIC PATHWAY: CLUSTER 1*
SDHD (familial paraganglioma type 1)†

SDHD

SDHAF2 (familial paraganglioma type 2)†
SDHC (familial paraganglioma type 3)

SDHAF2
SDHC

SDHB (familial paraganglioma type 4)

SDHB

SDHA

SDHA

VHL disease

VHL

Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carcinoma
(Reed syndrome)—fumarate hydratase variant
Hypoxia-­inducible factor (HIF) 2α
Familial erythrocytosis associated with pathogenic
variant in prolyl hydroxylase isoform 1 (PDH1)
Familial erythrocytosis associated with pathogenic
variant in prolyl hydroxylase isoform 2 (PDH2)
KIF1B

FH
HIF2A
EGLN2

Primarily skull base and neck; occasionally adrenal ­medulla, mediastinum,
abdomen, pelvis; GIST; possible pituitary adenoma
Primarily skull base and neck; occasionally abdomen and pelvis
Primarily skull base and neck; occasionally abdomen, pelvis, or chest;
GIST; possible pituitary adenoma
Abdomen, pelvis, and mediastinum; rarely adrenal medulla, skull base,
and neck; GIST; renal cell carcinoma; possible pituitary adenoma
Primarily skull base and neck; occasionally abdomen and pelvis; GIST;
possible pituitary adenoma
Adrenal medulla, frequently bilateral; occasionally paraganglioma that
may be localized from skull base to pelvis
Multifocal and metastatic; associated with hereditary
leiomyomatosis, uterine fibroids, and renal cell cancer
Paraganglioma, polycythemia, and rarely somatostatinoma
Polycythemia associated with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma

EGLN1

Polycythemia associated with pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma

KIF1B

Neuroblastoma

KINASE SIGNALING PATHWAY: CLUSTER 2‡
MEN2A and MEN2B
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)
MAX†
Familial pheochromocytoma

RET
NF1
MAX
TMEM127

Adrenal medulla, frequently bilateral
Adrenal or periadrenal
Adrenal medulla
Adrenal medulla; possible renal cell carcinoma

*Cluster 1 tumors are mostly extraadrenal paragangliomas (except in VHL, where most tumors are localized to the adrenal) and nearly all have a noradrenergic biochemical phenotype.
†Associated with maternal imprinting.
‡Cluster 2 tumors are usually adrenal pheochromocytomas with an adrenergic biochemical phenotype.

GIST, Gastrointestinal stromal tumor; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase; VHL, von Hippel-­Lindau disease.
Modified from Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 14th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 16.4, p. 550.

Table 555.3  Differential Diagnosis of Pheochromocytoma-­Type Spells
ENDOCRINE CAUSES
Carbohydrate intolerance
Hyperadrenergic spells
Hypoglycemia
Pancreatic tumors (e.g., insulinoma)
Pheochromocytoma
Thyrotoxicosis
CARDIOVASCULAR CAUSES
Orthostatic hypotension
Paroxysmal cardiac arrhythmia
Pulmonary edema
Renovascular disease
Syncope (e.g., vasovagal reaction)
PSYCHOLOGIC CAUSES
Factitious (e.g., drugs, Valsalva maneuver)
Hyperventilation
Severe anxiety and panic disorders
Somatization disorder
PHARMACOLOGIC CAUSES
Chlorpropamide-­alcohol flush
Combination of a monoamine oxidase inhibitor and a decongestant
Illegal drug ingestion (cocaine, phencyclidine, lysergic acid diethylamide)
Sympathomimetic drug ingestion
Vancomycin (red man syndrome)
Withdrawal of adrenergic inhibitor
NEUROLOGIC CAUSES
Autonomic neuropathy
Diencephalic epilepsy (autonomic seizures)
Migraine headache
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome
Stroke
OTHER CAUSES
Carcinoid syndrome
Mast cell disease
Recurrent idiopathic anaphylaxis
Unexplained flushing spells
Modified from Melmed S, Auchus RJ, Goldfine AB, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 14th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 16.3, p. 547.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3168 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
The initial treatment of ACT and PHEO/PGL is resection by a surgeon experienced in the management of these tumors. Children with
suspected or confirmed PHEO/PGL require preoperative medical
management with α-­adrenergic blockade (and sometimes β-­blockade)
to mitigate risk of hypertensive crisis.
Medical therapy for metastatic ACT includes mitotane and chemotherapy with cisplatin, etoposide, and doxorubicin. Endocrine
therapy targeting hormonal overproduction may also be needed to
palliate symptoms and improve quality of life. Metastatic PHEO/
PGL has historically been poorly responsive to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Kinase inhibitor therapy and peptide-­receptor radiotherapy (such as 177Lu-­D OTATATE) have demonstrated promise in
some studies.
Long-­term follow-­up is warranted for both ACTs and PHEOs to
monitor for recurrence, particularly in the context of hereditary tumor
predisposition syndromes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

555.5 Desmoplastic Small Round Cell Tumor
Cynthia E. Herzog
Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a very rare
and aggressive mesenchymal tumor that occurs predominantly
in adolescent and young adult males. It is associated with a diagnostic chromosomal translocation between the Ewing tumor gene
and the Wilms tumor gene, t(11;22) (p13;q12), creating a chimeric gene (EWS-­WT1) that encodes a chimeric protein with oncogenic properties. Patients typically present at advanced stage with a
bulky abdominal mass, multiple peritoneal and omental implants,
and symptoms of abdominal sarcomatosis, including pain, ascites,
intestinal obstruction, hydronephrosis, and weight loss. DSRCT
mainly involves the abdominal cavity but can spread to the lymph
nodes, liver, lungs, and bones, and in ∼10% of cases, arise outside
of the abdomen. There is no standard treatment approach. Aggressive treatment with combination chemotherapy, debulking surgery,
and whole abdominopelvic irradiation results almost universally in
a poor outcome. Median survival ranges between 17 and 25 months,
and the 5-­year overall survival remains <20%. Hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy may be of benefit but requires further
study. Novel targeted agents and radioimmunotherapy with monoclonal antibodies targeting different surface antigens on tumor cells
are being studied.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 556

Histiocytosis Syndromes
of Childhood
Stephan Ladisch
INTRODUCTION

Childhood histiocytoses constitute a diverse group of disorders that
are frequently severe in their clinical expression. These disorders
are individually rare and are grouped together because they have in
common a prominent proliferation or accumulation of cells of the

monocyte-­
macrophage system of bone marrow (myeloid) origin.
Although these disorders sometimes are difficult to distinguish clinically, accurate diagnosis is essential for facilitating progress in treatment. A current systematic classification of histiocytoses is based on
histopathologic, clinical, and genetic findings (Tables 556.1-­556.3) A
thorough, comprehensive evaluation of a biopsy specimen obtained at
diagnosis is critical. This evaluation includes studies such as immunostaining, molecular genetic analyses, and electron microscopy that may
require special sample processing.

CLASSIFICATION AND PATHOLOGY

Three classes of childhood histiocytosis are defined, based on histopathologic findings. The first and best known is Langerhans cell
histiocytosis (LCH), previously called histiocytosis X. LCH includes
the clinical entities of bone or skin limited disease (eosinophilic
granuloma), Hand-­Schüller-­Christian disease, and Letterer-­Siwe
disease. The normal Langerhans cell is an antigen-­presenting cell
(APC) of the skin. The hallmark of LCH in all forms is the presence
of a clonal proliferation of cells of the monocyte–dendritic cell lineage containing the characteristic electron microscopic findings of a
Langerhans cell, the Birbeck granule. This tennis racket–shaped bilamellar granule, when seen in the cytoplasm of lesional cells in LCH,
is diagnostic of the disease. The Birbeck granule expresses a newly
characterized antigen, langerin (CD207), which itself is involved in
antigen presentation to T lymphocytes. CD207 expression has been
established to be uniformly present in LCH lesions and thus becomes
an additional reliable diagnostic marker. However, it is now clear
that the LCH cell is not actually a (differentiated) Langerhans cell
but rather an immature cell of myeloid origin, possibly in an arrested
state of development. The definitive diagnosis of LCH is established
by demonstrating CD1a positivity of lesional cells, which can be done
using fixed tissue (Fig. 556.1). Lesional cells must be distinguished
from normal Langerhans cells of the skin, which are also CD1a positive but are only sparsely distributed and are not diagnostic of LCH.
The peripheral lesions usually leading to the diagnosis of LCH (e.g.,
skin, lymph node, bone) contain various proportions of Birbeck
granule–containing CD1a-­positive cells, lymphocytes, granulocytes,
monocytes, and eosinophils.
Clonality of individual lesions exists in some cases of LCH.
Importantly, an activating somatic pathogenic variant of the BRAF
gene (V600E) (part of the mitogen-­activated protein kinase [MAPK]
cell signaling pathway: Fig. 556.2) has been identified in many
patients with LCH. Studies in patients negative for BRAFV600E
have revealed pathogenic variants in other genes of the MAPK
pathway, including MAP2K1 and ARAF. With the majority of LCH
patients having one or another of these activating variants in the
MAPK pathway (see Fig. 556.2), it has been suggested that LCH is
driven by a disorder in MAPK signaling affecting cell migration and
resulting in an accumulation of LCH cells in the lesions.
In contrast to the prominence of an APC in LCH, the other
common form of histiocytosis is characterized by accumulation of activated macrophages and lymphocytes and is known as
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). This diagnosis
is the result of uncontrolled hemophagocytosis and uncontrolled
activation (upregulation) of inflammatory cytokines driven by an
abnormality of T cells. It has some similarities to the macrophage
activation syndrome. Tissue infiltration by activated CD8 T lymphocytes, activated macrophages, and hypercytokinemia are classic
features (Fig. 556.3). With the characteristic morphology of normal macrophages by light microscopy, these phagocytic cells (see
Fig. 556.1) are CD163 positive but negative for the markers that are
characteristic of LCH cells (Birbeck granules, CD1a, CD207).
The two major forms of HLH, primary and secondary, have indistinguishable pathologic findings but are important to differentiate
because of implications for treatment and prognosis. Primary HLH,
originally named familial erythrophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis,
is now known as familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
(FHLH). This disease is an autosomal recessive disorder and represents approximately 25% of patients with HLH (see Table 556.3).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood
Table 556.1

Main Types of Histiocytosis Disease
HISTIOCYTOSIS
CLASSIFICATION GROUP

DISEASE
LANGERHANS CELL HISTIOCYTOSIS
Single system
Pulmonary
Multisystem with no risk organ
involvement
Multisystem with risk organ involvement

L
L
L
L
L

ERDHEIM-­CHESTER DISEASE
Mixed H
Indeterminate H
Extracutaneous/disseminated JXG
with MAPK pathogenic variant
­(including LALK + H. and other
genetic alterations)

L
L
L
L
L

ROSAI-­DORFMAN-­DESTOMBES
DISEASE
Familial
Sporadic classical with or without IgG4
infiltration
Sporadic extranodal with or without
IgG4 infiltration

R
R
R
R

MALIGNANCY HISTIOCYTOSES
Primary, phenotypic subtypes
Secondary, phenotypic subtypes
Histiocytoses with cutaneous or
mucosal involvement

M
M
M
C

LYMPHOHISTIOCYTOSES
Primary
Sporadic
Unknown

M
M
M
M

L, Langerhans; R, Rosai-­Dorfman-­Destombes; M, Malignant, C, cutaneous; H, hemophagocytic; JXG, juvenile xanthogranuloma; MAPK: mitogen-­activated kinase.
From Emile JF, Cohen-­Aubart F, Collin M, et al. Histiocytosis. Lancet. 2021;398:157–168.
Supplementary Appendix, Table 1.

Genes are known for four of five familial HLH syndromes and other
hereditary causes of HLH; these pathogenic variants affect the ability of T lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells to synthesize and
release perforin and granzymes, thus reducing cytotoxic granule
formation (Fig. 556.4). Secondary HLH includes other forms of
the syndrome triggered by a separate pathologic process, such as
infection (infection-­
associated hemophagocytic syndrome), tumor
(malignancy-­associated HLH), or primary immunodeficiency
diseases and metabolic disorders (Tables 556.4 and 556.5). Both
primary and secondary HLH affect multiple organs and are characterized by massive infiltrates of hyperactivated lymphocytes and
activated phagocytic macrophages in the involved organs, with the
lymphocytes serving as the driver of the resulting disease process.
In primary HLH, genetic pathogenic variants in multiple different steps in granule formation and release by cytotoxic T cells
have been identified (Fig. 556.5, bottom). Pathogenic variants in the
PRF1 perforin gene or the MUNC13-­4 gene are the most common
causes of defective function of the cytotoxic lymphocytes whose
activity is inhibited in primary HLH. In an analogous way, a trigger
can result in secondary HLH (see Fig. 556.5, top). A myriad of both
infectious and noninfectious processes can trigger secondary HLH
(Fig. 556.6; see Table 556.4 and Fig. 556.11). Examples of noninfectious triggers include drugs (e.g., phenytoin, Lamictal, highly active
antiretroviral therapy), hematopoietic stem cell transplantation,
chemotherapy, autoimmune diseases, inflammatory bowel disease,
cancer, and immunodeficiency states (e.g., DiGeorge syndrome,
Bruton agammaglobulinemia, severe combined immunodeficiency

3169

syndrome, chronic granulomatous disease). A complicating factor
in diagnosis is the realization that there are also both mixed genetic
variants causing primary HLH and heterozygotic variants (therefore not strictly primary HLH) also causing disease, particularly
triggered by infection.
In addition to these two most common forms of childhood histiocytosis (LCH and HLH), rarer diseases are included under this
rubric (see Table 556.2). Juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG) is characterized by vacuolated histiocytes with foamy cytoplasm in lesions
that evolve into mixed granulomas also containing eosinophils,
lymphocytes, and other cells. Erdheim-­C hester disease (ECD)
predominantly affects adults. Surface markers suggest a link among
LCH, JXG, and ECD; all three are dendritic cell diseases, and represent a spectrum, or continuum, of differentiation stages of the
abnormal dendritic cell precursors, frequently with BRAFV600E
pathogenic variants in the affected cells. Another rare form of histiocytosis is Rosai-­Dorfman disease, also known as sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy. Rosai-­
Dorfman disease
is characterized by packing of sinusoids of the lymph nodes with
hemophagocytic histiocytes, although extranodal involvement may
also be present. Last, there is a group of unequivocal malignancies
of cells of monocyte–macrophage lineage. By this definition, acute
monocytic leukemia and true malignant histiocytosis are included
among the class III histiocytoses (see Chapter 544). True neoplasms
of Langerhans cells have been reported but are extremely rare.

556.1 Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis
Stephan Ladisch

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

LCH has an extremely variable presentation. The skeleton is
involved in 80% of patients and may be the only affected site, especially in children >5 years old. Bone lesions (eosinophilic granuloma) may be single or multiple and are seen most often in the
skull (Fig. 556.7). Other sites include the pelvis, femur, vertebra,
maxilla, and mandible. Lesions may be asymptomatic or associated
with pain and local swelling. Involvement of the spine may result in
collapse of the vertebral body, which can be seen radiographically
and may cause secondary compression of the spinal cord. In flat
and long bones, osteolytic lesions with sharp borders occur, and
no evidence exists of reactive new bone formation until the lesions
begin to heal. Lesions that involve weight-­bearing long bones may
result in pathologic fractures. Chronically draining, infected ears
are usually associated with destruction in the mastoid area. Bone
destruction in the mandible and maxilla may result in teeth that
appear to be free floating on radiographs. With response to therapy,
healing of bone lesions is usually complete.
Approximately 50% of patients experience skin involvement
(isolated or part of multisystem disease) at some time during the
course of disease. This is a frequently difficult-­to-­treat scaly, papular, seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp, diaper, axillary, or posterior
auricular regions (see Fig. 556.7; Figs. 556.8 and 556.9). The lesions
may spread to involve the back, palms, and soles. The exanthem
may be petechial or hemorrhagic, even in the absence of thrombocytopenia. Localized or disseminated lymphadenopathy is present
in approximately 33% of patients. Hepatosplenomegaly occurs in
approximately 20% of patients. Various degrees of hepatic malfunction may occur, including jaundice and ascites.
Gastrointestinal involvement, more common than previously
appreciated, can present as vomiting, abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea,
and/or failure to thrive.
Exophthalmos, when present, may be bilateral and is caused by retroorbital accumulation of granulomatous tissue. Gingival mucous membranes
may be involved with infiltrative lesions that appear superficially like candidiasis. Otitis media is present in 30–40% of patients; deafness may follow

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3170 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 556.2  Clinical Features, Investigations, and Treatment of Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis, Erdheim-­Chester Disease, and
Rosai-­Dorfman-­Destombes Disease
MOST FREQUENT
FIRST-­LINE SYSTEMIC
THERAPIES FOR
MULTIORGAN OR
DISSEMINATED FORMS

MOST FREQUENT
SYSTEMIC SECOND-­LINE
AND SALVAGE
THERAPIES

MOST FREQUENT
REVEALING CLINICAL
FEATURES

INITIAL INVESTIGATIONS*
WHEN DIAGNOSIS IS
CONFIRMED BY BIOPSY

Childhood
Langerhans cell
histiocytosis

Bone pain or fracture;
vertebra plana†; skin
papules; lymph-­
adenomegaly; palpable
tumor; diabetes
insipidus†; exophthalmos†;
deafness or chronic
otorrhea; systemic
symptoms with fever,
hepatosplenomegaly,
or hematologic
cytopenia (risk organs);
pneumothorax

For all patients: blood tests
(full blood count, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate or CRP,
albumin, renal function
tests, liver function tests,
coagulation tests); chest and
skeletal radiographs
According to initial
investigations: CT scan or MRI
focused on involved area;
brain MRI when diabetes
insipidus or any sign of CNS
involvement or visual or
hearing dysfunction; chest
high-­resolution CT scan when
signs of lung involvement

Vinblastine combined with
corticosteroids

Should be decided
according to initial
extension and risk-­organ
involvement status, as
assessed by a trained team
With risk organ
involvement: BRAF or
MEK inhibitors‡
Without risk organ
involvement:
monotherapy
or combined
chemotherapies with
cladribine, and, in less
documented approaches,
cytarabine or clofarabine

Adult Langerhans
cell histiocytosis

Bone pain or fracture;
skin papules; lymphadenopathy; palpable tumor;
diabetes insipidus†;
exophthalmos†; repeated
dental loss; pneumothorax;
dyspnea, dry cough

18F-­FDG-­PET (full body); chest,

Cytarabine, alone
or combined with
methotrexate;
­vinblastine combined
with ­corticosteroids;
­cladribine

BRAF or MEK inhibitors

Erdheim-­Chester
disease

Lower limb pain; general
symptoms (fatigue, weight
loss, fever); xanthelasma;
diabetes insipidus†;
exophthalmos†; ­dyspnea,
dry cough; signs of
cardiac involvement (e.g.,
tamponade); signs of CNS
involvement (degenerative
or tumoral)

18F-­FDG-­PET (full body); chest,

Interferon alfa-­2a or
pegylated interferon
alfa-­2a; other potential
options are anakinra,
infliximab, or sirolimus
plus corticosteroids;
BRAF or MEK inhibitors for life-­threatening
cases (e.g., CNS or heart
involvement)

BRAF or MEK inhibitors

Rosai-­Dorfman-­
Destombes
disease

Lymphadenopathy; skin
nodules; nasal ­obstruction,
epistaxis, nasal dorsum
deformity; dyspnea, dry
cough; signs of CNS or
nerve root involvement;
testicular enlargement

Children: chest x-­ray with neck
and abdominal ultrasound
scans
Adults: neck, chest, abdomen,
and pelvis CT scan; 18F-­FDG-­
PET is recommended by some
experts
All patients: brain MRI when
signs of orbital or CNS
involvement; blood tests (full
blood count, CRP, albumin,
renal function tests, liver
function tests)

Corticosteroids; sirolimus;
methotrexate; azathioprine

Several drugs or combined
chemotherapies or MEK
inhibitors reported to be
active in case reports or
small case series

abdomen, and pelvis CT scan;
brain MRI; blood tests (full
blood count, CRP, albumin,
renal function tests, liver
­function tests)

abdomen, and pelvis CT scan;
brain MRI; cardiac MRI; blood
tests (full blood count, CRP,
albumin, renal function tests,
liver function tests)

18F-­FDG-­PET, 18F-­fluorodeoxyglucose PET; CNS, central nervous system..

*Aimed to determine the extent of the disease; thus each clinical feature drives specific investigation of the potentially involved organ(s), including for any signs of endocrine dysfunction or autoimmunity.
†Features that are suggestive of the disease.
‡BRAF inhibitors: vemurafenib, dabrafenib, encorafenib. MEK inhibitors: cobimetinib, trametinib, binimetinib, selumetinib.
From Emile JF, Cohen-­Aubart F, Collin M, et al. Histiocytosis. Lancet. 2021;398:157–168. Fig. 1, p. 158.

destructive lesions of the middle ear. In 10–15% of patients, pulmonary
infiltrates are found on radiography. The lesions may range from diffuse
fibrosis and disseminated nodular infiltrates to diffuse cystic changes (Fig.
556.10). Rarely, pneumothorax is a complication. If the lungs are severely
involved, tachypnea and progressive respiratory failure may result.
Pituitary dysfunction or hypothalamic involvement in patients
often presents as diabetes insipidus and may also cause growth retardation. Patients suspected of having LCH should demonstrate the ability

to concentrate their urine before going to the operating room for a
biopsy. Rarely, panhypopituitarism may occur, as may primary hypothyroidism as a result of thyroid gland infiltration.
Patients with multisystem disease who are affected more severely are
those who have systemic manifestations, including fever, weight loss, malaise, irritability, and failure to thrive. These systemic manifestations will distinguish patients at high risk of mortality (i.e., risk organ–positive, or RO+,
patients) from patients at low risk of mortality (i.e., without systemic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood

3171

Table 556.3  Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
DISEASE

GENE

PROTEIN

PERCENTAGE OF
FHLH

IMMUNE
IMPAIRMENT
Cytotoxicity
Cytotoxicity; forms
pores in APCs

FHLH-­1
FHLH-­2

Unknown
PRF1

Perforin

FHLH-­3

UNC13D

Munc13–4

Rare
∼20–37, 50delT mainly
in African American/
African descent
20–33

FHLH-­4

STX11

Syntaxin

<5

FHLH-­5

STXBP2

Syntaxin-­binding
protein 2

5–20

SYNDROMES WITH PARTIAL OCULOCUTANEOUS ALBINISM
Griscelli syndrome
RAB27A
Rab27A

∼5

Cytotoxicity; vesicle
priming
Cytotoxicity; vesicle
fusion
Cytotoxicity; vesicle
fusion

Increased incidence
of CNS HLH
Mild recurrent HLH,
colitis
Colitis, hypogammaglobulinemia

Cytotoxicity; vesicle
docking
Cytotoxicity; heterogeneous defects in
NK cells
Cytotoxicity; vesicle
trafficking

Partial albinism,
silver-gray hair
Partial albinism,
bleeding tendency,
recurrent infections
Partial albinism,
bleeding tendency

Signaling in cytotoxic
NK and T cells
NK T-­cell survival and
NF-­κB signaling
IL-­2 signaling in T
cells

Hypogammaglobulinemia, lymphoma
Mild recurrent HLH,
colitis
Hypogammaglobulinemia, autoimmunity, Hodgkin
lymphoma
Combined
­immunodeficiency,
lymphoma
Lymphoma, recurrent
infections, CD4 T-­
cell lymphopenia
Responds to recombinant IL-­18BP
Neonatal cytopenias,
hepatosplenomegaly, fevers, urticaria-­
like rashes, facial
dysmorphisms
EBV susceptibility to
HLH
EBV susceptibility

Chédiak-­Higashi
syndrome

LYST

Lyst

∼2

Hermansky-­Pudlak
syndrome type II

AP3B1

AP-­3 complex subunit
β1

Rare

EBV-­DRIVEN AND RARE CAUSES
XLP1
SH2D1A

SAP

∼7

XLP2

BIRC4

XIAP

∼2

ITK deficiency

ITK

ITK

Rare

CD27 deficiency

CD27

CD27

Rare

Signal transduction in
lymphocytes

XMEN syndrome

MAGT1

MAGT1

Rare

NLRC4
GOF
CDC42

NLRC4 Somatic or
germline variants
CDC42

NLRC4 inflammasome

Rare

Magnesium transporter, induced by
TCR stimulation
↑ IL-­18

CDC42

Rare

↑ IL-­18, variants interfere with binding
and localization of
CDC42

CD70

CD70

Rare

CTPS1

CTPS1

↓ expression and
↓ cytotoxicity of T cells
Impaired proliferation
of NKT cells

RASGRP1

RASGRP1

CD70 interaction with
CD27
Cytidine nucleotide
triphosphate
synthesis
RASGRP1

Rare
Rare

UNIQUE CLINICAL
CHARACTERISTICS

Activates RAS; defects
in T-­cell activation,
migration, proliferation
↓ cytotoxicity
↓ NKT cells

EBV susceptibility to
HLH

APCs, Antigen-­presenting cells; CNS, central nervous system; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; FHLH, familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; GOF, gain of function; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; ITK, interleukin (IL)-­2–inducible T-­cell kinase; NF-­κB, nuclear factor–kappa B; NK, natural killer; TCR, T-­cell receptor; XLP-­1, 2-­X-­linked lymphoproliferative
diseases.
Adapted from Erker C, Harker-­Murray, Talano JA. Usual and unusual manifestations of familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Pediatr Clin
North Am. 2017;64:91–109. Table 1.

manifestations; risk organ–negative patients). The risk organs are liver,
spleen, and the hematopoietic (bone marrow) system. The lung is not considered a risk organ. The distinction of risk-­organ involvement is important
for deciding the intensity of the treatment approach and has been addressed
in standard treatment approaches for LCH, as delineated in the Histiocyte Society protocols. Bone marrow involvement may cause anemia and

thrombocytopenia. Two uncommon but serious manifestations of LCH
are hepatic involvement (leading to fibrosis and cirrhosis) and a peculiar central nervous system (CNS) involvement characterized by ataxia,
dysarthria, and other neurologic symptoms. Hepatic involvement is associated with multi­system disease that is often already present at diagnosis.
In contrast, neurodegenerative CNS involvement, which is progressive and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Fig. 556.3 Bone marrow aspirate of a child with familial (genetically

A

confirmed) hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Numerous characteristic hemophagocytic cells (which are CD163-­positive macrophages)
are seen ingesting various blood elements.

XIAP (XLP2)
4; 2%
SH2D1A (XLP1)
13; 7%

LYST
(CHS)
3; 2%

FHL, no
mutations
identified
15; 8%

RAB27A (GS2)
10; 5%

PRF1 (FHL2)
69; 37%

STX11
(FHL4)
1; 0%
STXBP2
(FHL5)
9; 5%

B
Fig. 556.1 A, Histopathology of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH)

shows eosinophilic granuloma of a lytic bone lesion of the femoral
head. Multiple LCH cells with characteristic grooved nuclei, as well as
numerous eosinophils, are visible in this mixed infiltrate. B, CD1a staining, characteristic and diagnostic of lesions with LCH cells.
ALK
CSF1R
CBL

TKR inhibitors:

NTRK1
RET

crizotinib
alectinib
selpercatinib

PTPN11

PIK3CA
PIK3CD

KRAS
NRAS
HRAS

BRAF
BRAF
ARAF
ARAF

mTOR inhibitor:
sirolimus

mTOR

MEK1
MEK2

BRAF inhibitors:
vemurafenib
dabrafenib

MEK inhibitors:
cobimetinib
trametinib

UNC13D (FHL3)
62; 33%

N = 186

Fig. 556.4 Different genetic subtypes in 171 patients with familial

hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) or FHL-­
related disease.
For each subtype, the name of the gene, the abbreviation of the disease subtype, the absolute number, and the percentage are shown.
Furthermore, we include as FHL one subgroup of 15 patients with either familial recurrence or refractory/recurrent disease despite specific
therapy and/or repeatedly documented severe functional defect in degranulation or cytotoxicity assays. (From Cetica V, Sieni E, Pende D,
et al. Genetic predisposition to hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis:
Report on 500 patients from the Italian registry. J Allergy Clin Immunol.
2016;137:188–196. Fig. 2, p. 191.)

histopathologically characterized by gliosis and has no definitive treatment,
may be observed only many years after the initial diagnosis of LCH. These
manifestations are not known to be associated with LCH cells, Birbeck granules, CD1a positivity, or any other indication of LCH cell infiltration, raising questions about their pathogenesis and the suggestion that they may be
cytokine-­mediated.
After tissue biopsy, which is diagnostic of LCH and is easiest to perform on skin or bone lesions, a comprehensive clinical and laboratory
evaluation is essential and should be undertaken. This should include
a series of studies in all patients: CBC, liver function tests, coagulation
studies, skeletal survey, chest radiograph, and measurement of urine
osmolality. In addition, detailed evaluation of any organ system shown
to be involved by physical examination or by these studies should be performed to establish the extent of disease before initiation of treatment.

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS
Proliferation survival

Fig. 556.2 Proteins of the MAP kinase cell-­signaling pathway involved
by activating pathogenic variants, and inhibitors already reported to
benefit patients with histiocytosis. (From Emile JF, Cohen-­Aubart F, Collin M, et al. Histiocytosis. Lancet. 2021;398:157–168. Fig. 1.)

The clinical course of single-­system disease (usually bone, lymph node,
or skin) generally is benign, with a high chance of spontaneous remission.
Therefore treatment should be minimal and should be directed at arresting the progression of a bone lesion that could result in permanent damage before it resolves spontaneously. Curettage or, less often but especially

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood
Table 556.4  Infections Associated with Hemophagocytic
Syndrome
VIRAL
Adenovirus
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Dengue virus
Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV)
Enteroviruses
Herpes simplex viruses (HSV1, HSV2)
Human herpesviruses (HHV6, HHV8)
HIV
Influenza viruses
Parvovirus B19
Varicella-­zoster virus (VZV)
Hepatitis viruses
Measles
Parechovirus
BACTERIAL
Babesia microti
Brucella abortus
Enteric gram-­negative rods
Haemophilus influenzae
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Staphylococcus aureus
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Ehrlichia chaffeensis
FUNGAL
Candida albicans
Cryptococcus neoformans
Histoplasma capsulatum
Fusarium

Table 556.5  Other Primary Immunodeficiency and
Inherited Metabolic Diseases That May Be
Complicated (Rarely) by Hemophagocytic
Lymphohistiocytosis
PRIMARY IMMUNODEFICENCY DISEASES
SCID
CIDs
DiGeorge syndrome
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Ataxia telangiectasia
Dyskeratosis congenita
ORAI-­1 deficiency
Chronic granulomatous disease
Other PIDs
X-­linked agammaglobulinemia
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome
STAT1 gain of function
CTLA4
GATA2
TRAPS
FMF
NEMO
TIM3
DOCK8
STAT2
STAT3
PIK3CD

PARASITIC
Leishmania donovani
Plasmodium

INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM
Lysinuric protein intolerance
Multiple sulfatase deficiency
Biotinidase deficiency
Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency/Wolman disease
Methylmalonic acidemia
Galactosemia
Gaucher disease
Pearson syndrome
Galactosialidosis
Propionic acidemia
Cobalamin C disease
Niemann-­Pick disease
LCHAD deficiency

From Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology of
Infancy and Childhood. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003, p. 1381.

CONGENITAL DISORDERS OF GLYCOSYLATION
COG6

MYCOBACTERIAL
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
RICKETTSIAL
Coxiella burnetii
Other rickettsial diseases

3173

From Canna SW, March RA. Pediatric hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Blood.
2020;135(16):1332–1343. Table 5.

when a weight-­bearing bone is involved, corticosteroid injection or low-­
dose local radiation therapy (5-­6 Gy) may accomplish this goal.
In contrast, multisystem disease requires treatment with systemic multiagent chemotherapy. Several different regimens have been proposed,
but central elements are the inclusion of vinblastine and corticosteroids,
both of which have been found to be very effective in treating LCH. Etoposide has been excluded from the standard treatment of multisystem
LCH, which is treated with multiple agents, designed to reduce mortality,
reactivation of disease, and long-­term consequences. The response rate to
therapy is quite high, and mortality in severe LCH has been substantially
reduced by multiagent chemotherapy, especially if the diagnosis is made
accurately and expeditiously. The most recent treatment results associated
with lengthened continuation therapy (HS LCH-III) show a greater than
85% survival rate in severe (RO+) multisystem disease and a reduced rate
of reactivation.
Experimental therapies are suggested only for unresponsive disease
(often in very young children with multisystem disease and organ dysfunction who have not responded to multiagent initial treatment) and reactivation of RO+ disease in risk organs but not in reactivation of mild disease
(any risk organ–negative reactivations) (see Fig. 556.2). The approaches

include immunosuppressive therapy with cyclosporine/antithymocyte
globulin and possibly imatinib, 2-­chlorodeoxyadenosine, and clofarabine.
With the discovery of the BRAFV600E pathogenic variant causing hyperactivation of the MAPK pathway in LCH cells, pharmacologic inhibition
of BRAF and pharmacologic inhibition of MEK are currently the subject of
clinical trials as therapeutic approaches for resistant disease.
Late (fibrotic) complications, whether hepatic or pulmonary, are irreversible and require organ transplantation to be definitively treated. Current treatment approaches and experimental protocols for both LCH and
HLH can be obtained at the Histiocyte Society website (http://www.his
tiocytesociety.org). An unresolved problem is treatment of the (usually
late-­onset) severe, progressive, and intractable LCH-­associated neurodegenerative syndrome. This is also under investigation for response to
experimental therapies, including the pharmacologic inhibitors of the
MAPK pathway. Regarding current treatment recommendations for
LCH as well as HLH, the continuing rapid advances in understanding
of their pathogeneses is likely to result in further rapid development and
validation of new therapeutic approaches.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3174 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Viral
infection

T lymphocytes
CD8+

TCD8+ activated
+++++
IFN

Macrophages
Hemophagocytosis
activation
+++++
TNF++

+++
IL6 ++

Tissues infiltration,
destruction

Cytoxic granule

Activation

Perforin/FHL2

Rab27a/Griscelli Syndrome
Docking

Munc18-2/FHL5
Syntaxin 11/FHL4

Priming

Munc13-4/FHL3

Fusion

Cytotoxic T
Lymphocyte

TCR

Target cell

MHC-Ag

Fig. 556.5 Inborn errors in the cytotoxic activity of lymphocytes. Top, Immune mechanisms leading to the occurrence of a hemophagocytic syn-

drome. Following a viral infection, antigen-­specific CD8+ T lymphocytes undergo massive expansion and activation and secrete high levels of interferon (IFN)-­γ. The overwhelming activated effector cells induce excessive macrophage activation and proinflammatory cytokine production, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α and interleukin-­6 (IL-­6). Macrophages spontaneously phagocytose blood elements (platelets, red blood cells, and
a polymorphonuclear cell shown here). Activated lymphocytes and macrophages infiltrate various organs, resulting in massive tissue necrosis and
organ failure. Bottom, Genetic variants causing hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytic syndrome (HLH) affect a precise step of the cytotoxic machinery:
granule content, docking, priming, or fusion. Only the defects causing Griscelli syndrome and familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) are
shown. MHC-­Ag, Major histocompatibility complex antigen; TCR, T-­cell receptor. (From Pachlopnik Schmid J, Cote M, Menager MM, et al. Inherited
defects in cytotoxic lymphocyte activity. Immunol Rev. 2010;235:10–23.)

Pathogenic variant
- Perforin
- Munc13-4
- Syntaxin 11
- Rab27a
- Lyst
- Others

Malignancy
- Lymphoma
- Leukemia
- Others

Acquired immune dysregulation
- Immune-modulating drugs
(methotrexate, gold salts,
sulfasalazine, NSAID, ...)
- Cytokine-antagonists
(ani-THF-α, anti-IL-1, anti-IL-6, ...)
- Others

TR

IG

GE
R

HLH

Autoimmune/autoinflammatory
disorders
- Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis
- Systemic lupus erythematosus
- Kawasaki disease
- Inflammatory bowel disease
- Others

-

Infection
Viral (Herpesviridae, ...)
Bacterial (Mycobacterium, ...)
Fungal (Candida, ...)
Parasitic (Histoplasma, ...)

CYTOKINE STORM

Fig. 556.6 Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) comprises a heterogeneous spectrum of disorders that all present with severe cytokine

storm and life-­threatening immunopathology. HLH can be caused by pathogenic variants in genes involved in granule-­mediated cytotoxicity but can
also be acquired on a multitude of underlying autoimmune/autoinflammatory diseases or malignancies, with possible facilitation by immunomodulating therapies. Clinical manifestations of HLH are generally precipitated by an infection. IL, Interleukin; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs. (From Brisse E, Wouters CH, Matthys P. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH): a heterogeneous spectrum of cytokine-­driven immune
disorders. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2015;26:263–280. Fig. 2, p. 267.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood

A

3175

B

G

C

F

E

D

H

Fig. 556.7 Langerhans cell histiocytosis. A, Young child with disseminated Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) skin lesions. B, Chest CT scan showing multiple cysts. C, X-­rays showing LCH involvement of the skull. D, X-­rays showing LCH involvement of the mandible, as revealed by so-­called
floating teeth. E, MRI showing a femoral lesion revealed by a fracture. F, CT scan showing the spinal column. G and H, MRI showing degenerative
neuro-­LCH on axial T2 spin echo-­weighted images, which reveal symmetrical hyperintensities within the cerebellar corpus medullare (arrows). (From
Emile JF, Cohen-­Aubart F, Collin M, et al. Histiocytosis. Lancet. 2021;398:157–168. Fig. 2.)

A

C

B

D

E

Fig. 556.8 Variable appearance of Langerhans cell histiocytosis of skin. A, Eczematous dermatitis. B, Hypopigmented, eroded papules. C, Hypo-

pigmented macules. D and E, Crusted papulonodules. Presentation does not reflect presence or absence of multisystem disease. Despite similar
appearance, the patient in D had a single lesion, whereas the patient in E had organ involvement. (From Simko SJ, Garmezy B, Abhyankar H, et al.
Differentiating skin-­limited and multisystem Langerhans cell histiocytosis. J Pediatr. 2014;165:990–996. Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3176 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
The HLH syndrome
(All conditions that meet syndrome definition)

HLH
Disease
mimics

Rheumatologic HLH
(R-HLH/MAS)
HLH
disease

Malignancy
associated
HLH
(M-HLH)

A

B

Fig. 556.9 Langerhans cell histiocytosis presenting as “blueberry

muffin” rash in neonate. Multiple firm, nonblanching, purple papules
affecting the head and neck (A) and the body (B). (From Schmitt AR,
Wetter DA, Camilleri MJ, et al. Langerhans cell histiocytosis presenting
as a blueberry muffin rash. Lancet. 2017;390:155.)

Fig. 556.10 High-­resolution coronal CT image (lung window) reveals

diffuse lung cysts with parenchymal destruction in bilateral lung fields.
(From Chauhan L, Aggarwal N. Honey-­comb Langerhans cell histiocytosis. J Pediatr. 2016;168:248. Fig. 2.)

556.2 Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
Stephan Ladisch
See the previous section on “Classification and Pathology,” Table 556.3,
and Chapter 174.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Primary FHLH and secondary HLH have a remarkably similar, clinically
indistinguishable presentation (Fig. 556.11). It consists of a generalized
disease process, most often with fever (90–100%), maculopapular and/or
petechial rash (10–60%), weight loss, and irritability. The initial clinical presentation can vary but is usually severe. In the case of secondary HLH, onset
may be camouflaged by a primary disease process. Acute presentations of
HLH include a hyperferritinemic septic shock–like picture, acute respiratory
distress, seizures, ataxia, focal lesions, or coma (because of CNS infiltration).
Other features that are frequently present result from bone marrow involvement and pancytopenia or hepatic dysfunction.

Other
HLH
(HLH-NOS)

HLH with
immune
compromise
(IC-HLH)

latrogenic
HLH
(Rx-HLH)

Familial HLH
(F-HLH)

Forme fruste HLH
(incompletely meeting
HLH definition)

Fig. 556.11 Spectrum of the hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis

(HLH) syndrome. The HLH syndrome includes all conditions meeting
consensus diagnostic criteria. This syndrome includes conditions that
would benefit from HLH-­directed immunosuppressive therapies, which
are termed “HLH disease,” and those conditions that would not benefit
from such therapy or require entirely different treatments, termed “HLH
disease mimics.” HLH disease includes recognizable subgroups: familial
HLH with clear genetic etiology, HLH associated with malignancy, HLH associated with rheumatologic conditions (also called MAS), HLH observed
after immune-­activating therapies (iatrogenic HLH, also called cytokine
release syndrome), HLH associated with immune compromise (either primary immune deficiency or treatment-­related immune suppression), and
HLH not associated with other specific conditions. Recognition of these
subcategories is valuable as this may alter treatment. (From Jordan MB,
Allen CE, Greenberg J, et al. Challenges in the diagnosis of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis: Recommendations from the North American
Consortium (NACHO). Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2019;66:e27929.)

Children with primary HLH are generally <1-­2 years old, and children with secondary HLH typically present at an older age, but both
forms may present at any age. Physical examination often reveals hepatosplenomegaly (70–100%), lymphadenopathy (20–50%), respiratory
distress (40–90%), jaundice, and symptoms of CNS involvement (50%)
that are not unlike those of aseptic meningitis, CNS vasculitis, or acute
demyelinating encephalomyelitis. MRI may demonstrate systemic T2
weighted/fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintensities in gray and white matter and in supratentorial and infratentorial regions (Fig. 556.12). The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pleocytosis
(50–90%) associated with CNS involvement in primary HLH is characterized by cells that are the same phagocytic macrophages found
in the peripheral blood or bone marrow. HLH may initially or only
manifest CNS symptoms. Isolated neuroinflammation may be present in the absence of cytopenias, splenomegaly, or other systemic features. Approximately 35% will eventually develop diagnostic features
of HLH (Table 556.6). The interval from neurologic onset to eventual
diagnosis often exceeds 2 years. In CNS isolated disease, the diagnosis of familial HLH is often made by whole exome sequencing for
other diseases.
The diagnosis of HLH is arrived at in two stages. The first stage is
based on a set of eight clinical and laboratory findings, with the presence of five of the eight being diagnostic of HLH. The eight findings,
formulated by the Histiocyte Society, are fever, splenomegaly, cytopenia of two cell lines (in 90–100%), hypertriglyceridemia (80–100%)
or hypofibrinogenemia (65–85%), hyperferritinemia (≥500 but often
>10,000), extremely elevated soluble CD25 (interleukin-­2 receptor), reduced or absent NK cell activity, and bone marrow, CSF, or
lymph node evidence of hemophagocytosis (see Table 556.6). The
second stage involves genetic analysis and is undertaken as quickly as
possible but generally requires ∼2 weeks to complete and should not
interfere with initiation of treatment (Fig. 556.13). The genetic findings
and family history will determine whether the diagnosis is (autosomal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood
A

Frequency of the neurologic
manifestations in isolated CNS-HLH
Gait disturbance
Seizures
Headache
Limb weakness / motor impairment
Visual abnormalities
Speech abnormalities
n=38
Vomiting
Altered mental status
Abnormal tone
Sensory impairment
Tremors / movement disorder
Psychiatric symptoms / mood disorder / personality change
Cognitive impairment / regression
0

20

40
%

60

3177

B

80

Neuroradiologic findings on MRI Imaging
Diffuse/multifocal white matter lesions
Cerebellar involvement
Periventricular changes
Brainstem involvement
Edema / swelling
Volume loss / atrophy
Spinal cord involvement
Grey matter involvement
Leptomeningeal enhancement
Hemorrhagic lesions

n=38

0

20

40

60

80 100

%
CNS biopsy results
Lymphohistiocytic infiltrations
Necrosis / destructive inflammation
Granulomas
Hemorrhage
Microinfarcts
0

5

10
n

15

20

Fig. 556.12 A, Frequencies of neurologic manifestations, neuroradiologic findings, and histopathologic central nervous system (CNS) biopsy

results in 38 patients with isolated CNS hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). B, Examples of CNS MRI imaging in patients with isolated CNS-­
HLH. Upper panels, T2 images in one patient from 2016 (left) and 2017 (right) demonstrate cerebral atrophy with diffuse white matter involvement.
Neuroradiologic findings on MRI show imaging abnormalities. Lower panels, T2 images from another patient reveal multiple nodular lesions in the
pons, cerebellum, and white matter. (From Blincoe A, Heeg M, Campbell PK, et al. Neuroinflammatory disease as an isolated manifestation of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. J Clin Immunol. 2020;40:901–916. Fig. 1.)

recessive) primary HLH, secondary HLH, or a genetic hybrid form of
HLH.
Hemophagocytosis is not specific for HLH and should be considered
only in the context of the diagnostic criteria. No absolute clinical or
laboratory distinction can be made between primary HLH and secondary HLH. In some subgroups of HLH, perforin assays may be normal.
Similarly, some patients with primary FHLH have no known identifiable pathogenic variant, while new genetic variants associated with
HLH continue to be discovered.
In the absence of either (1) a documented genetic defect coupled with
defective NK cell cytotoxicity or (2) frank hemophagocytosis, care should
be taken in making the diagnosis of secondary HLH, given the implication to use cytotoxic chemotherapy. The nonspecific criteria (indicative
of inflammation) used to diagnose HLH can also be seen in diseases
that are not always associated with hemophagocytosis (e.g., overwhelming acute viral infection with appropriate T-­cell activation), in which the
cytotoxic and immunosuppressive therapy used in treating HLH might be
contraindicated.
Macrophage activation syndrome, particularly in the context of
systemic-­onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) or infection, has many
similarities to HLH (see Chapter 196). Indeed, whole exome sequencing of patients with systemic-­onset JIA or those with fatal influenza has
revealed a higher than expected incidence of HLH genes.

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

Therapy for primary HLH (autosomal recessive genetic disease or
familial occurrence) consists of a combination of etoposide, dexamethasone, cyclosporine, and intrathecal methotrexate. It should be
stressed that pancytopenia and the presence of an infection are not
contraindications to cytotoxic or immunosuppressive therapy (etoposide and steroid, cyclosporine or antithymocyte globulin for maintenance therapy). Paradoxically they ameliorate the HLH. Emapalumab,
a monoclonal antibody against interferon-­γ, is approved for recurrent,
refractory, or progressive familial HLH or for patients who cannot
tolerate chemotherapy. The goal for all therapies is to reach the point
of initiating stem cell transplantation, to date the only known potentially curative treatment for primary HLH, effective in achieving cure
in >60% of patients. Chemotherapy is inadequate for sustained cure of
primary HLH, which is ultimately fatal without transplantation.
In secondary HLH, it is critical that the underlying disease (e.g., infection, malignancy) be identified and successfully treated. The diagnostic
distinction between primary HLH and secondary HLH sometimes can be
based on the acute onset of secondary HLH in the presence of an already
documented infection or cancer, including leukemia, and certain autoimmune or immunodeficiency disorders. In this case, treatment of the
underlying infection is coupled with supportive care. If the diagnosis is
made in the setting of iatrogenic immunodeficiency, immunosuppressive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3178 Part XX u Cancer and Benign Tumors
Table 556.6  Diagnostic Criteria for the HLH-2004 Trial and Their Relevance for Clinical Diagnosis
HLH2004 ENTRY CRITERIA

COMMENT
In a patient with known variants, treatment before full development of HLH
may be appropriate, but genetic studies usually just help to define HLH
recurrence risk, not the presence of an active disease state.

A. Molecular diagnosis consistent with HLH: Pathogenic variants
of PRF1, UNC13D, STXBP2, Rab27a, STX11, SH2D1A, or XIAP or
B. Five of the eight criteria listed below are fulfilled
1. Fever ≥38.3°C
2. Splenomegaly

Nearly universal in untreated HLH.
Although splenomegaly and hepatomegaly are very common in HLH,
­adenopathy is not.
Cytopenias are ubiquitous in HLH. Lack of cytopenias should make one
doubt a diagnosis of HLH, except in the special case of isolated, CNS-­only
disease.

3.	Cytopenias (affecting at least two of three lineages in the
peripheral blood): Hemoglobin <9 g/dL (in infants <4 wk:
hemoglobin <10 g/dL), platelets <100 × 103/mL, neutrophils < 1
× 103/mL
4.	Hypertriglyceridemia (>265 mg/dL) and/or hypofibrinogenemia
(<150 mg/dL)
5.	Hemophagocytosis in bone marrow or spleen or lymph nodes
or liver
6.	Low or absent NK-­cell activity

Low fibrinogen in the context of inflammation is paradoxical and one of the
more distinctive features of HLH.
Not specific to HLH, or essential for the diagnosis, but helpful as a disease
marker. Of note, it is often not evident early after disease onset.
More modern and robust assays measuring perforin levels and its degranulation should replace this assay for reliable diagnosis of HLH. This assay is
not specific for primary HLH.
Most patients have much higher levels than this threshold suggests.
As HLH is a T-­cell driven disease, this assay is extremely informative for
­diagnosis and response to therapy.

7.	Ferritin >500 ng/mL
8.	Elevated soluble CD25 (soluble IL-­2 receptor α)

HLH, Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; NK, natural killer; IL, interleukin; CNS, central nervous system.
From Jordan MB, Allen CE, Greenberg J, et al. Challenges in the diagnosis of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis: Recommendations from the North American Consortium (NACHO). Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2019;66(11):e27929. Table 1.

Male

Suspected HLH

Albinism
Microscopic analysis of
hair and blood smear

Flow cytometric assays

XLP1:
SAP deficiency
Lymphoma
EBV infection
XLP2:
XIAP deficiency
Splenomegaly
Colitis

SAP/XIAP

Perforin

Granule release
assay on resting
NK cells

Defective

Defective

Defective

PRF1 gene mutation
studies

Granule release
assay on IL-2activated NK cells

FHL2
Defective

Restoration

Western blotting
for Munc13-4
protein/UNC13D
gene variant
studies

Western blotting
for Syntaxin11
protein/STX11 or
STXBP2 gene
variant studies

FHL3

FHL4
No variants

FHL1 likely

FHL5: Colitis
and
hypogammaglobulinemia

Chediak-Higashi
syndrome:
Giant lysosomes in
leukocytes.
Evenly distributed,
regular melanin
granules larger than
those in normal hair.
Primary neurologic
disease.
Griscelli syndrome
type 2:
Hair with bigger and
irregular melanin
granules mainly near
medulla.
Under polarized light
microscopy, hair
appears
monotonously white.
Hermansky-Pudlak
syndrome type 2:
Characteristic eye
findings.
Increased bleeding.
Neutropenia.

Fig. 556.13 Algorithm for identification of genetic causes of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). The HLH algorithm is based on flow

cytometry assays: all the patients fitting into HLH criteria, irrespective of age and clinical presentations, should be screened for perforin expression
and granule release assay. All male patients should be screened for signaling lymphocyte activation molecule–associated protein (SAP) and X-­linked
inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) expression. For patients clinically presenting with albinism, microscopic analysis of hair and blood smear is essential for differential diagnosis of Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome, Griscelli syndrome, and Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome. Based on the defect in expression of a particular protein identified, molecular characterization for the respective gene should be performed for confirmation of diagnosis. EBV,
Epstein-­Barr virus; FHL, familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; IL, interleukin; NK, natural killer. (Adapted from Madkaikar M, Shabrish S, Desai M. Current updates on classification, diagnosis and treatment of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH). Indian J Pediatr. 2016;83:434–443.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 556 u Histiocytosis Syndromes of Childhood
treatment should be withdrawn and supportive care instituted along
with specific therapy for the underlying infection. In many patients the
prognosis is excellent without additional specific treatment other than
treating the triggering infection. However, when a treatable infection or
other cause cannot be documented, and when the clinical presentation is
severe, the prognosis for secondary HLH is as poor as for primary HLH.
These patients should receive the identical initial 8-­week chemotherapeutic approach, including etoposide, even in the face of cytopenias. In both
primary and secondary HLH, the cytotoxic effect of etoposide on macrophages interrupts cytokine production and the consequent cytokine storm,
the hemophagocytic process, and the accumulation of macrophages, all of
which may contribute to the pathogenesis of infection-­associated hemophagocytic syndrome. A broad spectrum of infectious agents, including
viruses (e.g., cytomegalovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus, human herpesvirus 6),
fungi, protozoa, and bacteria, may trigger secondary HLH, often in the
setting of immunodeficiency (see Table 556.3). A thorough evaluation for
infection should be undertaken in immunodeficient patients with hemophagocytosis. The same syndrome may be identified in conjunction with a
rheumatologic disorder (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, Kawasaki disease) or a neoplasm (e.g., leukemia). In these patients, effective treatment
of the underlying disease (e.g., infection, cancer) is critical and may itself
lead to ultimate resolution of the hemophagocytosis. In addition anakinra
or ruxolitinib (JAK inhibitors) has been used in patients with secondary
HLH.

3179

556.3 Other Histiocytoses
Stephan Ladisch
Other rare histiocytoses that have been named for their clinical presentation include xanthogranuloma in JXG, ECD, and striking lymphadenopathy in Rosai-­
Dorfman disease (sinus histiocytosis with massive
lymphadenopathy). JXG and ECD may require systemic treatment with
cytotoxic chemotherapy or potentially MAPK pathway inhibitors, reflecting the presence of a BRAF pathogenic variant. Rosai-­Dorfman disease
usually is not treated, although the massive lymphadenopathy may require
intervention because of its tendency to cause physical obstruction.
Rare histiocytic malignancies include acute monocytic leukemia, true
malignant histiocytosis, and histiocytic sarcoma. Also included is the more
recently identified histiocytic malignancy, ALK+ histiocytosis, which is a
systemic histiocytic proliferation presenting as disseminated disease in
infants. The cells bear histiocytic markers (CD68, CD163) but not those of
LCH (CD1a, BRAF V600E). Whereas all these rare histiocytic malignancies are referred to as histiocytoses because of their monocyte-­macrophage
lineage, they are better considered under the rubric of true proliferative
malignancies of the monocyte–macrophage lineage.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

