The Digestive System
Section 1

Clinical Manifestations
of Gastrointestinal
Disease
Chapter 351

Normal Digestive Tract
Phenomena
Asim Maqbool and Chris A. Liacouras
Gastrointestinal function varies with maturity; what is a physiologic
event in a newborn or infant might be a pathologic symptom at an
older age. A fetus can swallow amniotic fluid as early as 12 weeks of
gestation, but nutritive sucking in neonates first develops at about 34
weeks of gestation. The coordinated oral and pharyngeal movements
necessary for swallowing solids develop within the first few months
of life. Before this time, the tongue thrust is upward and outward to
express milk from the nipple, instead of a backward motion, which
propels solids toward the esophageal inlet. By 1 month of age, infants
appear to show preferences for sweet and salty foods. Infants’ interest in solids increases at approximately 4 months of age. The recommendation to begin solids at 6 months of age is based on nutritional
and cultural concepts rather than maturation of the swallowing process
(see Chapter 61). Infants swallow air during feeding, and burping is
encouraged to prevent gaseous distention of the stomach.
A number of normal anatomic variations may be noted in the
mouth. A short lingual frenulum (“tongue-­tie”) may be worrisome to
parents but only rarely interferes with nursing, bottle feeding, eating,
or speech, generally requiring no treatment. Surface furrowing of the
tongue (a geographic or scrotal tongue) is usually a normal finding. A
bifid uvula may be isolated or associated with a submucous cleft of the
soft palate (Fig. 351.1).
Regurgitation, the result of gastroesophageal reflux, occurs commonly in the first year of life. Effortless regurgitation can dribble out
of an infant’s mouth but also may be forceful. In an otherwise healthy
infant with regurgitation; volumes of emesis are commonly approximately 15-­30 mL but occasionally are larger. Most often, the infant
remains happy, although possibly hungry, after an episode of regurgitation. Episodes can occur from one to several times per day. Regurgitation gradually resolves in 80% of infants by 6 months of age and in
90% by 12 months. If complications develop or regurgitation persists,
gastroesophageal reflux is considered pathologic rather than merely
developmental and deserves further evaluation and treatment. Complications of gastroesophageal reflux include failure to thrive, pulmonary disease (apnea or aspiration pneumonitis), and esophagitis with
its sequelae (see Chapters 369 and 370).
Infants and young children may be erratic eaters; this may be a worry
to parents. A toddler might eat insatiably or refuse to consume food

PART

XVI

during a meal. Toddlers and young children also tend to eat only a limited variety of foods. Parents should be encouraged to view nutritional
intake over several days and not be overly concerned about individual meals. Infancy and adolescence are periods of rapid growth; high
nutrient requirements for growth may be associated with voracious
appetites. The reduced appetite of toddlers and preschool children is
often a worry to parents who are used to the relatively greater dietary
intake during infancy. Demonstration of age-­appropriate growth on a
growth curve is reassuring.
The number, color, and consistency of stools can vary greatly in
the same infant and between infants of similar age, without apparent
explanation. The earliest stools after birth consist of meconium, a dark,
viscous material that is normally passed within the first 48 hours of
life. With the onset of feeding, meconium is replaced by green-­brown
transition stools, often containing curds, and, after 4-­5 days, by yellow-­
brown milk stools. Stool frequency is extremely variable in normal
infants and can vary from none to seven per day. Breastfed infants can
have frequent small, loose stools early (transition stools), and then after
2-­3 weeks can have very infrequent soft stools. Some nursing infants
might not pass any stool for 1-­2 weeks and then have a normal soft
bowel movement. The color of stool has little significance except for the
presence of blood or absence of bilirubin products (white-­gray rather
than yellow-­brown). The presence of vegetable matter, such as peas or
corn, in the stool of an older infant or toddler ingesting solids is normal and suggests poor chewing and not malabsorption. A pattern of
intermittent loose stools, known as toddler’s diarrhea, occurs commonly between 1 and 3 years of age. These otherwise healthy growing children often drink excessive carbohydrate-­containing beverages.
The stools typically occur during the day and not overnight. The volume of fluid intake is often excessive; limiting sugar and unabsorbable
carbohydrate-­containing beverages and increasing fat in the diet often
lead to resolution of the pattern of loose stools.
A protuberant abdomen is often noted in infants and toddlers, especially after large feedings. This can result from the combination of weak
abdominal musculature, relatively large abdominal organs, and lordotic
stance. In the first year of life, it is common to palpate the liver 1-­2 cm

Fig. 351.1 Classic submucous cleft palate with triad of bifid uvula

(large arrow), furrow along the midline of the soft palate (arrowheads),
and a notch in the posterior margin of the hard palate (small arrow). The
midline furrow is sometimes referred to as the zona pellucida, reflecting the translucent nature of this area in some patients. (From Hasan A,
Gardner A, Devlin M, Russell C. Submucous cleft palate with bifid uvula.
J Pediatr. 2014;165:872.)

2223
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2224 Part XVI u The Digestive System
below the right costal margin. The normal liver is soft in consistency
and percusses to normal size for age. A Riedel lobe is a thin projection
of the right lobe of the liver that may be palpated low in the right lateral
abdomen. A soft spleen tip might also be palpable as a normal finding.
In thin young children, the vertebral column is easily palpable, and an
overlying structure may be mistaken for a mass. Pulsation of the aorta
can be appreciated. Normal stool can often be palpated in the left lower
quadrant in the descending or sigmoid colon.
Blood loss from the gastrointestinal tract is never normal, but
swallowed blood may be misinterpreted as gastrointestinal bleeding.
Maternal blood may be ingested at the time of birth or later by a nursing infant if there is bleeding near the mother’s nipple. Nasal or oropharyngeal bleeding is occasionally mistaken for gastrointestinal bleeding
(see Chapter 142). Red dyes in foods or drinks can turn the stool red
but do not produce a positive test result for occult blood.
Jaundice is common in neonates, especially among premature
infants, and usually results from the inability of an immature liver to
conjugate bilirubin, leading to an elevated indirect component (see
Chapter 137). Persistent elevation of indirect bilirubin levels in nursing infants may be a result of breast milk jaundice, which is usually
a benign entity in full-­term infants. An elevated direct bilirubin is
not normal and suggests liver disease, although in infants it may be
a result of extrahepatic infection (urinary tract infection). The direct
bilirubin fraction should account for no more than 15–20% of the
total serum bilirubin. Elevations in direct bilirubin levels can follow
indirect hyperbilirubinemia as the liver converts excessive indirect to
direct bilirubin and the rate-­limiting step in bilirubin excretion shifts
from the glucuronidation of bilirubin to excretion of direct bilirubin
into the bile canaliculus. Indirect hyperbilirubinemia, which occurs
commonly in normal newborns, tends to tint the sclerae and skin
golden yellow, whereas direct hyperbilirubinemia produces a greenish
yellow hue. The degree of jaundice does not always directly correlate
with serum bilirubin levels. An elevated total serum bilirubin warrants
closer examination, fractionation of bilirubin (direct and indirect), and
ongoing surveillance. Atypical elevations of unconjugated bilirubin are
associated with risk for kernicterus (see Chapter 140). Elevations in
conjugated bilirubin are reviewed in the chapter on cholestasis (see
Chapter 404.1).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 352

Major Symptoms and
Signs of Digestive Tract
Disorders
Asim Maqbool and Chris A. Liacouras
Disorders of organs outside the gastrointestinal (GI) tract can produce
symptoms and signs that mimic digestive tract disorders and should be
considered in the differential diagnosis (Table 352.1). In children with
normal growth and development, treatment may be initiated without
a formal evaluation based on a presumptive diagnosis after taking a
history and performing a physical examination. Poor weight gain or
weight loss is often associated with a significant pathologic process and
usually necessitates a more formal evaluation.

Table 352.1  Some Nondigestive Tract Causes of
Gastrointestinal Symptoms in Children
ANOREXIA
Systemic disease: inflammatory, neoplastic
Cardiorespiratory compromise
Iatrogenic: drug therapy, unpalatable therapeutic diets
Depression
Anorexia nervosa
VOMITING
Inborn errors of metabolism
Medications: erythromycin, chemotherapy, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs, marijuana
Increased intracranial pressure
Brain tumor
Infection of the urinary tract
Labyrinthitis
Adrenal insufficiency
Pregnancy
Psychogenic
Abdominal migraine
Poisoning/toxins
Renal disease
DIARRHEA
Infection: otitis media, urinary tract infection
Uremia
Medications: antibiotics, cisapride
Tumors: neuroblastoma
Pericarditis
Adrenal insufficiency
CONSTIPATION
Hypothyroidism
Spina bifida
Developmental delay
Dehydration: diabetes insipidus, renal tubular lesions
Medications: narcotics
Lead poisoning
Infant botulism
ABDOMINAL PAIN
Pyelonephritis, hydronephrosis, renal colic
Pneumonia (lower lobe)
Pelvic inflammatory disease
Porphyria
Fabry disease
Angioedema
Endocarditis
Abdominal migraine
Familial Mediterranean fever
Sexual or physical abuse
Systemic lupus erythematosus
School phobia
Sickle cell crisis
Vertebral disk inflammation
Psoas abscess
Pelvic osteomyelitis or myositis
Medications
Anterior (abdominal) cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome (ACNES)
ABDOMINAL DISTENTION OR MASS
Ascites: nephrotic syndrome, neoplasm, heart failure
Discrete mass: Wilms tumor, hydronephrosis, neuroblastoma,
mesenteric cyst, hepatoblastoma, lymphoma
Pregnancy
JAUNDICE
Hemolytic disease
Urinary tract infection
Sepsis
Hypothyroidism
Panhypopituitarism

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders
DYSPHAGIA

Difficulty in swallowing is termed dysphagia. Painful swallowing is
termed odynophagia. Globus is the sensation of something stuck in
the throat without a clear etiology. Swallowing is a complex process
that starts in the mouth with mastication and lubrication of food that
is formed into a bolus. The bolus is pushed into the pharynx by the
tongue. The pharyngeal phase of swallowing is rapid and involves protective mechanisms to prevent food from entering the airway. The epiglottis is lowered over the larynx while the soft palate is elevated against
the nasopharyngeal wall; respiration is temporarily arrested while the
upper esophageal sphincter opens to allow the bolus to enter the esophagus. In the esophagus, peristaltic coordinated muscular contractions
push the food bolus toward the stomach. The lower esophageal sphincter relaxes shortly after the upper esophageal sphincter, so liquids that
rapidly clear the esophagus enter the stomach without resistance.
Dysphagia is classified as oropharyngeal dysphagia and esophageal
dysphagia. Oropharyngeal dysphagia occurs when the transfer of the
food bolus from the mouth to the esophagus is impaired (also termed
transfer dysphagia). The striated muscles of the mouth, pharynx, and
upper esophageal sphincter are affected in oropharyngeal dysphagia.
Neurologic and muscular disorders can give rise to oropharyngeal
dysphagia (Table 352.2). Chiari malformations, Russell-­
Silver syndrome, and cri du chat may present with upper esophageal sphincter

Table 352.2  Causes of Oropharyngeal Dysphagia
NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDERS
Cerebral palsy
Brain tumors
Cerebrovascular disease/stroke
Chiari malformation
Polio and postpolio syndromes
Multiple sclerosis
Myositis
Dermatomyositis
Myasthenia gravis
Muscular dystrophies
Acquired or inherited dystonia syndrome
Dysautonomia
METABOLIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
Hyperthyroidism
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sarcoidosis
Amyloidosis

dysfunction, manifest by dysphagia with solids. The most serious complication of oropharyngeal dysphagia is life-­threatening aspiration.
A complex sequence of neuromuscular events is involved in the
transfer of foods to the upper esophagus. Abnormalities of the muscles
involved in the ingestion process and their innervation, strength, or
coordination are associated with transfer dysphagia in infants and children. In such cases, an oropharyngeal problem is usually part of a more
generalized neurologic or muscular problem (botulism, diphtheria,
neuromuscular disease). Painful oral lesions, such as acute viral stomatitis or trauma, occasionally interfere with ingestion. If the nasal air
passage is seriously obstructed, the need for respiration causes severe
distress when suckling. Although severe structural, dental, and salivary
abnormalities would be expected to create difficulties, ingestion proceeds relatively well in most affected children if they are hungry.
Esophageal dysphagia occurs when there is difficulty in transporting the food bolus down the esophagus. Esophageal dysphagia can
result from neuromuscular disorders or mechanical obstruction (Table
352.3). Primary motility disorders causing impaired peristaltic function and dysphagia are rare in children. Eosinophilic esophagitis can
present with esophageal dysphagia. Achalasia is an esophageal motility
disorder with associated inability of relaxation of the lower esophageal
sphincter; it rarely occurs in children. Motility of the distal esophagus
is disordered after surgical repair of tracheoesophageal fistula or achalasia. Abnormal motility can accompany collagen vascular disorders.
Mechanical obstruction can be intrinsic or extrinsic. Intrinsic structural defects cause a fixed impediment to the passage of food bolus
because of a narrowing within the esophagus, as in a stricture, web,
or tumor. Extrinsic obstruction is caused by compression from vascular rings, mediastinal lesions, or vertebral abnormalities. Structural
defects typically cause more problems in swallowing solids than liquids. In infants, esophageal web, tracheobronchial remnant, or vascular ring can cause dysphagia. An esophageal stricture secondary to
esophagitis (chronic gastroesophageal reflux, eosinophilic esophagitis,
chronic infections) occasionally has dysphagia as the first manifestation. An esophageal foreign body or a stricture secondary to a caustic
ingestion also causes dysphagia. A Schatzki ring, a thin ring of mucosal
tissue near the lower esophageal sphincter, is another mechanical cause
of recurrent dysphagia, and again is rare in children.
When dysphagia is associated with a delay in passage through the
esophagus, the patient may be able to point to the level of the chest
where the delay occurs, but esophageal symptoms are usually referred

Table 352.3  Causes of Esophageal Dysphagia

INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Meningitis
Botulism
Diphtheria
Lyme disease
Neurosyphilis
Viral infection: polio, coxsackievirus, herpes, cytomegalovirus

NEUROMUSCULAR
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Achalasia cardia
Diffuse esophageal spasm
Scleroderma

STRUCTURAL LESIONS
Inflammatory: abscess, pharyngitis
Congenital web
Cricopharyngeal bar
Dental problems
Bullous skin lesions
Plummer-­Vinson syndrome
Zenker diverticulum
Extrinsic compression: osteophytes, lymph nodes, thyroid swelling,
aberrant
right subclavian artery (dysphagia lusoria)

INTRINSIC LESIONS
Foreign bodies including pills
Esophagitis: GERD, eosinophilic esophagitis, infections
Stricture: corrosive injury, pill induced, peptic
Esophageal webs
Esophageal rings
Esophageal diverticula
Neoplasm
Chagas disease

OTHER
Corrosive injury
Side effects of medications
After surgery
After radiation therapy
Adapted from Gasiorowska A, Faas R. Current approach to dysphagia. Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2009;5(4):269–279.

2225

GERD

EXTRINSIC LESIONS
Vascular compression
Mediastinal lesion
Cervical osteochondritis
Vertebral abnormalities
GERD, Gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Adapted from Gasiorowska A, Faas R. Current approach to dysphagia. Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 2009;5(4):269–279.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2226 Part XVI u The Digestive System
to the suprasternal notch. When a patient points to the suprasternal
notch, the impaction can be found anywhere in the esophagus.

REGURGITATION

Regurgitation is the effortless movement of stomach contents into the
esophagus and mouth. It is not associated with distress, and infants
with regurgitation are often hungry immediately after an episode. The
lower esophageal sphincter prevents reflux of gastric contents into the
esophagus. Regurgitation is a result of gastroesophageal reflux through
an incompetent or, in infants, immature lower esophageal sphincter.
This is often a developmental process, and regurgitation or “spitting”
resolves with maturity. Regurgitation should be differentiated from
vomiting, which denotes an active reflex process with an extensive differential diagnosis (Table 352.4).

NAUSEA

Nausea has been described as an unpleasant, subjective sensation of
impending/imminent vomiting, often with epigastric sensation that
may be painless. Nausea is frequently associated with typical autonomic signs that accompany vomiting. Not all nausea is a prodrome
to vomiting. There are multiple potential triggers to nausea, including environmental exposures (toxins, odors), unpleasant visual stimuli, visceral pain, anxiety, stress, and a variety of additional etiologies
(Table 352.5).
The central nervous system (CNS) is frequently implicated for nausea. Receptors and neural pathways at the chemoreceptor trigger zone

(CTZ) are most often implicated by chemical stimuli with chemotherapy a prime example. Visceral stimuli can include ingestions, gastric
hyperacidity, physical stress, psychologic stressors, mechanical distention of the stomach, and impaired GI motility; vagal and sympathetic
nerves are involved in this process. Vestibular pathways are most often
implicated in nausea related to motion sickness. Increased intracranial
pressure can also present with nausea plus or minus vomiting.
Chronic nausea is more common in adolescents and may be coincidental with other functional GI disorders, including functional dyspepsia, delayed gastric emptying/gastroparesis, and constipation. There are
gender and ethnic differences with respect to chronic nausea in adolescence, with adolescent White females with anxiety more at risk than
other groups; there may be alterations in the brain gut axis coupled
with increased visceral hypersensitivity and hyperalgesia at play in the
setting (see Chapter 212). Dehydration and autonomic dysfunction
may also present with nausea as one facet of GI manifestations.
Nausea is often a clinical diagnosis, and while the differential diagnosis is extensive, negative findings do not equate to the patient not
having nausea. Nausea is often distressing, disruptive, and may be
disabling with respect to normal function. Table 352.5 reviews common medical conditions associated with nausea, as well as treatment
strategies. Hydration is important in many of these conditions. Many
of the medications used employ antihistamine, serotonergic, dopaminergic, and potentially even opioid pathways (although these are
still controversial). These agents are active at both the CNS and GI
level, with significant brain-­gut axis interplay. Complementary and

Table 352.4  Differential Diagnosis of Emesis During Childhood
INFANT
COMMON
Gastroenteritis
Gastroesophageal reflux
Overfeeding
Anatomic obstruction*
Systemic infection†
Pertussis syndrome
Otitis media

RARE
Adrenogenital syndrome
Inborn errors of metabolism
Brain tumor (increased intracranial pressure)
Subdural hemorrhage
Food poisoning
Rumination
Renal tubular acidosis
Ureteropelvic junction obstruction
Pseudoobstruction

CHILD

ADOLESCENT

Gastroenteritis
Systemic infection
Gastritis
Toxic ingestion/poisoning
Pertussis syndrome
Medication
Reflux (GERD)
Sinusitis
Otitis media
Anatomic obstruction*
Eosinophilic esophagitis

Gastroenteritis
GERD
Systemic infection
Toxic ingestion/poisoning/marijuana
Gastritis
Sinusitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Appendicitis
Migraine
Pregnancy
Medications
Ipecac abuse, bulimia
Concussion

Reye syndrome
Hepatitis
Peptic ulcer
Pancreatitis
Brain tumor
Increased intracranial pressure
Middle ear disease/labyrinthitis
Chemotherapy
Achalasia
Cyclic vomiting (migraine)
Esophageal stricture
Duodenal hematoma
Inborn error of metabolism
Pseudoobstruction
Gastroparesis

Reye syndrome
Hepatitis
Peptic ulcer
Pancreatitis
Cholecystitis
Brain tumor
Increased intracranial pressure
Concussion
Middle ear disease/labyrinthitis
Chemotherapy
Cyclic vomiting (migraine)
Biliary colic
Renal colic
Porphyria
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Adrenal insufficiency
Pseudoobstruction
Intestinal tumor
Gastroparesis
Achalasia
Superior mesentery artery syndrome
Distal intestinal obstruction syndrome

*Includes malrotation, pyloric stenosis, intussusception, Hirschsprung disease, adhesions, and hernias.
†Meningitis, sepsis.
GERD, Gastroesophageal reflux disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders

2227

Table 352.5  Examples of Causes and Management of Nausea
FUNCTIONAL GASTROINTESTINAL
DISORDERS
Gastroesophageal reflux
Esophagitis (reflux related, eosinophilic, etc.)
Dyspepsia
Gastroparesis
Constipation
Visceral hyperalgesia
OTHER GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Gastritis (medication/NSAID induced;
Helicobacter pylori)
Gastrointestinal dysmotility
Biliary dysfunction (cholelithiasis,
cholecystitis, biliary dyskinesia)
Fundoplication
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Increased intracranial pressure
Migraines, headaches
Motion sickness/vestibular dysfunction
Autonomic dysfunction
Chemotherapy-­induced nausea and vomiting
Postoperative nausea and vomiting

TREATMENT APPROACHES
Diet and lifestyle; acid reduction, refluxate management
Acid reduction, identifying and restricting environmental/dietary triggers
Dietary and lifestyle modification; acid reduction; cyproheptadine
Smaller, more frequent meals; dietary modification; prokinetic agents (D2 antagonists such as
metoclopramide and domperidone*; low-­dose erythromycin or azithromycin)
Adequate hydration, diet and lifestyle modification, stool softeners, stimulant laxatives, additional
adjunct measures if/as indicated
Tricyclic antidepressants (e.g., amitriptyline), cognitive behavioral therapy, hypnotherapy,
biofeedback, physical therapy for desensitization; biofeedback; stress reduction
Reduce/remove medications involved; treat the underlying cause
Adequate hydration; diet/feeding or eating modification; promotility agents
Treat the underlying cause
Smaller, more frequent meals; cyproheptadine to improve gastric accommodation
Treat underlying cause
Migraine prophylactic agents, including cyproheptadine. Abortive medications including triptans.
Antihistamines (e.g., diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine) anticholinergics (e.g., scopolamine)
Adequate hydration, increased salt intake, diet and lifestyle modification
5-­HT3 receptor antagonists; D2 antagonists; NK-­1 antagonists; butyrophenones; benzodiazepines;
dexamethasone; synthetic cannabinoids
5-­HT3 receptor antagonists

NON-­GI AND NON-­CNS ETIOLOGIES OF NAUSEA
Uremia
Treat the underlying disorder
Endocrine disorders [e.g., hypothyroidism]
Treat the underlying disorder
*D2 receptor antagonists such as metoclopramide and domperidone have a significant side effect profile, and have a U.S. Food and Drug Administration black box warning, and
should be used with caution.
NK-­1, Neurokinin 1.

alternative medicine approaches including using ginger, peppermint,
aromatherapy, and biofeedback may be helpful. Behavior psychology
and social work may be helpful in decreasing disability and enhancing
functionality.

VOMITING

Vomiting is a highly coordinated reflex process that may be preceded by increased salivation and begins with involuntary retching.
Violent descent of the diaphragm and constriction of the abdominal
muscles with relaxation of the gastric cardia actively force gastric
contents back up the esophagus. This process is coordinated in the
medullary vomiting center, which is influenced directly by afferent innervation and indirectly by the CTZ and higher CNS centers.
Many acute or chronic processes can cause vomiting (see Tables
352.1 and 352.4).
Vomiting caused by obstruction of the GI tract is probably mediated by intestinal visceral afferent nerves stimulating the vomiting center (Table 352.6). If obstruction occurs below the second
part of the duodenum, vomitus is usually bile stained. Emesis can
also become bile stained with repeated vomiting in the absence of
obstruction when duodenal contents are refluxed into the stomach.
Nonobstructive lesions of the digestive tract can also cause vomiting; this includes diseases of the upper bowel, pancreas, liver, or
biliary tree. CNS or metabolic derangements and cyclic vomiting
syndrome (see Chapter 390) can lead to severe, persistent emesis.
Marijuana use among teens has also led to cannabis hyperemesis
syndrome (see Chapter 157.3)
Potential complications of emesis are noted in Table 352.7. Broad
management strategies for vomiting in general and specific causes of
emesis are noted in Tables 352.8 and 352.9.

DIARRHEA

Diarrhea is best defined as excessive loss of fluid and electrolyte in the
stool. Acute diarrhea is defined as sudden onset of excessively loose
stools of >10 mL/kg/day in infants and >200 g/24 hr in older children,
which lasts <14 days. When the episode lasts longer than 14 days, it is
called chronic or persistent diarrhea.
Normally, a young infant has approximately 5 mL/kg/day of stool
output; the volume increases to 200 g/24 hr in an adult. The greatest
volume of intestinal water is absorbed in the small bowel; the colon
concentrates intestinal contents against a high osmotic gradient. The
small intestine of an adult can absorb 10-­11 L/day of a combination of
ingested and secreted fluid, whereas the colon absorbs approximately
0.5 L. Disorders that interfere with absorption in the small bowel tend
to produce voluminous diarrhea, whereas disorders compromising
colonic absorption produce lower-­volume diarrhea. Dysentery (small-­
volume, frequent bloody stools with mucus, tenesmus, and urgency) is
the predominant symptom of colitis.
The basis of all diarrheas is disturbed intestinal solute transport and
water absorption. Water movement across intestinal membranes is
passive and is determined by both active and passive fluxes of solutes,
particularly sodium, chloride, and glucose. The pathogenesis of most
episodes of diarrhea can be explained by secretory, osmotic, or motility
abnormalities or a combination of these (Table 352.10).
Secretory diarrhea occurs when the intestinal epithelial cell solute transport system is in an active state of secretion. It is often
caused by a secretagogue, such as cholera toxin, binding to a receptor on the surface epithelium of the bowel and thereby stimulating intracellular accumulation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
or cyclic guanosine monophosphate. Some intraluminal fatty acids
and bile salts cause the colonic mucosa to secrete through this

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2228 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 352.6  Causes of Gastrointestinal Obstruction
Ileal atresia
Meconium ileus
Meckel diverticulum with volvulus or intussusception
Inguinal hernia
Internal hernia
Intestinal duplication
Pseudoobstruction

ESOPHAGUS
Congenital
Esophageal atresia
Vascular rings
Schatzki ring
Tracheobronchial remnant
Acquired
Esophageal stricture
Foreign body
Achalasia
Chagas disease
Collagen vascular disease

Acquired
Postsurgical adhesions
Crohn disease
Intussusception
Distal ileal obstruction syndrome (cystic fibrosis)
Duodenal hematoma
Superior mesenteric artery syndrome

STOMACH
Congenital
Antral webs
Pyloric stenosis

COLON
Congenital
Meconium plug
Hirschsprung disease
Colonic atresia, stenosis
Imperforate anus
Rectal stenosis
Pseudoobstruction
Volvulus
Colonic duplication

Acquired
Bezoar, foreign body
Pyloric stricture (ulcer)
Chronic granulomatous disease of childhood
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Crohn disease
Epidermolysis bullosa
SMALL INTESTINE
Congenital
Duodenal atresia
Annular pancreas
Malrotation/volvulus
Malrotation/Ladd bands

Acquired
Ulcerative colitis (toxic megacolon)
Chagas disease
Crohn disease
Fibrosing colonopathy (cystic fibrosis)

Table 352.7  Complications of Vomiting
COMPLICATION

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

HISTORY, PHYSICAL EXAMINATION,
AND LABORATORY STUDIES

Metabolic

Fluid loss in emesis
HCl loss in emesis
Na, K loss in emesis
Acidosis

Dehydration
Alkalosis; hypochloremia
Hyponatremia; hypokalemia
Dehydration

Nutritional

Emesis of calories and nutrients
Anorexia for calories and nutrients

Malnutrition; “failure to thrive”

Mallory-­Weiss tear

Retching → tear at lesser curve of gastroesophageal junction

Forceful emesis → hematemesis

Esophagitis

Chronic vomiting → esophageal acid exposure

Heartburn; Hemoccult + stool

Aspiration

Aspiration of vomitus, especially in context of obtundation

Pneumonia; neurologic dysfunction

Shock

Severe fluid loss in emesis or in accompanying diarrhea
Severe blood loss in hematemesis

Dehydration (accompanying diarrhea
can explain acidosis?)
Blood volume depletion

Pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax

Increased intrathoracic pressure

Chest x-­ray

Petechiae, retinal hemorrhages

Increased intrathoracic pressure

Normal platelet count

From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004: p. 318.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders

2229

Table 352.8   Pharmacologic Therapies for Vomiting Episodes
DISORDER – THERAPEUTIC
CLASS
REFLUX – ANTACIDS
Histamine-­2 receptor antagonist

Proton pump inhibitors

DRUG

DOSAGE

COMMENTS

Famotidine (Pepcid)

<3 months: 0.5 mg/kg/dose PO
daily
≥ 3 months: 0.5 mg/kg/dose PO
twice daily
Children >40 kg: 20 mg twice
daily, max: 40 mg/dose

Nizatidine (Axid)

<12 years: 5 mg/kg/dose PO twice
daily*
≥12 years: 150 mg PO twice daily,
max 300 mg/day

• H2RAs are associated with
tachyphylaxis
• Ranitidine was withdrawn in
2020
• Cimetidine has antiandrogenic
potential, can stimulate
prolactin secretion, and may
be subject to drug interactions
due to enzyme inhibition

Cimetidine

<16 years: 30-­40 mg/kg/day PO
divided 2-­3x daily,* max:
400 mg/dose
≥16 years: 400 mg PO 4 times
daily or 800 mg PO twice daily

Omeprazole (Prilosec)
Lansoprazole (Prevacid)
Esomeprazole (Nexium)
Pantoprazole (Protonix)

1-­2 mg/kg/day PO in 1-­2 divided
doses
Maximum dose: omeprazole,
esomeprazole, pantoprazole:
40 mg/dose; lansoprazole:
30 mg/dose

• Administer 30 minutes before
first meal of the day for optimal
effect
• Long-­term side effects include
increased risk of infections,
bone health abnormalities,
hypomagnesemia, vitamin B12
deficiency
• Consider weaning in patients
on prolonged course
(>6 months) to avoid rebound
symptoms

0.1-­0.2 mg/kg/dose PO/IV every
6 to 8 hours, max: 10 mg/dose

• Use minimum effective dose
and limit duration due to
increased risk of extrapyramidal
symptoms (EPS) with
cumulative exposure
• Although some clinicians use
diphenhydramine to limit
EPS, anticholinergic effects of
diphenhydramine may negate
prokinetic benefit

5 mg/kg/dose PO 3-­4 times daily,
titrate up to 10 mg/kg/dose,
max: 250 mg/dose

• Prescribe suspension for
optimal pharmacokinetic profile
in patients with hypomotility
• Cycling or drug-­holidays may
mitigate tachyphylaxis
• Subject to drug interactions
due to CYP3A4 inhibition
• Associated with QTc prolongation,
consider baseline EKG and/or
periodic monitoring in
patients with risk factors
(underlying cardiac disorder,
concomitant QT prolonging
medications, electrolyte
derangements)
• Routine use of other macrolides
(azithromycin, clarithromycin)
is not recommended due to
limited data to support use,
unknown optimal dose/
frequency, and concerns for
antibiotic resistance

GASTROPARESIS – PROKINETICS
Dopamine antagonist
Metoclopramide (Reglan)

Motilin agonist

Erythromycin

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2230 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 352.8   Pharmacologic Therapies for Vomiting Episodes—cont’d
DISORDER – THERAPEUTIC
CLASS
Serotonin (5HT-­4) agonist

Cholinergic agonist

DRUG

DOSAGE

COMMENTS

Cisapride

Consult GI specialist

• Withdrawn from the market
in most countries due to QTc
prolongation risk
• Use restricted to regulated/
limited-­access programs with
specialist supervision

Prucalopride* (Motegrity)

>4 years: 0.04 mg/kg/dose PO
once daily, max: 2 mg/dose
Dosing range 0.02-­0.06 mg/kg/
dose to accommodate tablets

• Approved for constipation
in adults, but a single-­center
retrospective study showed
improvement in children with
refractory upper GI symptoms

Bethanechol*

0.1-­0.2 mg/kg/dose PO 3 to 4
times daily, max: 10 mg/dose

• Administer before feeds/meals
• Stimulates antral contractions
but does not impact gastric
emptying
• Caution when using with
anticholinergic agents (e.g.,
glycopyrrolate) due to potential
for reduced efficacy/negating
effect

CHEMOTHERAPY-­INDUCED NAUSEA/VOMITING (CINV), POSTOPERATIVE, GENERAL
Serotonin 5HT3 antagonist
Ondansetron (Zofran)
0.1-­0.15 mg/kg/dose PO/IV q8h,
max: 24 mg/day
Single dose regimen: 0.3 mg/kg/
dose PO/IV, max: 16 mg/dose

• Adverse effects: constipation,
headache, QTc prolongation
• Dose varies based on
chemotherapy emetogenicity

Granisetron (Kytril)

≥2 years: 0.01 mg/kg/dose PO/IV
q12h, max: 2 mg/dose
*Single daily dose: 0.02-­0.04 mg/
kg PO/IV

Prochlorperazine (Compazine)

≥2 years: 0.1 mg/kg/dose PO/IV
q6-­8h PRN, max: 10 mg/dose

Promethazine (Phenergan)

≥2 years: 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg/dose
PO/rectal q4-­6h PRN, max:
25 mg/dose

Chlorpromazine (Thorazine)

≥6 months: 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/dose
PO/IM/IV q6-­8h PRN

Substance P / neurokinin 1
antagonist

Aprepitant (Emend), for CINV

≥6 months and children <30 kg:
3 mg/kg PO on day 1, then
2 mg/kg once daily on days 2 and 3
Children >30 kg: 125 mg PO daily
on day 1, then 80 mg PO daily
on days 2 and 3

• Subject to drug interactions
due to enzyme inhibition

Steroids

Dexamethasone, for CINV

0.1 mg/kg/dose or 3 mg/m2/dose
PO/IV q12h-­24h

• Reported regimens vary, dose
depends on chemotherapy
emetogenicity
• May require dose reduction
with concomitant aprepitant

Phenothiazine

• Due to safety concerns (EPS,
sedation, respiratory depression),
routine use of phenothiazines is
not recommended
• Consider concomitant
diphenhydramine to decrease
risk of dystonic reactions
• Promethazine is associated with
extravasation; IV/IM administration
is generally avoided

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders

2231

Table 352.8   Pharmacologic Therapies for Vomiting Episodes—cont’d
DISORDER – THERAPEUTIC
CLASS

DRUG

MOTION SICKNESS, VESTIBULAR DISORDERS
Antihistamine
Diphenhydramine (Benadryl)

DOSAGE
0.5-­1 mg/kg/dose PO/IV/IM
q6-­8h, max: 50 mg/dose

COMMENTS
• Anticholinergic effects may
contribute to decreased
motility
• Dimenhydrinate is available as
50 mg tablets, prescribe in
12.5 mg increments
• Do not cut or manipulate
scopolamine transdermal
patches
• Withdrawal (cholinergic
rebound) symptoms reported
with long-­term use, limit
duration or consider weaning
with extended use

Dimenhydrinate (Dramamine)

>2 years: 1 to 1.5 mg/kg/dose PO
q6-­8h, max: 25 mg/dose

Meclizine (Antivert)

>2 to <12 years: 6.25 mg to 12.5
mg PO three times daily PRN
>12 years: 25 mg to 50 mg PO
1 to 4 times daily, max:
100 mg/day

Scopolamine (Transderm-­Scop)

>15 kg: 1 transdermal patch
applied behind the ear every
3 days

Cyproheptadine*

0.25 mg/kg/day PO in 1-­3 divided
doses, usual max: 4 mg/dose

• Consider starting with bedtime
dose and titrating up to prevent
daytime sedation
• Associated with tachyphylaxis
• Benefit reported in patients
with visceral hypersensitivity
• Anticholinergic effects may
decrease motility

Pseudo-­obstruction
Somatostatin analog

Octreotide*

0.5 to 1 mcg/kg subQ once daily,
max: 100 mcg/dose

• May cause bradycardia,
hypoglycemia

Adrenal Crisis

Hydrocortisone

100 mg/m2 IV/IM x1, followed by
25 mg/m2/dose IV/IM q6h, max:
100 mg/day
Taper as clinically indicated

• Reported regimens vary, refer
to individual protocols

MISCELLANEOUS
Visceral Hypersensitivity, Feeding
Intolerance
Antihistamine/serotonin
antagonist

*Limited data available

Table 352.9  Supportive and Nonpharmacologic Therapies for Vomiting Episodes
DISEASE

THERAPY

All

Treat cause
• Obstruction: operate
• Allergy: change diet (±steroids)
• Metabolic error: Rx defect
• Acid peptic disease: H2Ras, PPIs, etc.

COMPLICATIONS
Dehydration
Hematemesis
Esophagitis
Malnutrition
Meconium ileus
DIOS
Intussusception
Hematemesis
Sigmoid volvulus
Reflux
Psychogenic components

IV fluids, electrolytes
Transfuse, correct coagulopathy
H2Ras, PPIs
NG or NJ drip feeding useful for many chronic conditions
Gastrografin enema
Gastrografin enema; balanced colonic lavage solution (e.g., GoLYTELY)
Barium enema; air reduction enema
Endoscopic: injection sclerotherapy or banding of esophageal varices; injection therapy, fibrin sealant application,
or heater probe electrocautery for selected upper GI tract lesions
Colonoscopic decompression
Positioning; dietary measures (infants: rice cereal, 1 tbs/oz of formula)
Psychotherapy; tricyclic antidepressants; anxiolytics (e.g., diazepam: 0.1 mg/kg PO tid-­qid)

DIOS, Distal intestinal obstruction syndrome; GI, gastrointestinal; H2RA, H2-­receptor antagonist; NG, nasogastric; NJ, nasojejunal; PPIs, proton pump inhibitors; tbs, tablespoon.
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004: p. 319.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2232 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 352.10  Mechanisms of Diarrhea
PRIMARY MECHANISM

STOOL EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES

COMMENT

Secretory

Decreased absorption,
increased secretion,
electrolyte transport

DEFECT

Watery, normal
osmolality with ion gap
<100 mOsm/kg

Cholera, toxigenic
Escherichia coli; carcinoid,
VIP, neuroblastoma,
congenital chloride
diarrhea, Clostridium
difficile, cryptosporidiosis
(AIDS)

Persists during fasting; bile
salt malabsorption can
also increase intestinal
water secretion; no stool
leukocytes

Osmotic

Maldigestion, transport
defects ingestion of
unabsorbable substances

Watery, acidic, and reducing
substances; increased
osmolality with ion gap
>100 mOsm/kg

Lactase deficiency,
glucose-­galactose
malabsorption, lactulose,
laxative abuse

Stops with fasting;
increased breath
hydrogen with
carbohydrate
malabsorption; no stool
leukocytes

Increased motility

Decreased transit time

Loose to normal-­appearing
stool, stimulated by
gastrocolic reflex

Irritable bowel syndrome,
thyrotoxicosis,
postvagotomy dumping
syndrome

Infection can also contribute
to increased motility

Decreased motility

Defect in neuromuscular
unit(s) stasis (bacterial
overgrowth)

Loose to
normal-­appearing stool

Pseudoobstruction, blind
loop

Possible bacterial
overgrowth

Decreased surface area
(osmotic, motility)

Decreased functional
capacity

Watery

Short bowel syndrome,
celiac disease, rotavirus
enteritis

Might require elemental
diet plus parenteral
alimentation

Mucosal invasion

Inflammation, decreased
colonic reabsorption,
increased motility

Blood and increased
WBCs in stool

Salmonella, Shigella
infection; amebiasis;
Yersinia, Campylobacter
infection

Dysentery evident in
blood, mucus, and WBCs

VIP, Vasoactive intestinal peptide; WBC, white blood cell.
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS. eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004: p 274.

mechanism. Diarrhea not associated with an exogenous secretagogue can also have a secretory component (congenital microvillus
inclusion disease). Secretory diarrhea is usually of large volume and
persists even with fasting. The stool osmolality is predominantly
indicated by the electrolytes, and the ion gap is 100 mOsm/kg or
less. The ion gap is calculated by subtracting the concentration of
electrolytes from total osmolality:
Ion
gap Stool osmolality  [(Stool Na  stool K) 2]
Osmotic diarrhea occurs after ingestion of a poorly absorbed
solute. The solute may be one that is normally not well absorbed
(magnesium, phosphate, lactulose, or sorbitol) or one that is not
well absorbed because of a disorder of the small bowel (lactose with
lactase deficiency or glucose with rotavirus diarrhea). Malabsorbed
carbohydrate is fermented in the colon, and short-­chain fatty acids
are produced. Although short-­chain fatty acids can be absorbed in
the colon and used as an energy source, the net effect is increase in
the osmotic solute load. This form of diarrhea is usually of lesser
volume than a secretory diarrhea and stops with fasting. The osmolality of the stool will not be explained by the electrolyte content,
because another osmotic component is present and so the anion
gap is >100 mOsm.
Motility disorders can be associated with rapid or delayed transit and
are not generally associated with large-­volume diarrhea. Slow motility
can be associated with bacterial overgrowth leading to diarrhea. The
differential diagnosis of common causes of acute and chronic diarrhea
is noted in Table 352.11.

CONSTIPATION

Any definition of constipation is relative and depends on stool
consistency, stool frequency, and difficulty in passing the stool. A
normal child might have a soft stool only every second or third day
without difficulty; this is not constipation. A hard stool passed with

difficulty every third day should be treated as constipation. Constipation can arise from defects either in filling or emptying the rectum
(Table 352.12).
A nursing infant might have very infrequent stools of normal consistency, which is usually a normal pattern. True constipation in the
neonatal period is most likely secondary to Hirschsprung disease,
intestinal pseudoobstruction, or hypothyroidism.
Defective rectal filling occurs when colonic peristalsis is ineffective (in cases of hypothyroidism or opiate use and when
bowel obstruction is caused either by a structural anomaly or by
Hirschsprung disease). The resultant colonic stasis leads to excessive drying of stool and a failure to initiate reflexes from the rectum
that normally trigger evacuation. Emptying the rectum by spontaneous evacuation depends on a defecation reflex initiated by pressure receptors in the rectal muscle. Therefore stool retention can
also result from lesions involving these rectal muscles, the sacral
spinal cord afferent and efferent fibers, or the muscles of the abdomen and pelvic floor. Disorders of anal sphincter relaxation can also
contribute to fecal retention.
Constipation tends to be self-­p erpetuating, whatever its cause.
Hard, large stools in the rectum become difficult and even painful to evacuate; thus more retention occurs and a vicious circle
ensues. Distention of the rectum and colon lessens the sensitivity
of the defecation reflex and the effectiveness of peristalsis. Fecal
impaction is common and leads to other problems. Eventually,
watery content from the proximal colon might percolate around
hard retained stool and pass per rectum unperceived by the child.
This involuntary encopresis may be mistaken for diarrhea. Constipation itself does not have deleterious systemic organic effects,
but urinary tract stasis with increased risk of urinary tract infections can accompany severe long-­standing cases and constipation
can generate anxiety, having a marked emotional impact on the
patient and family.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 352.11

Differential Diagnosis of Diarrhea

INFANT

CHILD

ACUTE
Common
Gastroenteritis (viral > bacterial > protozoal)
Systemic infection
Antibiotic associated
Overfeeding
Rare
Primary disaccharidase deficiency
Hirschsprung toxic colitis
Adrenogenital syndrome
Neonatal opiate withdrawal
CHRONIC
Common
Postinfectious secondary lactase deficiency
Cow’s milk or soy protein intolerance (allergy)
Chronic nonspecific diarrhea of infancy
Excessive fruit juice (sorbitol) ingestion
Celiac disease
Cystic fibrosis
AIDS enteropathy
Rare
Primary immune defects
Autoimmune enteropathy
IPEX and IPEX-­like syndromes
Glucose-­galactose malabsorption
Microvillus inclusion disease (microvillus atrophy)
Congenital transport defects (chloride, sodium)
Primary bile acid malabsorption
Factitious syndrome by proxy
Hirschsprung disease
Shwachman syndrome
Secretory tumors
Acrodermatitis enteropathica
Lymphangiectasia
Abetalipoproteinemia
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Short bowel syndrome

ADOLESCENT

Gastroenteritis (viral > bacterial > protozoal) Gastroenteritis (viral > bacterial > protozoal)
Food poisoning
Food poisoning
Systemic infection
Antibiotic associated
Antibiotic associated
Toxic ingestion
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Intussusception

Hyperthyroidism
Appendicitis

Postinfectious secondary lactase deficiency
Irritable bowel syndrome
Celiac disease
Cystic fibrosis
Lactose intolerance
Excessive fruit juice (sorbitol) ingestion
Giardiasis
Inflammatory bowel disease
AIDS enteropathy

Irritable bowel syndrome
Inflammatory bowel disease
Lactose intolerance
Giardiasis
Laxative abuse (anorexia nervosa)
Constipation with encopresis

Primary and acquired immune defects
Secretory tumors
Pseudoobstruction
Sucrase-­isomaltase deficiency
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Secretory tumors

Secretory tumor
Primary bowel tumor
Parasitic infections and venereal diseases
Appendiceal abscess
Addison disease

IPEX, Immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-­linked.
From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004: p. 272.

Table 352.12

Causes of Constipation

NONORGANIC (FUNCTIONAL): RETENTIVE
Anatomic
Anal stenosis, atresia with fistula
Imperforate anus
Anteriorly displaced anus
Intestinal stricture (postnecrotizing enterocolitis)
Anal stricture
Abnormal Musculature
Prune-­belly syndrome
Gastroschisis
Down syndrome
Muscular dystrophy
Intestinal Nerve or Muscle Abnormalities
Hirschsprung disease
Pseudoobstruction (visceral myopathy or neuropathy)
Intestinal neuronal dysplasia
Spinal cord lesions
Tethered cord
Autonomic neuropathy
Spinal cord trauma
Spina bifida
Chagas disease

Drugs
Anticholinergics
Narcotics
Methylphenidate
Phenytoin
Antidepressants
Chemotherapeutic agents (vincristine)
Pancreatic enzymes (fibrosing colonopathy)
Lead, arsenic, mercury
Vitamin D intoxication
Calcium channel blocking agents
Metabolic Disorders
Hypokalemia
Hypercalcemia
Hypothyroidism
Diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus
Porphyria
Intestinal Disorders
Celiac disease
Cow’s milk protein intolerance
Cystic fibrosis (meconium ileus equivalent)
Inflammatory bowel disease (stricture)
Tumor
Connective tissue disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Scleroderma
Psychiatric Diagnosis
Anorexia nervosa

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2234 Part XVI u The Digestive System
ANOREXIA

Anorexia means prolonged lack of appetite. Hunger and satiety centers
are located in the hypothalamus; it seems likely that afferent nerves
from the GI tract to these brain centers are important determinants
of the anorexia that characterizes many diseases of the stomach and
intestine. Satiety is stimulated by distention of the stomach or upper
small bowel, the signal being transmitted by sensory afferents, which
are especially dense in the upper gut. Chemoreceptors in the intestine,
influenced by the assimilation of nutrients, also affect afferent flow to
the appetite centers. Impulses reach the hypothalamus from higher
centers, possibly influenced by pain or the emotional disturbance
of an intestinal disease. Other regulatory factors include hormones,
ghrelin, leptin, and plasma glucose, which, in turn, reflect intestinal
function.

ABDOMINAL PAIN

There is considerable variation among children in their perception
and tolerance for abdominal pain. This is one reason the evaluation of
chronic abdominal pain is difficult. A child with functional abdominal pain (also known as centrally mediated abdominal pain syndrome
or brain-­gut axis dysfunction) may be as uncomfortable as one with
an organic cause. It is very important to distinguish between organic
and nonorganic (functional) abdominal pain because the approach for
the management is based on this (Table 352.13). Normal growth and
physical examination (including a rectal examination) and the absence
of anemia or hematochezia are reassuring in a child who is suspected
of having functional pain.
A specific cause may be difficult to find, but the nature and location
of a pain-­provoking lesion can usually be determined from the clinical
description. Two types of nerve fibers transmit painful stimuli in the
abdomen. In skin and muscle, A fibers mediate sharp localized pain;
C fibers from viscera, peritoneum, and muscle transmit poorly localized, dull pain. These afferent fibers have cell bodies in the dorsal root
Table 352.13  Red Flags and Clues to an Organic Cause
of Abdominal Pain
Age <5 yr old
Localized pain in nonperiumbilical site
Referred pain
Sudden onset of excruciating pain
Crescendo nature of pain
Sudden worsening of pain
Fever (high fever >39.4°C suggests pneumonia, pyelonephritis,
dysentery, cholangitis, more than perforation or abscess)
Jaundice
Distention*
Dysphagia
Dysuria
Emesis (especially bilious)
Anorexia
Weight loss, failure to thrive
Positive family history (metabolic disorders, peptic ulcer disease)†
Change in urine or stool color (blood, acholic) or frequency
Vaginal discharge
Menstrual abnormalities (amenorrhea)
Sexual activity
Delayed sexual development (chronic pain)
Anemia
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Elevated stool calprotectin
Specific physical findings (hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, absent
bowel sounds, adnexal tenderness, palpable mass, involuntary
guarding, focal or diffuse tenderness, positive rectal examination
results, perianal disease, joint swelling, rashes)
*Consider 5 Fs: fat, feces, flatus (aerophagia, obstruction), fluid (ascites, hydronephrosis,
cysts), and fetus (pregnancy or fetal-­like abnormal growth [e.g., tumors]).
†Family history is also positive for chronic pain syndromes (constipation, irritable bowel,
dysmenorrhea, and lactase or sucrase deficiency).
Modified from Miranda A. Abdominal pain. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel
D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2023: Table 13.8, p. 229.

ganglia, and some axons cross the midline and ascend to the medulla,
midbrain, and thalamus. Pain is perceived in the cortex of the postcentral gyrus, which can receive impulses arising from both sides of
the body. In the gut, the usual stimulus provoking pain is tension or
stretching. Inflammatory lesions can lower the pain threshold, but
the mechanisms producing pain or inflammation are not clear. Tissue
metabolites released near nerve endings probably account for the pain
caused by ischemia. Perception of these painful stimuli can be modulated by input from both cerebral and peripheral sources. Psychologic
factors are particularly important. Tables 352.14 and 352.15 list features
of abdominal pain. Pain that suggests a potentially serious organic etiology is associated with age younger than 5 years; fever; weight loss;
bile-­or blood-­stained emesis; jaundice; hepatosplenomegaly; back or
flank pain or pain in a location other than the umbilicus; awakening
from sleep in pain; referred pain to shoulder, groin, or back; elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, white blood cell count, or CRP; anemia; edema; hematochezia; or a strong family history of inflammatory
bowel disease or celiac disease (see Table 352.13).
Visceral pain tends to be dull and aching and is experienced in
the dermatome from which the affected organ receives innervations.
So, most often, the pain and tenderness are not felt over the site of
the disease process. Painful stimuli originating in the liver, pancreas,
biliary tree, stomach, or upper bowel are felt in the epigastrium;
pain from the distal small bowel, cecum, appendix, or proximal
colon is felt at the umbilicus; and pain from the distal large bowel,
urinary tract, or pelvic organs is usually suprapubic. The pain from
the cecum, ascending colon, and descending colon sometimes is felt
at the site of the lesion because of the short mesocecum and corresponding mesocolon. The pain caused by appendicitis is initially
felt in the periumbilical region, and pain from the transverse colon
is usually felt in the suprapubic region. The shifting (localization) of
pain is a pointer toward diagnosis; for example, periumbilical pain
of a few hours localizing to the right lower quadrant suggests appendicitis. Radiation of pain can be helpful in diagnosis; in biliary colic
the radiation of pain is toward the inferior angle of the right scapula,
pancreatic pain is radiated to the back, and the renal colic pain is
radiated to the inguinal region on the same side.
Differentiating abdominal wall pain from visceral pain is important and can prevent unnecessary testing. Nerve entrapment is one
of the more common causes in adults. Costochondritis can be differentiated from underlying pain by palpating the rib margins, which
should reproduce the pain. Treatment with topical anesthetics and
NSAIDs if needed usually resolve pain within a few days. Slipped
rib syndrome can follow overuse or even minor trauma to the ribs
on either side. The name originates from a popping/slipping sensation that is often reported. Slipped rib syndrome may be mistaken
for hepatobiliary, splenic, pancreatic, esophageal, or gastric etiologies, among others. Rib fractures, costochondritis, perichondritis
[Tietze syndrome], and pleuritic pain may also present as an etiology. Anterior (abdominal) cutaneous nerve entrapment syndrome
(ACNES) may produce acute, recurrent, or chronic unilateral localized abdominal pain. Nerve entrapment is most common at the lateral border of the rectus muscle.
Somatic pain is intense and usually well localized. When the
inflamed viscus comes in contact with a somatic organ such as the parietal peritoneum or the abdominal wall, pain is localized to that site.
Peritonitis gives rise to generalized abdominal pain with rigidity, involuntary guarding, rebound tenderness, and cutaneous hyperesthesia on
physical examination.
Referred pain from extraintestinal locations, from shared central
projections with the sensory pathway from the abdominal wall, can
give rise to abdominal pain, as in pneumonia when the parietal pleural
pain is referred to the abdomen (Fig. 352.1).

GASTROINTESTINAL HEMORRHAGE

Bleeding can occur anywhere along the GI tract, and identification of
the site may be challenging (Table 352.16). Bleeding that originates
in the esophagus, stomach, or duodenum can cause hematemesis.
When exposed to gastric or intestinal juices, blood quickly darkens to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders
Table 352.14

2235

Chronic Abdominal Pain in Children

DISORDER

CHARACTERISTICS

NONORGANIC
Functional abdominal pain
Irritable bowel syndrome
Nonulcer dyspepsia
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Chronic constipation
Lactose intolerance
Parasite infection (especially Giardia)
Excess fructose or sorbitol ingestion
Crohn disease
Peptic ulcer
Esophagitis
Meckel diverticulum
Recurrent intussusception

KEY EVALUATIONS

Nonspecific pain, often periumbilical
Intermittent cramps, diarrhea, and constipation
Peptic ulcer–like symptoms without abnormalities on
evaluation of the upper GI tract

Hx and PE; tests as indicated
Hx and PE
Hx; esophagogastroduodenoscopy

Hx of stool retention, evidence of constipation on
examination
Symptoms may be associated with lactose ingestion;
bloating, gas, cramps, and diarrhea
Bloating, gas, cramps, and diarrhea

Hx and PE; plain x-­ray of abdomen

Nonspecific abdominal pain, bloating, gas, and
diarrhea
See Chapter 382.2
Burning or gnawing epigastric pain; worse on
awakening or before meals; relieved with antacids
Epigastric pain with substernal burning
Periumbilical or lower abdominal pain; may have
blood in stool (usually painless)
Paroxysmal severe cramping abdominal pain; blood
may be present in stool with episode

Trial of lactose-­free diet; lactose breath
hydrogen test
Stool evaluation for O&P; specific
immunoassays for Giardia
Large intake of apples, fruit juice, or candy
or chewing gum sweetened with sorbitol
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, upper GI
contrast x-­rays, or MRI enteroscopy
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
Meckel scan or enteroclysis
Identify intussusception during episode or
lead point in intestine between episodes
with contrast studies of GI tract
PE, CT of abdominal wall

Internal, inguinal, or abdominal wall hernia

Dull abdomen or abdominal wall pain

Chronic appendicitis or appendiceal
mucocele

Recurrent RLQ pain; often incorrectly diagnosed,
may be rare cause of abdominal pain

Barium enema, CT

RUQ pain, might worsen with meals
RUQ pain, mass ± elevated bilirubin
Persistent boring pain, might radiate to back,
vomiting

Ultrasound of gallbladder
Ultrasound or CT of RUQ
Serum amylase and lipase ± serum
trypsinogen; ultrasound, CT, or MRI-­ERCP
of pancreas

Dull suprapubic pain, flank pain
Unilateral abdominal or flank pain
Progressive, severe pain; flank to inguinal region to
testicle
Suprapubic or lower abdominal pain; genitourinary
symptoms

Urinalysis and urine culture; renal scan
Ultrasound of kidneys
Urinalysis, ultrasound, IVP, CT

See text; nausea, family Hx migraine
Might have seizure prodrome

Hx
EEG (can require >1 study, including
sleep-­deprived EEG)
Serum bilirubin

GALLBLADDER AND PANCREAS
Cholelithiasis
Choledochal cyst
Recurrent pancreatitis

GENITOURINARY TRACT
Urinary tract infection
Hydronephrosis
Urolithiasis
Other genitourinary disorders
MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES
Abdominal migraine
Abdominal epilepsy
Gilbert syndrome
Familial Mediterranean fever
Sickle cell crisis
Lead poisoning
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein purpura)
Angioneurotic edema
Acute intermittent porphyria
Anterior cutaneous nerve entrapment
syndrome (ACNES)

Mild abdominal pain (causal or coincidental?);
slightly elevated unconjugated bilirubin
Paroxysmal episodes of fever, severe abdominal
pain, and tenderness with other evidence of
polyserositis
Anemia
Vague abdominal pain ± constipation
Recurrent, severe crampy abdominal pain, occult
blood in stool, characteristic rash, arthritis
Swelling of face or airway, crampy pain
Severe pain precipitated by drugs, fasting, or
infections
Exquisite localized (∼2 × 2 cm) tenderness that is
replicable, most often RLQ

Ultrasound of kidneys and pelvis;
gynecologic evaluation

Hx and PE during an episode, DNA
diagnosis
Hematologic evaluation
Serum lead level
Hx, PE, urinalysis
Hx, PE, upper GI contrast x-­rays, serum C1
esterase inhibitor
Spot urine for porphyrins
Pain relief within 15 min of abdominal wall
injection of local anesthetic; may need
surgery

ERCP, Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; EEG, electroencephalogram; GI, gastrointestinal; Hx, history; IVP, intravenous pyelography; O&P, ova and parasites; PE,
physical exam; RLQ, right lower quadrant; RUQ, right upper quadrant.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2236 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 352.15  Distinguishing Features of Acute Abdominal Pain in Children
DISEASE

ONSET

LOCATION

REFERRAL

QUALITY

COMMENTS

Pancreatitis

Acute

Epigastric, left upper quadrant

Back

Constant, sharp, boring

Nausea, emesis,
tenderness

Intestinal obstruction

Acute or
gradual

Periumbilical-­lower abdomen

Back

Alternating cramping
(colic) and painless
periods

Distention, obstipation,
emesis, increased
bowel sounds

Appendicitis

Acute (1-­3 days)

Periumbilical, then localized
to lower right quadrant;
generalized with peritonitis

Back or pelvis if
retrocecal

Sharp, steady

Anorexia, nausea, emesis,
local tenderness, fever
with peritonitis

Intussusception

Acute

Periumbilical-­lower abdomen

None

Cramping, with
painless periods

Hematochezia, knees in
pulled-­up position

Urolithiasis

Acute, sudden

Back (unilateral)

Groin

Sharp, intermittent,
cramping

Hematuria

Urinary tract infection

Acute

Back

Bladder

Dull to sharp

Fever, costovertebral
angle tenderness,
dysuria, urinary frequency

Pelvic inflammatory
disease

Acute

Pelvis, lower quadrant

Upper thigh

Aching, peritoneal
signs

Vaginal discharge, fever

Small bowel
obstruction

Acute to
subacute

Periumbilical

None

Cramping diffuse

Emesis and obstipation

Ruptured ectopic
pregnancy

Acute sudden

Pelvis, lower quadrant

None

Sharp, intense,
localized

Vaginal bleeding, shock

Pancreatitis
Liver
Biliary colic

Perforated
duodenal ulcer

Heart
GERD
Peptic
ulcer

Cholecystitis,
pancreatitis,
duodenal ulcer

Penetrating
duodenal ulcer
Cholecystitis
Pancreatitis,
renal colic

Small intestine
pain, appendicitis
Appendicitis
Renal
colic

Colon pain

Rectal
lesions

Ureteral
colic

Fig. 352.1 Common sites of referred pain from the abdominal viscera. When a patient gives a history of referred pain from the viscera, the pain’s
location may not be directly over the impaired organ. Visceral embryologic development is the mechanism of the referred pain pattern. Pain is
referred to the site where the organ was located in fetal development.

resemble coffee grounds; massive bleeding is likely to be red. Red or
maroon blood in stools, hematochezia, signifies either a distal bleeding site or massive hemorrhage above the distal ileum. Moderate to
mild bleeding from sites above the distal ileum tends to cause blackened stools of tarry consistency (melena); major hemorrhages in the
duodenum or above can also cause melena.
Erosive damage to the mucosa of the GI tract is the most common
cause of bleeding, although variceal bleeding secondary to portal
hypertension occurs often enough to require consideration. Prolapse
gastropathy producing subepithelial hemorrhage and Mallory-­Weiss

lesions secondary to mucosal tears associated with emesis are causes
of upper intestinal bleeds. Vascular malformations are a rare cause in
children; they are difficult to identify (Figs. 352.2 and 352.3). Upper
intestinal bleeding is evaluated with esophagogastroduodenoscopy.
Evaluation of the small intestine is facilitated by capsule endoscopy.
The capsule-­sized imaging device is swallowed in older children or
placed endoscopically in younger children. Lower GI bleeding is investigated with a colonoscopy. In brisk intestinal bleeding of unknown
location, a tagged red blood cell scan is helpful in locating the site of the
bleeding, although CT angiography is usually diagnostic. Occult blood

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 352 u Major Symptoms and Signs of Digestive Tract Disorders

2237

Table 352.16  Differential Diagnosis of Gastrointestinal Bleeding in Childhood
INFANT

CHILD

COMMON
Bacterial enteritis
Milk protein allergy intolerance
Intussusception
Swallowed maternal blood
Anal fissure
Lymphonodular hyperplasia

RARE
Volvulus
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Meckel diverticulum
Stress ulcer, gastritis
Coagulation disorder (hemorrhagic
disease of newborn)
Esophagitis

ADOLESCENT

Bacterial enteritis
Anal fissure
Colonic polyps
Intussusception
Peptic ulcer/gastritis
Swallowed epistaxis
Prolapse (traumatic) gastropathy secondary to emesis
Mallory-­Weiss syndrome

Bacterial enteritis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Peptic ulcer/gastritis
Prolapse (traumatic) gastropathy secondary
to emesis
Mallory-­Weiss syndrome
Colonic polyps
Anal fissure

Esophageal varices
Esophagitis
Meckel diverticulum
Lymphonodular hyperplasia
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein purpura)
Foreign body
Hemangioma, arteriovenous malformation
Sexual abuse
Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
Inflammatory bowel disease
Coagulopathy
Duplication cyst
Angiodysplasia
Angiodysplasia with von Willebrand disease
Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome

Hemorrhoids
Esophageal varices
Esophagitis
Pill ulcer
Telangiectasia-­angiodysplasia
Graft versus host disease
Duplication cyst
Angiodysplasia
Angiodysplasia with von Willebrand disease
Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome

Fig. 352.3 Operative features of blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome.

Fig. 352.2 Intestinal angiodysplasia. A 7-­year-­old boy had tarry stool

for days. Panendoscopy showed multiple cherry red flat spots in the
gastric mucosa, compatible with the findings of angiodysplasia in CT
angiography. (From Chuang F, Lin JS, Yeung C, et al. Intestinal angiodysplasia: an uncommon cause of gastrointestinal bleeding in children.
Pediatr Neonatol. 2011;52:214–218, Fig. 2.)

in stool is usually detected by using commercially available fecal occult
blood testing cards, which are based on a chemical reaction between
the chemical guaiac and oxidizing action of a substrate (hemoglobin),
giving a blue color. The guaiac test is very sensitive, but random testing
can miss chronic blood loss, which can lead to iron-­deficiency anemia.
GI hemorrhage can produce hypotension and tachycardia but rarely
causes GI symptoms; brisk duodenal or gastric bleeding can lead to
nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. The breakdown products of intraluminal blood might tip patients into hepatic coma if liver function is
already compromised and can lead to elevation of serum bilirubin.

These lesions are similar to cutaneous lesions. (From Hasosah MY,
Abdul-­Wahab AA, Bin-­Yahab SA, et al. Blue rubber bled nevus syndrome: extensive small bowel vascular lesions responsible for gastrointestinal bleeding. J Pediatr Child Health. 2010;46:63–65. Fig. 3.)

ABDOMINAL DISTENTION AND ABDOMINAL
MASSES

Enlargement of the abdomen can result from diminished tone of the
wall musculature or from increased content: fluid, gas, or solid. Ascites,
the accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity, distends the abdomen both in the flanks and anteriorly when it is large in volume. This
fluid shifts with movement of the patient and conducts a percussion
wave. Ascitic fluid is usually a transudate with a low protein concentration resulting from reduced plasma colloid osmotic pressure of hypoalbuminemia and/or from raised portal venous pressure. In cases of
portal hypertension, the fluid leak probably occurs from lymphatics
on the liver surface and from visceral peritoneal capillaries, but ascites
does not usually develop until the serum albumin level falls. Sodium
excretion in the urine decreases greatly as the ascitic fluid accumulates, and thus additional dietary sodium goes directly to the peritoneal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2238 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Benign hepatic tumors
Liver abscess
Hepatoblastoma
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Metastatic cancer

Bezoar

Choledochal cyst
Splenomegaly
Splenic cyst
Intestinal obstruction
Appendiceal
abscess
Lymphoma

Intestinal
duplication

Ovarian cyst/neoplasm,
abscess

Mesenteric cyst

Tuboovarian
abscess
Hydrometrocolpos

Fig. 352.4 Location of select intrabdominal tumors and masses. (From Densmore JC, Densmore EM. Abdominal masses. In Kliegman RM, Toth H,
Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Fig. 20.1, p. 354.)

space, taking with it more water. When ascitic fluid contains a high
protein concentration, it is usually an exudate caused by an inflammatory or neoplastic lesion.
When fluid distends the gut, either obstruction or imbalance between
absorption and secretion should be suspected. The factors causing fluid
accumulation in the bowel lumen often cause gas to accumulate too.
The result may be audible gurgling noises. The source of gas is usually
swallowed air, but endogenous flora can increase considerably in malabsorptive states and produce excessive gas when substrate reaches the
lower intestine. Gas in the peritoneal cavity (pneumoperitoneum) is usually caused by a perforated viscus and can cause abdominal distention
depending on the amount of gas leak. A tympanitic percussion note,
even over solid organs such as the liver, indicates a large collection of gas
in the peritoneum.

An abdominal organ can enlarge diffusely or be affected by a discrete mass (Fig. 352.4). In the digestive tract, such discrete masses can
occur in the lumen, wall, omentum, or mesentery. In a constipated child,
mobile, nontender fecal masses are often found. Congenital anomalies,
cysts, or inflammatory processes can affect the wall of the gut. Gut wall
neoplasms are extremely rare in children. The pathologic enlargement of
liver, spleen, bladder, and kidneys can give rise to abdominal distention.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Thanks to Astrela Moore, PharmD, Clinical Pharmacy Specialist at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, for reviewing, verifying, and updating
the pharmacotherapy table.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 353 u Development and Developmental Anomalies of the Teeth

Section 2

The Oral Cavity

Table 353.1  Calcification, Crown Completion,
and Eruption

Development and
Developmental Anomalies
of the Teeth
Vineet K. Dhar
Newborn infants do not have teeth for about first 6 months after birth
(predentate period). At this stage, the upper and lower alveolar ridges in
the mouth, also known as gum pads, house the primary (deciduous) and
some permanent tooth buds. The primary dentition period starts with
eruption of the first primary tooth; all 20 primary teeth erupt by 3 years
of age. The permanent teeth start erupting around 6 years of age, and the
transition to full permanent dentition is completed by 13 years of age. The
transition time between primary and permanent dentition, when a mix of
primary and permanent teeth are present, is referred to as mixed dentition.

DEVELOPMENT OF TEETH
Initiation

The primary teeth form in dental crypts that arise from a band of epithelial cells incorporated into each developing jaw. By 12 weeks of fetal
life, each of these epithelial bands (dental laminae) has five areas of
rapid growth on each side of the maxilla and the mandible, seen as
rounded, budlike enlargements. Organization of adjacent mesenchyme
takes place in each area of epithelial growth, and the two elements
together are the beginning of a tooth.
After the formation of these crypts for the 20 primary teeth, another generation of tooth buds forms lingually (toward the tongue); these will develop
into the succeeding permanent incisors, canines, and premolars that eventually replace the primary teeth. This process takes place from approximately 3-­4 months of gestation for the central incisors to approximately
24-­30 months of age for the second premolars. On the other hand, the permanent first, second, and third molars arise from extension of the dental
laminae distal to the second primary molars; buds for these teeth develop
approximately at birth, 3 years of age, and 7-­10 years of age, respectively.

Histodifferentiation–Morphodifferentiation

As the epithelial bud proliferates, the deeper surface invaginates and a
mass of mesenchyme becomes partially enclosed. The epithelial cells
differentiate into the ameloblasts that lay down an organic matrix that
forms enamel; the mesenchyme forms the dentin and dental pulp.

Calcification

After the organic matrix has been laid down, the deposition of the inorganic mineral crystals takes place from several sites of calcification that
later coalesce. The characteristics of the inorganic portions of a tooth
can be altered by disturbances in formation of the matrix, decreased
availability of minerals, or the incorporation of foreign materials. Such
disturbances can affect the color, texture, or thickness of the tooth surface. Calcification of primary teeth begins at 3-­4 months in utero and
concludes postnatally at approximately 12 months, with mineralization
of the second primary molars (Table 353.1).

Eruption

At the time of tooth bud formation, each tooth begins a continuous
movement toward the oral cavity. Table 353.1 lists the times of eruption

FIRST
EVIDENCE OF
CALCIFICATION

CROWN
COMPLETED

ERUPTION

PRIMARY DENTITION
Maxillary
Central incisor
3-­4 mo in utero
Lateral incisor
4.5 mo in utero
Canine
5.5 mo in utero
First molar
5 mo in utero
Second molar
6 mo in utero

4 mo
5 mo
9 mo
6 mo
10-­12 mo

7.5 mo
8 mo
16-­20 mo
12-­16 mo
20-­30 mo

Mandibular
Central incisor
Lateral incisor
Canine
First molar
Second molar

4 mo
4½ mo
9 mo
6 mo
10-­12 mo

6.5 mo
7 mo
16-­20 mo
12-­16 mo
20-­30 mo

PERMANENT DENTITION
Maxillary
Central incisor
3-­4 mo
Lateral incisor
10 mo
Canine
4-­5 mo
First premolar
1½ -­1¾ yr
Second premolar
2-­2¼ yr
First molar
At birth
Second molar
2½ -­3 yr
Third molar
7-­9 yr

4-­5 yr
4-­5 yr
6-­7 yr
5-­6 yr
6-­7 yr
2½ -­3 yr
7-­8 yr
12-­16 yr

7-­8 yr
8-­9 yr
11-­12 yr
10-­11 yr
10-­12 yr
6-­7 yr
12-­13 yr
17-­21 yr

Mandibular
Central incisor
Lateral incisor
Canine
First premolar
Second premolar
First molar
Second molar
Third molar

4-­5 yr
4-­5 yr
6-­7 yr
5-­6 yr
6-­7 yr
2½ -­3 yr
7-­8 yr
12-­16 yr

6-­7 yr
7-­8 yr
9-­10 yr
10-­12 yr
11-­12 yr
6-­7 yr
11-­13 yr
17-­21 yr

TOOTH

Chapter 353

2239

4.5 mo in utero
4.5 mo in utero
5 mo in utero
5 mo in utero
6 mo in utero

3-­4 mo
3-­4 mo
4-­5 mo
1¾-­2 yr
2¼-­2 ½ yr
At birth
2½-­3 yr
8-­10 yr

Modified from Logan WHG, Kronfeld R. Development of the human jaws and
surrounding structures from birth to age 15 years. J Am Dent Assoc. 1993;20:379.

of the primary and permanent teeth. Occasionally the permanent teeth
may erupt behind the primary teeth (“shark tooth”); this usually causes
no problems.

Anomalies Associated with Eruption Pattern

Delayed eruption of the 20 primary teeth can be familial or indicate
systemic or nutritional disturbances such as hypopituitarism, hypothyroidism, cleidocranial dysplasia, trisomy 21, and multiple other
syndromes. Failure of eruption of single or small groups of teeth can
arise from local causes such as malpositioned teeth, supernumerary
teeth, cysts, or retained primary teeth. Premature loss of primary teeth
is commonly caused by premature eruption of the permanent teeth. If
the entire dentition is advanced for age and gender, precocious puberty
or hyperthyroidism should be considered.
Natal teeth are observed in approximately 1 in 2,000 newborn
infants, usually in the position of the mandibular central incisors.
Natal teeth are present at birth, whereas neonatal teeth erupt in the
first month of life. Attachment of natal and neonatal teeth is generally limited to the gingival margin, with little root formation or bony
support. They may be a supernumerary or a prematurely erupted primary tooth. A radiograph can easily differentiate between the two
conditions. Natal teeth are associated with cleft palate, Pierre Robin
syndrome, mesoectodermal dysplasia syndrome (Ellis-­van Creveld),
oculomandibulofacial syndrome (Hallermann-­Streiff), pachyonychia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2240 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 353.2  Syndromes with Natal Teeth
SYNDROME

ASSOCIATED ANOMALIES

INHERITANCE/GENE ABNORMALITY/
PREVALENCE

Ellis-­van Creveld (chondroectodermal
dysplasia)

Bilateral postaxial polydactyly of hands, chondrodysplasia
of long bones resulting in dwarfism, ectodermal dysplasia
affecting nails/teeth, congenital heart malformation

Autosomal-­recessive
EVC, EVC2
7/1 × 106

Hallermann-­Streiff

Dyscephaly, hypotrichosis, micro-­ophthalmia, cataracts,
beaked nose, micrognathia, proportionate short stature

Sporadic
Not known
>150 cases to date

Pachyonychia congenita
(1: Jadassohn-­Lewandowsky)
(2: Jackson-­Lawler)

Dystrophic nails, palmoplantar keratosis, hyperhidrosis,
follicular keratosis, oral leukokeratosis, cutaneous cysts

Autosomal-­dominant
Keratin gene variants: type I:
6a/16, type 2:6b/17
0.071/1 × 106
9:5 male to female

Pallister-­Hall (hypothalamic
hamartoblastoma)

Hypothalamic hamartoblastoma, craniofacial abnormalities,
postaxial polydactyly, cardiac and renal defects

Autosomal-­dominant
GLI3
>13 cases to date
8:5 male to female

Wiedemann-­Rautenstrauch

Endocrine dysfunction, aged facies, frontal and biparietal
bossing, small facial bones, sparse scalp hair, prominent
scalp veins, small beaked nose, low-­set ears

Autosomal-­recessive
POLR3A
>30 cases to date

Natal teeth, patent ductus arteriosus,
intestinal pseudoobstruction

Dilatation/hypermobility of small bowel, short or microcolon
without obstruction, incomplete rotation of midgut, patent
ductus arteriosus

X-­linked recessive
Not known
2 cases to date, brothers

Modified from Hebert AA. Mucous membrane disorders. In Schachner LA, Hansen RC, eds. Pediatric Dermatology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2011: Table 9.2, p. 654.

congenita, and other anomalies (Table 353.2). A family history of natal
teeth or premature eruption is present in 15–20% of affected children.
Natal or neonatal teeth occasionally result in pain and refusal to
feed and can produce maternal discomfort because of abrasion or
biting of the nipple during nursing. If the tooth is mobile, there
is a danger of detachment, with aspiration of the tooth. Because
the tongue lies between the alveolar processes during birth, it can
become lacerated (Riga-­Fede disease). Decisions regarding extraction of prematurely erupted primary teeth must be made on an individual basis.
Exfoliation failure occurs when a primary tooth is not shed before
the eruption of its permanent successor. Most often the primary tooth
exfoliates eventually, but in some cases the primary tooth needs to
be extracted. This occurs most commonly in the mandibular incisor
region.

Anomalies Associated with Tooth Development

Both failures and excesses of tooth initiation are observed. Developmentally missing teeth can result from environmental insult, a genetic
defect involving only teeth, or the manifestation of a syndrome.

Anomalies of Number

Anodontia, or absence of teeth, occurs when no tooth buds form
(ectodermal dysplasia, or familial missing teeth) or when there is a disturbance of a normal site of initiation (the area of a palatal cleft). The
teeth that are most commonly absent are the third molars, the maxillary lateral incisors, and the mandibular second premolars.
If the dental lamina produces more than the normal number of
buds, supernumerary teeth occur, most often in the area between
the maxillary central incisors. Because they tend to disrupt the position and eruption of the adjacent normal teeth, their identification
by radiographic examination is important. Supernumerary teeth also
occur with cleidocranial dysplasia (see Chapter 356) and in the area of
cleft palates.

Anomalies of Size

Twinning, in which two teeth are joined together, is most often
observed in the mandibular incisors of the primary dentition. It can
result from gemination, fusion, or concrescence. Gemination is the
result of the division of one tooth germ to form a bifid crown on a single root with a common pulp canal; an extra tooth appears to be present in the dental arch. Fusion is the joining of incompletely developed
teeth that, due to pressure, trauma, or crowding, continue to develop as
one tooth. Fused teeth are sometimes joined along their entire length;
in other cases, a single wide crown is supported on two roots. Concrescence is the attachment of the roots of closely approximated adjacent teeth by an excessive deposit of cementum. This type of twinning,
unlike the others, is found most often in the maxillary molar region.
Disturbances during differentiation can result in alterations in
dental morphology, such as macrodontia (large teeth) or microdontia (small teeth). The maxillary lateral incisors can assume a slender,
tapering shape (peg-­shaped laterals).

Anomalies of Shape

Dens in dente or dens invaginatus presents as tooth within tooth
appearance, which results from invagination of inner enamel epithelium caused by disruption during morphodifferentiation. Dens evaginatus presents as an extra cusp on anterior or posterior teeth, which
contains enamel, dentin, and sometimes even pulp tissue. In the anterior teeth the cusp is talon shaped and presents in the cingulum area.
Taurodontism is more common in permanent molars and is characterized by elongated pulp chamber with short-­stunted roots due to
failure or late invagination of Hertwig epithelial root sheath. It may be
associated with several syndromic conditions such as Down syndrome,
tricho-­dento-­osseous syndrome, ectodermal dysplasia (hypohidrotic),
and amelogenesis imperfecta (hypomaturation-­hypoplastic type).
Dilaceration is an abnormal bend or curve in root possibly due to
trauma. It may be subsequent to injury to the primary predecessor
tooth.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 353 u Development and Developmental Anomalies of the Teeth

2241

Fig. 353.2 Dentinogenesis imperfecta. The bluish, opalescent sheen
Fig. 353.1 Amelogenesis imperfecta, hypoplastic type. The enamel

defect results in areas of missing or thin enamel, as well as grooves
and pits.

Anomalies of Structure

Amelogenesis imperfecta represents a group of hereditary conditions
that manifest in enamel defects of the primary and permanent teeth
without evidence of systemic disorders (Fig. 353.1). There are four
subtypes: hypoplastic (type I), hypomaturation (type II), hypocalcified
(type III), and hypomaturation-­hypoplastic-­taurodontism (type IV).
Of the multiple subtypes, there are 19 genes inherited predominantly
as autosomal dominant or recessive traits. The teeth are covered by
only a thin layer of abnormally formed enamel through which the yellow underlying dentin is seen. The primary teeth are generally affected
more than the permanent teeth. Susceptibility to caries is low, but the
enamel is subject to destruction from abrasion. Complete coverage of
the crown may be indicated for dentin protection, to reduce tooth sensitivity, and for improved appearance.
Dentinogenesis imperfecta, or hereditary opalescent dentin, is a
condition analogous to amelogenesis imperfecta in which the odontoblasts fail to differentiate normally, resulting in poorly calcified dentin (Fig. 353.2). This autosomal dominant disorder can also occur in
patients with osteogenesis imperfecta. The enamel-­dentin junction is
altered, causing enamel to break away. The exposed dentin is then susceptible to abrasion, in some cases worn to the gingiva. The teeth are
opaque and pearly, and the pulp chambers are generally obliterated by
calcification. Both primary and permanent teeth are usually involved.
If there is excessive wear of the teeth, selected complete coverage of
the teeth may be indicated to prevent further tooth loss and improve
appearance.
Localized disturbances of calcification that correlate with periods of
illness, malnutrition, premature birth, or birth trauma are common.
Hypocalcification appears as opaque white patches or horizontal lines
on the tooth; hypoplasia is more severe and manifests as pitting or
areas devoid of enamel. Systemic conditions, such as renal failure and
cystic fibrosis, are associated with enamel defects. Local trauma to the
primary incisors can also affect calcification of permanent incisors.

on several of these teeth results from genetically defective dentin. This
condition may be associated with osteogenesis imperfecta. (From Nazif
MM, Martin BS, McKibben DH, et al. Oral disorders. In Zitelli BJ, Davis HW, eds. Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis. 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Mosby; 2002: p. 703.)

Fluorosis (mottled enamel) can result from systemic fluoride consumption >0.05 mg/kg/day during enamel formation. This high fluoride consumption can be caused by residing in an area of high fluoride
content of the drinking water (>2.0 ppm), swallowing excessive fluoridated toothpaste, or inappropriate fluoride prescriptions. Excessive fluoride during enamel formation affects ameloblastic function, resulting
in inconspicuous white, lacy patches on the enamel to severe brownish
discoloration and hypoplasia. The latter changes are usually seen with
fluoride concentrations in the drinking water >5.0 ppm.

Anomalies of Color

Discolored teeth can result from incorporation of foreign substances
into developing enamel. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia can produce blue
to black discoloration of the primary teeth. Porphyria produces a red-­
brown discoloration. Tetracyclines are extensively incorporated into
bones and teeth and, if administered during the period of formation
of enamel, can result in brown-­yellow discoloration and hypoplasia of
the enamel. Such teeth fluoresce under ultraviolet light. The period at
risk extends from approximately 4 months of gestation to 7 years of age.
Repeated or prolonged therapy with tetracycline carries the highest risk.
Teething is associated with primary tooth eruption and may manifest with benign symptoms such as gingival hyperemia, irritability, sucking fingers, and drooling; some infants have no symptoms
or symptoms not identified by their parents. Low-­grade fever is an
inconsistent finding. The treatment of symptoms of teething is often
unnecessary but could include oral analgesics and iced teething rings.
Teething remedies containing benzocaine may cause methemoglobinemia and are not recommended. “Natural” (homeopathic) teething
remedies may contain toxic additives and should be avoided. In addition, teething necklaces and bracelets are a risk for foreign body aspiration and choking.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2242 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 354

Chapter 355

Disorders of the Oral
Cavity Associated with
Other Conditions

Malocclusion

Vineet K. Dhar
Disorders of the teeth and surrounding structures can occur in isolation or in combination with other systemic conditions (Table 354.1).
Most commonly, medical conditions that occur during tooth development can affect tooth formation or appearance. Damage to teeth during their development is permanent.

Table 354.1  Dental Problems Associated with Selected
Medical Conditions
MEDICAL CONDITION

COMMON ASSOCIATED
DENTAL OR ORAL FINDINGS

Cleft lip and palate

Missing teeth, extra (supernumerary)
teeth, shifting of arch segments,
feeding difficulties, speech
problems

Kidney failure

Mottled enamel (permanent teeth),
facial dysmorphology

Cystic fibrosis

Stained teeth with extensive
medication, mottled enamel

Immunosuppression

Oral candidiasis with potential for
systemic candidiasis,
cyclosporine-­induced gingival
hyperplasia

Low birthweight

Palatal groove, narrow arch with
prolonged oral intubation; enamel
defects of primary teeth

Heart defects with susceptibility
to bacterial endocarditis

Bacteremia from dental procedures
or trauma

Neutrophil chemotactic
deficiency

Aggressive periodontitis (loss of
supporting bone around teeth)

Diabetes mellitus type 1
(uncontrolled)

Aggressive periodontitis

Neuromotor dysfunction

Oral trauma from falling; malocclusion
(open bite); gingivitis from lack of
hygiene

Prolonged illness (generalized)
during tooth formation

Enamel hypoplasia of crown portions
forming during illness

Seizures

Gingival enlargement if phenytoin
is used

Maternal infections

Syphilis: abnormally shaped teeth

Vitamin D–dependent rickets

Enamel hypoplasia

Vineet K. Dhar
The oral cavity is essentially a masticatory instrument. The purpose of
the anterior teeth is to bite off large portions of food. The posterior
teeth reduce foodstuff to a soft, moist bolus. The cheeks and tongue
force the food onto the areas of tooth contact. Establishing a proper
relationship between the mandibular and maxillary teeth is important
for both physiologic and cosmetic reasons.

VARIATIONS IN GROWTH PATTERNS

Growth patterns are classified into three main types of occlusion,
determined when the jaws are closed and the teeth are held together
(Fig. 355.1). According to the Angle classification of malocclusion,
in class I occlusion (normal), the cusps of the posterior mandibular teeth interdigitate ahead of and inside of the corresponding cusps
of the opposing maxillary teeth. This relationship provides a normal
facial profile.
In class II malocclusion, buck teeth, the cusps of the posterior
mandibular teeth are behind and inside the corresponding cusps of
the maxillary teeth. This common occlusal disharmony is found in
approximately 45% of the population. The facial profile can give the
appearance of a receding chin (retrognathia) (mandibular deficiency)
or protruding front teeth. The resultant increased space between upper
and lower anterior teeth encourage finger sucking and tongue-­thrust
habits. In addition, children with pronounced class II malocclusions
are at greater risks of damage to the incisors as a consequence of
trauma. Treatment includes orthodontic retraction of the maxilla or
stimulation of the mandible.
In class III malocclusion, underbite, the cusps of the posterior
mandibular teeth interdigitate a tooth or more ahead of their opposing maxillary counterparts. The anterior teeth appear in crossbite with
the mandibular incisors protruding beyond the maxillary incisors. The
facial profile gives the appearance of a protruding chin (prognathia)
with or without an appearance of maxillary deficiency. If necessary,

Class II

Class I

Class III

Fig. 355.1 Angle classification of occlusion. The typical correspondence between the facial-­jaw profile and molar relationship is shown.
(Data from Borrie FR, Bearn DR, Innes NP, et al. Interventions for the
cessation of non-­nutritive sucking habits in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;31:CD008694.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 356 u Cleft Lip and Palate 2243
treatment includes mandibular excess reduction osteotomy or orthodontic maxillary facial protrusion.
The molar relationship in primary dentition/baby teeth also has
three main types. The flush terminal plane relationship, where the
distal surface of mandibular second primary molar is flush with the
distal surface of maxillary second primary molar, is most common
and can translate into class I occlusion or class II malocclusion in
permanent dentition. The mesial step relationship, where the distal
surface of mandibular second primary molar lies mesial to the distal surface of maxillary second primary molar, is the second most
common and often translates into class I occlusion or sometimes
into class III malocclusion in permanent dentition. Lastly, the distal
step relationship, where the distal surface of the mandibular second
primary molar lies distal to the distal surface of maxillary second
primary molar, almost always translates into class II occlusion in permanent dentition.

CROSSBITE

Normally, the mandibular teeth are in a position just inside the maxillary teeth so that the outside mandibular cusps or incisal edges meet
the central portion of the opposing maxillary teeth. A reversal of this
relation is referred to as a crossbite. Crossbites can be anterior, involving the incisors; can be posterior, involving the molars; or can involve
single or multiple teeth; or can be unilateral or bilateral. Functional
posterior crossbites that involve lateral shift of the mandible during
closure may result in dental, skeletal adjustments, and even asymmetric condylar positioning; therefore an early diagnosis and correction is
recommended.

OPEN AND CLOSED BITES

If the posterior mandibular and maxillary teeth make contact with
each other, but the anterior teeth are still apart, the condition is
called an open bite. Open bites can result from skeletal growth pattern or digit sucking. If digit sucking is terminated before skeletal
and dental growth is complete, the open bite might resolve naturally.
If mandibular anterior teeth occlude inside the maxillary anterior
teeth in an overclosed position, the condition is referred to as a
closed or deep bite.
Treatment of open and closed bites consists of orthodontic correction, generally performed in the preteen or teenage years. Some severe
cases require orthognathic surgery to position the jaws optimally in a
vertical direction.

DENTAL CROWDING

Overlap of incisors can result when the jaws are too small, or the teeth
are too large for adequate alignment of the teeth. Growth of the jaws is
mostly in the posterior aspects of the mandible and maxilla; therefore
inadequate space for the teeth at 7 or 8 years of age will not resolve with
growth of the jaws. Spacing in the primary dentition is normal and
favorable for adequate alignment of successor teeth.

DIGIT SUCKING

Various and conflicting etiologic theories and recommendations for
correction have been proposed for digit sucking in children. Prolonged digit sucking can cause flaring of the maxillary incisor teeth,
an open bite, and a posterior crossbite. The prevalence of digit sucking
decreases steadily from the age of 2 years to approximately 10% by the
age of 5 years. The earlier the habit is discontinued after the eruption of
the permanent maxillary incisors (age 7-­8 years), the greater the likelihood that there will be lessening effects on the dentition.
A variety of treatments have been suggested, from behavioral
modification to insertion of an appliance with extensions that
serves as a reminder when the child attempts to insert the digit.
Unfortunately, a systematic review has found only low-­
quality
evidence of the effectiveness of interventions such as orthodontic
appliances and psychologic interventions. The greatest likelihood of
success occurs in cases in which the child desires to stop. Stopping
of the habit will not rectify a malocclusion caused by a prior deviant
growth pattern.

Chapter 356

Cleft Lip and Palate
Vineet K. Dhar
Clefts of the lip and palate are distinct entities that are closely related
embryologically, functionally, and genetically. It is thought that cleft of
the lip appears because of hypoplasia of the mesenchymal layer, resulting in a failure of the medial nasal and maxillary processes to join. Cleft
of the palate results from failure of palatal shelves to approximate or
fuse.

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of cleft lip with or without cleft palate is approximately
1 in 1,000 births. The reported incidence of cleft palate alone in the
United States is 1 in 1,687 births. Clefts of the lip are more common in
males. Possible causes include maternal drug exposure, a syndrome-­
malformation complex, or genetic factors. Although clefts of lips and
palates appear to occur sporadically, the presence of susceptible genes
appears important. There are approximately 400 syndromes associated
with cleft lip and palates. There are families in which a cleft lip or palate, or both, is inherited in a dominant fashion (van der Woude syndrome), and careful examination of parents is important to distinguish
this type from others, because the recurrence risk is 50%. Ethnic factors
also affect the incidence of cleft lip and palate; the incidence varies by
race, with Asian children most likely to be affected. Cleft lip may be
associated with other cranial facial anomalies, whereas cleft palate may
be associated with central nervous system anomalies.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Cleft lip can vary from a small notch in the vermilion border to a
complete separation involving skin, muscle, mucosa, tooth, and bone.
Clefts of the lip may be unilateral (more often on the left side) or bilateral and can involve the alveolar ridge (Fig. 356.1).
Isolated cleft palate occurs in the midline and might involve only
the uvula or can extend into or through the soft and hard palates to
the incisive foramen. When associated with cleft lip, the defect can
involve the midline of the soft palate and extend into the hard palate
on one or both sides, exposing one or both of the nasal cavities as
a unilateral or bilateral cleft palate. The palate can also have a submucosal cleft indicated by a bifid uvula, partial separation of muscle
with intact mucosa, or a palpable notch at the posterior of the palate
(see Fig. 356.1).

TREATMENT

A complete program of habilitation for the child with a cleft lip or
palate can require years of special treatment by a team consisting of a
pediatrician, plastic surgeon, otolaryngologist, oral and maxillofacial
surgeon, pediatric dentist, prosthodontist, orthodontist, speech therapist, geneticist, medical social worker, psychologist, and public health
nurse.
The immediate problem in an infant born with a cleft lip or palate is
feeding. Although some advocate the construction of a plastic obturator to assist in feedings, most believe that, with the use of soft artificial
nipples with large openings, a squeezable bottle, and proper instruction, feeding of infants with clefts can be achieved.
Surgical closure of a cleft lip is usually performed by 3 months of
age, when the infant has shown satisfactory weight gain and is free of
any oral, respiratory, or systemic infection. Modification of the Millard rotation–advancement technique is the most commonly used
technique; a staggered suture line minimizes notching of the lip from
retraction of scar tissue. The initial repair may be revised at 4 or 5
years of age. Corrective surgery on the nose may be delayed until adolescence. Nasal surgery can also be performed at the time of the lip
repair. Cosmetic results depend on the extent of the original deformity,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2244 Part XVI u The Digestive System

A

B

C

D

E

Fig. 356.1 Nonsyndromic orofacial clefts. A, Cleft lip and alveolus. B, Cleft palate. C, Incomplete unilateral cleft lip and palate. D, Complete
unilateral cleft lip and palate. E, Complete bilateral cleft lip and palate. (From Shaw WC. Orthodontics and Occlusal Management. Oxford, UK:
Butterworth-­Heinemann; 1993.)

healing potential of the individual patient, absence of infection, and the
skill of the surgeon.
Because clefts of the palate vary considerably in size, shape, and
degree of deformity, the timing of surgical correction should be individualized. Criteria such as width of the cleft, adequacy of the existing
palatal segments, morphology of the surrounding areas (width of the
oropharynx), and neuromuscular function of the soft palate and pharyngeal walls affect the decision. The goals of surgery are the union of
the cleft segments, intelligible and pleasant speech, reduction of nasal
regurgitation, and avoidance of injury to the growing maxilla.
In an otherwise healthy child, closure of the palate is usually done
before 1 year of age to enhance normal speech development. When
surgical correction is delayed beyond the third year, a contoured
speech bulb can be attached to the posterior of a maxillary denture
so that contraction of the pharyngeal and velopharyngeal muscles can
bring tissues into contact with the bulb to accomplish occlusion of the
nasopharynx and help the child to develop intelligible speech.
A cleft palate usually crosses the alveolar ridge and interferes with
the formation of teeth in the maxillary anterior region. Teeth in the
cleft area may be displaced, malformed, or missing. Missing teeth or
teeth that are nonfunctional are replaced by prosthetic devices.

POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT

During the immediate postoperative period, special nursing care
is essential. Gentle aspiration of the nasopharynx minimizes the
chances of the common complications of atelectasis or pneumonia.
The primary considerations in postoperative care are maintenance of
a clean suture line and avoidance of tension on the sutures. The infant
is fed with a specially designed bottle, and the arms are restrained
with elbow cuffs. A fluid or semifluid diet is maintained for 3 weeks.
The patient’s hands, toys, and other foreign bodies must be kept away
from the surgical site.

SEQUELAE

Recurrent otitis media and subsequent hearing loss are frequent with
cleft palate. Displacement of the maxillary arches and malposition of
the teeth usually require orthodontic correction. Misarticulations and
velopharyngeal dysfunction are often associated with cleft lip and palate and may be present or persist because of physiologic dysfunction,
anatomic insufficiency, malocclusion, or inadequate surgical closure of
the palate. Such speech is characterized by the emission of air from the
nose and by a hypernasal quality with certain sounds, or by compensatory misarticulations (glottal stops). Before and sometimes after palatal
surgery, the speech defect is caused by inadequacies in function of the
palatal and pharyngeal muscles. The muscles of the soft palate and the
lateral and posterior walls of the nasopharynx constitute a valve that
separates the nasopharynx from the oropharynx during swallowing

and in the production of certain sounds. If the valve does not function
adequately, it is difficult to build up enough pressure in the mouth to
make such explosive sounds as p, b, d, t, h, y, or the sibilants s, sh, and
ch, and such words as “cats,” “boats,” and “sisters” are not intelligible.
After operation or the insertion of a speech appliance, speech therapy
is necessary.

VELOPHARYNGEAL DYSFUNCTION

The speech disturbance characteristic of the child with a cleft palate
can also be produced by other osseous or neuromuscular abnormalities
where there is an inability to form an effective seal between oropharynx and nasopharynx during swallowing or phonation. In a child who
has the potential for abnormal speech, adenoidectomy can precipitate
overt hypernasality. If the neuromuscular function is adequate, compensation in palatopharyngeal movement might take place and the
speech defect might improve, although speech therapy is necessary. In
other cases, slow involution of the adenoids can allow gradual compensation in palatal and pharyngeal muscular function. This might explain
why a speech defect does not become apparent in some children who
have a submucous cleft palate or similar anomaly predisposing to palatopharyngeal incompetence.

Clinical Manifestations

Although clinical signs vary, the symptoms of velopharyngeal dysfunction are similar to those of a cleft palate. There may be hypernasal speech (especially noted in the articulation of pressure consonants
such as p, b, d, t, h, v, f, and s); conspicuous constricting movement
of the nares during speech; inability to whistle, gargle, blow out a
candle, or inflate a balloon; loss of liquid through the nose when
drinking with the head down; otitis media; and hearing loss. Oral
inspection might reveal a cleft palate or a relatively short palate with
a large oropharynx; absent, grossly asymmetric, or minimal muscular
activity of the soft palate and pharynx during phonation or gagging;
or a submucous cleft.
Velopharyngeal dysfunction may also be demonstrated radiographically. The head should be carefully positioned to obtain a true lateral
view; one film is obtained with the patient at rest and another during continuous phonation of the vowel u as in “boom.” The soft palate
contacts the posterior pharyngeal wall in normal function, whereas in
velopharyngeal dysfunction such contact is absent.
In selected cases of velopharyngeal dysfunction, the palate may be
retropositioned or pharyngoplasty may be performed using a flap of
tissue from the posterior pharyngeal wall. Dental speech appliances
have also been used successfully. The type of surgery used is best tailored to the findings on nasoendoscopy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 357 u Syndromes with Oral Manifestations 2245

Chapter 357

Syndromes with Oral
Manifestations
Vineet K. Dhar
Many syndromes have distinct or accompanying facial, oral, and dental
manifestations (see Apert syndrome, Chapter 631.9; Crouzon disease,
Chapter 631.9; Down syndrome, Chapter 99.2).
Osteogenesis imperfecta is often accompanied by effects on the
teeth, termed dentinogenesis imperfecta (see Chapter 353, Fig. 353.2).
Depending on the severity of presentation, treatment of the dentition
varies from routine preventive and restorative monitoring to covering
affected posterior teeth with stainless steel crowns to prevent further
tooth loss and improve appearance. Dentinogenesis imperfecta can
also occur in isolation without the bony effects.
Another syndrome, cleidocranial dysplasia, has orofacial features
such as frontal bossing, hypoplastic maxilla, and supernumerary
teeth. The primary teeth can be overretained, and the permanent teeth
remain unerupted. Supernumerary teeth are common, especially in the
premolar area. Extensive dental rehabilitation may be needed to correct severe tooth crowding and unerupted and supernumerary teeth.
Ectodermal dysplasias are a heterogeneous group of conditions in
which oral manifestations range from little or no involvement (the dentition is completely normal) to cases in which the teeth can be totally
or partially absent or malformed (see Chapter 690). Because alveolar
bone does not develop in the absence of teeth, the alveolar processes
can be either totally or partially absent, and the resultant overclosure
of the mandible causes the lips to protrude. Facial development is otherwise not disturbed. Teeth, when present, can range from normal to
small and conical. If aplasia of the buccal and labial salivary glands is
present, dryness and irritation of the oral mucosa can occur. People
with ectodermal dysplasia might need partial or full dentures, even at
a very young age. The vertical height between the jaws is thus restored,
improving the position of the lips and facial contours, as well as restoring masticatory function.
Pierre Robin syndrome consists of micrognathia and is usually
accompanied by a high arched or cleft palate (Fig. 357.1). The tongue
is usually of normal size, but the floor of the mouth is foreshortened.
The air passages can become obstructed, particularly on inspiration,
usually requiring treatment to prevent suffocation. The infant should
be maintained in a prone or partially prone position so that the tongue
falls forward to relieve respiratory obstruction. Some patients require
tracheostomy. Mandibular distraction procedures in the neonate can
improve mandibular size, enhance respiration, and facilitate oral
feedings.
Sufficient spontaneous mandibular growth can take place within
a few months to relieve the potential airway obstruction. Often the
growth of the mandible achieves a normal profile in 4-­6 years. Of children with Pierre Robin syndrome, 30–50% have Stickler syndrome
(types I-­VI), an autosomal dominant condition that includes other
findings such as prominent joints, arthritis, hypotonia, hypermobile
joints, mitral valve prolapse, hearing loss, spine problems (scoliosis,
kyphosis, platyspondyly), and ocular problems (high myopia, glaucoma, cataracts, retinal detachment). Symptoms may vary greatly even
within a family. Pathogenic variants are noted in the genes that produce
collagen (COL2A1 in most; COL11A1 in others) in many, but not all,
patients with Stickler syndrome. Other syndromes are associated with
Pierre Robin syndrome, including 22Q11.2 deletion syndrome (velocardiofacial syndrome).
Mandibulofacial dysostosis (Treacher Collins syndrome or
Franceschetti syndrome) is an autosomal dominant syndrome that

primarily affects the face. The facial appearance varies but is characterized by downward-­sloping palpebral fissures, colobomas of the
lower eyelids, sunken cheekbones, blind fistulas opening between
the angles of the mouth and the ears, malformed pinnae, atypical
hair growth extending toward the cheeks, receding chin, and large
mouth. Facial clefts, abnormalities of the ears, and deafness are
common. The mandible is usually hypoplastic; the ramus may be
deficient, and the coronoid and condylar processes are flat or even
aplastic. The palatal vault may be either high or cleft. Dental malocclusions are common. The teeth may be missing, hypoplastic, or
displaced or be in an open bite position. Initially, the primary concern is breathing and feeding problems. Surgery to restore normal
structure of the face can be performed, which may include repair
of cleft palate, zygomatic and orbit reconstruction, reconstruction
of the lower eyelid, external ear reconstruction, and orthognathic
surgery.
Hemifacial microsomia presentation can be quite variable but
is usually characterized by unilateral hypoplasia of the mandible
and can be associated with partial paralysis of the facial nerve,
underdeveloped ear, and blind fistulas between the angles of the
mouth and the ears. Severe facial asymmetry and malocclusion can
develop because of the absence or hypoplasia of the mandibular
condyle on the affected side. Congenital condylar deformity tends
to increase with age. Early craniofacial surgery may be indicated to
minimize the deformity. This disorder can be associated with ocular
and vertebral anomalies (oculoauriculovertebral spectrum, including Goldenhar syndrome); therefore radiographs of the vertebrae
and ribs should be considered to determine the extent of skeletal
involvement.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 357.1 Pierre Robin syndrome. (From Clark DA. Atlas of Neonatology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000. p. 144.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2246 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 358

Dental Caries
Vineet K. Dhar

this situation is initiated earlier and consequently can affect the maxillary incisors first and then progress to the molars as they erupt.
The prevalence of untreated caries was significantly higher in children between 3 and 9 years of age living at or below 100% of federal
poverty level compared with those above the poverty level. Along with
100
30

ETIOLOGY

EPIDEMIOLOGY

As per the 2011–2012 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), approximately 15% of children ranging from 2 to 8
years of age had one or more primary teeth affected by dental caries
(Fig. 358.2). In the permanent dentition, over 10% of children age 12-­
15 years had dental caries and one fourth of children were affected by
age 16-­19 years (Fig. 358.3).

25
Percentage

The development of dental caries depends on interrelationships among
the tooth surface, dietary carbohydrates, and specific oral bacteria.
Organic acids produced by bacterial fermentation of dietary carbohydrates reduce the pH of dental plaque adjacent to the tooth to a point
where demineralization occurs. The initial demineralization appears as
an opaque white spot lesion on the enamel, and with progressive loss
of tooth mineral, cavitation of the tooth occurs (Fig. 358.1).
The group of microorganisms, Streptococcus mutans, is the main
bacteria associated with the development of dental caries. These bacteria have the ability to adhere to enamel, produce abundant acid,
and survive at low pH. Once the enamel surface cavitates, other oral
bacteria (lactobacilli) can colonize the tooth, produce acid, and foster
further tooth demineralization. Demineralization from bacterial acid
production is determined by the frequency of carbohydrate consumption and by the type of carbohydrate. Sucrose is the most cariogenic
sugar because one of its by-­products during bacterial metabolism is
glucan, a polymer that enables bacteria to adhere more readily to tooth
structures. Dietary behaviors, such as consuming sweetened beverages
in a nursing bottle or frequently consuming sticky candies, increase
the cariogenic potential of foods because of the long retention of sugar
in the mouth.

20
15
10
5
0
Total

2−5

6−8

Overall

Age group (yrs)

White

Black

Asian

Hispanic

Fig. 358.2 Prevalence* of untreated dental caries† in primary teeth‡

among children age 2-­8 yr, by age group, and race/Hispanic origin—
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 2011–2014. *With
95% confidence intervals indicated with error bars. †Untreated dental
caries is defined as tooth decay (dental cavities) that has not received
appropriate treatment. Data were collected by dentists in the mobile
examination center as part of the oral health component of the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. ‡Primary teeth are the first
teeth (baby teeth), that are shed and replaced by permanent teeth.
(From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Prevalence of untreated dental caries in primary teeth among children aged 2-­8 years,
by age group and race/Hispanic origin—National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey, 2011–2014. MMWR. 2017;66[9]:261.)

100
30

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

25
Percentage

Dental caries of the primary dentition usually begins in the pits and
fissures. Small lesions may be difficult to diagnose by visual inspection,
but larger lesions are evident as darkened or cavitated lesions on the
tooth surfaces (Fig. 358.4). Rampant dental caries in infants and toddlers, referred to as early childhood caries, is the result of early colonization of the child with cariogenic bacteria and the frequent ingestion
of sugar, either in the bottle or in solid foods. The carious process in

20
15
10
5
0

Overall

6−11

12−15

16−19

Age group (yrs)

Fig. 358.3 Prevalence* of untreated dental caries† in permanent teeth

Fig. 358.1 Initial carious lesions (white spot lesions) around the necks
of the maxillary central incisors.

among children and adolescents age 6-­19 yr, by age group—National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, United States, 2011-­2014.
*With 95% confidence intervals indicated with error bars. †Untreated
dental caries (i.e., dental cavities) are defined as tooth decay that has
not received appropriate treatment. Data were collected by dentists in
the mobile examination center as part of the oral health component
of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. (From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Prevalence of untreated dental
caries in permanent teeth among children and adolescents aged 6-­19
years, by age group—National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, United States, 2011–2014. MMWR. 2017;66[1]:36.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 358 u Dental Caries

2247

1
2

3
4
5
6

Fig. 358.4 Rampant caries in a 3-­yr-­old child. Note darkened and
cavitated lesions on the fissure surfaces of mandibular molars.

high frequency of sugar consumption and colonization with cariogenic
bacteria, other enabling factors include low socioeconomic status of
the family, other family members with carious teeth, recent immigrant
status of the child, and the visual presence of dental plaque on the
child’s teeth. Children who develop caries at a young age are known to
be at high risk for developing further caries as they get older. Therefore
the appropriate prevention of early childhood caries can result in the
elimination of major dental problems in toddlers and less decay in later
childhood.
Among adolescents, the prevalence of dental caries was higher in age
group 16-­19 years (67%) compared with age group 12-­15 years (50%).
Overall, the caries experience did not significantly differ by race, Hispanic origin, and poverty levels.

COMPLICATIONS

Left untreated, dental caries usually destroy most of the tooth and
invade the dental pulp (Fig. 358.5), leading to an inflammation of
the pulp (pulpitis) and significant pain. Pulpitis can progress to pulp
necrosis, with bacterial invasion of the alveolar bone causing a dental
abscess (Fig. 358.6). Red flags for serious spreading of dental infection
are noted in Table 358.1. Infection of a primary tooth can disrupt normal development of the successor permanent tooth. In some cases, this
process leads to spread of infection to other facial spaces (Fig. 358.7;
Table 358.2).

7

8

Fig. 358.5 Basic dental anatomy: 1, enamel; 2, dentin; 3, gingival

margin; 4, pulp; 5, cementum; 6, periodontal ligament; 7, alveolar
bone; 8, neurovascular bundle.

TREATMENT

The age at which dental caries occurs is important in dental management. Children younger than 3 years of age lack the developmental
ability to cooperate with dental treatment and often require sedation or
general anesthesia to repair carious teeth. After 4 years of age, children
can generally cope with dental restorative care with the use of local
anesthesia. Children with neurologic impairment or developmental
delay may require general anesthesia for dental procedures at older
ages.
Current evidence supports the use of a chronic disease management
model to modify risk factors and manage dental caries. The disease
management includes at-­home strategies and in-­office preventive, minimally invasive, and invasive interventions for treating dental caries.
Minimally invasive strategies such as interim therapeutic restorations
and silver diamine fluoride application can be used to arrest active carious lesions. Conventional dental treatment, using silver amalgam, plastic composite, or stainless steel crowns, can restore most teeth affected
with dental caries. If caries involves the dental pulp, a partial removal
of the pulp (pulpotomy) or complete removal of the pulp (pulpectomy)
may be required. If a tooth requires extraction, a space maintainer may
be indicated to prevent migration of teeth, which subsequently leads to
malposition of permanent successor teeth.
Clinical management of the pain and infection associated with
untreated dental caries varies with the extent of involvement and the
medical status of the patient. Dental infection localized to the dentoalveolar unit can be managed by local measures (extraction, pulpectomy).

Fig. 358.6 Facial swelling from an abscessed primary molar. Resolu-

tion of the inflammation can be achieved by a course of antibiotics,
followed by either extraction or root canal of the offending tooth.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2248 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 358.1  Red Flags Suggestive of a Spreading Dental
Infection

Table 358.2  Clinical Presentation of Odontogenic
Infections by Location

• Pyrexia

TYPE OF INFECTION

• Tachycardia or tachypnea

Dentoalveolar

• Trismus; may be relative due to pain or absolute due to a
collection within the muscle causing muscle spasm in cases of
masticator space involvement

Swelling of the alveolar ridge with
periodontal, periapical, and subperiosteal
abscess

Submental space

Firm midline swelling beneath the chin;
caused by infection from the mandibular
incisors

Submandibular space

Swelling of the submandibular triangle
of the neck around the angle of the
mandible; caused by mandibular molar
infections; trismus typical

Sublingual space

Swelling of the floor of the mouth with
possible elevation of the tongue and
dysphagia

Retropharyngeal space

Stiff neck, sore throat, dysphagia, raspy
voice; caused by infections of the
molars; infection of retropharyngeal
space has a high potential to spread to
the mediastinum

Buccal space

Swelling of the cheek; caused by infection
of premolar or molar tooth

Masticator space

Swelling on either side of the mandibular
ramus; caused by infection of the
mandibular third molar; trismus present

Canine space

Swelling of the anterior cheek with loss
of the nasolabial fold and possible
extension to the infraorbital region

• Raised tongue and floor of mouth, drooling
• Periorbital cellulitis
• Difficulty with speaking, swallowing, and breathing
• Hypotension
• Increased white blood cell count
• Lymphadenopathy
• Dehydration
From Robertson DP, Keys W, Rautemaa-­Richardson R, et al. Management of severe
acute dental infections. BMJ. 2015;350:h1300. Box 3, p. 151.

Orbit

Nasal passage

Maxilla

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

From Ogle OE. Odontogenic infections. Dent Clin North Am. 2017;61:235–252. Table 1.

Maxillary sinus

Oral cavity
Tongue

Buccal sulcus

Buccinator
muscle

Floor of mouth
Buccal sulcus

Mylohyoid
muscle

Mandible

Fig. 358.7 Spread of infection in the maxillofacial region is compli-

cated by the variety of vital structures. Routes of spread are determined
by fascial planes and this affects the presentation and management of
each subdivision of cervicofacial infection. (From Robertson DP, Keys
W, Rautemaa-­Richardson R, et al. Management of severe acute dental
infections. BMJ. 2015;350:h1300. Fig. 3, p. 151.)

Oral antibiotics are indicated for dental infections associated with fever,
cellulitis, and facial swelling or if it is difficult to anesthetize the tooth
in the presence of inflammation. Penicillin is the antibiotic of choice,
except in patients with a history of allergy to this agent. Clindamycin
and erythromycin are suitable alternatives. Oral analgesics, such as ibuprofen, are usually adequate for pain control.

PREVENTION

Dental caries screening, risk assessment, and preventive management
in young children need to be part of the scope of medical providers because children younger than 3 years of age often are not under
the care of a dentist. Prevention of early childhood caries is critical
because, if primary dental care is not initiated or does not succeed,
teeth may develop dental caries requiring restorative care. Dental
restorative care to treat caries in young children may require the use
of sedation or general anesthesia with its associated high costs and
possible health risks, and there is high recurrence of carious lesions
once they develop.
Because they are seeing infants and toddlers on a periodicity schedule, physicians have an important role in screening children younger
than 3 years of age for dental caries; providing preventive instructions;
applying preventive measures, such as fluoride varnish; and referring
the child to a dentist if problems exist.

Fluoride

The most effective preventive measure against dental caries is communal water supplies with optimal fluoride content. Water fluoridation at
the level of 0.7-­1.2 mg fluoride per liter (ppm F) was introduced in the
United States in the 1940s. Because fluoride from water supplies is now
one of several sources of fluoride, the Department of Health and Human
Services proposes to not have a fluoride range, but instead to limit the
recommendation to the lower limit of 0.7 ppm F. The rationale is to balance the benefits of preventing dental caries with reducing the chance
of fluorosis. Children who reside in areas with fluoride-­deficient water
supplies or who consume primarily bottled water, and are at risk for caries, benefit from dietary fluoride supplements (Table 358.3). If the patient

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 359 u Periodontal Diseases
Table 358.3  Supplemental Fluoride Dosage Schedule
FLUORIDE IN HOME WATER
AGE

<0.3 (PPM)

0.3-­0.6 (PPM)

>0.6 (PPM)

6 mo-­3 yr

0.25*

0

0

3-­6 yr

0.50

0.25

0

6-­16 yr

1.00

0.50

0

*Milligrams of fluoride per day.

2249

Chapter 359

Periodontal Diseases
Vineet K. Dhar
The periodontium includes the gingiva, alveolar bone, cementum, and
periodontal ligament (see Fig. 358.5).

GINGIVITIS
uses a private water supply, it is necessary to get the water tested for fluoride levels before prescribing fluoride supplements. To avoid potential
overdoses, no fluoride prescription should be written for more than a
total of 1 mg/day of fluoride. However, because of confusion regarding
fluoride supplements among practitioners and parents, association of
supplements with fluorosis, and lack of parent compliance with the daily
administration, supplements may no longer be the first-­line approach for
preventing caries in preschool-­age children.
Topical fluoride on a daily basis can be achieved by using fluoridated toothpaste. Supervised use of less than a pea-­sized amount
of toothpaste (approximately 0.25 g) on the toothbrush in children
between 3 and 6 years of age reduces the risk of fluorosis. Children
younger than 3 years of age should brush with less than a smear or
grain-­sized amount of fluoridated toothpaste. Professional topical
fluoride applications performed semiannually reportedly reduce
caries by approximately 30%. Fluoride varnish is ideal for professional applications in preschool children because of ease of use,
even with non–dental health providers, and its safety because of
single-­dose dispensers. Products that are available come in containers of 0.25, 0.4, or 0.6 mL of varnish, corresponding to 5.6, 9.0, and
13.6 mg fluoride, respectively. Fluoride varnish should be administered twice a year for preschool children at moderate caries risk and
4 times a year for children at high caries risk.

Oral Hygiene

Daily brushing, especially with fluoridated toothpaste, helps prevent
dental caries. Most children younger than 8 years of age do not have
the coordination required for adequate tooth brushing. Accordingly,
parents should assume responsibility for the child’s oral hygiene, with
the degree of parental involvement appropriate to the child’s changing
abilities.

Diet

Frequent consumption of sweetened fruit drinks is not generally
recognized by parents for its high cariogenic potential. Consuming sweetened beverages in a nursing bottle or sippy cup should be
discouraged and special efforts made to instruct parents that their
child should consume sweetened beverages only at meal times and
not exceed 6 oz/day.

Dental Sealant

Plastic dental sealants have been shown to be effective in preventing
caries on the pit and fissure of the primary and permanent molars.
Sealants are most effective when placed soon after teeth erupt and
used in children with deep grooves and fissures in the molar teeth.
Sealants have been shown to reduce the incidence of caries by 85%
over 7 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Poor oral hygiene results in the accumulation of dental plaque at the tooth-­
gingival interface that activates an inflammatory response, expressed as
localized or generalized reddening and swelling of the gingiva. More than
half of American school children experience gingivitis. In severe cases, the
gingiva spontaneously bleeds and there is oral malodor. With proper oral
hygiene (careful tooth brushing and flossing) complete resolution can be
expected. Fluctuations in hormonal levels during the onset of puberty can
increase inflammatory responses to plaque. Gingivitis in healthy children
is unlikely to progress to periodontitis (inflammation of the periodontal
ligament resulting in loss of alveolar bone).

AGGRESSIVE PERIODONTITIS IN CHILDREN
­(PREPUBERTAL PERIODONTITIS)

Periodontitis in children before puberty is a rare disease that often
begins between the time of eruption of the primary teeth and the
age of 4 or 5 years. The disease occurs in localized and generalized forms. There is rapid bone loss, often leading to premature
loss of primary teeth. It is often associated with systemic problems, including neutropenia, leukocyte adhesion or migration
defects, hypophosphatasia, Papillon-­Lefèvre syndrome, leukemia,
and Langerhans cell histiocytosis. However, in many cases, there is
no apparent underlying medical problem. Nonetheless, diagnostic
workups are necessary to rule out underlying systemic disease.
Treatment includes aggressive professional teeth cleaning, strategic extraction of affected teeth, and antibiotic therapy. There are few
reports of long-­term successful treatment to reverse bone loss surrounding primary teeth.

AGGRESSIVE PERIODONTITIS IN ADOLESCENTS

Localized aggressive periodontitis (LAgP) in adolescents is characterized by rapid attachment and alveolar bone loss, on at least
two first molars and incisors. Overall prevalence in the United
States is <1%, but the prevalence among Black people is reportedly 2.5%. This form of periodontitis is associated with a strain of
Aggregatibacter (Actinobacillus) bacteria. In addition, the neutrophils of patients with aggressive periodontitis can have chemotactic or phagocytic defects. If left untreated, affected teeth lose their
attachment and can exfoliate. Treatment varies with the degree of
involvement. Patients whose disease is diagnosed at onset are usually managed by surgical or nonsurgical debridement in conjunction with antibiotic therapy. Prognosis depends on the degree of
initial involvement and compliance with therapy.
Generalized aggressive periodontitis (GAgP) occurs more in adolescents and young adults and is characterized by generalized interproximal attachment loss and bone loss, including three teeth that are not
first molars and incisors.

CYCLOSPORINE-­ OR PHENYTOIN-­INDUCED
­GINGIVAL OVERGROWTH

The use of cyclosporine to suppress organ rejection or phenytoin
for anticonvulsant therapy, and in some cases calcium channel
blockers, is associated with generalized enlargement of the gingiva.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2250 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Phenytoin and its metabolites have a direct stimulatory action on
gingival fibroblasts, resulting in accelerated synthesis of collagen.
Phenytoin induces less gingival hyperplasia in patients who maintain
meticulous oral hygiene.
Gingival hyperplasia occurs in 10–30% of patients treated with
phenytoin. Severe manifestations can include gross enlargement
of the gingiva, sometimes covering the teeth; edema and erythema
of the gingiva; secondary infection, resulting in abscess formation;
migration of teeth; and inhibition of exfoliation of primary teeth
and subsequent impaction of permanent teeth. Treatment should
be directed toward prevention and, if possible, discontinuation of
cyclosporine or phenytoin. Patients undergoing long-­term treatment with these drugs should receive frequent dental examinations and oral hygiene care. Severe forms of gingival overgrowth
are treated by gingivectomy, but the lesion recurs if drug use is
continued.

ACUTE PERICORONITIS

Acute inflammation of the flap of gingiva that partially covers the
crown of an incompletely erupted tooth is common in mandibular
permanent molars. Accumulation of debris and bacteria between
the gingival flap and tooth precipitates the inflammatory response.
A variant of this condition is a gingival abscess caused by entrapment of bacteria because of orthodontic bands or crowns. Trismus
and severe pain may be associated with the inflammation. Untreated
cases can result in facial space infections and facial cellulitis.
Treatment includes local debridement and irrigation, warm
saline rinses, and antibiotic therapy. When the acute phase has subsided, resection of the gingival flap prevents recurrence. Early recognition of the partial impaction of mandibular third molars and
their subsequent extraction prevents these areas from developing
pericoronitis.

NECROTIZING PERIODONTAL DISEASE (ACUTE
NECROTIZING ULCERATIVE GINGIVITIS)

Necrotizing periodontal disease, in the past sometimes referred to
as “trench mouth,” is a distinct periodontal disease associated with
oral spirochetes and fusobacteria. However, it is not clear whether
bacteria initiate the disease or are secondary. It rarely develops in
healthy children in developed countries, with a prevalence in the
United States of <1%, but is seen more often in children and adolescents from developing areas of Africa, Asia, and South America.
In certain African countries, where affected children usually have
protein malnutrition, the lesion can extend into adjacent tissues,
causing necrosis of facial structures (cancrum oris, or noma).
Clinical manifestations of necrotizing periodontal disease include
necrosis and ulceration of gingiva between the teeth, an adherent grayish pseudomembrane over the affected gingiva, oral malodor, cervical
lymphadenopathy, malaise, and fever. The condition may be mistaken
for acute herpetic gingivostomatitis. Dark-­field microscopy of debris
obtained from necrotizing lesions demonstrates dense spirochete
populations.
Treatment of necrotizing periodontal disease is divided into an
acute management with local debridement, oxygenating agents
(direct application of 10% carbamide peroxide in anhydrous glycerol
qid), and analgesics. Dramatic resolution usually occurs within 48
hours. If a patient is febrile, antibiotics (penicillin or metronidazole)
may be an important adjunctive therapy. A second phase of treatment may be necessary if the acute phase of the disease has caused
irreversible morphologic damage to the periodontium. The disease is
not contagious.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 360

Dental Trauma
Vineet K. Dhar
Traumatic oral injuries may be categorized into three groups: injuries to teeth, injuries to soft tissue (contusions, abrasions, lacerations,
punctures, avulsions, and burns), and injuries to jaw (mandibular and/
or maxillary fractures).

INJURIES TO TEETH

Approximately 10% of children between 18 months and 18 years of age
sustain significant tooth trauma. Oral injuries are second most common,
covering 18% of all somatic injuries in the age-­group 0-­6 years. Among
oral injuries, injuries to teeth are most common, followed by soft tissue
injuries. There appear to be three age periods of greatest predilection:
toddlers (1-­3 years), usually from falls or child abuse; school-­age children (7-­10 years), usually from bicycle and playground accidents; and
adolescents (16-­18 years), often the result of fights, athletic injuries, and
automobile accidents. Injuries to teeth are more common among children with protruding front teeth. Children with craniofacial abnormalities or neuromuscular deficits are also at increased risk for dental injury.
Injuries to teeth can involve the hard dental tissues, the dental pulp
(nerve), and injuries to the periodontal structure (surrounding bone and
attachment apparatus) (Fig. 360.1; Table 360.1).
Fractures of teeth may be uncomplicated (confined to the hard dental tissues) or complicated (involving the pulp). Exposure of the pulp
results in its bacterial contamination, which can lead to infection and
pulp necrosis. Such pulp exposure complicates therapy and can lower
the likelihood of a favorable outcome.
The teeth most often affected are the maxillary incisors. Uncomplicated crown fractures are treated by covering exposed dentin and by

Root
PDL

Pulp
Dentin

Enamel

Fig. 360.1 Tooth fractures can involve enamel, dentin, or pulp and

can occur in the crown or root of a tooth. PDL, Periodontal ligament.
(From Pinkham JR. Pediatric Dentistry: Infancy Through Adolescence.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1988. p. 172.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2250 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Phenytoin and its metabolites have a direct stimulatory action on
gingival fibroblasts, resulting in accelerated synthesis of collagen.
Phenytoin induces less gingival hyperplasia in patients who maintain
meticulous oral hygiene.
Gingival hyperplasia occurs in 10–30% of patients treated with
phenytoin. Severe manifestations can include gross enlargement
of the gingiva, sometimes covering the teeth; edema and erythema
of the gingiva; secondary infection, resulting in abscess formation;
migration of teeth; and inhibition of exfoliation of primary teeth
and subsequent impaction of permanent teeth. Treatment should
be directed toward prevention and, if possible, discontinuation of
cyclosporine or phenytoin. Patients undergoing long-­term treatment with these drugs should receive frequent dental examinations and oral hygiene care. Severe forms of gingival overgrowth
are treated by gingivectomy, but the lesion recurs if drug use is
continued.

ACUTE PERICORONITIS

Acute inflammation of the flap of gingiva that partially covers the
crown of an incompletely erupted tooth is common in mandibular
permanent molars. Accumulation of debris and bacteria between
the gingival flap and tooth precipitates the inflammatory response.
A variant of this condition is a gingival abscess caused by entrapment of bacteria because of orthodontic bands or crowns. Trismus
and severe pain may be associated with the inflammation. Untreated
cases can result in facial space infections and facial cellulitis.
Treatment includes local debridement and irrigation, warm
saline rinses, and antibiotic therapy. When the acute phase has subsided, resection of the gingival flap prevents recurrence. Early recognition of the partial impaction of mandibular third molars and
their subsequent extraction prevents these areas from developing
pericoronitis.

NECROTIZING PERIODONTAL DISEASE (ACUTE
NECROTIZING ULCERATIVE GINGIVITIS)

Necrotizing periodontal disease, in the past sometimes referred to
as “trench mouth,” is a distinct periodontal disease associated with
oral spirochetes and fusobacteria. However, it is not clear whether
bacteria initiate the disease or are secondary. It rarely develops in
healthy children in developed countries, with a prevalence in the
United States of <1%, but is seen more often in children and adolescents from developing areas of Africa, Asia, and South America.
In certain African countries, where affected children usually have
protein malnutrition, the lesion can extend into adjacent tissues,
causing necrosis of facial structures (cancrum oris, or noma).
Clinical manifestations of necrotizing periodontal disease include
necrosis and ulceration of gingiva between the teeth, an adherent grayish pseudomembrane over the affected gingiva, oral malodor, cervical
lymphadenopathy, malaise, and fever. The condition may be mistaken
for acute herpetic gingivostomatitis. Dark-­field microscopy of debris
obtained from necrotizing lesions demonstrates dense spirochete
populations.
Treatment of necrotizing periodontal disease is divided into an
acute management with local debridement, oxygenating agents
(direct application of 10% carbamide peroxide in anhydrous glycerol
qid), and analgesics. Dramatic resolution usually occurs within 48
hours. If a patient is febrile, antibiotics (penicillin or metronidazole)
may be an important adjunctive therapy. A second phase of treatment may be necessary if the acute phase of the disease has caused
irreversible morphologic damage to the periodontium. The disease is
not contagious.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 360

Dental Trauma
Vineet K. Dhar
Traumatic oral injuries may be categorized into three groups: injuries to teeth, injuries to soft tissue (contusions, abrasions, lacerations,
punctures, avulsions, and burns), and injuries to jaw (mandibular and/
or maxillary fractures).

INJURIES TO TEETH

Approximately 10% of children between 18 months and 18 years of age
sustain significant tooth trauma. Oral injuries are second most common,
covering 18% of all somatic injuries in the age-­group 0-­6 years. Among
oral injuries, injuries to teeth are most common, followed by soft tissue
injuries. There appear to be three age periods of greatest predilection:
toddlers (1-­3 years), usually from falls or child abuse; school-­age children (7-­10 years), usually from bicycle and playground accidents; and
adolescents (16-­18 years), often the result of fights, athletic injuries, and
automobile accidents. Injuries to teeth are more common among children with protruding front teeth. Children with craniofacial abnormalities or neuromuscular deficits are also at increased risk for dental injury.
Injuries to teeth can involve the hard dental tissues, the dental pulp
(nerve), and injuries to the periodontal structure (surrounding bone and
attachment apparatus) (Fig. 360.1; Table 360.1).
Fractures of teeth may be uncomplicated (confined to the hard dental tissues) or complicated (involving the pulp). Exposure of the pulp
results in its bacterial contamination, which can lead to infection and
pulp necrosis. Such pulp exposure complicates therapy and can lower
the likelihood of a favorable outcome.
The teeth most often affected are the maxillary incisors. Uncomplicated crown fractures are treated by covering exposed dentin and by

Root
PDL

Pulp
Dentin

Enamel

Fig. 360.1 Tooth fractures can involve enamel, dentin, or pulp and

can occur in the crown or root of a tooth. PDL, Periodontal ligament.
(From Pinkham JR. Pediatric Dentistry: Infancy Through Adolescence.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1988. p. 172.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 360 u Dental Trauma 2251
Table 360.1

Injuries to Crowns of Teeth

TYPE OF TRAUMA

DESCRIPTION

TREATMENT AND REFERRAL

Enamel infraction (crazing)

Incomplete fracture of enamel without loss of
tooth structure

Initially might not require therapy but should be assessed
periodically by dentist

Enamel fractures

Fracture of only the tooth enamel

Tooth may be smoothed or treated to replace fragment

Enamel and dentin fracture

Fracture of enamel and dentinal layer of the tooth.
Tooth may be sensitive to cold or air. Pulp may
become necrotic, leading to periapical abscess

Refer as soon as possible. Area should be treated to
preserve the integrity of the underlying pulp

Enamel, dentin fracture
involving the pulp

Bacterial contamination can lead to pulpal necrosis
and periapical abscess. The tooth might have the
appearance of bleeding or might display a small
red spot

Refer immediately. The dental therapy of choice depends
on the extent of injury, the condition of the pulp, the
development of the tooth, time elapsed from injury, and
any other injuries to the supporting structures. Therapy is
directed toward minimizing contamination in an effort to
improve the prognosis

From Josell SD, Abrams RG. Managing common dental problems and emergencies. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1991;38:1325–1342.

placing an aesthetic restoration. Complicated crown fractures involving the tooth pulp usually require endodontic therapy (root canal).
Crown-­root fractures and root fractures usually require extensive dental therapy. Such injuries in the primary dentition can interfere with
normal development of the permanent dentition; therefore significant
injuries of the primary incisor teeth are usually managed by extraction.
Traumatic oral injuries should be referred to a dentist as soon as possible.
Even when the teeth appear intact, a dentist should promptly evaluate the
patient. Baseline data (radiographs, mobility patterns, responses to specific
stimuli) enable the dentist to assess the likelihood of future complications.

INJURIES TO PERIODONTAL STRUCTURES

Trauma to teeth with associated injury to periodontal structures that
hold the teeth usually manifests as mobile or displaced teeth. Categories of trauma to the periodontium include concussion, subluxation,
intrusive luxation, extrusive luxation, and avulsion.

Fig. 360.2 Intruded primary incisor that appears avulsed (knocked
out).

Concussion

Injuries that produce minor damage to the periodontal ligament are
termed concussions. Teeth sustaining such injuries are not mobile or
displaced but react markedly to percussion (gentle hitting of the tooth
with an instrument). This type of injury usually requires no therapy
and resolves without complication. Primary incisors that sustain concussion can change color, which may indicate pulpal degeneration and
should be evaluated by a dentist.

Subluxation

Subluxated teeth exhibit mild to moderate horizontal mobility and/or vertical mobility. Hemorrhage is usually evident around the neck of the tooth
at the gingival margin. There is no displacement of the tooth. Many subluxated teeth need to be immobilized by splints to ensure adequate repair
of the periodontal ligament. Some of these teeth develop pulp necrosis.

Intrusion

Intruded teeth are pushed up into their socket, sometimes to the point
where they are not clinically visible. Intruded primary incisors can give
the false appearance of being avulsed (knocked out). To rule out avulsion, a dental radiograph is indicated (Figs. 360.2 and 360.3). Intruded
primary teeth are usually monitored for spontaneous repositioning or re-­
eruption. Depending on the severity, the intruded permanent teeth may
be monitored for re-­eruption or repositioned surgically or orthodontically.
Some of these teeth develop pulp necrosis and infection requiring further
management.

Extrusion

Extrusion injury is characterized by displacement of the tooth from
its socket. The tooth is usually displaced to the lingual (tongue)
side, with fracture of the wall of the alveolar socket. These teeth
need immediate treatment; the longer the delay, the more likely the

Fig. 360.3 Occlusal radiograph documents intrusion of “missing
tooth” presented in Figure 360.2.

tooth will be fixed in its displaced position. Therapy is directed at
reduction (repositioning the tooth) and fixation (splinting). The
pulp of such teeth often becomes necrotic and requires endodontic
therapy. Extrusive luxation in the primary dentition is usually managed by extraction because complications of reduction and fixation
can result in problems with development of permanent teeth.

Avulsion

If avulsed permanent teeth are replanted as soon as possible after
injury, there is a good chance that normal reattachment will follow
and the tooth will have a good prognosis. However, if the tooth is in
a dry environment for longer than 1 hour, the ligament that holds the
tooth in place has little chance for survival and failure (root resorption,
ankylosis) is common. Parents confronted with this emergency situation can be instructed to do the following:

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2252 Part XVI u The Digestive System
• Find the tooth.
• Briefly rinse the tooth. (Do not scrub the tooth. Do not touch the
root. After plugging the sink drain, hold the tooth by the crown and
rinse it under running tap water.)
• Insert the tooth into the socket. (Gently place it back into its normal
position. Do not be concerned if the tooth extrudes slightly. If the
parent or child is too apprehensive for replantation of the tooth,
the tooth should be placed in cold cow’s milk or other cold isotonic
solution.)
• Go directly to the dentist. (In transit, the child should hold the tooth
in its socket with a finger. The parent should place the child in an
age-­appropriate child seat, buckle a seatbelt around the child, and
drive safely.)
After the tooth is replanted, it must be immobilized to facilitate reattachment; endodontic therapy is always required. The initial signs of
complications associated with replantation can appear as early as 1
week after trauma or as late as several years later. Close dental follow­up is indicated for at least 1 year.

PREVENTION

To minimize the likelihood of dental injuries:
• Every child or adolescent who engages in contact sports should wear
a mouth guard, which may be constructed by a dentist or purchased
at any athletic goods store.
• Helmets with face guards should be worn by children or adolescents
with neuromuscular problems or seizure disorders to protect the
head and face during falls.
• Helmets should also be used during biking, skiing, skating, and
skateboarding.
• All children or adolescents with protruding incisors should be
evaluated by a pediatric dentist or orthodontist.

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS

Children who experience dental trauma might also have sustained
head or neck trauma, and therefore, neurologic assessment is warranted. Tetanus prophylaxis should be considered with any injury that
disrupts the integrity of the oral tissues. The possibility of child abuse
should always be considered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

self-­limited in the healthy newborn infant, but topical application of
nystatin to the oral cavity of the baby and to the nipples of breastfeeding mothers will hasten recovery.
OPC is also a major problem during myelosuppressive therapy.
Systemic candidiasis, a major cause of morbidity and mortality during myelosuppressive therapy, develops almost exclusively in patients
who have had prior oropharyngeal, esophageal, or intestinal candidiasis. This observation implies that prevention of OPC should reduce
the incidence of systemic candidiasis. The use of oral rinses of 0.2%
chlorhexidine gluconate solution along with systemic antifungals
may be effective in preventing OPC, systemic candidiasis, or candidal
esophagitis.

APHTHOUS ULCERS

The aphthous ulcer (canker sore) is a distinct oral lesion (Fig. 361.1),
prone to recurrence; Table 361.1 notes the differential diagnosis. Aphthous ulcers are reported to develop in 20% of the population. Their
etiology is unclear, but allergic or immunologic reactions, emotional
stress, genetics, and injury to the soft tissues in the mouth have been
implicated. Aphthous-­like lesions may be associated with inflammatory bowel disease, Behçet disease, gluten-­sensitive enteropathy, periodic fever-­aphthae-­pharyngitis-­adenitis syndrome, Sweet syndrome,
HIV infection (especially if ulcers are large and slow to heal), and
cyclic neutropenia (see Table 361.1). Clinically, these ulcers are characterized by well-­circumscribed, ulcerative lesions with a white necrotic
base surrounded by a red halo. The lesions generally last 10-­14 days
and heal without scarring. Nonprescription palliative therapies, such
as benzocaine and topical lidocaine, are effective, as are topical steroids.
Use of soft tissue dental lasers may help manage aphthous ulcers by
accelerating wound healing and reducing pain. Tetracycline is beneficial with severe outbreaks, but caution is necessary in pregnant women,
because it is classified as U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
pregnancy category D. In younger children (≤8 years), tetracycline can
affect developing teeth and cause permanent staining of the teeth.

HERPETIC GINGIVOSTOMATITIS

After an initial incubation period of approximately 1 week, the primary infection with herpes simplex virus manifests as fever and malaise, usually in a child younger than 5 years (see Chapter 299). The oral
cavity can show various expressions, including the gingiva becoming
erythematous, mucosal hemorrhages, and clusters of small vesicles
erupting throughout the mouth. There is often involvement of the
mucocutaneous margin and perioral skin (Fig. 361.2). The oral symptoms generally are accompanied by fever, lymphadenopathy, and difficulty eating and drinking. The symptoms usually regress within 2
weeks without scarring. Fluids should be encouraged because the child
may become dehydrated. Analgesics and anesthetic rinses can make

Chapter 361

Common Lesions of the
Oral Soft Tissues
Vineet K. Dhar
OROPHARYNGEAL CANDIDIASIS

Oropharyngeal infection with Candida albicans (thrush, moniliasis)
(see Chapter 280.1) is common in neonates from contact with the
organism in the birth canal or contact with the breast during breastfeeding. The lesions of oropharyngeal candidiasis (OPC) appear as
white plaques covering all or part of the oropharyngeal mucosa. These
plaques are removable from the underlying surface, which is characteristically inflamed and has pinpoint hemorrhages. The diagnosis is
confirmed by direct microscopic examination on potassium hydroxide smears and culture of scrapings from lesions. OPC is usually

Fig. 361.1 Major aphthous in a child. (From Gürkan A, Özlü SG,
Altiaylik-­
Özer P, et al. Recurrent aphthous stomatitis in childhood
and adolescence: a single-­
center experience. Pediatr Dermatol.
2015;32[4]:476–480. Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 361 u Common Lesions of the Oral Soft Tissues
Table 361.1

Differential Diagnosis of Oral Ulceration

CONDITION

COMMENT

COMMON
Aphthous ulcers (canker sores)

Painful circumscribed lesions;
recurrences

2253

the child more comfortable. Oral valacyclovir, if taken within the first
3 days of symptoms in immunocompetent patients, is beneficial in
shortening the duration of symptoms. Caution should be exercised to
prevent autoinoculation, especially of the eyes.

RECURRENT HERPES LABIALIS

Traumatic ulcers

Accidents, chronic cheek biter,
after dental local anesthesia

Hand, foot, and mouth disease

Painful; lesions on tongue, anterior
oral cavity, hands, and feet

Herpangina

Painful; lesions confined to soft
palate and oropharynx

Herpetic gingivostomatitis

Vesicles on mucocutaneous
borders; painful, febrile

Recurrent herpes labialis

Vesicles on lips; painful

Approximately 90% of the worldwide population develops antibodies
to herpes simplex virus. In periods of quiescence, the virus is thought
to remain latent in sensory neurons. Unlike primary herpetic gingivostomatitis, which manifests as multiple painful vesicles on the lips,
tongue, palate, gingiva, and mucosa, recurrent herpes is generally limited to the lips. Other than the annoyance of causing pain and being a
cosmetic issue, recurrent episodes generally do not involve systemic
symptoms. Reactivation of the virus is thought to be the result of exposure to ultraviolet light, tissue trauma, stress, or fevers. There is little
advantage of antiviral therapy over palliative therapies in an otherwise
healthy patient affected by recurrent herpes.

Chemical burns

Alkali, acid, aspirin; painful

PARULIS

Heat burns

Hot food, electrical

Medicine effect

NSAIDs, methotrexate, azathioprine,
enalapril, losartan, fluoxetine,
antiretroviral agents

RIME

Mycoplasma and other agents;
predominant oral ulcerations
with scattered cutaneous lesions

UNCOMMON
Neutrophil defects

Agranulocytosis, leukemia, cyclic
neutropenia; painful

Systemic lupus erythematosus

Recurrent; may be painless

Behçet syndrome

Resembles aphthous lesions;
associated with genital ulcers,
uveitis

Necrotizing ulcerative
gingivostomatitis

Vincent stomatitis; painful

Syphilis

Chancre or gumma; painless

Oral Crohn disease

Aphthous-­like; painful

Histoplasmosis

Lingual

Pemphigus

May be isolated to the oral cavity

Stevens-­Johnson syndrome

May be isolated to or appear
initially in the oral cavity

NSAIDs, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; RIME, reactive infectious mucotaneous
eruption.

The parulis (gum boil) is a soft reddish papule located adjacent to the
root of a chronically abscessed tooth. It occurs at the end-­point of a
draining dental sinus tract. Treatment consists of diagnosing which
tooth is abscessed and extracting it or performing root canal treatment
on the offending tooth.

CHEILITIS

Cheilitis, dryness of the lips followed by scaling and cracking and accompanied by a characteristic burning sensation, is common in children. Cheilitis may be caused by sensitivity to contact substances, lip licking, vitamin
deficiency, weakened immune system, or fungal or bacterial infections,
and often occurs in association with fever. Treatment may include antifungal or antibacterial agents and frequent application of petroleum jelly.

ANKYLOGLOSSIA

Ankyloglossia, or tongue-­tie, is characterized by an abnormally short
lingual frenum that can hinder the tongue movement, but rarely interferes with feeding or speech. It is possible that the frenum could spontaneously lengthen as the child gets older. If, in the rare event that the
extent of the ankyloglossia is severe, speech may be affected and surgical correction may be indicated.

GEOGRAPHIC TONGUE

Geographic tongue (migratory glossitis) is a benign and asymptomatic lesion that is characterized by one or more smooth bright red
patches, often showing a yellow, gray, or white membranous margin
on the dorsum of an otherwise normally roughened tongue. The
condition has no known cause, and no treatment is indicated (see
Chapter 705).

FISSURED TONGUE

The fissured tongue (scrotal tongue) is a malformation manifested clinically by numerous small furrows or grooves on the dorsal surface (see
Chapter 705). If the tongue is painful, brushing the tongue or irrigating
with water can reduce the bacteria in the fissures.

DEVELOPMENTAL (NORMAL) VARIATIONS
Bohn Nodules

Bohn nodules are small developmental anomalies located along the
buccal and lingual aspects of the mandibular and maxillary ridges and
in the hard palate of the neonate. These lesions arise from remnants of
mucous gland tissue. Treatment is not necessary as the nodules usually
disappear within a few weeks.

Dental Lamina Cysts
Fig. 361.2 Herpetic gingivostomatitis. Lip erosions with multiple

perioral herpetic lesions involving the mucocutaneous borders. (From
Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology. 3rd
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006. p. 398.)

Dental lamina cysts are small cystic lesions located along the crest of
the mandibular and maxillary ridges of the neonate. These lesions arise
from epithelial remnants of the dental lamina. Treatment is not necessary; they disappear within a few weeks.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2254 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Epstein Pearls

Epstein pearls are small developmental lesions located in the median
palatal raphe region due to entrapment of epithelial remnants along the
line of fusion of the palatal halves. Treatment is not necessary, as these
slough off on their own within a few weeks.

Fordyce Granules

Fordyce granules are common and almost 80% of adults have these
yellow-­
white granules in clusters or plaquelike areas on the oral
mucosa, most commonly on the buccal mucosa or lips. They are aberrant sebaceous glands. The glands are present at birth, but they can
undergo hypertrophy and first appear as discrete yellowish papules
during the preadolescent period in approximately 50% of children. No
treatment is necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

culture obtained from the Stensen duct or by surgical drainage. Viral
causes of parotitis include mumps (often in epidemics), Epstein-­Barr
virus, human herpesvirus 6, enteroviruses, COVID-­19, and HIV.

RANULA

A ranula is a cyst associated with a major salivary gland in the sublingual area. It is a large, soft, mucus-­containing swelling in the floor of
the mouth. It occurs at any age, including infancy. The cyst should be
excised, and the severed duct should be exteriorized.

MUCOCELE

Mucocele is a salivary gland lesion caused by a blockage of a salivary
gland duct. It is most common on the lower lip and has the appearance
of a fluid-­filled vesicle, or a fluctuant nodule with the overlying mucosa
being normal in color. Treatment is surgical excision, with removal of
the involved accessory salivary gland.

CONGENITAL LIP PITS

Congenital lip pits are caused by fistulous tracts that lead to embedded mucous glands in the lower lip. They leak saliva, especially with
salivary stimulation. Lip pits can be isolated anomalies, or they can be
found in patients with cleft lip or palate. Treatment is surgical excision
of the glandular tissue.

Chapter 362

Diseases of the Salivary
Glands and Jaws
Vineet K. Dhar
With the exception of mumps (see Chapter 295), diseases of the salivary glands are rare in children. Bilateral enlargement of the submaxillary glands can occur in HIV/AIDS, cystic fibrosis, Epstein-­Barr virus
infection, malnutrition, COVID-­19, and transiently during acute asthmatic attacks. Chronic vomiting can be accompanied by enlargement
of the parotid glands. Benign salivary gland hypertrophy has been
associated with endocrinopathies: thyroid disease, diabetes, and Cushing syndrome. Infiltrative disease or tumors are uncommon; red flags
include facial nerve palsy, rapid growth, fixed skin, paresthesias, ulceration, or a history of radiation to the head or neck region.

PAROTITIS

Acute parotitis is often caused by blockage, with further inflammation due to bacterial infection. The blockage may be due to a salivary
stone or mucus plug. Stones can be removed by physical manipulation,
surgery, or lithotripsy. Recurrent parotitis is an idiopathic swelling of
the parotid gland that can occur in otherwise healthy children. The
swelling is usually unilateral, but both glands can be involved simultaneously or alternately. There is little pain; the swelling is limited to the
gland and usually lasts 2-­3 weeks. Treatment may include local heat,
massaging the gland, and antibiotics. Suppurative parotitis is usually
caused by Staphylococcus aureus. It is usually unilateral and may be
accompanied by fever. The gland becomes swollen, tender, and painful. Suppurative parotitis responds to antibacterial therapy based on

ERUPTION CYST

Eruption cyst is a smooth painless swelling over the erupting tooth. If
bleeding occurs in the cyst space, it may appear blue or blue-­black. In
most cases, no treatment is indicated, and the cyst resolves with the full
eruption of the tooth.

XEROSTOMIA

Also known as dry mouth, xerostomia may be associated with fever,
dehydration, anticholinergic drugs, chronic graft-­versus-­host disease,
Mikulicz disease (leukemic infiltrates), Sjögren syndrome, or tumoricidal doses of radiation when the salivary glands are within the field.
Long-­term xerostomia is a high-­risk factor for dental caries.

SALIVARY GLAND TUMORS
See Chapter 549.

HISTIOCYTIC DISORDERS
See Chapter 556.

TUMORS OF THE JAW

Ossifying fibroma is a common benign tumor of the jaw. It is often
asymptomatic and is usually discovered on routine radiographic examinations. Treatment is resection due to the possibility of recurrence.
Central giant cell granuloma is another common lesion thought to
be reactive, rather than neoplastic. Although usually asymptomatic,
it can be expansile, with or without resorption of the roots of teeth
and perforation of the cortical plate. Treatment is complete curettage
or surgical excision. Dentigerous cysts are common lesions associated
with the crown of an impacted or unerupted tooth. Although usually
asymptomatic, they can become large and destructive. Treatment is
surgical removal.
The malignant primary tumors of the jaw in children include Burkitt
lymphoma, osteogenic sarcoma, lymphosarcoma, ameloblastoma, and,
more rarely, fibrosarcoma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 364 u Embryology, Anatomy, and Function of the Esophagus

Chapter 363

Diagnostic Radiology in
Dental Assessment
Diagnostic dental radiology in children follows the as low as reasonably
achievable (ALARA) principle. In children, intraoral radiographs such as
bitewings and select periapical radiographs are taken during routine dental visits and repeated every 6 months to 2 years based on the caries risk
assessment. Additional radiographs such as panoramic views, cephalometric radiographs, and dental cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) are
taken when indicated. In general, the cumulative radiation exposure due to
routine dental radiographs is minimal. In addition, precautions such as use
of high-­speed film, collimated beam, protective aprons and thyroid collars,
proper technique, and minimizing number of exposures are all taken to
keep radiation exposure minimal.
Intraoral dental radiographs are highly detailed, direct-­
exposure
films that demonstrate sections of the child’s teeth and supporting bone
structures. The film or image receptor is placed lingual to the teeth, and
the x-­ray beam is directed through the teeth and supporting structures.
The resulting images are used to detect dental caries, loss of alveolar bone
(periodontal disease), abscesses at the roots of the teeth, and trauma to the
teeth and alveolar bone. These radiographs are also used to demonstrate
the developmental status of permanent teeth within the bone.
The panoramic radiograph provides a single tomographic image of the
upper and lower jaw, including all teeth and supporting structures. The
x-­ray tube rotates about the patient’s head with reciprocal movement of the
film or image receptor during the exposure. The panoramic image shows
the teeth, mandibular bodies, rami, and condyles; maxillary sinuses; and
a majority of the facial buttresses. Such images are used to show abnormalities of tooth number, development and eruption pattern, cystic and
neoplastic lesions, bone infections, and fracture, as well as dental caries
and periodontal disease (Fig. 363.1).
Cephalometric radiographs are posteroanterior and lateral skull films
that are taken using a cephalostat (head positioner) and employ techniques that clearly demonstrate the facial skeleton and soft facial tissues.
Similar protocols for positioning children are used throughout the world.
From these images, cranial and facial points and planes can be determined
and compared with standards derived from thousands of images. A child’s
facial growth can be assessed serially when cephalometric radiographs
are taken sequentially. Relationships among the maxilla, mandible, cranial base, and facial skeleton can be determined in a quantitative manner.
Additionally, the alignment of the teeth and the relation of the teeth to the
supporting bone can be serially measured.

EI
pc
1st

Dental CBCT is a variation of traditional CT, used mainly to evaluate
oral and maxillofacial regions and teeth. Dental CBCT generally delivers lower radiation exposure than traditional CT, but higher than conventional dental radiography. There are several indications for CBCT,
such as evaluation of oral-­maxillofacial pathologies, diagnosis of dental
trauma, endodontic treatment, visualization of abnormal teeth, orthodontic assessment, or cleft palate assessment, among others.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Vineet K. Dhar

3rd
2nd

2255

pc
UP

Fig. 363.1 A panoramic radiograph of a 10-­yr-­old child showing ex-

tensive dental caries of the first permanent molars (arrows), as well as
normal structures: erupted first permanent molar, unerupted second
molar, and unerupted third molar. EI, Erupted incisors, UP, unerupted
premolars, pc, erupted primary canines.

Section 3

The Esophagus
Chapter 364

Embryology, Anatomy,
and Function of the
Esophagus
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy
Matta
The esophagus is a hollow muscular tube, separated from the pharynx
above and the stomach below by two tonically closed sphincters. Its
primary function is to convey ingested material from the mouth to the
stomach. Largely lacking digestive glands and enzymes, and exposed
only briefly to nutrients, it has no active role in digestion.

EMBRYOLOGY

The esophagus develops from the postpharyngeal foregut and can be
distinguished from the stomach in the 4-­week-­old embryo. At the
same time, the trachea begins to bud just anterior to the developing
esophagus; the resulting laryngotracheal groove extends and becomes
the lung. Disturbance of this stage can result in congenital anomalies
such as tracheoesophageal fistula (see Chapter 365). The length of the
esophagus is 8-­10 cm at birth and doubles in the first 2-­3 years of life,
reaching approximately 25 cm in the adult. The abdominal portion of
the esophagus is as large as the stomach in an 8-­week-­old fetus but
gradually shortens to a few millimeters at birth, attaining a final length
of approximately 3 cm by a few years of age. This intraabdominal location of both the distal esophagus and the lower esophageal sphincter
(LES) is an important antireflux mechanism because an increase in
intraabdominal pressure is also transmitted to the sphincter, augmenting its defense. Swallowing can be seen in utero as early as 16-­20 weeks
of gestation, helping to circulate the amniotic fluid; polyhydramnios
is a hallmark of lack of normal swallowing or of esophageal or upper
gastrointestinal tract obstruction. Sucking and swallowing are not fully
coordinated before 34 weeks of gestation, a contributing factor for feeding difficulties in premature infants.

ANATOMY

The luminal aspect of the esophagus is covered by thick, protective, nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium, which abruptly changes to
simple columnar epithelium at the stomach’s upper margin at the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). This squamous epithelium is relatively

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 364 u Embryology, Anatomy, and Function of the Esophagus

Chapter 363

Diagnostic Radiology in
Dental Assessment
Diagnostic dental radiology in children follows the as low as reasonably
achievable (ALARA) principle. In children, intraoral radiographs such as
bitewings and select periapical radiographs are taken during routine dental visits and repeated every 6 months to 2 years based on the caries risk
assessment. Additional radiographs such as panoramic views, cephalometric radiographs, and dental cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) are
taken when indicated. In general, the cumulative radiation exposure due to
routine dental radiographs is minimal. In addition, precautions such as use
of high-­speed film, collimated beam, protective aprons and thyroid collars,
proper technique, and minimizing number of exposures are all taken to
keep radiation exposure minimal.
Intraoral dental radiographs are highly detailed, direct-­
exposure
films that demonstrate sections of the child’s teeth and supporting bone
structures. The film or image receptor is placed lingual to the teeth, and
the x-­ray beam is directed through the teeth and supporting structures.
The resulting images are used to detect dental caries, loss of alveolar bone
(periodontal disease), abscesses at the roots of the teeth, and trauma to the
teeth and alveolar bone. These radiographs are also used to demonstrate
the developmental status of permanent teeth within the bone.
The panoramic radiograph provides a single tomographic image of the
upper and lower jaw, including all teeth and supporting structures. The
x-­ray tube rotates about the patient’s head with reciprocal movement of the
film or image receptor during the exposure. The panoramic image shows
the teeth, mandibular bodies, rami, and condyles; maxillary sinuses; and
a majority of the facial buttresses. Such images are used to show abnormalities of tooth number, development and eruption pattern, cystic and
neoplastic lesions, bone infections, and fracture, as well as dental caries
and periodontal disease (Fig. 363.1).
Cephalometric radiographs are posteroanterior and lateral skull films
that are taken using a cephalostat (head positioner) and employ techniques that clearly demonstrate the facial skeleton and soft facial tissues.
Similar protocols for positioning children are used throughout the world.
From these images, cranial and facial points and planes can be determined
and compared with standards derived from thousands of images. A child’s
facial growth can be assessed serially when cephalometric radiographs
are taken sequentially. Relationships among the maxilla, mandible, cranial base, and facial skeleton can be determined in a quantitative manner.
Additionally, the alignment of the teeth and the relation of the teeth to the
supporting bone can be serially measured.

EI
pc
1st

Dental CBCT is a variation of traditional CT, used mainly to evaluate
oral and maxillofacial regions and teeth. Dental CBCT generally delivers lower radiation exposure than traditional CT, but higher than conventional dental radiography. There are several indications for CBCT,
such as evaluation of oral-­maxillofacial pathologies, diagnosis of dental
trauma, endodontic treatment, visualization of abnormal teeth, orthodontic assessment, or cleft palate assessment, among others.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Vineet K. Dhar

3rd
2nd

2255

pc
UP

Fig. 363.1 A panoramic radiograph of a 10-­yr-­old child showing ex-

tensive dental caries of the first permanent molars (arrows), as well as
normal structures: erupted first permanent molar, unerupted second
molar, and unerupted third molar. EI, Erupted incisors, UP, unerupted
premolars, pc, erupted primary canines.

Section 3

The Esophagus
Chapter 364

Embryology, Anatomy,
and Function of the
Esophagus
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy
Matta
The esophagus is a hollow muscular tube, separated from the pharynx
above and the stomach below by two tonically closed sphincters. Its
primary function is to convey ingested material from the mouth to the
stomach. Largely lacking digestive glands and enzymes, and exposed
only briefly to nutrients, it has no active role in digestion.

EMBRYOLOGY

The esophagus develops from the postpharyngeal foregut and can be
distinguished from the stomach in the 4-­week-­old embryo. At the
same time, the trachea begins to bud just anterior to the developing
esophagus; the resulting laryngotracheal groove extends and becomes
the lung. Disturbance of this stage can result in congenital anomalies
such as tracheoesophageal fistula (see Chapter 365). The length of the
esophagus is 8-­10 cm at birth and doubles in the first 2-­3 years of life,
reaching approximately 25 cm in the adult. The abdominal portion of
the esophagus is as large as the stomach in an 8-­week-­old fetus but
gradually shortens to a few millimeters at birth, attaining a final length
of approximately 3 cm by a few years of age. This intraabdominal location of both the distal esophagus and the lower esophageal sphincter
(LES) is an important antireflux mechanism because an increase in
intraabdominal pressure is also transmitted to the sphincter, augmenting its defense. Swallowing can be seen in utero as early as 16-­20 weeks
of gestation, helping to circulate the amniotic fluid; polyhydramnios
is a hallmark of lack of normal swallowing or of esophageal or upper
gastrointestinal tract obstruction. Sucking and swallowing are not fully
coordinated before 34 weeks of gestation, a contributing factor for feeding difficulties in premature infants.

ANATOMY

The luminal aspect of the esophagus is covered by thick, protective, nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium, which abruptly changes to
simple columnar epithelium at the stomach’s upper margin at the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ). This squamous epithelium is relatively

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2256 Part XVI u The Digestive System
resistant to damage by gastric secretions, in contrast to the ciliated
columnar epithelium of the respiratory tract. However, chronic irritation by gastric contents can result in morphometric changes such as
thickening of the basal cell layer and lengthening of papillary ingrowth
into the epithelium, and subsequent metaplasia of the cells lining the
lower esophagus from squamous to columnar. Deeper layers of the
esophageal wall are composed successively of lamina propria, muscularis mucosae, submucosa, and the two layers of muscularis propria
(circular surrounded by longitudinal). The two delimiting sphincters
of the esophagus, the upper esophageal sphincter (UES) at the cricopharyngeus muscle and the LES at the GEJ, constrict the esophageal
lumen at its proximal and distal boundaries. The muscularis propria
of the upper third of the esophagus is predominantly striated, and that
of the lower two-­thirds is smooth muscle. Clinical conditions involving striated muscle (cricopharyngeal dysfunction, cerebral palsy) affect
the upper esophagus, whereas those involving smooth muscle (achalasia, reflux esophagitis) affect the lower esophagus. The muscular LES
and the mucosal “Z-­line” of the GEJ may be discrepant up to several
centimeters.

FUNCTION

The esophagus can be divided into three areas: the UES, the esophageal body, and the LES. At rest, the tonic LES pressure is normally
approximately 20 mm Hg; values <10 mm Hg are usually considered
abnormal, although it seems that competence against retrograde flow
of gastric material is maintained if the LES pressure is >5 mm Hg. The
LES pressure rises during intragastric pressure amplifications, whether
caused by gastric contractions, abdominal wall muscle contractions
(“straining”), or external pressure applied to the abdominal wall. It
also rises in response to cholinergic stimuli, gastrin, gastric alkalization, and certain drugs (bethanechol, metoclopramide, cisapride). The
UES pressure is more variable and often higher than that of the LES;
it decreases almost to zero during deep sleep and it increases markedly during stress and straining. The UES and LES relax briefly to allow
material to pass through during swallowing, belching, reflux, and vomiting. They can contract in response to subthreshold levels of reflux
(esophagoglottal closure reflex).
Swallowing is initiated by elevation of the tongue, propelling the
bolus into the pharynx. The larynx elevates and moves anteriorly, pulling open the relaxing UES, while the opposed aryepiglottic folds close.
The epiglottis drops back to cover the larynx and direct the bolus over
the larynx and into the UES. The soft palate occludes the nasopharynx. The primary peristalsis thus initiated is a contraction originating in the oropharynx that clears the esophagus aborally (Fig. 364.1).
Oropharyngeal swallowing related dysfunction may occur at multiple
levels (Table 364.1). The LES, tonically contracted as a barrier against
gastroesophageal reflux (GER), relaxes as swallowing is initiated, at
nearly the same time as the UES relaxation. The LES relaxation persists
considerably longer, until the peristaltic wave traverses it and closes it.
The normal esophageal peristaltic speed is approximately 3 cm/sec; the
wave takes 4 sec or longer to traverse the 12-­cm esophagus of a young
infant and considerably longer in a larger child. Facial stimulation by a
puff of air can induce swallowing and esophageal peristalsis in healthy
young infants, a reflex termed the Santmyer swallow.
In addition to relaxing to move swallowed material past the GEJ
into the stomach, the LES normally relaxes to vent swallowed air or
to allow retrograde expulsion of material from the stomach. Perhaps
as an extension of these functions, the normal LES also permits physiologic reflux episodes, brief events that occur approximately five times
in the first postprandial hour, particularly in the awake state, but are
otherwise uncommon. Transient LES relaxation, not associated with
swallowing, is the major mechanism underlying pathologic reflux (see
Fig. 364.1).
The close linkage of the anatomy of the upper digestive and respiratory tracts has mandated intricate functional protections of the respiratory tract during retrograde movement of gastric contents as well
as during swallowing. The protective functions include the LES tone,
the bolstering of the LES by the surrounding diaphragmatic crura,
and the backup protection of the UES tone. Secondary peristalsis, akin

Pharynx

mm Hg
40
0
80

UES
0
80
0
80

Esoph
body

0
80
0
80
0
80
0
80

LES

0
80

Stomach
pH

0
7
5
3
0

15

30
45
Time (sec)

60

75

Fig. 364.1 Continuous tracing of esophageal motility showing two

swallows, as indicated by the pharyngeal contraction associated with
relaxation of the upper esophageal sphincter (UES) and followed by
peristalsis in the body of the esophagus. The lower esophageal sphincter (LES) also displays a transient relaxation (arrow) unassociated with
a swallow. There is an episode of gastroesophageal reflux (asterisk)
recorded by a pH probe at the time of the transient LES relaxation.
(Courtesy John Dent, FRACP, PhD and Geoffrey Davidson, MD.)

Table 364.1  Mechanical Events of the Oropharyngeal
Swallow and Evidence of Dysfunction
MECHANICAL EVENT

EVIDENCE OF DYSFUNCTION

Nasopharyngeal closure

Nasopharyngeal regurgitation
Nasal voice

Laryngeal closure

Aspiration during bolus transit

Upper esophageal sphincter
opening

Dysphagia
Post-­swallow residue/aspiration
Diverticulum formation

Tongue loading and bolus
propulsion

Sluggish misdirected bolus

Pharyngeal clearance

Post-­swallow residue in
hypopharynx/aspiration

Modified from Pandolfino JE, Kahrilas PJ. Esophageal neuromuscular function and
motility disorders. In Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s
Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 43.1.

to primary peristalsis but without an oral component, originates in
the upper esophagus, triggered mainly by GER, thereby also clearing refluxed gastric contents from the esophagus. Another protective reflex is the pharyngeal swallow (initiated above the esophagus,
but without lingual participation). There are multiple levels of protection against aspiration, including the rhythmic coordination of
swallowing and breathing and a series of protective reflexes with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 364 u Embryology, Anatomy, and Function of the Esophagus
esophagopharyngeal afferents and efferents that close the UES or larynx. These reflexes include the esophago-­UES contractile reflex, the
pharyngo-­UES contractile reflex, the esophagoglottal closure reflex,
and two pharyngoglottal adduction reflexes. The last two reflexes
have chemoreceptors on the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis and
mechanoreceptors on the aryepiglottic folds as their sites of stimulus.
It is likely that interactions between the esophagus and the respiratory
tract, which cause extraesophageal manifestations of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), will be explained by subtle abnormalities
in these protective reflexes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

364.1 Common Clinical Manifestations and
Diagnostic Aids
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy Matta
Manifestations of esophageal disorders include pain, obstruction or
difficulty swallowing, abnormal retrograde movement of gastric contents (reflux, regurgitation, or vomiting), or bleeding; esophageal disease can also cause respiratory symptoms. Pain in the chest unrelated
to swallowing (heartburn) can be a sign of esophagitis, but similar
pain might also represent cardiac, pulmonary, or musculoskeletal disease or visceral hyperalgesia. Pain during swallowing (odynophagia)
localizes the disease more discretely to the pharynx and esophagus and
often represents inflammatory mucosal disease. Complete esophageal
obstruction can be produced acutely by esophageal foreign bodies,
including food impactions; can be congenital, as in esophageal atresia;
or can evolve over time as a peptic stricture occludes the esophagus.
Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) can be produced by incompletely
occlusive esophageal obstruction (by extrinsic compression, intrinsic
narrowing, or foreign bodies) but can also result from dysmotility of
the esophagus (whether primary/idiopathic or secondary to systemic
disease). Inflammatory lesions of the esophagus without obstruction
or dysmotility are a third cause of dysphagia; eosinophilic esophagitis
(EoE) is also relatively common.
The most common esophageal disorder in children is GERD (see
Chapter 369), which is from retrograde return of gastric contents into
the esophagus. Esophagitis can be caused by GERD, by eosinophilic
disease, by infection, or by caustic substances. Esophageal bleeding
can result from severe esophagitis that produces erosions or ulcerations and can manifest as anemia or hemoccult-­positive stools. More
acute or severe bleeding can be from ruptured esophageal varices. The
resulting hematemesis must be differentiated from more distal bleeding (gastric ulcer) and from more proximal bleeding (a nosebleed or
hemoptysis). Respiratory symptoms of esophageal disease can result
from luminal contents incorrectly being directed into the respiratory
tract or to reflexive respiratory responses to esophageal stimuli.

DIAGNOSTIC AIDS

The esophagus can be evaluated by radiography, endoscopy, histology, scintigraphy, manometry, pH-­metry (linked as indicated with
other polysomnography), and multichannel intraluminal impedance.
Contrast (usually barium) radiographic study of the esophagus usually incorporates fluoroscopic imaging over time so that motility and
anatomy can be assessed. Although most often requested to evaluate
for GERD, it is neither sensitive nor specific for this purpose; it can
detect complications of GERD (stricture) or conditions mimicking
GERD (pyloric stenosis or malrotation with intermittent volvulus), or
concurrent hiatal hernia complicating GERD.

2257

Barium fluoroscopy is optimal for evaluating for structural anomalies, such as duplications; strictures; hiatal hernia; congenital esophageal stenosis or external esophageal compression by an aberrant blood
vessel; or for causes of dysmotility, such as achalasia. Modifications of
the routine barium fluoroscopic study are used in special situations.
When an H-­type tracheoesophageal fistula is suspected, the test is most
sensitive if the radiologist, with the patient prone, distends the esophagus with barium via a nasogastric tube. The videofluoroscopic evaluation of swallowing performed with varying consistencies of barium
(modified barium swallow, oropharyngeal videoesophagram, or cookie
swallow) optimally evaluates children with dysphagia by demonstrating incoordination of the pharyngeal and esophageal phases of swallowing and any associated aspiration.
In some centers, fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing
uses nasopharyngeal endoscopy to visualize the pharynx and larynx
during swallowing of dye-­enhanced foods when dysphagia, laryngeal penetration, or aspiration is suspected. This is often combined
with sensory testing of the laryngeal adductor reflex in response to a
calibrated puff of air through the endoscope to the arytenoids, generating the composite fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing sensory testing that examines the mechanisms of any aspiration
that is present. Endoscopy allows direct visualization of esophageal
mucosa and helps therapeutically in the removal of foreign bodies
and treatment of esophageal varices. Endoscopy also allows biopsy
samples to be taken, thus improving the diagnosis of endoscopy-­
negative GERD, differentiating GERD from EoE, and identifying
viral or fungal causes of esophagitis.
Radionuclide scintigraphy scans are helpful in evaluating the efficiency of peristalsis and demonstrating reflux episodes. They can be
specific, although not very sensitive, for aspiration and can quantify gastric emptying, thus hinting at a cause for GERD. The related
radionuclide salivagram can demonstrate aspiration of even minute
amounts of saliva.
Esophageal manometry evaluates for dysmotility from the pharynx to the stomach; by synchronized quantitative pressure measurements along the esophagus, it detects and characterizes dysfunctions
sometimes missed radiographically. Manometry is often challenging
in young infants, and sphincters are optimally evaluated with special
Dent sleeves, rather than the simple ports available for the esophageal body. High-­resolution esophageal manometry (HRM) along with
video fluoroscopic swallowing study (VFSS) to evaluate UES relaxation
and pharyngeal and peristaltic pressures is now available at a few centers of expertise.
Extended pH monitoring of the distal esophagus is a sensitive test
for acidic GER episodes that can quantify duration and degree of
acidity, but not volume, of the reflux episodes. It is linked with polysomnography (a pneumogram) when GER is suspected to cause
apnea or similar symptoms. Multichannel intraluminal impedance
is a method for pH-­independent detection of bolus movements in
the esophagus; with a pH probe incorporated, it can distinguish
between acid and nonacid liquid and gaseous reflux, the proximal
extent of reflux, and several aspects of esophageal function, such
as direction of bolus flow, duration of bolus presence, and bolus
clearance.
The functional luminal imaging probe (FLIP) is another testing
modality available in few pediatric motility centers; it is used as
a diagnostic tool to guide and measure therapeutic success. FLIP
is indicated in patients with EoE to assess esophageal compliance
and esophagogastric junction (EGJ) distensibility in patients with
achalasia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2258 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 365

Congenital Anomalies
365.1 Esophageal Atresia and
Tracheoesophageal Fistula
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy Matta
Esophageal atresia (EA) is the most common congenital anomaly of
the esophagus, with a prevalence of 1.7 per 10,000 live births. Of these,
>90% have an associated tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). In the most
common form of EA, the upper esophagus ends in a blind pouch and the
TEF is connected to the distal esophagus (type C). Figure 365.1 shows
the types of EA and TEF and their relative frequencies. The exact cause
is still unknown; associated features include advanced maternal age,
European ethnicity, maternal obesity, low socioeconomic status, and
tobacco smoking. This defect has survival rates of >90%, due largely to
improved neonatal intensive care, earlier recognition, and appropriate
intervention. Infants weighing <1,500 g at birth and those with severe
associated cardiac anomalies have the highest risk for mortality. Fifty
percent of infants are nonsyndromic without other anomalies; the rest
have syndromes with associated anomalies, most often associated with
the vertebral, anorectal, (cardiac), tracheal, esophageal, renal, radial
(limb) (VACTERL) syndrome. Cardiac and vertebral anomalies are
seen in 32% and 24%, respectively. VACTERL is a sporadic disorder and
is generally associated with normal intelligence. Genetic factors have a
role in the pathogenesis of TEF in patients with other non-­VACTERL
syndromes as suggested by discrete pathogenic variants in syndromic
cases: Feingold syndrome (N-­MYC), CHARGE syndrome (coloboma
of the eye; central nervous system anomalies; heart defects; atresia of
the choanae; retardation of growth and/or development; genital and/
or urinary defects [hypogonadism]; ear anomalies and/or deafness)
(CHD7), and anophthalmia-­esophageal-­genital syndrome (SOX2).

(“H-­type” fistula) might come to medical attention later in life with
chronic respiratory problems, including refractory bronchospasm and
recurrent aspiration pneumonias.

DIAGNOSIS

In the setting of polyhydramnios, early-­onset respiratory distress
and the inability to pass a nasogastric or orogastric tube in the newborn suggests EA. Imaging findings of absence of the fetal stomach
bubble and maternal polyhydramnios might alert the physician to
EA before birth. Plain radiography in the evaluation of respiratory
distress might reveal a coiled feeding tube in the esophageal pouch
and/or an air-­distended stomach, indicating the presence of a coexisting TEF (Fig. 365.2). Conversely, pure EA can manifest as an airless scaphoid abdomen. In isolated TEF (H type), an esophagogram
with contrast medium injected under pressure can demonstrate
the defect (Fig. 365.3). Alternatively, the orifice may be detected
at bronchoscopy or when methylene blue dye injected into the
endotracheal tube during endoscopy is observed in the esophagus
during forced inspiration. The differential diagnosis of congenital
esophageal lesions is noted in Table 365.1.

MANAGEMENT

Initially, maintaining a patent airway, preoperative proximal pouch
decompression to prevent aspiration of oral secretions, and use of
antibiotics to prevent consequent pneumonia are paramount. Prone
positioning minimizes movement of gastric secretions into a distal fistula, and esophageal suctioning minimizes aspiration from a

PRESENTATION

The neonate with EA typically has frothing and bubbling at the mouth
and nose after birth as well as episodes of coughing, cyanosis, and
respiratory distress. Polyhydramnios is common. Feeding exacerbates
these symptoms, causes regurgitation, and can precipitate aspiration.
Aspiration of gastric contents via a distal fistula causes more damaging
pneumonitis than aspiration of pharyngeal secretions from the blind
upper pouch. The infant with an isolated TEF in the absence of EA

S

Fig. 365.1 Gross type classification and esophageal atresia (EA) and

trachea-­esophageal fistulas (TEF). Left to right: normal anatomy, gross
type B (EA with proximal TEF; 2%), gross type C (EA with distal TEF;
86%), gross type D (EA with proximal and distal TEF; 1%), gross type A
(pure EA, 7%), and gross type E (TEF without EA; 4%). (From Harrington
AW, Riebold J, Hernandez K, et al. Feeding and growth outcomes in infants with type C esophageal atresia who undergo early primary repair.
J Pediatr. 2022;241:77–82, Fig. 1.)

Fig. 365.2 Tracheoesophageal fistula. Lateral radiograph demonstrat-

ing a nasogastric tube coiled (arrows) in the proximal segment of an
atretic esophagus. The distal fistula is suggested by gaseous dilation of
the stomach (S) and small intestine. The arrowhead depicts vertebral fusion, whereas a heart murmur and cardiomegaly suggest the presence
of a ventricular septal defect. This patient demonstrated elements of the
vertebral, anorectal, tracheal, esophageal, renal, and radial anomalad.
(From Balfe D, Ling D, Siegel M. The esophagus. In Putman CE, Ravin CE,
eds. Textbook of Diagnostic Imaging. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1988.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 365 u Congenital Anomalies

2259

blind pouch. Endotracheal intubation with mechanical ventilation
is to be avoided if possible because it can worsen distention of the
stomach. Surgical ligation of the TEF and primary end-­to-­end anastomosis of the esophagus via right-­sided thoracotomy constitute the
standard surgical approach. In the premature or otherwise complicated infant, a primary closure may be delayed by temporizing with
fistula ligation and gastrostomy tube placement. If the gap between
the atretic ends of the esophagus is >3-­4 cm (>3 vertebral bodies), primary repair cannot be done; options include using gastric,
jejunal, or colonic segments interposed as a neoesophagus. Careful search must be undertaken for the common associated cardiac,
renal, and other anomalies. Thoracoscopic surgical repair is feasible
and associated with favorable long-­term outcomes.

OUTCOME

Fig. 365.3 H-­type fistula (arrow) demonstrated in an infant after bar-

ium swallow on frontal-­oblique chest x-­ray. The tracheal aspect of the
fistula is characteristically superior to the esophageal aspect. Barium is
seen to outline the tracheobronchial tree. (From Wyllie R, Hyams JS,
eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 3rd ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2006: p. 299.)

Most children with nonsyndromic EA and TEF grow up to lead
normal lives, but complications are often challenging, particularly
during the first 5 years of life. Complications of surgery include
anastomotic leak, refistulization, and anastomotic stricture formation, necessitating endoscopic dilations. Some recurrent and refractory strictures may need esophageal stent placement or surgical
stricture resection. Gastroesophageal reflux disease, resulting from
intrinsic abnormalities of esophageal function, often combined
with delayed gastric emptying, contributes to management challenges in many cases. Gastroesophageal reflux disease contributes
significantly to the respiratory disease (reactive airway disease)
that often complicates EA and TEF and also worsens the frequent
anastomotic strictures after repair of EA.
Many patients have an associated tracheomalacia that improves as
the child grows. Hence, it is important to target on prevention of long-­
term complications using appropriate surveillance techniques such as
endoscopy or pH-­Impedance.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 365.1  Clinical Aspects of Esophageal Developmental Anomalies
AGE AT
PRESENTATION

ANOMALY

PREDOMINANT SYMPTOMS

DIAGNOSIS

TREATMENT

Isolated atresia

Newborns

Regurgitation of feedings
Aspiration

Esophagogram*
Plain film: gasless abdomen

Surgery

Atresia + distal TEF

Newborns

Regurgitation of feedings
Aspiration

Esophagogram*
Plain film: gas-­filled abdomen

Surgery

H-­type TEF

Infants to adults

Recurrent pneumonia
Bronchiectasis

Esophagogram*
Bronchoscopy†

Surgery

Esophageal stenosis

Infants to adults

Dysphagia
Food impaction

Esophagogram*
Endoscopy†

Dilation‡
Surgery§

Duplication cyst

Infants to adults

Dyspnea, stridor, cough (infants)
Dysphagia, chest pain (adults)

EUS*
MRI/CT†

Surgery

Vascular anomaly

Infants to adults

Dyspnea, stridor, cough (infants)
Dysphagia (adults)

Esophagogram*
Angiography†
MRI/CT/EUS

Dietary modification‡
Surgery§

Esophageal ring

Children to adults

Dysphagia

Esophagogram*
Endoscopy†

Dilation‡
Endoscopic incision§

Esophageal web

Children to adults

Dysphagia

Esophagogram*
Endoscopy†

Bougienage

*Diagnostic test of choice.
†Confirmatory test.
‡Primary therapeutic approach.
§Secondary therapeutic approach.

TEF, Tracheoesophageal fistula; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound.
From Madanick R, Orlando RC. Anatomy, histology, embryology, and developmental anomalies of the esophagus. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and
Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 42.2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2260 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Fig. 365.5 An 18-­month-­old male with congenital esophageal steno-

sis. Esophagoscopy showed a circumferential, slightly noncentral narrowing at the distal esophagus, 2 cm proximal to the esophagogastric
junction. (From Serrao E, Santos, A, Gaivao A. Congenital esophageal
stenosis: a rare case of dysphagia. J Radiol Case Rep. 2010;4:8–14.
Fig. 3.)

A

B

Fig. 365.4 An 18-­month-­old male with congenital esophageal steno-

sis. Esophagogram using barium as contrast media shows an anteroposterior (AP) projection (A) and an unsuccessful attempt to obtain a lateral
projection (B) due to poor collaboration of the patient. An asymmetric
short narrowing of the distal esophagus is observed as well as proximal
dilatation of the esophagus. Gastroesophageal reflux was not identified.
(From Serrao E, Santos, A, Gaivao A. Congenital esophageal stenosis: a
rare case of dysphagia. J Radiol Case Rep. 2010;4:8–14. Fig. 2.)

365.2 Laryngotracheoesophageal Clefts
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy Matta
Laryngotracheoesophageal clefts are uncommon anomalies that result
when the septum between the esophagus and trachea fails to develop
fully, leading to a common channel defect between the pharyngoesophagus and laryngotracheal lumen, thus making the laryngeal closure incompetent during swallowing or reflux. Other developmental
anomalies, such as EA and TEF, are seen in 20% of patients with clefts.
The severity of presenting symptoms depends on the type of cleft; they
are commonly classified as one of four types (I-­IV) according to the
inferior extent of the cleft. Early in life, the infant presents with stridor,
choking, cyanosis, aspiration of feedings, and recurrent chest infections. The diagnosis is difficult and usually requires direct endoscopic
visualization of the larynx and esophagus. When contrast radiography

is used, material is often seen in the esophagus and trachea. Treatment
is surgical repair, which can be complex if the defects are long.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

365.3 Congenital Esophageal Stenosis
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy Matta
Congenital esophageal stenosis (CES) is a rare anomaly of the esophagus with clinical significance. Though the original incidence is not
known, it is estimated to affect 1:25,000 to 50,000 live births. The defect
results from incomplete separation of respiratory tract from the primitive foregut at the 25th day of fetal life. CES is differentiated by histology
into three types: esophageal membrane/web, total bronchial remnants
(TBR), and fibromuscular remnants (FMR). Symptoms vary depending on the location and severity of the defect. Higher lesions present
with respiratory symptoms and lower lesions present with dysphagia
and vomiting. Esophagogram (Fig. 365.4), MRI, CT, and endoscopic
ultrasound are used for diagnosis. Endoscopy (Fig. 365.5) is done to
evaluate mucosal abnormalities like strictures, foreign bodies, and
esophagitis. Treatment option (surgical correction, bougie dilation) is
chosen based on the location, severity, and type of stenosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 367 u Dysmotility 2261

Chapter 366

Obstructing Disorders of
the Esophagus
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy
Matta

Obstructing lesions classically produce dysphagia to solids earlier and
more noticeably than to liquids and can manifest when the infant liquid diet begins to incorporate solids; this is in contrast to dysphagia
from dysmotility, in which swallowing of liquids is affected as early
as, or earlier than, solids. In most instances of dysphagia, evaluation
begins with fluoroscopy, which may include videofluoroscopic evaluation of swallowing, particularly if aspiration is a primary symptom.
Secondary studies are often endoscopic if intrinsic obstruction is suspected or manometric if dysmotility is suspected; other imaging studies
may be used in particular cases. Congenital lesions can require surgery, whereas webs and peptic strictures might respond adequately to
endoscopic (or bougie) dilation. Peptic strictures, once dilated, should
prompt consideration of fundoplication for ongoing prophylaxis.

EXTRINSIC

Esophageal duplication cysts are the most commonly encountered
foregut duplications (see Table 365.1). These cysts are lined by intestinal epithelium, have a well-­developed smooth muscle wall, and are
attached to the normal gastrointestinal tract. Duplication cysts are
described as either communicating or noncommunicating with the
lumen of the alimentary tract. Most of these affect the distal half of the
esophagus on the right side. The most common presentation is respiratory distress caused by compression of the adjacent airways. Dysphagia is a common symptom in older children. Upper gastrointestinal
bleeding can occur as a result of acid-­secreting gastric mucosa in the
duplication wall. Neuroenteric cysts might contain glial elements and
are associated with vertebral anomalies. Diagnosis is made using
modalities, such as barium swallow, chest CT, and MRI, or endosonography. Treatment is surgical; laparoscopic approach to excision is also
possible.
Enlarged mediastinal or subcarinal lymph nodes, caused by infection (tuberculosis, histoplasmosis) or neoplasm (lymphoma), are the
most common external masses that compress the esophagus and produce obstructive symptoms. Vascular anomalies can also compress
the esophagus; dysphagia lusoria is a term denoting the dysphagia produced by a developmental vascular anomaly, which is often an aberrant right subclavian artery or right-­sided or double aortic arch (see
Chapter 481.1).

INTRINSIC

Intrinsic narrowing of the esophageal lumen can be congenital or
acquired. The etiology is suggested by the location, the character of
the lesion, and the clinical situation. The lower esophagus is the most
common location for peptic strictures, which are generally somewhat ragged and several centimeters long. Thin membranous rings,
including the Schatzki ring at the squamocolumnar junction, can also
occlude this area. In the midesophagus, congenital narrowing may be
associated with the esophageal atresia–tracheoesophageal fistula complex, in which some of the lesions might incorporate cartilage and
might be impossible to dilate safely; alternatively, reflux esophagitis can
induce a ragged and extensive narrowing that appears more proximal
than the usual peptic stricture, often because of an associated hiatal
hernia. Congenital webs or rings can narrow the upper esophagus. The
upper esophagus can also be narrowed by an inflammatory stricture
occurring after a caustic ingestion or due to epidermolysis bullosa.

Cricopharyngeal achalasia can appear radiographically as a cricopharyngeal bar posteriorly in the upper esophagus. Eosinophilic esophagitis is one of the most common causes for esophageal obstructive
symptoms (see Chapter 370). Although the pathogenesis of obstructive
eosinophilic esophagitis is not yet completely explained and seems to
vary among individual patients, endoscopy or radiology demonstrates
stricture formation in some children with eosinophilic esophagitis, and
in others a noncompliant esophagus is evident, with thickened wall layers demonstrable by ultrasonography.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 367

Dysmotility
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy
Matta
UPPER ESOPHAGEAL AND UPPER ESOPHAGEAL
SPHINCTER DYSMOTILITY (STRIATED MUSCLE)

Cricopharyngeal achalasia signifies a failure of complete relaxation of
the upper esophageal sphincter (UES), whereas cricopharyngeal incoordination implies full relaxation of the UES but incoordination of the
relaxation with the pharyngeal contraction. These entities are usually
detected on videofluoroscopic evaluation of swallowing (sometimes
accompanied by visible cricopharyngeal prominence, termed a bar),
but often the most precise definition of the dysfunction is obtained
with manometry. A self-­limited form of cricopharyngeal incoordination occurs in infancy and remits spontaneously in the first year of
life if nutrition is maintained despite the dysphagia. In children, treatment options for non–self-­limited cricopharyngeal achalasia consist of
dilation, Botox injection, and transcervical myotomy. It is important
to evaluate such children thoroughly, including cranial MRI to detect
Arnold-­Chiari malformations, which can manifest in this way but are
best treated by cranial decompression rather than esophageal surgery.
Cricopharyngeal spasm may be severe enough to produce posterior
pharyngeal (Zenker) diverticulum above the obstructive sphincter;
this entity occurs rarely in children.
Systemic causes of swallowing dysfunction that can affect the oropharynx, UES, and upper esophagus include cerebral palsy, Arnold-­
Chiari malformations, syringomyelia, bulbar palsy or cranial nerve
defects (Möbius syndrome, transient infantile paralysis of the superior
laryngeal nerve), transient pharyngeal muscle dysfunction, spinal muscular atrophy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, infections (botulism, tetanus, poliomyelitis, diphtheria), inflammatory and autoimmune
diseases (dermatomyositis, myasthenia gravis, polyneuritis, scleroderma), and familial dysautonomia. All of these can produce dysphagia. Medications (nitrazepam, benzodiazepines) and tracheostomy can
adversely affect the function of the UES and thereby produce dysphagia.

LOWER ESOPHAGEAL AND LOWER ESOPHAGEAL
SPHINCTER DYSFUNCTION (SMOOTH MUSCLE)

Causes of dysphagia resulting from more distal primary esophageal
dysmotility include achalasia, diffuse esophageal spasm, nutcracker
esophagus, and hypertensive lower esophageal sphincter (LES); all but
achalasia are rare in children. Secondary causes include Hirschsprung
disease, pseudoobstruction syndromes, inflammatory myopathies,
scleroderma, and diabetes.
Achalasia is a primary esophageal motor disorder of unknown etiology characterized by loss of LES relaxation and loss of esophageal
peristalsis, both contributing to a functional obstruction of the distal esophagus. Degenerative, autoimmune (antibodies to Auerbach

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2262 Part XVI u The Digestive System
plexus), and infectious (Chagas disease caused by Trypanosoma cruzi)
factors are possible causes in select cases. In rare cases, achalasia is
familial or part of the achalasia, alacrima, and adrenal insufficiency,
known as triple A syndrome or Allgrove syndrome. Pseudoachalasia
refers to achalasia caused by various forms of cancer via obstruction
of the gastroesophageal junction, infiltration of the submucosa and
muscularis of the LES, or as part of the paraneoplastic syndrome with
formation of anti-­Hu antibodies. Pathologically, in achalasia, inflammation surrounds ganglion cells, which are decreased in number.
There is selective loss of postganglionic inhibitory neurons that normally lead to sphincter relaxation, leaving postganglionic cholinergic
neurons unopposed. This imbalance produces high basal LES pressures
and insufficient LES relaxation. The loss of esophageal peristalsis can
be a secondary phenomenon.
Achalasia manifests with regurgitation and dysphagia for solids and
liquids and may be accompanied by undernutrition or chronic cough;
retained esophageal food can produce esophagitis. The presentations of
chronic regurgitation/vomiting with weight loss, and chronic cough have
led to misdiagnoses of anorexia nervosa and asthma, respectively. The
mean age in children is 8.8 years, with a mean duration of symptoms
before diagnosis of 23 months; it is uncommon before school age. Chest
radiograph shows an air-­fluid level in a dilated esophagus. Barium fluoroscopy reveals a smooth tapering of the lower esophagus leading to
the closed LES, resembling a bird’s beak (Fig. 367.1). Loss of primary
peristalsis in the distal esophagus with retained food and poor emptying are often present. Manometry is the most sensitive diagnostic test
and helps differentiate the three types of achalasia; it reveals the defining features of aperistalsis in the distal esophageal body and incomplete
or absent LES relaxation, often accompanied by high-­pressure LES and
low-­amplitude esophageal body contractions (Fig. 367.2).

The goals of achalasia therapy are relief of symptoms, improvement
of esophageal emptying, and prevention of megaesophagus. The two
most effective treatment options are sequential repeated pneumatic
dilation and laparoscopic or surgical (Heller) myotomy. Pneumatic
dilation is the initial treatment of choice and does not preclude
a future myotomy. Surgeons often supplement a myotomy with an
antireflux procedure (fundoplication) to prevent the gastroesophageal reflux disease that otherwise often ensues when the sphincter
is rendered less competent. Laparoscopic myotomy is a particularly
effective procedure in adolescent and young adult males. Peroral
endoscopic myotomy (POEM) is a feasible, safe, and effective alternative to the laparoscopic method. Calcium channel blockers (nifedipine) and phosphodiesterase inhibitors offer temporary relief of
dysphagia. Endoscopic injection of the LES with botulinum toxin
counterbalances the selective loss of inhibitory neurotransmitters by
inhibiting the release of acetylcholine from nerve terminals and may
be an effective initial therapy before a definitive procedure. Botulinum toxin is effective in 50–65% of patients and is expensive; half the
patients might require a repeat injection within 1 year. Most eventually require dilation or surgery.
Diffuse esophageal spasm causes chest pain and dysphagia and
affects adolescents and adults. It is diagnosed manometrically and can
be treated with nitrates or calcium-­channel-­blocking agents.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (see Chapter 369) constitutes the
most common cause of nonspecific abnormalities of esophageal motor
function, probably through the effect of the esophageal inflammation
on the musculature.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 367.1 Barium esophagogram of a patient with achalasia demonstrating dilated esophagus and narrowing at the lower esophageal sphincter.
Note retained secretions layered on top of barium in the esophagus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 368 u Hiatal Hernia
180

Fig. 367.2 Based on the residual wave type on

high-­
resolution esophageal manometry (HRM), three
subtypes of achalasia can be determined. A, No distal pressurization is observed in type I (AI), whereas
panesophageal pressurizations and spastic contractions are observed in type II (AII) and type III (AIII), respectively. B, A similar classification can be made when
conventional manometry is used. Note that pressure
recordings in type II achalasia are similar in every line
tracing, compatible with panesophageal pressurization.
LES, Lower esophageal sphincter. (From Rohof WO, Salvador R, Annese V. Outcomes of treatment for achalasia
depend on manometric subtype. Gastroenterology.
2013;144:718–725. Fig. 1.)

I

II

2263

III

0
mm Hg
0

A

5

10
Time (s)

15

0

5

10
Time (s)

15

Pharynx I

II

III

50
0

50
0

50
0

LES
gastric

B

0

Chapter 368

Hiatal Hernia
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy
Matta
Herniation of the stomach through the esophageal hiatus can occur
as a common sliding hernia (type 1), in which the gastroesophageal
junction slides into the thorax, or it can be paraesophageal (type 2),
in which a portion of the stomach (usually the fundus) is insinuated next to the esophagus inside the gastroesophageal junction in
the hiatus (Figs. 368.1 and 368.2). A combination of sliding and

20

40
Time (s)

60

0

20
40
Time (s)

60

0

5

10
Time (s)

0

20

40
Time (s)

15

60

paraesophageal types (type 3) is present in some patients. Sliding
hernias are often associated with gastroesophageal reflux disease
(see Chapter 369), especially in developmentally delayed children.
The relationship to hiatal hernias in adults is unclear. Diagnosis is
usually made by an upper gastrointestinal series and upper endoscopy. Medical treatment is not directed at the hernia but at the
gastroesophageal reflux, unless failure of medical therapy prompts
correction of the hernia at the time of fundoplication.
A paraesophageal hernia can be an isolated congenital anomaly
or associated with gastric volvulus, or it may be encountered after
fundoplication for gastroesophageal reflux, especially if the edges of
a dilated esophageal diaphragmatic hiatus have not been approximated. Fullness after eating and upper abdominal pain are the usual
symptoms. Infarction of the herniated stomach is rare.

A

B

Fig. 368.2 A, An upper gastrointestinal series shows a large hiatal

A

B

Fig. 368.1 Types of esophageal hiatal hernia. A, Sliding hiatal hernia,

hernia that extends above the diaphragm and impedes the exit of contrast from the esophagus into the stomach. Contrast is also noted to
reflux to the upper esophagus. B, A retroflexed view of the hernia from
the stomach during an upper endoscopy.

the most common type. B, Paraesophageal hiatal hernia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2264 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 369

Gastroesophageal Reflux
Disease
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy
Matta
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is the most common esophageal disorder in children of all ages. Gastroesophageal reflux (GER)
signifies the retrograde movement of gastric contents across the lower
esophageal sphincter (LES) into the esophagus, which occurs physiologically every day in all infants, older children, and adults. Physiologic
GER is exemplified by the effortless regurgitation of normal infants and
runs an uncomplicated course. Natural history studies observe that it
is uncommon for physiologic GER to have onset before 1 week and
to persist beyond 6 months of age, and usually peaks between 3 and
4 months. The phenomenon becomes pathologic GERD in infants
and children who manifest or report bothersome symptoms because
of frequent or persistent GER, producing esophagitis-­related symptoms, or extraesophageal presentations, such as respiratory (cough,
wheezing, hoarse voice) symptoms, nutritional effects, or growth failure. However, the clinical differentiation between GER and GERD is
not straightforward in nonverbal infants who may present with excess
crying, fussiness, and intermittent feeding and sleep problems while
thriving well, due to non-­GERD causes or even to variations of normal
infant behavior. Pediatricians may try multiple therapeutic options as
they try to diagnose and treat these behaviors. Concerned parents and
caregivers may also influence the management through requests for
interventions they may have heard about through the internet, or from
other parents. As a consequence, we are seeing widespread prescriptions of histamine 2 receptor antagonists (H2RAs) and proton pump
inhibitors (PPIs) to treat neonates and infants with physiologic GER.
It is profoundly important for pediatricians and pediatric gastroenterologists to instead address this challenge and curb the trend for over
investigation and over treatment through more effective educational
campaigns, reassurance of parents, and emphasizing the benign nature
of the diagnosis that is best handled with a conservative approach.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Factors determining the esophageal manifestations of reflux include the
duration of esophageal exposure (a product of the frequency and duration of reflux episodes), the causticity of the refluxate, and the susceptibility of the esophagus to damage. The LES, defined as a high-­pressure zone
by manometry, is supported by the crura of the diaphragm at the gastroesophageal junction and, together with valvelike functions of the esophagogastric junction anatomy, form the antireflux barrier. In the context of
even the normal intraabdominal pressure augmentations that occur during daily life, the frequency of reflux episodes is increased by insufficient
LES tone, by abnormal frequency of LES relaxations, and by hiatal herniation that prevents the LES pressure from being proportionately augmented
by the crura during abdominal straining. Normal intraabdominal pressure
augmentations may be further exacerbated by straining or respiratory
efforts. The duration of reflux episodes is increased by lack of swallowing
(e.g., during sleep) and by defective esophageal peristalsis. Vicious cycles
ensue because chronic esophagitis produces esophageal peristaltic dysfunction (low-­amplitude waves, propagation disturbances), decreased LES
tone, and inflammatory esophageal shortening that induces hiatal herniation, all worsening reflux.
Transient LES relaxation (TLESR) is the primary mechanism allowing
reflux to occur and is defined as simultaneous relaxation of both LES and
the surrounding crura. TLESRs occur independent of swallowing, reduce
LES pressure to 0-­2 mm Hg (above gastric), and last 10-­60 seconds; they
appear by 26 weeks of gestation. A vagovagal reflex, composed of afferent
mechanoreceptors in the proximal stomach, a brainstem pattern generator,

and efferents in the LES, regulates TLESRs. Gastric distention (postprandially, or from abnormal gastric emptying or air swallowing) is the main
stimulus for TLESRs. Whether GERD is caused by a higher frequency of
TLESRs or by a greater incidence of reflux during TLESRs is debated; each
is likely in different persons. Straining during a TLESR makes reflux more
likely, as do positions that place the gastroesophageal junction below the
air-­fluid interface in the stomach. Other factors influencing gastric pressure–volume dynamics, such as increased movement, straining, obesity,
large-­volume or hyperosmolar meals, gastroparesis, a large sliding hiatal
hernia, and increased respiratory effort (coughing, wheezing), can have
the same effect.

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND NATURAL HISTORY

Infant reflux becomes evident in the first few months of life, peaks at
4 months, and resolves in up to 88% by 12 months and in nearly all by
24 months. Happy spitters are infants who have recurrent regurgitation
without exhibiting discomfort or refusal to eat and failure to gain weight.
Symptoms of GERD in older children tend to be chronic, waxing and
waning, but completely resolving in no more than half, which resembles
adult patterns (Table 369.1). The histologic findings of esophagitis persist
in infants who have naturally resolving symptoms of reflux. GERD likely
has genetic predispositions: family clustering of GERD symptoms, endoscopic esophagitis, hiatal hernia, Barrett esophagus, and adenocarcinoma
have been identified. As a continuously variable and common disorder,
complex inheritance involving multiple genes and environmental factors
is likely. Genetic linkage is indicated by the strong evidence of GERD in
studies with monozygotic twins. A pediatric autosomal dominant form
with otolaryngologic and respiratory manifestations has been located to
chromosome 13q14, and the locus is termed GERD1.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most of the common clinical manifestations of esophageal disease can signify the presence of GERD and are generally thought to be mediated by the
pathogenesis involving acid GER (Table 369.2). Although less noxious for
the esophageal mucosa, non–acid-­reflux events are recognized to play an
important role in extraesophageal disease manifestations. Infantile reflux
manifests more often with regurgitation (especially postprandially), signs
of esophagitis (irritability, arching, choking, gagging, feeding aversion), and
resulting failure to thrive; symptoms resolve spontaneously in the majority
of infants by 12-­24 months. Older children can have regurgitation during
the preschool years; this complaint diminishes somewhat as children age,
and complaints of abdominal and chest pain supervene in later childhood
and adolescence. Occasional children present with food refusal or neck
contortions (arching, turning of head) that is termed Sandifer syndrome.
The respiratory presentations are also age dependent: GERD in infants
may manifest as obstructive apnea or as stridor or lower airway disease
in which reflux complicates primary airway disease such as laryngomalacia or bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Otitis media, sinusitis, lymphoid
hyperplasia, hoarseness, vocal cord nodules, and laryngeal edema have all
been associated with GERD. Airway manifestations in older children are
more commonly related to asthma or to otolaryngologic disease such as
laryngitis or sinusitis. Despite the high prevalence of GERD symptoms in
asthmatic children, data showing direction of causality are conflicting.
Neurologically challenged children are at an increased risk for
GERD. It is not well established if the greater risk is conferred due to
inadequate defensive mechanisms and/or inability to express symptoms. A low clinical threshold is important in the early identification
and prompt treatment of GERD symptoms in these individuals.

DIAGNOSIS

For most of the typical GERD presentations, particularly in older children, a thorough history and physical examination suffice initially to
reach the diagnosis. This initial evaluation aims to identify the pertinent positives in support of GERD and its complications and the negatives that make other diagnoses unlikely. The history may be facilitated
and standardized by questionnaires (e.g., the Infant Gastroesophageal
Reflux Questionnaire [I-­GERQ], and its derivative, the I-­GERQ-­R),
which also permit quantitative scores to be evaluated for their diagnostic discrimination and for evaluative assessment of improvement
or worsening of symptoms. The clinician should be alerted to the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 369 u Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease

2265

Table 369.1  Symptoms According to Age
MANIFESTATIONS

INFANTS

CHILDREN

ADOLESCENTS AND ADULTS

Impaired quality of life

+++

+++

+++

Regurgitation

++++

+

+

Excessive crying/irritability

+++

+

−

Vomiting

++

++

+

Food refusal/feeding disturbances/anorexia

++

+

+

Persisting hiccups

++

+

+

Failure to thrive

++

+

−

Abnormal posturing/Sandifer syndrome

++

+

−

Esophagitis

+

++

+++

Persistent cough/aspiration pneumonia

+

++

+

Wheezing/laryngitis/ear problems

+

++

+

Laryngomalacia/stridor/croup

+

++

−

Sleeping disturbances

+

+

+

Anemia/melena/hematemesis

+

+

+

Apnea/BRUE/desaturation

+

−

−

Bradycardia

+

?

?

Heartburn/pyrosis

?

++

+++

Epigastric pain

?

+

++

Chest pain

?

+

++

Dysphagia

?

+

++

Dental erosions/water brush

?

+

+

Hoarseness/globus pharyngeus

?

+

+

Chronic asthma/sinusitis

−

++

+

Laryngostenosis/vocal nodule problems

−

+

+

Stenosis

−

(+)

+

Barrett/esophageal adenocarcinoma

−

(+)

+

+++, Very common; ++ common; + possible; (+) rare; − absent; ? unknown; BRUE, brief resolved unexplained event; previously called ALTE, or apparent life-­threatening event.
From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2011: Table 22.3, p. 235.

possibility of other important diagnoses in the presence of any alarm or
warning signs: bilious emesis, frequent projectile emesis, gastrointestinal bleeding, lethargy, organomegaly, abdominal distention, dysphagia,
odynophagia, micro-­or macrocephaly, hepatosplenomegaly, anorexia,
failure to thrive, diarrhea, fever, bulging fontanelle, and seizures. The
important differential diagnoses to consider in the evaluation of an
infant or a child with chronic vomiting are milk and other food allergies, eosinophilic esophagitis, pyloric stenosis, intestinal obstruction
(especially malrotation with intermittent volvulus), nonesophageal
inflammatory diseases, infections, inborn errors of metabolism, hydronephrosis, increased intracranial pressure, rumination, and bulimia.
Focused diagnostic testing, depending on the presentation and the differential diagnosis, can then supplement the initial examination.
Most of the esophageal tests are of some use in particular patients with
suspected GERD. Contrast (usually barium) radiographic study of the
esophagus and upper gastrointestinal tract is performed in children with
vomiting and dysphagia to evaluate for achalasia, esophageal strictures
and stenosis, hiatal hernia, and gastric outlet or intestinal obstruction (Fig.
369.1). It has poor sensitivity and specificity in the diagnosis of GERD as
a result of its limited duration and the inability to differentiate physiologic
GER from GERD. Furthermore, contrast radiography neither accurately
assesses mucosal inflammation nor correlates with severity of GERD.
Extended esophageal pH monitoring of the distal esophagus, no longer
considered the sine qua non of a GERD diagnosis, provides a quantitative

and sensitive documentation of acidic reflux episodes, the most important type of reflux episodes for pathologic reflux. The distal esophageal pH
probe is placed at a level corresponding to 87% of the nares-­LES distance,
based on regression equations using the patient’s height, on fluoroscopic
visualization, or on manometric identification of the LES. Normal values of distal esophageal acid exposure (pH <4) are generally established
as <5–8% of the total monitored time, but these quantitative normals are
insufficient to establish or disprove a diagnosis of pathologic GERD. The
most important indications for esophageal pH monitoring are for assessing efficacy of acid suppression during treatment, evaluating apneic episodes in conjunction with a pneumogram and perhaps impedance, and
evaluating atypical GERD presentations such as chronic cough, stridor,
and asthma. Dual pH probes, adding a proximal esophageal probe to the
standard distal one, are used in the diagnosis of extraesophageal GERD,
identifying upper esophageal acid exposure times of 1% of the total time as
threshold values for abnormality.
Endoscopy allows diagnosis of erosive esophagitis (Fig. 369.2)
and complications such as strictures or Barrett esophagus; esophageal biopsies can diagnose histologic reflux esophagitis in the
absence of erosions while eliminating allergic and infectious causes.
Endoscopy is also used therapeutically to dilate reflux-­induced
strictures. Radionucleotide scintigraphy using technetium can
demonstrate aspiration and delayed gastric emptying when these
are suspected.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2266 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 369.2  Symptoms and Signs That May Be Associated
with Gastroesophageal Reflux
SYMPTOMS
Recurrent regurgitation with or
without vomiting
Weight loss or poor weight gain
Irritability in infants
Ruminative behavior
Heartburn or chest pain
Hematemesis
Dysphagia, odynophagia
Wheezing
Stridor
Cough
Hoarseness

SIGNS
Esophagitis
Esophageal stricture
Barrett esophagus
Laryngeal/pharyngeal inflammation
Recurrent pneumonia
Anemia
Dental erosion
Feeding refusal
Dystonic neck posturing (Sandifer
syndrome)
Apnea spells
Apparent life-­threatening events

From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 4th
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011: Table 22.1, p. 235.

The multichannel intraluminal impedance is a cumbersome test, but
with potential applications both for diagnosing GERD and for understanding esophageal function in terms of bolus flow, volume clearance, and
(in conjunction with manometry) motor patterns associated with GERD.
Because of the multiple sensors and a distal pH sensor, it is possible to
document acidic reflux (pH <4), weakly acidic reflux (pH 4-­7), and weakly
alkaline reflux (pH >7) with multichannel intraluminal impedance. It is
an important tool in those with respiratory symptoms, particularly for the
determination of nonacid reflux, but must be cautiously applied in routine clinical evaluation because of limited evidence-­based parameters for
GERD diagnosis and symptom association.
Esophageal manometry is not useful in demonstrating gastroesophageal reflux but might be of use to evaluate TLESR.
Laryngotracheobronchoscopy evaluates for visible airway signs
that are associated with extraesophageal GERD, such as posterior
laryngeal inflammation and vocal cord nodules; it can permit diagnosis
of silent aspiration (during swallowing or during reflux) by bronchoalveolar lavage with subsequent quantification of lipid-­laden macrophages in airway secretions. Detection of pepsin in tracheal fluid is a
marker of reflux-­associated aspiration of gastric contents. Esophageal
manometry permits evaluation for dysmotility, particularly in preparation for antireflux surgery.
Empirical antireflux therapy, using a time-­limited trial of high-­
dose PPI, is a cost-­effective strategy for diagnosis in adults; although
not formally evaluated in older children, it has also been applied to this
age group (Fig. 369.3). Failure to respond to such empirical treatment,
or a requirement for the treatment for prolonged periods, mandates
formal diagnostic evaluation.

MANAGEMENT

The conservative therapy and lifestyle modifications that form the
foundation of GERD therapy can be effectively implemented through
education and reassurance for parents. Dietary measures for infants
include normalization of any abnormal feeding techniques, volumes,
and frequencies. Thickening of feeds or use of commercially prethickened formulas increases the percentage of infants with no regurgitation,
decreases the frequency of daily regurgitation and emesis, and increases
the infant’s weight gain. However, caution should be exercised when
managing preterm infants because of the possible association between
xanthan gum-­based thickened feeds and necrotizing enterocolitis. The
evidence does not clearly favor one type of thickener over another;
the addition of a tablespoon of rice or oat cereal per ounce of formula
results in a greater caloric density (30 kcal/oz) and reduced crying time,
although it might not modify the number of nonregurgitant reflux episodes. Caution must be exercised while using rice cereal, as studies show
increased risk of arsenic exposure in children with excessive rice and
rice product consumption. A short trial (2 weeks) of a hypoallergenic
diet in infants may be used to exclude milk or soy protein allergy before

Fig. 369.1 Barium esophagogram demonstrating free gastroesopha-

geal reflux. Note stricture caused by peptic esophagitis. Longitudinal
gastric folds above the diaphragm indicate the unusual presence of an
associated hiatal hernia.

A

B

Fig. 369.2 Endoscopic image of a normal esophagus (A) and erosive
peptic esophagitis (B).

pharmacotherapy. A combination of modified feeding volumes, hydrolyzed infant formulas, proper positioning, and avoidance of tobacco
smoke exposure satisfactorily improve GERD symptoms in 24–59% of
infants with GERD. Older children should be counseled to avoid acidic
or reflux-­inducing foods, particularly if these trigger symptoms (tomatoes, chocolate, mint), and beverages (juices, carbonated and caffeinated
drinks, alcohol). Weight reduction for obese patients and elimination of
smoke exposure are other crucial measures at all ages.
Positioning measures are particularly important for infants who cannot control their positions independently. Seated position worsens infant
reflux and should be avoided in infants with GERD. Esophageal pH
monitoring demonstrates more reflux episodes in infants in supine and
side positions compared with the prone position, but evidence that the
supine position reduces the risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
has led the American Academy of Pediatrics and the North American
Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition to recommend
supine positioning during sleep. When the infant is awake and observed,
prone position and upright carried position can be used to minimize

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 369 u Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease

2267

Heartburn and/or regurgitation without alarm symptoms
Symptoms with sufficient frequency and intensity to impair QOL

8-week once before meal daily PPl trial

Complete relief
GERD likely

Incomplete relief

Discontinue PPI

Symptoms recur

EGD off PPI 2–4 weeks

LA grade B/C/D
Barrett’s >3 cm

GERD confirmed

Normal EGD or
LA grade A

Abnormal

Reflux monitoring
off therapy

Fig. 369.3 Diagnostic algorithm for GERD. EGD, Esoph-

agogastroduodenoscopy; LA, Los Angeles; PPI, proton
pump inhibitor; QOL, quality of life. (From Katz PO, Dunbar
KB, Schnoll-­Sussman FH, et al. ACG clinical guideline for the
diagnosis and management of gastroesophageal reflux disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2022;117:27–56. Fig. 1, p. 33.)

reflux. Lying in the flat supine position and semi-­seated positions (e.g.,
car seats, infant carriers) in the postprandial period are considered provocative positions for GER and therefore should be avoided. The efficacy
of positioning for older children is unclear, but some evidence suggests
a benefit to left side position and head elevation during sleep. The head
should be elevated by elevating the head of the bed, rather than using
excess pillows, to avoid abdominal flexion and compression that might
worsen reflux, and increases the risk of SIDS (see Chapter 423).
Pharmacotherapy is directed at ameliorating the acidity of the gastric
contents or at promoting their aboral movement and should be considered for those symptomatic infants and children who are either highly
suspected or proven to have GERD. Antacids are the most commonly
used antireflux therapy and are readily available over the counter. They
provide rapid but transient relief of symptoms by acid neutralization. The
long-­term regular use of antacids cannot be recommended because of side
effects of diarrhea (magnesium antacids) and constipation (aluminum
antacids) and rare reports of more serious side effects of chronic use.
H2RAs (cimetidine, famotidine, and nizatidine) have been used as
antisecretory agents that act by selective inhibition of histamine receptors on gastric parietal cells. It is important to note that ranitidine, one
of the most popular H2RAs was recalled by the FDA in 2020 due to the
discovery that it contained concerning amounts of a potential carcinogen
called N-­nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA). H2RAs were beneficial in the
treatment of mild to moderate reflux esophagitis. They have been recommended because of their excellent overall safety profile, but they are superseded by PPIs in this role.
PPIs (omeprazole, lansoprazole, pantoprazole, rabeprazole, and
esomeprazole) provide the most potent acid blockade effect by blocking
the hydrogen–potassium adenosine triphosphatase channels of the final
common pathway in gastric acid secretion. PPIs are superior to H2RAs
in the treatment of severe and erosive esophagitis. Pharmacodynamic
studies indicate that children require higher doses of PPIs than adults on
a per-­weight basis. The use of PPIs to treat infants and children deemed

Normal
Consider other causes
for symptoms

to have GERD on the basis of symptoms is common; however, an important systematic review of the efficacy and safety of PPI therapy in pediatric
GERD reveals no clear benefit for PPI over placebo use in suspected infantile GERD (crying, arching behavior). Limited pediatric data are available
to draw definitive conclusions about potential complications implicated
with PPI use, such as respiratory infections, Clostridium difficile infection,
osteopenic bone fractures (noted in adults), hypomagnesemia, and kidney
damage; most randomized controlled studies have not confirmed these
side effects.
Prokinetic agents available in the United States include metoclopramide (dopamine-­2 and 5-­HT3 antagonist), bethanechol (cholinergic
agonist), and erythromycin (motilin receptor agonist). Most of these
increase LES pressure, some improve gastric emptying or esophageal
clearance, but none affects the frequency of TLESRs. The available controlled trials have not demonstrated much efficacy for GERD. The FDA
announced a black box warning for metoclopramide, linking its chronic
use (longer than 3 months) with tardive dyskinesia, the rarely reversible movement disorder. Baclofen is a centrally acting γ-­aminobutyric
acid agonist that decreases reflux by decreasing TLESRs in healthy adults
and in a small number of neurologically impaired children with GERD.
Other agents of interest include peripherally acting γ-­aminobutyric
acid agonists devoid of central side effects, and metabotropic glutamate
receptor 5 antagonists that are reported to reduce TLESRs but are as yet
inadequately studied for this indication in children.
Cisapride is a serotonergic-­receptor agonist with a prokinetic effect that
is only available in the United States through a limited access program
because of its cardiac side effects (QT prolongation, dysrhythmias).
Surgery, usually fundoplication, is effective therapy for intractable
GERD in children, particularly those with refractory esophagitis or strictures and those at risk for significant morbidity from chronic pulmonary
disease. It may be combined with a gastrostomy for feeding or venting. The availability of potent acid-­suppressing medication mandates
more-­rigorous analysis of the relative risks (or costs) and benefits of this

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2268 Part XVI u The Digestive System
relatively irreversible therapy compared with long-­term pharmacotherapy. Some of the risks of fundoplication include a wrap that is too tight
(producing dysphagia or gas-­bloat) or too loose (and thus incompetent).
Surgeons may choose to perform a tight (360 degrees, Nissen) or variations of a loose (<360 degrees, Thal, Toupet, Boix-­Ochoa) wrap, or to add
a gastric drainage procedure (pyloroplasty) to improve gastric emptying,
based on their experience and the patient’s disease. Preoperative accuracy of the diagnosis of GERD and the skill of the surgeon are two of
the most important predictors of successful outcome. Long-­term studies
suggest that fundoplications often become incompetent in children, as
in adults, with reflux recurrence rates of up to 14% for Nissen and up to
20% for loose wraps (the rates may be highest with laparoscopic procedures); this fact currently combines with the potency of PPI therapy that
is available to shift practice toward long-­term pharmacotherapy in many
cases. Fundoplication procedures may be performed as open operations,
by laparoscopy, or by endoluminal (gastroplication) techniques. Pediatric experience is limited with endoscopic application of radiofrequency
therapy (Stretta procedure) to a 2-­3 cm area of the LES and cardia to
create a high-­pressure zone to reduce reflux.
Total esophagogastric dissociation is performed in selective neurologically impaired children with repeated failed fundoplications and
with severe life-­threatening GERD.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

369.1 Complications of Gastroesophageal
Reflux Disease
Seema Khan and Sravan Kumar Reddy Matta

ESOPHAGEAL: ESOPHAGITIS AND SEQUELAE—
STRICTURE, BARRETT ESOPHAGUS,
ADENOCARCINOMA

Esophagitis can manifest as irritability, arching, and feeding aversion in infants; chest or epigastric pain in older children; and, rarely, as
hematemesis, anemia, or Sandifer syndrome at any age. Erosive esophagitis is found in approximately 12% of children with GERD symptoms
and is more common in boys, older children, neurologically challenged
children, children with severe chronic respiratory disease, and in those
with hiatal hernia. Prolonged and severe esophagitis leads to formation of strictures, generally located in the distal esophagus, producing
dysphagia, and requiring repeated esophageal dilations and often fundoplication. Long-­standing esophagitis predisposes to metaplastic transformation of the normal esophageal squamous epithelium into intestinal
columnar epithelium, termed Barrett esophagus, a precursor of esophageal adenocarcinoma. A large multicenter prospective study of 840 consecutive children who underwent elective endoscopies reported a 25.7%
prevalence for reflux esophagitis, and a mere 0.12% for Barrett esophagus
in children without neurologic disorders or tracheoesophageal anomalies. Both Barrett esophagus and adenocarcinoma occur more in White
males and in those with increased duration, frequency, and severity of
reflux symptoms. This transformation increases with age to plateau in
the fifth decade; adenocarcinoma is rare in childhood. Barrett esophagus, uncommon in children, warrants periodic surveillance biopsies,
aggressive pharmacotherapy, and fundoplication for progressive lesions.

NUTRITIONAL

Esophagitis and regurgitation may be severe enough to induce failure
to thrive because of caloric deficits. Enteral (nasogastric or nasojejunal,
or percutaneous gastric or jejunal) or parenteral feedings are sometimes required to treat such deficits.

EXTRAESOPHAGEAL: RESPIRATORY (“ATYPICAL”)
PRESENTATIONS

GERD should be included in the differential diagnosis of children with
unexplained or refractory otolaryngologic and respiratory complaints.
GERD can produce respiratory symptoms by direct contact of the
refluxed gastric contents with the respiratory tract (aspiration, laryngeal
penetration, or microaspiration) or by reflexive interactions between the

esophagus and respiratory tract (inducing laryngeal closure or bronchospasm). Often, GERD and a primary respiratory disorder, such as asthma,
interact and a vicious cycle between them worsens both diseases. Many
children with these extraesophageal presentations do not have typical
GERD symptoms, making the diagnosis difficult. These atypical GERD
presentations require a thoughtful approach to the differential diagnosis
that considers a multitude of primary otolaryngologic (infections, allergies, postnasal drip, voice overuse) and pulmonary (asthma, cystic fibrosis)
disorders. Therapy for the GERD must be more intense (usually incorporating a PPI) and prolonged (usually at least 3-­6 months). In these cases a
multidisciplinary approach involving otolaryngology, pulmonary for airway disease, and gastroenterology for reflux disease is often warranted for
specialized diagnostic testing and for optimizing intensive management.

APNEA AND STRIDOR

These upper airway presentations have been linked with GERD in case
reports and epidemiologic studies; temporal relationships between them
and reflux episodes have been demonstrated in some but not all patients
by esophageal pH–multichannel intraluminal impedance studies, and
a beneficial response to therapy for GERD provides further support in a
number of case series. An evaluation of 1,400 infants with apnea attributed
the apnea to GERD in 50%, but other studies have failed to find an association. Apnea and brief resolved unexplained event (BRUE)-­like presentation (previously called an “apparent life-­threatening event”; see Chapter
424) caused by reflux is generally obstructive due to laryngospasm that
may be conceived as an abnormally intense protective reflex. At the time
of such apnea, infants have often been provocatively positioned (supine or
flexed seated), have been recently fed, and have shown signs of obstructive
apnea, with unproductive respiratory efforts. The evidence suggests that for
the large majority of infants presenting with apnea and BRUE, GERD is not
causal. Stridor triggered by reflux generally occurs in infants anatomically
predisposed toward stridor (laryngomalacia, micrognathia). Spasmodic
croup, an episodic frightening upper airway obstruction, can be an analogous condition in older children. Esophageal pH probe studies might fail
to demonstrate linkage of these manifestations with reflux because of the
buffering of gastric contents by infant formula and the episodic nature of
the conditions. Pneumograms can fail to identify apnea if they are not
designed to identify obstructive apnea by measuring nasal airflow.
Reflux laryngitis and other otolaryngologic manifestations (also
known as laryngopharyngeal reflux) can be attributed to GERD.
Hoarseness, voice fatigue, throat clearing, chronic cough, pharyngitis, sinusitis, otitis media, and a sensation of globus have been cited.
Laryngopharyngeal signs of GERD include edema and hyperemia (of
the posterior surface), contact ulcers, granulomas, polyps, subglottic
stenosis, and interarytenoid edema. The paucity of well-­controlled
evaluations of the association contributes to the skepticism with which
these associations may be considered. Other risk factors irritating the
upper respiratory passages can predispose some patients with GERD to
present predominantly with these complaints.
Many studies have reported a strong association between asthma
and reflux as determined by history, pH–multichannel intraluminal
impedance, endoscopy, and esophageal histology. GERD symptoms
are present in ∼23% (19–80%) of children with asthma; abnormal pH
results are noted in ∼63%, and esophagitis in ∼35% of asthmatic children. However, this association does not clarify the direction of causality in individual cases and thus does not indicate which patients with
asthma are likely to benefit from anti-­GERD therapy. Children with
asthma who are particularly likely to have GERD as a provocative factor are those with symptoms of reflux disease, those with refractory
or steroid-­dependent asthma, and those with nocturnal worsening of
asthma. Endoscopic evaluation that discloses esophageal sequelae of
GERD provides an impetus to embark on the aggressive (high dose and
many months’ duration) therapy of GERD.
Dental erosions constitute the most common oral lesion of GERD,
the lesions being distinguished by their location on the lingual surface
of the teeth. The severity seems to correlate with the presence of reflux
symptoms and the presence of an acidic milieu as the result of reflux in
the proximal esophagus and oral cavity. The other common factors that
can produce similar dental erosions are juice consumption and bulimia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 370 u Eosinophilic Esophagitis, Pill Esophagitis, and Infective Esophagitis

Chapter 370

Eosinophilic Esophagitis,
Pill Esophagitis, and
­Infective Esophagitis
Seema Khan
EOSINOPHILIC ESOPHAGITIS

Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic esophageal disorder
characterized by esophageal dysfunction and infiltration of the
esophageal epithelium by ≥15 eosinophils per high-­power field
(hpf). The proposed diagnostic criteria are the clinical presentation
of esophageal dysfunction in association with esophageal epithelial infiltration of at least 15 eosinophils per hpf or ∼60 eosinophils
per mm2; a careful evaluation of non-­EoE disorders was warranted.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) should be considered as another
treatment option rather than a diagnostic criterion to differentiate
from gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). EoE is a global disease, with incidence and prevalence rates in children of 5 and 29.5
per 100,000. Although infants and toddlers present commonly with
vomiting, feeding problems, and poor weight gain, older children
and adolescents usually experience solid food dysphagia with occasional food impactions (Figs. 370.1 and 370.2) or strictures and may
complain of heartburn and chest or epigastric pain. Many patients
are male. The mean age at diagnosis is 7 years (range: 1-­17 years),
and the duration of symptoms is 3 years. Many patients have other
atopic diseases (or a positive family history) and associated food
allergies; laboratory abnormalities can include peripheral eosinophilia and elevated immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels. The pathogenesis involves mainly T-­helper type 2 (Th2) cytokine-­mediated
(interleukin [IL]-­5 and -­13) pathways leading to production of
a potent eosinophil chemoattractant, eotaxin-­
3, by esophageal
epithelium.
The eosinophilic esophagitis endoscopic reference score (EREFS),
based on commonly observed features of edema (E), rings (R; Fig.
370.3), exudates (E; see Fig. 370.3), furrows (F; Fig. 370.4), and strictures (S), has utility in diagnosis and monitoring response to treatment.
Esophageal histology reveals profound eosinophilia, with a currently
acceptable cutoff for diagnosis chosen at ≥15-­20 eosinophils per hpf.
Up to 30% children with EoE have grossly visible normal esophageal
mucosa or endoscopy.

The role of acid in the pathogenesis and treatment of EoE has been
the subject of intense research with studies arguing for and against acid
suppression. It is important to highlight that gastric acid, among other
functions, activates important digestive enzymes and thereby facilitates
digestion of food. Acid suppression is postulated to promote absorption
of relatively larger intact proteins with allergenic potential as a consequence of reduced food digestion. Dilated esophageal epithelial intercellular spaces that have been described secondary to proton pump
inhibition may increase mucosal permeability of food antigens and
further provoke allergic pathways. Retrospective studies have shown
that infants treated with histamine receptor antagonists and PPIs are at
risk for developing EoE at an earlier age compared to matched control
infants. EoE is differentiated from GERD by concurrent atopic diseases,
its general lack of erosive esophagitis, its greater eosinophil density, and
its normal esophageal pH–multichannel intraluminal impedance results.
A favorable response to PPI therapy should not be considered diagnostic of
GERD, as approximately 50% of children with EoE also demonstrate histologic response. Observations in children and adults with EoE are notable
for striking similarities between PPI responders and PPI nonresponders
with regard to symptoms, histology, molecular signature, and mechanistic features. This response may be because of an acid suppressive action
or downregulation of Th2 allergic cell pathway, an antieosinophil effect
of the PPI class that is mediated by inhibition of eotaxin-­3 secretion.
Evaluation of EoE should include a search for food (aerodigestive) and
environmental allergies via skin prick (IgE mediated) and patch (non–
IgE mediated) tests to guide decisions regarding dietary elimination and
future food challenges.
Initial treatment involves dietary restrictions that take one of three
forms: elimination diets guided by circumstantial evidence and food
allergy test results, “6-­food elimination diet” removing the major food
allergens (milk, soy, wheat, egg, peanuts and tree nuts, seafood), and
trial of an elemental diet composed exclusively of an amino acid-­based
formula. Elimination diets are generally successful, with highest histologic response observed in nearly 91% on the elemental diet, in 73%
who undergo empiric dietary elimination, and 48% with a targeted
elimination diet. The major drawbacks of these dietary therapies lie in
their cost, difficult access, and lower quality of life, any or all of which
influence adherence and outcome.
Topically acting swallowed corticosteroids (fluticasone without spacer, viscous budesonide suspension) are the only therapy
strongly recommended based on moderate quality evidence as
first-­line therapy, as well as for those who refuse, fail to adhere,
or have a poor response to restricted diets. Histologic remission
is observed in 68–77% children and adults treated with fluticasone for 3 months. Histologic recurrence after discontinuation of
fluticasone is common, and emphasizes the need for maintenance
therapy. Ideal approaches carefully balance the risks of adrenocortical insufficiency as well as bone demineralization and fungal
infections against the risk of EoE evolving from an inflammatory
to fibrostenotic disease, which can produce esophageal stenosis
and strictures. Therapies under investigation include esophageal-­
specific delivery formulation of topical corticosteroids and monoclonal antibodies against IL-­13 (RPC4046) and IL-­5 (mepolizumab,
reslizumab). Dupilumab, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits IL-­4
and IL-­13 signaling, administered by subcutaneous injection, is
approved for patients ≥12 years of age with EoE. Histologic remission and improvement of dysphagia symptoms has occurred during
dupilumab therapy with minor side effects (injection site reactions,
upper respiratory tract infections, arthralgias, herpes viral infections). Patients require periodic endoscopy and histologic reassessment to accurately monitor response to treatment, particularly
given that there can be a significant disconnect between symptoms
and histology in the evolution of the disease. Expert clinical guidelines stress the need for long-­term studies to develop systematic
treatment and best follow-­up protocols.

INFECTIVE ESOPHAGITIS
Fig. 370.1 Endoscopic visualization of esophageal food impaction
(yellow arrow) and mucosal rings (blue arrows).

2269

Uncommon, and most often affecting immunocompromised children, infective esophagitis is caused by fungal agents, such as

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2270 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Dysphagia
Food Impaction
Vomiting
Growth Failure

Rings
Exudates

Fig. 370.2 Eosinophilic esophagitis. Graphical representation of

symptoms and endoscopic findings by age. (Modified from Oliva S,
Dias JA, Rea F, et al. Characterization of eosinophilic esophagitis from
the European pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis registry [pEEr] or ESPGHAN. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2022;75[3]:325–333. Fig. 2.)

0-5

6-10

11-14

15-18

Age (yrs)

Fig. 370.4 Endoscopy photograph showing mucosal furrowing (blue

arrows) characteristic of eosinophilic esophagitis in a patient with food
impaction (yellow arrow).

Fig. 370.3 Endoscopic image of eosinophilic esophagitis with characteristic mucosal appearance of furrowing and white specks.

Candida albicans and Torulopsis glabrata; viral agents, such as herpes simplex (HSV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), HIV, and varicella
zoster; and, rarely, bacterial infections, including diphtheria and
tuberculosis, or parasites. The typical presenting signs and symptoms are odynophagia, dysphagia, and retrosternal or chest pain;
there may also be fever, nausea, and vomiting. Candida is the leading
cause of infective esophagitis in immunocompetent and immunocompromised children and presents with concurrent oropharyngeal
infection in the majority of immunocompromised patients. It may
also be an incidental finding in asymptomatic patients, notably in

those with EoE receiving topical swallowed corticosteroids. Esophageal viral infections can also manifest in immunocompetent hosts
as an acute febrile illness. Infectious esophagitis, like other forms
of esophageal inflammation, occasionally progresses to esophageal
stricture. Diagnosis of infectious esophagitis is made by endoscopy,
usually notable for white plaques in Candida, multiple superficial
ulcers or volcano ulcers in HSV, and single deep ulcer in CMV. Histopathologic examination solidifies the diagnosis with the detection
of yeast and pseudohyphae in Candida; tissue invasion distinguishes esophagitis from mere colonization. Multinucleated giant
cells with intranuclear Cowdry type A (eosinophilic) and type B
(ground glass appearance) inclusions in HSV, and both intranuclear
and intracytoplasmic inclusions producing an owl’s eye appearance
in CMV are typically described. Adding polymerase chain reaction, tissue-­viral culture, and immunocytochemistry enhances the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 371 u Esophageal Perforation 2271
diagnostic sensitivity and precision. Treatment is with appropriate
antimicrobial agents: azole therapy, particularly oral fluconazole for
Candida; oral acyclovir for HSV; and oral valganciclovir for CMV,
or alternatively intravenous ganciclovir in severe CMV disease.

PILL ESOPHAGITIS

This acute injury is produced by contact with a damaging agent.
Medications implicated in pill esophagitis include tetracycline, doxycycline, potassium chloride, ferrous sulfate, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medications, cloxacillin, and alendronate (Table 370.1). Most
often the offending tablet is ingested at bedtime with inadequate
water. This practice often produces acute discomfort followed by progressive retrosternal pain, odynophagia, and dysphagia. Endoscopy
shows a focal lesion often localized to one of the anatomic narrowed
regions of the esophagus or to an unsuspected pathologic narrowing
(Fig. 370.5). Treatment is supportive; lacking much evidence, sucralfate, antacids, topical anesthetics, and bland or liquid diets are often
used. The offending pill may be restarted after complete resolution
of symptoms, if deemed necessary, though with clear emphasis on
ingestion with an adequate volume of water, usually at least 4 oz.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

B

Fig. 370.5 A, Barium esophagogram showing esophageal ulcera-

tion secondary to tetracycline, with the arrow pointing to an area of
ulcerations. B, Endoscopic image of a tetracycline-­induced esophageal
burn. (From Katzka DA. Esophageal disorders caused by medications,
trauma, and infection. In Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 46.1).

Table 370.1  Medications Commonly Associated with
Esophagitis or Esophageal Injury

Chapter 371

ANTIBIOTICS
Clindamycin
Doxycycline
Penicillin
Rifampin
Tetracycline

Esophageal Perforation
Seema Khan

ANTIVIRAL AGENTS
Nelfinavir
Zalcitabine
Zidovudine
BISPHOSPHONATES
Alendronate
Etidronate
Pamidronate
CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC AGENTS
Bleomycin
Cytarabine
Dactinomycin
Daunorubicin
5-­Fluorouracil
Methotrexate
Vincristine
NSAIDs
Aspirin
Ibuprofen
Naproxen
OTHER MEDICATIONS
Ascorbic acid
Ferrous sulfate
Lansoprazole
Multivitamins
Potassium chloride
Quinidine
Theophylline
NSAIDs, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
From Katzka DA. Esophageal disorders caused by medications, trauma, and infection.
In Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal
and Liver Disease. 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Box 46.1.

The majority of esophageal perforations in children are from blunt
trauma (automobile injury, gunshot wounds, child abuse) or are iatrogenic. Cardiac massage, the Heimlich maneuver, nasogastric tube
placement, traumatic laryngoscopy or endotracheal intubation, excessively vigorous postpartum suctioning of the airway during neonatal
resuscitation, difficult upper endoscopy, sclerotherapy of esophageal
varices, esophageal compression by a cuffed endotracheal tube, and
dilation for therapy of achalasia and strictures have all been implicated.
Esophageal rupture has followed forceful vomiting in patients with
anorexia and has followed esophageal injury due to caustic ingestion,
foreign body ingestion, food impactions, pill esophagitis, or eosinophilic esophagitis. Drinking cold, carbonated beverages rapidly is also
known to cause esophageal perforation.
Spontaneous esophageal rupture (Boerhaave syndrome) is less
common and is associated with sudden increases in intraesophageal
pressure brought on by situations such as vomiting, coughing, or
straining to stool. Children and adults with eosinophilic esophagitis
have also been described with Boerhaave syndrome in the setting of
forceful emesis in the aftermath of esophageal food impaction. The
prevalence of esophageal perforation in a large retrospective analysis
was reported to be 0.05%, the majority of whom were low birthweight
(<1,000 g) and ≤28 weeks’ gestational age. Importantly, esophageal perforation was not associated with an increased mortality in this pediatric cohort. In older children, as in adults, the tear occurs on the distal
left lateral esophageal wall, because the smooth muscle layer here is
weakest; in neonates (neonatal Boerhaave syndrome), spontaneous
rupture is on the right.
Symptoms of esophageal perforation include pain, neck tenderness, dysphagia, subcutaneous crepitus, fever, and tachycardia; several
patients with cervical-­level esophageal perforations have displayed
cold water polydipsia in an attempt to soothe pain in the throat.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2272 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Imaging studies are important for a rapid and accurate diagnosis.
Perforations in the proximal thoracic esophagus tend to create signs
(pneumothorax, effusions) in the left chest, whereas the signs of distal
tears are more often on the right. Plain radiography (posteroanterior
and lateral views) and CT of the neck and chest are often used, with the
latter as more sensitive and accurate in diagnosis. Signs of perforation
include pneumomediastinum, mediastinal widening, subcutaneous
emphysema, pneumothorax, hydrothorax, pleural effusion, and lung
collapse. If these x-­rays are normal, an esophagogram using water-­
soluble contrast media should be performed, but esophagograms miss
>30% of cervical perforations. Therefore, a negative water-­soluble contrast esophagogram should be followed by a barium study; the greater
density of barium can better demonstrate a small defect, although it
has a higher risk of inflammatory mediastinitis. Endoscopy may also
be useful but carries a 30% false-­negative rate.
Treatment must be individualized. Small tears in contained perforations with minimal mediastinal contamination in hemodynamically
stable patients can be treated conservatively with broad-­spectrum antibiotics, nothing given orally, gastric drainage, and parenteral nutrition.
Endoscopic techniques, considered less invasive and morbid, are now
being used more frequently and include clips for defects <2 cm, and
placement of stents and suturing for larger defects. Chest exploration
and direct surgical repair is infrequently indicated these days. Mortality rates range between 20% and 28%, with poor prognosis correlated
with delayed diagnosis and interventions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 372

Esophageal Varices

comprising a large series of children with biliary atresia and portal
hypertension described endoscopic findings of large varices, red
marks, and the presence of gastric varices as predictive of bleeding.
Noninvasive methods of evaluating varices include barium contrast
studies, ultrasound, computerized tomography, magnetic resonance, and elastography, but they are not recommended for routine
diagnostic evaluation because of suboptimal accuracy compared to
endoscopy.
Primary prophylaxis with the goal of preventing an initial hemorrhage can decrease the incidence of esophageal bleeding; the various modalities used are nonselective β-­blockade (e.g., propranolol
or nadolol), sclerotherapy, ligation, and portosystemic shunt surgery. Variceal band ligation is regarded as the preferred endotherapy and can be feasibly performed in children weighing more than
10 kg. Meso-­Rex bypass surgery should be offered to children with
EHPVO as both primary and secondary prophylaxis in the appropriate context (Fig. 372.1). Due to insufficient evidence, the same
cannot be recommended regarding endoscopic therapies and nonselective β blockers for primary prophylaxis in children. In contrast, adults do have a reduced risk of first-­time variceal bleeding
with endoscopic variceal ligation when compared with untreated
controls as well as patients treated with β-­blockade; a decrease in
mortality is only noted compared with the control group (see Chapter 415). The management of acute variceal bleeding must include
attention to hemodynamic stability through blood transfusion,
vasoactive drugs (e.g., octreotide), short-­term antibiotic use, and
endoscopy to perform ligation or sclerotherapy, as needed. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt should be considered
for variceal bleeding refractory to medical and endoscopic therapy.
Secondary prophylaxis to reduce recurrence of bleeding uses nonselective β-­blockade and obliteration of varices through serial treatment via ligation or sclerotherapy. The only randomized controlled
pediatric study has shown superiority of ligation over sclerotherapy
in reducing the risk for rebleeding and complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Seema Khan
Esophageal varices form in adults and children with portal hypertension with hepatic venous pressure gradient >10 mm Hg and pose
a risk for bleeding at >12 mm Hg (see Chapter 415). Spontaneous
decompression of this hypertension through portosystemic collateral circulation via the coronary vein, in conjunction with the left
gastric veins, gives rise to esophageal varices. Most esophageal varices are uphill varices; less commonly, those that arise in the absence
of portal hypertension and with superior vena cava obstruction are
downhill varices. Their treatment is directed at the underlying cause
of the superior vena cava abnormality. Hemorrhage from esophageal varices is the major cause of morbidity and mortality from
portal hypertension. Presentation is with significant hematemesis
and melena; whereas most patients have liver disease, some children with extrahepatic portal venous obstruction (EHPVO) might
have been previously asymptomatic. Any child with hematemesis
and splenomegaly should be presumed to have esophageal variceal
bleeding until proved otherwise. The leading causes of pediatric
portal hypertension, biliary atresia, and EHPVO are uniquely distinct from diseases encountered in adults. Hence, children tend to
tolerate variceal bleeding better because they have generally well
compensated liver disease, with studies reporting mortality risk
<1% after initial variceal bleed. The likelihood of esophageal varices in children with EHPVO increases from 1% to 22%, and small
(13%) to large (54%) at 1 year and 5 years of age, respectively. Upper
endoscopy is the preferred diagnostic test for esophageal varices, as
it provides definitive diagnosis and delineation of details that aid in
predicting the risk for bleeding, as well as enabling therapy for acute
bleeding episodes via either sclerotherapy or band ligation. A report

VII

II
III

VIII
IV

VI

RR

M
R
B

V

SV

S
M
V

I
M
V

Fig. 372.1 Meso-­Rex bypass between the superior mesenteric vein
(SMV) and the Rex recess (RR) of the left portal vein. IMV, Inferior mesenteric vein; MRB, Meso-­Rex bypass; SV, splenic vein. (From Brichard
M, Iesari S, Lerut J, et al. Meso-­Rex bypass for the management of
extrahepatic portal vein obstruction in adults. Hepatobiliary Pancreat
Dis Int. 2022;21:25–32. Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2272 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Imaging studies are important for a rapid and accurate diagnosis.
Perforations in the proximal thoracic esophagus tend to create signs
(pneumothorax, effusions) in the left chest, whereas the signs of distal
tears are more often on the right. Plain radiography (posteroanterior
and lateral views) and CT of the neck and chest are often used, with the
latter as more sensitive and accurate in diagnosis. Signs of perforation
include pneumomediastinum, mediastinal widening, subcutaneous
emphysema, pneumothorax, hydrothorax, pleural effusion, and lung
collapse. If these x-­rays are normal, an esophagogram using water-­
soluble contrast media should be performed, but esophagograms miss
>30% of cervical perforations. Therefore, a negative water-­soluble contrast esophagogram should be followed by a barium study; the greater
density of barium can better demonstrate a small defect, although it
has a higher risk of inflammatory mediastinitis. Endoscopy may also
be useful but carries a 30% false-­negative rate.
Treatment must be individualized. Small tears in contained perforations with minimal mediastinal contamination in hemodynamically
stable patients can be treated conservatively with broad-­spectrum antibiotics, nothing given orally, gastric drainage, and parenteral nutrition.
Endoscopic techniques, considered less invasive and morbid, are now
being used more frequently and include clips for defects <2 cm, and
placement of stents and suturing for larger defects. Chest exploration
and direct surgical repair is infrequently indicated these days. Mortality rates range between 20% and 28%, with poor prognosis correlated
with delayed diagnosis and interventions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 372

Esophageal Varices

comprising a large series of children with biliary atresia and portal
hypertension described endoscopic findings of large varices, red
marks, and the presence of gastric varices as predictive of bleeding.
Noninvasive methods of evaluating varices include barium contrast
studies, ultrasound, computerized tomography, magnetic resonance, and elastography, but they are not recommended for routine
diagnostic evaluation because of suboptimal accuracy compared to
endoscopy.
Primary prophylaxis with the goal of preventing an initial hemorrhage can decrease the incidence of esophageal bleeding; the various modalities used are nonselective β-­blockade (e.g., propranolol
or nadolol), sclerotherapy, ligation, and portosystemic shunt surgery. Variceal band ligation is regarded as the preferred endotherapy and can be feasibly performed in children weighing more than
10 kg. Meso-­Rex bypass surgery should be offered to children with
EHPVO as both primary and secondary prophylaxis in the appropriate context (Fig. 372.1). Due to insufficient evidence, the same
cannot be recommended regarding endoscopic therapies and nonselective β blockers for primary prophylaxis in children. In contrast, adults do have a reduced risk of first-­time variceal bleeding
with endoscopic variceal ligation when compared with untreated
controls as well as patients treated with β-­blockade; a decrease in
mortality is only noted compared with the control group (see Chapter 415). The management of acute variceal bleeding must include
attention to hemodynamic stability through blood transfusion,
vasoactive drugs (e.g., octreotide), short-­term antibiotic use, and
endoscopy to perform ligation or sclerotherapy, as needed. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt should be considered
for variceal bleeding refractory to medical and endoscopic therapy.
Secondary prophylaxis to reduce recurrence of bleeding uses nonselective β-­blockade and obliteration of varices through serial treatment via ligation or sclerotherapy. The only randomized controlled
pediatric study has shown superiority of ligation over sclerotherapy
in reducing the risk for rebleeding and complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Seema Khan
Esophageal varices form in adults and children with portal hypertension with hepatic venous pressure gradient >10 mm Hg and pose
a risk for bleeding at >12 mm Hg (see Chapter 415). Spontaneous
decompression of this hypertension through portosystemic collateral circulation via the coronary vein, in conjunction with the left
gastric veins, gives rise to esophageal varices. Most esophageal varices are uphill varices; less commonly, those that arise in the absence
of portal hypertension and with superior vena cava obstruction are
downhill varices. Their treatment is directed at the underlying cause
of the superior vena cava abnormality. Hemorrhage from esophageal varices is the major cause of morbidity and mortality from
portal hypertension. Presentation is with significant hematemesis
and melena; whereas most patients have liver disease, some children with extrahepatic portal venous obstruction (EHPVO) might
have been previously asymptomatic. Any child with hematemesis
and splenomegaly should be presumed to have esophageal variceal
bleeding until proved otherwise. The leading causes of pediatric
portal hypertension, biliary atresia, and EHPVO are uniquely distinct from diseases encountered in adults. Hence, children tend to
tolerate variceal bleeding better because they have generally well
compensated liver disease, with studies reporting mortality risk
<1% after initial variceal bleed. The likelihood of esophageal varices in children with EHPVO increases from 1% to 22%, and small
(13%) to large (54%) at 1 year and 5 years of age, respectively. Upper
endoscopy is the preferred diagnostic test for esophageal varices, as
it provides definitive diagnosis and delineation of details that aid in
predicting the risk for bleeding, as well as enabling therapy for acute
bleeding episodes via either sclerotherapy or band ligation. A report

VII

II
III

VIII
IV

VI

RR

M
R
B

V

SV

S
M
V

I
M
V

Fig. 372.1 Meso-­Rex bypass between the superior mesenteric vein
(SMV) and the Rex recess (RR) of the left portal vein. IMV, Inferior mesenteric vein; MRB, Meso-­Rex bypass; SV, splenic vein. (From Brichard
M, Iesari S, Lerut J, et al. Meso-­Rex bypass for the management of
extrahepatic portal vein obstruction in adults. Hepatobiliary Pancreat
Dis Int. 2022;21:25–32. Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 373 u Ingestions 2273

Chapter 373

Ingestions
373.1 Foreign Bodies in the Esophagus
Seema Khan
The majority (80%) of accidental foreign-­body ingestions occur in
children, most of whom are 5 years of age or younger. Older children
and adolescents with developmental delays and those with psychiatric
disorders are also at increased risk. Most ingested foreign bodies are
associated with a good outcome as they pass spontaneously through an
anatomically normal digestive tract. The presentation of a foreign body
lodged in the esophagus constitutes an emergency and is associated
with significant morbidity and mortality because of the potential for
perforation and sepsis. Although coins are by far the most commonly
ingested foreign body, followed by small toy items, it is the ingestion of
batteries and multiple magnets that could lead to life-­threatening complications. Food impactions are less common in children than in adults
and usually occur in children in association with eosinophilic esophagitis (diagnosed in 92% of those presenting with food impactions and
dysphagia), repair of esophageal atresia, and Nissen fundoplication.
Most esophageal foreign bodies lodge at the level of the cricopharyngeus (upper esophageal sphincter), the aortic arch, or just superior
to the diaphragm at the gastroesophageal junction (lower esophageal
sphincter).
At least 30% of children with esophageal foreign bodies may be
totally asymptomatic, so any history of foreign-­body ingestion should
be taken seriously and investigated. An initial bout of choking, gagging, and coughing may be followed by excessive salivation, dysphagia, food refusal, emesis, or pain in the neck, throat, or sternal notch
regions. Respiratory symptoms such as stridor, wheezing, cyanosis, or
dyspnea may be encountered if the esophageal foreign body impinges
on the larynx or membranous posterior tracheal wall. Cervical swelling, erythema, or subcutaneous crepitations suggest perforation of the
oropharynx or proximal esophagus.
Evaluation of the child with a history of foreign-­body ingestion starts
with plain anteroposterior radiographs of the neck, chest, and abdomen, along with lateral views of the neck and chest. The flat surface of a
coin in the esophagus is seen on the anteroposterior view and the edge
on the lateral view (Fig. 373.1). The reverse is true for coins lodged in
the trachea; here, the edge is seen anteroposteriorly and the flat side is
seen laterally. Disk-­shaped button batteries can look like coins and can
be differentiated on close examination by the double halo (not obvious in the new slimmer batteries) and step-­off (indicating the negative
pole) on anteroposterior and lateral views, respectively (Fig. 373.2). The
use of button batteries has been increasingly popular, leading to a sharp
rise in accidental ingestions, and an increase in morbidity and mortality. The latter is thought to be due to both an increase in diameter and
a change to lithium cells. Children younger than 5 years of age with
ingestion of batteries ≥20 mm are considered to have the highest risk for
catastrophic events such as necrosis, tracheoesophageal fistula, perforation, stricture, vocal cord paralysis, mediastinitis, and aortoenteric fistula (Fig. 373.3). Materials such as plastic, wood, glass, aluminum, and
bones may be radiolucent; failure to visualize the object with plain films
in a symptomatic patient warrants urgent endoscopy. CT scan with
three-­dimensional reconstruction may increase the sensitivity of imaging a foreign body. Although barium contrast studies may be helpful
in the occasional asymptomatic patient with negative plain films, their
use is to be discouraged because of the potential of aspiration, as well
as making subsequent visualization and object removal more difficult.
In managing the child with an esophageal foreign body, it is important
to assess risk for airway compromise and to obtain a chest CT scan and
surgical consultation in cases of suspected airway perforation. Treatment
of esophageal foreign bodies usually merits endoscopic visualization of the

A

B

Fig. 373.1 Radiographs of a coin in the esophagus. When foreign
bodies lodge in the esophagus, the flat surface of the object is seen
in the anteroposterior view (A) and the edge is seen in the lateral view
(B). The reverse is true for objects in the trachea. (Courtesy Beverley
Newman, MD.)

object and underlying mucosa and removal of the object using an appropriately designed foreign body–retrieving accessory instrument through
the endoscope and with an endotracheal tube protecting the airway. Sharp
objects in the esophagus, multiple magnets or a single magnet with a
metallic object, or foreign bodies associated with respiratory symptoms
mandate urgent removal within 12 hours of presentation. Button batteries,
in particular, must be emergently removed within 2 hours of presentation
regardless of the timing of the patient’s last oral intake, because they can
induce mucosal injury in as little as 1 hour of contact time and involve all
esophageal layers within 4 hours (see Fig. 373.3; Fig. 373.4). In cases of
delayed endoscopic intervention, frequent ingestion of honey and sucralfate are recommended as mitigation measures to reduce injury. Asymptomatic blunt objects and coins lodged in the esophagus can be observed
for up to 24 hours in anticipation of passage into the stomach. If there are
no problems in handling secretions, meat impactions can be observed for
up to 24 hours. In patients without prior esophageal surgeries, glucagon
(0.05 mg/kg intravenously; maximum pediatric dose, 0.5 mg; adult dose,
1-2 mg) can sometimes be useful in facilitating passage of distal esophageal food boluses by decreasing the lower esophageal sphincter pressure.
The use of meat tenderizers or gas-­forming agents can lead to perforation
and are not recommended. An alternative technique for removing esophageal coins impacted for <24 hours, performed most safely by experienced
radiology personnel, consists of passage of a Foley catheter beyond the
coin at fluoroscopy, inflating the balloon, and then pulling the catheter
and coin back simultaneously with the patient in a prone oblique position. Concerns about the lack of direct mucosal visualization and, when
tracheal intubation is not used, the lack of airway protection prompt caution in the use of this technique. Bougienage of esophageal coins toward
the stomach in selected uncomplicated pediatric cases has been suggested
to be an effective, safe, and economical modality where endoscopy might
not be routinely available.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

373.2 Caustic Ingestions
Seema Khan
Ingestion of caustic substances is a worldwide public health problem
accounting for a significant burden on healthcare resources. According

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2274 Part XVI u The Digestive System
to an inpatient database of U.S. pediatric hospital discharges in 2009,
the estimated number of caustic ingestions was 807 (95% confidence
interval [CI], 731-­882) cases, amounting to $22.9 million in total hospital charges. The medical sequelae of caustic ingestions are esophagitis, necrosis, perforation, and stricture formation (see Chapter 94).
Most cases (70%) are accidental ingestions of liquid alkali substances
that produce severe, deep liquefaction necrosis; drain decloggers are

Fig. 373.3 Severe esophageal injury at site of button battery (BB) reFig. 373.2 Disk battery impacted in esophagus. Note the double rim.

(From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006.)

moval, with necrosis and eschar. (From Leinwand K, Brumbaugh DE,
Kramer RE. Button battery ingestion in children—a paradigm for management of severe pediatric foreign-­body ingestions. Gastrointest Endosc Clin North Am. 2016;26:99–118. Fig. 1.)

Witnessed or suspected
BB ingestion

Gastric or
beyond

Esophageal

Otherwise
stable:
immediate
endoscopic
removal

Active bleeding or
clinically unstable:
endoscopic removal in
OR with surgery/CV
surgery present

If evidence of any
esophageal injury:
admission, NPO, IV abx

Consider CT angiography to exclude aortic
injury. Consider MRI of chest to determine
proximity of injury to aorta

Fig. 373.4 Proposed manage-

ment algorithm for ingestion of
button battery (BB) in children. Abx,
Antibiotics; CV, cardiovascular; GI,
gastrointestinal; IV, intravenous;
NPO, nil per os; OR, operating
room; q, every; UGI, upper gastrointestinal series. (From Kramer RE,
Lerner DG, Lin T, et al. Management of ingested foreign bodies
in children: a clinical report of the
NASPGHAN endoscopy committee. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
2015;60[4]:562–574. Fig. 1.)

No significant injury to
surrounding tissue or
proximity to aorta

Esophagram to
exclude leak before
advancing diet as
tolerated

Demonstration of injury
close to aorta

<5 years of age
AND
BB ≥20 mm

≥5 years of age
AND/OR
BB <20 mm

Consider
assessment of any
esophageal injury
and endoscopic
removal, if possible,
within 24–48 hours

May
consider
outpatient
observation
only

If esophageal
injury present:
admit, NPO, IV
anbx, and consider
CT angiography,
MRI of chest

Continue NPO and abx
and serial MRI q 5–7
days until injury seen to
recede from aorta

If presence of hematemesis or UGI
bleeding within 21 days of removal,
assume aortoenteric fistula and
emergently prepare for thoracotomy
with CV surgery

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Repeat x-ray
in 48 hours
for BB ≥20
mm, repeat at
10–14 days
for BB <20
mm if failure
to pass in
stool

Endoscopic
removal if
develops GI
symptoms or
not passed
stomach by
time of x-ray
at time
described
above

Chapter 373 u Ingestions 2275
Table 373.1

Ingestible Caustic Materials Around the House

CATEGORY

MOST DAMAGING AGENTS

Alkaline drain cleaners, milking machine pipe
cleaners

Sodium or potassium hydroxide

Acidic drain openers

Hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid

Toilet cleaners

Hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, phosphoric
acid, other acids

Oven and grill cleaners

Sodium hydroxide, perborate (borax)

Denture cleaners

Persulfate (sulfur), hypochlorite (bleach)

OTHER AGENTS
Ammonia, sodium hypochlorite, aluminum
particles

Ammonium chloride, sodium hypochlorite

Dishwasher detergent
Liquid

Sodium hydroxide

Powdered

Sodium hypochlorite

Packaged

Sodium carbonate

Bleach

Sodium hypochlorite

Ammonia salt

Swimming pool chemicals

Acids, alkalis, chlorine

Battery acid (liquid)

Sulfuric acid

Disk batteries

Electric current

Rust remover

Hydrofluoric, phosphoric, oxalic, and other
acids

Household delimers

Phosphoric acid, hydroxyacetic acid,
hydrochloric acid

Barbeque cleaners

Sodium and potassium hydroxide

Glyphosate surfactant (RoundUp) acid

Glyphosate herbicide

Hair relaxer

Sodium hydroxide

Weed killer

Dichlorophenoxyacetate, ammonium
phosphate, propionic acid

Zinc or other metal salts

Surfactants

Source: National Library of Medicine: Health and Safety Information on Household Products (website). http://householdproducts.nlm.nih.gov/
From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011: Table 19.1, p. 198.

most common, and because they are tasteless, more is ingested (Table
373.1). Acidic agents (20% of cases) are bitter, so less may be consumed; they produce coagulation necrosis and a somewhat protective
thick eschar. They can produce severe gastritis, and volatile acids can
result in respiratory symptoms. Children younger than 5 years of age
account for half of the cases of caustic ingestions, and boys are far more
often involved than girls.
Caustic ingestions produce signs and symptoms such as vomiting,
drooling, refusal to drink, oral burns, dysphagia, dyspnea, abdominal
pain, hematemesis, and stridor. Twenty percent of patients develop
esophageal strictures. Absence of oropharyngeal lesions does not
exclude the possibility of significant esophagogastric injury, which can
lead to perforation or stricture. The absence of symptoms is usually
associated with no or minimal lesions; hematemesis, respiratory distress, or presence of at least three symptoms predicts severe lesions. An
upper endoscopy is recommended as the most efficient means of rapid
identification of tissue damage and must be undertaken in all symptomatic children within the first 24-­48 hours of ingestion. In select
situations when endoscopy may not be possible, CT of the chest and
abdomen should be considered in the evaluation of transmural and
extraesophageal injury, as well as in anticipation of emergent surgical
planning.

Dilution by water or milk is recommended as acute treatment, but
neutralization, induced emesis, and gastric lavage are contraindicated.
Treatment depends on the severity and extent of damage (Table 373.2,
Fig. 373.5). Stricture risk is increased by circumferential ulcerations,
white plaques, and sloughing of the mucosa and is reported to occur
in 70–100% of grade 2b and grade 3 caustic esophagitis. Strictures can
require treatment with dilation, and in some severe cases, surgical
resection and colon or small bowel interposition are needed. Silicone
stents (self-­expanding) placed endoscopically after a dilation procedure
can be an alternative and conservative approach to the management
of strictures. Rare late cases of superimposed esophageal carcinoma
are reported. The role of corticosteroids is controversial; they are not
recommended in grade 1 burns, but they can reduce the risk of strictures in more-­advanced caustic esophagitis. Many centers also use proton pump inhibitors as well as antibiotics in the initial treatment of
caustic esophagitis on the premise that reducing superinfection in the
necrotic tissue bed will, in turn, lower the risk of stricture formation.
Studies examining the role of antibiotics in caustic esophagitis have not
reported a clinically significant benefit even in those with grade 2 or
greater severity of esophagitis.
There may be an increase of esophageal (not gastric) carcinoma following a caustic ingestion.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2276 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 373.2  	 Classification of Caustic Injury
GRADE

VISIBLE APPEARANCE

CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE

Grade 0

History of ingestion but no visible damage or symptoms

Able to take fluids immediately

Grade 1

Edema, loss of normal vascular pattern, hyperemia, no
transmucosal injury

Temporary dysphagia, able to swallow within 0-­2 days, no
long-­term sequelae

Grade 2a

Transmucosal injury with friability, hemorrhage, blistering,
exudate, scattered superficial ulceration

Scarring, no circumferential damage (no stenosis), no
long-­term sequelae

Grade 2b

Grade 2a plus discrete ulceration and/or circumferential
ulceration

Small risk of perforation, scarring that may result in later
stenosis

Grade 3a

Scattered deep ulceration with necrosis of the tissue

Risk of perforation, high risk of later stenosis

Grade 3b

Extensive necrotic tissue

High risk of perforation and death, high risk of stenosis

From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011: Table 19.2, p. 199.

Grade 1

Grade 2

Grade 3

Fig. 373.5 CT grading of corrosive injuries of the

esophagus and the stomach. Grade 1, normal appearance; grade 2, wall and soft tissue edema, increased
wall enhancement (arrow); grade 3, transmural necrosis
with absent wall enhancement (arrow). (From Chirica M,
Bonavina L, Kelly MD, et al. Caustic ingestion. Lancet.
2017;389:2041–2050. Fig. 1.)

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 4

Stomach and Intestines
Chapter 374

Normal Development,
Structure, and Function
of the Stomach and
Intestines
Asim Maqbool and Chris A. Liacouras
DEVELOPMENT

The primitive gut is recognizable by the fourth week of gestation and is
composed of the foregut, midgut, and hindgut. The foregut gives rise to
the upper gastrointestinal tract, which includes the esophagus, stomach,
and duodenum to the level of the insertion of the common bile duct.

The midgut gives rise to the rest of the small bowel and the large bowel
to the level of the midtransverse colon. The hindgut forms the remainder of the colon and upper anal canal. The rapid growth of the midgut
causes it to protrude out of the abdominal cavity through the umbilical
ring during fetal development. The midgut subsequently returns to the
peritoneal cavity and rotates counterclockwise until the cecum lies in the
right lower quadrant. The process is normally complete by the eighth week
of gestation.
The liver derives from the hepatic diverticulum that evolves into
parenchymal cells, bile ducts, vascular structures, and hematopoietic and
Kupffer cells. The extrahepatic bile ducts and gallbladder develop first as
solid cords that canalize by the third month of gestation. The dorsal and
ventral pancreatic buds grow from the foregut by the fourth week of gestation. The two buds fuse by the sixth week. Exocrine secretory capacity is
present by the fifth month.
Cis-­regulatory genomic sequences govern gene expression during
development. Modules of cis sequences are linked and allow a cascade
of gene regulation that controls functional development. Extrinsic factors have the capacity to influence gene expression. In the gut, several
growth factors, including growth factor-­β, insulin-­like growth factor,
and growth factors found in human colostrum (human growth factor
and epidermal growth factor), influence gene expression.
Propulsion of food down the gastrointestinal tract relies on the coordinated action of muscles in the bowel wall. The contractions are regulated by the enteric nervous system under the influence of a variety of
peptides and hormones. The enteric nervous system is derived from
neural crest cells that migrate in a cranial to caudal fashion. Migration
of the neural crest tissue is complete by the 24th week of gestation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 374 u Normal Development, Structure, and Function of the Stomach and Intestines
Interruption of the migration results in Hirschsprung disease. Newborn bowel motor patterns are different from adults. Normal fasting
upper gastrointestinal motility is characterized by a triphasic pattern
known as the migrating motor complex. Migrating motor complexes
occur less often in neonates, and they have more nonmigrating phasic
activity. This leads to ineffective propulsion, particularly in premature
infants. Motility in the fed state consists of a series of ring contractions
that spread caudad over variable distances.

DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION

The wall of the stomach, small bowel, and colon consists of four layers:
mucosa, submucosa, muscularis, and serosa. Eighty-­five percent of the
gastric mucosa is lined by oxyntic glands containing cells that secrete
hydrochloric acid, pepsinogen, and intrinsic factor, and mucous and endocrine cells that secrete peptides having paracrine and endocrine effects.
Pepsinogen is a precursor of the proteolytic enzyme pepsin, and intrinsic factor is required for the absorption of vitamin B12. Pyloric glands are
located in the antrum and contain gastrin-­secreting cells. Acid production
and gastrin levels are inversely related to each other except in pathologic
secretory states. Acid secretion is low at birth but increases dramatically by
24 hours. Acid and pepsin secretions peak in the first 10 days and decrease
from 10 to 30 days after birth. Intrinsic factor secretion rises slowly in the
first 2 weeks of life.
The small bowel is approximately 270 cm long at birth in a term neonate and grows to an adult length of 450-­550 cm by 4 years of age. The
mucosa of the small intestine is composed of villi, which are finger-­like
projections of the mucosa into the bowel lumen that significantly expand
the absorptive surface area. The mucosal surface is further expanded by
a brush border containing digestive enzymes and transport mechanisms
for monosaccharides, amino acids, dipeptides and tripeptides, and fats.
The cells of the villi originate in adjacent crypts and become functional as
they migrate from the crypt up the villus. The small bowel mucosa is completely renewed in 4-­5 days, providing a mechanism for rapid repair after
injury, but in young infants or malnourished children, the process may be
delayed. Crypt cells also secrete fluid and electrolytes. The villi are present
by 8 weeks of gestation in the duodenum and by 11 weeks in the ileum.
Disaccharidase activities are measurable at 12 weeks, but lactase activity does not reach maximal levels until 36 weeks. Even premature infants
usually tolerate lactose-­containing formulas because of carbohydrate
salvage by colonic bacteria. In children of African and Asian ethnicity,
lactase levels may begin to fall at 4 years of age, leading to intolerance to
mammalian milk. Mechanisms to digest and absorb protein, including
pancreatic enzymes and mucosal mechanisms to transport amino acids,
dipeptides, and tripeptides, are in place by the 20th week of gestation.
Carbohydrates, protein, and fat are normally absorbed by the upper
half of the small intestine; the distal segments represent a vast reserve of
absorptive capacity. Most of the sodium, potassium, chloride, and water
are absorbed in the small bowel. Bile salts and vitamin B12 are selectively
absorbed in the distal ileum, and iron is absorbed in the duodenum and
proximal jejunum. Intraluminal digestion depends on the exocrine pancreas. Secretin and cholecystokinin stimulate synthesis and secretion of
bicarbonate and digestive enzymes, which are released by the upper intestinal mucosa in response to various intraluminal stimuli, among them
components of the diet.
Carbohydrate digestion is normally an efficient process that is completed in the distal duodenum. Starches are broken down to glucose, oligosaccharides, and disaccharides by pancreatic amylase. Residual glucose
polymers are broken down at the mucosal level by glucoamylase. Lactose
is broken down at the brush border by lactase, forming glucose and galactose; sucrose is broken down by sucrase-­isomaltase to fructose and glucose. Galactose and glucose are primarily transported into the cell by a
sodium-­and energy-­dependent process, whereas fructose is transported
by facilitated diffusion.
Proteins are hydrolyzed by pancreatic enzymes, including trypsin, chymotrypsin, elastase, and carboxypeptidases, into individual amino acids
and oligopeptides. The pancreatic enzymes are secreted as proenzymes,
which are activated by release of the mucosal enzyme enterokinase. Oligopeptides are further broken down at the brush border by peptidases into
dipeptides, tripeptides, and amino acids. Protein can enter the cell by separate noncompetitive carriers that can transport individual amino acids or
dipeptides and tripeptides similar to those in the renal tubule. The human

2277

gut is capable of absorbing antigenic intact proteins in the first few weeks
of life because of leaky junctions between enterocytes. Entry of potential
protein antigens through the mucosal barrier might have a role in later
food-­and microbe-­induced symptoms.
Fat absorption occurs in two phases. Dietary triglycerides are
broken down into monoglycerides and free fatty acids by pancreatic
lipase and colipase. The free fatty acids are subsequently emulsified by
bile acids, forming micelles with phospholipids and other fat-­soluble
substances, and are transported to the cell membrane, where they are
absorbed. The fats are reesterified in the enterocyte, forming chylomicrons that are transported through the intestinal lymphatics to the thoracic duct. Medium-­chain fats are absorbed more efficiently and can
directly enter the cell. They are subsequently transported to the liver
via the portal system. Fat absorption can be affected at any stage of the
digestion and absorption process. Decreased pancreatic enzymes occur
in cystic fibrosis, cholestatic liver disease leads to poor bile salt production and micelle formation, celiac disease affects mucosal surface area,
abnormal chylomicron formation occurs in abetalipoproteinemia, and
intestinal lymphangiectasia affects transport of the chylomicrons.
Fat absorption is less efficient in the neonate compared with adults.
Premature infants can lose up to 20% of their fat calories compared
with up to 6% in the adult. Decreased synthesis of bile acids and pancreatic lipase and decreased efficiency of ileal absorption are contributing factors. Fat digestion in the neonate is facilitated by lingual and
gastric lipases. Bile salt–stimulated lipase in human milk augments the
action of pancreatic lipase. Infants with malabsorption of fat are usually fed with formulas that have a greater percentage of medium-­chain
triglycerides, which are absorbed independently of bile salts.
The colon is a 75-­to 100-­cm sacculated tube formed by three strips
of longitudinal muscle called taenia coli that traverse its length and fold
the mucosa into haustra. Haustra and taenia appear by the 12th week
of gestation. The most common motor activity in the colon is nonpropulsive rhythmic segmentation that acts to mix the chyme and expose
the contents to the colonic mucosa. Mass movement within the colon
typically occurs after a meal. The colon extracts additional water and
electrolytes from the luminal contents to render the stools partially or
completely solid. The colon also acts to scavenge by-­products of bacterial degradation of carbohydrates. Stool is stored in the rectum until
distention triggers a defecation reflex that, when assisted by voluntary
relaxation of the external sphincter, permits evacuation.

THE GASTROINTESTINAL MICROBIOTA

The term “microbiome” refers to organisms and their genomes/functions, whereas “microbiota” refers to the organisms themselves. The
difference is very subtle, and sometimes they are used interchangeably.
The gastrointestinal microbiota composition develops early in life;
it is influenced by environmental exposures, including specifically
exposure to maternal flora (via vaginal delivery vs C-­section), birth
location (hospital vs at home, suburban vs rural), antibiotic use, and
prominently are related to diet and infant feeding practices (breastfed
vs formula fed, food supplementation). The richness and diversity of
gastrointestinal microbiota developed early, as does gastrointestinal
immunotolerance to it. Microbiota concentration and complexity
increase from proximal to distal throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
This microflora has implications on human health and disease. There
is a symbiotic relationship between the host of the gastrointestinal tract
and the commiserate microflora. These microorganisms are involved
in the fermentation of undigestible carbohydrates (in particular, fiber),
resulting in short-­chain fatty acids, the preferred fuel for colonic tissues.
Additionally, the microbiota is involved in the metabolism of intraluminal conjugated bile acids, and the synthesis of vitamins (vitamin K), and
in the degradation of other compounds. The metabolome specifically
refers to the collection of metabolites that organisms produce.
The composition of the intestinal microbiota may render individuals
at risk for noncommunicable diseases, including obesity. The intestinal
microbiota may have implications for vaccine efficacy. Perturbations in
the intestinal microbiota composition may increase risk for gastrointestinal inflammatory conditions and disorders, including inflammatory bowel disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2278 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 375

Pyloric Stenosis and Other
Congenital Anomalies of
the Stomach
375.1 Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis
Arunjot Singh and Chris A. Liacouras
Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis occurs in 2-­5/1,000 infants in the United
States. It is common in White people, particularly of northern European ancestry, and less frequent in Black and Asian populations. Males
(especially firstborns) are affected approximately 4 times as often as
females. There is a familial link with an increased risk in offspring of
parent(s) with pyloric stenosis. Pyloric stenosis develops in approximately 20% of the male and 10% of the female descendants of a mother
who had pyloric stenosis. Pyloric stenosis has also been associated
with other congenital defects, including tracheoesophageal fistula and
hypoplasia or agenesis of the inferior labial frenulum.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis is unknown,
although many genetic and environmental factors have been implicated. Development of pyloric stenosis is likely postnatal, given that
it is unusual in stillbirths. Genetic predisposition, a well-­established
risk of pyloric stenosis, is more concordant in monozygotic than dizygotic twins. Pyloric stenosis has been associated with eosinophilic
gastroenteritis, Apert syndrome, Zellweger syndrome, trisomy 18,
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome, and Cornelia de Lange syndrome (Table
375.1). An association has been seen with the use of macrolide antibiotics, particularly erythromycin in neonates, if given within the first
2 weeks of life. There have also been reports of a higher incidence of
pyloric stenosis among mostly female infants of mothers treated with
macrolide antibiotics during pregnancy and breastfeeding. Other risk
factors may include formula feeding and a maternal history of smoking during pregnancy. Abnormal muscle innervation, elevated serum
levels of prostaglandins, and infant hypergastrinemia have also been

implicated. Multiple genetic susceptibility loci have been identified
including IHPS genes on chromosomes 12q, 16p13 and 11q14, and
Xq23. The etiologic role of nitric oxide synthase gene (NOS1) is also
apparent with reduced levels of neuronal nitric oxide found via altered
expression of the neuronal nitric oxide synthase exon 1c regulatory
region.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Nonbilious vomiting is the initial symptom of pyloric stenosis. The
vomiting may or may not be projectile initially but is usually progressive, occurring immediately after a feeding. Emesis might follow each
feeding, or it may be intermittent. The vomiting usually starts after 3
weeks of age, but symptoms can develop as early as the first week of
life and as late as 5 months of age. On rare occasions, late-­onset pyloric
stenosis may develop between 2 and 8 years of life. Approximately
20% have intermittent emesis from birth that then progresses to the
classic picture. After vomiting, the infant is hungry and wants to feed
again. As vomiting continues, a progressive loss of fluid, hydrogen ion,
and chloride leads to hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis. Awareness of
pyloric stenosis has led to earlier identification of patients with fewer
instances of chronic malnutrition and severe dehydration and at times
a subclinical self-­resolving hypertrophy.
Hyperbilirubinemia is the most common clinical association of
pyloric stenosis, also known as icteropyloric syndrome. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia is more common than the conjugated type
and usually resolves with surgical correction of the pyloric stenosis.
It may be associated with a decreased level of glucuronyl transferase as seen in approximately 5% of affected infants. Pathogenic gene
variants in the bilirubin uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase
gene (UGT1A1) have also been implicated, supporting the notion that
Gilbert syndrome may be linked in pathogenesis. If conjugated hyperbilirubinemia is a part of the presentation, other etiologies need to be
investigated including eosinophilic gastroenteritis, hiatal hernia, peptic ulcer, congenital nephrotic syndrome, congenital heart disease, and
congenital hypothyroidism.
The diagnosis has clinically been established by palpating a pyloric
mass. The mass is firm, movable, approximately 2 cm in length, olive
shaped, and best palpated when the patient is lying on the left side. The
mass is located above and to the right of the umbilicus in the midepigastrium beneath the liver edge. The olive is easiest palpated after an
episode of vomiting. After feeding, there may be a visible gastric peristaltic wave that progresses across the abdomen (Fig. 375.1). Earlier
imaging diagnosis has made the palpable olive a less common physical
finding.
Two imaging studies are used to establish the diagnosis. Ultrasound
examination confirms the diagnosis in the majority of cases. Criteria
for diagnosis include pyloric thickness 3-­4 mm, an overall pyloric

Table 375.1  Etiology of Gastric Outlet Obstruction
CONGENITAL
Aplasia
Atresia
Diaphragms, webs, valves
Ectopic pancreatic rests
Gastric duplication
Associated with epidermolysis bullosa
IDIOPATHIC HYPERTROPHIC PYLORIC STENOSIS
Infantile-­onset pyloric stenosis
Late onset
Associated with medications: erythromycin, prostaglandin E1
ACQUIRED
Peptic ulcer disease
Caustic chemical injury
Bezoars: lacto-­, phyto-­, tricho-­, medications
Associated with Crohn disease
Associated with chronic granulomatous disease
Associated with eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Tumor
Gastric volvulus

Fig. 375.1 Gastric peristaltic wave in an infant with pyloric stenosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 375 u Pyloric Stenosis and Other Congenital Anomalies of the Stomach

2279

Fig. 375.2 A, Transverse sonogram

demonstrating a pyloric muscle wall
thickness of >4 mm (distance between
crosses). B, Horizontal image demonstrating a pyloric channel length >14
mm (wall thickness outlined between
crosses) in an infant with pyloric stenosis.

A

B

pyloric stenosis; however, abnormalities including metabolic acidosis and elevated serum potassium and urinary sodium concentrations of adrenal insufficiency aid in differentiation. Inborn errors of
metabolism can also cause recurrent emesis and are manifested by
alkalosis (urea cycle) or acidosis (organic acidemia) with lethargy,
coma, or seizures. Metabolic disorders and adrenogenital syndrome
may first be identified on the newborn screening test. Vomiting may
also be a presentation of an infection such as urinary tract infection
or gastroenteritis, although these are usually accompanied by fever or
diarrhea. Rarely, a pyloric membrane or pyloric duplication results in
projectile vomiting, visible peristalsis, and, in the case of a duplication, a palpable mass (Table 375.2). Duodenal stenosis proximal to
the ampulla of Vater results in the clinical features of pyloric stenosis
but can be differentiated by the presence of a pyloric mass on physical
examination or ultrasonography.

TREATMENT

Fig. 375.3 Barium in the stomach of an infant with projectile vomiting. The attenuated pyloric canal is typical of congenital hypertrophic
pyloric stenosis.

length 15-­19 mm, and pyloric diameter of 10-­14 mm (Fig. 375.2).
Ultrasonography has a sensitivity of approximately 95%. Less commonly, an upper gastrointestinal (GI) contrast study is used. Contrast
studies demonstrate an elongated pyloric channel (string sign), a bulge
of the pyloric muscle into the antrum (shoulder sign), and parallel
streaks of barium seen in the narrowed channel, producing a “double
tract sign” (Fig. 375.3).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Pyloric stenosis must be differentiated from other causes that present with vomiting, irritability, and dehydration in the infant. Gastroesophageal reflux is one of the most common etiologies of vomiting.
In contrast to pyloric stenosis, reflux is typically a self-­limiting condition that manifests with frequent effortless regurgitation and vomiting and usually does not cause abnormal chemistries. If symptoms
are significant, reflux can be differentiated from pyloric stenosis by
radiographic studies. Adrenogenital syndrome can also simulate

The treatment of pyloric stenosis requires surgery in most patients.
The preoperative treatment is directed toward correcting the fluid and
electrolyte losses, as well as the acid-­base disturbance. Correction of
the alkalosis is essential to prevent postoperative apnea, which may be
associated with anesthesia. Most infants can be successfully rehydrated
within 24 hours. Vomiting usually stops when the stomach is empty,
and only an occasional infant requires nasogastric suction.
Surgical treatment of pyloric stenosis is by open or laparoscopic
pyloromyotomy. This procedure is safe and cost-­effective. Treatment
is curative, with an operative mortality of 0–0.5%. The traditional
Ramstedt procedure had been performed through a short transverse
skin incision in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen followed by
a longitudinal cut of the pyloric mass to the layer of the submucosa.
Laparoscopic pyloromyotomy has become the procedure of choice
given improved laparoscopic instrumentation and potential of shorter
recovery times.
Postoperative vomiting occurs in half the infants and is thought
to be secondary to edema of the pylorus at the incision site. In most
infants, feedings can be initiated within 12-­24 hours after surgery and
advanced to maintenance oral feedings within 36-­48 hours. Persistent
vomiting suggests an incomplete pyloromyotomy, gastritis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, or another cause of the obstruction. Endoscopic balloon dilation has been successful in infants with persistent
vomiting secondary to incomplete pyloromyotomy.
Conservative management with nasoduodenal feedings is a rare
treatment choice, advisable only in rare patients who are not good
surgical candidates. Oral and intravenous atropine sulfate (pyloric
muscle relaxant) has also been described when surgical expertise is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2280 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 375.2  Anomalies of the Stomach
ANOMALY

INCIDENCE

AGE AT PRESENTATION

SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS

TREATMENT

Gastric, antral, or pyloric
atresia

3/100,000, when
combined with
webs

Infancy

Nonbilious emesis

Gastroduodenostomy,
gastrojejunostomy

Pyloric or antral
­membrane (web)

As above

Any age

Failure to thrive, emesis

Incision or excision,
pyloroplasty

Microgastria

Rare

Infancy

Emesis, malnutrition

Continuous-­drip feedings
or jejunal reservoir pouch

Gastric diverticulum

Rare

Any age

Usually asymptomatic

Usually unnecessary

Gastric duplication

Rare; male:female, 1:2

Any age

Abdominal mass, emesis,
hematemesis; peritonitis if
ruptured

Excision or partial
gastrectomy

Gastric teratoma

Rare

Any age

Upper abdominal mass

Resection

Gastric volvulus

Rare

Any age

Emesis, refusal to feed

Reduction of volvulus,
anterior gastropexy

Pyloric stenosis (infantile
hypertrophic and adult
forms)

United States, 3/1,000
(range, 1-­8/1,000
in various regions);
male:female, 4:1

Infancy

Nonbilious emesis

Pyloromyotomy

Congenital absence of
the pylorus

Rare

Childhood, adulthood

Dyspepsia, if symptomatic

Usually unnecessary

Modified from Semrin MG, Russo MA. Anatomy, histology, and developmental anomalies of the stomach and duodenum. In Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and
Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016; Table 48.1.

not available with 80% success rate described in some studies. Because
conservative management takes longer and oral feedings may not be
well tolerated, worsening of the nutritional status can occur in these
patients and total parenteral nutrition may be required.

diagnostic and demonstrates a pyloric dimple. When contrast studies
are performed, care must be taken to avoid possible aspiration. An
antral web may appear as a thin septum near the pyloric channel. In
older children, endoscopy has been helpful in identifying antral webs.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

TREATMENT

375.2 Congenital Gastric Outlet Obstruction
Arunjot Singh and Chris A. Liacouras
Gastric outlet obstruction resulting from pyloric atresia and antral
webs is uncommon and accounts for <1% of all GI atresias of the
alimentary tract (see Tables 375.1 and 375.2). The exact cause
of the defect is unknown but is hypothesized to be secondary to
incomplete recanalization of the foregut or an intrauterine vascular accident. Pyloric atresia has been associated with epidermolysis
bullosa and usually presents in early infancy. The gender distribution is equal.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Infants with pyloric atresia present with nonbilious vomiting, feeding difficulties, and abdominal distention during the first day of
life. Low birthweight is also common. Polyhydramnios is a feature
seen on prenatal ultrasonography in most cases. The gastric aspirate
at birth is large (>20 mL fluid) and should be removed to prevent
aspiration. Rupture of the stomach may occur as early as the first
12 hours of life. Infants with an antral web may present with less
dramatic symptoms, depending on the degree of obstruction. Older
children with antral webs present with nausea, vomiting, abdominal
pain, and weight loss.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of congenital gastric outlet obstruction is suggested
by the finding of a large, dilated stomach on abdominal plain radiographs or in utero ultrasonography. Upper GI contrast series is usually

The treatment of all causes of gastric outlet obstruction in neonates
starts with the correction of dehydration and hypochloremic alkalosis.
Persistent vomiting should be relieved with nasogastric decompression. Surgical or endoscopic repair is then required when the patient
is medically stable.

375.3 Gastric Duplication
Arunjot Singh and Chris A. Liacouras
Gastric duplications are rare cystic or tubular malformations that usually occur within the wall of the stomach. With an incidence of 1.7
per 100,000, gastric duplications account for 2–9% of all congenital
duplications in the alimentary tract. The cystic type is most common
and involves the greater curvature of the stomach (see Table 375.2).
Most are less than 12 cm in diameter and do not usually communicate
with the stomach lumen; however, they do have a common blood supply. Associated anomalies occur in as many as 35% of patients. Several
hypotheses for the etiology of gastric duplication have been developed
including the splitting notochord theory, diverticulation, canalization
defects, and caudal twinning.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The most common clinical manifestations are associated with partial
or complete gastric outlet obstruction. Presentation can also be complicated by intussusception, volvulus of the small bowel, and bleeding secondary to ulceration of ectopic mucosa. In 33% of patients,
the duplication cyst may be palpable. Communicating duplications
can cause gastric ulceration and be associated with hematemesis or
melena.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 375 u Pyloric Stenosis and Other Congenital Anomalies of the Stomach
DIAGNOSIS

Radiographic studies usually show a paragastric mass displacing the
stomach. Ultrasound can show the inner hyperechoic mucosal and
outer hypoechoic muscle layers that are typical of gastric duplications.
CT and MRI are diagnostic in cases where ultrasound remains unclear,
although these should be used judiciously given risk associated with
radiation and sedation.

TREATMENT

Surgical treatment for symptomatic gastric duplications with complete
resection of the duplication cyst is the gold standard. Avoiding incision
into the gastric lumen is preferred whenever possible. Recently laparoscopic resection has shown successful outcomes. For communicating
types of duplication, the marsupialization and drainage procedure may
also be used.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

375.4 Gastric Volvulus
Arunjot Singh and Chris A. Liacouras
The stomach is tethered longitudinally by the gastrohepatic, gastrosplenic, and gastrocolic ligaments. In the transverse axis, it is tethered
by the gastrophrenic ligament and the retroperitoneal attachment of
the duodenum. A volvulus occurs when one of these attachments is
absent or elongated, allowing the stomach to rotate around itself. In
some children, other associated defects are present, including intestinal malrotation, diaphragmatic defects, hiatal hernia, or adjacent
organ abnormalities such as asplenia. Volvulus can occur along the
longitudinal axis, producing organo-­
axial volvulus, or along the
transverse axis, producing mesentero-­axial volvulus. Combined volvulus occurs if the stomach rotates around both organo-­axial and
mesentero-­axial axes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Gastric volvulus in infancy is usually associated with nonbilious vomiting and abdominal distention. It has also been associated with episodes
of dyspnea and apnea in this age group. Acute volvulus can advance
rapidly to strangulation and perforation. Chronic gastric volvulus is
more common in older children who present with a history of emesis,
abdominal pain, distention, early satiety, and failure to thrive.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis is suggested in plain abdominal radiographs by the presence of a dilated stomach. Erect abdominal films demonstrate a double
fluid level with a characteristic “beak” near the lower esophageal junction in mesentero-­axial volvulus. The stomach tends to lie in a vertical
plane. In organo-­axial volvulus, a single air-­fluid level is seen without
the characteristic beak with stomach lying in a horizontal plane. Upper
GI series is the more definitive test as it reveals gastric rotation and
estimates the degree of obstruction.

TREATMENT

Treatment of acute gastric volvulus requires prompt management
given the increased mortality risk. Following immediate stabilization,
emergent surgery via laparoscopic gastropexy is the most common surgical approach. Open thoracotomies are also a treatment modality with
gastropexy, gastrostomy, and partial/total gastric resection potentially
being required. Endoscopic reduction has also been reported in select

2281

cases, although gastropexy may ultimately be needed. Chronic gastric
volvulus may be treated with conservative measures, including dietary
modification, positioning, prokinetics, and antisecretory agents.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

375.5 Hypertrophic Gastropathy
Arunjot Singh and Chris A. Liacouras
Hypertrophic gastropathy in children is uncommon and usually a transient, benign, and self-­limited condition. The mean age at diagnosis is 5
years (range: 2 days to 17 years).

PATHOGENESIS

The condition is often secondary to cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection,
but other agents, including herpes simplex virus, Giardia, and Helicobacter pylori have also been implicated. The pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying the clinical picture are not completely understood
but might involve widening of gap junctions between gastric epithelial
cells with resultant fluid and protein losses. There is an association with
increased expression of transforming growth factor-­α in gastric mucosal tissue shown in CMV-­induced gastropathy. H. pylori infection can
cause the elevation of serum glucagon-­like peptide-­2 levels, a mucosal
growth-­inducing gut hormone.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Clinical manifestations include epigastric abdominal pain, fatigue,
vomiting, anorexia, and edema (protein-­losing enteropathy). Other
symptoms of nausea, diarrhea, and GI bleeding via hematemesis may
arise due to gastric erosion or ulceration. In children, disease is typically of acute onset and spontaneously resolves within a few weeks
(range: 2-­14 weeks).

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Diagnostic imaging such as upper GI series and ultrasound show
thickened gastric mucosa, although endoscopy and biopsy is essential
for diagnosis. Endoscopy visualizes the enlargement of gastric folds
and rugae typically in the fundus or body of the stomach. Histopathology shows characteristic foveolar hyperplasia, reduction in parietal
cells, and hyperplasia of smooth muscle, whereas H. pylori staining and
tissue CMV polymerase chain reaction can identify infectious etiology. The differential diagnosis includes different forms of hyperplastic
and nonhyperplastic gastropathy such as Menetrier disease, Zollinger-­
Ellison syndrome, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, gastric lymphoma,
Crohn disease, and inflammatory pseudotumor.

TREATMENT

Therapy is supportive and should include adequate hydration, antisecretory agents (H2-­receptor blockade, proton pump inhibitors), and
albumin replacement if hypoalbuminemia is symptomatic. When H.
pylori are detected, appropriate treatment is recommended. Ganciclovir in CMV-­positive gastropathy is indicated only in severe cases.
There are no official guidelines as far as the length of treatment. In
practice, IV therapy is initiated for the first 24-­48 hours. Treatment is
continued with oral valganciclovir for a total of 3 weeks. Octreotide
therapy has been of benefit in some case reports. Complete recovery
is the rule.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2282 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 376

Intestinal Atresia,
­Stenosis, and Malrotation
Christina B. Bales and Chris A. Liacouras
Approximately 1 in 2,000 children is born with intestinal obstruction.
Obstruction may be partial or complete, and it may be characterized as
simple or strangulating. Luminal contents fail to progress in an aboral
direction in simple obstruction, whereas blood flow to the intestine is
also impaired in strangulating obstruction. If strangulating obstruction
is not promptly relieved, it can lead to bowel infarction and perforation.
Intestinal obstruction can be further classified as either intrinsic or
extrinsic based on underlying etiology. Intrinsic causes include inherent abnormalities of intestinal innervation, mucus production, or
tubular anatomy. Among these, congenital disruption of the tubular
structure is most common and can manifest as obliteration (atresia) or
narrowing (stenosis) of the intestinal lumen. More than 90% of intestinal stenosis and atresia occurs in the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
Rare cases occur in the colon, and these may be associated with more
proximal atresias.
Extrinsic causes of congenital intestinal obstruction involve compression of the bowel by vessels (e.g., preduodenal portal vein), organs
(e.g., annular pancreas), and cysts (e.g., duplication, mesenteric).
Abnormalities in intestinal rotation during fetal development also
represent a unique extrinsic cause of congenital intestinal obstruction.
Malrotation is associated with inadequate mesenteric attachment of
the intestine to the posterior abdominal wall, which leaves the bowel
vulnerable to auto obstruction as a result of intestinal twisting or volvulus. Malrotation is commonly accompanied by congenital adhesions
that can compress and obstruct the duodenum as they extend from the
cecum to the right upper quadrant.
Obstruction is typically associated with bowel distention, which
is caused by an accumulation of ingested food, gas, and intestinal
secretions proximal to the point of obstruction. As the bowel dilates,
absorption of intestinal fluid is decreased and secretion of fluid and
electrolytes is increased. This shift results in isotonic intravascular
depletion, which is usually associated with hypokalemia. Bowel distention also results in a decrease in blood flow to the obstructed bowel.
As blood flow is shifted away from the intestinal mucosa, there is loss
of mucosal integrity. Bacteria proliferate in the stagnant bowel, with a
predominance of coliforms and anaerobes. This rapid proliferation of
bacteria, coupled with the loss of mucosal integrity, allows bacteria to
translocate across the bowel wall and potentially lead to endotoxemia,
bacteremia, and sepsis.
The clinical presentation of intestinal obstruction varies with the
cause, level of obstruction, vascular compromise, and time between
the obstructing event and the patient’s evaluation. Classic symptoms
of obstruction in the neonate include vomiting, abdominal distention,
and obstipation. Obstruction high in the intestinal tract results in large-­
volume, frequent, bilious emesis with little or no abdominal distention.
Pain is intermittent and is usually relieved by vomiting. Obstruction
in the distal small bowel leads to moderate or marked abdominal distention with emesis that is progressively feculent. Both proximal and
distal obstructions are eventually associated with obstipation. However, meconium stools can be passed initially if the obstruction is in
the upper part of the intestinal tract or if the obstruction developed
late in intrauterine life.
The diagnosis of congenital bowel obstruction relies on a combination of history, physical examination, and radiologic findings. In certain cases, the diagnosis is suggested in the prenatal period. Routine
prenatal ultrasound can detect polyhydramnios, which often accompanies high intestinal obstruction. The presence of polyhydramnios

should prompt aspiration of the infant’s stomach immediately after
birth. Aspiration of more than 15-­20 mL of fluid, particularly if it is
bile stained, is highly indicative of intestinal obstruction.
In the postnatal period, a plain radiograph is the initial diagnostic
study and can provide valuable information about potential associated complications. With completely obstructing lesions, plain radiographs reveal bowel distention proximal to the point of obstruction.
Upright or cross-­table lateral views typically demonstrate a series of
air-­fluid levels in the distended loops. Caution must be exercised in
using plain films to determine the location of intestinal obstruction.
Because colonic haustra are not fully developed in the neonate, small
and large bowel obstructions may be difficult to distinguish with plain
films. In these cases, contrast studies of the bowel or computed tomography images may be indicated. Oral or nasogastric contrast medium
may be used to identify obstructing lesions in the proximal bowel, and
contrast enemas may be used to diagnose more-­distal entities. Indeed,
enemas may also play a therapeutic role in relieving distal obstruction
caused by meconium ileus or meconium plug syndrome.
Initial treatment of infants and children with bowel obstruction
must be directed at fluid resuscitation and stabilizing the patient.
Nasogastric decompression usually relieves pain and vomiting. After
appropriate cultures, broad-­spectrum antibiotics are usually started
in ill-­appearing neonates with bowel obstruction and those with suspected strangulating infarction. Patients with strangulation must have
immediate surgical relief before the bowel infarcts, resulting in gangrene and intestinal perforation. Extensive intestinal necrosis results in
short bowel syndrome (see Chapter 385.6). Nonoperative conservative
management is usually limited to children with suspected adhesions
or inflammatory strictures that might resolve with nasogastric decompression or antiinflammatory medications. If clinical signs of improvement are not evident within 12-­24 hours, then operative intervention
is usually indicated.

376.1 Duodenal Obstruction
Christina B. Bales and Chris A. Liacouras
Congenital duodenal obstruction occurs in 2.5-­10/100,000 live births.
In most cases, it is caused by atresia, an intrinsic defect of bowel formation. It can also result from extrinsic compression by abnormal neighboring structures (e.g., annular pancreas, preduodenal portal vein),
duplication cysts, or congenital bands associated with malrotation.
Although intrinsic and extrinsic causes of duodenal obstruction occur
independently, they can also coexist. Thus a high index of suspicion for
more than one underlying etiology may be critical to avoiding unnecessary reoperations in these infants.
Duodenal atresia complicates 1/5-­10,000 live births and accounts
for up to 60% of all intestinal atresias. In contrast to more distal atresias, which likely arise from prenatal vascular accidents, duodenal
atresia results from failed recanalization of the intestinal lumen during gestation. Throughout the fourth and fifth week of normal fetal
development, the duodenal mucosa exhibits rapid proliferation of epithelial cells. Persistence of these cells, which should degenerate after
the seventh week of gestation, leads to occlusion of the lumen (atresia)
in approximately two thirds of cases and narrowing (stenosis) in the
remaining one third. Duodenal atresia can take several forms, including a thin membrane that occludes the lumen, a short fibrous cord that
connects two blind duodenal pouches, or a gap that spans two nonconnecting ends of the duodenum. The membranous form is most common, and it almost invariably occurs near the ampulla of Vater. In rare
cases, the membrane is distensible and is referred to as a windsock web.
This unusual form of duodenal atresia causes obstruction several centimeters distal to the origin of the membrane.
Approximately 50% of infants with duodenal atresia are premature.
Concomitant congenital anomalies are common and include congenital heart disease (30%), malrotation (10–30%), annular pancreas
(30%), renal anomalies (5–15%), esophageal atresia with or without
tracheoesophageal fistula (5–10%), skeletal malformations (5%), and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 376 u Intestinal Atresia, ­Stenosis, and Malrotation
anorectal anomalies (5%). Of these anomalies, only complex congenital
heart disease is associated with increased mortality. Annular pancreas
is associated with increased late complications, including gastroesophageal reflux disease, peptic ulcer disease, pancreatitis, gastric outlet and
recurrent duodenal obstruction, and gastric cancer. Thus long-­term
follow-­up of these patients into adulthood is warranted. Nearly half
of patients with duodenal atresia have chromosome abnormalities; trisomy 21 is identified in up to 40% of patients.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

The hallmark of duodenal obstruction is bilious vomiting without
abdominal distention, which is usually noted on the first day of life.
Peristaltic waves may be visualized early in the disease process. A history of polyhydramnios is present in up to 80% of pregnancies and is
caused by inadequate absorption of amniotic fluid in the distal intestine. This fluid may be bile stained because of intrauterine vomiting.
Jaundice is present in one third of the infants.
The diagnosis is suggested by the presence of a double-­bubble sign on
a plain abdominal radiograph (Fig. 376.1). The appearance is caused
by a distended and gas-­filled stomach and proximal duodenum, which
are invariably connected. Contrast studies are occasionally needed to
exclude malrotation and volvulus because intestinal infarction can
occur within 6-­12 hours if the volvulus is not relieved. Contrast studies are generally not necessary and may be associated with aspiration.
Prenatal diagnosis of duodenal atresia is readily made by fetal ultrasonography, which reveals a sonographic double-­bubble. Prenatal identification of duodenal atresia is associated with decreased morbidity and
fewer hospitalization days.

TREATMENT

The initial treatment of infants with duodenal atresia includes nasogastric or orogastric decompression and intravenous fluid replacement.
Echocardiography, renal ultrasound, and radiology of the chest and

2283

spine should be performed to evaluate for associated anomalies. Definitive correction of the atresia is usually postponed until life-­threatening
anomalies are evaluated and treated.
The typical surgical repair for duodenal atresia is duodenoduodenostomy. This procedure is also preferred in cases of concomitant or
isolated annular pancreas. In these instances, the duodenoduodenostomy is performed without dividing the pancreas. The dilated proximal
bowel might have to be tapered to improve peristalsis. Postoperatively,
a gastrostomy tube can be placed to drain the stomach and protect the
airway. Intravenous nutritional support or a transanastomotic jejunal
tube is needed until the infant starts to feed orally. Long-­term prognosis is excellent, approaching 90% survival in most series.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

376.2 Jejunal and Ileal Atresia and
­Obstruction
Christina B. Bales and Chris A. Liacouras
The primary etiologies of congenital small bowel obstruction involve
intrinsic abnormalities in anatomic development (jejunoileal stenosis
and atresia), mucus secretion (meconium ileus), and bowel wall innervation (long-­segment Hirschsprung disease).
Jejunoileal atresias are generally attributed to intrauterine vascular accidents, which result in segmental infarction and resorption of
the fetal intestine. Underlying events that potentiate vascular compromise include intestinal volvulus, intussusception, meconium ileus, and
strangulating herniation through an abdominal wall defect associated
with gastroschisis or omphalocele. Maternal behaviors that promote
vasoconstriction, such as cigarette smoking and cocaine use, can
also have a role. Only a few cases of familial inheritance have been
reported. In these families, multiple intestinal atresias have occurred
in an autosomal recessive pattern. Jejunoileal atresias have been linked
with multiparity, low birthweight, and prematurity. Unlike atresia in
the duodenum, they are not commonly associated with extraintestinal
anomalies.
Five types of jejunal and ileal atresias are encountered (Fig. 376.2),
with a relatively even distribution among the five types. In type I, a
mucosal web occludes the lumen, but continuity is maintained between
the proximal and distal bowel. Type II involves a small-­diameter solid
cord that connects the proximal and distal bowel. Type III is divided
into two subtypes. Type IIIa occurs when both ends of the bowel
end in blind loops, accompanied by a small mesenteric defect. Type
IIIb is similar, but it is associated with an extensive mesenteric defect
and a loss of the normal blood supply to the distal bowel. The distal
ileum coils around the ileocolic artery, from which it derives its entire
blood supply, producing an “apple-­peel” appearance. This anomaly is

IIIa

I

IIIb

II

IV

Fig. 376.2 Classification of intestinal atresia. Type I: Mucosal obstruc-

Fig. 376.1 Abdominal radiograph of a newborn infant held upright.

Note the “double-­bubble” gas shadow and the absence of gas in the
distal bowel in this case of congenital duodenal atresia.

tion caused by an intraluminal membrane with intact bowel wall and
mesentery. Type II: Blind ends are separated by a fibrous cord. Type IIIa:
Blind ends are separated by a V-­shaped mesenteric defect. Type IIIb:
“Apple-­peel” appearance. Type IV: Multiple atresias. (From Grosfeld J.
Jejunoileal atresia and stenosis. In Welch KJ, Randolph JG, Ravitch MM,
eds. Pediatric Surgery, 4th ed. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers;
1986.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2284 Part XVI u The Digestive System
associated with prematurity, an unusually short distal ileum, and significant foreshortening of the bowel. Type IV involves multiple intestinal atresias. In rare cases, Type IV atresia may be associated with
pathogenic variants in the TTC7A gene, which disrupt normal development of the thymus and intestinal epithelial lining of the intestine.
This subset of patients may present with stricturing inflammatory
bowel disease, severe combined immune deficiency (SCID), and associated recurrent sepsis. Thus type IV atresia uniquely warrants genetic
and immunologic screening.
Meconium ileus occurs primarily in newborn infants with cystic
fibrosis, an exocrine gland defect of chloride transport that results
in abnormally viscous secretions (see Chapter 454). Approximately
80–90% of infants with meconium ileus have cystic fibrosis, but only
10–15% of infants with cystic fibrosis present with meconium ileus.
Pathogenic variants in GUCY2C also produce meconium ileus. In simple cases of meconium ileus, the distal 20-­30 cm of ileum is collapsed
and filled with pellets of pale stool. The proximal bowel is dilated
and filled with thick meconium that resembles sticky syrup or glue.
Peristalsis fails to propel this viscid material forward, and it becomes
impacted in the ileum. In complicated cases, a volvulus of the dilated
proximal bowel can occur, resulting in intestinal ischemia, atresia, and/
or perforation. Perforation in utero results in meconium peritonitis,
which can lead to potentially obstructing adhesions and calcifications.
Both intestinal atresia and meconium ileus must be distinguished
from long-­
segment Hirschsprung disease. This condition involves
congenital absence of ganglion cells in the myenteric and submucosal plexuses of the bowel wall. In a small subset (5%) of patients, the
aganglionic segment includes the terminal ileum in addition to the
entire length of the colon. Infants with long-­segment Hirschsprung
disease present with a dilated small intestine that is ganglionated but
has hypertrophied walls, a funnel-­shaped transitional hypoganglionic
zone, and a collapsed distal aganglionic bowel. Congenital pseudoobstruction syndromes may mimic long-­segment Hirschsprung disease
and other etiologies of intestinal obstruction (see Chapter 378).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATION AND DIAGNOSIS

Distal intestinal obstruction is less likely than proximal obstruction to
be detected in utero. Polyhydramnios is identified in 20–35% of jejunoileal atresias, and it may be the first sign of intestinal obstruction.
Abdominal distention is rarely present at birth, but it develops rapidly after initiation of feeds in the first 12-­24 hours. Distention is often
accompanied by vomiting, which is often bilious. Up to 80% of infants
fail to pass meconium in the first 24 hours of life. Jaundice is reported
in 20–30% of patients.
In patients with obstruction caused by jejunoileal atresia or long-­
segment Hirschsprung disease, plain radiographs typically demonstrate multiple air-­fluid levels proximal to the obstruction in the
upright or lateral decubitus positions (Fig. 376.3). These levels may be

absent in patients with meconium ileus because the viscosity of the
secretions in the proximal bowel prevents layering. Instead, a typical
hazy or ground-­glass appearance may be appreciated in the right lower
quadrant. This haziness is caused by small bubbles of gas that become
trapped in inspissated meconium in the terminal ileal region. If there is
meconium peritonitis, patchy calcification may also be noted, particularly in the flanks. Plain films can reveal evidence of pneumoperitoneum due to intestinal perforation. Air may be seen in the subphrenic
regions on the upright view and over the liver in the left lateral decubitus position.
Because plain radiographs do not reliably distinguish between small
and large bowel in neonates, contrast studies are often required to localize the obstruction. Water-­soluble enemas (Gastrografin, Hypaque)
are particularly useful in differentiating atresia from meconium ileus
and Hirschsprung disease. A small microcolon suggests disuse due to
in utero obstruction proximal to the ileocecal valve. Abdominal ultrasound may be an important adjunctive study, which can help to distinguish meconium ileus from ileal atresia and identify concomitant
intestinal malrotation.

TREATMENT

Patients with small bowel obstruction should be stable and in adequate
fluid and electrolyte balance before operation or radiographic attempts
at disimpaction unless volvulus is suspected. Documented infections
should be treated with appropriate antibiotics. Prophylactic antibiotics
are usually given before surgery.
Ileal or jejunal atresia requires resection of the atretic portion of
the bowel followed by end-­to-­end anastomosis. In select cases, proximal bowel dilation necessitates initial decompressing ostomy creation
and/or bowel tapering before bowel anastomosis. If a simple mucosal
diaphragm is present, jejunoplasty or ileoplasty with partial excision
of the web is an acceptable alternative to resection. In uncomplicated
meconium ileus, Gastrografin enemas diagnose the obstruction and
wash out the inspissated material. Gastrografin is hypertonic, and care
must be taken to avoid dehydration, shock, and bowel perforation. The
enema may have to be repeated after 8-­12 hours. Resection after reduction is not needed if there have been no ischemic complications.
Approximately 50% of patients with simple meconium ileus do not
adequately respond to water-­soluble enemas and need laparotomy.
Operative management is indicated when the obstruction cannot be
relieved by repeated attempts at nonoperative management and for
infants with complicated meconium ileus. The extent of surgical intervention depends on the degree of pathology. In simple meconium ileus,
the plug can be relieved by manipulation or direct enteral irrigation
with N-­acetylcysteine following an enterotomy. In complicated cases,
bowel resection, peritoneal lavage, abdominal drainage, and stoma
formation may be necessary. Total parenteral nutrition is generally
required.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

376.3 Malrotation
Christina B. Bales and Chris A. Liacouras

A

B

Fig. 376.3 A, Abdominal radiograph in a neonate with bilious vomit-

ing shows a few loops of dilated intestine with air-­fluid levels. B, At laparotomy, a type I (mucosal) jejunal atresia was observed. (From O’Neill
JA Jr, Grosfeld JL, Fonkalsrud EW, et al., eds. Principles of Pediatric
Surgery, 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2003: p 493.)

Disruptions in the normal sequential herniation, rotation, and fixation
of the midgut during development give rise to a spectrum of rotational
abnormalities. The gut starts as a straight tube from stomach to rectum.
Intestinal rotation and attachment begin in the fifth week of gestation
when the mid-­bowel (distal duodenum to mid-­transverse colon) elongates, gradually herniates through the umbilical ring, and then rotates
in stages in a counterclockwise direction, using the superior mesenteric
artery (SMA) as a rotational axis. As a 270-­degree counterclockwise
rotation is accomplished, the third portion of the duodenum passes
posterior to the SMA and the duodenal-­jejunal junction moves to the
left upper quadrant and becomes suspended in the ligament of Treitz
(LOT), while the cecum settles in the right lower quadrant. The ascending and descending colon subsequently become fixed in the right and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 376 u Intestinal Atresia, ­Stenosis, and Malrotation

2285

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptomatic malrotation occurs in 1 in 6,000 live births, whereas
asymptomatic cases may be as frequent as 1 in 200 live births. Most
symptomatic patients present in the first year of life, with approximately 50% presenting in the first week and 75% in the first month
of life. Symptomatic infants typically present with bilious emesis due
to bowel obstruction caused by volvulus or duodenal compression by
Ladd bands or other adhesive bands that constrict the small and large
bowel. Infants with volvulus may experience irritability, bloody stools,
and rapid clinical deterioration with signs of sepsis. Older children
with midgut volvulus may manifest similar features, though symptoms
may be more subtle. Sporadic colicky pain and bilious emesis due to
intermittent volvulus mandates a high level of suspicion for this entity.

DIAGNOSIS

-

Fig. 376.4 Mechanism of intestinal obstruction with incomplete rota-

tion of the midgut (malrotation). The dashed lines show the course the
cecum should have taken. Failure to rotate has left obstructing bands
across the duodenum and a narrow pedicle for the midgut loop, making it susceptible to volvulus. (From Nixon HH, O’Donnell B. The Essentials of Pediatric Surgery. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott; 1961.)

left retroperitoneum, respectively. Fixation of the bowel at the LOT and
in the retroperitoneum provides a broad-­based support to the mesentery, thus preventing twisting of the mesenteric root and kinking of the
vascular supply. Intestinal rotation and attachment are completed by
the 12th week of gestation.
Nonrotation occurs when the bowel fails to rotate after it returns to
the abdominal cavity. The first and second portions of the duodenum
assume their normal position, but the residual small bowel remains on
the right side of the abdomen and the colon resides on the left. In contrast, typical malrotation involves failure of the cecum to fully rotate
into the right lower quadrant (Fig. 376.4) and form the normal broad-­
based adherence to the posterior abdominal wall. As a consequence of
this incomplete rotation, the mesentery, including the SMA, is tethered by a narrow stalk. This configuration leaves patients with malrotation vulnerable to midgut volvulus, a life-­threatening complication
that occurs when the small bowel twists around the SMA, leading to
vascular compromise and ischemia of the bowel. Bowel obstruction
may also be caused by congenital bands of tissue (Ladd bands), which
can extend from the cecum to the right upper quadrant, compress, and
possibly obstruct the duodenum.
Rotational abnormalities are commonly associated with other congenital anomalies, including intestinal atresia, Hirschsprung disease
and other congenital motility disorders, diaphragmatic hernia, gastroschisis, and omphalocele. Malrotation may also be associated with
heterotaxy syndrome, which is a complex of congenital anomalies
including heart malformations, malrotation, biliary atresia, and asplenia or polysplenia (see Chapter 480.11).

Upper GI series is considered the gold standard for diagnosis
(≥93%) and reveals displacement of duodenojejunal junction (DJJ)
from its normal position to the left of the spine, generally posterior
and level or superior to the duodenal bulb. DJJ displacement may
be appreciated in other conditions, including spleen or left kidney
enlargement/tumor, gastric or colonic distention, and enteric feeding tubes. As fixation of the DJJ increases with age (>4 years), the
specificity of these findings for malrotation improves. In equivocal
cases, a follow-­through series or contrast enema may demonstrate
malposition of the cecum, though this finding may be absent in up
to 20% of patients. Ultrasonography can demonstrate the inversion
of the SMA and vein, with the vein located to the left rather than
to the right of the artery. In cases of midgut volvulus, the upper GI
series may reveal a corkscrew appearance of the small bowel or a
bird’s beak narrowing of the duodenum, consistent with obstruction, and Doppler ultrasound may show a whirlpool sign.

TREATMENT

Surgical intervention is recommended for any symptomatic patient
with malrotation, regardless of age. Treatment of asymptomatic malrotation appreciated incidentally on imaging is more controversial,
particularly in patients with congenital heterotaxy syndrome, who
may be at higher risk for surgical complications. In asymptomatic
patients careful assessment of imaging, supplemented in some cases
by exploratory laparoscopy, guides selection for surgical intervention.
Those patients who are older and have a broad-­based mesentery may
be appropriate for nonsurgical observation with careful parental counseling. If a volvulus is present, surgery is done immediately as an acute
emergency. The volvulus is reduced, and a Ladd procedure is typically
performed. In the Ladd procedure, the duodenum and upper jejunum
are freed of any bands and remain in the right abdominal cavity. The
colon is freed of adhesions and placed in the right abdomen with the
cecum in the left lower quadrant, usually accompanied by incidental
appendectomy. The Ladd procedure may be performed laparoscopically for malrotation without volvulus, but it is generally done as an
open procedure if volvulus is present. The purpose of surgical intervention is to minimize the risk of subsequent volvulus rather than to
return the bowel to a normal anatomic configuration. Extensive intestinal ischemia from volvulus can result in short bowel syndrome (see
Chapter 385.6).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2286 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 377

Intestinal Duplications,
Meckel Diverticulum, and
Other Remnants of the
Omphalomesenteric Duct
377.1 Intestinal Duplication
Máire A. Conrad and Chris A. Liacouras
Duplications of the intestinal tract are rare anomalies that consist of
well-­formed tubular or spherical structures firmly attached to the
intestine with a common blood supply. The lining of the duplications resembles that of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Duplications
are located on the mesenteric border and can communicate with the
intestinal lumen. Duplications can be classified into three categories:
(1) localized duplications, (2) duplications associated with spinal cord
defects and vertebral malformations, and (3) duplications of the colon.
Occasionally (10–15% of cases), multiple duplications are found.
Localized duplications can occur in any area of the GI tract but are
most common in the ileum and jejunum. They are usually cystic or tubular structures within the wall of the bowel. The cause is unknown, but
their development has been attributed to defects in recanalization of the
intestinal lumen after the solid stage of embryologic development. Duplication of the intestine occurring in association with vertebral and spinal
cord anomalies (hemivertebra, anterior spina bifida, band connection
between lesion and cervical or thoracic spine) is thought to arise from
splitting of the notochord in the developing embryo. Duplication of the
colon is usually associated with anomalies of the urinary tract and genitals. Duplication of the entire colon, rectum, anus, and terminal ileum
rarely occur. The defects are thought to be secondary to caudal twinning,
with duplication of the hindgut, genital, and lower urinary tracts.

seventh week of gestation. The omphalomesenteric duct connects
the yolk sac to the gut in a developing embryo and provides nutrition
until the placenta is established. Between the fifth and seventh week
of gestation, the duct attenuates and separates from the intestine.
Just before this involution, the epithelium of the yolk sac develops
a lining similar to that of the stomach. Partial or complete failure of
involution of the omphalomesenteric duct results in various residual
structures. Meckel diverticulum is the most common of these structures, occurring in 2–3% of all infants. A typical Meckel diverticulum is a true diverticulum containing all layers of the small intestinal
wall and is a 3-­to 6-­cm outpouching of the ileum along the antimesenteric border 50-­75 cm (approximately 2 feet) from the ileocecal
valve (Fig. 377.1). The distance from the ileocecal valve depends on
the age of the patient. Meckel diverticulum has been conveniently
characterized by the “rule of 2s,” which explains the classic presentation of this congenital anomaly. Meckel diverticula are found in
approximately 2% of the general population, are usually located 2
feet proximal to the ileocecal valve, are approximately 2 inches in
length, can contain two types of ectopic tissue (pancreatic or gastric), generally present before the age of 2 years, and are found twice
as often in females. Although intraabdominal in location, a rare
presentation of a Meckel diverticulum is entrapment in an inguinal, umbilical, or femoral hernia (known as a Littre hernia). Other
omphalomesenteric duct remnants occur infrequently, including a
persistently patent duct, a solid cord, or a cord with a central cyst or
a diverticulum associated with a persistent cord between the diverticulum and the umbilicus.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms of a Meckel diverticulum usually arise in the first or second
year of life (average: 2.5 years), but initial symptoms may occur in the
first decade. The majority of symptomatic Meckel diverticula are lined
by an ectopic mucosa, including an acid-­secreting mucosa that causes
intermittent painless rectal bleeding by ulceration of the adjacent normal ileal mucosa. This ectopic mucosa is most commonly of gastric
origin, but it can also be pancreatic, jejunal, or a combination of these
tissues. Unlike in the duodenum, the secreted acid is not neutralized by
pancreatic bicarbonate.
The stool is typically described as brick colored or currant jelly colored. Bleeding can cause significant anemia but is usually self-­limited
because of contraction of the splanchnic vessels, as patients become

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms depend on the size, location, and type of mucosal lining.
Duplications can cause bowel obstruction by compressing the adjacent
intestinal lumen, or they can act as the lead point of an intussusception
or a site for a volvulus. If they are lined by acid-­secreting mucosa, they
can cause ulceration, perforation, and hemorrhage of or into the adjacent bowel. Patients can present with abdominal pain, vomiting, palpable mass, or acute GI hemorrhage. Intestinal duplications in the thorax
(neuroenteric cysts) can manifest as respiratory distress. Duplications
of the lower bowel can cause constipation or diarrhea or be associated
with recurrent prolapse of the rectum.
The diagnosis is suspected based on the history and physical examination. Radiologic studies such as barium studies, ultrasonography,
CT, and MRI are helpful but usually nonspecific, demonstrating cystic structures or mass effects. Radioisotope technetium scanning can
localize ectopic gastric mucosa. The treatment of duplications is surgical resection and management of associated defects.

377.2 Meckel Diverticulum and Other
­Remnants of the Omphalomesenteric
Duct
Máire A. Conrad and Chris A. Liacouras
Meckel diverticulum is the most common congenital anomaly of the
GI tract and is caused by the incomplete obliteration of the omphalomesenteric duct (also known as the vitelline duct) during the

Fig. 377.1 Typical Meckel diverticulum located on the antimesenteric
border.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 378 u Motility Disorders and Hirschsprung Disease
hypovolemic. Bleeding from a Meckel diverticulum can also be less
dramatic, with melanotic stools.
Less often, a Meckel diverticulum is associated with partial or complete bowel obstruction. The most common mechanism of obstruction
occurs when the diverticulum acts as the lead point of an intussusception. The mean age of onset of obstruction is younger than that for
patients presenting with bleeding. Obstruction can also result from
intraperitoneal bands connecting residual omphalomesenteric duct
remnants to the ileum and umbilicus. These bands cause obstruction
by internal herniation or volvulus of the small bowel around the band.
A Meckel diverticulum occasionally becomes inflamed (diverticulitis)
and manifests similarly to acute appendicitis. These children are older,
with a mean of 8 years of age. Diverticulitis can lead to perforation and
peritonitis.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of omphalomesenteric duct remnants depends on the
clinical presentation. If an infant or child presents with significant
painless rectal bleeding, the presence of a Meckel diverticulum should
be suspected because Meckel diverticulum accounts for 50% of all
lower GI bleeds in children younger than 2 years of age.
Confirmation of a Meckel diverticulum can be difficult. Plain
abdominal radiographs are of no value, and routine barium studies rarely fill the diverticulum. The most sensitive study is a Meckel
radionuclide scan, which is performed after intravenous infusion
of technetium-­99m pertechnetate. The mucus-­secreting cells of the
ectopic gastric mucosa take up pertechnetate, permitting visualization of the Meckel diverticulum (Fig. 377.2). The uptake can be
enhanced with various agents, including histamine H2-­blockers such
as famotidine or cimetidine, glucagon, and pentagastrin. The sensitivity of the enhanced scan is approximately 85%, with a specificity
of approximately 95%. A false-­negative scan may be seen in anemic
patients; although false-­positive results are uncommon, they have
been reported with intussusception, appendicitis, duplication cysts,
arteriovenous malformations, and tumors. Other methods of detection include radiolabeled tagged red blood cell scan (the patient must
be actively bleeding), abdominal ultrasound, superior mesenteric
angiography, abdominal CT scan, or exploratory laparoscopy. In
patients with omphalomesenteric duct remnants who present with
intestinal obstruction or symptoms most similar to appendicitis, the
diagnosis is rarely made before surgery.
The treatment of a symptomatic Meckel diverticulum is surgical
excision. A diverticulectomy can be performed safely as either a laparoscopic or open procedure. There is significant debate regarding the
proper management of an asymptomatic Meckel diverticulum and
whether excision versus observation is appropriate. However, the risk
of serious complications does seem to exceed the operative risk in children younger than 8 years old.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

20 min.

25 min.

Fig. 377.2 Meckel scan demonstrating accumulation of technetium

in the stomach (superior), bladder (inferior) and in the acid-­secreting
mucosa of a Meckel diverticulum (arrows).

2287

Chapter 378

Motility Disorders and
Hirschsprung Disease
378.1 Chronic Intestinal Pseudoobstruction
Jennifer Webster, Kristin N. Fiorino, and
Chris A. Liacouras
Chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction (CIPO) comprises a group of primary and secondary disorders characterized as a motility disorder with
the dominant defect of impaired peristalsis; symptoms are consistent
with intestinal obstruction in the absence of mechanical obstruction
(Tables 378.1 and 378.2). It has been suggested that pseudoobstruction
in the pediatric population should be referred to as pediatric intestinal
pseudoobstruction (PIPO) as it is a distinct entity from adult CIPO
(Table 378.3). The natural history of primary pseudoobstruction is that
of a progressive disorder, although there are occasional cases of secondary pseudoobstruction caused by conditions that can transiently
or permanently alter bowel motility. The most common cause of acute
Table 378.1  Classification of Pediatric Intestinal
Pseudoobstruction
PRIMARY PIPO
• Sporadic or familial forms of myopathy and/or neuropathy and/
or mesenchymopathy (abnormal ICC development) that relate to
disordered development, degeneration, or inflammation.
Inflammatory (including autoimmune) conditions include
lymphocytic and eosinophilic ganglionitis and/or leiomyositis
• Mitochondrial neuro-­gastrointestinal-­encephalomyopathy
(MNGIE) and other mitochondrial diseases
• Neuropathy associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIB
• Hirschsprung disease, for example, total intestinal aganglionosis*
• MMIHS
SECONDARY PIPO
• Conditions affecting GI smooth muscle:
• Rheumatologic conditions (dermatomyositis/polymyositis,
scleroderma, systematic lupus erythematosus, Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome)
• Other (Duchenne muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy,
amyloidosis, ceroidosis or alternatively reported as brown bowel
syndrome)
• Pathologies affecting the enteric nervous system (familial
dysautonomia, primary dysfunction of the autonomic nervous
system, neurofibromatosis, diabetic neuropathy, fetal alcohol
syndrome, postviral-­related inflammatory neuropathy, e.g.,
cytomegalovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus, varicella zoster virus, JC virus)
• Endocrinologic disorders (hypothyroidism, diabetes,
hypoparathyroidism, pheochromocytoma)
• Metabolic conditions (uremia, porphyria, electrolyte imbalances,
e.g., potassium, magnesium, calcium)
• Gastroschisis
• Neuropathy post neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis
• Other: celiac disease, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, Crohn disease,
radiation injury, Chagas disease, Kawasaki disease, angioedema,
drugs (e.g., opiates, anthraquinone laxatives, calcium channel
blockers, antidepressants, antineoplastic agents like vinca alkaloids),
paraneoplastic CIPO, major trauma/surgery, chromosome
abnormalities
Idiopathic (i.e., where forms of primary or secondary PIPO classified
earlier do not, as yet, have a defined etiopathogenesis)
*Needs to be excluded in all cases of PIPO
PIPO, Pediatric intestinal pseudoobstruction; ICC, interstitial cells of Cajal; GI,
gastrointestinal; MMIHS, megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome.
From Thapar N, Saliakellis E, Benninga M, et al. Paediatric Intestinal Pseudoobstruction: Evidence and Consensus-­based Recommendations From an ESPGHAN-­
Led Expert Group. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2018;66(6):991–1019. Table 3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 378 u Motility Disorders and Hirschsprung Disease
hypovolemic. Bleeding from a Meckel diverticulum can also be less
dramatic, with melanotic stools.
Less often, a Meckel diverticulum is associated with partial or complete bowel obstruction. The most common mechanism of obstruction
occurs when the diverticulum acts as the lead point of an intussusception. The mean age of onset of obstruction is younger than that for
patients presenting with bleeding. Obstruction can also result from
intraperitoneal bands connecting residual omphalomesenteric duct
remnants to the ileum and umbilicus. These bands cause obstruction
by internal herniation or volvulus of the small bowel around the band.
A Meckel diverticulum occasionally becomes inflamed (diverticulitis)
and manifests similarly to acute appendicitis. These children are older,
with a mean of 8 years of age. Diverticulitis can lead to perforation and
peritonitis.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of omphalomesenteric duct remnants depends on the
clinical presentation. If an infant or child presents with significant
painless rectal bleeding, the presence of a Meckel diverticulum should
be suspected because Meckel diverticulum accounts for 50% of all
lower GI bleeds in children younger than 2 years of age.
Confirmation of a Meckel diverticulum can be difficult. Plain
abdominal radiographs are of no value, and routine barium studies rarely fill the diverticulum. The most sensitive study is a Meckel
radionuclide scan, which is performed after intravenous infusion
of technetium-­99m pertechnetate. The mucus-­secreting cells of the
ectopic gastric mucosa take up pertechnetate, permitting visualization of the Meckel diverticulum (Fig. 377.2). The uptake can be
enhanced with various agents, including histamine H2-­blockers such
as famotidine or cimetidine, glucagon, and pentagastrin. The sensitivity of the enhanced scan is approximately 85%, with a specificity
of approximately 95%. A false-­negative scan may be seen in anemic
patients; although false-­positive results are uncommon, they have
been reported with intussusception, appendicitis, duplication cysts,
arteriovenous malformations, and tumors. Other methods of detection include radiolabeled tagged red blood cell scan (the patient must
be actively bleeding), abdominal ultrasound, superior mesenteric
angiography, abdominal CT scan, or exploratory laparoscopy. In
patients with omphalomesenteric duct remnants who present with
intestinal obstruction or symptoms most similar to appendicitis, the
diagnosis is rarely made before surgery.
The treatment of a symptomatic Meckel diverticulum is surgical
excision. A diverticulectomy can be performed safely as either a laparoscopic or open procedure. There is significant debate regarding the
proper management of an asymptomatic Meckel diverticulum and
whether excision versus observation is appropriate. However, the risk
of serious complications does seem to exceed the operative risk in children younger than 8 years old.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

20 min.

25 min.

Fig. 377.2 Meckel scan demonstrating accumulation of technetium

in the stomach (superior), bladder (inferior) and in the acid-­secreting
mucosa of a Meckel diverticulum (arrows).

2287

Chapter 378

Motility Disorders and
Hirschsprung Disease
378.1 Chronic Intestinal Pseudoobstruction
Jennifer Webster, Kristin N. Fiorino, and
Chris A. Liacouras
Chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction (CIPO) comprises a group of primary and secondary disorders characterized as a motility disorder with
the dominant defect of impaired peristalsis; symptoms are consistent
with intestinal obstruction in the absence of mechanical obstruction
(Tables 378.1 and 378.2). It has been suggested that pseudoobstruction
in the pediatric population should be referred to as pediatric intestinal
pseudoobstruction (PIPO) as it is a distinct entity from adult CIPO
(Table 378.3). The natural history of primary pseudoobstruction is that
of a progressive disorder, although there are occasional cases of secondary pseudoobstruction caused by conditions that can transiently
or permanently alter bowel motility. The most common cause of acute
Table 378.1  Classification of Pediatric Intestinal
Pseudoobstruction
PRIMARY PIPO
• Sporadic or familial forms of myopathy and/or neuropathy and/
or mesenchymopathy (abnormal ICC development) that relate to
disordered development, degeneration, or inflammation.
Inflammatory (including autoimmune) conditions include
lymphocytic and eosinophilic ganglionitis and/or leiomyositis
• Mitochondrial neuro-­gastrointestinal-­encephalomyopathy
(MNGIE) and other mitochondrial diseases
• Neuropathy associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIB
• Hirschsprung disease, for example, total intestinal aganglionosis*
• MMIHS
SECONDARY PIPO
• Conditions affecting GI smooth muscle:
• Rheumatologic conditions (dermatomyositis/polymyositis,
scleroderma, systematic lupus erythematosus, Ehlers-­Danlos
syndrome)
• Other (Duchenne muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy,
amyloidosis, ceroidosis or alternatively reported as brown bowel
syndrome)
• Pathologies affecting the enteric nervous system (familial
dysautonomia, primary dysfunction of the autonomic nervous
system, neurofibromatosis, diabetic neuropathy, fetal alcohol
syndrome, postviral-­related inflammatory neuropathy, e.g.,
cytomegalovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus, varicella zoster virus, JC virus)
• Endocrinologic disorders (hypothyroidism, diabetes,
hypoparathyroidism, pheochromocytoma)
• Metabolic conditions (uremia, porphyria, electrolyte imbalances,
e.g., potassium, magnesium, calcium)
• Gastroschisis
• Neuropathy post neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis
• Other: celiac disease, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, Crohn disease,
radiation injury, Chagas disease, Kawasaki disease, angioedema,
drugs (e.g., opiates, anthraquinone laxatives, calcium channel
blockers, antidepressants, antineoplastic agents like vinca alkaloids),
paraneoplastic CIPO, major trauma/surgery, chromosome
abnormalities
Idiopathic (i.e., where forms of primary or secondary PIPO classified
earlier do not, as yet, have a defined etiopathogenesis)
*Needs to be excluded in all cases of PIPO
PIPO, Pediatric intestinal pseudoobstruction; ICC, interstitial cells of Cajal; GI,
gastrointestinal; MMIHS, megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome.
From Thapar N, Saliakellis E, Benninga M, et al. Paediatric Intestinal Pseudoobstruction: Evidence and Consensus-­based Recommendations From an ESPGHAN-­
Led Expert Group. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2018;66(6):991–1019. Table 3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2288 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 378.2  Primary Pediatric Intestinal Pseudoobstruction with Identified Genetic Pathogenic Variants
GENE

SYNDROME

Sox 10

Type IV Waardenburg
syndrome

Autosomal
dominant

INHERITANCE

Peripheral neuropathy with
hypomyelination, sensorineural
deafness and pseudoobstruction

PHENOTYPE

Neonatal period

AGE OF ONSET

POLG1 (DNA-­
polymerase
gamma)

Congenital myopathy and
gastrointestinal
pseudoobstruction

Autosomal
recessive

Associated with mitochondrial
depletion and deletions. Severe
hypotonia and generalized muscle
weakness, severe abdominal
distension and hypoactive bowel

Neonatal period

FLNA (filamin A)

Chronic idiopathic intestinal
pseudoobstruction (CIIPX)

X-­linked recessive

Abnormal filamin A leads to
cytoskeletal abnormalities and
potentially disrupts enteric-­neuron
structure and function. Seizures
and progressive abdominal
distension and obstruction

Neonatal period

L1CAM (L1 cell
adhesion molecule)

Hydrocephalus with stenosis
of the aqueduct of Sylvius
(HSAS) and congenital
idiopathic intestinal
pseudoobstruction

Autosomal
recessive

Defect in the differentiation of
the interstitial cells of Cajal
leading to progressive distension
and intermittent episodes of
obstruction

Neonatal period

ACTG2 (enteric
smooth muscle
actin–gamma 2)

Familial visceral myopathy;
megacystis-­microcolon-­
intestinal hypoperistalsis
syndrome

Autosomal
dominant,
sporadic

Altered ACTG2 protein in the
muscularis propria leads to
impaired contractility

Neonatal to third decade
in life

MYH11 (myosin
heavy chain 11)

Megacystis-­microcolon-­
intestinal hypoperistalsis
syndrome

Autosomal
recessive

Abnormal MYH11 in smooth muscle
myosin leads to impaired contractility

Neonatal to third decade
in life

MYLK (myosin light
chain kinase)

Megacystis-­microcolon-­
intestinal hypoperistalsis
syndrome

Autosomal recessive

Abnormal MYLK leads to impaired
smooth muscle cell contraction

Neonatal to third decade
in life

LMOD1 (leiomodin 1)

Megacystis-­microcolon-­
intestinal hypoperistalsis
syndrome

Sporadic

Abnormal LMOD1 leads to impaired
intestinal smooth muscle contractility

Neonatal to third decade
in life

MYL9 (myosin
regulatory light
chain 9)

Megacystis-­microcolon-­
intestinal hypoperistalsis
syndrome

Autosomal
recessive

Abnormal MYL9 leads to impaired
intestinal smooth muscle
contractility

Neonatal to third decade
in life

RET protooncogene
(receptor tyrosine
kinase)

MEN2B

Autosomal
dominant

Gain-­in-­function mutation associated
with intestinal ganglioneuromas
leading to increased cell number in
the myenteric plexus and dysmotility

Infancy to third decade
of life

TYMP (thymidine
phosphorylase)

Mitochondrial
neurogastrointestinal
encephalomyopathy
(MNGIE)

Autosomal
recessive

Accumulation of thymidine in
mitochondrial DNA leads to
impaired function. Multisystem
mitochondrial disease with
progressive gastrointestinal
dysmotility

Infancy to third decade
of life

RAD21

Mungan syndrome

Autosomal
recessive

Pseudoobstruction,
megaduodenum, long segment
Barrett esophagus and cardiac
abnormalities

First to second decade
of life

SGOL1

Chronic atrial and intestinal
dysrhythmia (CAID)

Autosomal
recessive

Accelerated cell cycle progression
and enhanced activation of
transforming growth factor-­β
signaling leading to changes in
both the enteric nervous system
and smooth muscle

First to fourth decade of
life

ACTA2

Megacystitis-­microcolon-­
intestinal hypoperistalsis

Autosomal
dominant

Smooth muscle dysfunction,
congenital mydriasis

Neonatal period

Modified from Gamboa H, Sood M. Pediatric intestinal pseudo-­obstruction in the era of genetic sequencing. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2019;21:1–12. Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 378 u Motility Disorders and Hirschsprung Disease

2289

Table 378.3  Common and Distinctive Features of Pediatric Chronic Intestinal Pseudoobstruction
CHILDREN

ADOLESCENTS AND YOUNG ADULTS

Etiology

Majority of cases appear to be congenital (up to 80%) and
primary. Secondary forms rare (<10%)

Secondary forms (mostly to systemic disease)
common and account for up to 50% of cases

Disease subtype

Neuropathies more common (∼70%) with myopathic forms seen
in ∼30%

Predominantly neuropathies (majority inflammatory)
(∼45%) with myopathies accounting for (∼30%)

Symptom onset

In utero, from birth or early infancy (65–80% of patients by 12 mo
of age)

Median age of onset is 20-­40 yr

Clinical features

Recurrent or continuous episodes of intestinal
pseudoobstruction with symptoms present from birth/early life
Pain infrequently seen (approximately 30%)
Urologic involvement common (36–100%)
Intestinal malrotation in about 30% of cases
High risk of colonic and small bowel volvulus

Chronic abdominal pain and distension with
superimposed acute episodes of pseudoobstruction
Pain is a cardinal symptom present in at least 80% of
patients
Urologic involvement rare
Intestinal malrotation rarely seen
Low risk of colonic and small bowel volvulus

Natural history

Poor outcome predicted by myopathic forms of PIPO; urinary
involvement; concurrent intestinal malrotation; and inability to
tolerate enteral feeds
Risk of mortality in approximately 20% of cases

Low mortality if ability to restore oral feeding and the
presence of symptoms <20 yr of age
High mortality if systemic sclerosis or paraneoplasia
and severe/diffuse esophageal and intestinal
dysmotility

Diagnostic approach

Diagnosis relies on clinical picture and radiology together with
specialized tests (e.g., intestinal manometry, histopathology)
Dilated bowel loops with fluid levels commonly absent (∼40%) in
patients presenting in the neonatal period
Histopathology yield high and used to inform management, for
example, use of parenteral nutrition in intestinal myopathies
and prokinetics in intestinal neuropathies
Apart from specific indications little yield from investigating for
secondary PIPO
Need to differentiate from feeding problems and fabricated or
induced illness.

Diagnosis made on clinical picture and radiology with
variable use of intestinal manometry
On radiology defined by the presence of dilated
loops of bowel with fluid levels
Histopathology has a positive yield in the majority of
patients but guides treatment only in minority
May help support a diagnosis of secondary CIPO
with other clinical findings/investigations

Nutritional therapy

Significant number (∼80%) require parenteral nutrition to maintain
normal growth and development. Specialized feeds (e.g.,
hydrolyzed protein feeds) and feeding routes (e.g., jejunal)
used to promote enteral feed tolerance

Approximately 20–50% need home parenteral
nutrition to prevent malnutrition

Pharmacologic
therapy

Virtually no evidence base from controlled trials. Use of
medication mostly anecdotal, case reports or drawn from adult
literature

Few controlled trials, often small studies; few
conclusions can be drawn

Surgical therapy

Venting ostomies very commonly used to decompress and
reduce pseudoobstructive events; Surgery as a “bridge” to
transplantation may be indicated in highly selected cases

Venting or defunctioning ostomies may help some
patients.
Little role for surgical resection

PIPO, Pediatric intestinal pseudoobstruction.
Modified from Thapar N, Saliakellis E, Benninga M, et al. Paediatric Intestinal Pseudo-­obstruction: Evidence and Consensus-­based Recommendations From an ESPGHAN-­Led Expert
Group. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2018;66(6):991–1019. Table 2.

pseudoobstruction is Ogilvie syndrome (acute pseudoobstruction of
the colon). Pseudoobstruction represents a wide spectrum of pathologic disorders from abnormal myoelectric activity to abnormalities of
the nerves (intestinal neuropathy) or musculature (intestinal myopathy) of the gut. The organs involved can include the entire gastrointestinal tract or be limited to certain components, although almost always
include the small bowel. The distinctive pathologic abnormalities are
considered together because of their clinical similarities. For these reasons, CIPO may be thought of more as a clinical syndrome at times.
Most congenital forms of primary pseudoobstruction occur sporadically, although autosomal dominant (SOX10, ACTG2, RET), autosomal
recessive (RAD2I, SGOL1, TYMP, POLG), X-­linked (FLNA, L1CAM),
and familial patterns of inheritance have been identified (see Table 378.2).
Patients with autosomal dominant forms of pseudoobstruction have
variable expressions of the disease. Patients with pathogenic variants in
TYMP and POLG genes present with mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE) syndrome; mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) syndrome is
another mitochondrial disorder associated with CIPO. MNGIE is characterized by intestinal dysmotility, abdominal pain and distention, emesis,

cachexia, ptosis, leukoencephalopathy, peripheral neuropathy (paresthesia,
pain), and myopathy. Sixty percent have symptoms (often subtle) before
age 20 years (see Chapter 378.2). Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis (MMIHS) syndrome includes pseudoobstruction plus bladder
dysfunction and is due to pathogenic variants in ACTG2 and other genes
(Table 378.2). Acquired pseudoobstruction can follow episodes of acute
gastroenteritis, presumably resulting in injury to the myenteric plexus.
In congenital pseudoobstruction, abnormalities of the muscle or
nerves can be demonstrated in most cases. In myopathies, the smooth
muscle is involved, in which the outer longitudinal muscle layer is
replaced by fibrous material. These manifestations of visceral myopathies may be a primary or secondary phenomenon. The enteric nervous
system is usually altered in neuropathies and may involve disorganized
ganglia, hypoganglionosis, or hyperganglionosis. Abnormalities in the
interstitial cells of Cajal, the intestinal pacemaker, are classified as mesenchymopathies. In others, mitochondrial defects have been identified.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

More than half the children with congenital pseudoobstruction experience symptoms in the neonatal period (see Table 378.3). Two thirds of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2290 Part XVI u The Digestive System

C

A

B

D

E

G

F

Fig. 378.1 Synoptic view of the chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction (CIPO) spectrum. A and B, The most severe pediatric cases with antenatal (in

utero) evidence of multivisceral dilation, often gut (B) and urinary system, commonly associated with an extremely poor prognosis. C and D, CIPO
phenotype with rapid progression to intestinal dilation (± ureter/bladder) and failure, often occurring as a result of an anamnestically reported gastroenteritis. Massive bowel dilation (C) and associated histopathology (D; corresponds to white squared area in C) revealed an intense inflammatory
(mainly lymphocytic) neuropathy (hence, myenteric ganglionitis). Alkaline phosphatase anti-­alkaline phosphatase immunohistochemical technique
using specific anti-­CD8 monoclonal antibodies was used to identify a subset of T lymphocytes. E and G, Examples of another phenotype of the
syndrome that may be seen in patients who have more insidious mild and nonspecific symptoms progressing to a classic CIPO over time. E, Markedly distended abdomen of a 32-­yr-­old man who presented with subocclusive episodes after years of unspecific (dyspeptic-­like/irritable bowel
syndrome–like) symptoms. Note the evident air-­fluid levels detectable in upright position in anteroposterior (F) and laterolateral (G) plain abdominal radiographs. (A from Shen O, Schimmel MS, Eitan R, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of intestinal pseudo-­obstruction. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol.
2007;29:229–231; B–G from Di Nardo G, Di Lorenzo C, Lauro A, et al. Chronic intestinal pseudo-­obstruction in children and adults: diagnosis and
therapeutic options. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2017;29:e12945.)

infants presenting in the first few days of life are born prematurely, and
approximately 40% have malrotation of the intestine. In 75% of all affected
children, symptoms occur in the first year of life, whereas the remainder
are usually symptomatic within the next several years. Females present
with CIPO more than males during the first year of life, with equal sex
distribution in older children. The most common symptoms are abdominal distention (85–95% of patients) and vomiting (55–90%). Constipation,
growth failure, and abdominal pain occur in approximately 60% of patients
and diarrhea in 25–30%. The symptoms wax and wane in most patients;
poor nutrition, psychologic stress, and intercurrent illness tend to exacerbate symptoms. Urinary tract and bladder involvement occurs in 80%
of children with myopathic pseudoobstruction and in 20% of those with
neuropathic disease. Symptoms can manifest as recurrent urinary tract
infection, megacystis, or obstructive symptoms. Megacystis-­microcolon-­
intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome (MMIHS) is a prenatal or neonatal
manifestation of CIPO.
The clinical manifestations depend in large part on the areas of the
gastrointestinal tract that are involved, with milder forms more common
in older children. Although counterintuitive, older children with CIPO
may present with both abdominal distention and diarrhea, related to
small bowel bacterial overgrowth because of altered motility. Other presentations may include constipation and bilious emesis, as well as failure
to thrive, as a consequence of decreased enteral feeding tolerance.

Table 378.4  Findings in Pseudoobstruction
GI SEGMENT
Esophageal motility

Abnormalities in approximately half of
CIPO, although in some series up to 85%
demonstrate abnormalities
Decreased LES pressure
Failure of LES relaxation
Esophageal body: low-­amplitude waves,
poor propagation, tertiary waves,
retrograde peristalsis, occasionally
aperistalsis

Gastric emptying

May be delayed

EGG

Tachygastria or bradygastria may be seen

ADM

Postprandial antral hypomotility is seen
and correlates with delayed gastric
emptying
Myopathic subtype: low-­amplitude
contractions, <10-­20 mm Hg
Neuropathic subtype: contractions are
uncoordinated, disorganized
Absence of fed response
Fasting MMC is absent, or MMC is
abnormally propagated

Colonic

Absence of gastrocolic reflex because
there is no increased motility in response
to a meal

ARM

Normal rectoanal inhibitory reflex

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of pseudoobstruction is based on the presence of compatible symptoms in the absence of mechanical obstruction (Fig.
378.1). If CIPO is considered, diagnosis should start with exclusion
of mechanical obstruction, exclusion of alternative diagnoses, and
confirmation of impaired motility. Plain abdominal radiographs
demonstrate air-­fluid levels in the intestine. Contrast studies are
integral to rule out mechanical obstruction and often demonstrate
slow passage of barium; water-­soluble agents should be considered.
Gastric emptying scintigraphy can be used to evaluate upper GI dysmotility. Antroduodenal (small intestinal) manometry is integral to

FINDINGS*

*Findings can vary according to the segment(s) of the GI tract that are involved.
ADM, Antroduodenal manometry; ARM, anorectal manometry; CIPO, chronic intestinal
pseudoobstruction; EGG, electrogastrography; GI, gastrointestinal; LES, lower
esophageal sphincter; MMC, migrating motor complex.
From Steffen R: Gastrointestinal motility. In: Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric
Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2006: p 66.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 378 u Motility Disorders and Hirschsprung Disease
diagnosis with a normal study conclusively ruling out a diagnosis
of CIPO (Table 378.4). Manometric evidence of a normal migrating
motor complex and postprandial activity should redirect the diagnostic evaluation. CIPO due to an intestinal myopathy may demonstrate manometry evidence of low-­amplitude contractions, whereas
CIPO due to enteric neuropathy demonstrates normal amplitude
but poorly organized contractions (nonperistaltic or tonic). Anorectal motility is normal and differentiates pseudoobstruction from
Hirschsprung disease. Full-­thickness intestinal biopsy might show
involvement of the muscle layers or abnormalities of the intrinsic
intestinal nervous system. Gene panels or whole exome sequencing
helps define the genetic etiology of CIPO.
The differential diagnosis is broad and includes such etiologies
as Hirschsprung disease, MNGIE, mechanical obstruction, psychogenic constipation, neurogenic bladder, and superior mesenteric
artery syndrome. Secondary causes of ileus or pseudoobstruction
that should be considered include medication side effects, infectious etiologies, metabolic disturbances, immunologic disorders,
oncologic processes, vasculitides, neuropathies, and myopathies
(see Table 378.1). Examples include use of opiates, hypokalemia,
hypothyroidism, hypokalemia, diabetic neuropathy, porphyria,
amyloidosis, Chagas disease, scleroderma, hereditary angioedema,
mitochondrial disorders, and radiation, and these must be excluded.
Other causes of abdominal distention such as small bowel bacterial overgrowth and aerophagia may present similarly and should
be considered. Small bowel bacterial overgrowth is a complication
of CIPO.

TREATMENT

Nutritional support is the mainstay of treatment for pseudoobstruction. Thirty to 50% of patients require partial or complete
parenteral nutrition. Some patients can be treated with intermittent
enteral supplementation, whereas others can maintain themselves
on selective oral diets. Prokinetic drugs are generally used, although
studies have not shown definitive evidence of their efficacy. Isolated gastroparesis can follow episodes of viral gastroenteritis and
spontaneously resolves, usually in 6-­24 months. Erythromycin, a
motilin receptor agonist, and cisapride, a serotonin 5-­HT4 receptor
agonist, may enhance gastric emptying and proximal small bowel
motility and may be useful in this select group of patients. Metoclopramide, a prokinetic and antinausea agent, is effective in gastroparesis, although side effects, such as tardive dyskinesia, limit its
use. Domperidone, an antidopaminergic agent, is a prokinetic agent
that can be considered. Pain management is difficult and requires
a multidisciplinary approach. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)
may be beneficial in immune mediated CIPO.
Symptomatic small bowel bacterial overgrowth is usually treated
with rotated nonabsorbable oral antibiotics and/or probiotics. Bacterial overgrowth can be associated with steatorrhea and malabsorption. Octreotide, a long-­acting somatostatin analog, has been used
in low doses to treat small bowel bacterial overgrowth. Patients with
acid peptic symptoms are generally treated with acid suppression.
Many patients with CIPO benefit from a gastrostomy for decompression, and some benefit from decompressive enterostomies
(Fig. 378.2). Colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis is beneficial
if the large bowel is the primary site of the motility abnormality.
Bowel transplantation may benefit selected patients with CIPO. The
prognosis is better for patients without urinary tract involvement
and for those with neuropathic etiologies over myopathic disorders.

2291

Fig. 378.2 Photograph of a child with chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction who improved clinically after ileostomy creation. He receives
enteral feeding through his jejunal feeding tube, whereas his gastrostomy tube remains to straight drain. (From Bitton S, Markowitz JF. Ulcerative colitis in children and adolescents. In: Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M,
eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 44.3.)

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

378.2 Mitochondrial Neurogastrointestinal
Encephalomyopathy
Jennifer Webster, Kristin N. Fiorino, and
Chris A. Liacouras
Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy (MNGIE)
is a multisystem autosomal recessive disease that initially presents
with severe gastrointestinal disturbances; the neurologic manifestations usually occur later in the illness and may initially be subtle or
asymptomatic.
MNGIE is caused by a pathogenic variant in the nuclear DNA TYMP
gene encoding thymidine phosphorylase that results in abnormalities
in intergenomic communication with resulting instability of mitochondrial DNA (some patients have pathogenic variants in POLG1). There
are at least 50 individual variants with a poor genotype-­phenotype correlation and varying manifestations within each family. Consanguinity
is present in 30% of families.
MNGIE affects both males and females and is usually diagnosed in
the second and third decade (average age: 18 years; range: 5 months
to 35 years). Onset is usually around age 12 years, but there is often a
5-­to 10-­year delay in the diagnosis. The disease is progressive with an
overall survival of <5% after 50 years of age.
MNGIE initially presents with gastrointestinal symptoms. Severe
intestinal dysmotility and gastroparesis are associated with early satiety, postprandial emesis, episodic pseudoobstruction, diarrhea, constipation, and abdominal pain and cramping, which leads to significant
cachexia. Because of the age of onset, emesis, early satiety, and cachexia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2292 Part XVI u The Digestive System
patients are often misdiagnosed with an eating disorder. Radiologic
studies may find small bowel diverticulosis or GI dilation.
Most often, neurologic symptoms follow the onset of gastrointestinal
manifestations, which include ptosis, progressive external ophthalmoplegia, hearing loss, myopathy, and peripheral neuropathy. The neuropathy is
either demyelinating or a mixed axonal demyelinating type and manifests
as weakness, decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes, and paresthesias.
Leukoencephalopathy is initially asymptomatic and noted on MRI as
patchy lesions predominantly in the cortex but also in the basal ganglia and
brainstem. Eventually the central nervous system lesions become diffuse
and confluent. A small number of patients develop cognitive impairment
or dementia.
The diagnosis is suggested by the constellation of gastrointestinal and
neurologic symptoms, lactic acidosis, ragged red fibers, and cytochrome C
oxidase–deficient fibers seen in most patients on muscle biopsy. Reduced
activity of thymidine phosphorylase enzyme and elevated plasma levels of
thymidine and deoxyuridine are often diagnostic; genetic testing for the
TYMP pathogenic variant or other genes (POLG1) is recommended.
Treatment is focused on providing sufficient nutritional support and
avoidance of infectious complications and of nutritional deficiencies.
Hemodialysis, continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis, and platelet
infusions have been effective in achieving temporary improvement and
can be used while waiting for a permanent treatment option or as compassionate care. Domperidone has been used for nausea and emesis, antibiotics for small bowel bacterial overgrowth, amitriptyline or gabapentin
for neuropathic pain, and parenteral alimentation for nutritional support.
Opiates and any medications that affect intestinal motility or mitochondrial function must be avoided. Stem cell transplantation and liver transplantation have been successful in a small number of patients, although
they are limited by posttreatment mortality rates.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

378.3 Encopresis and Functional
­Constipation
Jennifer Webster, Kristin N. Fiorino, and
Chris A. Liacouras
Constipation is defined as a delay or difficulty in defecation present
for >1 month and significant enough to cause distress to the patient.
Another approach to the definition is the Rome criteria, outlined
in Tables 378.5 and 378.6. Functional constipation, also known as
idiopathic constipation or fecal withholding, can usually be differentiated from constipation secondary to organic causes based on
a history and physical examination. Unlike anorectal malformations and Hirschsprung disease, functional constipation typically
starts after the neonatal period. Usually there is an intentional or
subconscious withholding of stool. An acute episode usually precedes the chronic course. This acute event could include changes
in diet such as transition to formula or addition of pureed/solid
foods and can also include a social stressor such as initiation of toilet training, birth of a sibling, starting daycare/school, or abuse. The
stool becomes firm, smaller, and difficult to pass, resulting in anal
irritation and often an anal fissure. In toddlers, coercive or inappropriately early toilet training is a factor that can initiate a pattern of stool retention. In older children, retentive constipation can
develop after entering a situation that makes stooling inconvenient,
such as school. Because the passage of bowel movements is painful,
voluntary or subconscious withholding of feces to avoid the painful
stimulus develops.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

When children have the urge to defecate, typical behaviors include
contracting the gluteal muscles by stiffening the legs while lying down,

Table 378.5  Rome IV Diagnostic Criteria for Defecatory Disorders in Neonates and Toddlers
FGID
Functional constipation

AGE RANGE

CRITERIA REQUIREMENTS

CRITERIA ELEMENTS

All pediatric age groups

Must include 1 month of ≥2 of the
criteria elements in infants up to 4 mo
of age

• 2 or fewer defecations weekly
• History of excessive stool retention
• History of hard/painful bowel movements
• History of large-­diameter stools
• Presence of a large fecal mass in the rectum

In toilet-­trained children, the following
additional criteria elements may be
used

• At least 1 weekly episode of incontinence
after being toilet trained
• History of large-­diameter stools that may
clog the toilet

FGID, Functional gastrointestinal disorders.
Modified from Benninga MA, Faure C, Hyman PE, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal disorders: neonate/toddler. Gastroenterology. 2016;150:1443–1455.

Table 378.6  Rome IV Diagnostic Criteria for Defecatory Disorders in Children and Adolescents
AGE RANGE

CRITERIA REQUIREMENTS

CRITERIA ELEMENTS

Functional constipation

Developmental age ≥4 yr

Must include ≥2 of the criteria
elements for ≥2 months with
insufficient criteria to diagnose
irritable bowel syndrome

• ≤2 defecations in the toilet per week
• ≥1 episode of fecal incontinence per week
• History of retentive posturing or excessive
volitional stool retention
• History of painful or hard bowel movements
• Presence of a large fecal mass in the rectum
• History of large-­diameter stools that can
obstruct the toilet

Nonretentive fecal
Incontinence

Developmental age ≥4 yr

History of symptoms (criteria
elements) for ≥1 month

• Defecation into places inappropriate to the
sociocultural context
• No evidence of fecal retention
• After appropriate evaluation, symptoms
cannot be fully explained by another medical
condition

Modified from Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal disorders: child/adolescent. Gastroenterology. 2016;150:1456–1468.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 378 u Motility Disorders and Hirschsprung Disease
holding onto furniture while standing, or squatting quietly in corners,
waiting for the urge to stool to pass. The urge to defecate passes as the
rectum accommodates to its contents. A vicious cycle of retention develops, as increasingly larger volumes of stool need to be expelled. Caregivers may misinterpret these withholding behaviors as straining or pain.
There is often a history of blood in the stool noted with the passage of
a large bowel movement. Findings suggestive of underlying pathology
include failure to thrive, weight loss, abdominal pain, significant abdominal distention, vomiting, or persistent anal fissure or fistula.
In functional constipation, encopresis is common. Encopresis is
defined as voluntary or involuntary passage of feces into inappropriate
places at least once a month for 3 consecutive months once a chronological or developmental age of 4 year has been reached. Encopresis is
not diagnosed when the behavior is exclusively the result of the direct
effects of a substance (e.g., laxatives) or a general medical condition
(except through a mechanism involving constipation). Subtypes include
retentive encopresis (with constipation and overflow incontinence), representing 65–95% of cases, and nonretentive encopresis (without constipation and overflow incontinence). Nonretentive fecal incontinence is
defined as no evidence of fecal retention (impaction), ≥1 episodes per
week in the previous 1 month, or defecation in places inappropriate to
the social context in a child who has been previously toilet trained and
without evidence of anatomic, inflammatory, metabolic, endocrine, or
neoplastic process that could explain the symptoms. Encopresis can
persist from infancy onward (primary) or can appear after successful
toilet training (secondary). The updated Rome criteria (IV) differentiate
between infants/toddlers and older children who have been toilet trained
versus not toilet trained, for practical assessment purposes.

DIAGNOSIS

The physical examination often demonstrates a large volume of stool
palpated in the suprapubic area; rectal examination demonstrates
a dilated rectal vault filled with guaiac-­negative stool. Children with
encopresis often present with reports of underwear soiling, and many
parents initially presume that diarrhea, rather than constipation, is
the cause. In retentive encopresis, associated complaints of difficulty
with defecation, abdominal or rectal pain, impaired appetite with poor
growth, and urinary (day and/or night) incontinence are common.
Children often have large bowel movements that obstruct the toilet.
There may also be retentive posturing or recurrent urinary tract infections. Nonretentive encopresis is more likely to occur as a solitary
symptom and have an associated primary underlying psychologic etiology. Children with encopresis can present with poor school performance and attendance that is triggered by the scorn and derision from
schoolmates because of the child’s offensive odor.
The location of the anus relative to perineal anatomic landmarks by
sex also needs to be considered. This is expressed as the anogenital
index, and it can be calculated when necessary. This is determined by
the distance in centimeters from the vagina or scrotum to the anus,
divided by the distance from the vagina or scrotum to the coccyx. The
normal anogenital index in females is 0.39 ± 0.09, whereas 0.56 ± 0.2
is normal for males.
The presence of a hair tuft over the spine or spinal dimple, or failure
to elicit a cremasteric reflex or anal wink suggests spinal pathology. A
tethered cord is suggested by decreased or absent lower leg reflexes.
Spinal cord lesions can occur with overlying skin anomalies. Urinary
tract symptoms include recurrent urinary tract infection and enuresis.
Children with no evidence of abnormalities on physical examination
rarely require radiologic evaluation.
In refractory patients (intractable constipation), specialized testing
should be considered to rule out conditions such as hypothyroidism,
hypocalcemia, lead toxicity, celiac disease, and disorders of neuromuscular gastrointestinal pathology (Table 378.7). Colonic transit
studies using radiopaque markers or scintigraphy techniques may be
useful. Selected children can benefit from MRI of the spine to identify an intraspinal process, motility studies to identify underlying
myopathic or neuropathic bowel abnormalities, or a contrast enema
to identify structural abnormalities. In patients with severe functional

2293

Table 378.7  London Classification of Gastrointestinal
Neuromuscular Pathology
1.	Neuropathies
1.1	Absent neurons
1.1.1	Aganglionosis*
1.2	Decreased numbers of neurons
1.2.1	Hypoganglionosis
1.3	Increased numbers of neurons
1.3.1	Ganglioneuromatosis†
1.3.2	IND, type B‡
1.4	Degenerative neuropathy§
1.5	Inflammatory neuropathies
1.5.1	Lymphocytic ganglionitis¶
1.5.2	Eosinophilic ganglionitis
1.6	Abnormal content in neurons
1.6.1	Intraneuronal nuclear inclusions
1.6.2	Megamitochondria
1.7	Abnormal neurochemical coding**
1.8	Relative immaturity of neurons
1.9	Abnormal enteric glia
1.9.1	Increased numbers of enteric glia
2.	Myopathies
2.1	Muscularis propria malformations††
2.2	Muscle cell degeneration
2.2.1	Degenerative leiomyopathy/‡‡
2.2.2	Inflammatory leiomyopathy
2.2.2.1	Lymphocytic leiomyositis
2.2.2.2	Eosinophilic leiomyositis
2.3	Muscle hyperplasia/hypertrophy
2.3.1	Muscularis mucosae hyperplasia
2.4	Abnormal content in myocytes
2.4.1	Filament protein abnormalities
2.4.1.1	Alpha-­actin myopathy§§
2.4.1.2	Desmin myopathy
2.4.2	Inclusion bodies
2.4.2.1	Polyglucosan bodies
2.4.2.2	Amphophilic
2.4.2.3	Megamitochondria¶¶
2.5	Abnormal supportive tissue
2.5.1	Atrophic desmosis***
3.	ICC abnormalities (enteric mesenchymopathy)
3.1	Abnormal ICC networks†††
*Can include rare cases of non-­Hirschsprung disease severe hypoplastic
hypoganglionosis with long interganglionic intervals (zonal aganglionosis).
†Although neurons have not been formally quantified, gross increases of disorganized
neurons are evident.
‡Can include retarded neuronal maturation.
§May occur with or without neuronal loss but is best regarded as a separate entity.
¶May occur with neuronal degeneration and/or loss; lymphocytic epithelioganglionitis
is a variant.
**Includes neurotransmitter loss (e.g., reduced or absent expression) or loss of a
neurochemically defined functional subset of nerves (see text).
††Includes absence, fusion, or additional muscle coats.
‡‡Hollow visceral myopathy may be diagnosed in familial cases with other characteristic
phenotypic features; myopathy with autophagic activity and pink blush myopathy
with nuclear crowding are rare variants in which degenerative findings are less overt.
§§Smooth muscle alpha-­actin deficiency is best described, although deficiencies of
other proteins related to the contractile apparatus of myocytes have been reported.
¶¶Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy causes a degenerative
appearance predominantly in the longitudinal muscle.
***Absent connective tissue scaffold has been almost exclusively described in the
colon.
†††Generally reduced or absent ICC, although abnormal morphology also reported.
ICC, Interstitial cells of Cajal; IND, intestinal neuronal dysplasia.
From Knowles CH, De Giorgio R, Kapur RP, et al. The London classification of
gastrointestinal neuromuscular pathology: report on behalf of the Gastro 2009
International Working Group. Gut. 2010;59:882–887. Table 1.

constipation, water-­soluble contrast enema reveals the presence of a
mega rectosigmoid (Fig. 378.3). Anorectal motility studies can demonstrate a pattern of paradoxical contraction of the external anal sphincter during defecation, which can be treated by behavior modification,
biofeedback, and pelvic floor physical therapy. Colonic motility can
guide therapy in refractory cases, demonstrating segmental problems
that might require surgical intervention.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2294 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 378.8  Suggested Medications and Dosages for
Disimpaction
MEDICATION

AGE

DOSAGE

RAPID RECTAL DISIMPACTION
Glycerin
Infants and
suppositories
toddlers
Phosphate enema

6 mo-2 yr

66 mL

≥3 yr

133 mL

SLOW ORAL DISIMPACTION IN OLDER CHILDREN
Over 2-­3 Days
Polyethylene glycol
25 mL/kg body weight/hr,
with electrolytes
up to 1,000 mL/hr until
clear fluid comes from
the anus
Over 5-­7 Days
Polyethylene without
electrolytes

1.5 g/kg body weight/day
for 3 days

Milk of magnesia

2 mL/kg body weight
twice/day for 7 days

Mineral oil

3 mL/kg body weight
twice/day for 7 days

Lactulose or sorbitol

2 mL/kg body weight
twice/day for 7 days

From Loening-­Baucke V. Functional constipation with encopresis. In: Wyllie R, Hyams
JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2006: p 183.

Fig. 378.3 Barium enema in a 14-­yr-­old boy with severe constipa-

tion. The enormous dilation of the rectum and distal colon is typical of
acquired functional megacolon.

Complications of retentive encopresis include day and night urinary
incontinence, urinary retention, urinary tract infection, megacystis,
and rarely toxic megacolon.

TREATMENT

Therapy for functional constipation and encopresis includes patient
education, behavioral interventions, relief of impaction, and softening
of the stool. Caregivers must understand that soiling associated with
overflow incontinence is associated with loss of normal sensation and
not a willful act. There needs to be a focus on adherence with regular
postprandial toilet sitting and adoption of a balanced diet. In addition,
caregivers should be instructed not to respond to soiling with retaliatory or punitive measures, because children are likely to become angry,
ashamed, and resistant to intervention. From the outset, parents should
be actively encouraged to reward the child for adherence to a healthy
bowel regimen and to avoid power struggles.
If an impaction is present on the initial physical examination, an
enema is usually required to clear the impaction while stool softeners
are started as maintenance medications. Typical regimens include the
use of polyethylene glycol preparations, lactulose, magnesium, or mineral oil (Tables 378.8 and 378.9). Stimulant laxatives such as senna and
bisacodyl can also be helpful.
Compliance can wane, and failure of this standard treatment
approach sometimes requires more intensive intervention. In cases
where behavioral or psychiatric problems are evident, involvement of a
psychologist or behavioral management (e.g., behavior programs and/
or biofeedback) is recommended. Maintenance therapy is generally
continued until a regular bowel pattern has been established and the
association of pain with the passage of stool is abolished.
For children with chronic diarrhea and/or irritable bowel syndrome where stress and anxiety play a major role, stress reduction
and learning effective coping strategies can play an important role

Table 378.9  Suggested Medications and Dosages for
Maintenance Therapy of Constipation
MEDICATION

AGE

DOSE

TYPICAL DOSES FOR LONG-­TERM TREATMENT (YR)
Milk of magnesia
>1 mo
1-­3 mL/kg body weight/day,
divided into 1-­2 doses
Mineral oil

>12 mo

1-­3 mL/kg body weight/day,
divided into 1-­2 doses

Lactulose or sorbitol

>1 mo

1-­3 mL/kg body weight/day,
divided into 1-­2 doses

Polyethylene glycol
3350 (MiraLAX)

>1 yr

0.7 g/kg body weight/day

FOR SHORT-­TERM TREATMENT (MO)
Senna (Senokot) syrup, 1-­5 yr
5 mL (1 tablet) with breakfast,
tablets
max 15 mL daily
5-­15 yr

2 tablets with breakfast,
maximum 3 tablets daily

From Loening-­Baucke V. Functional constipation with encopresis. In: Wyllie R, Hyams
JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 2006: p 185.

in responding to the encopresis. Relaxation training, stress inoculation, assertiveness training, and/or general stress management procedures can be helpful, and the participation of behavioral health
specialists is valuable.
Neurostimulation (transcutaneous or sacral implantation) and
pelvic physiotherapy are novel approaches used in patients with
medication refractory constipation. Surgical interventions such
as rectal Botox, cecostomy, and colostomy may be considered for
severe cases.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 378 u Motility Disorders and Hirschsprung Disease

378.4 Congenital Aganglionic Megacolon
(Hirschsprung Disease)
Prasanna K. Kapavarapu, Kristin N. Fiorino, and
Chris A. Liacouras
Hirschsprung disease, or congenital aganglionic megacolon, is a developmental disorder (neurocristopathy) of the enteric nervous system, characterized by the absence of ganglion cells in the submucosal and myenteric
plexus. It is the most common cause of lower intestinal obstruction in neonates, with an overall incidence of 1 in 5,000 live births. The male:female
ratio for Hirschsprung disease is 4:1 for short-­segment disease and approximately 2:1 with total colonic aganglionosis. Prematurity is uncommon.
There is an increased familial incidence in long-­
segment disease.
Hirschsprung disease may be associated with other congenital defects,
including trisomy 21, Joubert syndrome, Goldberg-­Shprintzen syndrome,
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome, Shah-­Waardenburg syndrome, cartilage-­
hair hypoplasia, multiple endocrine neoplasm 2 syndrome, neurofibromatosis, neuroblastoma, congenital hypoventilation (Ondine’s curse), and
urogenital or cardiovascular abnormalities. Hirschsprung disease has been
seen in association with microcephaly, intellectual disability, abnormal
facies, autism, cleft palate, hydrocephalus, and micrognathia.

PATHOLOGY

Hirschsprung disease is the result of an absence of ganglion cells in the
bowel wall, extending proximally from the anus for a variable distance.
The absence of neural innervation is a consequence of an arrest of neuroblast migration from the proximal to distal bowel. Without the myenteric
and submucosal plexus, there is inadequate relaxation of the bowel wall
and bowel wall hypertonicity, which can lead to intestinal obstruction.
Hirschsprung disease is usually sporadic, although dominant and
recessive patterns of inheritance have been demonstrated in family
groups. Genetic variants have been identified in multiple genes that
encode proteins of the RET signaling pathway (RET, GDNF, NTN,
ARTN, and PSPN) and involved in the endothelin (EDN) type B
receptor pathway (EDNRB, EDN3, and ECE-­1). Syndromic forms of
Hirschsprung disease have been associated with the L1CAM, SOX10,
PHOX2B, KIAA1279, and ZFHX1B (formerly SIP1) genes.
The aganglionic segment is limited to the rectosigmoid in 80% of
patients. Approximately 10–15% of patients have long-­segment disease,
defined as disease proximal to the sigmoid colon. Total bowel aganglionosis is rare and accounts for approximately 5% of cases. Observed
histologically is an absence of Meissner’s and Auerbach’s plexuses and
hypertrophied nerve bundles with high concentrations of acetylcholinesterase between the muscular layers and in the submucosa.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Hirschsprung disease is usually diagnosed in the neonatal period secondary to a distended abdomen, failure to pass meconium, and/or bilious
emesis or aspirates with feeding intolerance. In 99% of healthy full-­term
infants, meconium is passed within 48 hours of birth. Hirschsprung disease should be suspected in any full-­term infant (the disease is unusual
in preterm infants) with delayed passage of stool. Some neonates pass
meconium normally but subsequently present with a history of chronic
constipation. Failure to thrive with hypoproteinemia from protein-­losing
enteropathy is a less common presentation because Hirschsprung disease
is usually recognized early in the course of the illness but has been known
to occur. Breastfed infants might not present as severely as formula-­fed
infants.
Failure to pass stool leads to dilation of the proximal bowel and
abdominal distention. As the bowel dilates, intraluminal pressure
increases, resulting in decreased blood flow and deterioration of the
mucosal barrier. Stasis allows proliferation of bacteria, which can
lead to enterocolitis (Clostridium difficile, Staphylococcus aureus,
anaerobes, coliforms) with associated diarrhea, abdominal tenderness, sepsis, and signs of bowel obstruction. Red flags in the neonatal
period then include neonatal intestinal obstruction, bowel perforation,
delayed passage of meconium, abdominal distention relieved by digital

2295

rectal stimulation or enemas, chronic severe constipation, and enterocolitis. Early recognition of Hirschsprung disease before the onset of
enterocolitis is essential in reducing morbidity and mortality.
Hirschsprung disease in older patients must be distinguished
from other causes of abdominal distention and chronic constipation
(see Tables 378.7; Table 378.10 and Figs. 378.4 and 378.5). The history often reveals constipation starting in infancy that has responded
poorly to medical management. Failure to thrive is not uncommon.
Fecal incontinence, fecal urgency, and stool-­
withholding behaviors
are usually not present. Significant abdominal distention is unusual in
non–Hirschsprung-­related constipation, as is emesis. The abdomen is
tympanitic and distended, with a large fecal mass palpable in the left
lower abdomen. Rectal examination demonstrates a normally placed
anus that easily allows entry of the finger but feels snug. The rectum is
usually empty of feces, and when the finger is removed, there may be
an explosive discharge of foul-­smelling feces and gas. The stools, when
passed, can consist of small pellets, be ribbon-­like, or have a fluid consistency, unlike the large stools seen in patients with functional constipation. Intermittent attacks of intestinal obstruction from retained feces
may be associated with pain and fever. Urinary retention with enlarged
bladder or hydronephrosis can occur secondary to urinary compression.
In neonates, Hirschsprung disease must be differentiated from
meconium plug syndrome, meconium ileus, and intestinal atresia. In
older patients, the Currarino triad must be considered, which includes
anorectal malformations (ectopic anus, anal stenosis, imperforate
anus), sacral bone anomalies (hypoplasia, poor segmentation), and
presacral anomaly (anterior meningoceles, teratoma, cyst). Mimics
of Hirschsprung disease include intestinal neuronal dysplasia (IND),
hypoganglionosis, absence of argyrophil plexus, and megacystis
Table 378.10  Distinguishing Features of Hirschsprung
Disease and Functional Constipation
VARIABLE

HIRSCHSPRUNG
DISEASE

FUNCTIONAL

HISTORY
Onset of
constipation

After 2 yr of age

At birth

Encopresis

Common

Very rare

Failure to thrive

Uncommon

Possible

Enterocolitis

None

Possible

Forced bowel training

Usual

None

EXAMINATION
Abdominal
distention

Uncommon

Common

Poor weight gain

Rare

Common

Rectum

Filled with stool

Empty

Rectal examination

Stool in rectum

Explosive passage of
stool

Malnutrition

None

Possible

Relaxation of
internal anal
sphincter

Failure of internal anal
sphincter relaxation

Rectal biopsy

Normal

No ganglion
cells, increased
acetylcholinesterase
staining

Barium enema

Massive amounts of
stool, no transition
zone

Transition zone,
delayed evacuation
(>24 hr)

INVESTIGATIONS
Anorectal
manometry

From Imseis E, Gariepy C. Hirschsprung disease. In: Walker WA, Goulet OJ, Kleinman RE,
et al., eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal Disease, 4th ed. Hamilton, ON: BC Decker; 2004: p 1035.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2296 Part XVI u The Digestive System
microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome (MMIHS). MMIH
demonstrates an enlarged bladder and intestinal obstruction with
microcolon (Fig. 378.6 and Fig. 378.7); involved genes are noted in
Table 378.11.

DIAGNOSIS

Rectal suction biopsy is the “gold standard” for diagnosing
Hirschsprung disease (see Fig. 378.5). The biopsy material should
contain an adequate amount of submucosa to evaluate for the presence of ganglion cells. To avoid obtaining biopsies in the normal
area of hypoganglionosis, which ranges from 3 to 17 mm in length,
the suction rectal biopsy should be obtained no closer than 2 cm
above the dentate line. The biopsy specimen should be stained for
acetylcholinesterase to facilitate interpretation. Patients with aganglionosis demonstrate a large number of hypertrophied nerve bundles that stain positively for acetylcholinesterase with an absence of
ganglion cells. Calretinin is a calcium binding protein expressed in
ganglion cells in submucosa and myenteric plexus; hence, calretinin
staining may provide a diagnosis of Hirschsprung disease when acetylcholinesterase staining may not be sufficient. In Hirschsprung
disease, on the hematoxylin and eosin staining there is absence of
ganglion cells in the submucosa with abundance of hypertrophic
nerves; on acetylcholinesterase staining there is abnormal accumulation of acetylcholinesterase-­positive hypertrophied nerve bundles
in muscularis mucosa and lamina propria; and on calretinin staining there is paucity of calretinin-­immunoreactive nerves in muscularis mucosa and lamina propria.
Anorectal manometry evaluates the internal anal sphincter while
a balloon is distended in the rectum. In healthy individuals, rectal distention initiates relaxation of the internal anal sphincter in
response to rectal distention (known as the rectoanal inhibitory
reflux [RAIR]). In patients with Hirschsprung disease, the internal

Fig. 378.4 Lateral view of a barium enema in a 3-­yr-­old with Hirschsprung

disease. The aganglionic distal segment is narrow, with distended normal
ganglionic bowel above it.

Rectal suction biopsy
stained with AChE

Presence
of ganglion cells
and normal AChE activity,
but absence of rectosphincteric reflex
on anorectal
manometry

Presence
of ganglion cells
and normal AChE activity,
but therapy-resistant
constipation or
functional bowel
obstruction

Internal
anal sphincter
achalasia

Full-thickness
rectal biopsy

g
nin
tai
ds
H-

DP
NA
Immature ganglia

Isolated
hypoganglionosis

g
nin
tai

Intestinal ganglioneuromatosis

Intestinal neuronal
dysplasia type B

Hirschsprung
disease

on

rs

AChE and
NADPH-d
staining

si

lve

AC

sm

Si

hE

st

Absence
of ganglion cells
and increased
AChE activity

an

is

ng

ni

ai

Tr

Submucosal
hyperganglionosis
with giant ganglia,
ectopic ganglion cells
and increased
AChE activity

el

ec

tro

n

m

Absence of the
argyrophil plexus

ic

ro

sc

op

y

Megacystis
microcolon
intestinal
hypoperistalsis
syndrome

Fig. 378.5 Diagnostic algorithm for investigating chronic constipation and functional bowel obstruction in newborn infants and young children.
AChE, Acetylcholinesterase; NADPH-­d, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate diaphorase. (From Friedmacher F, Puri P. Classification and
diagnostic criteria of variants of Hirschsprung’s disease. Pediatr Surg Int. 2013;29:855–872. Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 378 u Motility Disorders and Hirschsprung Disease

Fig. 378.6 Voiding cystourethrogram showing massively enlarged

bladder in an MMIHS patient. (Modified from Puri P, Gosemann JH.
Variants of Hirschsprung disease. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2012;21:310–
318. Fig. 5A.)

in young infants. A normal response in the course of manometric
evaluation precludes a diagnosis of Hirschsprung disease; an equivocal or paradoxical response requires a repeat anorectal manometry
or rectal suction biopsy. The sensitivity and specificity of anorectal
manometry are both >90%.
An unprepared contrast enema is most likely to aid in the diagnosis in children older than 1 month of age because the proximal ganglionic segment might not be significantly dilated in the first few
weeks of life. Classic findings are based on the presence of an abrupt
narrow transition zone between the normal dilated proximal colon
and a smaller-­caliber obstructed distal aganglionic segment. In the
absence of this finding, it is imperative to compare the diameter of
the rectum with that of the sigmoid colon, because a rectal diameter that is the same as or smaller than the sigmoid colon suggests
Hirschsprung disease. Radiologic evaluation should be performed
without prior preparation (i.e., unprepped contrast enema study) to
prevent transient dilation of the aganglionic segment. As many as
10% of newborns with Hirschsprung disease have a normal contrast study. This diagnostic test is most valuable in the disease that
involves the distal colon, and specifically, the rectosigmoid. A transition zone may not be readily identifiable in total bowel aganglionosis. The 24-­hour delayed films are helpful in showing retained
contrast (see Fig. 378.4). If significant barium is still present in the
colon, it increases the suspicion of Hirschsprung disease even if a
transition zone is not identified. Barium enema examination is useful in determining the extent of aganglionosis before surgery and
in evaluating other diseases that manifest as lower bowel obstruction in a neonate. The sensitivity (∼70%) and specificity (50–80%)
of barium enema studies diagnosing Hirschsprung disease is lower
than other methodologies. Full-­thickness rectal biopsies can be
performed at the time of surgery to confirm the diagnosis, level of
involvement, and to differentiate other disorders (see Fig. 378.5).

TREATMENT

Fig.

378.7 Megacystis-­microcolon-­intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome. Single frontal view of newborn female reveals the microcolon
characteristic of this entity. Note the malposition of the cecum, consistent with the malrotation that is common in these patients. Soft tissue density in the pelvis is consistent with a distended urinary bladder.
(From Hernanz-­
Schulman M. Congenital and neonatal disorders. In
Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 105.16, p. 1019.)

anal sphincter fails to relax in response to rectal distention, and
there is absence of the RAIR. Although the sensitivity and specificity can vary widely, in experienced hands, the test can be quite
sensitive. However, the test can be technically difficult to perform

2297

Once the diagnosis is established, the definitive treatment is operative
intervention. Previously, a temporary ostomy was placed, and definitive
surgery was delayed until the child was older. Currently, many infants
undergo a primary pull-­through procedure unless there is associated
enterocolitis or other complications, when a decompressing ostomy is
usually required.
There are essentially two surgical options. One procedure creates
a neorectum, bringing down normally innervated bowel behind the
aganglionic rectum. The neorectum created in this procedure has an
anterior aganglionic segment with normal sensation and a posterior
ganglionic segment with normal propulsion. The endorectal pull-­
through procedure involves stripping the mucosa from the aganglionic
rectum and bringing normally innervated colon through the residual
muscular cuff, thus bypassing the abnormal bowel from within.
Advances in techniques have led to successful laparoscopic single-­stage
endorectal pull-­through procedures, which are the treatment of choice.
In ultrashort-­segment Hirschsprung disease, also known as anal
achalasia, the aganglionic segment is limited to the internal sphincter.
The clinical symptoms are similar to those of children with functional
constipation. Ganglion cells are present on rectal suction biopsy, but
the anorectal manometry is abnormal, with failure of relaxation of the
internal anal sphincter in response to rectal distention. Current treatment, although controversial, includes anal botulism injection to relax
the anal sphincter and anorectal myectomy if indicated.
Long-­segment Hirschsprung disease involving the entire colon and,
at times, part of the small bowel presents a difficult problem. Anorectal manometry and rectal suction biopsy demonstrate findings of
Hirschsprung disease, but radiologic studies are difficult to interpret
because a colonic transition zone cannot be identified. The extent of
aganglionosis can be determined accurately by biopsy at the time of
laparotomy. When the entire colon is aganglionic, often together with
a length of terminal ileum, ileal-­anal anastomosis is the treatment
of choice, preserving part of the aganglionic colon to facilitate water
absorption, which helps the stools to become firm.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2298 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 378.11  Megacystis-­Microcolon-­Intestinal Hypoperistalsis Syndrome: Genes and Distinguishing Clinical Features
GENE*

% OF ALL MMIHS

MOI

DISTINGUISHING CLINICAL FEATURES

OTHER

ACTG2

44.1%

AD

Classic features of MMIHS (e.g., megacystis,
microcolon, intestinal dysmotility)

Greater disease severity reported
in probands with a de novo (vs
inherited) pathogenic variant
Parental somatic and germline
mosaicism reported

LMOD1

1 person

AR

Classic features of MMIHS

Large deletions/duplications not
reported to date

MYH11

2 persons

AR

Overlapping features of MMIHS and
prune-­belly sequence (one person)
Overlapping features of MMIHS and MSMDS
(1 person)

Large del/dups not associated with
MMIHS to date

MYL9

1 person

AR

Mydriasis
No vascular smooth muscle dysfunction†

Homozygous partial-­gene deletion
reported

MYLK

2 families

AR

No vascular smooth muscle dysfunction†

Large deletions/duplications not
associated with MMIHS to date

Unknown

∼55%

*Genes are listed alphabetically.
†Vascular smooth muscle dysfunction including aortic aneurysms or dissection has not been reported.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; MMIHS, megacystis-­microcolon-­intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome; MOI, mode of inheritance; MSMDS, multisystemic smooth
muscle dysfunction syndrome.
Modified from Ambartsumyan L. Megacystis-­microcolon-­intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome overview. NIH National Library of Medicine. GeneRev. 2019.

The prognosis of surgically treated Hirschsprung disease is generally satisfactory independent of the kind of surgical procedure,
about 15–60% experience bowel problems ranging from constipation and/or fecal incontinence and enterocolitis episodes, but these
symptoms diminish with age. Children presenting with persistent
bowel problems after surgery often need additional diagnostics
(contrast enema, three-­dimensional [3D] high-­definition anorectal
manometry, rectal suction biopsy, and colon manometry), advanced
bowel regimen (stool softeners, stimulant laxatives, medicated
enemas, pelvic floor therapy), and additional surgical procedures
(anal dilation, anal myectomy, re-­do pull-­through corrective surgery, appendicostomy or cecostomy, colostomy, ileostomy). Recent
advances in the field of motility include usage of 3D high-­definition
anorectal manometry to assess the anorectal function of the postsurgical anal sphincter and high-­resolution colon manometry to
assess and characterize the motility function of the residual colon
after Hirschsprung surgery.
Hirschsprung disease–associated enterocolitis can occur at any
time before or after surgery and is the leading cause of death in
these patients. Dysmotility related to partial obstruction, underlying disease, impaired immune function, and the intestinal microbiome may all contribute to this pathophysiologic process. Explosive,
foul-­smelling and/or bloody diarrhea, abdominal distention, explosive discharge of rectal contents on digital examination, diminished
peripheral perfusion, lethargy, and fever are all ominous signs.
Management principles include hydration, decompression from
above and below (nasogastric Salem Sump, rectal tube, rectal irrigation), and the use of broad-­spectrum antibiotics.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

378.5 Intestinal Neuronal Dysplasia
Prasanna K. Kapavarapu, Kristin N. Fiorino, and
Chris A. Liacouras
IND describes different quantitative (hypoganglionosis or hyperganglionosis) and qualitative (immature or heterotropic ganglion
cells) abnormalities of the submucosal plexus. The typical histology is that of hyperganglionosis and giant ganglia. Type A occurs
very rarely and is characterized by congenital aplasia or hypoplasia
of the sympathetic innervation. Patients present early in the neonatal period with episodes of intestinal obstruction, diarrhea, and
bloody stools. Type B accounts for more than 95% of cases. Biopsies for diagnosis of IND type B have to be taken 8 cm proximal
to the dentate line with sufficient submucosa and should be cut
rectangular to the surface mucosa to avoid false-­positive results.
Qualitative criteria include hypoganglionosis and hypertrophy of
nerve trunks. Quantitative criteria include presence of at least 20%
submucosal giant ganglia in 30 serial sections examined, 8 (10 ±
2) nerve cells per ganglion, and children >1 year of age. IND type
B mimics Hirschsprung disease, and patients present with chronic
constipation (see Table 378.7 and Fig. 378.5). Clinical manifestations include abdominal distention, constipation, and enterocolitis. Various lengths of bowel may be affected from segmental to the
entire intestinal tract. IND has been observed in an isolated form
and proximal to an aganglionic segment. Other intraintestinal and
extraintestinal manifestations are present in patients with IND. It
has been reported in all age groups, most commonly in infancy, but
is also seen in adults who have had constipation not dating back to
childhood.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 379 u Ileus, Adhesions, ­Intussusception, and Closed-­Loop Obstructions
Associated diseases and conditions include Hirschsprung disease,
prematurity, small left colon syndrome, and meconium plug syndrome.
Studies have identified a deficiency in substance P in patients with
IND. Type A IND may be inherited in a familial, autosomal recessive
pattern. Most cases of IND type B are sporadic, with few familial clusters, suggesting autosomal dominant inheritance.
Management includes that for functional constipation, and, if
unsuccessful, surgery is indicated including emergency surgeries for
acute obstruction.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

378.6 Superior Mesenteric Artery Syndrome
(Wilkie Syndrome, Cast Syndrome,
Arteriomesenteric Duodenal
Compression Syndrome)
Prasanna K. Kapavarapu, Kristin N. Fiorino, and
Chris A. Liacouras
Superior mesenteric artery syndrome results from compression
of the third duodenal segment by the superior mesenteric artery
against the aorta. Malnutrition or catabolic states may cause mesenteric fat depletion, which collapses the duodenum within a
narrowed aortomesenteric angle. Other etiologies include extraabdominal compression (e.g., body cast) and mesenteric tension, as
can occur from ileoanal pouch anastomosis. Rapid weight loss and
immobilization are risk factors.
Symptoms include intermittent epigastric pain, anorexia, nausea,
and vomiting. Risk factors include thin body habitus, prolonged bed
rest, abdominal surgery, and exaggerated lumbar lordosis. Onset can
be within weeks of a trigger, but some patients have chronic symptoms
that evade diagnosis. A classic example is an underweight adolescent
who begins vomiting 1-­2 weeks after scoliosis surgery or spinal fusion.
Recognition may be delayed in the context of an eating disorder. Superior mesenteric artery syndrome can not only simulate anorexia nervosa, but also precipitate and sometimes even complicate anorexia
nervosa.
The diagnosis is established radiologically by demonstrating a
duodenal cutoff just right of midline along with proximal duodenal dilation, with or without gastric dilation. Although the upper
gastrointestinal series remains a mainstay, modalities including
abdominal CT or CT/MR angiography, or ultrasound may be more
appropriate if there is concern for other etiologies such as malignancy. Upper endoscopy should be considered to rule out intraluminal pathology.
Treatment focuses on obstructive relief, nutritional rehabilitation, and correction of associated fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Lateral or prone positioning can shift the duodenum away
from obstructing structures and allow resumption of oral intake. If
repositioning is unsuccessful, patients require nasojejunal enteral
nutrition past the obstruction or parenteral nutrition if this is not
tolerated. This management is successful in the vast majority of
cases, with eventual withdrawal of tube feeding once weight has
been regained and enteral feeding tolerance orally has been gradually and fully restored. Patients with refractory courses may require
surgery to bypass the obstruction.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2299

Chapter 379

Ileus, Adhesions,
­Intussusception, and
Closed-­Loop Obstructions
379.1 Ileus
Elizabeth C. Maxwell and Chris A. Liacouras
Ileus is the failure of intestinal peristalsis caused by loss of coordinated
gut motility without evidence of mechanical obstruction. In children,
it is most often associated with abdominal surgery or infection (gastroenteritis, pneumonia, peritonitis). Ileus also accompanies metabolic
abnormalities (e.g., uremia, hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, hypermagnesemia, acidosis) or administration of certain drugs, such as opiates,
vincristine, and antimotility agents such as loperamide when given
during gastroenteritis.
Ileus manifests with nausea, vomiting, feeding intolerance,
abdominal distention with associated pain, and delayed passage
of stool and bowel gas. Bowel sounds are minimal or absent, in
contrast to early mechanical obstruction, when they are hyperactive. Abdominal radiographs demonstrate multiple air-­fluid levels
throughout the abdomen. Serial radiographs usually do not show
progressive distention as they do in mechanical obstruction. Contrast radiographs, if performed, demonstrate slow movement of
barium through a patent lumen. Ileus after abdominal surgery generally resolves within 72 hours.
Treatment involves correcting the underlying abnormality, supportive care of comorbidities, and mitigation of iatrogenic contributions. Electrolyte abnormalities should be identified and
corrected, and narcotic agents, when used, should be weaned as tolerated. Nasogastric decompression can relieve recurrent vomiting
or abdominal distention associated with pain; resultant fluid losses
should be corrected with isotonic crystalloid solution. Prokinetic
agents such as erythromycin are not routinely recommended. Selective peripheral opioid antagonists such as methylnaltrexone hold
promise in decreasing postoperative ileus, but pediatric data are
lacking.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

379.2 Adhesions
Elizabeth C. Maxwell and Chris A. Liacouras
Adhesions are fibrous tissue bands that result from peritoneal injury.
Their formation is a complex process involving inflammation, hypoxia,
and the extracellular matrix. They can constrict hollow organs and are
a major cause of postoperative small bowel obstruction. Most remain
asymptomatic, but problems can arise any time after the second postoperative week to years after abdominal surgery, regardless of surgical
extent. In one large meta-analysis, the incidence of bowel obstruction

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2300 Part XVI u The Digestive System
secondary to adhesive formation (ASBO) was between 1 and 12.6% in
children. ASBO is an important cause of pediatric surgical emergency.
The diagnosis is suspected in patients with colicky abdominal pain,
constipation, anorexia, emesis, and a history of intraperitoneal surgery. Nausea and vomiting quickly follow onset of pain. Initially, bowel
sounds are hyperactive, and the abdomen is flat. Subsequently, bowel
sounds disappear, and bowel dilation can cause abdominal distention.
Fever and leukocytosis suggest bowel necrosis and peritonitis. Plain
radiographs demonstrate obstructive features, and a CT scan or contrast studies may be needed to define the etiology.
Management includes nasogastric decompression, intravenous
fluid resuscitation, and broad-­spectrum antibiotics in preparation for
surgery. The laparoscopic approach is used with increased frequency
now compared to open laparotomy. Nonoperative intervention is contraindicated unless a patient is stable with obvious clinical improvement. Gastrografin (diatrizoate meglumine), typically used as an oral
contrast agent for radiologic studies, may be a useful nonoperative
management tool. A few small pediatric studies have shown promise,
including decreased surgical requirement, decreased time to feed after
admission, decreased hospital length of stay, and decreased healthcare
costs with its use. Long-­term complications include formation of new
adhesions from surgery to relieve the obstruction, female infertility,
failure to thrive, and chronic abdominal and/or pelvic pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

379.3 Intussusception
Elizabeth C. Maxwell and Chris A. Liacouras
Intussusception occurs when a portion of the alimentary tract is telescoped into an adjacent segment. It is the most common cause of intestinal obstruction between 5 months and 3 years of age and the most
common abdominal emergency in children younger than 2 years of
age. Sixty percent of patients are younger than 1 year of age and 80% of
the cases occur before age 24 months; it is rare in neonates. The incidence varies from 1 to 4 per 1,000 live births. The male:female ratio
is 3:1. Many small bowel–small bowel and a few small bowel–colonic
intussusceptions reduce spontaneously; if left untreated, ileal-­colonic
intussusception may lead to intestinal infarction, perforation, peritonitis,
and death.

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Approximately 90% of cases of intussusception in children are idiopathic. The seasonal incidence has peaks in fall and winter. Correlation
with prior or concurrent respiratory adenovirus (type C) infection has
been noted, and the condition can complicate otitis media, gastroenteritis, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, COVID-­19, or upper respiratory
tract infections. A slight increase in intussusception has been noted to
occur within 3 weeks of the rotavirus vaccine (especially after the first
dose), but this is a very rare side effect.
It is postulated that gastrointestinal infection or the introduction of new food proteins results in swollen Peyer patches in the
terminal ileum. Lymphoid nodular hyperplasia is another related
risk factor. Prominent mounds of lymph tissue lead to mucosal prolapse of the ileum into the colon, thus causing an intussusception.
In 2–8% of patients, recognizable lead points for the intussusception are found, such as a Meckel diverticulum, intestinal polyp, neurofibroma, intestinal duplication cysts, inverted appendix stump,
leiomyomas, hamartomas, ectopic pancreatic tissue, anastomotic
suture line, enterostomy tube, posttransplant lymphoproliferative
disease, hemangioma, or malignant conditions such as lymphoma
or Kaposi sarcoma. Gastrojejunal and jejunostomy tubes can also
serve as lead points for intussusception. Lead points are more common in children older than 2 years of age; the older the child, the
higher the risk of a lead point. In adults, lead points are present

Fig. 379.1 Transverse image of an ileocolic intussusception. Note the
loops within the loops of bowel.

in 90%. Intussusception can complicate mucosal hemorrhage, as
in Henoch-­S chönlein purpura, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, or hemophilia. Cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, and Crohn disease are other risk factors. Postoperative intussusception is ileoileal
and usually occurs within several days of an abdominal operation.
Anterograde intussusception may occur rarely following bariatric
surgery with a Roux-­en-­Y gastric bypass and is noteworthy that
there does not seem to be a lead point in these cases. Intussuception occurring during development in utero may be associated with
the development of intestinal atresia. Intussusception in premature
infants is rare.
Ileo-­
ileal (as compared to ileo-­
colonic) intussusception may
be more common than previously believed, is often idiopathic or
associated with Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura, and usually resolves
spontaneously.

PATHOLOGY

Symptomatic intussusceptions are most often ileocolic, less commonly cecocolic, and occasionally ileal. Very rarely, the appendix
forms the apex of an intussusception. The upper portion of bowel,
the intussusceptum, invaginates into the lower, the intussuscipiens, pulling its mesentery along with it into the enveloping loop.
Constriction of the mesentery obstructs venous return; engorgement of the intussusceptum follows, with edema, and bleeding
from the mucosa leads to a bloody stool, sometimes containing
mucus. The apex of the intussusception can extend into the transverse, descending, or sigmoid colon, even to and through the anus
in neglected cases. This presentation must be distinguished from
rectal prolapse. Most intussusceptions do not strangulate the bowel
within the first 24 hours but can eventuate in intestinal gangrene
and shock.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 379 u Ileus, Adhesions, ­Intussusception, and Closed-­Loop Obstructions

2301

the protruding intestine and the rectal wall, which does not exist in
prolapse of the rectum.
Ileoileal intussusception in children younger than 2 years can
have a less typical clinical picture, and the symptoms and signs are
chiefly those of small intestinal obstruction. These often resolve
without treatment. Recurrent intussusception is noted in 5–8%
and is more common after hydrostatic than surgical reduction.
Chronic intussusception, in which the symptoms exist in milder
form at recurrent intervals, is more likely to occur with or after
acute enteritis and can arise in older children as well as in infants.

DIAGNOSIS

Fig. 379.2 Intussusception in an infant. The obstruction is evident in

the proximal transverse colon. Contrast material between the intussusceptum and the intussuscipiens (arrows) is responsible for the coiled-­
spring appearance.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In typical cases, there is sudden onset, in a previously well child,
of severe paroxysmal colicky pain that recurs at frequent intervals
and is accompanied by straining efforts with legs and knees flexed
and loud cries. The child may initially be comfortable and play normally between the paroxysms of pain, but if the intussusception is
not reduced, the child becomes progressively weaker and lethargic.
At times, the lethargy is often disproportionate to the abdominal
signs. With progression, a shocklike state, with fever and peritonitis, can develop. The pulse becomes weak and thready, the respirations become shallow and grunting, and the pain may be manifested
only by moaning sounds. Vomiting occurs in most cases and is usually more frequent in the early phase. In the later phase, the vomitus
becomes bile stained. Stools of normal appearance may be evacuated in the first few hours of symptoms. After this time, fecal excretions are small or more often do not occur, and little or no flatus is
passed. Blood is generally passed in the first 12 hours but at times
not for 1-­2 days and infrequently not at all; 60% of infants pass a
stool containing red blood and mucus, the commonly described
currant jelly stool. Some patients have only irritability and alternating or progressive lethargy. The classic triad of pain, a palpable
sausage-­shaped abdominal mass, and bloody or currant jelly stool is
seen in <30% of patients with intussusception. The combination of
paroxysmal pain, vomiting, and a palpable abdominal mass has a
positive predictive value of >90%; the presence of rectal bleeding
increases this to approximately 100%.
Palpation of the abdomen usually reveals a slightly tender
sausage-­shaped mass, sometimes ill defined, which might increase
in size and firmness during a paroxysm of pain and is most often
in the right upper abdomen, with its long axis cephalocaudal. If
it is felt in the epigastrium, the long axis is transverse. Approximately 30% of patients do not have a palpable mass. The presence
of bloody mucus on rectal examination supports the diagnosis of
intussusception. Abdominal distention and tenderness develop as
intestinal obstruction becomes more acute. On rare occasions, the
advancing intestine prolapses through the anus. This prolapse can be
distinguished from prolapse of the rectum by the separation between

When the clinical history and physical findings suggest intussusception, an abdominal ultrasound is typically performed. A plain
abdominal radiograph might show a density in the area of the
intussusception. Screening ultrasounds for suspected intussusception increases the yield of diagnostic or therapeutic enemas and
reduces unnecessary radiation exposure in children with negative
ultrasound examinations. The diagnostic findings of intussusception on ultrasound include a tubular mass in longitudinal views and
a doughnut or target appearance in transverse images (Fig. 379.1).
Ultrasound has a sensitivity of approximately 98–100% and a specificity of approximately 98% in diagnosing intussusception. Air,
hydrostatic (saline), and, less often, water-­soluble contrast enemas
have replaced barium examinations. Contrast enemas demonstrate
a filling defect or cupping in the head of the contrast media where
its advance is obstructed by the intussusceptum (Fig. 379.2). A
central linear column of contrast media may be visible in the compressed lumen of the intussusceptum, and a thin rim of contrast
may be seen trapped around the invaginating intestine in the folds
of mucosa within the intussuscipiens (coiled-­spring sign), especially after evacuation. Retrogression of the intussusceptum under
pressure and visualized on x-­ray or ultrasound documents successful reduction. Air reduction is associated with fewer complications
and lower radiation exposure than traditional contrast hydrostatic
techniques.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

It may be particularly difficult to diagnose intussusception in a child
who already has gastroenteritis; a change in the pattern of illness,
in the character of pain, or in the nature of vomiting or the onset
of rectal bleeding should alert the physician. The bloody stools and
abdominal cramps that accompany enterocolitis can usually be differentiated from intussusception because in enterocolitis the pain
is less severe and less regular, there is diarrhea, and the infant is
recognizably ill between painful episodes. Bleeding from a Meckel
diverticulum is usually painless. Joint symptoms, purpura, or hematuria usually but not invariably accompany the intestinal hemorrhage of Henoch-­S chönlein purpura. Because intussusception can
be a complication of this disorder, ultrasonography may be needed
to distinguish the conditions.
It is important in patients with cystic fibrosis to distinguish intussusception from distal intestinal obstruction syndrome. Distal intestinal
obstruction syndrome requires antegrade treatment, which would be
harmful if there was an intussusception.

TREATMENT

Reduction of an acute intussusception is an emergency procedure
and should be performed immediately after diagnosis in preparation for possible surgery. In patients with prolonged intussusception and signs of shock, peritoneal irritation, intestinal perforation,
or pneumatosis intestinalis, hydrostatic reduction should not be
attempted.
The success rate of radiologic hydrostatic reduction under
fluoroscopic or ultrasonic guidance is approximately 80–95% in
patients with ileocolic intussusception. Spontaneous reduction of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2302 Part XVI u The Digestive System
intussusception occurs in approximately 4–10% of patients. Bowel
perforations occur in 0.5–2.5% of attempted barium and hydrostatic (saline) reductions. The perforation rate with air reduction is
0.1–0.2%. Surgical reduction is indicated in the presence of refractory shock, suspected bowel necrosis or perforation, peritonitis,
and multiple recurrences (suspected lead point).
An ileoileal intussusception is best demonstrated by abdominal ultrasonography. Reduction by instillation of contrast agents,
saline, or air might not be possible. Such intussusceptions can
develop insidiously after bowel surgery and require reoperation
if they do not spontaneously reduce. Ileoileal disease is common
with Henoch-­S chönlein purpura and other unidentifiable disorders
and usually resolves without the need for any specific treatment. If
manual operative reduction is impossible or the bowel is not viable, resection of the intussusception is necessary, with end-­to-­end
anastomosis.

PROGNOSIS

Untreated ileal-­colonic intussusception in infants is usually fatal;
the chances of recovery are directly related to the duration of intussusception before reduction. Most infants recover if the intussusception is reduced in the first 24 hours, but the mortality rate rises
rapidly after this time, especially after the second day. Spontaneous
reduction during preparation for operation is not uncommon.
The recurrence rate after nonsurgical reduction of intussusceptions is approximately 10%, and after surgical reduction it is 2–5%;
none has recurred after surgical resection. Most recurrences occur
within 72 hours of reduction. Corticosteroids may reduce the frequency of recurrent intussusception but are rarely used for this
purpose. Repeated reducible episodes caused by lymphonodular
hyperplasia may respond to treatment of identifiable food allergies if present. A single recurrence of intussusception can usually
be reduced radiologically. In patients with multiple ileal-­colonic
recurrences, a lead point should be suspected and laparoscopic surgery considered. It is unlikely that an intussusception caused by a
lesion such as lymphosarcoma, polyp, or Meckel diverticulum will
be successfully reduced by radiologic intervention. With adequate
surgical management, laparoscopic reduction carries a very low
mortality.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

379.4 Closed-­Loop Obstructions
Elizabeth C. Maxwell and Chris A. Liacouras
Closed-­loop obstructions (i.e., internal hernia) result from bowel
loops that enter windows created by mesenteric defects or adhesions and become trapped, with the entrapped segment of bowel
becoming obstructed at two points. Vascular engorgement of the
strangulated bowel results in intestinal ischemia and necrosis unless
promptly relieved. Prior abdominal surgery is an important risk
factor. Symptoms include abdominal pain, distention, and bilious
emesis. Symptoms can be intermittent if the herniated bowel slides
in and out of the defect. Peritoneal signs suggest ischemic bowel.
Plain radiographs demonstrate signs of small bowel obstruction or
free air if the bowel has perforated. CT scan can identify and delineate internal hernias. Supportive management includes intravenous
fluids, antibiotics, and nasogastric decompression. Prompt surgical
relief of the obstruction is indicated to prevent bowel necrosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com Bibliography.

Chapter 380

Foreign Bodies and
Bezoars
380.1 Foreign Bodies in the Stomach and
Intestine
Trusha Patel, Petar Mamula, and Chris A. Liacouras
Foreign body (FB) ingestions are common in children, with most
ingestions occurring between 6 months and 3 years of age. Generally, FB ingestions in young children are unintentional and involve
small household objects (coins, toys, jewelry, magnets, batteries,
etc.). Although children may present with symptoms of abdominal
pain or chest pain, stridor, drooling, respiratory distress, fever, dysphagia, or inability to tolerate oral intake after FB ingestions, up to
50% of children may be asymptomatic at the time of presentation.
A thorough history and clinical examination is required, including evaluation for respiratory distress, oropharyngeal injury, and
signs of perforation such as subcutaneous emphysema or peritoneal
signs. When determining the appropriate management of a child
after FB ingestion, clinicians must consider patient age and anatomy; object type, location, and size; timing of ingestion; presence or
absence of symptoms; nil per os (NPO) status; and logistical factors
(availability of necessary staff, social factors that may impact timely
follow-­up). In addition to history and clinical examination, anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the neck, chest, and/or abdomen are useful to confirm the presence and determine the location
of radiopaque foreign bodies. Object location is particularly important to consider in the context of the most common sites of potential FB impaction, obstruction, or retention, which include multiple
locations in the esophagus, pylorus, duodenal sweep, ligament of
Treitz, ileocecal valve, rectosigmoid colon, and anus.
Otolaryngologists, gastroenterologists, and general surgeons are
all trained in the management of FB ingestions and center-­specific
availability and expertise should guide consultation with the appropriate specialist. The management of esophageal foreign bodies is
reviewed elsewhere (Chapter 373.1). Considerations for management of gastrointestinal foreign bodies in the stomach and intestine
are based on object type, along with recommendations regarding
timing of potential endoscopic removal as being emergent (<2
hours, regardless of NPO status), urgent (<24 hours, following usual
NPO guidelines), or elective (>24 hours from presentation, following usual NPO guidelines). It should be noted, however, that given
the great variability in patient and object size, the management of
pediatric FB ingestions is case dependent, and clinicians must use
their judgment when determining appropriate management.

BUTTON BATTERIES

Button battery ingestion in a child of any age requires emergent
evaluation, given the potential for rapid, severe caustic injury and
associated complications. For children ≥1 year of age with suspected lithium button battery ingestion in the prior 12 hours or
confirmed location in the esophagus, current recommendations are
to administer honey 10 mL every 10 minutes (or sucralfate if available) and proceed to the emergency department as soon as possible.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2302 Part XVI u The Digestive System
intussusception occurs in approximately 4–10% of patients. Bowel
perforations occur in 0.5–2.5% of attempted barium and hydrostatic (saline) reductions. The perforation rate with air reduction is
0.1–0.2%. Surgical reduction is indicated in the presence of refractory shock, suspected bowel necrosis or perforation, peritonitis,
and multiple recurrences (suspected lead point).
An ileoileal intussusception is best demonstrated by abdominal ultrasonography. Reduction by instillation of contrast agents,
saline, or air might not be possible. Such intussusceptions can
develop insidiously after bowel surgery and require reoperation
if they do not spontaneously reduce. Ileoileal disease is common
with Henoch-­S chönlein purpura and other unidentifiable disorders
and usually resolves without the need for any specific treatment. If
manual operative reduction is impossible or the bowel is not viable, resection of the intussusception is necessary, with end-­to-­end
anastomosis.

PROGNOSIS

Untreated ileal-­colonic intussusception in infants is usually fatal;
the chances of recovery are directly related to the duration of intussusception before reduction. Most infants recover if the intussusception is reduced in the first 24 hours, but the mortality rate rises
rapidly after this time, especially after the second day. Spontaneous
reduction during preparation for operation is not uncommon.
The recurrence rate after nonsurgical reduction of intussusceptions is approximately 10%, and after surgical reduction it is 2–5%;
none has recurred after surgical resection. Most recurrences occur
within 72 hours of reduction. Corticosteroids may reduce the frequency of recurrent intussusception but are rarely used for this
purpose. Repeated reducible episodes caused by lymphonodular
hyperplasia may respond to treatment of identifiable food allergies if present. A single recurrence of intussusception can usually
be reduced radiologically. In patients with multiple ileal-­colonic
recurrences, a lead point should be suspected and laparoscopic surgery considered. It is unlikely that an intussusception caused by a
lesion such as lymphosarcoma, polyp, or Meckel diverticulum will
be successfully reduced by radiologic intervention. With adequate
surgical management, laparoscopic reduction carries a very low
mortality.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

379.4 Closed-­Loop Obstructions
Elizabeth C. Maxwell and Chris A. Liacouras
Closed-­loop obstructions (i.e., internal hernia) result from bowel
loops that enter windows created by mesenteric defects or adhesions and become trapped, with the entrapped segment of bowel
becoming obstructed at two points. Vascular engorgement of the
strangulated bowel results in intestinal ischemia and necrosis unless
promptly relieved. Prior abdominal surgery is an important risk
factor. Symptoms include abdominal pain, distention, and bilious
emesis. Symptoms can be intermittent if the herniated bowel slides
in and out of the defect. Peritoneal signs suggest ischemic bowel.
Plain radiographs demonstrate signs of small bowel obstruction or
free air if the bowel has perforated. CT scan can identify and delineate internal hernias. Supportive management includes intravenous
fluids, antibiotics, and nasogastric decompression. Prompt surgical
relief of the obstruction is indicated to prevent bowel necrosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com Bibliography.

Chapter 380

Foreign Bodies and
Bezoars
380.1 Foreign Bodies in the Stomach and
Intestine
Trusha Patel, Petar Mamula, and Chris A. Liacouras
Foreign body (FB) ingestions are common in children, with most
ingestions occurring between 6 months and 3 years of age. Generally, FB ingestions in young children are unintentional and involve
small household objects (coins, toys, jewelry, magnets, batteries,
etc.). Although children may present with symptoms of abdominal
pain or chest pain, stridor, drooling, respiratory distress, fever, dysphagia, or inability to tolerate oral intake after FB ingestions, up to
50% of children may be asymptomatic at the time of presentation.
A thorough history and clinical examination is required, including evaluation for respiratory distress, oropharyngeal injury, and
signs of perforation such as subcutaneous emphysema or peritoneal
signs. When determining the appropriate management of a child
after FB ingestion, clinicians must consider patient age and anatomy; object type, location, and size; timing of ingestion; presence or
absence of symptoms; nil per os (NPO) status; and logistical factors
(availability of necessary staff, social factors that may impact timely
follow-­up). In addition to history and clinical examination, anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the neck, chest, and/or abdomen are useful to confirm the presence and determine the location
of radiopaque foreign bodies. Object location is particularly important to consider in the context of the most common sites of potential FB impaction, obstruction, or retention, which include multiple
locations in the esophagus, pylorus, duodenal sweep, ligament of
Treitz, ileocecal valve, rectosigmoid colon, and anus.
Otolaryngologists, gastroenterologists, and general surgeons are
all trained in the management of FB ingestions and center-­specific
availability and expertise should guide consultation with the appropriate specialist. The management of esophageal foreign bodies is
reviewed elsewhere (Chapter 373.1). Considerations for management of gastrointestinal foreign bodies in the stomach and intestine
are based on object type, along with recommendations regarding
timing of potential endoscopic removal as being emergent (<2
hours, regardless of NPO status), urgent (<24 hours, following usual
NPO guidelines), or elective (>24 hours from presentation, following usual NPO guidelines). It should be noted, however, that given
the great variability in patient and object size, the management of
pediatric FB ingestions is case dependent, and clinicians must use
their judgment when determining appropriate management.

BUTTON BATTERIES

Button battery ingestion in a child of any age requires emergent
evaluation, given the potential for rapid, severe caustic injury and
associated complications. For children ≥1 year of age with suspected lithium button battery ingestion in the prior 12 hours or
confirmed location in the esophagus, current recommendations are
to administer honey 10 mL every 10 minutes (or sucralfate if available) and proceed to the emergency department as soon as possible.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 380 u Foreign Bodies and Bezoars 2303

A

B

Fig. 380.1 A, Supine abdominal radiograph of 8-­yr-­old girl with history of ingestion of 23 Buckyball-­type magnets over preceding 3-­mo period

demonstrating loop of magnets. B, Endoscopic image of magnets during retrieval from lesser curvature of the stomach, with additional finding of
magnet penetrating the wall of stomach. Subsequent surgical exploration demonstrated fistula between stomach and jejunum, which was repaired.

Immediate two-­view radiograph is indicated to determine battery
location and negative pole orientation; direct notification of otolaryngology, gastroenterology, and/or general surgery is indicated
pending results of this radiograph. Although removal of esophageal
button batteries is emergent, management of button batteries in the
stomach and more distally depends on the presence of symptoms
and whether a single battery or multiple objects have been ingested.
If symptoms of anorexia, vomiting, abdominal pain, or fever are
present or if there is co-­ingestion of a magnet, then urgent endoscopic removal is indicated if the button battery is in the stomach
or proximal small intestine. If the patient is asymptomatic after the
ingestion of a single button battery ≥15 mm that has passed beyond
the esophagus, esophagram should still be considered (particularly
in children <6 years of age) to evaluate for esophageal injury. If
esophagram is normal, observant management may be appropriate, with repeat abdominal x-­ray (AXR) in 2-­3 days and consideration of button battery removal if it still has not passed the stomach
within 4 days. However, if the esophagram is abnormal or if patient
size or other factors make it unlikely that the battery will pass spontaneously, hospital admission for observation, endoscopic evaluation, and potential battery removal is indicated. If the patient is
asymptomatic and only a single button battery <15 mm has been
ingested and is in the stomach or more distal, observant management is appropriate. AXR should be considered if an ingested button battery has not passed in the stool within 10-­14 days.

COINS/BLUNT OBJECTS

Although coins are the most frequently ingested FB, when coin
ingestion is reported or identified on imaging, it is important to
confirm that the ingested object could not potentially be a button
battery (on imaging, it is important to make sure there is no “step-­
off ” sign on lateral view or “double halo” sign on anteroposterior
views). Generally, endoscopic removal of coins and other small,
blunt objects in the stomach and more distally is only necessary
if the patient is symptomatic or if the object is unlikely to pass
(child <2 years old and object dimensions of width >2 cm or length
>5 cm). Repeat abdominal radiography may be considered in 2-­3
weeks if a child under 2 years of age swallowed a quarter or another
object that may not pass in a timely fashion.

MAGNETS

In the case of a suspected or confirmed magnet ingestion, two-­view
radiographs should be obtained to confirm whether a single magnet

Fig. 380.2 Abdominal radiograph of a 3-­yr-­old boy, noting three at-

tached magnets that resulted in volvulus (i.e., twisting of the bowel) and
multiple bowel perforations. (Courtesy U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission. From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Gastrointestinal injuries from magnet ingestion in children—United States,
2003–2006. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2006;55:1296–1300.)

or multiple magnets have been ingested, as multiple magnet ingestion
places the patient at risk for entero-­enteric fistula formation between
magnets in adjacent loops of bowel, which can lead to perforation,
peritonitis, and bowel ischemia/necrosis. If a single magnet has been
ingested and is in the stomach or intestine and the patient is asymptomatic, with low risk for ingestion of additional magnets and with
good follow-­up, allowing spontaneous passage is appropriate. In that
case, precautions that should be taken include removing all magnets
and metallic objects from the patient’s environment (including patient’s
clothing) and preventing any risk of additional magnet ingestion until
the magnet has passed. In the case of multiple magnet ingestion, urgent
endoscopic removal is indicated if the magnets are in the stomach to
prevent further passage or complications (Fig. 380.1). If multiple magnets are beyond the stomach, consultation with a general surgeon is
recommended and magnet removal should be pursued if the patient
is symptomatic (either with enteroscopy, laparoscopy or laparotomy,
depending on center expertise) (Fig. 380.2). If the patient is asymptomatic, hospital admission for laxative therapy, serial abdominal exams
and x-­rays (every 4-­6 hours) and consideration of later removal if not
passing is appropriate.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2304 Part XVI u The Digestive System
SHARP OBJECTS

The management of ingested sharp objects depends on size and
shape of the object. Radiographic evaluation is key in identifying
size, location, and orientation of radiopaque sharp objects, although
it will not be beneficial for radiolucent objects. Generally, urgent
endoscopic removal is indicated for sharp objects in the stomach
or duodenum if the patient is symptomatic, the object is likely to
cause perforation if allowed to pass spontaneously, or if the object
is unlikely to pass due to large size (>5-­6 cm long in teenagers/
adults or ≥2-­3 cm long in a younger child). If a large, sharp object
is beyond the duodenum, consultation with general surgery is recommended, as removal is indicated if the patient is symptomatic.
Even if the patient is asymptomatic, serial radiographs are indicated
and removal with enteroscopy or surgery may be needed if symptoms develop or if the object does not pass after 3 days. Otherwise,
if the patient is asymptomatic and the object is smaller than the
aforementioned dimensions, particularly with the sharp end of the
object trailing behind a heavier blunt end, allowing spontaneous
passage is reasonable. For reported ingestion of sharp, radiolucent
objects, urgent endoscopic evaluation and potential removal is indicated if the patient is asymptomatic. If the patient is symptomatic,
alternate imaging (CT, ultrasound, MRI, fluoroscopy) may be utilized for assessment and removal may be considered if the object is
identified.

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Other foreign bodies that may require special considerations include
those with the potential to cause obstruction or toxicity based on
object characteristics. Super-­
absorbent objects (including expanding children’s spongelike toys, tampons) may expand rapidly within
the GI tract and cause gastric outlet or bowel obstruction. If not yet
expanded and accessible via endoscope, removal should be considered.
Lead-­containing foreign bodies should be removed promptly if endoscopically accessible, as they have the potential to cause lead toxicity.
Consultation with toxicology is recommended and obtaining baseline
serum lead level is suggested. If the lead-­containing FB is beyond the
stomach, bowel irrigation and monitoring of blood lead levels may be
appropriate to minimize and monitor toxicity. In the case of ingestion
of narcotic packets, endoscopic removal should be avoided to prevent
packet rupture and severe toxicity and consultation with Poison Control Center is recommended.
Children occasionally place objects in their rectum. Small blunt
objects usually pass spontaneously, but large or sharp objects typically
need to be retrieved. Adequate sedation is essential to relax the anal
sphincter before attempting endoscopic or speculum removal. If the
object is proximal to the rectum, observation for 12-­24 hours usually
allows the object to descend into the rectum.

IMPORTANT NUMBERS
National Battery Ingestion Hotline: 800-­498-­8666
Poison Control: 800-­222-­1222
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

380.2 Bezoars
Trusha Patel, Petar Mamula, and Chris A. Liacouras
A bezoar is an accumulation of exogenous matter in the stomach
or intestine. Risk factors for development of a bezoar include anatomic abnormalities (congenital or due to prior gastrointestinal surgery), gastric dysmotility, and medical and psychiatric conditions
that lead to consumption of nonfood materials. Bezoars are often
incidental findings on imaging or endoscopy in an asymptomatic
patient. When they cause symptoms, abdominal pain, nausea,
vomiting, decreased appetite, and halitosis are most common. An

Fig. 380.3 Large trichobezoar in the shape of the stomach, duodenum, and proximal jejunum after surgical removal. (Courtesy Dr. Michael L. Nance, Division of Pediatric General, Thoracic and Fetal Surgery, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)

abdominal plain film can suggest the presence of a bezoar, which
can be confirmed on ultrasound, fluoroscopy, or CT examination.
On fluoroscopy or CT scan, a bezoar appears as a nonhomogeneous,
nonenhancing mass within the lumen of the stomach or intestine.
Oral contrast circumscribes the mass.
Bezoars are classified on the basis of their composition. Phytobezoars are the most common type of bezoar and are composed of
undigestible vegetable/fruit matter. Carbonated soda has been demonstrated to help dissolve phytobezoars and should be considered
as a first-­line option for management. When available, cellulase can
also be used for chemical dissolution. Given the risk of gastric ulcer
or perforation, the use of papain (meat tenderizer) is not recommended. If endoscopic removal is needed, endotracheal intubation
is required and use of an overtube may be considered. In addition to
chemical dissolution and endoscopic or removal, prokinetic agents
may be used for adjuvant medical therapy as well. Trichobezoars
are composed of hair and are most frequently a complication of the
psychiatric disorder trichotillomania, and the most severe form is
known as Rapunzel syndrome (hair bezoar extending beyond the
stomach to the small intestine). Large trichobezoars require surgical removal; endoscopic removal is not recommended (Fig. 380.3).
Lactobezoars are uncommon and are most frequently seen in
premature infants and can be attributed to the high casein or calcium content of some premature formulas. These bezoars generally
resolve when feedings are withheld for 24-­48 hours. Pharmacobezoars (composed of ingested medications) and other bezoars composed of various other objects (vinyl gloves, cement, Styrofoam,
etc.) may also be seen and management is case-­dependent.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 381 u Peptic Ulcer Disease in Children

Chapter 381

Peptic Ulcer Disease in
Children
Samra S. Blanchard and Steven J. Czinn
Peptic ulcer disease, the end result of inflammation caused by an imbalance between cytoprotective and cytotoxic factors in the stomach and
duodenum, manifests with varying degrees of gastritis or frank ulceration. The pathogenesis of peptic ulcer disease is multifactorial, but the
final common pathway for the development of ulcers is the action of acid
and pepsin-­laden contents of the stomach on the gastric and duodenal
mucosa and the inability of mucosal defense mechanisms to allay those
effects. Abnormalities in the gastric and duodenal mucosa can be visualized on endoscopy, with or without histologic changes. Deep mucosal
lesions that disrupt the muscularis mucosa of the gastric or duodenal wall
define peptic ulcers. Gastric ulcers are generally located on the lesser curvature of the stomach, and 90% of duodenal ulcers are found in the duodenal bulb. Rates of peptic ulcer disease in childhood appear to be low.
Large pediatric centers anecdotally report an incidence of 5-­7 children
with gastric or duodenal ulcers per 2,500 hospital admissions each year.
Ulcers in children can be classified as primary peptic ulcers, which
are chronic and more often duodenal, or secondary, which are usually
more acute in onset and are more often gastric (Table 381.1). Primary
ulcers are most often associated with Helicobacter pylori infection. Secondary peptic ulcers can result from stress caused by sepsis, shock, or an
intracranial lesion (Cushing ulcer), or in response to a severe burn injury
(Curling ulcer). Secondary ulcers can also occur as the result of using
drugs (nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], corticosteroids,
sodium valproate, iron, potassium supplements, theophylline), hypersecretory states like Zollinger-­Ellison syndrome (see Chapter 381.1), G-­cell
hyperplasia, short bowel syndrome, and hyperparathyroidism. Infections with cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, and tuberculosis and
systemic inflammatory diseases like Crohn disease, sarcoidosis, mastocytosis, and eosinophilic gastroenteritis can also cause ulcers.

PATHOGENESIS
Acid Secretion

By 3-­4 years of age, gastric acid secretion approximates adult values.
Acid initially secreted by the oxyntic cells of the stomach has a pH
Table 381.1  Etiologic Classification of Peptic Ulcers
Positive for Helicobacter pylori infection
Drug (NSAID)-­induced
H. pylori and NSAID-­positive
H. pylori and NSAID-­negative*
Acid hypersecretory state (Zollinger-­Ellison syndrome)
Anastomosis ulcer after subtotal gastric resection
Tumors (cancer, lymphoma, carcinoid syndrome)
Crohn disease of the stomach or duodenum
Eosinophilic gastroduodenitis
Systemic mastocytosis
Radiation damage
Viral infections (cytomegalovirus or herpes simplex infection,
particularly in immunocompromised patients)
Colonization of stomach with Helicobacter heilmannii
Severe systemic disease
Cameron ulcer (gastric ulcer where a hiatal hernia passes through
the diaphragmatic hiatus)
True idiopathic ulcer
*Requires search for other specific causes.
NSAID, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug.
From Vakil N, Megraud F. Eradication therapy for Helicobacter pylori. Gastroenterology.
2007;133:985–1001.

2305

of approximately 0.8, whereas the pH of the stomach contents is 1-­2.
Excessive acid secretion is associated with a large parietal cell mass,
hypersecretion by antral G cells, and increased vagal tone, resulting in
increased or sustained acid secretion in response to meals and increased
secretion during the night. The secretagogues that promote gastric acid
production include acetylcholine released by the vagus nerve, histamine secreted by enterochromaffin cells, and gastrin released by the G
cells of the antrum. Mediators that decrease gastric acid secretion and
enhance protective mucin production include prostaglandins.

Mucosal Defense

A continuous layer of mucous gel that serves as a diffusion barrier to
hydrogen ions and other chemicals covers the gastrointestinal (GI)
mucosa. Mucus production and secretion are stimulated by prostaglandin E2. Underlying the mucous coat, the epithelium forms a
second-­line barrier, the characteristics of which are determined by
the biology of the epithelial cells and their tight junctions. Another
important function of epithelial cells is to secrete chemokines when
threatened by microbial attack. Secretion of bicarbonate into the
mucous coat, which is regulated by prostaglandins, is important for
neutralization of hydrogen ions. If mucosal injury occurs, active proliferation and migration of mucosal cells occurs rapidly, driven by
epithelial growth factor, transforming growth factor-­α, insulin-­like
growth factor, gastrin, and bombesin, and covers the area of epithelial
damage.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The presenting symptoms of peptic ulcer disease vary with the age of
the patient. Hematemesis or melena is reported in up to half of the
patients with peptic ulcer disease. School-­age children and adolescents
more commonly present with epigastric pain and nausea, presentations generally seen in adults. Dyspepsia, epigastric abdominal pain or
fullness, is seen in older children. Infants and younger children usually
present with feeding difficulty, vomiting, crying episodes, hematemesis, or melena. In the neonatal period, gastric perforation can be the
initial presentation.
The classic symptom of peptic ulceration, epigastric pain alleviated
by the ingestion of food, is present only in a minority of children. Many
pediatric patients present with poorly localized abdominal pain, which
may be periumbilical. The vast majority of patients with periumbilical
or epigastric pain or discomfort do not have a peptic ulcer, but rather
a functional GI disorder, such as irritable bowel syndrome or nonulcer
(functional) dyspepsia (see Chapter 389). Patients with peptic ulceration rarely present with acute abdominal pain from perforation or
symptoms and signs of pancreatitis from a posterior penetrating ulcer.
Occasionally, bright red blood per rectum may be seen if the rate of
bleeding is brisk and the intestinal transit time is short. Vomiting can
be a sign of gastric outlet obstruction.
The pain is often described as dull or aching, rather than sharp or
burning, as in adults. It can last from minutes to hours; patients have
frequent exacerbations and remissions lasting from weeks to months.
Nocturnal pain waking the child is common in older children. A history of typical ulcer pain with prompt relief after taking antacids is
found in <33% of children. Rarely, in patients with acute or chronic
blood loss, penetration of the ulcer into the abdominal cavity or adjacent organs produces shock, anemia, peritonitis, or pancreatitis. If
inflammation and edema are extensive, acute or chronic gastric outlet
obstruction can occur.

DIAGNOSIS

Esophagogastroduodenoscopy is the method of choice to establish the
diagnosis of peptic ulcer disease. Endoscopy allows the direct visualization of esophagus, stomach, and duodenum, identifying the specific
lesions. Biopsy specimens must be obtained from the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum for histologic assessment as well as to screen for
the presence of H. pylori infection. Endoscopy also provides the opportunity for hemostatic therapy including clipping, injection, and the use
of thermal coagulation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2306 Part XVI u The Digestive System
PRIMARY ULCERS
Helicobacter pylori Gastritis

H. pylori is among the most common bacterial infections in humans.
It is a gram-­negative, S-­shaped rod that produces urease, catalase, and
oxidase; these enzymes might play a role in the pathogenesis of peptic
ulcer disease. The mechanism of acquisition and transmission of H.
pylori is unclear, although the most likely mode of transmission is fecal-­
oral or oral-­oral. Viable H. pylori organisms can be cultured from the
stool or vomitus of infected patients. Risk factors such as low socioeconomic status in childhood or affected family members also influence
the prevalence. All children infected with H. pylori develop histologic
chronic active gastritis but are often asymptomatic. In children, H.
pylori infection can manifest with abdominal pain or vomiting and,
less often, refractory iron-­deficiency anemia or poor growth. H. pylori
can be associated, though rarely, with chronic autoimmune thrombocytopenia. Chronic colonization with H. pylori can predispose children
to a significantly increased risk of developing a duodenal ulcer, gastric
cancer such as adenocarcinoma, or mucosa-­associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas. The relative risk of gastric carcinoma is 2.3-­8.7 times
greater in infected adults compared with uninfected subjects. H. pylori
is classified by the World Health Organization as a group I carcinogen.
Anemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, short stature, and
sudden unexplained infant death (SUID) have also been reported as
extragastric manifestations of H. pylori infection. In one published study,
H. pylori infection has been correlated with cases of SUID, but there is no
evidence to suggest that H. pylori plays a role in the pathogenesis of SUID.
The diagnosis of H. pylori infection is made histologically by demonstrating the organism in the biopsy specimens. The current consensus report does not recommend using antibody-­based tests (IgG, IgA)
for H pylori in serum, whole blood, urine, and saliva in the clinical
setting. 13C-­urea breath tests and stool antigen tests are reliable noninvasive methods of detecting H. pylori infection in patients who do
not require endoscopic evaluation. Patients should stop proton pump
inhibitor (PPI) therapy 2 weeks before testing as they can cause false-­
negative results. Nonetheless, for symptomatic children with suspected
H. pylori infection, an initial upper endoscopy is recommended to
evaluate and confirm H. pylori disease. The range of endoscopic findings in children with H. pylori infection varies from being grossly normal to the presence of nonspecific gastritis with prominent rugal folds,
nodularity (Fig. 381.1), or ulcers. Because the antral mucosa appears
to be endoscopically normal in a significant number of children with
primary H. pylori gastritis, gastric biopsies should always be obtained
from the body and antrum of the stomach regardless of the endoscopic
appearance. If H. pylori is identified, even in a child with no symptoms,
eradication therapy should be offered (Tables 381.2 and 381.3). Successful H. pylori eradication is associated with cure of peptic ulcer disease and very low risk of relapse. Therefore monitoring the success of
therapy is mandatory in these patients 4-­6 weeks after stopping antibiotics and at least 2 weeks after stopping PPI therapy. Eradication must
be tested with the 13C-­urea breath test or stool antigen test. If there is an
eradication failure, the patient should receive rescue therapy.

IDIOPATHIC ULCERS

H. pylori–negative peptic ulcers in children who have no history of taking NSAIDs represent 15–20% of pediatric peptic ulcers. The pathogenesis of idiopathic ulcer remains uncertain. These patients do not
have nodularity in the gastric antrum or histologic evidence of gastritis. In idiopathic ulcers, acid suppression alone is the preferred effective treatment. Either PPIs or H2-­receptor antagonists may be used.
Idiopathic ulcers have a high recurrence rate after discontinuing antisecretory therapy. These children should be followed closely, and if
symptoms recur, antisecretory therapy should be restarted. It is also
important to consider uncommon but possible conditions like Crohn
disease, cytomegalovirus, and Zollinger-­Ellison syndrome.

SECONDARY ULCERS
Aspirin and Other Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory
Drugs

NSAIDs produce mucosal injury by direct local irritation
and by inhibiting cyclooxygenase (COX) and prostaglandin

Fig. 381.1 Endoscopic view of lymphoid modular hyperplasia of the

gastric antrum. Endoscopic hemostatic therapy is indicated for ulcers
with active spurting, active oozing, and nonbleeding but visible vessels.
Hemostatic therapy may include bipolar electrocoagulation or heater
probe, or injectable soluble alcohol. (From Campbell DI, Thomas JE.
Helicobacter pylori infection in paediatric practice. Arch Dis Child Educ
Pract Ed. 2005;90:ep25–ep30.)

formation. Prostaglandins enhance mucosal resistance to injury; therefore a decrease in prostaglandin production increases the risk of mucosal injury. The severe erosive gastropathy produced by NSAIDs can
ultimately result in bleeding ulcers or gastric perforations. The location
of these ulcers is more common in the stomach than in the duodenum,
and usually in the antrum. The discovery of two isoforms of COX-­1
and COX-­2 has led to the development of COX-­2-­selective NSAIDs,
but they can still cause ulcerations in the GI tract.

STRESS ULCERATION

Stress ulceration usually occurs within 24 hours of onset of a critical illness in which physiologic stress is present. In many cases, the patients
bleed from gastric erosions, rather than ulcers. Approximately 25% of
the critically ill children in a pediatric intensive care unit have macroscopic evidence of gastric bleeding. Preterm and term infants in the
neonatal intensive care unit can also develop gastric mucosal lesions
and can present with upper GI bleeding or perforated ulcers. Although
prophylactic measures to prevent stress ulcers in children are not standardized, drugs that inhibit gastric acid production (PPIs) are often
used in the pediatric intensive care unit to reduce the rate of gastric
erosions or ulcers. There is a concern that prophylactic PPI therapy
increases the risk of ventilator-­associated pneumonia and possibly
Clostridium difficile–associated disease.

TREATMENT

The management of acute hemorrhage includes serial monitoring of
pulse, blood pressure, and hematocrit to ensure hemodynamic stability and avoid significant hypovolemia and anemia. Normal saline can
be used to resuscitate a patient who has poor intravascular volume
status. This can be followed by packed red blood cell transfusions for
significant symptomatic anemia. The patient’s blood should be typed
and cross matched, and a large-­bore catheter should be placed for fluid
or blood replacement. A nasogastric tube should be placed to determine whether the bleeding has stopped. Significant anemia can occur
after fluid resuscitation as a consequence of equilibration or continued blood loss (which can also cause shock). In adults, a conservative threshold for transfusion (<7 g/dL vs 9 g hemoglobin) resulted in
improved survival and fewer episodes of rebleeding. Fortunately, most
acute peptic ulcer bleeding stops spontaneously.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 381 u Peptic Ulcer Disease in Children

2307

Table 381.2  Recommended Eradication Therapies for Helicobacter pylori–Associated Disease in Children
MEDICATIONS
Proton pump inhibitor

DOSE

DURATION OF TREATMENT

1 mg/kg/dose twice a day

1 mo

ANTIBIOTICS

WEIGHT

DOSE

DURATION OF TREATMENT

Amoxicillin

15-­24 kg

500 mg twice a day

14 days

25-­34 kg

750 mg twice a day

>35 kg

1,000 mg twice a day

Clarithromycin

Metronidazole

15-­24 kg

250 mg twice a day

25-­34 kg

500 mg in a.m., 250 mg in p.m.

>35 kg

500 mg twice a day

15-­24 kg

250 mg twice a day

25-­34 kg

500 mg in a.m., 250 mg in p.m.

>35 kg

500 mg twice a day

14 days

14 days

Depending on previous antibiotic use history, recommended combinations are amoxicillin + clarithromycin + PPI OR amoxicillin + metronidazole + PPI OR clarithromycin + metronidazole + PPI.
Adapted from Jones NL, Koletzko S, Goodman K, et al. Joint ESPGHAN/NASPGHAN Guidelines for the Management of Helicobacter pylori in Children and Adolescents. J Pediatr
Gastroenterol Nutr. 2017;64(6):991–1003.

Table 381.3  Antisecretory Therapy with Pediatric Dosages
MEDICATION

PEDIATRIC DOSE

HOW SUPPLIED

H2-­RECEPTOR ANTAGONISTS
Ranitidine

4-­10 mg/kg/day divided 2 or 3 × a day

Pulled from market

Famotidine

1-­2 mg/kg/day divided twice a day

Syrup: 40 mg/5 mL. Tablets: 20, 40 mg

Nizatidine

5-­10 mg/kg/day divided twice a day
Older than 12 yr: 150 mg twice a day

Pulled from market

1.0-­3.3 mg/kg/day
weigh <20 kg: 10 mg/day
weigh >20 kg: 20 mg/day
Approved for use in those older than 1 month

Capsules: 10, 20, 40 mg

Lansoprazole

0.8-­4 mg/kg/day
weigh <30 kg: 15 mg/day
weigh >30 kg: 30 mg/day
Approved for use in those older than 1 yr

Capsules: 15, 30 mg
Powder packet: 15, 30 mg
SoluTab: 15, 30 mg

Rabeprazole

1-­11 yr (weigh <15 kg): 5 mg/day
1-­11 yr (weigh >15 kg): 10 mg/day
>12 yr: 20 mg tablet
Approved for use in those older than 1 yr

Delayed release capsule: 5, 10 mg
Delayed release tablet: 20 mg

Pantoprazole

1-­5 yr: 0.3-­1.2 mg/kg/day (limited data)
>5 yr of age:
weigh >15 kg to <40 kg: 20 mg/day
weigh >40 kg: 40 mg/day
Approved for use in those older than 1 yr

Tablet: 20, 40 mg
Powder pack: 40 mg

Esomeprazole

1 mo -­< 1 yr old
weigh 3 kg to 5 kg: 2.5 mg
weigh >5 kg to 7.5 kg: 5 mg
weigh >7.5 kg to 12 kg: 10 mg
1-­11 yr old
weigh <20 kg: 10 mg
weigh >20 kg: 20 mg
Approved for use 1 mo and older

Capsules: 20, 40
Delayed-release single-dose packs: 2.5, 5, 10,
20 mg

Dexlansoprazole

12-­17 yr: 30-­60 mg
Approved for use in those older than 12 yr

Capsules: 30, 60

Omeprazole sodium bicarbonate

Safety and efficacy have not been established
for those under 18 yr

Capsules: 20, 40
Powder for oral suspension: 20 mg, 40 mg

40-­80 mg/kg/day

Suspension: 1,000 mg/5 mL
Tablet: 1,000 mg

PROTON PUMP INHIBITORS
Omeprazole

CYTOPROTECTIVE AGENTS
Sucralfate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2308 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Patients with suspected peptic ulcer hemorrhage should receive
high-­dose intravenous (IV) PPI therapy, which lowers the risk of
rebleeding. Some centers also use octreotide, which lowers splanchnic
blood flow and gastric acid production.
Once the patient is hemodynamically stable, endoscopy is indicated
to identify the source of bleeding and to treat a potential bleeding site
(Fig. 381.2). Methods used to achieve hemostasis include mechanical
devices (clipping), injection therapy (diluted epinephrine 1:100,00),
and thermal therapy (heater probe). Ulcer therapy has two goals, ulcer
healing and elimination of the primary cause. Other important considerations are relief of symptoms and prevention of complications. The
first-­line drugs for the treatment of gastritis and peptic ulcer disease
in children are PPIs and H2-­receptor antagonists (see Table 381.3).
PPIs are more potent in ulcer healing. Cytoprotective agents can also
be used as adjunct therapy if mucosal lesions are present. Antibiotics
in combination with a PPI must be used for the treatment of H. pylori–
associated ulcers (see Table 381.2).
H2-­receptor antagonists (cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine, nizatidine) competitively inhibit the binding of histamine at the H2 subtype
receptor of the gastric parietal cell. PPIs block the gastric parietal cell
H+/K+-­adenosine triphosphatase pump in a dose-­dependent fashion,
reducing basal and stimulated gastric acid secretion. Ranitidine and
nizatidine were pulled out of the market in April 2020 due to unacceptable levels of N-­
nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), a probable
human carcinogen. NDMA impurities have been introduced during
the manufacturing processes and as the result of product degradation
during storage. Currently, seven PPIs are available in the United States:
omeprazole, lansoprazole, pantoprazole, esomeprazole, rabeprazole,
dexlansoprazole, and omeprazole/sodium bicarbonate. Apart from the
last two, they are all approved in children and adolescents. They are
well tolerated with only minor adverse effects, such as diarrhea (1–4%),
headache (1–3%), and nausea (1%). When one considers therapeutic
efficacy, the evidence suggests that all PPIs have comparable efficacy in
treatment of peptic ulcer disease using standard doses and are superior
to H2-­receptor antagonists. PPIs have their greatest effect when given
before a meal. Pantoprazole and esomeprazole are the only PPI available in IV form in United States. IV PPI should be used in acute upper
GI bleeding. Studies in adults have demonstrated that twice a day IV
PPI is as effective as continuous infusion, and the current recommendation is to start with IV PPI and change to the oral form after evaluating their rebleeding risk at the time of endoscopy.

Treatment of Helicobacter pylori–Related Peptic
Ulcer Disease

In pediatrics, antibiotics and bismuth salts have been used in combination
with PPIs to treat H. pylori infection (see Table 381.2). Eradication rates
in children range from 68–92% when the dual or triple therapy is used
for 14 days. The ulcer healing rate ranges from 91–100%. Triple therapy
yields a higher cure rate than dual therapy. The optimal regimen for the

eradication of H. pylori infection in children has yet to be established, but
the use of a PPI in combination with clarithromycin and amoxicillin or
metronidazole for 2 weeks is a well-­tolerated and recommended triple
therapy (see Table 381.2). Although children younger than 5 years of age
can become reinfected, the most common reason for treatment failure is
poor compliance or antibiotic resistance. H. pylori has become more resistant to clarithromycin or metronidazole as a consequence of the extensive use of these antibiotics for other infections. In the case of resistant H.
pylori infection, bismuth-­based quadruple therapy or sequential treatment
with different antibiotics or rescue therapy are acceptable options. The
sequential treatment regimen is a 10-­day treatment consisting of a PPI and
amoxicillin (both twice daily) administered for the first 5 days followed by
triple therapy consisting of a PPI, clarithromycin, and metronidazole for
the remaining 5 days. Levofloxacin, rifabutin, or furazolidone can be used
with amoxicillin and bismuth as a rescue therapy depending on the age of
the patient. Fidaxomicin has equivalent efficacy to vancomycin in adults.
Knowledge of the community’s H. pylori resistance pattern to clarithromycin or metronidazole might help choose the initial or rescue therapy. In
adults with persistent H. pylori infection, a combination of rifabutin with
amoxicillin and esomperazole was effective in eradicating H. pylori.

Surgical Therapy

Since the discovery of H. pylori and the availability of modern medical management, peptic ulcer disease requiring surgical treatment has
become extremely rare. The indications for surgery remain uncontrolled bleeding, perforation, and obstruction.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

381.1 Zollinger-­Ellison Syndrome
Samra S. Blanchard and Steven J. Czinn
Zollinger-­Ellison syndrome is a rare syndrome characterized by refractory, severe peptic ulcer disease caused by gastric hypersecretion due
to the autonomous secretion of gastrin by a neuroendocrine tumor
(gastrinoma). Clinical presentations are similar to those of peptic ulcer
disease with the addition of diarrhea. The diagnosis is suspected by the
presence of recurrent, multiple, or atypically located ulcers. More than
98% of patients have elevated fasting gastrin levels. Zollinger-­Ellison
syndrome is common in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia 1
and rare with neurofibromatosis and tuberous sclerosis. Prompt and
effective management of increased gastric acid secretion is essential in
the management. PPIs are the drug of choice due to their long duration
of action and potency. H2-­receptor antagonists are also effective, but
higher doses are required than those used in peptic ulcer disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Endoscopic
features

Active bleeding
or visible vessel

Adherent clot

Flat pigmented
spot

Clean base

Endoscopic
therapy

Endoscopic
therapy

No recommendation
for or against
endoscopic therapy

No
endoscopic
therapy

No
endoscopic
therapy

Medical
therapy

High-dose
PPI therapy*

High-dose
PPI therapy*

Standard
PPI therapy†

Standard
PPI therapy†

Fig. 381.2 Endoscopic and medical therapy algorithm for ulcer bleeding based on endoscopic features of ulcer. *For continuous regimen, 80-­mg

bolus followed by 8-­mg/min infusion for 3 days is recommended. For intermittent regimens, doses of 40 mg 2 to 4 times daily for 3 days are suggested, given orally if feasible, and an initial bolus of 80 mg may be appropriate. †Standard PPI therapy (e.g., oral PPI once daily) has been recommended
by previous guidelines. PPI, Proton pump inhibitor. (From Laine L, Barkun AN, Saltzman JR, et al. ACG clinical guideline: upper gastrointestinal and
ulcer bleeding. Am J Gastrointerol. 2021;116:899–917. Fig. 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 382 u Inflammatory Bowel Disease

Chapter 382

Inflammatory Bowel
Disease
Ronen E. Stein, Sudha A. Anupindi, and
Robert N. Baldassano
The term inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is used to represent two
distinctive disorders of idiopathic chronic intestinal inflammation:
Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis. Their respective etiologies are
poorly understood, and both disorders are characterized by unpredictable exacerbations and remissions. The most common time of onset of
IBD is during the preadolescent/adolescent era and young adulthood.
A bimodal distribution has been shown with an early onset at 10-­20
years of age and a second, smaller peak at 50-­80 years of age. Approximately 25% of patients present before 20 years of age. IBD may begin as
early as the first year of life, and an increased incidence among young
children has been observed since the turn of the 20th century. Children
with early-­onset IBD are more likely to have colonic involvement. In
developed countries, these disorders are the major causes of chronic
intestinal inflammation in children beyond the first few years of life. A
third, less-­common category, indeterminate colitis, represents approximately 10% of pediatric patients.
Genetic and environmental influences are involved in the pathogenesis of IBD. The risk of IBD in family members of an affected person
has been reported in the range of 7–30%; a child whose parents both
have IBD has a >35% chance of acquiring the disorder. Relatives of a
patient with ulcerative colitis have a greater risk of acquiring ulcerative
colitis than Crohn disease, whereas relatives of a patient with Crohn
disease have a greater risk of acquiring this disorder; the two diseases
can occur in the same family. The risk of occurrence of IBD among
relatives of patients with Crohn disease is somewhat greater than for
patients with ulcerative colitis.
The importance of genetic factors in the development of IBD is noted
by a higher chance that both twins will be affected if they are monozygotic rather than dizygotic. The concordance rate in twins is higher
in Crohn disease (36%) than in ulcerative colitis (16%). Genetic disorders that have been associated with IBD include Turner syndrome,
Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome, glycogen storage disease type Ib, and
various immunodeficiency disorders. The first IBD gene, NOD2, was
identified through association mapping; an IBD5 risk haplotype was
also identified. There has been an exponential growth in the set of validated genetic risk factors for IBD (Table 382.1).
A perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody is found in
approximately 70% of patients with ulcerative colitis compared with
<20% of those with Crohn disease and is believed to represent a marker
of genetically controlled immunoregulatory disturbance. Approximately 55% of those with Crohn disease are positive for anti–Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibody. Since the importance of these were first
described, multiple other serologic and immune markers of Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis have been recognized.
IBD is caused by dysregulated or inappropriate immune response to
environmental factors in a genetically susceptible host. An abnormality in intestinal mucosal immunoregulation may be of primary importance in the pathogenesis of IBD, involving activation of cytokines,
triggering a cascade of reactions that results in bowel inflammation.
These cytokines are recognized as known or potential targets for IBD
therapies.
Multiple environmental factors are recognized to be involved in the
pathogenesis of IBD, none more critical than the gut microbiota. The
increasing incidence of IBD over time is likely in part attributable to
alterations in the microbiome. Evidence includes association between
IBD and residence in or immigration to industrialized nations, a

2309

Western diet, increased use of antibiotics at a younger age, high rates
of vaccination, and less exposure to microbes at a young age. Although
gut microbes likely play an important role in the pathogenesis of IBD,
the exact mechanism needs to be elucidated further. Some environmental factors are disease specific; for example, cigarette smoking is a
risk factor for Crohn disease but paradoxically protects against ulcerative colitis.
It is usually possible to distinguish between ulcerative colitis and
Crohn disease by the clinical presentation and radiologic, endoscopic,
and histopathologic findings (Table 382.2). It is not possible to make
a definitive diagnosis in approximately 10% of patients with chronic
colitis; this disorder is called indeterminate colitis. Occasionally, a child
initially believed to have ulcerative colitis on the basis of clinical findings is subsequently found to have Crohn colitis. This is particularly
true for the youngest patients, because Crohn disease in this patient
population can more often manifest as exclusively colonic inflammation, mimicking ulcerative colitis. The medical treatments of Crohn
disease and ulcerative colitis overlap.
Extraintestinal manifestations occur slightly more commonly with
Crohn disease than with ulcerative colitis (Table 382.3). Poor growth is
seen in 15–40% of children with Crohn disease at diagnosis. Decrease
in height velocity occurs in nearly 90% of patients with Crohn disease
diagnosed in childhood or adolescence. Of the extraintestinal manifestations that occur with IBD, joint, skin, eye, mouth, and hepatobiliary
involvement tend to be associated with colitis, whether ulcerative or
Crohn. The presence of some manifestations, such as peripheral arthritis, erythema nodosum, and anemia, correlates with activity of the
bowel disease. Activity of pyoderma gangrenosum correlates less well
with activity of the bowel disease, whereas sclerosing cholangitis, ankylosing spondylitis, and sacroiliitis do not correlate with intestinal disease. Arthritis occurs in three patterns: migratory peripheral arthritis
involving primarily large joints, ankylosing spondylitis, and sacroiliitis.
The peripheral arthritis of IBD tends to be nondestructive. Ankylosing
spondylitis begins in the third decade and occurs most commonly in
patients with ulcerative colitis who have the human leukocyte antigen
B27 phenotype. Symptoms include low back pain and morning stiffness; back, hips, shoulders, and sacroiliac joints are typically affected.
Isolated sacroiliitis is usually asymptomatic but is common when a
careful search is performed. Among the skin manifestations, erythema
nodosum is most common. Patients with erythema nodosum or pyoderma gangrenosum have a high likelihood of having arthritis as well.
Glomerulonephritis, uveitis, and a hypercoagulable state are other rare
manifestations that occur in childhood. Cerebral thromboembolic disease has been described in children with IBD.

382.1 Chronic Ulcerative Colitis
Ronen E. Stein, Sudha A. Anupindi, and
Robert N. Baldassano
Ulcerative colitis, an idiopathic chronic inflammatory disorder, is
localized to the colon and spares the upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract.
Disease usually begins in the rectum and extends proximally for a variable distance. When it is localized to the rectum, the disease is ulcerative proctitis, whereas disease involving the entire colon is pancolitis.
Approximately 50–80% of pediatric patients have extensive colitis;
adults more commonly have distal disease. Ulcerative proctitis is less
likely to be associated with systemic manifestations, although it may be
less responsive to treatment than more diffuse disease. Approximately
30% of children who present with ulcerative proctitis experience proximal spread of the disease. Ulcerative colitis has rarely been noted to
present in infancy. Dietary protein intolerance can easily be misdiagnosed as ulcerative colitis in this age-­group. Dietary protein intolerance (cow’s milk protein) is a transient disorder; symptoms are directly
associated with the intake of the offending antigen.
The incidence of ulcerative colitis has increased but not to the extent
of the increase in Crohn disease; incidence varies with country of origin. The age-­specific incidence rates of pediatric ulcerative colitis in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2310 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 382.1  Selection of Most Important Genes Associated with Inflammatory Bowel Disease and the Most Commonly
Associated Physiologic Functions and Pathways
ASSOCIATED
DISEASE

GENE NAME

GENE FUNCTION AND ASSOCIATED
PATHWAYS

PHYSIOLOGIC
FUNCTION

NOD2

Nucleotide-­binding
oligomerization
domain-­containing protein 2

Crohn disease

Bacterial recognition and response, NFκB
activation and autophagy and apoptosis

Innate mucosal defense

IL10

IL-­10

Crohn disease

Antiinflammatory cytokine, NFκB inhibition,
JAK-­STAT regulation

Immune tolerance

IL10RA

IL-­10 receptor A

Crohn disease

Antiinflammatory cytokine receptor, NFκB
inhibition, JAK-­STAT regulation

Immune tolerance

IL10RB

IL-­10 receptor B

Crohn disease

Antiinflammatory cytokine receptor, NFκB
inhibition, JAK-­STAT regulation

Immune tolerance

IL23R

IL-­23 receptor

Crohn disease and
ulcerative colitis

Immune regulation, proinflammatory
pathways—JAK-­STAT regulation

IL-­23/T helper 17

TKY2

Tyrosine kinase 2

Crohn disease and
ulcerative colitis

Inflammatory pathway signaling (IL-­10 and -­6,
etc.) through intracellular activity

IL-­23/T helper 17

IRGM

Immunity-­related GTPase M

Crohn disease

Autophagy and apoptosis in cells infected with
bacteria

Autophagy

ATG16L1

Autophagy-­related 16 like 1

Crohn disease

Autophagy and apoptotic pathways

Autophagy

SLC22A4

Solute carrier family 22
member 4

Crohn disease

Cellular antioxidant transporter

Solute transporters

CCL2

C-­C motif chemokine ligand 2

Crohn disease

Cytokine involved in chemotaxis for monocytes

Immune cell recruitment

CARD9

Caspase recruitment domain
family member 9

Crohn disease and
ulcerative colitis

Apoptosis regulation and NFκB pathway
activation

Oxidative stress

IL2

IL-­2

Ulcerative colitis

Cytokine involved in immune cell activation

T-­cell regulation

MUC19

Mucin 19

Crohn disease and
ulcerative colitis

Gel-­forming mucin protein

Epithelial barrier

IL, Interleukin; JAK-­STAT, Janus kinase-­signal transducers and activators of transcription; NFκB, nuclear factor κ-­light chain enhancer of activated B cells.
From Ashton JJ, Ennis S, Beattie RM. Early-­onset paediatric inflammatory bowel disease. Lancet. 2017;1:147–158. Table 1.

Table 382.2  Comparison of Crohn Disease and Ulcerative Colitis
FEATURE

CROHN DISEASE

ULCERATIVE
COLITIS

FEATURE

CROHN DISEASE

ULCERATIVE
COLITIS

Rectal bleeding

Sometimes

Common

Strictures

Common

Rare

Diarrhea, mucus, pus

Variable

Common

Fissures

Common

Rare

Abdominal pain

Common

Variable

Fistulas

Common

Rare

Abdominal mass

Common

Not present

Toxic megacolon

None

Present

Growth failure

Common

Variable

Sclerosing cholangitis

Less common

Present

Perianal disease

Common

Rare

Increased

Greatly increased

Rectal involvement

Occasional

Universal

Risk for intestinal
cancers

Pyoderma gangrenosum

Rare

Present

Discontinuous (skip)
lesions

Common

Not present

Erythema nodosum

Common

Less common

Transmural involvement

Common

Unusual

Mouth ulceration

Common

Rare

Crypt abscesses

Less common

Common

Thrombosis

Less common

Present

Granulomas

Common

None

Colonic disease

50–75%

100%

Linear ulcerations

Uncommon

Common

Ileal disease

Common

None except
backwash ileitis

<20%

70%

Stomach–esophageal
disease

More common

Chronic gastritis
can be seen

Perinuclear
antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody–
positive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 382.3  Extraintestinal Complications of Inflammatory Bowel Disease
MUSCULOSKELETAL
Peripheral arthritis
Granulomatous monoarthritis
Granulomatous synovitis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Sacroiliitis
Ankylosing spondylitis
Digital clubbing and hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
Periostitis
Osteoporosis, osteomalacia
Rhabdomyolysis
Pelvic osteomyelitis
Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO)
Relapsing polychondritis
SKIN AND MUCOUS MEMBRANES
Oral lesions
Orofacial granulomatosis
Cheilitis
Aphthous stomatitis, glossitis
Granulomatous oral Crohn disease
Inflammatory hyperplasia fissures and cobblestone mucosa
Peristomatitis vegetans
DERMATOLOGIC
Erythema nodosum
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Sweet syndrome
Metastatic Crohn disease
Psoriasis
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
Perianal skin tags
Polyarteritis nodosa
Melanoma and nonmelanoma skin cancers
OCULAR
Conjunctivitis
Uveitis, iritis
Episcleritis
Scleritis
Retrobulbar neuritis
Chorioretinitis with retinal detachment
Crohn keratopathy
Posterior segment abnormalities
Retinal vascular disease
Idiopathic orbital inflammation (orbital pseudotumor)
BRONCHOPULMONARY
Chronic bronchitis with bronchiectasis
Chronic bronchitis with neutrophilic infiltrates
Fibrosing alveolitis
Pulmonary vasculitis
Small airway disease and bronchiolitis obliterans
Eosinophilic lung disease
Granulomatous lung disease
Tracheal obstruction

HEMATOLOGIC/ONCOLOGIC
Anemia: iron deficiency (blood loss)
Vitamin B12 (ileal disease or resection, bacterial overgrowth, folate
deficiency)
Anemia of chronic inflammation
Anaphylactoid purpura (Crohn disease)
Hyposplenism
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Coagulation abnormalities
Increased activation of coagulation factors
Activated fibrinolysis
Anticardiolipin antibody
Increased risk of arterial and venous thrombosis with cerebrovascular
stroke, myocardial infarction, peripheral arterial, and venous
occlusions and pulmonary embolism
Systemic lymphoma (nonenteric)
RENAL AND GENITOURINARY
Metabolic
• Urinary crystal formation (nephrolithiasis, uric acid, oxalate)
Hypokalemic nephropathy
Inflammation
• Retroperitoneal abscess
• Fibrosis with ureteral obstruction
• Fistula formation
Glomerulitis
Membrane nephritis
Renal amyloidosis, nephrotic syndrome
PANCREATITIS
Secondary to medications (sulfasalazine, 6-­mercaptopurine,
azathioprine, parenteral nutrition)
Ampullary Crohn disease
Granulomatous pancreatitis
Decreased pancreatic exocrine function
Sclerosing cholangitis with pancreatitis
HEPATOBILIARY
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Small duct primary sclerosing cholangitis (pericholangitis)
Carcinoma of the bile ducts
Fatty infiltration of the liver
Cholelithiasis
Autoimmune hepatitis
ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIC
Growth failure, delayed sexual maturation
Thyroiditis
Osteoporosis, osteomalacia
NEUROLOGIC
Peripheral neuropathy
Meningitis
Vestibular dysfunction
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (Pseudotumor cerebri)
Cerebral vasculitis
Migraine

CARDIAC
Pleuropericarditis
Cardiomyopathy
Endocarditis
Myocarditis
MALNUTRITION
Decreased intake of food
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Dietary restriction
Malabsorption
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Bowel resection
• Bile salt depletion
• Bacterial overgrowth
Intestinal losses
• Electrolytes
• Minerals
• Nutrients
Increased caloric needs
• Inflammation
• Fever
Modified from Kugathasan S. Diarrhea. In Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2004.p. 285.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2312 Part XVI u The Digestive System
North America is 2/100,000 population. The prevalence of ulcerative
colitis in northern European countries and the United States varies
from 100 to 200/100,000 population. Men are slightly more likely to
acquire ulcerative colitis than are women; the reverse is true for Crohn
disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Blood, mucus, and pus in the stool as well as diarrhea are the typical presentation of ulcerative colitis. Constipation may be observed in
those with proctitis. Symptoms such as tenesmus, urgency, cramping
abdominal pain (especially with bowel movements), and nocturnal
bowel movements are common. The mode of onset ranges from insidious with gradual progression of symptoms to acute and fulminant
(Table 382.4; Figs. 382.1 and 382.2). Fever, severe anemia, hypoalbuminemia, leukocytosis, and more than five bloody stools per day for 5
days define fulminant colitis. Chronicity is an important part of the
diagnosis; it is difficult to know if a patient has a subacute, transient
infectious colitis or ulcerative colitis when a child has had 1-­2 weeks of
symptoms. Symptoms beyond this duration often prove to be secondary to IBD. Anorexia, weight loss, and growth failure may be present,
although these complications are more typical of Crohn disease.
Extraintestinal manifestations that tend to occur more commonly
with ulcerative colitis than with Crohn disease include pyoderma gangrenosum, sclerosing cholangitis, chronic active hepatitis, and ankylosing spondylitis. Iron deficiency can result from chronic blood loss
as well as decreased intake. Folate deficiency is unusual but may be
accentuated in children treated with sulfasalazine, which interferes
with folate absorption. Chronic inflammation and the elaboration of
a variety of inflammatory cytokines can interfere with erythropoiesis
and result in the anemia of chronic disease. Secondary amenorrhea is
common during periods of active disease.

Table 382.4  Montreal Classification of Extent and Severity
of Ulcerative Colitis
• E1 (proctitis): inflammation limited to the rectum
• E2 (left-­sided; distal): inflammation limited to the splenic flexure
• E3 (pancolitis): inflammation extends to the proximal splenic
flexure
• S0 (remission): no symptoms
• S1 (mild): four or less stools per day (with or without blood),
absence of systemic symptoms, normal inflammatory markers
• S2 (moderate): four stools per day, minimum signs of systemic
symptoms
• S3 (severe): six or more bloody stools per day, pulse rate of
≥90 beats/min, temperature ≥37.5°C (99.5°F), hemoglobin
concentration <105 g/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate ≥30 mm/hr
E, Extent; S, severity.
From Ordàs I, Eckmann L, Talamini M, et al. Ulcerative colitis. Lancet. 2012;380:
1606–1616. Panel 2.

A

B

The clinical course of ulcerative colitis is marked by remission and
relapse, often without apparent explanation. After treatment of initial
symptoms, approximately 5% of children with ulcerative colitis have a
prolonged remission (longer than 3 years). Approximately 25% of children presenting with severe ulcerative colitis require colectomy within
5 years of diagnosis, compared with only 5% of those presenting with
mild disease. It is important to consider the possibility of enteric infection with recurrent symptoms, specifically Clostridium difficile; these
infections can mimic a flare-­up or actually provoke a recurrence. The
use of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs is considered by some to
predispose to exacerbation.
It is generally believed that the risk of colon cancer begins to increase
after 8-­10 years of disease and can then increase by 0.5–1% per year.
The risk is delayed by approximately 10 years in patients with colitis
limited to the descending colon. Proctitis alone is associated with virtually no increase in risk over the general population. Because colon
cancer is usually preceded by changes of mucosal dysplasia, it is recommended that patients who have had ulcerative colitis for longer
than 8-­10 years be screened with colonoscopy and biopsies every 1-­2
years. Although this is the current standard of practice, it is not clear if
morbidity and mortality are changed by this approach. Two competing
concerns about this plan of management remain unresolved. The original studies may have overestimated the risk of colon cancer; therefore
the need for surveillance has been overemphasized, and screening for
dysplasia might not be adequate for preventing colon cancer in ulcerative colitis if some cancers are not preceded by dysplasia.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The major conditions to exclude are infectious colitis, allergic colitis,
and Crohn colitis. Every child with a new diagnosis of ulcerative colitis
should have stool cultured for enteric pathogens, stool evaluation for
C. difficile, ova and parasites, and perhaps serologic studies for amebae
(Table 382.5). Cytomegalovirus infection can mimic ulcerative colitis
or be associated with an exacerbation of existing disease, usually in
immunocompromised patients. The most difficult distinction is from
Crohn disease because the colitis of Crohn disease can initially appear
identical to that of ulcerative colitis, particularly in younger children.
The gross appearance of the colitis or development of small bowel disease eventually leads to the correct diagnosis; this can occur years after
the initial presentation.
At the onset, the colitis of hemolytic uremic syndrome may be
identical to that of early ulcerative colitis. Ultimately, signs of microangiopathic hemolysis (the presence of schistocytes on blood smear),
thrombocytopenia, and subsequent renal failure should confirm the
diagnosis of hemolytic-­
uremic syndrome. Although IgA vasculitis
(Henoch-Schönlein purpura) can manifest as abdominal pain and
bloody stools, it is not usually associated with colitis. Behçet disease
can be distinguished by its typical features (see Chapter 202). Other
considerations are radiation proctitis, viral colitis in immunocompromised patients, and ischemic colitis (Table 382.6). In infancy, dietary
protein intolerance can be confused with ulcerative colitis, although the
former is a transient problem that resolves on removal of the offending

C

D

Fig. 382.1 Mayo endoscopic score for ulcerative colitis. A, Score 0 = normal; endoscopic remission. B, Score 1 = mild; erythema, decreased vas-

cular pattern, mild friability. C, Score 2 = moderate; marked erythema, absent vascular pattern, friability, erosions. D, Score 3 = severe; spontaneous
bleeding, ulceration. (Images courtesy Elena Ricart. From Ordàs I, Eckmann L, Talamini M, et al. Ulcerative colitis. Lancet. 2012;380:1606–1616. Fig.
2, p. 1610.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 382 u Inflammatory Bowel Disease

2313

Fig. 382.2 Ulcerative colitis phenotypes by Montreal Classification. Symptoms and treatment strategy can differ based on extent of disease. 5-­
ASA, 5-­Aminosalicylate; IM, immunomodulator. (Illustration by Jill Gregory. Printed with permission of Mount Sinai Health System.)

protein, and ulcerative colitis is extremely rare in this age-­group. Very
early onset monogenic disorders should be considered in infants (see
Chapter 382.3 and Table 382.6). Hirschsprung disease can produce an
enterocolitis before or within months after surgical correction; this is
unlikely to be confused with ulcerative colitis.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of ulcerative colitis or ulcerative proctitis requires a
typical presentation in the absence of an identifiable specific cause (see
Tables 382.5 and 382.6) and typical endoscopic and histologic findings
(see Tables 382.2 and 382.4). One should be hesitant to make a diagnosis
of ulcerative colitis in a child who has experienced symptoms for <2-­3
weeks until infection has been excluded. When the diagnosis is suspected in a child with subacute symptoms, the physician should make
a firm diagnosis only when there is evidence of chronicity on colonic
biopsy. Laboratory studies can demonstrate evidence of anemia (either
iron deficiency or the anemia of chronic disease) or hypoalbuminemia. Although the sedimentation rate and C-­reactive protein are often
elevated, they may be normal even with fulminant colitis. An elevated
white blood cell count is usually seen only with more severe colitis. Fecal
calprotectin levels are usually elevated and are increasingly recognized
to be a more sensitive and specific marker of GI inflammation than typical laboratory parameters. Barium enema is suggestive but not diagnostic of acute (Fig. 382.3) or chronic burned-­out disease (Fig. 382.4).
The diagnosis of ulcerative colitis must be confirmed by endoscopic
and histologic examination of the colon (see Fig. 382.1). Classically, disease starts in the rectum with a gross appearance characterized by erythema, edema, loss of vascular pattern, granularity, and friability. There
may be a cutoff demarcating the margin between inflammation and
normal colon, or the entire colon may be involved. There may be some
variability in the intensity of inflammation even in those areas involved.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy can confirm the diagnosis; colonoscopy can
evaluate the extent of disease and rule out Crohn colitis. A colonoscopy
should not be performed when fulminant colitis is suspected because of
the risk of provoking toxic megacolon or causing a perforation during the

procedure. The degree of colitis can be evaluated by the gross appearance of the mucosa. One does not generally see discrete ulcers, which
would be more suggestive of Crohn colitis. The endoscopic findings of
ulcerative colitis result from microulcers, which give the appearance of a
diffuse abnormality. With very severe chronic colitis, pseudopolyps may
be seen. Biopsy of involved bowel demonstrates evidence of acute and
chronic mucosal inflammation. Typical histologic findings are cryptitis,
crypt abscesses, separation of crypts by inflammatory cells, foci of acute
inflammatory cells, edema, mucus depletion, and branching of crypts.
The last finding is not seen in infectious colitis. Granulomas, fissures, or
full-­thickness involvement of the bowel wall (usually on surgical rather
than endoscopic biopsy) suggest Crohn disease.
Perianal disease, except for mild local irritation or anal fissures associated with diarrhea, should make the clinician think of Crohn disease.
Plain radiographs of the abdomen might demonstrate loss of haustral
markings in an air-­filled colon or marked dilation with toxic megacolon. With severe colitis, the colon may become dilated; a diameter of
>6 cm, determined radiographically, in an adult suggests toxic megacolon. If it is necessary to examine the colon radiologically in a child with
severe colitis (to evaluate the extent of involvement or to try to rule out
Crohn disease), it is sometimes helpful to perform an upper GI contrast series with small bowel follow-­through and then look at delayed
films of the colon. Small bowel ultrasonography is another option for
evaluation of small intestinal inflammation. CT and MR enterography
allow for even higher resolution images of the small intestine. A barium
enema is contraindicated in the setting of a potential toxic megacolon.

TREATMENT
Medical

A medical cure for ulcerative colitis is not available; treatment is aimed
at controlling symptoms and reducing the risk of recurrence, with a
secondary goal of minimizing steroid exposure. The intensity of treatment varies with the severity of the symptoms.
The first drug class to be used with mild or mild to moderate colitis is
an aminosalicylate. Sulfasalazine is composed of a sulfur moiety linked

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2314 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 382.5  Infectious Agents Mimicking Inflammatory Bowel Disease
AGENT

MANIFESTATIONS

BACTERIAL
Campylobacter jejuni

DIAGNOSIS

COMMENTS

Acute diarrhea, fever, fecal blood, and
leukocytes
Acute → chronic diarrhea, right lower
quadrant pain, mesenteric adenitis–
pseudoappendicitis, fecal blood,
and leukocytes
Extraintestinal manifestations, mimics
Crohn disease
Postantibiotic onset, watery → bloody
diarrhea, pseudomembrane on
sigmoidoscopy
Colitis, fecal blood, abdominal pain
Watery → bloody diarrhea, food-­
borne, fecal leukocytes, fever, pain,
cramps
Watery → bloody diarrhea, fecal
leukocytes, fever, pain, cramps
Bloody diarrhea, cramps
Cramps, diarrhea, fecal blood

Culture

Diarrhea, cramps
Rarely bovine, now Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
Ileocecal area, fistula formation

Culture
Culture, purified protein
derivative, biopsy

Acute bloody diarrhea and liver
abscess, colic

Trophozoite in stool, colonic
mucosal flask ulceration,
serologic tests
“Owl”-­like trophozoite and
cysts in stool; rarely duodenal
intubation

Travel to endemic area

AIDS-­ASSOCIATED ENTEROPATHY
Cryptosporidium
Chronic diarrhea, weight loss

Stool microscopy

Isospora belli
Cytomegalovirus

Culture, biopsy

Mucosal findings not like
inflammatory bowel disease
Tropical location
More common when on
immunosuppressive medications

Yersinia enterocolitica

Clostridium difficile
Escherichia coli O157:H7
Salmonella
Shigella
Edwardsiella tarda
Aeromonas hydrophila
Plesiomonas shigelloides
Tuberculosis

PARASITES
Entamoeba histolytica
Giardia lamblia

Foul-­smelling, watery diarrhea,
cramps, flatulence, weight loss; no
colonic involvement

As in Cryptosporidium
Colonic ulceration, pain, bloody
diarrhea

to the active ingredient 5-­aminosalicylate (5-­ASA). This linkage prevents the absorption of the medication in the upper GI tract, allowing
it to reach the colon, where the two components are separated by bacterial cleavage. The dose of sulfasalazine is 30-­100 mg/kg/24 hr (divided
into two to four doses). Generally, the dose is not more than 2-­4 g/24
hr. Hypersensitivity to the sulfa component is the major side effect of
sulfasalazine and occurs in 10–20% of patients. Because of poor tolerance, sulfasalazine is used less commonly than other, better tolerated
5-­ASA preparations (mesalamine, 50-­100 mg/kg/day; balsalazide 2.25-­
6.75 g/day). Sulfasalazine and the 5-­ASA preparations effectively treat
active ulcerative colitis and prevent recurrence. It is recommended that
the medication be continued even when the disorder is in remission.
These medications might also modestly decrease the lifetime risk of
colon cancer.
Approximately 5% of patients have an allergic reaction to 5-­ASA,
manifesting as rash, fever, and bloody diarrhea, which can be difficult
to distinguish from symptoms of a flare of ulcerative colitis. 5-­ASA can
also be given in enema or suppository form and is especially useful
for proctitis. Hydrocortisone enemas are used to treat proctitis as well,
but they are probably not as effective. A combination of oral and rectal
5-­ASA as well as monotherapy with rectal preparation has been shown
to be more effective than just oral 5-­ASA for distal colitis. Extended
release budesonide may also induce remission in patients with mild to
moderate ulcerative colitis. Rectal preparations of budesonide are also
available.

Culture

Common in adolescents, may
relapse
Common in adolescents as fever
of unknown origin, weight loss,
abdominal pain

Cytotoxin assay

May be nosocomial
Toxic megacolon possible

Culture and typing
Culture

Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Usually acute

Culture

Dysentery symptoms

Culture
Culture

Ulceration on endoscopy
May be chronic
Contaminated drinking water
Shellfish source
Can mimic Crohn disease

May be chronic

Probiotics are effective in adults for maintenance of remission for
ulcerative colitis, although they do not induce remission during an
active flare. The most promising role for probiotics has been to prevent pouchitis, a common complication following colectomy and ileal-­
pouch anal anastomosis surgery.
Children with moderate to severe pancolitis or colitis that is unresponsive to 5-­ASA therapy should be treated with corticosteroids, most
commonly oral prednisone. The usual starting dose of prednisone is
1-­2 mg/kg/24 hr (40-­60 mg maximum dose). This medication can be
given once daily. With severe colitis, the dose can be divided twice daily
and can be given intravenously. Steroids are considered an effective
medication for acute flares, but they are not appropriate maintenance
medications because of loss of effect and side effects, including poor
growth, adrenal suppression, cataracts, osteopenia, aseptic necrosis of
the head of the femur, glucose intolerance, risk of infection, mood disturbance, and cosmetic effects.
For a hospitalized patient with persistence of symptoms despite
intravenous steroid treatment for 3-­5 days, escalation of therapy or
surgical options should be considered. The validated pediatric ulcerative colitis activity index can be used to help determine current disease severity based on clinical factors and help determine who is more
likely to respond to steroids and those who will likely require escalation
of therapy (Table 382.7).
With medical management, most children are in remission within
3 months; however, 5–10% continue to have symptoms unresponsive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 382 u Inflammatory Bowel Disease

2315

Table 382.6  Chronic Inflammatory Bowel–Like Intestinal
Disorders Including Monogenic Diseases
INFECTION (SEE TABLE 382.5)
AIDS-­Associated
Toxin
Immune–Inflammatory
Severe combined immunodeficiency diseases
Agammaglobulinemia
Chronic granulomatous disease
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Common variable immunodeficiency diseases
Acquired immunodeficiency states
Dietary protein enterocolitis
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 1
Behçet disease
Lymphoid nodular hyperplasia
Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
Omenn syndrome
Graft-­versus-­host disease
IPEX (immune dysfunction, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy,
X-­linked) syndromes
Interleukin-­10 signaling defects
Autoimmune enteropathy*
Microscopic colitis
Hyperimmunoglobulin M syndrome
Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndromes
Mevalonate kinase deficiency
Familial Mediterranean fever
Phospholipase Cγ2 defects
IL10RA pathogenic variant
Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 5
X-­linked lymphoproliferative syndromes types 1, 2 (XIAP gene)
Congenital neutropenias
TRIM22 pathogenic variant
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency 1
NLRC4 pathogenic variants

A

B

contrast barium enema in a
Fig. 382.3 Ulcerative colitis. Double-­

5-­yr-­old child who had had intermittent intestinal and extraintestinal
symptoms since the age of 3 yr. A, Small ulcerations are distributed
uniformly about the colonic circumference and continuously from the
rectum to the proximal transverse colon. This pattern of involvement is
typical of ulcerative colitis. B, In this coned view of the sigmoid in the
same patient, small ulcerations are represented by fine spiculation of
the colonic contour in tangent and by fine stippling of the colon surface
en face. (From Hoffman AD. The child with diarrhea. In Hilton SW, Edwards DK, eds. Practical Pediatric Radiology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders; 1994. p. 260.)

VASCULAR–ISCHEMIC DISORDERS
Systemic vasculitis (systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis)
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Granulomatosis with angiitis
OTHER
Glycogen storage disease type 1b
Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa
X-­linked ectodermal dysplasia and immunodeficiency
Dyskeratosis congenita
ADAM-­17 deficiency
Prestenotic colitis
Diversion colitis
Kindler syndrome
Radiation colitis
Neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis
Typhlitis
Sarcoidosis
Hirschsprung colitis
Intestinal lymphoma
Laxative abuse
Endometriosis
Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome
Trichohepatoenteric syndrome
Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) hamartoma tumor
syndrome

Fig. 382.4 Ulcerative colitis: late changes. This single-­contrast barium

*May be the same as IPEX.

enema shows the late changes of ulcerative colitis in a 15-­yr-­old child.
The colon is featureless, reduced in caliber, and shortened. Dilation of
the terminal ileum (backwash ileitis) is present. (From Hoffman AD. The
child with diarrhea. In Hilton SW, Edwards DK, eds. Practical Pediatric
Radiology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1994. p. 262.)

to treatment beyond 6 months. Many children with disease requiring
frequent corticosteroid therapy are started on immunomodulators such
as azathioprine (2.0-­2.5 mg/kg/day) or 6-­mercaptopurine (1-­1.5 mg/kg/
day). Uncontrolled data suggest a corticosteroid-­sparing effect in many
treated patients. This is not an appropriate choice in a patient who is nonresponsive to steroids with acute severe colitis because of longer onset
of action. Lymphoproliferative disorders are associated with thiopurine

use. Infliximab and adalimumab, which are a fully human monoclonal
antibody to tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, are effective for induction
and maintenance therapy in children and adults with moderate to severe
disease. TNF blocking agents are associated with an increased risk of
infection (particularly tuberculosis) and malignancies (lymphoma,
leukemia). There are a number of other agents that are approved for
treatment of refractory ulcerative colitis in adults, but are often used

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2316 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 382.7  Pediatric Ulcerative Colitis Activity Index
ITEM

POINTS

(1) ABDOMINAL PAIN
No pain
Pain can be ignored
Pain cannot be ignored
(2) RECTAL BLEEDING
None
Small amount only, in <50% of
stools
Small amount with most stools
Large amount (>50% of the stool
content)

0
5
10
0
10
20
30

(3) STOOL CONSISTENCY OF MOST STOOLS
Formed
Partially formed
Completely unformed

0
5
10

(4) NUMBER OF STOOLS PER 24 HR
0-­2
3-­5
6-­8
>8

0
5
10
15

(5) NOCTURNAL STOOLS (ANY EPISODE CAUSING WAKENING)
No
0
Yes
10
(6) ACTIVITY LEVEL
No limitation of activity
Occasional limitation of activity
Severe restricted activity

0
5
10

Sum of Index (0-­85)

delicate anastomosis between the sleeve of the pouch and the rectum.
The ileostomy is usually closed within several months, restoring bowel
continuity. At that time, stool frequency is often increased but may be
improved with loperamide. The major complication of this operation is
pouchitis, which is a chronic inflammatory reaction in the pouch, leading to bloody diarrhea, abdominal pain, and, occasionally, low-­grade
fever. The cause of this complication is unknown, although it is more
common when the ileal pouch has been constructed for ulcerative colitis than for other indications (e.g., familial polyposis coli). Pouchitis
is seen in 30–40% of patients who had ulcerative colitis. It commonly
responds to treatment with oral metronidazole or ciprofloxacin. Probiotics have also been shown to decrease the rate of pouchitis as well as
the recurrence of pouchitis following antibiotic therapy.

Support

Psychosocial support is an important part of therapy for this disorder.
This may include adequate discussion of the disease manifestations and
management between patient and physician, psychologic counseling
for the child when necessary, and family support from a social worker
or family counselor. Patient support groups have proved helpful for
some families. Children with ulcerative colitis should be encouraged
to participate fully in age-­appropriate activities; however, activity may
need to be reduced during periods of disease exacerbation.

PROGNOSIS

The course of ulcerative colitis is marked by remissions and exacerbations. Most children with this disorder respond initially to medical management. Many children with mild manifestations continue to respond
well to medical management and may stay in remission on a prophylactic 5-­ASA preparation for long periods. An occasional child with mild
onset, however, experiences intractable symptoms later. Beyond the
first decade of disease, the risk of development of colon cancer begins
to increase rapidly. The risk of colon cancer may be diminished with
surveillance colonoscopies beginning after 8-­10 years of disease. Detection of significant dysplasia on biopsy would prompt colectomy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

off-­label in children, including vedolizumab, a humanized monoclonal
antibody that inhibits adhesion and migration of leukocytes into the
GI tract, and ustekinumab, a monoclonal antibody against interleukins
(ILs) 12 and 23. Small molecule agents are another class of medications
to be approved for adults with moderate to severe ulcerative colitis in
adults, including tofacitinib and upadacitinib; oral Janus kinase inhibitors; and ozanimod, a sphingosine 1-­phosphate receptor modulator
that leads to peripheral lymphocyte sequestration. A specific combination of three to four broad-­spectrum oral antibiotics given over 2-­3
weeks may be effective in treating severe pediatric ulcerative colitis
refractory to other therapies, but it is being further studied in children.

Surgical

Colectomy is performed for intractable disease, complications of
therapy, and fulminant disease that is unresponsive to medical management. No clear benefit of the use of total parenteral nutrition or
a continuous enteral elemental diet in the treatment of severe ulcerative colitis has been noted. Nevertheless, parenteral nutrition is used if
oral intake is insufficient so that the patient will be nutritionally ready
for surgery if medical management fails. With any medical treatment
for ulcerative colitis, the clinician should always weigh the risk of the
medication or therapy against the fact that colitis can be successfully
treated surgically.
Surgical treatment for intractable or fulminant colitis is total colectomy. The optimal approach is to combine colectomy with an endorectal pull-­through, where a segment of distal rectum is retained and the
mucosa is stripped from this region. The distal ileum is pulled down and
sutured at the internal anus with a J pouch created from ileum immediately above the rectal cuff. This procedure allows the child to maintain
continence. Commonly, a temporary ileostomy is created to protect the

382.2 Crohn Disease (Regional Enteritis,
Regional Ileitis, Granulomatous Colitis)
Ronen E. Stein, Sudha A. Anupindi, and
Robert N. Baldassano
Crohn disease, an idiopathic, chronic inflammatory disorder of the
bowel, involves any region of the alimentary tract from the mouth to
the anus. Although there are many similarities between ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease, there are also major differences in the clinical
course and distribution of the disease in the GI tract (see Table 382.2).
The inflammatory process tends to be eccentric and segmental, often
with skip areas (normal regions of bowel between inflamed areas).
Although inflammation in ulcerative colitis is limited to the mucosa
(except in toxic megacolon), GI involvement in Crohn disease is often
transmural.
Compared to adult-­onset disease, pediatric Crohn disease is more
likely to have extensive anatomic involvement. At initial presentation, more than 50% of patients have disease that involves ileum and
colon (ileocolitis), 20% have exclusively colonic disease, and upper GI
involvement (esophagus, stomach, duodenum) is seen in up to 30%
of children. Isolated small bowel disease is much less common in the
pediatric population compared to adults. Isolated colonic disease is
common in children younger than 8 years of age and may be indistinguishable from ulcerative colitis. Anatomic location of disease tends to
extend over time in children.
Crohn disease tends to have a bimodal age distribution, with the first
peak beginning in the teenage years. The incidence of Crohn disease
has been increasing. In the United States, the reported incidence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 382 u Inflammatory Bowel Disease
pediatric Crohn disease is 4.56/100,000 and the pediatric prevalence
is 43/100,000 children.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Crohn disease can be characterized as inflammatory, stricturing, or
penetrating. Patients with small bowel disease are more likely to have
an obstructive pattern (most commonly with right lower quadrant
pain) characterized by fibrostenosis, and those with colonic disease are
more likely to have symptoms resulting from inflammation (diarrhea,
bleeding, cramping). Disease phenotypes often change as duration of
disease lengthens (inflammatory becomes structuring and/or penetrating) (Figs. 382.5 and 382.6).
Systemic signs and symptoms are more common in Crohn disease
than in ulcerative colitis. Fever, malaise, and easy fatigability are common. Growth failure with delayed bone maturation and delayed sexual
development can precede other symptoms by 1 or 2 years and is at least
twice as likely to occur with Crohn disease as with ulcerative colitis.
Children can present with growth failure as the only manifestation of
Crohn disease. Decreased height velocity occurs in about 88% of prepubertal patients diagnosed with Crohn disease, and this often precedes
GI symptoms. Causes of growth failure include inadequate caloric
intake (anorexia, partial obstruction–related pain), suboptimal absorption or excessive loss of nutrients, the effects of chronic inflammation
on bone metabolism and appetite, and the use of corticosteroids during treatment. Primary or secondary amenorrhea and pubertal delay
are common. In contrast to ulcerative colitis, perianal disease is common (tag, fistula, deep fissure, abscess). Gastric or duodenal involvement may be associated with recurrent vomiting and epigastric pain.
Partial small bowel obstruction, usually secondary to narrowing of
the bowel lumen from inflammation or stricture, can cause symptoms
of cramping abdominal pain (especially with meals), borborygmus,
and intermittent abdominal distention (Fig. 382.7). Stricture should be
suspected if the child notes relief of symptoms in association with a
sudden sensation of gurgling of intestinal contents through a localized
region of the abdomen.
Penetrating disease is demonstrated by fistula formation. Enteroenteric or enterocolonic fistulas (between segments of bowel) are
often asymptomatic but can contribute to malabsorption if they have
high output or result in bacterial overgrowth. Enterovesical fistulas
(between bowel and urinary bladder) originate from ileum or sigmoid
colon and appear as signs of urinary infection, pneumaturia, or fecaluria. Enterovaginal fistulas originate from the rectum, cause feculent
vaginal drainage, and are difficult to manage. Enterocutaneous fistulas
(between bowel and abdominal skin) often are caused by prior surgical

Digestive damage

Fistula/abscess
Stricture

Disease
onset

Diagnosis

Pre-clinical

Stricture
Inflammatory activity
(CDAI, CDEIS, CRP)

Surgery

Early
disease
Clinical

Fig. 382.5 The Lémann Score. Exemplary visualization of the Lémann

score, a new technique to score and study intestinal damage in Crohn
disease. CDAI, Crohn disease activity index; CDEIS, Crohn disease of
endoscopic severity; CRP, C-­reactive protein. (From Baumgart DC, Sandborn WJ. Crohn’s disease. Lancet. 2012;380:1590–1602. Fig. 5, p. 1596.)

2317

anastomoses with leakage. Intraabdominal abscess may be associated
with fever and pain but might have relatively few symptoms. Hepatic
or splenic abscess can occur with or without a local fistula. Anorectal
abscesses often originate immediately above the anus at the crypts of
Morgagni. The patterns of perianal fistulas are complex because of the
different tissue planes. Perianal abscess is usually painful, but perianal
fistulas tend to produce fewer symptoms than anticipated. Purulent
drainage is commonly associated with perianal fistulas. Psoas abscess
secondary to intestinal fistula can present as hip pain, decreased hip
extension (psoas sign), and fever.
Extraintestinal manifestations occur more commonly with Crohn
disease than with ulcerative colitis; those that are especially associated
with Crohn disease include oral aphthous ulcers, peripheral arthritis,
erythema nodosum, digital clubbing, episcleritis, venous thrombosis,
pulmonary disease, renal stones (uric acid, oxalate), and gallstones.
Any of the extraintestinal disorders described in the section on IBD
can occur with Crohn disease (see Table 382.3). The peripheral arthritis is nondeforming. The occurrence of extraintestinal manifestations
usually correlates with the presence of colitis. Metastatic Crohn disease
is most often cutaneous, presenting with noncaseating granulomas in a
location that is not contiguous with an active penetrating lesion; it may
resemble erythema nodosum.
Extensive involvement of small bowel, especially in association with
surgical resection, can lead to short bowel syndrome, which is rare
in children. Complications of terminal ileal dysfunction or resection
include bile acid malabsorption with secondary diarrhea and vitamin
B12 malabsorption, with possible resultant deficiency. Chronic steatorrhea can lead to oxaluria with secondary renal stones. Increasing calcium intake can actually decrease the risk of renal stones secondary to
ileal inflammation. The risk of cholelithiasis is also increased secondary to bile acid depletion.
A disorder with this diversity of manifestations can have a major
impact on an affected child’s lifestyle. Fortunately, the majority of children with Crohn disease are able to continue with their normal activities, having to limit activity only during periods of increased symptoms.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The most common diagnoses to be distinguished from Crohn disease
are the infectious enteropathies (in the case of Crohn disease: acute
terminal ileitis, infectious colitis, enteric parasites, and periappendiceal abscess) (see Tables 382.5 and 382.6; Table 382.8). Yersinia can
cause many of the radiologic and endoscopic findings in the distal
small bowel that are seen in Crohn disease. The symptoms of bacterial
dysentery are more likely to be mistaken for ulcerative colitis than for
Crohn disease. Celiac disease and Giardia infection have been noted
to produce a Crohn-­like presentation including diarrhea, weight loss,
and protein-­losing enteropathy. GI tuberculosis is rare but can mimic
Crohn disease. Foreign-­body perforation of the bowel (toothpick) can
mimic a localized region with Crohn disease. Small bowel lymphoma
can mimic Crohn disease but tends to be associated with nodular filling defects of the bowel without ulceration or narrowing of the lumen.
Bowel lymphoma is much less common in children than is Crohn
disease. Recurrent functional abdominal pain can mimic the pain of
small bowel Crohn disease. Lymphoid nodular hyperplasia of the terminal ileum (a normal finding) may be mistaken for Crohn ileitis. Right
lower quadrant pain or mass with fever can be the result of periappendiceal abscess. This entity is occasionally associated with diarrhea
as well.
Growth failure may be the only manifestation of Crohn disease;
other disorders such as growth hormone deficiency, gluten-­sensitive
enteropathy (celiac disease), Turner syndrome, or anorexia nervosa
must be considered. If arthritis precedes the bowel manifestations, an
initial diagnosis of juvenile idiopathic arthritis may be made. Refractory anemia may be the presenting feature and may be mistaken for
a primary hematologic disorder. Chronic granulomatous disease of
childhood can cause inflammatory changes in the bowel as well as
perianal disease. Antral narrowing in this disorder may be mistaken
for a stricture secondary to Crohn disease. Other immunodeficiencies or autoinflammatory conditions and monogenetic disorders may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2318 Part XVI u The Digestive System
A

B

• Diarrhea

• Postprandial pain

• Abdominal pain

• Bloating

• Weight loss

• Nausea and vomiting

• Low-grade fever

• Occlusion/subocclusion

• Fatigue
• Growth retardation
• Malnourishment

C

• Symptoms depend on the location of

fistulae
• Enterourinary fistula: fecaluria,

pneumaturia, recurrent UTI
• Rectovaginal fistula: dispareunia,
stool discharge through the vagina
• Enteroenteric fistula: asymptomatic,
abdominal abscesses

Fig. 382.6 Behavior of Crohn disease (CD) as per Montreal classification represented in MR enterography (MRE) and illustrated with typical symp-

toms. A, T1 weighted MRE imaging with fat saturation after injection of gadolinium chelates shows mural thickening and enhancement in the distal
ileum (arrows) in a patient with active CD. B, T2 weighted MRE imaging shows a narrowed luminal segment with thickened wall and upstream dilation (arrows), suggesting the presence of a stricture. C, T1 weighted MRE imaging with fat saturation after injection of gadolinium chelates shows
multiple converging enhancing loops of small bowel suggestive of enteroenteric fistulas (arrows). Lower illustration shows a deep and transmural
fissure or ulcer leading to the formation of an abscess. UTI, Urinary tract infection. (Illustration by Jill Gregory. Printed with permission of Mount Sinai
Health System.)

A

B

Fig. 382.7 Stenosis in Crohn disease. A, MR enterography of Crohn

disease restricted to the terminal ileum (Montreal category L1) with inflammatory stenosis. B, Ultrasound image of an intestinal stenosis in
Crohn disease. (From Baumgart DC, Sandborn WJ. Crohn’s disease.
Lancet. 2012;380:1590–1602. Fig. 4.)

present with GI symptoms suggestive of IBD, particularly in very early
or infant/toddler onset of disease (see Table 382.6).

DIAGNOSIS

Crohn disease can manifest as a variety of symptom combinations
(see Fig. 382.6). At the onset, symptoms may be subtle (growth failure,

abdominal pain alone); this explains why the diagnosis might not be
made until 1 or 2 years after the start of symptoms. The diagnosis of
Crohn disease depends on finding typical clinical features of the disorder (history, physical examination, laboratory studies, and endoscopic
or radiologic findings), ruling out specific entities that mimic Crohn
disease, and demonstrating chronicity. The history can include any
combination of abdominal pain (especially right lower quadrant), diarrhea, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, growth retardation, and extraintestinal manifestations. Only 25% initially have the triad of diarrhea,
weight loss, and abdominal pain. Most do not have diarrhea, and only
25% have GI bleeding.
Children with Crohn disease often appear chronically ill. They commonly have weight loss and growth failure, and they are often malnourished. The earliest sign of growth failure is decreased height velocity,
which can be present in up to 88% of prepubertal patients with Crohn disease and typically precedes symptoms. Children with Crohn disease often
appear pale, with decreased energy level and poor appetite; the latter finding sometimes results from an association between meals and abdominal
pain or diarrhea. There may be abdominal tenderness that is either diffuse
or localized to the right lower quadrant. A tender mass or fullness may be
palpable in the right lower quadrant. Perianal disease, when present, may
be characteristic. Large anal skin tags (1-­3 cm in diameter) or perianal
fistulas with purulent drainage suggest Crohn disease. Digital clubbing,
findings of arthritis, and skin manifestations may be present.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 382 u Inflammatory Bowel Disease
A complete blood cell count commonly demonstrates anemia,
often with a component of iron deficiency, as well as thrombocytosis.
Although the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-­reactive protein
are often elevated, they may be unremarkable. The serum albumin level
may be low, indicating small bowel inflammation or protein-­losing
enteropathy. Fecal calprotectin and lactoferrin are more sensitive and
specific markers of bowel inflammation as compared to serologic
parameters, and these are often elevated. Multiple serologic, immune,
and genetic markers can also be abnormal, although the best utilization
of these remains to be determined.
The small and large bowel and the upper GI tract should be examined
by both endoscopic and radiologic studies in the child with suspected
Crohn disease. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy and ileocolonoscopy
should be performed to properly assess the upper GI tract, terminal
ileum, and entire colon. Findings on colonoscopy can include patchy,
nonspecific inflammatory changes (erythema, friability, loss of vascular pattern), aphthous ulcers, linear ulcers, nodularity, and strictures.
Findings on biopsy may be only nonspecific chronic inflammatory
changes. Noncaseating granulomas, similar to those of sarcoidosis,
are the most characteristic histologic findings, although often they are
not present. Transmural inflammation is also characteristic but can be
identified only in surgical specimens.
Radiologic studies are necessary to assess the entire small bowel and
investigate for evidence of structuring or penetrating disease. A variety of findings may be apparent on radiologic studies. Plain films of
the abdomen may be normal or might demonstrate findings of partial small bowel obstruction or thumbprinting of the colon wall (Fig.
382.8). An upper GI contrast study with small bowel follow-­through
might show aphthous ulceration and thickened, nodular folds as well as
narrowing or stricturing of the lumen. Linear ulcers can give a cobblestone appearance to the mucosal surface. Bowel loops are often separated as a result of thickening of bowel wall and mesentery (Fig. 382.9).
Other manifestations on radiographic studies that suggest more severe
Crohn disease are fistulas between bowel (enteroenteric or enterocolonic), sinus tracts, and strictures (see Fig. 382.7).
An upper GI contrast examination with small bowel follow-­through
has typically been the study of choice for imaging of the small bowel,
but CT and MR enterography as well as small bowel ultrasonography
are more often performed (Fig. 382.10). MR and ultrasound have the
advantage of not exposing the patient to ionizing radiation. CT and
MR enterography can also assess for extraluminal findings such as
intraabdominal abscess. MR of the pelvis is also useful for delineating
the extent of perianal involvement. PET/MRI studies are also helpful in
identifying areas of active intestinal and extraintestinal inflammation
(Fig. 382.11).

2319

Video capsule endoscopy is another modality that allows for evaluation of the small bowel. This study can uncover mucosal inflammation
or ulceration that might not have been detected by traditional imaging. However, video capsule endoscopy is contraindicated in the presence of stricturing disease, as surgical intervention would be required
to remove a video capsule that is unable to pass through the bowel
because a stricture. If there is concern for stricturing disease, a patency
capsule can be swallowed before video capsule endoscopy to assess for
passage through the GI tract.

Fig. 382.8 A 19-­yr-­old patient who presented with bloody stools and
later diagnosed with inflammatory bowel disease. Abdominal radiograph at presentation showed classic thumbprinting involving the distal
transverse colon, splenic flexure, and descending colon (arrows) representing submucosal edema seen in colitis. (Images from Department of
Radiology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)

Table 382.8  Differential Diagnosis of Presenting Symptoms of Crohn Disease
PRIMARY PRESENTING SYMPTOM

DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS

Right lower quadrant abdominal pain, with or without
mass

Appendicitis, infection (e.g., Campylobacter, Yersinia spp.), lymphoma, intussusception,
mesenteric adenitis, Meckel diverticulum, ovarian cyst

Chronic periumbilical or epigastric abdominal pain

Irritable bowel syndrome, constipation, lactose intolerance, peptic disease

Rectal bleeding, no diarrhea

Fissure, polyp, Meckel diverticulum, rectal ulcer syndrome

Bloody diarrhea

Infection, hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, ischemic bowel,
radiation colitis

Watery diarrhea

Irritable bowel syndrome, lactose intolerance, giardiasis, Cryptosporidium infection,
sorbitol, laxatives

Perirectal disease

Fissure, hemorrhoid (rare), streptococcal infection, condyloma (rare)

Growth delay

Endocrinopathy

Anorexia, weight loss

Anorexia nervosa

Arthritis

Collagen vascular disease, infection

Liver abnormalities

Chronic hepatitis

From Kugathasan S: Diarrhea. In Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004. p. 287.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2320 Part XVI u The Digestive System

A

B

Fig. 382.9 A 12-­yr-­old child with weight loss and bloody stools diagnosed with Crohn disease. Small bowel follow-­through barium examination
showed the classic features of Crohn disease. A, Mucosal thickening, irregularity (arrows). B, Nodularity, “cobblestoning” (arrowheads) of the terminal ileum and distal ileal loops. There was also separation of the bowel loops due to fatty proliferation of the mesentery. (Images from Department
of Radiology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)

TI

A

RLQ

TI

B

C

RLQ

Fig. 382.10 An 11-­yr-­old child who presented with abdominal pain, weight loss, leukocytosis, and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)/

C-­reactive protein (CRP). The patient underwent an initial bowel ultrasound and then CT enterography with assistance from Child Life mitigating
use of sedation. Sagittal (A) grayscale and color Doppler (B) ultrasound images showed markedly thickened abnormal hyperemic terminal ileum
(straight arrows) and surrounding thickened echogenic mesentery (curved arrow) indicative of active inflammation, C, Coronal image from a contrast-­
enhanced CT enterography showed correlating abnormal enhancing and thickened distal and terminal ileum (arrows) with enlarged reactive adjacent lymph nodes (arrowhead). (Images from Department of Radiology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.)

TREATMENT

Crohn disease cannot be cured by medical or surgical therapy. The
aim of treatment is to relieve symptoms and prevent complications of
chronic inflammation (anemia, growth failure), prevent relapse, minimize corticosteroid exposure, and, if possible, effect mucosal healing.

Medical

The specific therapeutic modalities used depend on geographic localization of disease, severity of inflammation, age of the patient, and the
presence of complications (abscess). Traditionally, a step-­up treatment
paradigm has been used in the treatment of pediatric Crohn disease,
whereby early disease is treated with steroids and less immunosuppressive medications. Escalation of therapy would occur if disease severity increased, the patient was refractory to current medications, or for
steroid dependence. A top-­down approach has also been espoused,
particularly in adults after multiple studies demonstrated superior efficacy. With this approach, patients with moderate to severe Crohn disease are treated initially with stronger, disease-­modifying agents, with
the goal of achieving mucosal healing, or deep remission, early in the
disease course. This is thought to increase the likelihood of long-­term
remission while decreasing corticosteroid exposure. Improvements in

remission and growth have been shown using a top-­down approach
in pediatrics, and this treatment approach is being increasingly used
among children.

5-­Aminosalicylates

For mild terminal ileal disease or mild Crohn disease of the colon, an
initial trial of mesalamine (50-­100 mg/kg/day, maximum 3-­4 g) may be
attempted. Specific pharmaceutical preparations have been formulated
to release the active 5-­ASA compound throughout the small bowel, in
the ileum and colon, or exclusively in the colon. Rectal preparations
are used for distal colonic inflammation.

Antibiotics/Probiotics

Antibiotics such as metronidazole (5 mg/kg/dose three times per day,
up to 250 mg three times per day) are used for infectious complications and are first-­line therapy for perianal disease (although perianal
disease usually recurs when antibiotic is discontinued). Additionally,
at low doses antibiotics may be effective for treatment of mild to moderate Crohn disease. To date, probiotics have not been shown to be
effective in induction or maintenance of remission for pediatric Crohn
disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 382 u Inflammatory Bowel Disease

A

B

2321

C

Fig. 382.11 Crohn disease, coexistence of active and chronic changes. Coronal PET (A), coronal STIR MRI (B), and fused PET/MRI (C). Discontinu-

ous areas of active inflammation (arrows) demonstrate increased focal FDG uptake, bowel wall thickening, and edema. Note adjacent fibrofatty
proliferation (asterisk) and pseudosacculations indicative of the chronicity of the process. (From Furtado FS, Suarez-Weiss KE, Amorim BJ, et al.
Gastrointestinal imaging. In Catalano A (ed). Clinical PET/MRI. London: Elsevier, 2023. Fig 14.15.)

Corticosteroids

Corticosteroids are used for acute exacerbations of pediatric Crohn
disease because they effectively suppress acute inflammation, rapidly
relieving symptoms (prednisone, 1-­2 mg/kg/day, by mouth [PO],
maximum 40-­60 mg). The goal is to taper dosing as soon as the disease becomes quiescent. Clinicians vary in their tapering schedules,
and the disease can flare during this process. There is no role for continuing corticosteroids as maintenance therapy because, in addition
to their side effects, tolerance develops, and steroids do not change
disease course or promote healing of mucosa. A special controlled
ileal-­release formulation of budesonide, a corticosteroid with local
antiinflammatory activity on the bowel mucosa and high hepatic first-­
pass metabolism, is also used for mild to moderate ileal or ileocecal
disease (adult dose: 9 mg daily). Ileal-­release budesonide appears to be
more effective than mesalamine in the treatment of active ileocolonic
disease but is less effective than prednisone. Although less effective
than traditional corticosteroids, budesonide does cause fewer steroid-­
related side effects.

Immunomodulators

Approximately 70% of patients require escalation of medical therapy
within the first year of pediatric Crohn disease diagnosis. Immunomodulators such as azathioprine (2.0-­2.5 mg/kg/day) or 6-­mercaptopurine
(1.0-­1.5 mg/kg/day) may be effective in some children who have a
poor response to prednisone or who are steroid dependent. Because
a beneficial effect of these drugs can be delayed for 3-­4 months after
starting therapy, they are not helpful acutely. The early use of these
agents can decrease cumulative prednisone dosages over the first 1-­2
years of therapy. Genetic variations in an enzyme system responsible
for metabolism of these agents (thiopurine S-­methyltransferase) can
affect response rates and potential toxicity. Lymphoproliferative disorders have developed from thiopurine use in patients with IBD. Other
common toxicities include hepatitis, pancreatitis, increased risk of
skin cancer, increased risk of infection, and slightly increased risk of
lymphoma.
Methotrexate is another immunomodulator that is effective in the
treatment of Crohn disease and has been shown to improve height
velocity in the first year of administration. The advantages of this medication include once-­weekly dosing by either a subcutaneous or oral

route (15 mg/m2, adult dose 25 mg weekly) and a more rapid onset
of action (6-­8 weeks) than azathioprine or 6-­mercaptopurine. Folic
acid is usually administered concomitantly to decrease medication side
effects. Administration of ondansetron before methotrexate has been
shown to diminish the risk of the most common side effect of nausea.
The most common toxicity is hepatitis. The immunomodulators are
effective for the treatment of perianal fistulas.

Biologic Therapy

Therapy with antibodies directed against mediators of inflammation is
used for patients with Crohn disease. Infliximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody to TNF-­α, is effective for the induction and maintenance
of remission and mucosal healing in chronically active moderate to
severe Crohn disease, healing of perianal fistulas, steroid sparing,
and preventing postoperative recurrence. Pediatric data additionally
support improved growth with the administration of this medication. The onset of action of infliximab is quite rapid, and it is initially
given as three infusions over a 6-­week period (0, 2, and 6 weeks), followed by maintenance dosing beginning every 8 weeks. The durability of response to infliximab is variable, and dose escalation (higher
dose and/or decreased interval) is often necessary. Measurement of
serum trough infliximab level before an infusion can help guide dosing decisions. Side effects include infusion reactions, increased incidence of infections (especially reactivation of latent tuberculosis),
increased risk of lymphoma, and the development of autoantibodies.
The development of antibodies to infliximab is associated with an
increased incidence of infusion reactions and decreased durability
of response. Regularly scheduled dosing of infliximab, as opposed to
episodic dosing on an as-­needed basis, is associated with decreased
levels of antibodies to infliximab. A purified protein derivative test or
gamma interferon test for tuberculosis should be done before starting
infliximab.
Adalimumab, a subcutaneously administered, fully humanized
monoclonal antibody against TNF-­α, is effective for the treatment of
chronically active moderate to severe Crohn disease in adults and children. After a loading dose, this is typically administered once every 2
weeks, although dose escalation is sometimes required with this medication. Vedolizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits
adhesion and migration of leukocytes into the GI tract, is approved for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2322 Part XVI u The Digestive System
the treatment of Crohn disease in adults. Like infliximab, vedolizumab
is initially given as three infusions over a 6-­week period followed by
maintenance dosing beginning every 8 weeks. However, the onset of
action for vedolizumab is slower compared to infliximab and adalimumab. Therefore concomitant therapies may be needed until response
is demonstrated. Dose escalation to every 4 weeks may be necessary
in some patients with loss of response, but it is being further studied.
Ustekinumab, a monoclonal antibody against both IL-­12 and IL-­23, is
also approved for treatment of chronically active moderate to severe
Crohn disease in adults. A loading dose is given intravenously followed
by maintenance dosing administered subcutaneously every 8 weeks.
Risankizumab, a monoclonal antibody against IL-­23A, has demonstrated efficacy for induction and remission maintenance in adults.

Enteral Nutritional Therapy

Exclusive enteral nutritional therapy, whereby all of a patient’s calories
are delivered via formula, is an effective primary as well as adjunctive
treatment. The enteral nutritional approach is as rapid in onset and
as effective as the other treatments. Pediatric studies have suggested
similar efficacy to prednisone for improvement in clinical symptoms,
but enteral nutritional therapy is superior to steroids for actual healing of mucosa. Because affected patients have poor appetite and these
formulas are relatively unpalatable, they are often administered via a
nasogastric or gastrostomy infusion, usually overnight. The advantages
are that it is relatively free of side effects, avoids the problems associated with corticosteroid therapy, and simultaneously addresses the
nutritional rehabilitation. Children can participate in normal daytime
activities. A major disadvantage of this approach is that patients are not
able to eat a regular diet because they are receiving all of their calories
from formula. A novel approach where 80–90% of caloric needs are
provided by formula, allowing children to have some food intake, has
been successful. For children with growth failure, this approach may
be ideal.
High-­calorie oral supplements, although effective, are often not tolerated because of early satiety or exacerbation of symptoms (abdominal pain, vomiting, or diarrhea). Nonetheless, they should be offered to
children whose weight gain is suboptimal even if they are not candidates for exclusive enteral nutritional therapy. The continuous administration of nocturnal nasogastric feedings for chronic malnutrition
and growth failure has been effective with a much lower risk of complications than parenteral hyperalimentation.

Surgical

Surgical therapy should be reserved for very specific indications.
Recurrence rate after bowel resection is high (>50% by 5 years); the
risk of requiring additional surgery increases with each operation.
Potential complications of surgery include development of fistula or
stricture, anastomotic leak, postoperative partial small bowel obstruction secondary to adhesions, and short bowel syndrome. Surgery is the
treatment of choice for localized disease of small bowel or colon that is
unresponsive to medical treatment, bowel perforation, fibrosed stricture with symptomatic partial small bowel obstruction, and intractable
bleeding. Intraabdominal or liver abscess sometimes is successfully
treated by ultrasonographic or CT-­guided catheter drainage and concomitant intravenous antibiotic treatment. Open surgical drainage is
necessary if this approach is not successful.
Perianal abscess often requires drainage unless it drains spontaneously. In general, perianal fistulas should be managed by a combined
medical and surgical approach. Often, the surgeon places a seton
through the fistula to keep the tract open and actively draining while
medical therapy is administered, to help prevent the formation of a
perianal abscess. A severely symptomatic perianal fistula can require
fistulotomy, but this procedure should be considered only if the location allows the sphincter to remain undamaged.
The surgical approach for Crohn disease is to remove as limited a
length of bowel as possible. There is no evidence that removing bowel
up to margins that are free of histologic disease has a better outcome

than removing only grossly involved areas. The latter approach reduces
the risk of short bowel syndrome. Laparoscopic approach is increasingly being used, with decreased postoperative recovery time. One
approach to symptomatic small bowel stricture has been to perform a
strictureplasty rather than resection. The surgeon makes a longitudinal
incision across the stricture but then closes the incision with sutures
in a transverse fashion. This is ideal for short strictures without active
disease. The reoperation rate is no higher with this approach than with
resection, whereas bowel length is preserved. Postoperative medical
therapy with agents, such as mesalamine, metronidazole, azathioprine,
and, more recently, infliximab, is often given to decrease the likelihood
of postoperative recurrence.
Severe perianal disease can be incapacitating and difficult to treat if
unresponsive to medical management. Diversion of fecal stream can
allow the area to be less active, but on reconnection of the colon, disease activity usually recurs.

Support

Psychosocial issues for the child with Crohn disease include a sense of
being different, concerns about body image, difficulty in not participating fully in age-­appropriate activities, and family conflict brought
on by the added stress of this disease. Social support is an important
component of the management of Crohn disease. Parents are often
interested in learning about other children with similar problems, but
children may be hesitant to participate. Social support and individual
psychologic counseling are important in the adjustment to a difficult
problem at an age that by itself often has difficult adjustment issues.
Patients who are socially “connected” fare better. Ongoing education
about the disease is an important aspect of management because children generally fare better if they understand and anticipate problems.
The Crohn and Colitis Foundation has local chapters throughout the
United States and supports several regional camps for children with
Crohn disease.

PROGNOSIS

Crohn disease is a chronic disorder that is associated with high morbidity but low mortality. Symptoms tend to recur despite treatment and
often without apparent explanation. Weight loss and growth failure
can usually be improved with treatment and attention to nutritional
needs. Up to 15% of patients with early growth retardation secondary
to Crohn disease have a permanent decrease in linear growth. Osteopenia is particularly common in those with chronic poor nutrition and
frequent exposure to high doses of corticosteroids. Dual-­energy x-­ray
absorptiometry can help identify patients at risk for developing osteopenia. Steroid-­sparing agents, weight-­bearing exercise, and improved
nutrition, including supplementation with vitamin D and calcium, can
improve bone mineralization. Some of the extraintestinal manifestations can, in themselves, be major causes of morbidity, including sclerosing cholangitis, chronic active hepatitis, pyoderma gangrenosum,
and ankylosing spondylitis.
The region of bowel involved and complications of the inflammatory process tend to increase with time and include bowel strictures,
fistulas, perianal disease, and intraabdominal or retroperitoneal
abscess. Most patients with Crohn disease eventually require surgery for one of its many complications; the rate of reoperation
is high. Surgery is unlikely to be curative and should be avoided
except for the specific indications noted previously. An earlier, most
aggressive medical treatment approach, with the goal of exacting
mucosal healing may improve long-­term prognosis, and this is an
active area of investigation. The risk of colon cancer in patients with
long-­standing Crohn colitis approaches that associated with ulcerative colitis, and screening colonoscopy after 8-­10 years of colonic
disease is indicated.
Despite these complications, most children with Crohn disease lead
active, full lives with intermittent flare-­up in symptoms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 382 u Inflammatory Bowel Disease

382.3 Very Early Onset Inflammatory Bowel
Disease
Ronen E. Stein, Sudha A. Anupindi, and
Robert N. Baldassano
IBD may be classified according to age at onset: pediatric onset (<17
years), early onset (<10 years), very early onset (<6 years), infant/toddler onset (0-­2 years), and neonatal onset IBD (<28 days). The incidence of pediatric IBD is rising with the greatest rates of increase
occurring among young children. Very early onset IBD (VEO-­IBD)
accounts for up to 15% of pediatric-­onset IBD with an estimated prevalence of 14/100,000 children. Approximately 1% of children with IBD
are diagnosed before the age of 2 years.
Although IBD is a complex disorder with genetics, the immune
system, the microbiome, and environmental factors each contributing
to its development, children with VEO-­IBD are more likely to have
a monogenic cause for their disease. Genetic testing has led to the
identification of novel genetic pathways linked to the development of

2323

VEO-­IBD. Many of these pathways contain genes associated with primary immunodeficiencies (see Tables 382.1 and 382.6; Table 382.9).
Family history of IBD among first-­degree relatives occurs more frequently in children diagnosed at a younger age. Approximately 44%
of children diagnosed with ulcerative colitis under the age of 2 years
will have a first-­degree relative with IBD compared with 19% of older
children with IBD.
VEO-­IBD has a distinct clinical phenotype characterized by a higher
likelihood for extensive colonic involvement and a greater tendency
for a more aggressive disease course that is refractory to conventional
therapies. However, there is a spectrum of clinical presentations within
this population, including patients with milder forms of the disease
and a more traditional disease course. Younger patients with IBD can
present with any combination of diarrhea, abdominal pain, vomiting,
and growth failure. Severe perirectal disease can be present and is often
associated with monogenic forms of VEO-­IBD, including those caused
by IL-­10 receptor pathogenic variants. In addition to intestinal symptoms, there may be associated manifestations of the specific monogenetic disorder (Fig. 382.12).

Table 382.9  Known Defects Associated with Very Early Onset Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Its Associated Extraintestinal
Manifestations and Laboratory Findings

DEFECTS

GENE DEFECT

IPEX AND IPEX-­LIKE DISORDERS
IPEX

FOXP3

CD25 deficiency

CD25

STAT5b deficiency

STAT5B

STAT1 GOF mutation

STAT1

STAT3 GOF mutation

STAT3

LRBA deficiency

LRBA

CTLA4 haploinsufficiency

CTLA4

DEFECTS IN IL-­10 SIGNALING
Defects in IL-­10 and IL-­10R

IL-­10RA
IL-­10RB
IL-­10

DEFECTS IN NEUTROPHIL FUNCTION
CGD
CYBB
CYBA
NCF1
NCF2
NCF4
Glycogen storage disease 1b
SLC37A4
Leukocyte adhesion defect

ITGB2

Congenital neutropenia

G6PC3

EXTRAINTESTINAL IMMUNE,
HEMATOLOGIC, OR SOMATIC
MANIFESTATIONS
Autoimmune endocrinopathy, cytopenia,
hepatitis and kidney disease, eczema, food
allergy, eosinophilia
Autoimmune endocrinopathy, cytopenia,
eczema, gingivitis, alopecia universalis, bullous
pemphigoid, CMV, EBV disease
Autoimmune endocrinopathy, eczema, short
stature, interstitial pneumonitis, alopecia
universalis, bullous pemphigoid, varicella and
herpes zoster infections
Mucocutaneous candidiasis, short stature,
eczema, autoimmune endocrinopathy,
sinopulmonary infection, hypertension,
aneurysm
Multisystem autoimmunity, variable short stature,
lymphoproliferation

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND
FUNCTIONAL EVALUATION
Decrease in Treg cells number and
function
Decreased Foxp3 expression
Absent CD25 expression
Variable immune abnormality
Normal to low T, B, and NK cells

Multisystem autoimmunity, cytopenia, arthritis,
recurrent sinopulmonary infection, granuloma,
hypogammaglobulinemia
Diarrhea, enteropathy, hypogammaglobulinemia,
granulomatous lymphocytic interstitial lung
disease, multisystem autoimmunity

Most have normal Treg
cell number and Foxp3
expression, abnormal STAT1
phosphorylation studies
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Decreased class switched memory
B cells
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Decreased class switched memory
B cells
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Decreased class switched memory
B cells

Perianal fistula, folliculitis, arthritis, abscess,
lymphoma

STAT3 phosphorylation by IL-­6
and IL-­10 studies*

Perianal fistula, recurrent cold abscess from
catalase positive organisms,† gastric outlet
obstruction

Decreased neutrophil oxidative
burst study
Elevated IgG

Recurrent bacterial infections, hypoglycemic
seizures, hepatomegaly
Neutrophilia, recurrent bacterial infections,
delayed separation of umbilical cord, poor
wound healing
Cutaneous vascular malformation and cardiac defect

Neutropenia, hypoglycemia,
hyperuricemia, hyperlipidemia
Leukocytosis
Absent CD18 expression
Severe neutropenia
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2324 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 382.9  Known Defects Associated with Very Early Onset Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Its Associated Extraintestinal
Manifestations and Laboratory Findings—cont’d

DEFECTS

GENE DEFECT

HYPERINFLAMMATORY DISORDERS
XIAP
BIRC4

EXTRAINTESTINAL IMMUNE,
HEMATOLOGIC, OR SOMATIC
MANIFESTATIONS
Perianal fistula, recurrent HLH, EBV, and CMV
infections, hypogammaglobinemia

NLRC4 GOF variant
Mevalonate kinase deficiency

NLRC4
MVK

Recurrent macrophage activation, rash
Recurrent fever, rash, abdominal pain and emesis

Familial Mediterranean fever

MEFV

Familial HLH type 5

STXBP2

Recurrent fever, abdominal pain, arthralgia,
peritonitis
HLH, hypogammaglobinemia, sensorineural
hearing loss

Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome

HPS1
HPS4
HPS6

DEFECTS IN EPITHELIAL BARRIER FUNCTION
TTC7A deficiency
TTC7A
X-­linked ectodermal
immunodeficiency (NEMO
deficiency)
ADAM17 deficiency

IKBKG

Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa

COL7A1

Kindler syndrome

FERMT1

ADAM17

Partial albinism, bleeding tendency, recurrent
infection and immunodeficiency

Varying degree of intestinal atresia, T-­cell
immune defect and recurrent infections
Varying degree of ectodermal dysplasia, conical
teeth, sparse and brittle hair, recurrent
bacterial, viral and mycobacterial infections
Neonatal inflammatory skin and bowel disease,
generalized pustular rash
Blistering disorder primarily affect the hands,
feet, knees, and elbows
Acral skin blistering, photosensitivity, progressive
poikiloderma, and diffuse cutaneous atrophy

ISOLATED OR COMBINED T-­CELL AND B-­CELL IMMUNE DEFECTS
X-­linked agammaglobulinemia
BTK
Recurrent sinopulmonary infection

Common variable immune defect
(CVID)

Heterogeneous group of defects with
sinopulmonary infections, autoimmunity,
lymphoproliferation, and variable T-­cell
immune defect
Sclerosing cholangitis, Cryptosporidium diarrhea
and Pneumocystis infection

X-­linked hyper IgM (CD40L)

CD40L

Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome

WAS

Eczema, recurrent infection, autoimmunity,
vasculitis

Leaky SCID or Omenn

RAG1, RAG2
IL-­7Ra
IL-­2RG

Generalized erythroderma, hepatosplenomegaly,
lymphadenopathy

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND
FUNCTIONAL EVALUATION
Markedly elevated IL-­18
Decreased or absent XIAP protein
expression by flow
Markedly elevated IL-­18
Elevated inflammatory markers
Elevated IgD
Elevated urine mevalonate
Elevated inflammatory markers
Marked elevated ferritin and
sIL-­2R
Decreased CD107a degranulation
Decreased CD107a degranulation

Mild to severe T-­cell immune
deficiency
Hypogammaglobinemia
Hypogammaglobinemia
Decreased class switched memory
B cells
Normal T-­cell and B-­cell numbers
Unremarkable immune findings
Eosinophilia

Absent B cells in peripheral blood
Absent plasma cells in tissue
Decreased class switched memory
B cells
Hypogammaglobinemia
Variable T-­cell lymphopenia
Elevated or normal IgM,
neutropenia
Absent class switched memory B
cells
Microthrombocytopenia
Variable lymphopenia, low IgM
Decreased WAS protein
Eosinophilia
T-­cell lymphopenia
Decreased naïve T cells

*STAT3 signaling following IL-­6 and IL-­10 will only identify IL-­10R A and B defects; it will not identify IL-­10 deficiency.
†Staphylococcus aureus, Serratia marcescens, Burkholderia cepacia, Aspergillus, and Candida.
IPEX, Immune dysfunction, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked; Treg, regulatory T cell; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; NK, natural killer; GOF, gain of function;
IL, interleukin; CGD, chronic granulomatous disease; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; SCID, severe combined immune deficiency.
From Chandrakasan S, Venkateswaran S, Kugathasan S. Nonclassic inflammatory bowel disease in young infants – immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked
syndrome, and other disorders. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2017;64:139–160. Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 382 u Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Comorbidities

CNS abnormality (DKC1, RTEL1, TGFB1, etc.)
Recurrent severe infection, Atypical Infection
Skin disease
Eczema/follicuIitis in early infancy
(IL10/R, FOXP3, WAS)
Ectodermal anhidrotic dysplasia (IKBKG)
Blistering (FERMT1, PLCG2, COL7A1, etc.)
Hyperkeratosis (DKC1, RTEL1)
Skin ulcer, Bullosa, Digital clubbing

2325

Specific physical findings
Hair abnormality (ADAM17, DKC1, RTEL1)
Wooly hair with trlchorrhezia (TTC37, SKIV2L)
Dysmorphic features
(IKBKG, MALT1, G6PC3, TTC37, SKIV2L, etc.)
Oral Ulcer, Oral leukoplakia (DKC1, RTEL1)
Lymphadenopathy/Lymphatic abscess

Hepatomegaly/Splenomegaly
Malignancy (IL10/R, LRBA, CTLA4)
Lymphoma, Gastric cancer

HLH, MAS (XLAP, STXBP2, MVK, NLRC4)

Metabolic syndrome
Niemann-Pick type C (NPC1)
Glycogen storage type 1b (SLC37A4)
Albinism (HPS1/4/6)
Intestinal obstruction (TTC7A)

Autoimmune disorders
(CTLA4, LRBA, STAT1, STAT3, FOXP3, etc.)
AIHA, ITP, TIDM, Thyroiditis
Arthritis, Psoriasis, AIH, Uveitis,
Nephropathy, Interstitial lung disease

Periostosis (SLCO2A1)

Blood cell counts abnormalities
Neutropenia (G6PC3, SLC37A4)
Lymphopenia (TTC7A)
Thrombocytopenia (WAS)
Leukocytosis (ITGB2, MEFV)
Thrombocytosis (MEFV)

Fig. 382.12 Key indicators of monogenic IBD in clinical practice. Showing physical findings and comorbidities of which physicians should be aware

at the initial physical examination and during follow-­up. (Modified from Nambu R, Muise AM. Advanced understanding of monogenic inflammatory
bowel disease. Front Pediatr. 2021;8:Article 618918. Fig. 1C.)

Diagnosis of IBD is ultimately confirmed by upper endoscopy
and ileocolonoscopy. Classic histologic findings of IBD can be seen,
although atypical findings, such as the presence of extensive epithelial apoptosis, could indicate the presence of monogenic disease. Most
children with VEO-­IBD will have isolated colonic inflammation on
ileocolonoscopy. However, the inflammation can be extensive and
involve the entire colon making it challenging to differentiate between
Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis; 11–22% of patients with VEO-­
IBD are diagnosed with indeterminate colitis at diagnosis. Additionally,
an initial diagnosis of ulcerative colitis occurs in approximately 60%
of VEO-­IBD patients. However, because children with VEO-­IBD are
more likely to have disease extension over time, a number of patients
felt to have indeterminate colitis or ulcerative colitis at diagnosis may
eventually be reclassified as having Crohn disease later in life. As small
bowel imaging using CT or MR enterography may not be tolerated in
a young child, small bowel ultrasonography is an alternative imaging
modality in VEO-­IBD.
The differential diagnosis of VEO-­IBD is similar to older children
and adults including infectious and allergic colitis (see Table 382.5).
However, primary immunodeficiencies, such as chronic granulomatous disease, common variable immunodeficiency, severe combined
immunodeficiency, Wiskott-­
Aldrich syndrome and immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­
linked syndrome,
are higher on the differential (see Tables 382.6 and 382.9). Therefore
immunologic evaluation is a critical component of diagnosis and management (Table 382.10). History of autoimmunity, atypical infections,

recurrent infections, skin disorders, and/or hair abnormalities could
indicate an underlying immunodeficiency. Laboratory evaluation
could include dihydrorhodamine cytometric testing, quantitative
immunoglobulins, vaccine titers, as well as testing of B-­and T-­cell
function. More targeted immunologic testing is guided by clinical history. Genetic testing modalities, such as whole exome sequencing, are
helpful in identifying rare monogenic pathways responsible for development of the disease.
A multidisciplinary team approach at a center experienced in
VEO-­IBD can be helpful in formulating an individualized treatment
plan. Younger children are more likely to fail conventional therapies,
such as 5-­ASA, immunomodulators, and biologics, and require surgical intervention. Surgical decisions must be made with caution in
very young children as disease extension from the colon to the small
intestine can occur with time. More extensive and severe disease
at presentation could explain the higher rates of treatment failure
among younger children. However, other children may fail conventional therapies if the inflammation is being driven by a monogenic
disease process that is not targeted by conventional therapies. Therefore for children with an underlying primary immunodeficiency
or a novel monogenic disease process, the specific disease pathway
involved may influence treatment choices. In some cases, bone marrow transplantation may be a necessary treatment for the underlying
disease process.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2326 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 382.10  Functional Analysis
FUNCTIONAL SCREENING CONSIDERED
• Immunoglobulins (IgG, IgM, IgA, IgD, IgE)
• Lymphocyte subsets by flow
• Antibody to vaccines
• TRECs
• DHR-­123
• Cytokine assay (serum cytokine level during flare)

Chapter 383

Eosinophilic
Gastroenteritis
Ronen E. Stein and Robert N. Baldassano

TARGETED FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS (RECOMMENDED)
GENE
FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS
IL10RA

IL-­10-­induced STAT3 phosphorylation by flow
cytometry or immunoblotting

IL10RB
NCF1

Neutrophil oxidative burst study, DHR-­123 test

NCF2
CYBA
CYBB
NCF4*

Neutrophil oxidative burst study

CYBC1
TTC7A

Immunohistochemistry-­TTC7A, apoptosis

WAS

WASP expression by flow cytometry

XIAP

XIAP expression by flow cytometry TNF, IL-­8, and
MCP-­1 expression in response to MDP
stimulation

SLCO2A1

Immunohistochemistry-­SLCO2A1

NPC1

Filipin staining of cultured skin fibroblasts

SLC37A4

G6Pase enzyme activity in Liver tissue (non-­frozen)

MVK

Increased urine mevalonic acid when fever

TNFAIP3

A20 expression by immunoblotting RT-­PCR using
total RNA

CTLA4

CTLA-­4 expression within stimulated Treg cells by
flow cytometry

LRBA

LRBA expression in response to PHA stimulation
by flow cytometry

FOXP3

FOXP3 expression by flow cytometry

STAT1(GOF)

CD25 expression by flow cytometry

STAT3(GOF)

STAT3 reporter luciferase assay under basal or
stimulated condition (IL-­6/growth hormone) in
cell lines SOCS3 expression levels under basal
or stimulated condition (IL-­21) in
EBV-­transformed patient cell lines

*The production of ROS in phagocyte is normal and need to examine the bacterial
killing activity.
TREC, T-­cell receptor excision circles; DHR-­123, dihydrorhodamine 123; WASP, Wiskott-­
Aldrich syndrome protein; IL-­8, interleukin-­8; MCP-­1, monocyte chemoattractant
protein; MDP, muramyl dipeptide; RT-­PCR, real-­time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction, TNF, tumor necrosis factor; Treg, regulatory T cell; PHA,
phytohemagglutinin; SOCS3, suppressor of cytokine signaling 3; EBV, Epstein-­Barr
virus; ROS, reactive oxygen species.
From Nambu R, Muise AM. Advanced understanding of monogenic inflammatory
bowel disease. Front Pediatr. 2021;8:Article 618918. Table 1A.

Eosinophilic gastroenteritis consists of a group of rare and poorly
understood disorders that have in common gastric and small intestine infiltration with eosinophils and peripheral eosinophilia. The
esophagus and large intestine may also be involved. Tissue eosinophilic infiltration can be seen in mucosa, muscularis, or serosa.
The mucosal form is most common and is diagnosed by identifying
large numbers of eosinophils in biopsy specimens of gastric antrum
or small bowel. Endoscopy may reveal gastritis or colitis, ulceration,
and thickened mucosal folds, as well as nodules. This condition
clinically overlaps the dietary protein hypersensitivity disorders of
the small bowel and colon. Peripheral eosinophilia may be absent.
The differential diagnosis also includes celiac disease, chronic
granulomatous disease, connective tissue disorders and vasculitides (eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis), multiple infections (particularly parasites), hypereosinophilic syndrome, early
inflammatory bowel disease, medications (tacrolimus, enalapril,
naproxen, interferon, rifampicin, azathioprine), and rarely malignancy. Many patients have allergies to multiple foods, seasonal
allergies, atopy, eczema, and asthma. Serum immunoglobulin E is
commonly elevated. Laboratory abnormalities may include hypoalbuminemia, iron-­deficiency anemia, and elevated liver enzymes.
Medications have been associated with eosinophilic gastroenteritis
including gold, enalapril, and carbamazepine.
The presentation of eosinophilic gastroenteritis is nonspecific. Clinical symptoms often correlate with which layers of the gastrointestinal
tract are affected. Mucosal involvement can produce nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, abdominal pain, gastrointestinal bleeding, protein-­
losing
enteropathy, or malabsorption. Involvement of the muscularis can
produce obstruction (especially of the pylorus) or intussusception,
whereas serosal activity produces abdominal distention and eosinophilic ascites. Presentation in infants can be similar to pyloric stenosis. Laboratory testing often reveals peripheral eosinophilia, elevated
serum immunoglobulin E levels, hypoalbuminemia, and anemia.
The disease usually runs a chronic, debilitating course with sporadic severe exacerbations. Although usually effective for the treatment of isolated eosinophilic esophagitis (see Chapter 370), elemental
diets are not always successful for the treatment of eosinophilic gastroenteritis. Orally administered cromolyn sodium and montelukast
are sometimes successful. There have been case reports of clinical
improvement using ketotifen, an antihistamine and mast cell stabilizer. Many patients require treatment for acute disease exacerbations
with systemic corticosteroids, which are often effective. Systemic corticosteroids may also be needed long term. Oral budesonide, a corticosteroid with local antiinflammatory activity on the bowel mucosa
and limited systemic absorption due to high hepatic first-­pass metabolism, can be attempted for long-­term therapy. In adults, biologic
agents (e.g., omalizumab) have been used.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 384 u Celiac Disease

Chapter 384

Celiac Disease
Ankur A. Chugh
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Celiac disease (CD) is an immune-­mediated systemic disorder elicited by
gluten in wheat and related prolamins from rye and barley in genetically
susceptible individuals, and is characterized by the presence of a variable
combination of gluten-­
dependent clinical manifestations, CD-­
specific
antibodies, human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-­DQ2 or DQ8 haplotypes,
and enteropathy. CD-­specific antibodies comprise autoantibodies against
tissue transglutaminase (TG2) including endomysial antibodies (EMAs),
and antibodies against forms of deamidated gliadin peptides (DGPs).
CD is a common disorder with 1.4% global prevalence of positive
serologies and 0.7% of biopsy-proven disease, with variability across
countries. CD affects both children and adults (second to third decade of
life). Although CD develops in genetically susceptible individuals, environmental factors might affect the risk of developing CD or the timing
of its presentation. Neither breastfeeding during gluten introduction nor
any breastfeeding has been shown to reduce the risk of CD. The impact
of early gluten introduction (age 4 months) on the risk of developing CD
is contradictory. Large amounts of gluten at a young age (6 months) may
convey risk of earlier development of CD autoimmunity (positive serology) and CD, whereas lower amounts of gluten in the first 2 years of life
may convey lower risk of CD. Infectious agents have been hypothesized
to play a causative role, as frequent rotavirus infections were shown to be
associated with an increased risk of developing CD. It is plausible that the
contact with gliadin at a time when there is an ongoing intestinal inflammation alters intestinal permeability, and the enhanced antigen presentation can increase the risk of developing CD, at least in a subset of persons.
The mode of delivery, socioeconomic status, season of birth, and the use
of drugs have been associated with the risk of developing CD, but the evidence is contradictory.

action of TG2: the enzyme converts particular glutamine residues into
glutamic acid, which results in higher affinity of these gliadin peptides
for HLA-­DQ2 or HLA-­DQ8. The pattern of cytokines produced following gliadin activation is dominated by interferon-­γ (T-­helper type
1 skewed); IL-­21 is also upregulated. In downstream T-­cell activation
a complex remodeling of the mucosa takes place involving increased
levels of metalloproteinases and growth factors, which leads to the
classical histologic finding of a flat mucosa. A severe impairment of
intraepithelial lymphocyte (IEL) homeostasis is present in CD. IL-­15
is implicated in the expression of natural killer receptors CD94 and
NKG2D, as well as in epithelial expression of stress molecules, thus
enhancing cytotoxicity, cell apoptosis, and villous atrophy. The most
evident expression of autoimmunity is the presence of serum antibodies to TG2. However, the mechanisms leading to autoimmunity are
largely unknown, as well as their pathogenetic significance. Potential
CD, in which TG2 antibodies can be detected in situ without any histologic abnormality, shows that the production of antibodies does not
necessarily lead to intestinal damage. The finding that IgA deposits on
extracellular TG2 are not limited to the intestine but can be found in
the liver, lymph nodes, and muscles indicates that TG2 is accessible
to the gut-­derived autoantibodies, turning CD into a systemic disease.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND ASSOCIATED
DISORDERS

Clinical features of CD vary considerably. Intestinal symptoms are more
common in children whose disease is diagnosed within the first 2 years
of life; failure to thrive, chronic diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal distention, muscle wasting, anorexia, and irritability are present in most cases
(Fig. 384.1). Occasionally there is constipation, with cases presenting
with intussusception. As the age at presentation of the disease shifts to
later in childhood, and with the more extensive use of serologic screening tests, extraintestinal manifestations, without any accompanying
digestive symptoms, have increasingly become recognized, affecting
cm in 0
104
102 40
100
98
96 38

Length
Weight

6

9

12

Age (mo)
15 18 21

24

27

30

33

36
95th
90th
75th
50th
25th
10th
5th

36
34
32
30
28
26

95th
90th

24

75th
50th

22

25th
10th
5th

20

cm in
104
102 40
100
98
96 38
94
92
90
88
86
84
82
80
78
76
74

36
34
32
30

18 40
38
17
36
16
34
15
32
14
30
13 28
12 26
11 24

18

10 22

9 20

9

20

8 18
16
7
14
6
12
5
10
4
8
3 6

8

18

3

6

2

2

4
lb

4
kg lb 0

7
6
5
4

3

6

9

12

15

18 21
Age (mo)

24

27

30

33

36

kg

Weight

94
92
90
88
86
84
82
80
78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
60
58
56
54
52
50
48
46
44

3

Length

GENETICS AND PATHOGENESIS

A genetic predisposition is suggested by the family aggregation and
the concordance in monozygotic twins, which approaches 100%. The
strongest association is with HLA-­DQ2.5 (one or two copies encoded
by DQA1*05 [for the alpha] and DQB1*02 genes [for the beta chain]).
Such a DQ molecule has been found to be present in more than 90% of
CD patients. The highly homologous DQ2.2 molecule confers a much
lower risk, whereas the data available on DQ2-­negative CD patients indicate that they almost invariably are HLA-­DQ8 positive (DQA1*0301/
DQB1*0302). A gene dosage effect has been proved in prospective studies, and a molecular hypothesis for such a phenomenon has been proposed, based on the impact of the number and quality of the HLA-­DQ2
molecules on gluten peptide presentation to T cells. The HLA locus is the
most significant and dominant gene associated with CD; however, other
loci known to contribute to CD have been documented. Most have been
found to be associated with other autoimmune diseases such as type 1
diabetes. Interestingly, very few polymorphisms associated with CD are
in coding regions, as they often are in binding sites for transcription factors, where they then affect gene expression.
CD is a T-­cell–mediated chronic inflammatory disorder with an
autoimmune component. Altered processing by intraluminal enzymes,
changes in intestinal permeability, and activation of innate immunity
mechanisms precede the activation of the adaptive immune response.
Immunodominant epitopes from gliadin are highly resistant to intraluminal and mucosal digestion; incomplete degradation favors the
immunostimulatory and toxic effects of these sequences. Some gliadin
peptides activate innate immunity, in particular they induce interleukin
(IL)-­15. The latter, but also type 1 interferons, may alter the tolerogenic
phenotype of dendritic cells, resulting in lamina propria T-­cell activation by other peptides presented in the context of HLA-­DQ2 or HLA­DQ8 molecules. Gliadin-­specific T-­cell responses are enhanced by the

2327

16
14
12
10
8

Fig. 384.1 Gluten-­sensitive enteropathy. Growth curve demonstrates

initial normal growth from 0 to 9 mo, followed by onset of poor appetite with intermittent vomiting and diarrhea after initiation of gluten-­
containing diet (single arrow). After biopsy confirmed diagnosis and
treatment with gluten-­free diet (double arrow), growth improves.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2328 Part XVI u The Digestive System
almost all organs (Table 384.1). One of the most common extraintestinal manifestation of CD is iron-­deficiency anemia, which is usually
unresponsive to iron therapy. Osteoporosis may be present; in contrast
to adults, it can be reversed by a gluten-­free diet in children, with restoration of normal peak bone densitometric values. Other extraintestinal manifestations include short stature, delayed puberty, arthritis and
arthralgia, epilepsy with bilateral occipital calcifications, peripheral
neuropathies, isolated hypertransaminasemia, dental enamel hypoplasia, and aphthous stomatitis. The mechanisms responsible for the
severity and the variety of clinical presentations remain obscure. Nutritional deficiencies or abnormal immune responses have been suggested. Silent CD is recognized, mainly in asymptomatic first-­degree

relatives of CD patients and in subjects affected by diseases associated
with CD (Table 384.2). Small bowel biopsy in silent/subclinical CD
reveals severe mucosal damage consistent with CD. Potential CD is
defined when patients have positive CD-­specific antibodies, but without documented small bowel damage (Table 384.3).
Some diseases, many with an autoimmune pathogenesis, are found
with a higher than normal incidence in CD patients. Among these
are type 1 diabetes, autoimmune thyroid disease, Addison disease,
Sjögren syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis, autoimmune cholangitis,
autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cholangitis, and juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Such associations have been interpreted as a consequence of the sharing of identical HLA haplotypes, but a direct role of

Table 384.1  Extraintestinal Manifestations of Celiac Disease
MANIFESTATION

PROBABLE CAUSE(S)

CUTANEOUS
Ecchymoses and petechiae

Vitamin K deficiency; rarely, thrombocytopenia

Edema

Hypoproteinemia

Dermatitis herpetiformis

Epidermal (type 3) tTG autoimmunity

Follicular hyperkeratosis and dermatitis

Vitamin A malabsorption, vitamin B complex malabsorption

ENDOCRINOLOGIC
Amenorrhea, infertility, impotence, delayed
puberty, short stature, type 1 diabetes,
thyroiditis, Addison disease, Graves disease

Malnutrition, hypothalamic-­pituitary dysfunction, immune dysfunction

Secondary hyperparathyroidism

Calcium and/or vitamin D malabsorption with hypocalcemia

HEMATOLOGIC
Anemia

Iron, folate, vitamin B12, or pyridoxine deficiency

Hemorrhage

Vitamin K deficiency; rarely, thrombocytopenia due to folate deficiency

Thrombocytosis, Howell-­Jolly bodies

Hyposplenism; splenic atrophy; autoantibodies

Pancytopenia

Vitamin B12 deficiency; immune medicated

Thrombosis

Venous and arterial, including portal vein

Malignancies

Enteropathy-­type T-­cell lymphoma, B-­cell gut lymphoma, adenocarcinoma of small intestine

HEPATIC
Elevated liver biochemical test levels

Lymphocytic celiac hepatitis, NAFLD

Autoimmune hepatitis

Associated autoimmune hepatitis

MUSCULAR
Atrophy

Malnutrition due to malabsorption

Tetany

Calcium, vitamin D, and/or magnesium malabsorption

Weakness

Generalized muscle atrophy, hypokalemia

NEUROLOGIC
Peripheral neuropathy

Deficiencies of vitamin B12 and thiamine; immune-­based neurologic dysfunction

Ataxia

Cerebellar and/or posterior column damage

Demyelinating central nervous system lesions

Immune-­based neurologic dysfunction

Seizures (difficult to treat)

Unknown; associated occipital calcifications

SKELETAL
Osteopenia, osteomalacia, and osteoporosis

Malabsorption of calcium and vitamin D, secondary hyperparathyroidism, chronic inflammation

Osteoarthropathy

Unknown

Pathologic fractures

Osteopenia and osteoporosis

OTHER
Enamel hypoplasia

Vitamin D, calcium malabsorption

Anxiety, schizophrenia

Unknown, uncertain

Pulmonary hemosiderosis

Unknown, uncertain

Aphthous stomatitis

Unknown

Benign inflammatory mass

Granulomatous self-resolving process with treatment

tTG, Tissue transglutaminase; NAFLD, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
Modified from Kelly CP. Celiac disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2016: Table 107.1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 384 u Celiac Disease
Table 384.2  National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence Guidelines on the Indications That
Should Prompt Testing for Celiac Disease
CELIAC TESTING RECOMMENDED
• Persistent unexplained abdominal or gastrointestinal symptoms
• Faltering growth
• Prolonged fatigue
• Unexpected weight loss
• Severe or persistent mouth ulcers
• Unexplained iron, vitamin B12, or folate deficiency
• Type 1 diabetes
• Autoimmune thyroid disease
• Irritable bowel syndrome
• First degree relatives of people with coeliac disease
• Dermatitis herpetiformis
CELIAC TESTING SHOULD BE CONSIDERED
• Metabolic bone disorders (reduced bone mineral density or
osteomalacia)
• Unexplained neurologic symptoms (particularly peripheral
neuropathy or ataxia)
• Unexplained subfertility or recurrent miscarriage
• Persistently increased concentrations of liver enzymes with
unknown cause
• Dental enamel defects
• Down syndrome
• Turner syndrome
• William syndrome
• Selective IgA deficiency
IgA, Immunoglobulin A.
From Downey L, Houten R, Murch S, Longson D for the Guideline Development Group.
Recognition, assessment, and management of coeliac disease: summary of updated
NICE guidance. BMJ. 2015;351:h4513.

Table 384.3  Clinical Spectrum of Celiac Disease
SYMPTOMATIC
Frank malabsorption symptoms and signs (e.g., chronic diarrhea,
failure to thrive, weight loss)
Extraintestinal symptoms and signs (e.g., anemia, fatigue,
hypertransaminasemia, neurologic disorders, short stature, dental
enamel defects, arthralgia, aphthous stomatitis)
SILENT
No apparent symptoms in spite of histologic evidence of villous
atrophy
In most cases identified by serologic screening in at-­risk groups (see
Table 384.1)
LATENT
Subjects who have a normal intestinal histology, but at some other
time have shown a gluten-­dependent enteropathy
POTENTIAL
Subjects with positive celiac disease serology but without evidence
of altered intestinal histology. Patients may or may not have
symptoms and signs of disease and may or may not develop a
gluten-­dependent enteropathy later

gluten in promoting autoimmunity cannot be excluded. The relation
between CD and other autoimmune diseases is poorly defined; once
those diseases are established, they are not influenced by a gluten-­free
diet. Other associated conditions include selective IgA deficiency and
Down, Turner, and Williams syndromes (see Table 384.2).

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of CD is based on a combination of symptoms, antibodies, and duodenal histology. The initial approach to symptomatic
patients is to test for anti-­TG2 IgA antibodies and for total IgA in
serum to exclude IgA deficiency. If IgA anti-­TG2 antibodies are negative, and serum total IgA is normal for age, CD is unlikely to be the

2329

cause of the symptoms. If anti-­TG2 antibody testing is positive, the
patients should be referred to a pediatric gastroenterologist for further
diagnostic workup, which depends on the serum antibody levels.
In patients with selective IgA deficiency, testing is recommended with
IgG antibodies to TG2. Patients with positive anti-­TG2 antibody levels
<10 times the upper limit of normal should undergo upper endoscopy
with multiple biopsies. In patients with positive anti-­TG2 antibody levels
at or >10 times the upper limit of normal, EMA titers should be obtained
in a second blood draw (to prevent mislabeling). If the patient has positive antibodies, the diagnosis of CD is essentially confirmed, a lifelong
gluten-­free diet is started, and the patient is followed for the improvement of symptoms and the decline of antibodies. In the rare case of negative anti-­EMA in a child with TG2 antibody titers >10 times the upper
limits of normal, the diagnostic workup should be extended, and duodenal biopsies obtained (Fig. 384.2). In asymptomatic persons belonging to high-­risk groups with anti-­TG2 levels >10 times the upper limit
of normal, the decision to utilize the nonbiopsy approach should be a
shared decision with the patient/family. When biopsies are indicated, at
least four fragments should be obtained from the descending part of the
duodenum and at least one from the duodenal bulb. The diagnosis is
confirmed by an antibody decline and preferably a clinical response to
a gluten-­free diet. CD is not the only cause for lymphocytic infiltration
or villous atrophy (Table 384.4). HLA testing is helpful for diagnostic
uncertainty, patients already on a gluten free diet, and in screening of
high-­risk individuals. The benefit of obtaining additional DGP antibodies in patients <2 years of age is no longer favored.

TREATMENT

The only treatment for CD is lifelong, strict adherence to a gluten-­free diet.
This requires a wheat-­, barley-­, and rye-­free diet (Tables 384.5 and 384.6).
Despite evidence that oats are safe for most patients with CD, there is concern regarding the possibility of contamination of oats with gluten during
harvesting, milling, and shipping. Nevertheless, it seems wise to add oats
to the gluten-­free diet only when the latter is well established, so that possible adverse reactions can be readily identified. There is a consensus that
all CD patients should be treated with a gluten-­free diet regardless of the
presence of symptoms. However, whereas it is relatively easy to assess the
health improvement after treatment of CD in patients with clinical symptoms of the disease, it proves difficult in persons with asymptomatic CD.
The nutritional risks, particularly osteopenia and increased risk for other
autoimmune disorders, along with the increased but rare risk of intestinal
lymphoma, are those mainly feared for subjects who have silent CD and
continue on a gluten-­containing diet. Little is known about the health risks
in untreated patients with potential CD. For these patients, adequate gluten intake should be confirmed, the biopsy orientation should be checked,
and monitoring should occur at a tertiary medical center, given the potential for serologies to both normalize or progress to villous atrophy.
Some older patients do not respond to a gluten free diet; refractory
or nonresponsive CD requires a systematic approach to determine the
correct diagnosis, compliance, and therapeutic options (Fig. 384.3).
The Codex Alimentarius Guidelines define gluten-­free food item for
food containing <20 parts per million (ppm; equivalent to 20 mg gluten in
1 kg of product). However, despite analytical methods for gluten detection
reaching a satisfactory degree of sensitivity, more information is needed
on the daily gluten amount that may be tolerated by CD patients. The data
available so far seem to suggest that the threshold should be set to <50
mg/day, although individual variability makes it difficult to set a universal
threshold.
It is important that an experienced dietitian with specific expertise in
CD counseling educates the family and the child about dietary restriction. Compliance with a gluten-­free diet can be difficult, especially in
adolescents, and patients should be monitored for signs of depression and
referred to psychology or adolescent medicine as appropriate. It is recommended that children with CD be monitored with periodic visits for
assessment of symptoms, growth, physical examination, and adherence
to the gluten-­free diet. Bloodwork, such as complete blood count, hepatic
panel, thyroid function, calcium, vitamin D, iron, and ferritin have been
suggested at diagnosis, with abnormal values followed until normalized.
Periodic measurements of TG2 antibody levels to document reduction in
antibody titers are recommended as indirect evidence of adherence to a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2330 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Child/adolescent with symptoms suggestive of CD

Anti-TG2 IgA & total IgA

Anti-TG2
positive

Anti-TG2
negative

Not CD

Refer to pediatric GI
Discuss diagnostic pathways

Anti-TG2 >10 x normal

EMA

Anti-TG2 <10 x normal

EMA
negative

Refer to pediatric GI and consider
further diagnostic testing if:
IgA deficiency
History: - Low gluten intake
- Immunosuppressant
medication
- Severe symptoms
- Dermatitis herpetiformis
EGD & biopsies

EMA pos

Marsh 0–1

Marsh 2 or 3

CD+

Unclear case
Consider:
False positive serology
False negative biopsy
Potential CD
Extended evaluation of
HLA/serology/biopsies

CD+

GFD & F/u

GFD & F/u

Fig. 384.2 Diagnostic algorithm for celiac disease according to European Society for Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition
(ESPGHAN). CD, Celiac disease; EMA, endomysial antibodies; EGD, esophagogastroduodenoscopy; F/u, follow-­up; GFD, gluten-­free diet; GI,
gastrointestinal; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; Ig, immunoglobulin; neg, negative; pos, positive; TG2, transglutaminase. (Modified from Husby S,
Koletzko S, Korponay-­Szabò IR, et al. European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition Guidelines for Diagnosing Coeliac
Disease. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2020;70:13841–14157. Fig. 4.)

Table 384.4  Conditions Other Than Celiac Disease That
Can Cause Duodenal Lymphocytosis or
Villous Atrophy
DUODENAL LYMPHOCYTOSIS
• Food allergy, non-­celiac gluten sensitivity
• Infection (e.g., Helicobacter pylori or giardiasis)
• Drugs (e.g., nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs)
• Postenteritis syndrome
• Immune deficiency (e.g., selective IgA deficiency, common
variable immune deficiency)
• Immune dysregulation (e.g., autoimmune thyroiditis)
• Crohn disease
• Preinfiltrative intestinal T-­cell lymphoma
VILLOUS ATROPHY
• Environmental enteropathy (tropical sprue)
• Common variable immune deficiency
• Autoimmune enteropathy
• Drugs (e.g., olmesartan or azathioprine)
• Food allergy
• Giardiasis
• Crohn disease
• Eosinophilic enteritis
• Radiation enteritis
• Intestinal lymphoma
• HIV enteropathy
• Bacterial overgrowth
• Graft-­versus-­host disease
• Protein energy malnutrition
Modified from Catassi C, Verdu EF, Bai JC, Lionette E. Coeliac disease. Lancet.
2022;399:2413–2424.

Table 384.5  Principles of Initial Dietary Therapy for
Patients with Celiac Disease
Avoid all foods containing wheat, rye, and barley gluten (pure oats
usually safe).
Avoid malt unless clearly labeled as derived from corn.
Use only rice, corn, maize, buckwheat, millet, amaranth, quinoa,
sorghum, potato or potato starch, soybean, tapioca, and teff, bean,
and nut flours.
Wheat starch and products containing wheat starch should only be
used if they contain <20 ppm gluten and are marked “gluten free.”
Read all labels and study ingredients of processed foods.
Beware of gluten in medications, supplements, food additives,
emulsifiers, or stabilizers.
Limit milk and milk products initially if there is evidence of lactose
intolerance.
Avoid all beers, lagers, ales, and stouts (unless labeled gluten free).
Wine, most liqueurs, ciders, and spirits, including whiskey and
brandy, are allowed.
ppm, Parts per million.

gluten-­free diet, although they are insensitive to slight dietary transgressions and can take up to 2-­3 years to normalize. The TG2 antibody levels
can be checked every 1-2 years after they normalize, or sooner if symptoms
or concerns for compliance arise. Commercial tests are available to monitor for compliance and transgressions via the detection of gluten peptides
in the urine and stool, but remain under investigation for validation. If
compliance is uncertain or body mass index (BMI) z scores are low, bone
health should be assessed. Therapeutic treatments, such as those that target
IL-­15, IL-­21, and gluten degradation, remain in clinical trials.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 384 u Celiac Disease
Table 384.6  Some Potential Sources of Hidden Gluten
Beers, ales, other fermented beverages (distilled beverages
acceptable)
Bouillon and soups
Candy
Communion wafers
Drink mixes
Gravy and sauces
Herbal tea
Imitation meat and seafood
Nutritional supplements
Play-­Doh
Salad dressings and marinades
Self-­basting turkeys
Soy sauce
From Kelly CP. Celiac disease. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger
and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2016:
Box 107.3.

2331

THE SPECTRUM OF GLUTEN-­RELATED DISORDERS

CD is not the only disorder related to gluten ingestion. Symptoms in
IgE-­mediated wheat allergy are usually immediate (urticaria, angioedema, asthma, exercise-­induced anaphylaxis). Diagnosis is based on
dietary challenge, in vitro assay for specific IgE, and skin testing.
Non­celiac gluten sensitivity (NCGS) is a poorly understood condition. Diagnosis is suspected in patients who do not have CD or wheat
allergy, and yet show GI and non-­GI symptoms upon ingestion of
gluten-­or wheat-­containing food. In the general population, the incidence of self-­reported gluten avoidance varies from 0.5% to 13%. Similar symptoms are often experienced by patients with irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS), and some patients with IBS respond positively to a
gluten-­free diet or a diet low in fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols (FODMAP diet).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Supporting evidence:
Confirmation of small bowel histology findings
consistent with celiac disease
Positive EMA, tTG, or DGP serology at some
time during clinical course
Presence of HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8
Biopsy-proven dermatitis herpetiformis
Clinical and/or histologic response to GFD
Strong family history of celiac disease
Presence of associated autoimmune
disorders

Nonresponsive celiac disease1
Confirm accuracy of
celiac disease diagnosis

Yes

Evaluate for other causes of villous atrophy2
and/or other conditions with celiac-like clinical
presentations3

No

Celiac serologies4 and
Expert dietician evaluation:
Gluten ingestion and/or
other food intolerances identified?

Yes

No

Adjust diet and
monitor progress

Small bowel biopsy
(with colonic biopsies
if persisting diarrhea)
Enteritis with
villous atrophy?

Yes

No

Reconsider and exclude other
etiologies for villous atrophy2

Consider alternative etiologies
for ongoing symptoms3

Refractory celiac disease (RCD; usually in adults)5
Abnormal or clonal intestinal T lymphocytes?6

Yes

No

Type II RCD

Type I RCD

Fig. 384.3 Diagnostic algorithm for

the approach to patients with nonresponsive celiac disease. 1Nonresponsive celiac disease may be defined
as persistent symptoms and signs
despite 6-­
12 mo of dietary gluten
avoidance. Abnormal tissue transglutaminase (tTG) can last even 2-­3 yr.
2Causes of nonceliac small intestinal
villous atrophy that may be misdiagnosed as celiac disease include autoimmune enteropathy, tropical sprue,
medication induced enteropathy,
hypogammaglobulinemia, combined
variable immunodeficiency, collagenous sprue, Crohn disease, and peptic
duodenitis. 3Conditions that present
clinically in a fashion similar to celiac
disease but where villous atrophy is
not evident include irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS), carbohydrate malabsorption, small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth, Crohn’s disease, and microscopic colitis. 4Positive serologic
testing for celiac disease despite 12
mo of treatment with a gluten-­
free
diet (GFD) suggest that there may be
ongoing gluten ingestion.5Refractory
celiac disease (RCD) is defined as
persistent or recurrent malabsorptive symptoms and signs, with small
intestinal villous atrophy despite a
strict GFD for more than 12 mo and
in the absence of other disorders
including overt lymphoma. 6Abnormal intestinal lymphocytes may be
identified by immunohistochemistry
of intraepithelial lymphocytes or by
flow cytometry showing an increased
number of CD3-­positive cells that lack
CD8 or by the identification of clonal
T-­
cell receptor gene rearrangement
by molecular analysis. EMA, Endomysial antibody; DGP, deamidated gliadin peptide; HLA, human leukocyte
antigen. (Adapted from Green PHR,
Paski S, Ko CW, Rubio-Tapia A. AGA
clinical practice update on management of refractory celiac disease:
expert
review.
Gastroenterology
2022;163(5):1461–1469.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2332 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 385

Disorders of
Malabsorption
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri
Malabsorption is defined as a decreased intestinal absorption of one
or more dietary elements. The intestinal tract requires several components to properly absorb the required elements from our diet, and the
absence or improper digestion within the lumen or diminished or dysfunctional mucosal absorption is due to the lack of presence or function of these components. Due to the change in composition or volume
of luminal contents, many if not all malabsorptive disorders result in
diarrhea. Chronic ongoing losses further worsen the malabsorption,
resulting in chronic diarrhea (see Chapter 388). Malabsorption can be
categorized based on mucosal defects resulting in a more generalized
malabsorption with multiple nutrient defects (Table 385.1), or due to
the malabsorption of specific components such as carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, vitamins, minerals, and trace elements (Table 385.2).

CLINICAL APPROACH

Because malnutrition leads to the loss of typically absorbed components in stool, the presentation of a patient will differ depending upon
the length of time with malabsorption, the extent of losses, and the
phase of growth and magnitude of required nutrients. With proper
follow-­up, the clinical features tend to be growth related, with failure
to gain weight and a stagnation of linear growth percentiles. Physical
exam findings tend to be subtle, with abdominal distension, diarrhea,
and even constipation as presenting features depending on the malabsorbed component. With more extensive losses or delay in presentation, the clinical features become more pronounced. Findings can
include muscle wasting, loss of subcutaneous fat, and loose skinfolds
(Fig. 385.1). Because toddlers have increased energy requirements, presentation in this age-­group can be dramatic and more acute. In older
children and adolescents, the presentation may be more subtle, with
suboptimal weight gain or weight loss as a more common presentation.
Height stunting tends to lag behind weight parameters. In developing
areas of the world where access to health resources including enteral
and parenteral nutrition (PN) continues to be limited, prolonged
malabsorption may lead to death (see Chapter 64). This outcome is
uncommon in the developed world, where access to healthcare leads to
improved outcomes. Nonetheless, monogenetic causes of malabsorption often produce failure to thrive in any region of the world. Specific
findings on examination can guide toward a specific disorder; edema
is usually associated with protein-­losing enteropathy (PLE), digital
clubbing with conditions including cystic fibrosis and celiac disease,
perianal excoriation and gaseous abdominal distention with carbohydrate malabsorption, perianal and circumoral rash with acrodermatitis
enteropathica, abnormal hair with Menkes syndrome (ATP7A defects),
tricho-­hepato-­enteric syndrome (THE), and the typical facial features
diagnostic of the Johanson-­Blizzard syndrome.
To compensate for the fecal losses of nutrients and calories, many
children present with a history of a good appetite. In exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, fecal losses of up to 40% of ingested protein and
energy do not lead to malnutrition, as long as they are compensated
by an increased appetite. In conditions associated with villous atrophy
or inflammation (Celiac disease, postinfectious enteropathy or Crohn
disease), fecal protein and energy losses are usually modest, but associated anorexia and thus reduced food intake results in malnutrition.
The nutritional assessment is an important part of clinical evaluation
in children with malabsorptive disorders (see Chapter 60). Long-­term
calcium and vitamin D malabsorption can lead to reduced bone mineral density and metabolic bone disease (often resistant to oral vitamin

D), with increased risk of bone fractures. Vitamin K malabsorption,
irrespective of the underlying mechanism (fat malabsorption, mucosal
atrophy), can result in coagulopathy. Severe PLE is often associated with
malabsorption syndromes (celiac disease, Crohn disease, congenital
disorders of glycosylation, intestinal lymphangiectasia [IL]) and causes
hypoalbuminemia and edema. Other nutrient deficiencies include iron
malabsorption causing microcytic anemia and low reticulocyte count,
low serum folate levels in conditions associated with mucosal atrophy,
especially in the proximal part of the small intestinal tract, and low
serum vitamin A and vitamin E concentrations in fat malabsorption.
Diarrhea is the main clinical expression of malabsorption. Early
presentation of diarrhea in early infancy suggests a congenital defect
(Table 385.3). In congenital disorders of diarrhea such as microvillus
inclusion disease (MVID) and congenital sodium or chloride diarrhea,
higher volume fluid losses within the stool lead to watery like diarrhea,
often mistaken for urine (see Chapter 388). The onset of symptoms
after the introduction of a particular food into a child’s diet can provide diagnostic clues, such as with sucrose in sucrase-­isomaltase (SI)
deficiency. The nature of the diarrhea may be helpful: explosive watery
diarrhea suggests carbohydrate malabsorption; loose, bulky stools are
associated with celiac disease; and pasty, yellowish, and offensive smelling stools suggest fat malabsorption and an exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Stool color is usually not helpful, though it may suggest blood
loss if red or melena. Green stool with undigested foods can suggest
rapid intestinal transit in toddler’s diarrhea, which by itself is a self-­
limiting condition unassociated with failure to thrive.
Following medical history, physical examination, and laboratory
testing (see Chapter 385.1), intestinal biopsies may assist in the diagnosis. This is usually done for chronic rather than acute diseases which
are typically self-­limited. Generalized mucosal villous atrophy (flat
mucosa) may be associated with malabsorption of multiple macronutrients and micronutrients and has a wide range of differential diagnoses (see Chapters 384 and 385.2).

385.1 Evaluation of Children with Suspected
Intestinal Malabsorption
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri
In a child presenting with chronic or recurrent diarrhea, the initial workup should include nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs)
(viruses, bacteria) and, when not available, by stool cultures and antibody (or antigen testing) tests for parasites. Stool microscopy for ova
and parasites can look for parasites such as Giardia. Fecal leukocytes
and calprotectin and/or lactoferrin may suggest inflammatory disorders. Acidic stool pH and positive reducing substances suggest a
component of carbohydrate malabsorption. Stool osmolality helps differentiate between osmotic and secretory diarrhea. Along with a careful
diet history focusing on fat intake, quantitative stool fat examination
helps determine whether there is fat malabsorption. Elevated fecal
α1-­antitrypsin and a low serum albumin (in the absence of hepatic or
renal disease) can suggest enteral protein loss. Fecal stool elastase-­1 can
assess for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
A complete blood count, including peripheral smear for microcytic
anemia, lymphopenia (lymphangiectasia), neutropenia (Shwachman-­
Diamond syndrome), and acanthocytosis (abetalipoproteinemia),
is useful. If celiac disease is suspected, serum immunoglobulin IgA
and anti-­tissue transglutaminase IgA (anti-­TTG IgA) antibody levels
should be determined (see Chapter 384). If inflammation is suspected,
CRP and ESR can be drawn. Depending on the initial test results, more
specific investigations can be planned.

INVESTIGATIONS FOR CARBOHYDRATE
MALABSORPTION

The measurement of acidic stool pH and the amount of reducing substances are simple screening tests for carbohydrate malabsorption. An
acidic stool with a pH <5 and >2+ reducing substance suggests carbohydrate malabsorption. Sucrose or starch in the stool is not recognized

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 385 u Disorders of Malabsorption 2333
Table 385.1  Malabsorption Disorders and Chronic
Diarrhea Associated with Generalized
Mucosal Defect

Table 385.2  Classification of Malabsorption Disorders and
Chronic Diarrhea Based on the Predominant
Nutrient Malabsorbed

ACQUIRED AUTOIMMUNITY
Celiac disease (Gluten sensitive enteropathy)
Cow’s milk and other protein intolerance enteropathy
Eosinophilic enteropathy
Crohn disease

CARBOHYDRATE MALABSORPTION
Lactose malabsorption
Congenital lactase deficiency
Hypolactasia (adult type)
Secondary lactase deficiency
Congenital sucrase isomaltase deficiency
Glucose galactose malabsorption

Immune Dysregulation
Congenital immunodeficiency disorders
Selective immunoglobulin A deficiency (associated with celiac
disease)
Severe combined immunodeficiency
Agammaglobulinemia
X-­linked hypogammaglobulinemia
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
Common variable immunodeficiency disease
Chronic granulomatous disease
IPEX (immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­
linked inheritance) and IPEX-­like syndromes (tregopathies)
Autoimmune polyendocrine candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy
syndrome type 1 (APECED)
CONGENITAL BOWEL MUCOSAL DEFECTS
Microvillus inclusion disease
Tufting enteropathy
Carbohydrate-­deficient glycoprotein syndrome
Enterocyte heparan sulfate deficiency
Tricho-­hepatic-­enteric syndrome
Enteroendocrine Cell Dysfunction
Enteric anendocrinosis (NEUROG3)
Proprotein convertase 1/3 deficiency (PCSK1)
ACQUIRED IMMUNE DEFICIENCY
HIV infection
Immunosuppressive therapy and post bone marrow transplantation
Mechanical Defects
Short bowel syndrome
Blind loop syndrome
Pseudoobstruction
MISCELLANEOUS
Lymphangiectasia
Immunoproliferative small intestinal disease
Radiation enteritis
Protein-­calorie malnutrition

as a reducing sugar until after hydrolysis with hydrochloric acid, which
converts them to reducing sugars.
Breath hydrogen test is used to identify the specific carbohydrate
that is malabsorbed. After an overnight fast, the suspected sugar (lactose, sucrose, fructose, or glucose) is administered as an oral solution
(carbohydrate load up to 2 g/kg, maximum total of 25 g, depending
on the specific carbohydrate type). In malabsorption, the sugar is not
digested or absorbed in the small bowel; it passes on to the colon and is
metabolized by the normal gut microflora. One of the products of this
process is hydrogen gas, which is absorbed through the colon mucosa
and excreted in the breath. Because human cells are incapable of producing hydrogen, increased hydrogen concentration in the breath samples suggests carbohydrate malabsorption. A rise in breath hydrogen of
20 parts per million (ppm) above the baseline, preferably with associated symptoms, is considered a positive test. The child should not be on
antibiotics at the time of the test because antibiotics may suppress the
colonic flora, which is essential for fermenting the sugar. Care should
be taken in the interpretation of these results as small intestinal bacterial overgrowth can lead to an early elevation of hydrogen.
Small bowel mucosal biopsies can directly measure mucosal disaccharidase (lactase, sucrase, maltase, palatinase) concentrations. In primary
enzyme deficiencies the mucosal enzyme levels are low and small bowel

FAT MALABSORPTION
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Cystic fibrosis
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome
Johanson-­Blizzard syndrome
Pearson syndrome
Secondary exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Chronic pancreatitis
Severe protein-­calorie malnutrition
Decreased pancreozymin/cholecystokinin secretion
Isolated enzyme deficiency
Enterokinase deficiency
Trypsinogen deficiency
Lipase/colipase deficiency
Disrupted enterohepatic circulation of bile salts
Cholestatic liver disease
Bile acid synthetic defects
Deconjugation of bile acids (bacterial overgrowth)
Bile acid malabsorption (terminal ileal disease or resection)
Intestinal brush border disorders
Allergic enteropathy
Autoimmune enteropathy
Disorders in formation and transport of chylomicrons by
enterocytes to the lymphatics
Abetalipoproteinemia
Homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia
Chylomicron retention disease (Anderson disease)
Disorders of lymph flow
Primary or secondary lymphangiectasia
PROTEIN/AMINO ACID MALABSORPTION
Lysinuric protein intolerance (defect in dibasic amino acid transport)
Hartnup disease (defect in free neutral amino acids)
Blue diaper syndrome (isolated tryptophan malabsorption)
Oasthouse urine disease (defect in methionine absorption)
Lowe syndrome (lysine and arginine malabsorption)
Enterokinase deficiency
Protein-­losing enteropathy
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
CD55 deficiency
MINERAL AND VITAMIN MALABSORPTION
Congenital chloride diarrhea
Congenital sodium diarrhea
Acrodermatitis enteropathica (zinc malabsorption)
Menkes disease (copper malabsorption)
Vitamin D–dependent rickets
Folate malabsorption
Secondary to chronic mucosal damage
Vitamin B12 malabsorption
Autoimmune pernicious anemia
Decreased gastric acid (H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors)
Terminal ileal disease (e.g., Crohn disease) or resection
Inborn errors of vitamin B12 transport and metabolism
Primary hypomagnesemia
DRUG INDUCED
Sulfasalazine: folic acid malabsorption
Cholestyramine: calcium and fat malabsorption
Anticonvulsant drugs such as phenytoin (causing vitamin D
deficiency and folic acid and calcium malabsorption)
Gastric acid suppression: vitamin B12
Methotrexate: mucosal injury

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2334 Part XVI u The Digestive System
mucosal morphology is normal. Primary enzymatic deficiencies can also
be diagnosed by genetic testing (see Chapters 385.8-­385.10 and 388). Partial or total villous atrophy due to autoimmune disorders such as celiac

disease or Crohn disease or following acute rotavirus gastroenteritis can
result in secondary disaccharidase deficiency and transient lactose intolerance (see Chapters 384 and 385.2 for differential diagnosis of villous atrophy). The disaccharidase levels revert to normal after mucosal healing.

INVESTIGATIONS FOR FAT MALABSORPTION

The presence of fat globules in the stool suggests fat malabsorption.
The ability to absorb fat varies with age. While on a typical diet, a premature infant can absorb only 65–75% of dietary fat, a full-­term infant
absorbs almost 90%, and an older child absorbs more than 95% of fat.
Quantitative determination of fat malabsorption requires a 3-­day stool
collection and dietary fat intake recall for evaluation of fat excretion
and determination of the coefficient of fat absorption:
Coefficient of fat absorption % = (fat intake − fecal fat losses/fat
intake) × 100
where fat intake and fat losses are in grams. Because fecal fat balance
studies are cumbersome, expensive, and unpleasant to perform, simpler tests are often preferred. Among these stool tests, the acid steatocrit test is the most reliable. When bile acid (BA) deficiency is suspected
of being the cause of fat malabsorption, the evaluation of BA levels in
duodenal fluid aspirate may be useful. Intestinal mucosal abnormalities may not affect only fat absorption, but shorter intestinal transit
time may also result in steatorrhea. Steatorrhea from intestinal mucosal disorders such as celiac disease or cow’s milk protein enteropathy
are usually far less severe in than in exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and other fat malabsorption disorders (see Table 385.2) are usually associated with deficiencies of fat-­
soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. Serum concentrations of vitamins A,
D, and E can be measured. A prolonged prothrombin time is an indirect test to assess vitamin K malabsorption and subsequent deficiency.

INVESTIGATIONS FOR PROTEIN-­LOSING
ENTEROPATHY
Fig. 385.1 An 18-­month-­old male with active celiac disease. Note the
ill appearance with loose skinfolds, marked proximal muscle wasting,
and distended abdomen.

Dietary and endogenous proteins secreted into the bowel are usually
completely absorbed; minimal amounts of protein from these sources
pass into the colon. The majority of stool nitrogen is derived from gut
bacterial proteins. Excessive bowel protein loss usually manifests as

Table 385.3  Disorders Leading to Early-­Onset Diarrhea
GENE(S)
INVOLVED

CATEGORY

DISORDER

Defects in
epithelial
nutrient and
electrolyte
transport

Congenital chloride
diarrhea

SLC26A3

INHERITANCE
AR

• High chloride in stools
• Founder effect from Saudi Arabia (Taif region) and
Finland
• Premature with IUGR
• Absence of meconium
• Polyhydramnios and dilated loops of bowel on
prenatal imaging, abdominal distension after birth
• 24% had renal involvement (chronic kidney disease)
• Dental carries
• Some overlap with Bartter and Gitelman syndrome

FEATURES

Congenital sodium
diarrhea

SLC9A3
GUCY2C

AR
AD

• Increased risk of development of IBD
• Polyhydramnios and dilated loops of bowel on
prenatal imaging
• High sodium in stools
• Diarrhea may improve with time

Glucose-­galactose
malabsorption

SLC5A1

AR

• Treatment requires avoidance of all sugars other
than fructose

Primary bile acid
diarrhea

SLC10A2
SLC51B

AR
AR

• Associated with cholestasis, increased
gamma-­glutamyl transferase level, and
fat-­soluble vitamin deficiency

Acrodermatitis
enteropathica

SLC39A4

AR

• Perioral and extremity lesions, alopecia, and
diarrhea
• Recurrent infection from immune dysfunction

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 385 u Disorders of Malabsorption 2335
Table 385.3  Disorders Leading to Early-­Onset Diarrhea—cont’d
GENE(S)
INVOLVED

CATEGORY

DISORDER

Defects in
epithelial
enzymes and
metabolism

Congenital lactase
deficiency

LCT

AR

• Rare form of inherited diarrhea

Congenital sucrase-­
isomaltase deficiency

SI

AR

• Bloating, diarrhea, and rarely associated with failure
to thrive
• High prevalence in Greenland and Inuit (5%), with
0.2% prevalence in Europeans
• Variable phenotype

Trehalase deficiency

TREH

AR

• Up to 8% of Greenland population
• Similar to lactase deficiency

Enterokinase deficiency

TMPRSS15

AR

• Deficiency of activator of pancreatic enzymes

DGAT1 deficiency

DGAT1

AR

• Fat-­soluble vitamin deficiency
• Avoidance of enteral lipids seems to help

Sieving protein-­losing
enteropathy

PLVAP

AR

• Protein loss of specific sizes
• Syndromic with hydrops, dysmorphic facies, cardiac
and renal abnormalities

Abetalipoproteinemia

MTTP

AR

Hypobetalipoproteinemia

APOB

AR

Chylomicron retention
disease

SAR1B

AR

• Enterocytes show lipid-­filled vacuoles
• Steatorrhea and failure to thrive
• Later noted to have fat-­soluble vitamin deficiency
and bleeding issues

Dyskeratosis congenita

DKC1
RTEL1

X
AR

• Nail pitting, leukoplakia, and immune defects

Kabuki syndrome

KMT2D

AD

• Multiple congenital anomalies with varying
phenotype

Microvillus inclusion
disease

MYO5B

AR

• Microvilli seen on electron microscopy are periodic
acid–Schiff positive
• May be associated with Fanconi syndrome

STX3

AR

• Rare form; may be associated with neurologic
findings

Tufting enteropathy

EPCAM

AR

• Teardrop-­shaped tufts of enterocytes throughout
the intestine

Syndromic sodium-­losing
diarrhea

SPINT2

AR

• Phenotype similar to tufting enteropathy, but with
sodium-­losing diarrhea

Trichohepatoenteric
syndrome

TTC37

AR

SKIV2L

AR

• Woolly hair, SCID-­like phenotype and hepatic
defects

Familial hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis
type 5

STXBP2

AR

• Recurrence after HSCT, villous blunting

Multiple intestinal atresia

TTC7A

AR

• Variable phenotype with multiple intestinal atresia,
SCID-­like phenotype, and enterocolitis

Enteric anendocrinosis

NEUROG3

AR

• Severe malabsorptive diarrhea, neonatal-­onset
diabetes mellitus, and normal intestinal biopsies

Proprotein convertase 1/3
deficiency

PCSK1

AR

• Age-­dependent phenotype. Infants have TPN-­
dependent diarrhea and failure to thrive; later
appear to lose intestinal phenotype and develop
multiple endocrine abnormalities

X-­linked lissencephaly
with abnormal genitalia

ARX

X

• Seizures, abnormal genitalia, survival between 6
days and 6 yr

Mitchell-­Riley syndrome

RFX6

AR

• Lack of enteroendocrine cells

Intractable congenital
diarrhea in infants

ICR

AR

• Secretory diarrhea caused by a noncoding variant
with wide-­ranging effects on multiple intestinal
genes

Defects in
epithelial
trafficking and
polarity

Enteroendocrine
cell dysfunction

INHERITANCE

FEATURES

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2336 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 385.3  Disorders Leading to Early-­Onset Diarrhea—cont’d
CATEGORY
Immune
dysregulation–
associated
enteropathy

GENE(S)
INVOLVED

INHERITANCE

Immune dysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy,
enteropathy X-­linked

FOXP3

X

• Polyendocrinopathy

Common variable immune
deficiency (CVID) type 1

ICOS

AR

• Variable presentation; may have dietary-­induced
diarrhea

CVID type 8

LRBA

AR

ADAM17 deficiency

ADAM17

AR

• Fatal in most patients

EGFR deficiency

EGFR

AR

• Described in three patients

CTLA-­4

CTLA-­4

AD

• Similar to LRBA; may respond to abatacept

CD55 deficiency

CD55

AR

• Protein-­losing enteropathy and thrombosis

X-­linked inhibitor of
apoptosis

XIAP

X

• Responsive to HSCT

DISORDER

FEATURES

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; HSCT, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IUGR
intrauterine growth restriction; SCID, severe combined immunodeficiency; TPN, total parenteral nutrition; X, X-­linked.
From Elkadri AA. Congenital diarrheal syndrome. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:87–104. Table 2.

hypoalbuminemia. Because the most common cause of hypoalbuminemia in children is a renal disorder, urinary protein excretion must be
determined. Other potential causes of hypoalbuminemia include acute
infection, liver disease (reduced production), and inadequate protein
intake. Very rarely hypoalbuminemia can result from an extensive
skin disorder (burns) causing protein loss via the skin. Measurement
of stool α1-­antitrypsin is a useful screening test for PLE. This serum
protein has a molecular weight similar to albumin; however, unlike
albumin it is resistant to digestion in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.
Excessive α1-­antitrypsin excretion in the stool should prompt further
investigations to identify the specific cause of intestinal or stomach
(Ménétrier disease) protein loss (Table 385.4).

Other tests for pancreatic insufficiency (nitroblue tetrazolium–para-­
aminobenzoic acid test and pancreolauryl test) measure urine or breath
concentrations of substances released and absorbed across the mucosal
surface following pancreatic digestion. These tests lack specificity and
are rarely used in clinical practice.
The gold standard test for exocrine pancreatic function is direct
analysis of duodenal aspirate for volume, bicarbonate, trypsin, and
lipase upon secretin and pancreozymin/cholecystokinin stimulation.
This involves duodenal intubation (see Chapter 396) and is technically
difficult.

INVESTIGATIONS FOR EXOCRINE PANCREATIC
FUNCTION

Establishing a specific diagnosis for malabsorption often requires histologic examination of small bowel mucosal biopsies. These are obtained
during endoscopy, allowing multiple biopsies to be performed. Mucosal involvement can often be patchy, especially in milder forms of celiac
disease or Crohn disease. Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining of mucosal biopsies collected in formalin and electron microscopy biopsies collected in fixatives such as glutaraldehyde are necessary in congenital
diarrhea to assess cellular ultrastructure and diagnose disorders such
as congenital microvillus inclusion disease. Bowel mucosal lesions can
also be segmental in cases of intestinal lymphangiectasia. In these situations, radiographic small bowel series, repeated ultrasonographies,
lymphoscintigraphy, and/or MRI lymphangiography can identify a
region of thickened bowel responsible for protein loss. Intestinal biopsies can also detect infectious agents such as Giardia lamblia. During
endoscopy, mucosal biopsies can be obtained to measure mucosal
disaccharidase activities. Duodenal aspirates can be performed to measure pancreatic enzyme concentration as well as quantitative bacterial
cultures.

Cystic fibrosis (see Chapter 454) is the most common cause of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in children; therefore a sweat chloride
test must be performed before embarking on invasive tests to investigate possible exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (Fig. 385.2). Many cases
of cystic fibrosis are detected by neonatal genetic screening programs;
occasional rare pathogenic variants are undetected. Other etiologies
are noted in Table 385.5.
Fecal elastase-­1 estimation is a sensitive test to assess exocrine pancreatic function in chronic cystic fibrosis and pancreatitis. Elastase-­1
is a stable endoprotease unaffected by exogenous pancreatic enzymes.
One disadvantage of the fecal elastase-­1 test is the lack of full differentiation between primary exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and exocrine pancreatic dysfunction secondary to intestinal villous atrophy.
The proximal small bowel is the site for pancreozymin/cholecystokinin
production; the latter is the hormone that stimulates enzyme secretion
from the exocrine pancreas. Mucosal atrophy can lead to diminished
pancreozymin/cholecystokinin secretion and subsequently to exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency. Fecal elastase-­1 can also give a false-­positive
result during acute episodes of diarrhea.
Serum trypsinogen concentration can also be used as a screening
test for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. In cystic fibrosis, the levels are
greatly elevated early in life, and then they gradually fall, so that by 5-­7
years of age, most patients with cystic fibrosis with pancreatic insufficiency have subnormal levels. Patients with cystic fibrosis and adequate
exocrine pancreatic function tend to have normal or elevated levels.
In such patients, observing the trend in serial serum trypsinogen estimation may be useful in monitoring exocrine pancreatic function. In
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome, another condition associated with
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, the serum trypsinogen level is low.

INVESTIGATIONS FOR INTESTINAL MUCOSAL
DISORDERS

IMAGING PROCEDURES

Plain radiographs and barium contrast studies might suggest a site and
cause of intestinal motility disorders. Although flocculations of barium
and dilated bowel with thickened mucosal folds have been attributed
to diffuse malabsorptive lesions such as celiac disease, these abnormalities are nonspecific. Diffuse fluid-­filled bowel loops during sonography
also suggest malabsorption. MRI enterography, though technically difficult in younger children due to the prolonged image acquisition time,
provides information about small bowel inflammation and the extent
of involvement.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 385 u Disorders of Malabsorption 2337
Table 385.4  Etiology of Protein-­Losing Enteropathy
CATEGORIES

AGENT, DISEASES (GENE)

Gastrointestinal infections

CMV, rotavirus, HIV enteropathy
Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, Clostridium difficile, Helicobacter pylori
Whipple disease
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth
Giardiasis
Strongyloides stercoralis
Tuberculosis

Gastrointestinal inflammatory disorders

Ménétrier disease
Eosinophilic gastroenteropathy
Food (milk, others)-­induced enteropathy
Celiac disease
Crohn disease
Ulcerative colitis
Tropical sprue
Radiation enteritis
GVHD
NEC
Malrotation/volvulus
Lymphoproliferative disorder (posttransplant)

Malignancies

Adenocarcinomas
Lymphomas
Kaposi sarcoma
Neuroblastoma
Langerhan cell histiocytosis

Vasculitic disorders

IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Systemic lupus erythematosus

Drugs

NSAID-­induced enteropathy

Metabolic/genetic

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG)
Variants in DGAT1 gene
Variants in CD55
Congenital enterocyte heparan sulfate deficiency (ALG6)
PVLAP -­associated diarrhea
Infantile systemic hyalinosis (ANTRX2)
Familial polyposis (SMAD4)

Intestinal lymphangiectasia

Congenital/primary IL
Syndromal/genetic/metabolic

Turner, Noonan, Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber
Hennekam (CCBE1, FAT4) syndromes
PLE with skeletal dysplasia (FGFR3)
Generalized lymphatic dysplasia (PIEZO1)

Secondary
Inflammation

Sarcoidosis

Radiotherapy

Retroperitoneal fibrosis

Neoplastic disorders

Retroperitoneal malignancies, lymphoma

Cardiac disorders

Constrictive pericarditis, after Fontan operation, CHF

Other

Budd-­Chiari syndrome, lymphatic-­enteric fistula

CHF, Congestive heart failure; CMV, cytomegalovirus; GVHD, graft-­versus-­host disease; IL, intestinal lymphangiectasia; NEC, necrotizing enterocolitis, NSAID, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug; PLE, protein-­losing enteropathy.
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 12.10, p. 221.

385.2 Other Malabsorptive Syndromes
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri

DEFECTS OF ENTEROCYTE DIFFERENTIATION AND
POLARIZATION

This group mainly includes two conditions characterized by typical
histologic and ultrastructural lesions in the intestinal biopsies, microvillus inclusion disease (MVID) and congenital tufting enteropathy
(CTE). Tricho-­hepato-­enteric syndrome (THE) or syndromic/phenotypic diarrhea is also usually classified in this group.

MICROVILLUS INCLUSION DISEASE (CONGENITAL
MICROVILLUS ATROPHY)

MVID is an autosomal recessive disorder that manifests at birth with
profuse watery secretory diarrhea. A late-­onset variant, with onset 2-­3

months postnatally, has also been described. It is the most severe cause
of congenital diarrhea involving the development of the intestinal
mucosa. Light microscopy of the small bowel mucosa demonstrates
diffuse thinning of the mucosa, with hypoplastic villous atrophy and
no inflammatory infiltrate. If MVID is suspected, electron microscopy
should be performed as it shows enterocytes with electron-­dense secretory granules as well as vesicles containing microvilli (Fig. 385.3). Using
PAS and CD10 staining, light microscopy may show an absent or thin
brush border with PAS-­positive intracellular inclusions. Polyhydramnios is observed on prenatal sonography, and neonates usually present
with very early onset severe watery diarrhea (up to 200-­330 mL/kg/day)
causing dehydration and failure to thrive. Despite parenteral nutrition,
diarrhea continues; fluid management is difficult. Fanconi syndrome
has been described in two unrelated patients with MVID, leading to
increased renal fluid losses, aminoaciduria, renal tubular acidosis, and
resulting phosphaturia with hypophosphatemic rickets. Disease causing variations of the MYO5B gene coding for a nonconventional motor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2338 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Suspicion of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
Perform fecal elastase-1 test*

Fecal elastase-1 concentration abnormal?†
No

Yes

Reanalyze the suspicion
Immediate answer needed?
No

Long-term observation
(fecal elastase-1 annually
or when needed)

Exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency highly probable‡
(E1 100 g/g normal pancreatic
function unlikely, usually
steatorrhea present)

Yes

Refer to specialized
GI center
(direct test possible)

Assess the need
for enzyme
supplementation

Fig. 385.2 Algorithm for assessment of exocrine pancreatic function. *If not available, use another test. Perform
appropriate imaging studies of the pancreas. †In case of
borderline values, consider repeating the test with three
independent samples. ‡Consider differential diagnosis (especially consider mucosal villous atrophy and dilution effect of watery stool). GI, Gastrointestinal. (Modified from
Walkowiak J, Nousia-­Arvanitakis S, Henker J, et al. Indirect
pancreatic function tests in children. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2005;40:107–114.)

Table 385.5  Pancreatic Disorders Leading to Early-­Onset Chronic Diarrhea
DISEASE

GENETICS

SYMPTOMS

DIAGNOSIS

Cystic fibrosis

• AR
• Pathogenic genetic variants
involving CFTR
• More than 1,300 pathogenic
genetic variants have been
described
• Most common is pathogenic
genetic variant ΔF508

• Meconium ileus in neonate
• Megacolon
• Chronic diarrhea from pancreatic
insufficiency starting from 1 mo
of age
• Failure to thrive
• Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia

• Low stool elastase
• High sweat chloride (>60
mEq/L)
• Newborn screening
• Molecular genetic testing

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome

• AR
• SBDS gene in over 90%

• Chronic diarrhea from pancreatic
insufficiency
• Bone marrow failure
• Skeletal changes
• Pancreatic lipomatosis on
diagnostic imaging (ultrasound
or computed tomography)

• Clinical features
• Molecular genetic testing

Johanson-­Blizzard syndrome

• AR
• UBRI gene

• Chronic diarrhea from pancreatic
insufficiency
• Dysmorphic features: aplastic
alae nasi, extension of the
hairline to the forehead with
upswept frontal hair, low-­set
ears, large anterior fontanel,
micrognathia, thin lips,
microcephaly, aplasia cutis
(patchy distribution of hair
with areas of alopecia), dental
anomalies, poor growth, and
anorectal anomalies (mainly
imperforate anus)

• Clinical features
• Molecular genetic testing

Pearson syndrome

Sporadic: caused by de novo
single, large deletions of
mtDNA, which can range from
1,000 to 10,000 nucleotides

• Chronic diarrhea from
pancreatic insufficiency
• Sideroblastic anemia,
variable neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia, and
vacuolization of bone marrow
precursors
• Lactic acidosis and liver failure

• Clinical features
• Molecular genetic testing

AR, Autosomal recessive; CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA.
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 14.12, p. 253.

protein, myosin Vb, results in MVID as is described in a cohort of
patients suffering from early-­onset MVID.
MYO5B disease causing variants result in mislocalization of apical
proteins and disrupted enterocyte polarization, leading to the visualized inclusions in MVID. Another gene, the t-­SNARE syntaxin3 (STX3),
has been described in patients with a milder form of MVID. Patients
with pathologic variants in the STX3 binding protein STXBP2/Munc18­2, causing familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 5, also

demonstrates microvillous atrophy and histologic findings reminiscent
of MVID. Loss of STX3 or Munc18-­2 inhibits the fusion of vesicles with
the apical membrane, resulting in the intracellular retention of apical
proteins. MYO5B disease causal variants have also been identified in several patients with progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC)-­
like phenotype with normal serum gamma-­glutamyl transferase activity
and without intestinal disease. Variants in MYO5B have been identified
in children of Navajo descent presenting with severe infantile diarrhea.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 385 u Disorders of Malabsorption 2339
MI
a

L
b
c

A

B

C

Fig. 385.3 Microvillus inclusion disease. A, From top to bottom: microvillus inclusion (a), a granule with few microvilli (b), and a lysosome (c) de-

tected in the same enterocyte. Inset: Higher magnification of b and c ×11,000, inset ×21,500. B, Microvillus inclusion disease. Periodic acid–Schiff
(PAS) staining highlights abundant PAS-­positive material (arrows) in the apical part of the enterocyte cytoplasm. C, Microvillus inclusion disease.
The villous enterocytes lack brush border microvilli, whereas their apical cytoplasm contains a microvillus inclusion (MI) and numerous lysosomes (L)
×5,500. (A from Morroni M, Cangiotti AM, Guarino A, et al. Unusual ultrastructural features in microvillous inclusion disease: a report of two cases.
Virchows Arch. 2006;448:805–810.)

Management includes parenteral nutrition and, depending upon the
severity of the diarrhea, intestinal transplantation (see Chapter 386).

TUFTING ENTEROPATHY (CONGENITAL TUFTING
ENTEROPATHY)

CTE (intestinal epithelial dysplasia) manifests in the first few weeks
of life with persistent watery diarrhea; it accounts for a small fraction
of infants with intractable diarrhea of infancy. The distinctive feature
on small intestinal mucosal biopsy is focal epithelial tufts (teardrop-­
shaped groups of closely packed enterocytes with apical rounding of
the plasma membrane) involving 80–90% of the epithelial surface. The
typical pathology does not appear immediately after birth; other enteropathies may show tufts on the epithelial surface.
CTE is a phenotypic and genetic heterogenous condition. Genetic
studies identified causal variants in the epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EPCAM) gene in 73% of patients and causal variants in the serine protease inhibitor Kunitz type 2/hepatocyte growth factor activator
inhibitor type 2 SPINT2/HAI2 gene in 21%. A minority of patients do
not carry any identifiable variants in either gene. The phenotype associated with pathologic variants of EPCAM is usually an isolated congenital diarrhea without associated extra digestive symptoms, except
late-­onset arthritis or superficial punctuate keratitis. In the syndromic
form of CTE, diarrhea is associated with one or more of these same
anomalies: superficial punctate keratitis (100%), choanal atresia (50%),
esophageal or intestinal atresia, anal imperforation, hair dysplasia, skin
hyperlaxity, bone abnormalities, hexadactylia, and facial dysmorphism.
No specific treatment exists, and as for MVID, management requires
permanent parenteral nutrition with possible intestinal transplantation
(see Chapter 386).

TRICHO-­HEPATO-­ENTERIC SYNDROME
(SYNDROMIC DIARRHEA)

THE, also known as syndromic diarrhea (SD), is a congenital enteropathy
manifesting with early onset of severe diarrhea. Patients are born small for
gestational age and present with diarrhea starting in the first 6 months of
life. They are noted to have facial dysmorphism with a prominent forehead, broad nose, and hypertelorism. Their hair is noted to have a poor
pigmentation, with hair follicles showing trichorrhexis nodosa, a distinctly woolly, fragile, and uncombable presentation. Abnormal cutaneous lesions including café-­au-­lait on the lower limbs have been observed.
Liver disease affects about half of the patients, with extensive fibrosis or
cirrhosis observed. Cardiac abnormalities and colitis have been reported
sporadically, as well as one case involving polyhydramnios, placental
abnormalities, and congenital hemochromatosis. The immune phenotype
is characterized by defective antibody responses to vaccination, with some
patients with hypogammaglobulinemia that improves over time. Antigen-­
specific skin tests are defective despite positive proliferative responses
in vitro. Patients with THE can also present as very early onset inflammatory bowel disease (VEO-­IBD; see Chapter 382.3) with involvement of any

portion of the GI tract. Small bowel biopsies show nonspecific villous atrophy with or without mononuclear cell infiltration of the lamina propria,
and without specific histologic abnormalities involving the epithelium.
Causal variants in either tetratricopeptide repeat domain 37 (TTC37) gene
(60%) or SKIV2L (40%) have been identified as a cause of THE syndrome.
Enterocytes with TTC37 variants show reduced expression of brush border–associated NHE-­2 and -­3, aquaporin-­7, the Na+/I-­symporter, and the
H+/K+-­ATPase or mislocalization relative to their normal pattern. Prognosis of this type of intractable diarrhea of infancy is noted to be poor. The
long-­term follow-­up of these children reported that at 15 years about 50%
of patients were alive or have been weaned off PN. The main complications
are liver disease and infections. Most of the children achieve short final
stature, and half are slightly developmentally delayed.

DEFECTS IN ENTEROENDOCRINE CELLS
DIFFERENTIATION

This class of congenital diarrhea is characterized by abnormal enteroendocrine cell development, function, or complete absence. The genes
causing these disorders encode either transcription factors essential for
the development of all or a subset of enteroendocrine cells, or cellular
proteins/endopeptidases that are required for the production of active
hormones from prohormones. These conditions manifest with osmotic
diarrhea and may be associated with additional systemic endocrine
disorders. The treatment is nutritional support and hormonal replacement if needed. Defects in four genes have been associated with the
diseases classified in this group: NEUROG3, RFX6, ARX, and PCSK1.

ENTERIC ANENDOCRINOSIS

NEUROG3 is a key transcription factor that controls the fate of endocrine cells in both the pancreas and intestine. Variants of the NEUROG3
gene produce generalized mucosal malabsorption, vomiting, diarrhea,
failure to thrive, dehydration, and a hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Oral alimentation with anything other than water produces diarrhea. Villus-­crypt architecture in small bowel biopsies is normal, but
staining for neuroendocrine cells using immunohistochemistry staining for chromogranin A demonstrates a complete absence of this secretory cell lineage with the preservation of goblet cells and Paneth cells.

PROPROTEIN CONVERTASE 1/3 DEFICIENCY

Autosomal recessive proprotein convertase 1/3 (PC1/3) deficiency,
caused by variants in the PCSK1 gene, is characterized by severe
congenital malabsorptive diarrhea requiring parenteral nutrition,
childhood-­
onset obesity, and other endocrine abnormalities. All
functional hormones produced by endocrine cells, including those
in the gut, are processed by a specific Ca2+-­dependent serine endoprotease named proprotein convertase 1/3 (also known as neuroendocrine convertase 1). Chronic watery, neonatal-­
onset diarrhea is
described in infants with hyperinsulinism, hypoglycemia, hypogonadism, and hypoadrenalism. A small bowel biopsy reveals a nonspecific

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2340 Part XVI u The Digestive System
enteropathy. Growth hormone deficiency, adrenal insufficiency, central
diabetes insipidus, and hypogonadism are commonly observed.

immunosuppressive drugs. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is
indicated in patients with a known molecular defect.

MITCHELL-­RILEY SYNDROME

AUTOIMMUNE POLYGLANDULAR SYNDROME
TYPE 1

Mitchell-­Riley syndrome is a complex clinical phenotype that includes
severe intrauterine growth restriction, neonatal diabetes, multiple GI
anomalies including duodenal atresia, intestinal malrotation, gallbladder agenesis, abnormal biliary tract, and an annular pancreas.
They also have chronic osmotic diarrhea. Several probands previously
reported with Mitchell-­Riley syndrome were found to carry pathologic
variants in RFX6. DNA-­binding protein RFX6 (regulatory factor X6;
encoded by RFX6) is a winged helix transcription factor downstream of
the neurogenin-­3 signal required for islet cell development and enteroendocrine cell function. Immunofluorescence staining in RFX6 knockout mice shows that pancreatic endocrine cells are present, but do not
express the islet cell hormones including insulin, glucagon, somatostatin, and ghrelin.

ARISTALESS-­RELATED HOMEOBOX GENE
VARIANTS

Aristaless-­related homeobox (ARX) gene encodes a homeodomain containing a transcription factor required for the normal development of
mouse and human enteroendocrine cells. ARX expression is detected in a
subset of neurogenin-­3-­positive endocrine progenitors and is also found
in a subset of hormone-­producing cells. In mice, removal of Arx from
the developing endoderm results in a decrease of some enteroendocrine
cell types, such as gastrin, glucagon/GLP-­1, CCK, secretin secreting cells,
and an increase of somatostatin-­expressing cells. Disease causal variants
in the ARX gene are associated with a complex X-­linked disorder with a
clinical phenotype of intellectual disability, seizures, lissencephaly, loss of
pancreatic alpha cells, abnormal genitalia, and in approximately half of
the patients, congenital malabsorptive diarrhea.

AUTOIMMUNE ENTEROPATHY

The term autoimmune enteropathy describes a subgroup of infants
with severe, protracted diarrhea, no response to dietary restriction, the
presence of circulating gut autoantibodies and/or associated autoimmune diseases, and the lack of another cause of severe immunodeficiency. Symptoms of autoimmune enteropathy usually occur within
the first 6 months of life, presenting with chronic diarrhea, PLE, malabsorption, and failure to thrive. The diagnosis is based on the endoscopic and histologic identification of inflammation of the GI tract,
more pronounced in the small bowel. Histologic findings in the small
bowel include partial or complete villous atrophy, crypt hyperplasia,
and an increase in chronic inflammatory cells in the lamina propria.
Marked intraepithelial lymphocytosis reminiscent of celiac disease can
be present in a subset of patients. Cryptitis and crypt abscesses can also
be seen and may obscure the presence of apoptosis. Immunologic analyses indicate the presence of autoantibodies including anti–enterocyte
antibodies (present in ∼85% of patients), as well as anti–autoimmune
enteropathy-­related 75-­kDa antigen.
Genetic testing in patients with autoimmune enteropathy identified
that the majority of patients with autoimmune enteropathy carried
disease causal variants in the forkhead box P3 (FOXP3) gene on the
X chromosome. The term immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-­linked syndrome (IPEX) is used to describe these
patients. Patients not found to have a causal variant in FOXP3 had what
were termed IPEX-­like disorders and were found to have a variable
phenotype and presented in females as well. Disease causing variants
within other genes include interleukin-­2 receptor A (IL2RA), LPS
responsive beige-­like anchor protein (LRBA), cytotoxic T-­lymphocyte
associated protein 4 (CTLA-­4), and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 and 3 (STAT1 and STAT3), along with others.
The differential diagnosis of pediatric autoimmune enteropathy
includes other immune-­mediated disorders, such as food sensitivity
enteropathies (e.g., cow’s milk protein intolerance and celiac disease),
severe Crohn disease, and graft-­versus-­host disease.
Treatment options are limited and are based on nutritional support, including parenteral nutrition and glucocorticoids followed by

See Chapter 165.

Defects in Lipids Transport and Metabolism

See Chapter 106.3.
After uptake from the lumen, fatty acids and monoacylglycerol are
transported to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In the ER they are
converted to triglycerides in several metabolic steps, the last of which
is dependent on acyl CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1).
Apolipoprotein B (ApoB) and microsomal triglycerides transfer protein
(MTTP) act in concert to incorporate triglycerides into chylomicrons.
The newly formed chylomicrons bud from the ER in a prechylomicron
transport vesicle (PCTV), which subsequently fuses with the Golgi,
a process that is dependent on Sar1b. The chylomicron is then transported in a vesicle to the basal membrane, where it exits the cell.

ABETALIPOPROTEINEMIA

Abetalipoproteinemia (Bassen-­Kornzweig syndrome) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of lipoprotein metabolism associated with severe
fat malabsorption and steatorrhea from birth (see Chapter 106.3). Children fail to thrive during the first year of life and have stools that are pale,
foul smelling, and bulky. The abdomen is distended, and deep tendon
reflexes are absent because of peripheral neuropathy secondary to vitamin E deficiency. Intellectual development tends to be delayed. After 10
years of age, intestinal symptoms are less severe, ataxia may develop, with
loss of position and vibration sensation, and the onset of intention tremors. These latter symptoms reflect involvement of the posterior columns,
cerebellum, and basal ganglia. In adolescence, in the absence of adequate
supplement of vitamin E, atypical retinitis pigmentosa develops.
The diagnosis is suggested by the presence of acanthocytes in the
peripheral blood smear and extremely low plasma levels of cholesterol
(<50 mg/dL); triglycerides are also very low (<20 mg/dL). Chylomicrons and very low density lipoproteins are not detectable, and the
low-­density lipoprotein (LDL) fraction is virtually absent from the
circulation. Marked triglyceride accumulation in villous enterocytes
occurs in the duodenal mucosa. Patients with abetalipoproteinemia
have pathogenic variants of the MTTP gene. MTTP catalyzes the transfer of triglycerides to nascent ApoB particles in the ER.
Specific treatment is not available. Nutritional support and large
supplements of the fat-­soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K should be given.
High doses of vitamin E (100-­300 mg/kg/24 hr) appears to arrest neurologic and retinal degeneration, with some children requiring higher
doses based on serum levels. Limiting long-­chain fat intake can alleviate intestinal symptoms; medium-­chain triglycerides (MCTs) can be
used to supplement fat intake.

HOMOZYGOUS HYPOBETALIPOPROTEINEMIA

Homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia (see Chapter 106.3) is a dominantly inherited condition associated with pathogenic variants in the
APOB gene, encoding ApoB, the apolipoprotein of the nascent chylomicron. The homozygous form is indistinguishable from abetalipoproteinemia. The parents of these patients, as heterozygotes, have reduced
plasma LDL and ApoB concentrations, whereas the parents of patients
with abetalipoproteinemia have normal levels. On transmission electron microscopy of small bowel biopsies, the size of lipid vacuoles in
enterocytes differentiates between abetalipoproteinemia and hypobetalipoproteinemia: many small vacuoles are present in hypobetalipoproteinemia, and larger vacuoles are seen in abetalipoproteinemia.

CHYLOMICRON RETENTION DISEASE (ANDERSON
DISEASE)

Chylomicron retention disease (CRD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the SAR1B gene. SAR1B variants result in defective trafficking of nascent chylomicrons in PCTVs
between the ER and the Golgi apparatus, interfering with the successful

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 385 u Disorders of Malabsorption 2341
assembly of chylomicrons and their delivery to the lamina propria. The
patients with CRD have steatorrhea, chronic diarrhea, and failure to
thrive. Acanthocytosis is rare, and neurologic manifestations are less
severe than those observed in abetalipoproteinemia. Plasma cholesterol levels are moderately reduced (<75 mg/dL), and fasting triglycerides are normal, but the fat-­soluble vitamins, particularly A and E,
are very low. Treatment is early aggressive therapy with fat-­soluble
vitamins and modification of dietary fat intake, as in the treatment of
abetalipoproteinemia.

DGAT1 VARIANTS

DGAT1 encodes for DGAT that converts diacylglycerides to triglycerides by adding an acyl CoA moiety. In the small intestine, DGAT1
helps to reassemble the triglycerides, whereas in the liver it produces
triglycerides from fatty acids synthesized de novo or taken up from the
circulation. The mechanism by which DGAT1 disease causal variants
causes diarrhea is unclear but is likely to involve the buildup of DGAT1
lipid substrates in the enterocytes or in the gut lumen. Pathogenic variants in DGAT1 gene have been reported in patients presenting with
failure to thrive, PLE, hypoalbuminemia, early-­onset diarrhea, and oral
vitamin D refractory rickets.

WOLMAN DISEASE

Wolman disease is a rare, lethal lipid storage disease that leads to
lipid accumulation in multiple organs, including the small intestine and liver. In addition to vomiting, severe diarrhea, and hepatosplenomegaly, patients have steatorrhea as a result of lymphatic
obstruction. Insufficient free cholesterol available for steroidogenesis in adrenal glands results in adrenal insufficiency; a characteristic pattern of subcapsular adrenal calcification represents a
distinctive marker of disease. Deficiency of lysosomal acid lipase
(LAL) is the underlying cause of disease (see Chapter 106.4). LAL is
a lysosomal enzyme that hydrolyzes cholesteryl esters and triglycerides within endolysosomes. Loss-­of-­function variants in the LIPA
gene are associated with variable phenotypes. Homozygous and
compound heterozygous pathogenic variations, resulting in complete LAL deficiency, cause Wolman disease. Variants associated
with residual LAL activity cause cholesteryl ester storage disease,
an attenuated form of Wolman disease exhibiting a variable phenotype. Common features in infants, children, and adults include
elevated serum aminotransferase levels, dyslipidemia, hepatomegaly, liver fibrosis, and cirrhosis. Wolman disease may also present
with neonatal cholestasis and severe liver disease as its main feature
already in infancy. Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis has been
reported in few infants with Wolman disease. The hallmark of the
disease is the presence of adrenal calcification seen on imaging, and
definite diagnosis is done genetically.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has been reported in few
patients with variable outcome. A recombinant human enzyme-­
replacement therapy for LAL deficiency is approved for use in patients
suffering from LAL deficiency. This treatment has allowed a small
number of infants with Wolman disease to achieve a relatively normal growth rate and to improve survival. In older children and adults,
the enzyme has corrected their dyslipidemia and produced significant
improvement in markers of hepatic function.

TANGIER DISEASE

See Chapter 106.
Cellular free cholesterol is mobilized, along with phospholipid,
through the export pump ABCA1, resulting in the transfer to an
extracellular ApoA-­I acceptor and the formation of discoidal high-­
density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Loss-­of-­function variants in
ABCA1genes in patients with Tangier disease cause cholesterol accumulation in the intestine, spleen, tonsils, relapsing neuropathy, orange-­
brown spots on the colon and ileum, and diarrhea in association with
decreased plasma cholesterol levels (ApoA-­I and A-­II), with virtually
no detectable plasma HDL. Heterozygosity of ABCA1 variants leads to
low HDL levels (below the 10th percentile). Specific therapy for Tangier disease has not yet been established.

SITOSTEROLEMIA

See Chapter 106.4.
Sitosterol and other sterols are preferentially secreted back into the
intestinal lumen through the sterol pump, paired half-­transporters
ABCG5/G8. Pathogenic variants of the ABCG5 (sterolin-­
1) and
ABCG8 (sterolin-­2) transporters result in the defective efflux of sterol
and leads to the increased absorption of dietary sterols. The disorder
is associated with tendon xanthomas, increased atherosclerosis, and
hemolytic anemia. Plasma levels of phytosterols (mainly sitosterol) are
typically >10 mg/dL.

BILE ACID MALABSORPTION

Bile acids (BAs) are detergent compounds secreted by and excreted
from the liver, and are responsible for the solubilization of the dietary
lipids, aiding in their digestion and absorption. Approximately 95% of
BAs are reabsorbed in the terminal ileum and transported back to the
liver, the enterohepatic circulation. The apical Na+-­dependent bile salt
transporter (ASBT) or ileal BA transporter (IBAT) is responsible for
the active reuptake of BAs in the terminal ileum. Pathogenic variants in
the ASBT/SLC10A2 gene are very rare and are responsible for primary
BA malabsorption, a disease associated with congenital diarrhea, steatorrhea, and reduced plasma cholesterol levels. Unabsorbed BAs stimulate chloride excretion in the colon, resulting in diarrhea. Secondary BA
malabsorption can result from ileal disease, such as in Crohn disease,
and following ileal resection. The diagnosis of BA malabsorption is
typically based on reduced BA retention of radiolabeled 75selenium-­
homocholic acid taurine (75SeHCAT), increased BA synthesis (serum
C4), or increased fecal BA loss (measured by serum FGF-­19 levels). In
clinical practice, diagnosis is often based on the response to BA sequestrants (e.g., cholestyramine or colesevelam), which are also the treatment of choice for this disorder.
Chronic neonatal-­onset diarrhea has also been described in autosomal recessive cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, which is caused by
pathogenic variants in CYP27A1 and results in an inborn error of BA
synthesis due to 27-­hydroxylase deficiency. These children also present with juvenile-­onset cataracts and developmental delay. Neonatal
cholestasis has also been described as a presenting feature. Tendon
xanthomas develop in the second and third decades of life. The diagnosis is important to establish at a younger age, as treatment with oral
chenodeoxycholic acid is effective at preventing irreversible neurologic
damage.

PROTEIN-­LOSING ENTEROPATHY

PLE is a rare entity caused by a variety of intestinal and extraintestinal disorders and characterized by excessive enteric loss of plasma
proteins. The clinical presentation of patients with PLE is variable and
depends upon the underlying cause, but generally includes edema and
hypoproteinemia. Impaired synthesis (malnutrition, liver disease),
protein loss through other organs (kidney or skin), or redistribution
(septic states) must be excluded before considering PLE. The disorders causing PLE can be divided into those due to protein loss from an
inflamed or abnormal mucosal surface or from derangements in intestinal lymphatics, such as in primary or secondary IL (see Table 385.4).
Intestinal lymphangectasia is characterized by diffuse or local dilatation of the enteric lymphatics and is located in the mucosa, submucosa, or subserosa. Lymph rich in proteins, lipids, and lymphocytes
leaks into the bowel lumen, resulting in PLE, steatorrhea, and lymphocyte depletion. Hypoalbuminemia, hypogammaglobulinemia, edema,
lymphopenia, malabsorption of fat and fat-­
soluble vitamins, and
chylous ascites often occur. IL can also manifest with ascites, peripheral edema, and a low serum albumin. The etiology of primary IL is
unknown. Several genes, including vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor 3 (VEGFR3), prospero-­related homeobox-­transcriptional factor (PROX1), forkhead transcriptional factor (FOXC2), and SRY (sex
determining region Y)-­box 18 (SOX18), are involved in the development of the lymphatic system and have been shown to have altered
expression in the duodenal mucosa in patients with IL. A pathogenic
variant in CD55, a regulator of complement activation, has also been
described as a cause for primary PLE. The diagnosis of PLE is suggested

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2342 Part XVI u The Digestive System
by the typical clinical and laboratory findings in association with an
elevated fecal α1-­antitrypsin clearance. Radiologic findings of uniform,
symmetric thickening of mucosal folds throughout the small intestine are characteristic but nonspecific. Small bowel mucosal biopsy in
patients with IL can show dilated lacteals with distortion of villi and
no inflammatory infiltrate. A patchy distribution and deeper mucosal
involvement on occasion causes false-­negative results on small bowel
histology. Video capsule endoscopy may reveal similar lesions (Figs.
385.4 and 385.5). Magnetic resonance lymphangiography may identify
lymphatic abnormalities (Fig. 385.6).
Treatment of PLE is generally supportive and consists of a low-­
fat, high-­protein diet. In patients with IL, a low-­fat, high-­protein diet
supplemented with MCTs is recommended. Along with dietary adjustments, appropriate treatment for the underlying etiology is necessary,
as well as supportive care to avoid complications of edema. Rarely, PN
is required. If only a portion of the intestine is involved, surgical resection may be considered. A few patients with lymphatic malformation
and generalized lymphatic anomalies were successfully treated with
propranolol. Sirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, has been used for primary
IL and is thought to decrease lymphatic sprouting and proliferation.
Everolimus use has been described in a patient with primary IL. Prognosis depends upon the severity and treatment options of the underlying disease.

is associated with a duration of an intestinal infection longer than
expected. Prolonged diarrhea is an acute-­onset diarrhea that lasts >7
days, whereas chronic diarrhea lasts >14 days, with some using 30 days
as a more definitive cutoff.

POSTINFECTIOUS DIARRHEA

Chronic diarrhea can appear following infectious enteritis, regardless
of the nature of the pathogen. The pathogenesis of the diarrhea is not
always clear and may be related to persistent infection or reinfection,
secondary lactase deficiency, food protein allergy, antibiotic-­associated
diarrhea, or a combination of these. In some cases, postinfectious diarrhea may be the initial manifestation of functional diarrhea, in which
case it is not associated with malabsorption.
Treatment of postinfectious diarrhea is supportive and may include
a lactose-­free diet in the presence of secondary lactase deficiency. Some
infants might require a semi-­elemental diet. The beneficial effect of
specific probiotic products may be indicated in selected conditions.

PROXIMAL INTESTINAL BACTERIAL OVERGROWTH

Malabsorption is a rare consequence of primary intestinal infection
and infestation in immunocompetent children but is relatively common in previously malnourished or immunocompromised children
and is associated with significant mortality. Often malabsorption is
associated with diarrhea and triggers a vicious cycle of further weight
loss and growth failure. For children living in developing countries,
malabsorption is associated with long-­term growth failure leading to
stunting within a peculiar condition defined as environmental enteropathy, in which diarrhea is not always present. Generally, malabsorption

Bacteria are normally present in large numbers in the colon (1011-­1013
colony-­forming units [CFU]/g of feces) and have a symbiotic relationship with the host, providing nutrients and protecting the host from
pathogenic organisms. Within the stomach and small bowel, bacteria are
usually present in much smaller numbers. Excessive numbers of bacteria
in the stomach or small bowel are noted to be harmful. Bacterial overgrowth can result from clinical conditions that alter the gastric pH or
small bowel motility, such as partial bowel obstruction, diverticula, intestinal failure, intestinal duplications, diabetes mellitus, idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction syndrome, and scleroderma, as well as proton
pump inhibitor use. Prematurity, immunodeficiency, and malnutrition
are other factors associated with bacterial overgrowth of the small bowel.
The diagnosis of bacterial overgrowth is often difficult and can be
made by culturing small bowel aspirate (>105 CFU/mL) or by a lactulose hydrogen breath test. Lactulose is a synthetic disaccharide not
digested by mucosal brush border enzymes but is fermented by bacteria producing hydrogen and methane. High baseline breath hydrogen
and a quick rise in hydrogen in expired breath samples support the
diagnosis of bacterial overgrowth. Some individuals (up to 30%) produce methane as a predominant by-­product of carbohydrate digestion.
False-­positive tests are common and may be due to rapid GI transit
time and colonic fermentation.

Fig. 385.4 Swollen villi detected by video capsule endoscopy in

Fig. 385.5 Protein-­rich lymphatic fluid aggregates detected by video

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

385.3 Intestinal Infections and Infestations
Associated with Malabsorption
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri

the proximal ileum. (From Gortani G, Maschio M, Ventura A. A child
with edema, lower limb deformity, and recurrent diarrhea. J Pediatr.
2012;161:1177. Fig. 1.)

capsule endoscopy in the intestinal lumen. (From Gortani G, Maschio
M, Ventura A. A child with edema, lower limb deformity, and recurrent
diarrhea. J Pediatr. 2012;161:1177. Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 385 u Disorders of Malabsorption 2343
ENVIRONMENTAL ENTEROPATHY (TROPICAL
SPRUE)

A

B
Fig. 385.6 MR lymphangiogram. A, Axial T1-­weighted fat-­saturated

MR image showing contrasted-­
filled dilated retroperitoneal tubular
channels (arrow). B, Thick maximum intensity projection of MR lymphangiogram (T1-­
weighted) image showing dilated retroperitoneal
channels with contrast refluxing into bowel wall (arrow) suggestive of
associated intestinal lymphangiectasia. (From Valakada J, Madhusudhan KS, Ranjan G, et al. Abdominal lymphangiomatosis with intestinal
lymphangiectasia diagnosed by magnetic resonance lymphangiography: a case study. Curr Prob Diag Radiol. 2018;47:200–202.)

Bacterial overgrowth leads to inefficient intraluminal processing
of dietary fat with steatorrhea due to bacterial deconjugation of bile
salts, vitamin B12 malabsorption, and microvillus brush border injury
with further malabsorption. Bacterial consumption of vitamin B12
and enhanced synthesis of folate result in decreased vitamin B12 and
increased folate serum levels. Overproduction of d-­lactate (the stereoisomer of l-­lactate) can cause stupor, neurologic dysfunction, and
shock from d-­lactic acidosis. Lactic acidosis should be suspected in
children at risk of bacterial overgrowth who show signs of neurologic
deterioration and a high anion gap metabolic acidosis not explained
by measurable acids such as l-­lactate. Measurement of d-­lactate is
required because standard lactate assay only measures the l-­isomer.
The treatment of bacterial overgrowth focuses on the correction
of underlying causes such as partial obstruction. Oral metronidazole can provide relief for many months but is not always effective.
The cycling of antibiotics, including azithromycin, trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole, ciprofloxacin, and metronidazole, may be required.
Other alternatives are oral nonabsorbable antibiotics such as aminoglycosides, nitazoxanide, or rifaximin. Occasionally, antifungal therapy is
required to control fungal overgrowth of the bowel.

In developing regions of the world, an atypical subclinical form of
enteropathy has been described termed environmental enteropathy
(tropical sprue). Theorized to be due to chronic fecal-­oral exposure,
it is thought to be the result of interactions between enteric pathogens, enteropathy, and malnutrition. There is resulting malabsorption, which may be clinically evident or subclinical, at times with
or without diarrhea. It is a frequent cause of death in childhood in
endemic regions, particularly in South Asian areas, African countries, and other developing regions. Selected pathogens including
rotavirus, Shigella, Cryptosporidium, and enterotoxigenic Escherichia
coli cause the majority of intestinal infections leading to moderate to
severe diarrhea and often triggers a vicious circle with malnutrition.
This tends to progress to wasting and stunting with or without a clear
association with diarrhea.
In addition to a high risk of death, environmental enteropathy
impairs normal growth and brain development and impacts productivity. There is evidence of oral vaccine failure, pointing to an alteration
of the intestinal mucosal immune system. The etiology of this disorder is unclear because it follows outbreaks of acute diarrheal disease
and improves with antibiotic therapy. Individuals traveling in endemic
regions have developed enteropathy similar to native residents, which
improves with return to nonendemic regions. Immigrants with malabsorptive diarrhea were shown to have improved absorption and jejunal
biopsies with increasing periods of residence in nonendemic countries. Therefore an infectious etiology within the endemic environment is suspected. Nevertheless, environmental enteropathy includes
interrelated mechanisms such as intestinal malabsorption, increased
permeability, loss of intestinal mass, inflammation, increased bacterial
translocation, and impairment of immune response. The incidence is
decreasing worldwide, largely because of an improvement in hygiene
and access to nutrients. Clinical symptoms include fever and malaise
followed by diarrhea. After about a week the acute features subside,
and anorexia, intermittent diarrhea, and chronic malabsorption result
in severe malnutrition characterized by glossitis, stomatitis, cheilosis,
night blindness, hyperpigmentation, and edema, reflecting the various
nutrient deficiencies. Muscle wasting is often marked, and the abdomen is often distended. Megaloblastic anemia results from folate and
vitamin B12 deficiencies.
Diagnosis is made by small bowel biopsy, which shows villous flattening with crypt hyperplasia and mild intestinal inflammation, with
lipid accumulation in the surface epithelium.
Treatment response with nutritional and antimicrobial interventions
may be poor, with no clear improvement in weight gain. Nutritional
supplementation, including supplementation of folate and vitamin B12
as well as glutamine, is recommended. To prevent recurrence, 6 months
of therapy with oral folic acid (5-10 mg) and antibiotics are recommended. Relapses occur in 10–20% of patients who continue to reside
in an endemic tropical region. This suggests a persistent environmental
factor causing recurrence, and that improved overall hygiene is key to
treatment and prevention. Improvements in public health infrastructure and educational interventions are the key to prevention rather than
medical interventions in individual cases.

WHIPPLE DISEASE

Whipple disease is a rare childhood chronic systemic infectious disorder. It is caused by Tropheryma whipplei, which can be cultured from a
lymph node in the involved tissue.
The most common symptoms in Whipple disease are diarrhea,
abdominal pain, weight loss, and joint pains. Malabsorption, lymphadenopathy, skin hyperpigmentation, and neurologic symptoms are
also common. Involvement of other organs, such as eyes, heart, and
kidneys, has been reported.
Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion and is made upon
demonstration of PAS-­positive macrophage inclusions in the biopsy
material, usually a duodenal biopsy. Positive identification using polymerase chain reaction for T. whipplei confirms the diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2344 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Treatment requires antibiotics, such as trimethoprim-­ 385.5 Immunoproliferative Small Intestinal
sulfamethoxazole, for 1-­2 years. A 2-­week course of intravenous ceftriDisease
axone or meropenem, followed by trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole for
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri
1 year, is recommended.

Malabsorption and diarrhea are a common presentation of patients with
underlying primary immune deficiencies. It is not surprising that more
than half of the primary immunodeficiencies present with GI manifestations because the gut is the largest lymphoid organ in the body and represents an interface between our environment, microbiome, and immune
system. Malabsorption can be due to either intestinal inflammation or
infection, with chronic diarrhea and failure to thrive one of the main modes
of presentation. Multiple defects of humoral and or cellular immunity have
been described, including selective IgA deficiency, agammaglobulinemia,
common variable immunodeficiency disease (CVID), severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID), hyper-­IgM syndrome, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, and chronic granulomatous disease. The most common primary
immunodeficiency is selective IgA deficiency, with the majority of patients
being asymptomatic. Recurrent infections with Giardia or nonspecific
enteropathy with bacterial overgrowth can occur; celiac disease is noted
to be more common in selective IgA deficiency. In CVID and X-­linked
agammaglobulinemia, lymphoid hyperplasia, villous atrophy, granulomas, and increased intraepithelial lymphocytes have been reported in up
to 60% of children these disorders, with relative paucity of plasma cells.
Pathology is reminiscent of acute graft-­versus-­host disease, with the presence of apoptotic bodies in the intestinal epithelia. Malabsorption has also
been reported in approximately 10% of patients with CVID or X-­linked
agammaglobulinemia, often secondary to noroviral infection, giardiasis,
Campylobacter, Salmonella, Cryptosporidium, enteroviruses, or cytomegalovirus (CMV) infections, and can be hard to eradicate. Cryptosporidium
is the most common pathogen causing diarrhea and malabsorption in
hyper-­IgM syndrome patients, though other infections have also been
described. SCID-­affected children develop severe diarrhea and malabsorption early in life involving viral and opportunistic infections, especially chronic rotavirus infection, CMV, and adenovirus. Malabsorption
associated with immunodeficiency is exacerbated by villous atrophy and
secondary disaccharidase deficiency. In chronic granulomatous disease,
phagocytic function is impaired and granulomas develop throughout the
GI tract, mimicking Crohn disease. In addition to failure to thrive, it is
important to consider that malabsorption associated with immunodeficiency is often complicated by micronutrient deficiencies, including vitamins A, E, and B12, and calcium, zinc, and iron.
Acquired immunodeficiencies in children are more often secondary to other conditions such as cancer and chemotherapy. Malnutrition, diarrhea, and failure to thrive are common in untreated children
with HIV infection. The risk of GI infection is related to the depression of the CD4 count. Opportunistic infections include Cryptosporidium parvum, CMV, Mycobacterium avium-­intracellulare, Isospora
belli, Enterocytozoon bieneusi, Candida albicans, astrovirus, calicivirus,
adenovirus, and the usual bacterial enteropathogens. In these patients,
Cryptosporidium can cause a chronic secretory diarrhea.
Chemotherapeutic agents can damage the bowel mucosa, leading to
secondary malabsorption of disaccharides such as lactose. After bone
marrow transplantation, mucosal damage from conditioning agents
and graft-­versus-­host disease can cause diarrhea and malabsorption.
Small bowel biopsies show nonspecific villous atrophy, mixed inflammatory cell infiltrates, and increased apoptosis. Cancer chemotherapy
and bone marrow transplantation are associated with pancreatic damage, which may lead to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.

Lymphoma (see Chapter 545) is the most common small bowel
malignancy in the pediatric age-­group. Malignant lymphomas of
the small intestine are categorized into three subtypes: Burkitt lymphoma, non-­Hodgkin lymphomas, and immunoproliferative small
intestinal disease (IPSID) (originally termed as Mediterranean
lymphoma or α-­heavy chain disease but found worldwide). Burkitt
lymphoma, the most common form in children, characteristically
involves the terminal ileum with extensive abdominal involvement. The relatively uncommon non-­Hodgkin lymphomas (usually
large B-­cell type) can involve various regions of the small intestine.
Inflammatory bowel disease and primary immunodeficiencies are
risk factors for the development of lymphoproliferative disorders of
the intestinal tract. IPSID is a rare extranodal marginal zone B-­cell
lymphoma occurring primarily in the proximal small intestine. It
is a variant of mucosa-­associated lymphoid-­tissue (MALT) lymphoma described in young adults from the developing world and
is characterized by lymphoplasmacytic intestinal infiltrates with
monotypic α-­heavy chain expression.
IPSID occurs most often in the proximal small intestine in older
children and young adults in the Mediterranean basin, Middle East,
Asia, and Africa. Poverty and frequent episodes of gastroenteritis during infancy are risk factors. The initial clinical presentation is intermittent diarrhea and abdominal pain. Later, chronic diarrhea with
malabsorption, PLE, weight loss, digital clubbing, and growth failure
ensue. Intestinal obstruction, abdominal masses, and ascites are common in advanced stages.
In contrast to primary nonimmunoproliferative small intestinal
lymphomas, in which the pathology in the intestine is usually focal,
IPSID involves specific segments of the intestine and leaves the
segments between the involved areas free of disease. The pathology in IPSID is diffuse, with a mucosal cellular infiltrate involving large segments of the intestine and sometimes the entire length
of the intestine, thus producing malabsorption. Molecular and
immunohistochemical studies demonstrated an association with
Campylobacter jejuni infection. The differential diagnosis includes
chronic enteric infections (parasites, tropical sprue), celiac disease,
and other lymphomas. Radiologic findings include multiple filling defects, ulcerations, strictures, and enlarged mesenteric lymph
nodes on CT scan.
The diagnosis is usually established by endoscopic biopsies and/
or laparotomy. Upper endoscopy shows thickening, erythema, and
nodularity of the mucosal folds in the duodenum and proximal
jejunum. Capsule endoscopy may be helpful in the diagnosis. When
the disease progresses, tumors usually appear in the proximal small
intestine and rarely in the stomach. The diagnosis requires multiple duodenal and jejunal mucosal biopsies showing dense mucosal
infiltrates, consisting of centrocyte-­like and plasma cells. Progression to higher grade large cell lymphoplasmacytic and immunoblastic lymphoma is characterized by increased plasmocytic atypia with
formation of aggregates and later sheets of dystrophic plasma cells
and immunoblasts invading the submucosa and muscularis propria.
A serum marker of IgA, a heavy-­chain paraprotein, is present in
most cases.
Treatment of early-­stage IPSID with antibiotics results in complete remission in 30–70% of cases (tetracycline, ampicillin, or metronidazole). Some patients achieve durable remission lasting several
years but should be monitored closely for relapse. The majority of
untreated IPSID cases progress to lymphoplasmacytic and immunoblastic lymphoma invading the intestinal wall and mesenteric
lymph nodes, resulting in metastasis to distant organs, and requiring aggressive treatment with surgery and/or chemotherapy.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

385.4 Immunodeficiency Disorders
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 385 u Disorders of Malabsorption 2345

385.6 Short Bowel Syndrome
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri
Short bowel (or short gut) syndrome is defined as a state of reduced
functional intestinal mass that is lower than the required amount
for the digestion and absorption of nutrients and fluids required for
normal growth and survival. It results from congenital malformations or the resection of the small bowel (Table 385.6). Its incidence
increases with low birthweight and earlier gestational age and is estimated at 7/1,000 live births in U.S. infants with birthweight <1,500
mg. Depending upon the area of the bowel resected or absent, loss of
>50% of the small bowel, with or without a portion of the large intestine, can result in symptoms of generalized malabsorptive disorder or
in specific nutrient deficiencies. At birth, the length of small bowel is
200-­250 cm; by adulthood, it grows to 300-­800 cm. Bowel resection
is better tolerated in infants with an improved prognosis relative to
adults due to the potential for intestinal growth and adaptation. An
infant with as little as 15 cm of bowel with an ileocecal valve, or 20 cm
without an ileocecal valve, has the potential to survive and be eventually weaned from PN.
In addition to the length of the bowel, the anatomic location of the
resection is also important. The proximal 100-­200 cm of jejunum is
the main site for carbohydrate, protein, iron, and water-­soluble vitamin absorption, whereas fat absorption occurs over a longer length
of the small bowel. Depending on the region of the bowel resected,
specific nutrient malabsorption can result. Vitamin B12 and bile salts
are only absorbed in the distal ileum (Fig. 385.7). Jejunal resections
are generally tolerated better than ileal resections because the ileum,
unlike the jejunum, is better able to adapt to absorb nutrients and
fluids. Net sodium and water absorption is relatively higher in the
ileum. Ileal resection has a profound effect on fluid and electrolyte
absorption due to malabsorption of sodium and water by the remaining ileum. Ileal malabsorption of bile salts stimulates increased
colonic secretion of fluid and electrolytes. The presence of a colon
in continuity is better tolerated and improves absorption and enteral
autonomy.

TREATMENT

After bowel resection, treatment of short bowel syndrome is initially
focused on repletion of the massive fluid and electrolyte losses while
the bowel initially accommodates to absorb these losses. Proton
pump inhibitors are usually added to reduce gastric secretions due
to hypersecretion of gastric acids of up to 4 L per day compared to
750 mL in healthy individuals. Nutritional support is often provided
via parenteral nutrition. A central venous catheter should be inserted
to provide optimized and durable parenteral fluid and nutrition support. The ostomy or stool output should be measured, and fluid and
electrolyte losses adequately replaced. Measurement of urinary Na+ to
assess whole body Na+ stores is useful to prevent Na+ depletion. Maintaining urinary Na+ higher than 20 mmol/L ensures that Na+ intake is
adequate. Early introduction of even a small amount of enteral feeding
by mouth or tube feeding is essential and enhances bowel adaptation.

After the initial few weeks following resection, fluid and electrolyte losses begin to stabilize, and the focus of therapy shifts to bowel
rehabilitation with a gradual increase in the volume of enteral feeds.
Continuous or bolus small-­volume enteral feeding should be promoted with an extensively or partially hydrolyzed protein with MCT-­
enriched formula if the colon is in continuity. Breast milk is preferable
over formula, and its use should be encouraged as it stimulates gut hormones and promotes mucosal growth. Enteral feeding also increases
pancreatobiliary flow and reduces parenteral nutrition-­induced hepatotoxicity. To maintain interest in oral feeds and minimize oral aversion, infants should be given a small amount of formula or mother’s
milk by mouth as early as possible. As intestinal adaptation occurs,
enteral feeding increases, and parenteral supplementation decreases.
The bowel mucosa surface area proliferates, and the bowel lengthens
with growth.
Approximately 60% of patients with short bowel syndrome achieve
enteral autonomy within 5 years of bowel resection, and the majority
do so in the first 2-­3 years after resection. In addition to bowel length,
factors increasing the likelihood of achieving enteral autonomy include
the presence of the ileocecal valve, a diagnosis of necrotizing enterocolitis, and care by an intestinal rehabilitation program.
Patients may require repeat surgeries for obstruction or bowel
lengthening procedures (longitudinal lengthening, serial transverse
enteroplasties or both) to optimize the bowel absorptive capacity.
Bowel lengthening procedures are indicated in patients with dilated
bowel who are unable to progress toward enteral autonomy or in those
with refractory small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
Vitamin and micronutrient deficiencies are common and increase
over time. The management of specific micronutrient and vitamin deficiencies and the treatment of transient problems such as postinfectious
mucosal malabsorption are required. GI infections or small bowel bacterial overgrowth can cause setbacks in the progression to full enteral
feeding in patients with marginal absorptive function. Marked increase
in stool output or evidence of carbohydrate malabsorption (stool pH
<5.5 and positive test for reducing substances) is a contraindication for
further increases in enteral feeds. Slow advancement of continuous or
bolus enteral feeding rates continues until all nutrients are provided
enterally.
In patients with large stool output, the addition of soluble fiber and
antidiarrheal agents, such as loperamide and anticholinergics, can
be beneficial, although these drugs can increase the risk of bacterial

Duodenum and
Proximal jejunum
• Calcium
• Magnesium
• Phosphorus
• Iron
• Folic acid

Proximal 100-200 cm
of small intestine
• Carbohydrates
• Protein
• Water-soluble vitamins

Table 385.6  Causes of Short Bowel Syndrome
CONGENITAL
Congenital short bowel syndrome
Intestinal atresia
Gastroschisis
BOWEL RESECTION
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Volvulus with or without malrotation
Long segment Hirschsprung disease
Meconium peritonitis
Crohn disease
Trauma

Colon
• Water
• Electrolytes

Distal ileum
• Vitamin B12
• Bile acids

Throughout the small
intestine
• Monoglycerides and fatty
acids as micellar complexes
• Medium-chain triglycerides
directly into portal circulation

Fig. 385.7 Absorption of nutrients in the small bowel varies with the
region.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2346 Part XVI u The Digestive System
overgrowth. Cholestyramine can be beneficial for patients with distal
ileal resection, but its potential depletion of the BA pool can increase
steatorrhea. Bacterial overgrowth is common in infants with a short
bowel and can delay progression of enteral feedings. Empirical treatment with metronidazole or other antibiotics (nitazoxanide, rifaximin)
is often useful. Diets high in fat and without simple sugars may be helpful in reducing bacterial overgrowth as well as in enhancing adaptation.

COMPLICATIONS

Long-­term complications of short bowel syndrome include those of parenteral nutrition: central catheter infection, thrombosis, intestinal failure associated liver disease (IFALD), and gallstones. Appropriate care of
the central line to prevent infection and catheter-­related thrombosis is
extremely important. Sepsis is a leading cause of death and can occur any
time after treatment is initiated (months to years later), and is most often
bacterial (single organism more common than polymicrobial), although
fungal infection may be noted in 20–25% of septic episodes. The use of
an ethanol, sodium bicarbonate, or taurolidine lock can reduce the incidence of central catheter infections and prevent infections.
Some patients will continue to require long-­term parenteral nutritional
support, and lack of central line access is potentially life-­threatening. Inappropriate removal or frequent changes of central lines in the neonatal
period should be avoided. IFALD can lead to cholestasis, cirrhosis, and
liver failure and is a common reason for death or need the for transplantation. The incidence and severity of IFALD has significantly reduced over
the past decade, probably due to the reduced use of soy-­based lipid emulsions and the positive effect of omega-­3-­based lipid emulsions on cholestasis, as well as the collaboration of specialized intestinal failure teams
to prevent recurrent septic episodes. Other complications of terminal ileal
resection include vitamin B12 deficiency, which might not appear until
1-­2 years after parenteral nutrition is withdrawn. Long-­term monitoring
for deficiencies of vitamin B12, folate, iron, fat-­soluble vitamins, and trace
minerals, such as zinc and copper, is important. Renal stones can occur as
a result of hyperoxaluria secondary to steatorrhea as calcium preferentially
binds to the excess fat compared to oxalate, resulting in increased oxalate
absorption and excretion in the urine. Venous thrombosis and vitamin
deficiency have been associated with hyperhomocysteinemia in short
bowel syndrome. Bloody diarrhea secondary to patchy, mild colitis can
rarely develop during the progression of enteral feedings. The pathogenesis
of this feeding colitis is unknown, but it is usually benign and can improve
with a hypoallergenic diet or treatment with mesalamine.
In some children with life-­threatening complications of parenteral
nutrition, especially progressive liver failure and loss of vascular access,
small intestine and liver transplantation becomes the preferred therapy
(see Chapter 386).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

385.7 Chronic Malnutrition
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri
Malnutrition can be divided into primary malnutrition, which is more
common in developing countries and due to the socioeconomic factors leading to inadequate access to an appropriate caloric intake, and
secondary malnutrition, which is due to decreased food intake, disease
processes that cause abnormal nutrient loss, or an increased expenditure of energy (see Chapter 64). The American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (ASPEN) defined pediatric malnutrition in
developed countries as an imbalance between nutrient requirements
and intake that results in cumulative deficits of energy, protein, or
micronutrients that may negatively affect growth, development, and
other relevant outcomes. Malnutrition can also be classified into illness related (caused by disease/trauma) or non-­illness related (caused
by environmental/behavioral factors). Based upon duration, it can
also be further classified into acute malnutrition (<3 months; short
duration, weight loss without stunting) or chronic malnutrition (>3
months; weight loss and stunting) that may differ in their etiology,

growth patterns, and outcome. Chronic malnutrition is usually due to
decreased food intake, malabsorption syndromes, or increased nutritional needs in children with chronic diseases. Malnutrition is diagnosed in 11–50% of hospitalized children and reports from Europe
suggest a prevalence of close to 20% in chronically ill children. Child
neglect and improper formula preparation can result in severe malnutrition. A detailed medical history should assess for symptoms that
may lead to decreased oral intake, including decreased appetite, vomiting, dysphagia, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and tenesmus, as well as
mood and behavioral changes. Obtaining a dietary history to determine caloric intake as well as obtaining anthropometric measurements
will help determine nutritional status. Anthropometric measures to
assess include reduced weight per age and weight per height, body
mass index <5th percentile, and mid upper arm circumference <−1
z score. Physical exam findings suggestive of nutrient deficiencies
include an atrophic tongue in iron deficiency, decreased subcutaneous fat, and alopecia in zinc deficiency. Laboratory testing can be used
to assess vitamin and micronutrient deficiencies, including CBC and
iron studies for anemia and serum albumin for protein losing enteropathy. Though screening tools for malnutrition are available in adults
to provide a simple and fast way of diagnosing those patients at risk
for malnutrition, few such screening tools for the pediatric population
have been developed to assess children at risk, and their use in clinical
practice is still questionable.
Malnourished children suffer from impaired immunity, chronic
enteropathy, poor wound healing, muscle weakness, and diminished psychologic drive. Malnutrition has short-­term consequences
(increased disability, morbidity, and mortality) and long-­term consequences (final adult size, developmental deficiencies, economic productivity). Undernutrition in hospitalized children is associated with
increased infectious complications, delayed recovery, increased length
of stay and costs, increased readmission rate, and increased mortality.
Nutritional rehabilitation in malnourished children is discussed in
Chapter 64.
Chronic malnutrition complicated by diarrheal dehydration is a
commonly observed phenomenon. Infectious diarrhea is common
in tropical and subtropical countries, in the setting of poor hygiene
practices and water quality, in immunocompromised hosts (e.g., HIV,
congenital immunodeficiency), and when impairment of the immune
response is due to chronic malnutrition itself. In children with chronic
disorders, diarrhea may be related to the underlying disease, such as
noncompliance with a gluten-­free diet in celiac disease, noncompliance with pancreatic enzyme treatment in cystic fibrosis, and cholestatic liver disease with fat malabsorption. Malnutrition per se can lead
to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, which, in turn, aggravates malabsorption and diarrhea.
In infants and children with severe malnutrition, many of the signs
normally used to assess the state of hydration or shock are unreliable.
Severe malnutrition might be accompanied by sepsis; thus children
with septic shock might not have diarrhea, thirst, or sunken eyes but
may be hypothermic, hypoglycemic, or febrile. Cardiac reserve is lowered, and heart failure is a common complication.
Despite clinical signs of dehydration, urinary osmolality may be low
in the chronically malnourished child. Renal acidifying ability is also
limited in patients with malnutrition.
Management of diarrhea in chronically malnourished children is
based on three principles: oral rehydration to correct dehydration,
prompt resumption of feeds with avoidance of periods of nothing by
mouth, and treating the underlying etiology behind the diarrhea.
When treating dehydration in malnutrition, the extracellular space
appears to be overexpanded and intra-­and extracellular spaces are
hypo-­osmolar. In this setting, reduced or hypotonic osmolarity oral
rehydration solutions are indicated. When oral rehydration is not possible due to etiologies such as feeding aversion, the route of choice
is nasogastric, and parenteral rehydration and nutrition should be
avoided when possible.
Initial intravenous therapy in profound dehydration is designed to
improve the circulation and expand extracellular volume. For patients
with edema, the quality of fluid and the rate of administration might

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 385 u Disorders of Malabsorption 2347
require readjustment from recommended levels to avoid overhydration
and pulmonary edema. Blood should be given if the patient is in shock
and severely anemic. Potassium salts can be initiated early if urine output is good. Clinical improvement may be more rapid with magnesium
therapy.
Children with chronic malnutrition are at risk for refeeding syndrome (see Chapter 63). Therefore initial calorie provision should not
exceed the previous daily intake and is usually begun at 50–75% of estimated resting energy expenditure, with rapid increase to caloric goals
once there are no severe abnormalities in sodium, potassium, phosphorus, calcium, or magnesium. Correction of malnutrition and catch­up growth are not part of the primary treatment of these children, but a
nutrition rehabilitation plan is necessary.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

385.8 Enzyme Deficiencies
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri

CARBOHYDRATE MALABSORPTION

Symptoms of carbohydrate malabsorption include loose watery diarrhea, flatulence, abdominal distention, and pain. Unless consumed in
large amounts, children may remain asymptomatic. Disaccharidases
are present on the brush border membrane of the small bowel. Disaccharidase deficiency can be caused by a genetic defect or secondary
to damage to the small bowel epithelium, as occurs with infection or
inflammatory disorders.
Nonabsorbed carbohydrates enter the large bowel and are fermented
by intestinal bacteria, producing organic acids and gases such as methane and hydrogen. The gases can cause abdominal distension and discomfort, whereas the unabsorbed carbohydrates and the organic acids
result in osmotic diarrhea characterized by an acidic pH and the presence of either reducing or nonreducing sugars in the stool. Hydrogen
and methane gas can be detected in the breath as a sign of fermentation
of unabsorbed carbohydrates (hydrogen breath test).

LACTASE DEFICIENCY

Congenital lactase deficiency is rare and is associated with symptoms occurring on exposure to lactose in milk. Fewer than 50 cases
have been reported worldwide. In patients with congenital lactase
deficiency, five distinct disease causal variants in the coding region of
the LCT gene were found. In most patients (84%), homozygosity for a
nonsense variant, 4170T-­A (Y1390X; OMIM 223000), designated Fin
(major), was found.
Primary adult-­type hypolactasia is caused by a physiologic decline
in lactase activity that occurs following weaning in most mammals. The
brush border lactase enzyme is expressed at low levels during fetal life;
activity increases in late fetal life and peaks from term to 3 years, after
which levels gradually decrease with age. This decline in lactase levels
varies between ethnic groups. Lactase deficiency occurs in approximately 15% of White adults, 40% of Asian adults, and 85% of Black
adults in the United States. Lactase is encoded by a single gene (LCT) of
approximately 50 kb located on chromosome 2q21. C/T (−13910) polymorphisms of the MCM6 gene were found to be related to adult-­type
hypolactasia in most European populations. In three African populations—Tanzanians, Kenyans, and Sudanese—three single-­
nucleotide
polymorphisms, G/C(−14010), T/G(−13915), and C/G(−13907), were
identified with lactase persistence and have derived alleles that significantly enhance transcription from the lactase gene promoter in vitro.
Secondary lactose intolerance follows small bowel mucosal damage (celiac disease, acute severe gastroenteritis) and is usually transient,
improving with mucosal healing. Lactase deficiency can be diagnosed
by the hydrogen breath test (2 g/kg up to 25 g) or by measurement of
lactase activity in mucosal tissue retrieved by small bowel biopsy. Diagnostic testing is not mandatory, and often simple dietary changes that
reduce or eliminate lactose from the diet relieve symptoms.

Treatment of lactase deficiency consists of a milk-­free diet. A lactose-­
free formula (based on either soy or cow’s milk) can be used in infants.
In older children, low-­lactose milk can be consumed. The addition of
lactase to dairy products usually improves the symptoms.
Live-­culture yogurt contains bacteria that produce lactase enzymes
and is therefore tolerated in most patients with lactase deficiency. Hard
cheeses and cottage cheeses have a small amount of lactose and are
generally well tolerated.

FRUCTOSE MALABSORPTION

Children consuming a large quantity of juice rich in fructose, corn
syrup, or natural fructose in fruit juices can present with diarrhea,
abdominal distention, and slow weight gain. Identification by history
followed by the restriction of the amount of juice in the diet resolves
the symptoms and helps avoid unnecessary investigations. A fructose hydrogen breath test can be helpful in the diagnosis of fructose
malabsorption. The reason for fructose malabsorption is a reduced
abundance of GLUT-­5 transporter on the surface of the intestinal
brush border membrane, which occurs in approximately 5% of the
population.

SUCRASE-­ISOMALTASE DEFICIENCY

Sucrase-­isomaltase (SI) deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with a complete absence of sucrase and reduced maltase digestive
activity. The SI complex is composed of 1,927 amino acids encoded by
a 3,385 bp messenger RNA. The gene locus on chromosome 3 has 30
exons spanning 106.6 kb. Most SI pathogenic variants result in a lack
of enzyme protein synthesis (null variant). Posttranslational processing
defects have also been identified.
Approximately 2% of Europeans and Americans are heterozygous
for a causal variant. Sucrase deficiency is especially common in indigenous Greenlanders (estimated 5%) in whom it is often accompanied
by lactase deficiency. Gene variants of the SI are found to have some
implications in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), as they were found
more often in patients with IBS than in controls.
Symptoms of SI deficiency usually begin when the infant is exposed
to sucrose or a glucose polymer diet. This can occur with ingestion
of non–lactose-­based infant formula or on the introduction of pureed
food, especially fruits and sweets. Diarrhea, abdominal pain, and poor
growth are observed. Occasionally, patients present with symptoms in
late childhood or even adult life, but careful history often indicates that
symptoms appeared earlier. Diagnosis of SI malabsorption requires
acid hydrolysis of stool for reducing substances due to the fact that
sucrase is a nonreducing sugar. Alternatively, hydrogen breath testing
can be used, as well as direct enzyme assay of small bowel biopsy or
genetic testing.
The mainstay of treatment is lifelong dietary restriction of sucrose-­
containing foods, although symptoms may diminish with age. Enzyme
replacement with a purified yeast enzyme sacrosidase is a highly effective adjunct to dietary restriction.

GLUCOSE-­GALACTOSE MALABSORPTION

More than 30 different pathogenic variants of the sodium/glucose
co-transporter gene (SGLT1) have been identified. These variants cause
a rare autosomal recessive disorder of intestinal glucose and galactose/
Na+ co-transport system that leads to osmotic diarrhea. Because most
dietary sugars are polysaccharides or disaccharides with glucose or
galactose moieties, diarrhea follows the ingestion of glucose, breast
milk, or conventional lactose-­containing formulas. Dehydration and
acidosis can be severe, resulting in death.
Stools are noted to be acidic and contain sugar. Patients with the defect
have normal absorption of fructose, and their small bowel function and
structure are normal in all other aspects. Intermittent or permanent glycosuria after fasting, or after a glucose load, is a common finding due to
the transport defect also being present in the kidney. The presence of
reducing substances in watery stools and slight glycosuria despite low
blood sugar levels is highly suggestive of glucose-­galactose malabsorption. Malabsorption of glucose and galactose is easily identified using the
breath hydrogen test. It is safe to perform the first test with a dose of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2348 Part XVI u The Digestive System
0.5 g/kg of glucose or galactose; if necessary, a second test can be performed using 2 g/kg. Breath hydrogen will rise more than 20 ppm. Biopsy
of the small intestine is useful to document a normal villous architecture
and normal disaccharidase activities and to rule out other etiologies. The
identification of causal variants of SGLT1 make it possible to perform
prenatal screening in families at risk for the disease.
Treatment consists of rigorous restriction of glucose and galactose.
Fructose, the only carbohydrate that can be given safely, should be
added to a carbohydrate-­free formula at a concentration of 6–8%. This
formula results in almost immediate cessation of diarrhea. Although
the defect is permanent and lifelong, limited amounts of glucose,
starches, or sucrose may be tolerated later in life.

EXOCRINE PANCREATIC INSUFFICIENCY

Chapter 397 discusses disorders of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
(see Table 385.5). Cystic fibrosis is the most common congenital disorder associated with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Although rare,
the next most common cause of pancreatic insufficiency in children
is Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome. Other rare disorders with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency include Johanson-­Blizzard syndrome
(severe steatorrhea, aplasia of alae nasi, deafness, hypothyroidism,
scalp defects), Pearson bone marrow syndrome (sideroblastic anemia, variable degree of neutropenia, thrombocytopenia), and isolated
pancreatic enzyme deficiency (lipase, colipase, trypsinogen, amylase).
Enterokinase deficiency, a key enzyme produced in the proximal small
bowel and responsible for the activation of trypsinogen to trypsin,
manifests clinically as exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1, a rare autosomal recessive disorder, is caused by pathogenic variants in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE). Patients develop chronic mucocutaneous
candidiasis along with failure of the parathyroid gland, adrenal cortex,
pancreatic β cells, gonads, gastric parietal cells, and thyroid gland. Pancreatic insufficiency and steatorrhea are associated with this condition.

ENTEROKINASE (ENTEROPEPTIDASE) DEFICIENCY

Enterokinase (enteropeptidase) is a brush border serine protease
enzyme of the small intestine responsible for the cleavage of trypsinogen to trypsin. This in turn results in the cascade activation of a number of other pancreatic enzymes. Deficiency of this enzyme results in
severe diarrhea, malabsorption, failure to thrive, and hypoproteinemic
edema shortly after birth.
The diagnosis can be established by measuring the enzyme level
in intestinal tissue or by genetic testing, as enterokinase deficiency is
caused by pathogenic variants in the serine protease-­7 gene (PRSS7) on
chromosome 21q21. Treatment of this rare autosomal recessive disorder consists of replacement with pancreatic enzymes and administration of a protein hydrolyzed formula with added MCT oil in infancy.

TREHALASE DEFICIENCY

The disaccharide trehalose is mainly present in mushrooms and has
been approved to add to dried food. It is hydrolyzed by the intestinal
trehalase into two molecules of glucose. Trehalase deficiency has been
reported in 8% of Greenlanders; only three cases of this deficiency have
been reported elsewhere. In untreated celiac disease, the intestinal trehalase activity is reduced as those of other disaccharidases and recovers
after introduction of a gluten-­free diet.

TRYPSINOGEN DEFICIENCY

Trypsinogen deficiency is a rare syndrome with symptomatology
similar to that of enterokinase deficiency. Enterokinase catalyzes the
conversion of trypsinogen to trypsin, which, in turn, activates the various pancreatic proenzymes, such as chymotrypsin, procarboxypeptidase, and proelastase, for their active forms. Deficiency of trypsinogen
results in severe diarrhea, malabsorption, failure to thrive, and hypoproteinemic edema soon after birth.
The trypsinogen gene is encoded on chromosome 7q35. Treatment
is the same as for enterokinase deficiency, with pancreatic enzymes and
protein hydrolysate formula with added MCT oil in infancy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

385.9 Liver and Biliary Disorders Causing
Malabsorption
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri
Absorption of lipids and lipid-­soluble vitamins depends to a great
extent on an adequate bile flow delivering BA to the small intestine,
which helps mixed micelle formation of lipid droplets. Most liver and
biliary disorders lead to impairment of the bile flow, contributing to
malabsorption of long-­chain fatty acids and fat-­soluble vitamins such
as A, D, E, and K. Liver disorders associated with significant malabsorption and failure to thrive are mainly due to these categories:
In PFIC syndromes and BA synthesis defects, PFIC type 1 is associated with chronic diarrhea caused by a bile acid transport defect in
the gut. It is not uncommon for these children to have symptomatic
fat-­soluble vitamin deficiencies and suffer from pathologic fractures
and peripheral neuropathy.
Children with lipid storage disorders (e.g., Wolman disease) also
manifest with severe failure to thrive and multiple vitamin deficiencies.
Children with biliary disorders such as biliary atresia after portoenterostomy surgery (Kasai portoenterostomy), cystic fibrosis, neonatal
sclerosing cholangitis, Alagille syndrome, and sclerosing cholangitis
constitute another major group of disorders with reduced bile flow
where malabsorption could be a significant challenge.
Chronic liver disease of any etiology could also lead to lipid malabsorption mechanisms. In addition, severe portal hypertension can
lead to portal hypertensive enteropathy, resulting in poor absorption
of nutrients.
Decompensated liver disease leads to anorexia and increased energy
expenditures, further widening the gap between calorie intake and net
absorption and leading to severe malnutrition. Adequate management of
nutrition is essential to improve the outcome with or without liver transplantation. This is usually achieved by using MCT-­rich milk formula,
supplemental vitamins, and continuous or bolus enteral feed where oral
intake is poor.
Vitamin D deficiency is commonly observed on biochemical tests, and
children can present with pathologic fractures. Simultaneous administration of vitamin D with the water-­soluble vitamin E preparation (TPGS
1,000 succinate) enhances absorption of vitamin D as well. In young
infants with cholestasis, oral vitamin D3 is given at a dose of 1,000 IU/
kg/24 hr. After 1 month, if the serum 25-­hydroxyvitamin D level continues
to be low, intramuscular administration of 10,000 units/kg or maximum of
60,000 is recommend. Monitoring of 25-­hydroxy vitamin D serum levels
every 1-2 months is recommended in children with severe cholestasis.
Vitamin E deficiency in patients with chronic cholestasis is not
usually symptomatic but can manifest as a progressive neurologic syndrome, including peripheral neuropathy (manifesting as loss of deep
tendon reflexes and ophthalmoplegia), cerebellar ataxia, and posterior
column dysfunction. Early in the course, findings are partially reversible with treatment; late features may not be reversible. It may be difficult to identify vitamin E deficiency because the elevated blood lipid
levels in cholestatic liver disease can falsely elevate the serum vitamin
E level. Therefore it is important to also obtain serum lipid levels to
measure the ratio of serum vitamin E to total serum lipids. A normal
level for patients younger than 12 years of age is >0.6, and for patients
older than 12 years is >0.8. Neurologic sequelae can be prevented with
the use of an oral water-­soluble vitamin E preparation (TPGS, Liqui-­E)
at a dose of 25-­50 IU/day in neonates and 15-­25 IU/kg/day in children.
Vitamin K deficiency can occur because of cholestasis and poor fat
absorption. In children with liver disease, it is very important to differentiate between the coagulopathy related to vitamin K malabsorption
and one secondary to the synthetic failure of coagulation factors from
the liver. A single dose of vitamin K administered intravenously does
not correct the prolonged prothrombin time in liver failure but will help
correct the deficiency state within a few hours. Easy bruising may be
the first sign. In neonatal cholestasis, coagulopathy because of vitamin
K deficiency can manifest with intracranial bleeding with devastating
consequences, and prothrombin time should be routinely measured to
monitor for deficiency in children with cholestasis. All children with
cholestasis should receive regular vitamin K supplementation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 385 u Disorders of Malabsorption 2349
Vitamin A deficiency is rare and is associated with night blindness,
xerophthalmia, and increased mortality if patients contract measles.
Serum vitamin A levels should be monitored, and adequate supplementation considered. Caution should be observed with supplementation, as high levels of vitamin A can cause liver damage.

385.10 Rare Inborn Defects Causing
Malabsorption
Abdul-­Aziz K. Elkadri
Congenital (primary) malabsorption disorders originate from a multitude of defects, which includes structural or functional defects of
enterocytes or disorders involving other cellular lineages of the GI tract
such as enteroendocrine or immune cells (see Chapters 385.3 and 388).
Integral membrane proteins are another class of primary disorders of
malabsorption as they fulfill the function of transporter of nutrients
as a receptor or channel across the apical or basolateral membrane of
enterocytes. Histologic examination of the mucosa of the small and
large bowel is typically normal. Most of these disorders are rare and
inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern as they are typically a loss
of function of a protein. With increased access to genetic sequencing,
patients are being discovered to carry pathologic variants in genes
traditionally thought to carry a traditional phenotype. This broader
phenotype is thought to be possibly due to modifier genes and variable penetrance and may provide us with a better understanding of the
spectrum of these disorders.

DISORDERS OF CARBOHYDRATE ABSORPTION

These are described in Chapter 385.9.
Patients with Fanconi-­Bickel syndrome present with tubular
nephropathy, hypophosphatemic rickets, hepatomegaly, and nephromegaly due to glycogen accumulation in liver and small bowel; failure
to thrive; and fasting hypoglycemia and postprandial hyperglycemia.
The disorder is caused by homozygous pathogenic variants of GLUT2
(SLC2A2), the facilitative monosaccharide transporter at the basolateral
membrane of enterocytes, hepatocytes, renal tubules, pancreatic islet
cells, and cerebral neurons. Patients exhibit postprandial hyperglycemia
secondary to low insulin secretion (impaired glucose-­sensing mechanisms in β cells) and fasting hypoglycemia due to altered glucose transport out of the liver. The increased intracellular glucose level inhibits
glycogen degradation leading to intracellular glycogen accumulation.
Similarly, altered monosaccharide transport out of enterocytes may be
responsible for the putative glycogen accumulation and result in the diarrhea and malabsorption observed in some patients. Therapy includes the
substitution of electrolyte losses and vitamin D and supplying uncooked
cornstarch to prevent hypoglycemia. Patients who present in the neonatal period need frequent small meals and galactose-­free milk.

DISORDERS OF AMINO ACID AND PEPTIDE
ABSORPTION

Protein digestion and absorption in the intestine is accomplished by a
combination of proteases, peptidases, and transporters of peptides and
amino acids. Amino acid transporters are essential for the absorption
and transport of amino acids from luminal nutrients, through intracellular transfer and finally between cellular compartments. Due to their
ontogenic origins, enterocytes and renal tubules share similar amino
acid transporters. The highest intestinal transporter activity is found
in the jejunum. The transporters causing Hartnup disease, cystinuria,
iminoglycinuria, and dicarboxylic aminoaciduria are in the apical
membrane, and those causing lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) and
blue diaper syndrome are anchored in the basolateral membrane of the
intestinal epithelium.
Dibasic amino acids, including cystine, ornithine, lysine, and arginine, are taken up by the Na-­independent heterodimeric transporter
protein complex made up of SLC3A1 and SLC7A9. Cystinuria, a defect
in this transporter, is the most common primary inherited aminoaciduria. This disorder is not associated with any GI or nutritional

consequences because of compensation by an alternative transporter.
However, hypersecretion of cystine in the urine leads to recurrent cystine stones, which account for up to 6–8% of all urinary tract stones in
children. Ample hydration, urine alkalinization, and cystine-­binding
thiol drugs can increase the solubility of cystine. Cystinuria type A
(SLC3A1), or type 1 in the phenotypic classification, is inherited as an
autosomal recessive trait, whereas cystinuria type B, classified phenotypically as type II and III, is due to pathogenic variants in SLC7A9.
Parents of patients with type B cystinuria have increased cystine levels
but do not form stones, which suggests that it is likely inherited in an
autosomal dominant manner with incomplete penetrance. Cystinuria
type I has been described in association with 2p21 deletion syndrome
and hypotonia-­cystinuria syndrome.
Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) is the second most common
disorder of amino acid transport (see Chapter 105.14). It is caused by
the y+LAT-­1 (SLC7A7) subunit of the cationic amino acid transporter
present at the basolateral membrane of the intestinal and renal epithelium and causes a failure to deliver cytosolic dibasic cationic amino
acids into the paracellular space. This defect is not compensated by
the SLC3A1/SLC7A9 transporter at the apical membrane. The symptoms of LPI, which appear after weaning, include diarrhea, failure to
thrive, hepatosplenomegaly, nephritis, respiratory insufficiency, alveolar proteinosis, pulmonary fibrosis, and osteoporosis. Abnormalities of
the bone marrow with anemia and thrombocytopenia have also been
described in a subgroup of LPI patients. The disorder is characterized
by low plasma concentrations of the dibasic amino acids lysine, arginine, and ornithine, high concentrations of glutamine, alanine, glycine,
serine, and proline, and a massive urinary excretion of lysine, as well as
orotic acid, ornithine, and arginine to a lesser extent. Hyperammonemia episodes and coma along with emesis usually develop after fasting
or with the ingestion of large amounts of protein, specifically alanine, likely due to a deficiency of intramitochondrial ornithine. Some
patients show moderate intellectual disability. Cutaneous manifestations can include alopecia, perianal dermatitis, and sparse hair. Some
patients learn to avoid protein-­containing foods. Immune dysfunction
is potentially attributable to nitric oxide overproduction secondary to
arginine intracellular trapping and may be the underlying pathophysiologic route explaining many LPI complications such as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, autoimmune disorders, and an incompletely
characterized immune deficiency. Treatment includes dietary protein
restriction (<1.5 g/kg/day) and orally administered citrulline (100
mg/kg/day), which is well absorbed from the intestine and carnitine
supplementation.
Hartnup disease is characterized by the malabsorption of all neutral amino acids (except proline), including the essential amino acid
tryptophan. It is characterized by aminoaciduria, photosensitive
pellagra-­like rash, headaches, cerebellar ataxia, delayed intellectual
development, and diarrhea. The clinical spectrum ranges from asymptomatic to severely affected with progressive neurodegeneration leading to death by adolescence. SLC6A19, which is the major luminal
sodium-­dependent neutral amino acid transporter of small intestine
and renal tubules, has been identified as the defective protein. A similar phenotype is observed in defects in collectrin (CLTRN), and the
requirement of angiotensin-­converting enzyme 2 may explain the phenotypic heterogeneity of Hartnup disorder. Tryptophan is a precursor
of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate biosynthesis; therefore the disorder can be treated by nicotinamide in addition to a diet
of 4 g protein/kg. The use of lipid-­soluble esters of amino acids and
tryptophan ethyl ester has also been reported.
Defects in specific, basolateral tryptophan transporter (SLC16A10)
are the cause of blue diaper syndrome (indicanuria, Drummond syndrome). Intestinal bacteria convert the unabsorbed tryptophan to indican, which is responsible for the bluish discoloration of the urine after its
hydrolysis and oxidation. Symptoms can include digestive disturbances
such as vomiting, constipation, poor appetite, failure to thrive, hypercalcemia, nephrocalcinosis, fever, irritability, and ocular abnormalities.
The underlying defect of iminoglycinuria is the malabsorption of
proline, hydroxyproline, and glycine as a consequence of the proton
amino acid transporter SLC36A2 defect, with a possible participation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2350 Part XVI u The Digestive System
of modifier genes, one of which (SLC6A20) is present in the intestinal epithelium. This disorder is usually benign, but sporadic cases with
encephalopathy, intellectual disability, deafness, blindness, kidney
stones, hypertension, and gyrate atrophy have been described.
The neuronal glutamate transporter EAAT3 (SLC1A1) is affected in
dicarboxylic aminoaciduria. This carrier is present in the small intestine, kidney, and brain and transports the anionic acids l-­glutamate,
l-­ and d-­aspartate, and l-­cysteine. There are single-­case reports indicating that this disorder could be associated with hyperprolinemia and
neurologic symptoms such as POLIP (polyneuropathy, ophthalmoplegia, leukoencephalopathy, intestinal pseudoobstruction) syndrome.

DISORDERS OF FAT TRANSPORT

These are described in Chapters 106.3 and 385.3.

DISORDERS OF VITAMIN ABSORPTION

Transporters and receptors of the intestinal epithelium have been
described for water-­soluble but not fat-­soluble vitamins with the latter absorbed primarily into enterocytes by passive diffusion after the
emulsification of fats by bile salts. Transfer proteins (retinol-­binding
protein [RBP4] and α-­tocopherol transfer protein [TTP1]) have been
involved in deficiency states of vitamins E (spinocerebellar ataxia) and
A (ophthalmologic signs), respectively.
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) is synthesized exclusively by microorganisms and is acquired mostly from meat and milk (see Chapter 503.2).
Its absorption starts with the removal of cobalamin from dietary
protein by gastric acidity and its binding to haptocorrin. In the duodenum, pancreatic proteases hydrolyze the cobalamin-­
haptocorrin
complex, allowing the binding of cobalamin to intrinsic factor (IF),
which originates from parietal cells from the stomach. The receptor of
the cobalamin-­IF complex (Cbl-­IF) is located at the apical membrane
of the ileal enterocytes and represents a heterodimer consisting of
cubilin (CUBN) and amnionless (AMN). After endocytic uptake into
endosomes, the Cbl-­IF and its receptor binds to megalin and forms a
cobalamin–transcobalamin (TC)-­2 complex (after cleavage of IF) for
further transcytosis. Vitamin B12 exits the lysosome via LMBD1 and
ABCD4 and is released to the bloodstream most likely through the
basolateral transporter multifunctional multidrug resistance protein 1
(MRP1). Biologically available circulating vitamin B12 is bound to TC,
a nonglycosylated protein that carries 10–30% of the total vitamin B12.
TC-­vitamin B12 complexes enter the cells via two members of the LDL
receptor gene family, CD320 and renal Lrp2/megalin. As a cofactor for
methionine synthase, cobalamin converts homocysteine to methionine. Cobalamin deficiency can be caused by inadequate intake of the
vitamin (e.g., breastfeeding by mothers on a vegan diet) and primary
or secondary achlorhydria including autoimmune gastritis, exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency, bacterial overgrowth (see Chapter 385.4), ileal
disease (Crohn disease, see Chapter 382.2), ileal (or gastric) resection,
infections (fish tapeworm), and Whipple disease (see Chapter 388).
Clinical signs of congenital cobalamin malabsorption, which usually appear from a few months to more than 10 years, are pancytopenia
including megaloblastic anemia, fatigue, failure to thrive, and neurologic symptoms, including developmental delay. Recurrent infections
and bruising may be present. Laboratory evaluation indicates low serum
cobalamin, hyperhomocysteinemia, methylmalonic acidemia, and mild
proteinuria. The Schilling test is useful to differentiate between a lack of
IF and the malabsorption of cobalamin. Several rare autosomal recessive disorders of congenital cobalamin deficiency affect absorption and
transport of cobalamin (in addition to seven other inherited defects of
cobalamin metabolism). These include pathogenic variants of the gastric IF (GIF) gene with absence of IF (but normal acid secretion and
lack of autoantibodies against IF or parietal cells), variants of the AMN
and CUBN gene subunits of the Cbl-­IF receptor in ileum (Imerslund-­
Grasbeck syndrome), and variants in the TC 2 cDNA. Two inborn
defects were identified recently in the genes encoding LMBD1 and
ABCD4 transporters and are responsible for the rare inborn defect in
Cbl-­IF, which results in the trapping of free vitamin B12 in lysosomes.
These disorders require long-­
term parenteral cobalamin treatment:
intramuscular injections of cobalamin. High-­dose substitution with oral

cyanocobalamin (1 mg biweekly) does not seem to be sufficient for all
patients with congenital cobalamin deficiency. Intramuscular cobalamine injections of 1000 mcg/day for 7 days, then three times a week for
3 weeks, then once a month for 3 months, followed by a change to 1000
mcg daily oral cobalamine has been successful in some cases.
Folate is an essential vitamin required to synthesize methionine from
homocysteine. It is found mainly in green leafy vegetables, legumes,
and oranges. After its uptake by enterocytes, folate is converted to
5-­
methyltetrahydrofolate. Secondary folate deficiency is caused by
insufficient folate intake, villous atrophy (e.g., celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease), treatment with phenytoin and trimethoprim,
among others (see Chapter 503.1). Several inherited disorders of folate
metabolism and transport have been described.
Three mammalian folate transporter systems have been described in
a variety of tissues: (1) the bidirectional reduced folate carrier 1 (RFC1,
SLC19A1), (2) the glycosyl-­phosphatidylinositol-­anchored folate receptors (FOLR1, FOLR2, and FOLR4) responsible for folate-­receptor mediated endocytosis, and (3) the human proton-­coupled folate transporter
(PCFT). Hereditary folate malabsorption is characterized by a defect of
the PCFT of the brush border, leading to impaired absorption of folate in
the upper small intestine as well as impaired transport of folate into the
central nervous system. Symptoms of congenital folate malabsorption are
diarrhea, failure to thrive, megaloblastic anemia presenting in the first few
months of life, glossitis, infections (Pneumocystis jirovecii) with episodes
of hypogammaglobulinemia, and neurologic abnormalities (seizures,
intellectual impairment, and basal ganglia calcifications). Macrocytosis,
with or without neutropenia, multilobulated polymorphonuclear cells,
increased lactate dehydrogenase and bilirubin, increased saturation of
transferrin, and decreased cholesterol can also be found. Low levels of
folate are present in serum and cerebrospinal fluid. Plasma homocysteine
concentrations as well as urine excretion of formiminoglutamic acid and
orotic acid are elevated. Long-­standing deficiency of folate (around 3-­4
months) is best documented using red cell folate. Therapy involves large
doses of oral (up to 150-400 mg/day of folic acid) or systemic (intrathecal) folate. Folinic acid has been used in intramuscular and/or oral form,
more readily correcting the systemic and CSF folate levels. 150-400 mg
of oral folinic acid daily has been used (starting dose 10-15 mg/kg daily).
CSF folate levels should be followed, monitoring for clinical response of
the systemic signs of disease. Sulfasalazine and methotrexate are potent
inhibitors of PCFT. Therefore folate deficiency may develop during treatment with these drugs. Although the RFC1 is ubiquitously expressed,
including the brush border membrane in the small intestine, involvement
of RFC1 in intestinal folate uptake has not been confirmed.
The molecular basis of intestinal transport of other water-­soluble
vitamins such as vitamin C (Na+-­dependent vitamin C transporters 1
and 2), pyridoxine/vitamin B6, and biotin/vitamin B5 (Na+-­dependent
multivitamin transporter) have been described; congenital defects of
these transporter systems have not yet been found in humans. A thiamine/vitamin B1–responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome, which
is associated with early-­onset type 1 diabetes mellitus and sensorineural
deafness, is caused by pathogenic variants of the thiamine transporter
protein gene, THTR-­1 (SLC19A2), present in the brush border.

DISORDERS OF ELECTROLYTE AND MINERAL
ABSORPTION

Congenital chloride diarrhea (CCD) is a rare but relatively common
group of congenital diarrheal disorders. It includes defects in SLC26A3,
encoding a Na+-­independent Cl−/HCO3− exchanger within the apical
membrane of ileal and colonic epithelium, and GUCY2C, encoding a
guanylate cyclase receptor in the intestine for the bacterial heat-­stable
enterotoxin. Defects in SLC26A3 have been found to have a prevalence in Finland of 1:20,000. Founder pathogenic variants have been
described in Finnish, Polish, and Arab patients: V317del, I675-­676ins,
and G187X, respectively. The Cl−/HCO3− exchanger absorbs chloride
originating from gastric acid and the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator and secretes bicarbonate into the lumen, neutralizing the acidity of gastric secretion.
Defects in GUCY2C have been identified, which leads to an autosomal dominant activation defect in guanylate cyclase C. This leads to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 385 u Disorders of Malabsorption 2351
elevated levels of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) and activation of the CFTR receptor. The mechanism is similar to the response to
heat-­stable enterotoxins from Escherichia coli and results in a chloride-­
losing diarrhea. Interestingly, a homozygous recessive inactivation
defect has been described in a Bedouin cohort resulting in a meconium
ileus phenotype due to the inactivation of CFTR.
Prenatally, CCD is characterized by maternal polyhydramnios, dilated
fetal bowel loops, and preterm birth. Newborns with CCD present with
severe life-­threatening secretory diarrhea during the first few weeks of life.
Volvulus has been reported in few patients with CCD. Laboratory findings are metabolic alkalosis, hypochloremia, hypokalemia, and hyponatremia (with high plasma renin and aldosterone activities). Fecal chloride
concentrations are >90 mmol/L and exceed the sum of fecal sodium and
potassium. Early diagnosis and aggressive lifelong enteral substitution of
KCl in combination with NaCl (chloride doses of 6-­8 mmol/kg/day for
infants and 3-­4 mmol/kg/day for older patients) prevent mortality and
long-­term complications (such as urinary infections, hyperuricemia with
renal calcifications, renal insufficiency, and hypertension) and allow normal growth and development. Orally administered proton pump inhibitors, cholestyramine, and butyrate can reduce the severity of diarrhea.
However, febrile diseases are likely to exacerbate symptoms as a consequence of severe dehydration and electrolyte imbalances. (See Chapter 71
for fluid and electrolyte management.) The diarrheal symptoms usually
tend to regress with age, but the phenotype is highly variable. In familial cohorts carrying the same variant, individuals have demonstrated an
increased incidence of inflammatory bowel disease as well as a phenotype
of irritable bowel syndrome and motility issues.
The classic form of congenital sodium diarrhea (CSD) manifests
with polyhydramnios, massive secretory diarrhea, severe metabolic acidosis, alkaline stools (fecal pH >7.5), and hyponatremia because of fecal
losses of Na+ (fecal Na+ >70 mmol/L). Urinary secretion of sodium is
low to normal. CSD is clinically and genetically heterogeneous. A syndromic form of CSD with superficial punctate keratitis, choanal or anal
atresia, hypertelorism, and corneal erosions has been related to pathologic variants in SPINT2, which encodes a serine-­protease inhibitor
whose pathophysiologic action on intestinal Na+ absorption is unclear.
This form of CSD is also referred to as congenital tufting enteropathy (intestinal epithelial dysplasia) as it often shows clustered enterocytes that form “tufts” with branching crypts on histology (described
in Chapter 385.3). Pathogenic variants in SLC9A3, the gene encoding
the Na+/H+ antiporter 3 (NHE3), the major intestinal brush border
Na+/H+ exchanger, were identified in nine patients with nonsyndromic
CSD. IBD developed in two of nine patients with recessive SLC9A3
pathogenic variants, implicating NHE3 in the pathogenesis of IBD in
a subset of patients.
The congenital form of acrodermatitis enteropathica manifests
with severe deficiency of body zinc soon after birth in bottle-­fed children or after weaning from breastfeeding (see Chapter 712). Clinical
signs of this disorder are anorexia, diarrhea, failure to thrive, humoral
and cell-­mediated immunodeficiency (poor wound healing, recurrent
infections), male hypogonadism, skin lesions (vesiculobullous dermatitis on the extremities and perirectal, perigenital, and perioral regions,
and alopecia), and neurologic abnormalities (tremor, apathy, depression, irritability, nystagmus, photophobia, night blindness, and hypogeusia). The genetic defect of acrodermatitis enteropathica is caused
by a pathogenic variant in the Zrt-­Irt-­like protein 4 (ZIP4, SLC39A4),
normally expressed on the apical membrane, which enables the uptake
of zinc into the cytosol of enterocytes. The zinc-­dependent alkaline
phosphatase and plasma zinc levels are low. Paneth cells in the crypt
of the small intestinal mucosa show inclusion bodies. Acrodermatitis enteropathica requires long-­term treatment with elemental zinc
at 1-3 mg/kg/day. Maternal zinc deficiency impairs embryonic, fetal,
and postnatal development. Chapter 72 described the acquired forms
of zinc deficiency. Transient neonatal zinc deficiency is an autosomal dominant disorder with similar manifestations as acrodermatitis
enteropathica. The disease is caused by pathogenic variants in ZnT2,
the transporter responsible for supplying human milk with zinc.
Menkes disease and occipital horn syndrome are both caused by
pathogenic variants in the gene encoding Cu2+ transporting adenosine

triphosphatase (ATPase), α-­polypeptide (ATP7A), which is also called
Menkes or MNK protein. ATP7A is mainly expressed by enterocytes,
placental cells, and the central nervous system, and is localized in the
trans-­Golgi network for copper transfer to enzymes in the secretory
pathway or to endosomes to facilitate copper efflux. Copper values
in liver and brain are low in contrast to an increase in mucosal cells,
including enterocytes and fibroblasts. Plasma copper and ceruloplasmin levels decline postnatally. Clinical features of Menkes disease
are progressive cerebral degeneration (convulsions), feeding difficulties, failure to thrive, hypothermia, apnea, infections (urinary tract),
hypertelorism, hair abnormalities (kinky hair), hypopigmentation,
bone changes, and cutis laxa. Patients with the classic form of Menkes
disease usually die before the age of 3 years. A therapeutic trial with
copper-­histidinase should start before the age of 6 weeks. In contrast
to Menkes disease, occipital horn syndrome usually manifests during
adolescence with borderline intelligence, craniofacial abnormalities,
skeletal dysplasia (short clavicles, pectus excavatum, genu valgum),
connective tissue abnormalities, chronic diarrhea, orthostatic hypotension, obstructive uropathy, and osteoporosis. It should be differentiated
from Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome type V.
Active calcium absorption is mediated by the transient receptor
potential channel 6 (TRPV6) at the brush border membrane, calbindin, and the Ca-­ATPase, or the Na+-­Ca2+ exchanger for calcium efflux
at the basolateral membrane within the proximal small bowel. A congenital defect of these transporters has not yet been described.
Intestinal absorption of dietary magnesium, which occurs via the
transient receptor potential channel TRPM6 at the apical membrane, is
impaired in familial hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia,
which manifests with neonatal seizures and tetany.
Intestinal iron absorption consists of several complex regulated processes starting with the uptake of heme-­containing iron
by heme carrier protein 1 (HCP1) and Fe2+ (after luminal reduction
of oxidized Fe3+) by the divalent metal transporter 1 (DMT1) at the
apical membrane, followed by the efflux of Fe2+ by ferroportin 1
(also called the iron-­regulated transporter) at the basolateral membrane of duodenal enterocytes. Hepatic hormone hepcidin has a key
role in iron homeostasis by interacting with ferroportin. When it
binds to ferroportin, hepcidin induces phosphorylation of the iron
exporter, causing its internalization and degradation. A decrease in
the ferroportin protein level on the cell surface inhibits iron export
from intracellular pools. Thus hepcidin controls plasma iron levels by reducing iron absorption in the gut, lowering iron release
from hepatocytes, and preventing iron recycling by macrophages.
Hepcidin deficiency causes iron overload in hereditary hemochromatosis and iron-­loading anemias, whereas hepcidin excess causes
or contributes to the development of iron-­restricted anemia in
inflammatory diseases, infections, some cancers, and chronic kidney disease. Pathogenic variants of the ferroportin 1 gene have been
found in the autosomal dominant form of hemochromatosis type
4. Variants within the hemochromatosis (HFE) gene (Cys282 Tyr,
His63Asn, Ser65Cys) of classic hemochromatosis reduce the endocytic uptake of diferric transferrin by the transferrin receptor-­1 at
the basolateral membrane of the intestinal epithelium. Hepcidin is
the defective gene of juvenile hemochromatosis (type 2, subtype B).
Elevated hepcidin results in hypoferremia and insufficient supply
of iron for erythropoiesis, leading to different types of anemia. The
underlying causes of hepcidin elevation in iron-­restricted anemias
are varied. An example of a genetic cause of hepcidin increase is
the familial iron-­refractory iron deficiency anemia (IRIDA), an
autosomal recessive disorder caused by a pathogenic variant in matriptase-­2 (TMPRSS6), a negative regulator of hepcidin expression.
This anemia is characterized by very low plasma iron levels, unresponsiveness to oral iron therapy, and partial correction by parenteral iron. Pathologic variants in the DMT1 transporter (SLC11A2)
are another cause of IRIDA. The development of severe microcytic,
hypochromic anemia typifies these patients; however, surprisingly,
some of them load iron in the liver.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2352 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 386

Intestinal Transplantation
in Children with Intestinal
Failure
Jorge D. Reyes and Danielle R. Wendel
The introduction of tacrolimus and the development of the abdominal
multiorgan procurement techniques allowed the tailoring of various
types of intestine grafts that can contain other intraabdominal organs,
such as the liver, pancreas, and stomach. The understanding that the
liver protects the intestine against rejection demonstrates the interaction between recipient and donor immunocytes (host-­versus-­graft
and graft-­versus-­host), which under the cover of immunosuppression
allows varying degrees of graft acceptance and eventual minimization of drug therapy. Over the past several years the number of patients
placed on the list for and those undergoing intestinal transplantation
has decreased, which is a result of improvements in the care of patients
with intestinal failure (IF) under a multidisciplinary intestinal care team
management. Advances in care include prevention and treatment of
intestinal failure–associated liver disease (IFALD), advances in central
venous catheter care, improved prevention of life-­threatening central line–associated bloodstream infections, and corrective surgery
enhancing absorptive surface and motility, which have led to increased
survival and decreased morbidity.

INDICATIONS FOR INTESTINAL TRANSPLANT

IF describes a patient who has lost the ability to maintain nutritional
support and adequate fluid requirements needed to sustain growth with
their own intestine and is permanently dependent on parenteral nutrition
(PN). The majority of these patients have short bowel syndrome as a result
of a congenital deficiency or acquired condition (see Chapter 385.6). In
others, the cause of IF is a functional disorder of motility or absorption
(Table 386.1). Rarely do patients receive intestinal transplants for benign
neoplasms, hepatic failure secondary to acute diffuse intestinal infarction,
and failure of a first intestinal transplant. The complications of IF include
loss of venous access, life-­threatening infections, and IFALD.
Table 386.1  Causes of Intestinal Failure in Children
Requiring Transplantation
SHORT BOWEL
• Volvulus
• Gastroschisis
• Necrotizing enterocolitis
• Intestinal atresia
• Trauma
INTESTINAL DYSMOTILITY
• Intestinal pseudoobstruction
• MMIHS
• Intestinal aganglionosis (Hirschsprung disease)
ENTEROCYTE DYSFUNCTION
• Microvillus inclusion disease
• Tufting enteropathy
• Other congenital enteropathies
TUMORS
• Invasive intraabdominal desmoid tumor
VASCULAR
• Acute diffuse intestinal infarction with hepatic failure
MMIHS, megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome.

Paucity of Venous Access

Administration of PN requires the insertion of a centrally placed
venous catheter, there being only six readily accessible sites (bilateral
internal jugular, subclavian, iliac veins). The loss of venous access generally occurs in the setting of recurrent catheter sepsis and thrombosis.
Children who have lost three of four upper body central veins (right or
left subclavian or internal jugular) or have an occlusion of a brachiocephalic vein should be considered for intestinal transplant evaluation
due to the risk of losing the ability to provide PN.

Life-­Threatening Infections

Life-­threatening infections are usually catheter related, although their
frequency is decreasing with improvements in central venous catheter
care including antimicrobial locks. The absence of significant length
of intestine is often associated with abnormal motility of the residual
bowel (producing both delayed and/or rapid emptying), with varying
degrees of bacterial overgrowth and translocation as a consequence
of intestinal inflammation, loss of intestinal barrier function, and/or
loss of gut immunity. This situation contributes to IFALD, multisystem organ failure, and metastatic infectious foci in lungs, kidneys, liver,
bone, and the brain.

Liver Disease

The development of IFALD is the most serious complication of IF and
may be a consequence of the toxic effects of PN on hepatocytes, a disruption of bile flow as a result of lack of enteral intake, alterations in
bile acid metabolism, the frequent occurrence of bacterial overgrowth/
translocation, and sepsis with endotoxin release into the portal circulation, all often in the setting of a premature liver. Soy-­based intravenous
lipids may contribute to liver disease; the incidence of liver disease has
decreased with the use of fish oil–based products. IFALD varies in frequency depending on the patient’s age and the etiology of the IF; it is
most common in neonates with extreme short gut. Initially characterized by cholestasis and inflammation, later phases involve steatosis and
fibrosis. Cholestasis in IFALD is defined as direct/conjugated bilirubin
>2 mg/dL and more than 20% of total bilirubin after other etiologies
have been excluded. The histology includes cholestasis, bile ductular
reaction, portal inflammation, steatosis, periportal fibrosis, and liver
macrophages. Development of IFALD, as evidenced by cholestasis, is
one of the greatest predictors of mortality in children with short bowel
syndrome.

TRANSPLANTATION OPERATION
Donor Selection

Intestinal grafts are usually procured from hemodynamically stable,
ABO-­identical brain-­dead donors who have minimal clinical or laboratory evidence suggesting intraabdominal ischemia. Size matching
varies according to age of the recipients, and present surgical techniques allow for significant reductions of the graft to achieve abdominal closure. Although the exact effect is still unknown, donor-­specific
antibodies (DSAs) have been linked to rejection and poor long-­term
outcomes in the recipient leading to increased use of pretransplant
cross-­matched results to improve organ allocation, especially in sensitized recipients. Exclusion criteria include a history of malignancy
and intraabdominal evidence of infection; systemic viral or bacterial
infections are not excluded. Donor preparation has been limited to
the administration of systemic and enteral antibiotics. Prophylaxis for
graft-­versus-­host disease with graft pretreatment using irradiation or a
monoclonal antilymphocyte antibody has varied over time. Grafts have
been preserved with the University of Wisconsin solution, as is the case
with other types of abdominal organs.

Types of Intestinal Grafts

Intestinal allografts are used in various forms, either alone (as an isolated intestine graft) or as a composite graft, which can include the
liver, duodenum, and pancreas (liver-­intestine graft). When this
composite graft includes the stomach, and the recipient operation
requires the removal of all of the patient’s gastrointestinal tract (as with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 386 u Intestinal Transplantation in Children with Intestinal Failure
intestinal pseudoobstruction) and liver, then this replacement graft is
known as a multivisceral graft.
The procurement of these various types of grafts focuses on the
preservation of the arterial vessels of celiac and/or superior mesenteric
arteries, as well as appropriate venous outflow, which would include the
superior mesenteric vein or the hepatic veins in the composite grafts.
The larger composite grafts inherently retain the celiac and superior
mesenteric arteries; this includes multivisceral grafts, liver plus small
bowel grafts, and modified multivisceral grafts in which the liver is
excluded, but the entire gastrointestinal tract is replaced, including the
stomach. The isolated intestine graft retains the superior mesenteric
artery and vein. This graft can be accomplished with preservation of
the vessels going to the pancreas, when that organ has been allocated to
another recipient. The graft that is to be used in a particular recipient is
dissected out in situ and then removed after cardiac arrest of the donor,
with core cooling of the organs, using an infusion of preservation solution (Fig. 386.1).
Various modifications in these grafts have included the preservation
of visceral ganglia at the base of the arteries, the inclusion of donor
duodenum and pancreas for the liver and intestine graft, the inclusion
of colon, the reduction of the liver graft (into left or right side) and variable reduction of the intestine graft, and living donor intestine (4-­foot
segment of ileum) graft.

The Recipient Operation

Because many children have had multiple previous abdominal operations, intestinal transplantation can be a formidable technical challenge; most children require replacement of the liver because of IFALD
and often present with advanced liver failure. Transplantation of an
isolated intestinal allograft involves exposure of the lower abdomen,
infrarenal aorta, and inferior vena cava. Placement of vascular homografts using donor iliac artery and vein to these vessels allows arterialization and venous drainage of the intestinal graft. In patients who have
retained their intestine and then undergo an enterectomy at the time of
transplantation, use of the native superior mesenteric vessels is feasible.
Transplantation of a larger composite graft requires the removal and
replacement of the native liver in the liver with intestine transplant,
and complete abdominal exenteration in the multivisceral transplant.
In a similar fashion, the infrarenal aorta is exposed for placement of an
arterial conduit graft (donor thoracic aorta) for arterialization of the
graft. The venous drainage is achieved to the retained hepatic veins,
which are fashioned to a single conduit for anastomosis to the allograft
liver.
The intestinal anastomosis to native proximal and distal bowel is
performed, leaving an enterostomy of distal allograft ileum; this will
be used for routine posttransplantation surveillance endoscopy and

biopsy. This ostomy is closed 3-­6 months after transplantation (Fig.
386.2).

POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
Immunosuppression

Successful immunosuppression for intestinal transplantation occurred
with the introduction of tacrolimus in addition to corticosteroids.
This required high levels of tacrolimus (in the nephrotoxic range), and
although initial success rates were high, they were followed by rejection

MCA
IPDV
IPDA
SMV, SMA
Aorta

IVC

Fig. 386.1 Various abdominal organs can be dissected in situ, provid-

ing isolated or composite grafts to fit the individual patient’s needs.
Separation of intestine and pancreas is feasible, with preservation of the
inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery (IPDA) and vein (IPDV). The use of
vascular grafts from the donor allow connections to the superior mesenteric pedicle (artery [SMA] and vein [SMV]) to aorta and inferior vena
cava (IVC) or portal vein (inset). MCA, Major coronary artery. (From Abu-­
Elmagd K, Fung J, Bueno J, et al. Logistics and technique for procurement of intestinal, pancreatic and hepatic grafts from the same donor.
Ann Surg. 2000;232:680–697.)

Small Bowel Transplantation Surgery
Isolated Intestine

2353

Combined with Liver

Fig. 386.2 Three basic intestinal

transplant procedures (the graft is
shaded). With the isolated intestine,
the venous outflow may be to the recipient portal vein, inferior vena cava
(inset left), or superior mesenteric
vein (inset right). With the composite
grafts, which include the liver, the arterialization is from the aorta with venous
drainage out from the liver graft to the
recipient inferior vena cava.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Multivisceral

2354 Part XVI u The Digestive System
rates of >80%, infection, and late drug toxicities, resulting in a gradual
loss of grafts and patients. The next generation of protocols incorporated the addition of other agents, such as azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, induction with an interleukin (IL)-­2 antibody antagonist,
mycophenolate mofetil, and rapamycin. This modification resulted in
a decreased incidence in the severity of initial rejection; the inability
to decrease immunosuppression later did not allow for stabilization of
long-­term survival. The introduction of induction therapy has resulted
in improved transplant survival as a result of a significant decrease in
the incidence of rejection, permitting the gradual decrease of immunosuppressive drug therapy, resulting in a decline in drug toxicity events
and infections. The most common induction regimen used is T-­cell–
depleting agents followed by IL-­2 receptor antagonists. A mainstay of
maintenance immunosuppression is tacrolimus and prednisone dual
therapy, although many centers add mycophenolate mofetil or rapamycin for triple-­drug regimens when patients have had episodes of rejection. By 1 year the majority of patients are on tacrolimus monotherapy.

Allograft Assessment

There are no simple laboratory tools that allow assessment of the intestinal allograft. The gold standard for diagnosis of intestinal allograft
rejection has been serial endoscopic surveillance and biopsies through
the allograft ileostomy. Clinical signs and symptoms of rejection or
infection of the allograft can overlap and mimic each other, producing
either diarrhea or complete ileus with pseudoobstruction syndromes,
abdominal pain, or gastrointestinal bleeding. Any changes in clinical
status should warrant thorough evaluation for rejection with endoscopic biopsies and an evaluation for opportunistic infection, malabsorption, and other enteral infections.
The diagnosis of acute rejection is based on seeing destruction of
crypt epithelial cells from apoptosis, in association with a mixed lymphocytic infiltrate. These histologic findings may or may not correlate
with endoscopic evidence of injury, which varies from diffuse erythema and friability to ulcers and, in cases of severe rejection, exfoliation of the intestinal mucosa. Chronic rejection of the allograft can be
diagnosed only through full-­thickness sampling of the intestine, which
shows the typical vasculopathy that can result in progressive ischemia
of the allograft.

Rejection and Graft-­Versus-­Host Disease

Acute rejection rates for the intestinal allograft are significantly higher
than with any other organ, in the range of 60–70%, and severe rejection
requiring the use of antilymphocyte antibody preparations may be as
high as 30%. Triple-­drug regimens and the use of IL-­2 antibody inhibitors have resulted in significant decreases in rejection rates; nonetheless, the amount of immunosuppression was incompatible with
improvements in long-­term patient and graft survival. Rejection rates
of 40% are achievable with the use of antilymphocyte globulin. These
protocols induce varying degrees of prope tolerance (or almost tolerant),
which can eventually allow for minimization of immunosuppression,
thus reducing the risk of drug toxicity and infection. Vascular rejection
has been an uncommon occurrence, and chronic rejection has been
seen in approximately 10–15% of cases.
Many intestine transplant recipients are immunologically sensitized,
increasing the risk of DSA formation. DSA can be pre-­formed before
transplant or develop de novo afterward. While the negative effects of
DSA have been recognized in other types of solid organ transplant for
years, the effects in intestinal transplants are less clear. Studies show
increased episodes of both acute and chronic rejection as well as graft
loss in recipients with positive DSA antibody mediated rejection.
Graft-­
versus-­
host disease is infrequent but potentially life-­
threatening; the mortality rate exceeds 80%, and most recipients die
from infectious complications from bone marrow failure. The incidence seen in intestinal transplantation is 5–10% with increased risk

associated with liver inclusive grafts. Although no standard treatment
is available, early diagnosis, prevention of infection, and initiation
of treatment with corticosteroids as soon as possible may improve
outcomes.

Infections

Infectious complications are the most significant cause of morbidity and mortality after intestinal transplantation. The most common
is infectious enteritis although there are also bacterial, fungal, and
polymicrobial infections that occur as a result of a need for venous
catheter placement in the immediate posttransplant period or during
episodes of intestinal graft dysfunction. Infections as a consequence
of immunosuppressive drug management are from cytomegalovirus
(CMV; 22% incidence), Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV; 21% incidence), and
adenovirus enteritis (40% incidence). Despite improvements in monitoring and preventative measures, CMV remains the most common
viral infection postintestinal transplantation. CMV may be acquired
from blood transfusions, reactivation of endogenous viruses, or the
donated allograft. The highest-­risk recipients for CMV infection are
those who are immunologically naïve and receive an allograft from a
donor who is seropositive. The two CMV prevention strategies commonly employed are universal prophylaxis and preemptive therapy.
Consensus guidelines recommend prophylaxis treatment for high-­risk
patients (donor+/recipient−). The preferred drugs for CMV prophylaxis are ganciclovir and oral valganciclovir.
Patients at the highest risk for EBV infection are those who are
seronegative at the time of transplantation and those requiring a high-­
burden immunosuppressive therapy to maintain their graft. EBV
disease varies from asymptomatic viremia to posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD). The incidence of EBV-­related PTLD
is highest in patients receiving intestinal allografts compared to liver,
heart, or kidney. Children have a higher incidence of PTLD compared
to adults and are most likely to have EBV + PTLD. Early diagnosis
and prevention of PTLD is essential, and the mainstay of therapy is
to reduce immunosuppression, although some patients have required
chemotherapy. The use of anti–B-­cell monoclonal antibodies, such
as the anti-­CD20 antibody rituximab, in PTLD has been successful
as noted in anecdotal reports. Successful management of these viral
infections is achieved through early detection and preemptive therapy,
for both CMV and EBV, before the development of a serious life-­
threatening infection. This approach has improved outcomes for CMV
(see Chapters 223, 301, and 302).

Outcomes

Intestinal transplantation is the standard of care for children with IF
who have significant complications of PN and can no longer tolerate
such therapy. Graft survival at 1 and 5 years are ∼68% and 50%, respectively. One-­year graft survival was associated with first-­time transplantation and liver-­inclusive grafts, whereas poor overall graft survival
was associated with retransplantation. Patient survival was associated
with elective status of the procedure versus hospitalized status with
sepsis continuing to be the most significant factor leading to patient
death. Colon inclusion was associated with improved rates of enteral
autonomy, which increased in general over the recent decades. Rejection remained the main factor associated with long-­term graft loss with
decreasing contributions from PTLD and technical complications.
Combined adult and pediatric registry data show stable long-­term graft
survival of approximately 40%, although single centers have reported
rates as high as 60–70%. Rehabilitation and quality-­of-­life studies have
shown that more than 80% of survivors reach total independence from
PN and have meaningful life activities. Consequently, there has been a
shift in efforts to improve long-­term outcomes and quality of life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children

Chapter 387

Acute Gastroenteritis in
Children
E. Adrianne Hammershaimb and
Karen L. Kotloff
The term gastroenteritis denotes inflammation of the gastrointestinal
tract, most commonly the result of infections with bacterial, viral, or
parasitic pathogens (Tables 387.1-­387.3). Many of these infections are
food-­borne illnesses (Table 387.4). Several clinical syndromes are often
described because they have different (albeit overlapping) etiologies,
outcomes, and treatments. Acute gastroenteritis (AGE) captures the
bulk of infectious cases of diarrhea. The most common manifestations
are diarrhea and vomiting, which can also be associated with systemic
features such as abdominal pain and fever. Dysentery refers to a syndrome characterized by frequent small stools containing visible blood,
often accompanied by fever, tenesmus, and abdominal pain. This
should be distinguished from bloody diarrhea (larger volume bloody
stools with less systemic illness) because the etiologies may differ. Prolonged (lasting 7-­13 days) and persistent diarrhea (lasting 14 days or
longer) are important because of their impact on growth and nutrition.

BURDEN OF CHILDHOOD DIARRHEA

Although global mortality due to diarrheal diseases has declined
substantially (39%) during the past 2 decades, it remains unacceptably high. In 2019 diarrheal disease caused an estimated 500,000, or
10% of all deaths in children under 5 years, making it the third leading cause of under-­5 child mortality worldwide. Approximately 88%
of those deaths occurred in sub-­Saharan Africa and South Asia (71%
and 17%, respectively). Over the same period, a smaller decline (10%)
was observed in the incidence of diarrheal disease among children
younger than 5 years. Almost 1 billion episodes occurred in 2019
worldwide, resulting in an estimated 45.5 million childhood disability-­
adjusted life years. The decline in diarrheal mortality, despite the lack
of significant changes in incidence, is the result of preventive rotavirus vaccination and improved case management of diarrhea, as well as
improved nutrition of infants and children. These interventions have
included widespread home-­and hospital-­based oral rehydration solution (ORS) therapy and improved nutritional management of children
with diarrhea.
In addition to the risk of mortality, high rates of diarrhea can be
associated with long-­term adverse outcomes. Diarrheal illnesses, especially episodes among young children that are recurrent, prolonged, or
persistent, can be associated with malnutrition, stunting, micronutrient deficiencies, and significant deficits in psychomotor and cognitive
development.

PATHOGENS

Rotavirus is the most common cause of AGE among children throughout the world. Several other viruses occur less frequently. Norovirus
and sapovirus are the two genera of caliciviruses that cause AGE. Norovirus genogroup II, genotype 4 (GII.4) has predominated globally since
the mid-­1990s. Among the more than 50 serotypes of adenovirus, 40
and 41 are most often associated with diarrhea. Astroviruses are identified less often (see Table 387.1). SARS-­CoV-­2 is also recognized as
a cause of AGE in adults and in children, both as a manifestation of
COVID-­19 and as a symptom of multisystem inflammatory syndrome
in children (MIS-­C).
The major bacterial pathogens that cause AGE are nontyphoidal
Salmonella (NTS), Shigella, Campylobacter, and Yersinia (see Table
387.2). Five pathotypes of Escherichia coli infect humans: Shiga
toxin–producing (STEC), also known as enterohemorrhagic (EHEC),

2355

enterotoxigenic (ETEC), enteropathogenic (EPEC), enteroaggregative
(EAEC), and enteroinvasive (EIEC). Two serogroups of Vibrio cholerae
(O1 and O139) produce epidemic cholera and cause nearly all sporadic
cases. Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile) disease can
be both nosocomial and community acquired in children. Bacterial
pathogens that cause food-­borne illness due to their ability to produce
emetic and/or enterotoxins include Bacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringens, and Staphylococcus aureus. The significance of isolating Aeromonas and Plesiomonas in a diarrheal stool remains uncertain.
Giardia duodenalis, Cryptosporidium spp., Cyclospora cayetanensis,
and Entamoeba histolytica are the most common parasites that cause
diarrhea in the United States (see Table 387.3). At least 13 species of
Cryptosporidium are associated with human disease, but C. hominis
and, to a lesser extent, C. parvum are most common. The genus Entamoeba comprises six species that colonize humans, but only E. histolytica is considered a human pathogen. G. duodenalis (formerly G.
lamblia and G. intestinalis) is a flagellate protozoan that infects the
small intestine and biliary tract. Other protozoa that uncommonly
cause AGE are Cystoisospora belli (formerly Isospora belli) and Blastocystis hominis.

EPIDEMIOLOGY IN THE UNITED STATES AND
OTHER MIDDLE-­AND HIGH-­INCOME COUNTRIES
Risk Factors Related to Economic Development

Insufficient access to adequate hygiene, sanitation, and clean drinking water are the main factors leading to the heavy burden of AGE in
developing countries. Although the severe consequences have become
uncommon, infectious AGE remains ubiquitous in middle-­and high-­
income countries. Economic development poses its own risks for transmission of enteric pathogens. The ability to mass produce and widely
distribute food has led to large multistate outbreaks of AGE due to NTS,
STEC, and other agents (see Table 387.4). Globalization has cultivated a
taste for tropical fruits and vegetables, creating a mechanism for importation of novel pathogens. The increasing frequency of antimicrobial
resistance among bacteria that cause AGE has been linked to the use of
antibiotics as growth promotors for animals bred for food. Recreational
swimming facilities and water treatment systems have provided a vehicle
for massive outbreaks of Cryptosporidium, a chlorine-­resistant organism.
Venues serving catered food to large groups of people, such as hotels
and cruise ships, are conducive to outbreaks, as are institutions where
hygiene is compromised, such as daycare centers, prisons, and nursing
homes. Hospitalization and modern medical therapy have created a
niche for nosocomial C. difficile toxin infection. Childcare and schoolbased outbreaks are often due to norovirus and Shigella spp.

Endemic Diarrhea

In the United States, rotavirus was the most common cause of medically
attended AGE among children younger than 5 years until the introduction of rotavirus vaccine for routine immunization of infants in 2006.
Before 2006, annual epidemics swept across the country beginning in
the southwest in November and reaching the northeast by May, affecting nearly every child by the age of 2 years. Since vaccine introduction,
healthcare utilization for AGE has decreased markedly at a considerable cost savings. Norovirus is now the leading cause of AGE among
children in the United States seeking healthcare, followed by sapovirus,
adenoviruses 40 and 41, and astrovirus (see Table 387.1).

Laboratory-­Based Surveillance for Food-­Borne
Pathogens

The most comprehensive resource for describing the burden of bacterial and protozoal diarrhea in the United States is the Foodborne
Diseases Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet) maintained by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (see Table 387.4).
FoodNet performs active laboratory-­
based surveillance of nine
bacterial and protozoal enteric pathogens commonly transmitted
by food. Among children 0-­19 years of age in 2019, NTS was most
common, followed by Campylobacter, STEC, and Shigella. Vibrio
and Yersinia were the least common. As of January 1, 2018, FoodNet has stopped conducting active surveillance for Cryptosporidium;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2356 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 387.1  Etiologies of Viral Gastroenteritis

ETIOLOGY

INCUBATION
PERIOD

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION OF
ILLNESS

PRINCIPAL
VEHICLE AND
TRANSMISSION

RISK FACTORS

COMMERCIALLY
AVAILABLE
DIAGNOSTIC TEST

Caliciviruses
(including
noroviruses and
sapoviruses)

12-­48 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
abdominal
cramping, diarrhea,
fever, myalgia, and
some headache

1-­3 days

Person-­to-­person
(fecal-­oral and
aerosolized
vomit), and
food, water,
and fomites
contaminated
with human feces

Very contagious
(chlorine and
heat resistant);
produces large
outbreaks in
closed settings
such as cruise
ships, daycares,
schools, and
restaurants
Shellfish

Multiplex PCR
RT-­qPCR of stool
and vomit is the
preferred method
for outbreak
investigation,
available in public
health laboratories
Immunoassays for
norovirus have
poor sensitivity
Norovirus
genotyping (GI and
GII) is performed
by CDC

Rotavirus
(groups A-­C),
astrovirus, and
enteric
adenovirus
(serotypes 40
and 41)

2-­4 days

Often begins with
vomiting, followed
by watery diarrhea,
low-­grade fever

3-­8 days

Person-­to-­person
(fecal-­oral),
fomites
Aerosol
transmission of
rotavirus may be
possible

Nearly all infants
and children
worldwide
were infected
by 2 yr of age
before vaccine
introduction

Multiplex PCR
Immunoassays for
rotavirus and
enteric adenovirus

SARS-­CoV-­2

2-­14 days

Acute COVID-­19:
Fever, chills, cough,
shortness of breath,
difficulty breathing,
fatigue, myalgia,
headache, anosmia,
dysgeusia, sore
throat, congestion,
runny nose, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea is
usually nonbloody
but may be blood
tinged
MIS-­C: fever,
abdominal pain,
vomiting, diarrhea,
rash,
conjunctivitis,
dizziness or
light-­headedness

Acute COVID-­19:
May be self-­
limited, less
than 2 wk
Prolonged
symptoms may
last months
(e.g., fatigue,
anosmia,
dysgeusia)
MIS-­C: unclear;
often fatal if
untreated

Respiratory
aerosols and
droplets; airborne
precautions
recommended

Unvaccinated
immune status
Local
epidemiology
and lack of
transmission
mitigating
precautions

RT-PCR (may be
included in a
multiplex PCR)
Antigen
immunoassay
Serology (may be
useful for the
diagnosis of MIS-­C
but not for acute
COVID-­19)

Note: Commercially available denotes that the diagnostic tests have been cleared by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
RT, Real-­time reverse transcriptase; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; MIS-­C, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Diagnosis and management of foodborne illnesses. MMWR. 2004;53(RR-­4):1–33.

in 2015, Cryptosporidium was the fourth most commonly identified
food-­borne pathogen in U.S. children less than 19 years of age. Children younger than 5 years have the highest incidence of food-­borne
diarrheal disease, whereas the elderly have the highest frequency of
hospitalization and death. Only 5% of these infections are associated
with recognized outbreaks.
Toxin-­mediated food-­b orne gastroenteritis may be infectious
or noninfectious. Pathogens that cause toxin-­
mediated food-­
borne gastroenteritis include S. aureus, B. cereus, and C. perfringens. Ingestion of food contaminated with the preformed S. aureus
heat-­stable enterotoxin types A to E causes staphylococcal food
poisoning. B. cereus produces two forms of gastrointestinal illness,
one resembling staphylococcal food poisoning and caused by a
preformed emetic toxin, and the other caused by a group of three
enterotoxins formed in vivo. Ingested C. perfringens sporulates
in the small intestine, releasing a heat-­labile, single-­p olypeptide
enterotoxin. Noninfectious agents may also cause food-­
b orne
gastrointestinal symptoms due to a direct toxic effect of the food
(mushrooms), contamination (heavy metals), or fish or shellfish
toxins (Table 387.5).

Diarrhea Outbreaks

The U.S. Foodborne Disease Outbreak Surveillance System quantifies enteric infections associated with food-­borne outbreaks. In 2017,
among all age-­groups, norovirus was the most common agent (49%),
followed by NTS (19%). Less common were C. perfringens (6%), Campylobacter (4%), STEC (3%), S. aureus (2%), and B. cereus (2%), followed much less often (each 1%) by Clostridium botulinum, Shigella,
Cryptosporidium, Yersinia, Listeria, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, and Shigella. Outbreaks of enteric pathogens propagated by direct person-­to-­
person contact are most often caused by norovirus and Shigella species;
other pathogens include NTS, rotavirus, Giardia, Cryptosporidium, C.
difficile, and Campylobacter jejuni.

Nosocomial Diarrhea

C. difficile is the most common cause of healthcare-­associated infection in the United States. Severe disease occurs most often in those
with predisposing conditions (e.g., recent antibiotics, gastric acid
suppression, immunosuppression, gastrointestinal comorbidities). In
contrast to adults, rates of colostomy and in-­hospital mortality have
not increased in children despite increasing rates of community and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 387.2  Etiologies of Bacterial Gastroenteritis
INCUBATION
PERIOD

ETIOLOGY

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children
DURATION
OF ILLNESS

PRINCIPAL
VEHICLE AND
TRANSMISSION

RISK
FACTORS

2357

COMMERCIALLY
AVAILABLE
DIAGNOSTIC TEST

Bacillus cereus
(preformed
emetic toxin)

1-­6 hr

Sudden onset of severe
nausea and vomiting;
diarrhea may be present

24 hr

Soil and water

Improperly
refrigerated cooked
or fried rice, meats

Routine stool culture
to look for
overabundance of
pathogen, does
not detect toxins
Reference laboratory
used for outbreaks

B. cereus
(enterotoxins
formed in vivo)

8-­16 hr

Abdominal cramps, watery
diarrhea; nausea and
vomiting may be present

1-­2 days

Soil and water

Meats, stews,
gravies, vanilla
sauce

Routine stool culture
to look for overab
undance of
pathogen, does
not detect toxins
Reference laboratory
used for outbreaks

Campylobacter
jejuni

1-­5 days

Diarrhea, (10–20% of
episodes are
prolonged), cramps,
fever, and
vomiting; bloody
diarrhea, bacteremia,
extraintestinal
infections, severe
disease in
immunocompromised

5-­7 days
(sometimes
>10 days)
usually self-­
limiting

Wild and
domestic
animals and
animal
products

Raw and undercooked
poultry,
unpasteurized milk,
untreated surface
water

Stool culture on
selective agar,
microaerobic
conditions, and
incubation at 42°C
Antigen detection
by EIA
Multiplex PCR

Clostridioides
difficile toxin

Unknown
Can appear
weeks after
antibiotic
cessation

Mild to moderate watery
diarrhea that can
progress to severe,
pseudomembranous
colitis with systemic
toxicity

Variable

Person-­to-­person Immunosuppression,
(fecal-­oral),
intestinal disease or
mostly within
surgery,
healthcare
prolonged
facilities
hospitalization,
antibiotics

PCR,† immunoassay
Multistep approach
using EIA for GDH
and toxins A and B
± NAAT

Clostridium
perfringens
toxin

8-­16 hr

Watery diarrhea, nausea,
abdominal cramps; fever
is rare

1-­2 days

Environment,
human and
animal
intestines

Meats, poultry, gravy,
dried or precooked
foods with poor
temperature control

None
Reference laboratory
used for outbreaks

Escherichia coli
O157:H7 and
other Shiga
toxin–producing
E. coli (STEC)

1-­9 days
(usually 3-­4
days)

Watery diarrhea that
becomes bloody in 1-­4
days in ∼40% of
infections; in contrast to
dysentery, bloody stools
are large volume and
fever/toxicity is minimal
More common in
children <4 yr old

4-­7 days

Food and water Undercooked beef
contaminated
especially
with feces from
hamburger,
ruminants;
unpasteurized milk
infected
and juice, raw fruits,
people and
and petting zoos,
animals
recreational
(fecal-­oral);
swimming, daycare
predominantly Antimotility agents
high-­resource
and antibiotics
countries
increase risk of
hemolytic uremic
syndrome

Multiplex PCR to
detect E. coli
O157:H7 and
non-O157:H7 Shiga
toxin genes
simultaneously with
stool culture on
sorbitol-­MacConkey
agar
Immunoassay
for O157:H7;
presumptive E. coli
O157:H7 isolates
and all Shiga
toxin-positive stool
specimens that
did not yield a
presumptive E. coli
O157:H7 isolate
should be sent
to a public health
laboratory to identify
non-O157:H7 STEC
and for serotyping
and whole genome
sequencing

Enterotoxigenic
E. coli (ETEC)

1-­5 days

Watery diarrhea,
abdominal cramps,
some vomiting

3-­7 days

Water or food
contaminated
with human
feces

Infants and young
children in LMIC
and travelers

Multiplex PCR,†or
reference
laboratory

Salmonella,
nontyphoidal

1-­5 days

Diarrhea, (10–20%
prolonged), cramps, fever,
and vomiting; bloody
diarrhea, bacteremia,
extraintestinal infections,
severe disease in
immunocompromised

5-­7 days
(sometimes
>10 days)
usually
self-­limiting

Domestic
poultry,
cattle,
reptiles,
amphibians,
birds

Ingestion of raw or
undercooked food,
improper food
handling, travelers,
immunosuppression,
hemolytic anemia,
achlorhydria,
contact with
infected animal

Multiplex PCR
Routine stool culture

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Continued

2358 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 387.2  Etiologies of Bacterial Gastroenteritis—cont’d
RISK
FACTORS

COMMERCIALLY
AVAILABLE
DIAGNOSTIC TEST

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

Shigella spp.

1-­5 days
(up to 10
days for S.
dysenteriae
type 1)

Abdominal cramps, fever,
diarrhea
Begins with watery
stools that can be the
only manifestation or
proceed to dysentery

5-­7 days

Infected people Poor hygiene and
or fecally
sanitation,
contaminated
crowding, travelers,
surfaces
daycare, MSM,
(fecal-­oral)
prisoners

Multiplex PCR
Routine stool culture

Staphylococcus
aureus
(preformed
enterotoxin)

1-­6 hours

Sudden onset of severe
nausea and vomiting
Abdominal cramps
Diarrhea and fever may be
present

1-­3 days

Birds, mammals, Unrefrigerated or
dairy, and
improperly
environment
refrigerated meats,
potato and egg
salads, cream
pastries

Routine stool
culture to look for
overabundance of
pathogen, does
not detect toxins
Reference laboratory
used for outbreaks

Vibrio cholerae
O1 and O139

1-­5 days

Watery diarrhea and
vomiting, which can
be profuse and lead to
severe dehydration and
death within hours

3-­7 days

Food and water Contaminated water,
contaminated
fish, shellfish,
with human
street-­vended food
feces
from endemic or
epidemic settings;
blood group O,
vitamin A deficiency

Stool culture
(requires special
TCBS media so
laboratory must be
notified)
Rapid test is useful
in epidemics but
does not provide
susceptibility or
subtype so should
not be used for
routine diagnosis.
FDA-­approved
multiplex PCR

Vibrio
2-­48 hr
parahaemolyticus

Watery diarrhea,
abdominal cramps,
nausea, vomiting
Bacteremia and wound
infections occur
uncommonly, especially
in high-­risk patients,
e.g., with liver disease
and diabetes

2-­5 days

Estuaries
Undercooked or raw
and marine
seafood, such as
environments;
fish, shellfish
currently
undergoing
pandemic
spread

Culture of stool,
wound, or blood
depending on
suspected source
Requires special
TCBS media so
laboratory must be
notified
Multiplex PCR

Vibrio vulnificus

1-­7 days

Vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain
Bacteremia and wound
infections, particularly
in patients with chronic
liver disease (presents
with septic shock and
hemorrhagic bullous skin
lesions)

2-­8 days

Estuaries
and marine
environments

Undercooked or raw
shellfish, especially
oysters, other
contaminated
seafood, and open
wounds exposed to
seawater

Culture of stool,
wound, or blood
depending on
suspected source
Requires special
TCBS media so
laboratory must be
notified
Multiplex PCR

Yersinia
enterocolitica
and Y. pseudo­
tuberculosis

1-­5 days

Diarrhea, (10–20%
prolonged), cramps, fever,
and vomiting; bloody
diarrhea, bacteremia,
extraintestinal infections,
severe disease in
immunocompromised;
pseudoappendicitis
occurs primarily in older
children

5-­7 days
(sometimes
>10 days)
usually
self-­limiting

Swine products, Undercooked
occasionally
pork, improper
person-­to-­
food handling,
person and
unpasteurized milk,
animal-­to-­
tofu, contaminated
humans,
water, transfusion
water-­borne,
from a bacteremic
blood-­borne
person, cirrhosis,
(can multiply
chelation therapy
during
refrigeration)

Stool culture or
multiplex PCR
Culture requires
special media and
incubation at 25°C.
Not performed in
many laboratories
unless requested
When clinically
relevant, can
isolate from vomit,
blood, throat,
lymph nodes, joint
fluid, urine, and
bile

ETIOLOGY

DURATION
OF ILLNESS

PRINCIPAL
VEHICLE AND
TRANSMISSION

INCUBATION
PERIOD

†FDA-­cleared multiplex PCR assays are available but cannot determine antimicrobial susceptibility to guide treatment or speciate the organism for outbreak investigation.

EIA, Enzyme immunoassays; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; GDH, glutamate dehydrogenase; NAAT, nucleic acid amplification test; LMIC, low-­and middle-­income countries; MSM,
men who have sex with men; TCBS, thiosulfate-­citrate-­bile salts-­sucrose agar; FDA, U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Diagnosis and management of foodborne illnesses. MMWR. 2004;53(RR-­4):1–33.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children

2359

Table 387.3  Etiologies of Parasitic Gastroenteritis
SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION OF
ILLNESS

PRINCIPAL
VEHICLE AND
TRANSMISSION

RISK FACTORS

COMMERCIALLY
AVAILABLE
DIAGNOSTIC TEST

ETIOLOGY

INCUBATION
PERIOD

Cryptosporidium

1-­11 days

Diarrhea (usually
watery), bloating,
flatulence, cramps,
malabsorption,
weight loss, and
fatigue may wax
and wane
Persons with AIDS
or malnutrition
have more severe
disease

1-­2 wk; may be
remitting and
relapsing over
weeks to months

Person-­to-­person
(fecal-­oral),
contaminated
food and water
(including
municipal and
recreational
water
contaminated
with human
feces)

Infants 6-­18 mo of
age living in
endemic
settings in LMIC,
patients with
AIDS, childcare
settings,
drinking
unfiltered surface
water, MSM, Ig
deficiency

Immunoassays, PCR,
and multiplex PCR
are most sensitive
Microscopy (direct
fluorescent
antibody staining is
preferable to
modified acid fast)

Cyclospora
cayetanensis

1-­11 days

Same as
Cryptosporidium

Same as
Cryptosporidium

Fresh produce
(imported
berries, lettuce)

Travelers,
consumption of
fresh produce
imported from
the tropics

Fecal microscopy,
multiplex PCR
May need to
examine water or
food

Entamoeba
histolytica

2-­4 wk

Gradual onset of
cramps, watery
diarrhea and often
dysentery with
cramps but rarely
fever
Can wax and wane
with weight loss
Dissemination to live
and other organs
can occur

Variable; may
be protracted
(several weeks to
several months)

Fecal-­oral
transmission
Any uncooked
food or food
contaminated
by an ill food
handler after
cooking;
drinking water

Persons living in or
traveling to LMIC,
institutionalized
persons, MSM

Immunoassay or
multiplex PCR are
preferred
Fecal microscopy
of fresh stool for
cysts and parasites
on at least three
samples can also
be performed
Serology for
extraintestinal
infections

Giardia
duodenalis

1-­4 wk

Diarrhea, stomach
cramps, gas, weight
loss; symptoms may
wax and wane

2-­4 wk

Any uncooked
food or food
contaminated
by an ill food
handler after
cooking;
drinking water

Hikers
drinking
unfiltered surface
water, persons
living in or
traveling to
LMIC, MSM, IgA
deficiency

Immunoassay or
multiplex PCR
preferred
Fecal microscopy for
ova and parasites
can be performed; at
least three samples
recommended

LMIC, Low-­and middle-­income countries; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; MSM, men having sex with men.

hospital-­acquired C. difficile infection, suggesting that C. difficile may
be less pathogenic in children. Moreover, high rates of asymptomatic
carriage among children younger than 2 years create diagnostic uncertainty, so children <1 year should never be routinely tested; testing and
treatment in children 1-­2 years of age should be reserved for those in
whom noninfectious or other infectious causes have been ruled out,
and children ≥2 years may be tested if they have prolonged or worsening diarrhea and relevant risk factors or exposures (see Table 387.2).

for STEC to asymptomatically colonize the intestines of ruminant
animals explains why unpasteurized dairy products, fruits harvested
from fields where cattle graze, and undercooked hamburger are common vehicles. The major animal reservoir for Yersinia is pigs, so ingestion of raw or undercooked pork products is an important risk factor.
Pets can be the source of NTS (asymptomatic young birds, amphibians, and reptiles), Campylobacter, and Yersinia (puppies and kittens
that are usually ill with diarrhea).

Zoonotic Transmission

Seasonality

Many diarrheal pathogens are acquired from animal reservoirs
(see Tables 387.1-­387.3). The ability of NTS to undergo transovarian passage in hens allows infection of intact grade A pasteurized
eggs, a source of multiple large outbreaks. Although Campylobacter
is prevalent in poultry, its lower outbreak potential has been attributed to its lack of transovarian spread in hens and stringent growth
requirements, which limit its ability to replicate in foods. On the
other hand, Campylobacter has an extensive reservoir in domestic and
wild animals and remains a major cause of sporadic bacterial food-­
borne disease in industrialized countries, usually from consumption
of contaminated chicken meat, beef, and milk. Its ubiquitous animal
reservoir also has resulted in widespread contamination of surface
waters, resulting in diarrhea among hikers and campers who drink
from streams, ponds, and lakes in wilderness areas. The predilection

Seasonality provides a clue to implicate specific pathogens, although
patterns may differ in tropical and temperate climates. Rotavirus and
norovirus peak in cool seasons, while enteric adenovirus infections
occur throughout the year, with some increase in summer. Salmonella,
Shigella, and Campylobacter favor warm weather, whereas the tendency
for Yersinia to tolerate cold manifests as a winter seasonality, with
higher prevalence in northern countries, and the ability to survive in
contaminated blood products during refrigeration.

EPIDEMIOLOGY IN LOW-­AND MIDDLE-­INCOME
COUNTRIES

Large epidemiologic studies conducted during the previous decade have
advanced our understanding of the etiology of diarrheal disease among
children in low-­resource countries. The Global Enteric Multicenter

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2360 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 387.4  Number of Laboratory-­Diagnosed Bacterial and Parasitic Infections, Hospitalizations, Deaths,
Outbreak-­Associated Infections, and Crude Incidence by Pathogen — Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance
Network, 10 U.S. sites,* 2021†
2021
NO. (%)
NUMBER OF
INFECTIONS§

HOSPITALIZATIONS¶

DEATHS**

OUTBREAK-­ASSOCIATED
INFECTIONS††

Total

22,019

5,359 (24)

153 (0.7)

861 (4)

—

Campylobacter

8,974

1,822 (20)

33 (0.4)

51 (0.6)

17.8

Salmonella

7,148

1,974 (28)

52 (0.7)

597 (8)

14.2

STEC

2,542

600 (24)

10 (0.4)

79 (3)

5.0

Shigella

1,699

532 (31)

8 (0.5)

67 (4)

3.4

Yersinia

683

146 (21)

3 (0.4)

2 (0.3)

1.4

Vibrio

461

117 (25)

9 (2)

8 (2)

0.9

Listeria

148

140 (95)

37 (25)

9 (6)

0.3

Cyclospora

364

28 (8)

1 (0.3)

48 (13)

0.7

PATHOGEN

CRUDE
INCIDENCE§§

*Data were obtained from laboratories in Connecticut, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota, New Mexico, Oregon, Tennessee, and selected counties in California, Colorado, and New
York.† 2021 data are preliminary.§ Bacterial infections diagnosed by culture or CIDT. Cyclospora infections diagnosed by microcopy or polymerase chain reaction.¶ Admission to an
inpatient unit or an observation stay of >24 hours within 7 days before or after specimen collection or determined to be related to the infection if beyond this time frame. Absolute
change in percentage of infections resulting in hospitalization during 2021 compared with annual average for 2016–2018: Campylobacter (0.3), Salmonella (0.3), STEC (1), Shigella
(8), Yersinia (−4), Vibrio (−5), Listeria (−2), Cyclospora (2), and overall (0.6). Unknown hospitalization status (10% of infections during 2021 and 4% during 2016–2018) was classified as
not hospitalized.
**Attributed to infection when deaths occurred during hospitalization or within 7 days after specimen collection for nonhospitalized patients. Absolute change in percentage of
infections resulting in death during 2021 compared with annual average for 2016–2018: Campylobacter (<0.1), Salmonella (0.3), STEC (<0.1), Shigella (0.4), Yersinia (−0.7), Vibrio
(−0.2), Listeria (6), Cyclospora (0.1), and overall (0.2). Unknown death status (8% of infections during 2021 and 3% during 2016–2018) was not classified as a death.†† Generally
defined as two or more cases of similar illness associated with a common exposure; some sites also stipulate that illnesses be from more than one household. Absolute change in
percentage of outbreak-­associated infections during 2021 compared with annual average for 2016–2018: Campylobacter (0.2), Salmonella (1), STEC (−1), Shigella (−1), Yersinia (0.2),
Vibrio (−2), Listeria (1), Cyclospora (−10), and overall (<0.1). Unknown outbreak-­association status (0.02% of infections during 2021 and 0% during 2016–2018) was classified as not
outbreak-­associated.§§ Cases per 100,000 population. Domestic incidences (cases with no or unknown travel) by pathogen during 2021: Campylobacter (17.0), Salmonella (13.1),
STEC (4.6), Shigella (3.0), Yersinia (1.3), Vibrio (0.8), Listeria (0.3), and Cyclospora (0.6).
CIDT, Culture-­independent diagnostic test; STEC, Shiga toxin–producing E. coli.
Modified from Collins JP, Shah HJ, Weller DL, et al. Preliminary incidence and trends of infections caused by pathogens transmitted commonly through food – foodborne diseases
active surveillance network, 10 U.S. sites, 2016-­2021. MMWR. 2022;71(4):1260–1263.

Study (GEMS) evaluated children younger than 5 years living in seven
low-­income countries in sub-­Saharan Africa and South Asia and seeking healthcare for moderate to severe diarrhea (Fig. 387.1). Although
a broad array of pathogens was identified, most episodes of moderate
to severe diarrhea were attributed to four pathogens: rotavirus, Cryptosporidium, Shigella, and ETEC producing heat-­stable toxin (ST) either
alone or in combination with heat-­labile toxin (LT), herein termed ST-­
ETEC and LT-­ETEC, and, to a lesser extent, adenoviruses 40 and 41.
On the other hand, several etiologic agents that are common causes of
AGE in high-­resource settings are notable for their low frequency in
resource-­limited settings: NTS, STEC, norovirus, and C. difficile toxin.
The three agents associated with most deaths among children <5 years
are rotavirus (29%), Cryptosporidium (12%), and Shigella (11%). The
Etiology, Risk Factors, and Interactions of Enteric Infections and Malnutrition and the Consequences for Child Health and Development
Project (MAL-­ED) was a study of less severe, community-­based diarrhea. Viral causes predominated (36.4% of the overall incidence), but
Shigella had the single highest attributable incidence (26.1 attributable
episodes per 100 child-­years).

Host Risk Factors

Most pathogens show an age predilection. The incidence of rotavirus and NTS are highest in infancy. Endemic shigellosis peaks in 1-­
to 4-­year olds, whereas Campylobacter and Cryptosporidium show a
bimodal distribution with the greatest number of reported cases in
infants and young children with a secondary peak in young adults.
Pandemic V. cholerae and Shigella. dysenteriae type 1 produce high
attack rates and mortality in all age-­groups and often afflict displaced
persons in emergency settings. Some agents (e.g., NTS, Shigella, Campylobacter, Yersinia, and Cryptosporidium) are more frequent and more
severe when the host is immunocompromised or malnourished.

Additional risks factors for AGE include immunodeficiency, measles, malnutrition, and lack of exclusive or predominant breastfeeding.
Malnutrition increases the risk of diarrhea and associated mortality, and moderate to severe stunting increases the odds of diarrhea-­
associated mortality. The fraction of such infectious diarrhea deaths
that are attributable to nutritional deficiencies varies with the prevalence of deficiencies; the highest attributable fractions are in sub-­
Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Andean Latin America. The risks are
especially high with malnutrition, particularly when associated with
micronutrient deficiency. Vitamin A deficiency accounts for 157,000
deaths from diarrhea, measles, and malaria. Zinc deficiency is estimated to cause 116,000 deaths from diarrhea and pneumonia.

PATHOGENESIS OF INFECTIOUS GASTROENTERITIS

Intrinsic properties of the organism help to define the mode of transmission and incubation period (Table 387.6). Enteropathogens that are
infectious in small inocula (Shigella, STEC, norovirus, rotavirus, G.
duodenalis, Cryptosporidium spp., C. difficile, E. histolytica) are readily transmitted by person-­to-­person contact via the fecal-­oral route.
Pathogens with larger infectious doses, such as cholera, NTS, ETEC,
and Campylobacter, generally require food or water vehicles (see Tables
387.1-­387.3). Pathogens that produce preformed toxins (S. aureus, B.
cereus emetic toxin) have shorter incubation periods (1-­6 hours) compared with 8-­16 hours for those that must elaborate enterotoxins in situ
(e.g., C. perfringens and B. cereus enterotoxin). Incubation periods of
1-­5 days are seen with pathogens that attach to the epithelium and elaborate enterotoxins (e.g., V. cholerae, ETEC) or cytotoxins (e.g., S. dysenteriae type 1 and STEC) or those that invade and disrupt the intestinal
epithelium (Shigella, NTS, Campylobacter, and Yersinia). The requirement for protozoa to progress through a life cycle to trigger pathogenic processes results in a more extended incubation period. Other

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children

2361

Fig. 387.1 Attributable incidence of pathogen-­specific moderate to severe diarrhea per 100 child-­years by age stratum, all sites combined. The bars

show the incidence rates and the error bars show the 95% confidence intervals. ST/LT-ETEC, heat-stable toxin (ST) / heat labile toxin (LT)-enterotoxigenic
Escherichia coli; tEPEC, traditional (t) enteropathogenic Escherichia coli. (From Kotloff KL, Nataro JP, Blackwelder WC, et al. Burden and aetiology of
diarrhoeal disease in infants and young children in developing countries [the Global Enteric Multicenter Study, GEMS]: a prospective, case-­control study.
Lancet. 2013;382:209–222. Fig. 4.)

properties affecting transmissibility are bioavailability as conferred by
a copious and/or prolonged fecal shedding, extended infectivity in the
environment, and resistance to disinfection (all exhibited by norovirus
and Cryptosporidium), or a large environmental or animal reservoir
(e.g., Campylobacter). The ability to circumvent immune surveillance
by frequent antigenic changes resulting from recombinational events
(e.g., norovirus) or a large serotype diversity (e.g., Shigella) maintains a
susceptible host population.
Viral AGE causes a cytolytic infection of the small intestinal villus
tips resulting in decreased absorption of water, disaccharide malabsorption, inflammation, and cytokine activation. The rotavirus protein
NSP4 acts as a viral enterotoxin that causes secretory diarrhea. In addition, rotavirus activates the enteric nervous system, causing decreased
gastric emptying and increased intestinal mobility. There is a genetic
susceptibility to both rotavirus and norovirus infection that is mediated by histo-­blood group antigens on the epithelial cell surface and in
mucus secretions (Fig. 387.2).
Pathogens primarily manifesting as secretory diarrhea attach to the
surface of the epithelium and stimulate secretion of water and electrolytes
by activating adenylate cyclase and raising intracellular cAMP (V. cholerae and LT-­ETEC) and/or cGMP (ST-­ETEC) (Figs. 387.3 and 387.4).
The diarrheagenic phenotype of C. difficile is attributed to production
of toxins A (an enterotoxin) and B (an enterotoxin and cytotoxin). The

epidemic hypervirulent NAP1 C. difficile also makes binary toxin, which
may enhance colonization and augment toxin production.
Shigella, NTS, Campylobacter, and Yersinia all possess an invasive
phenotype and elicit diarrhea by a variety of mechanisms that generally involves elicitation of inflammatory cytokines with or without
associated toxin production (Fig. 387.5). The pathogenesis of Shigella,
the most common cause of bacillary dysentery, has been characterized in greatest detail. Following invasion, Shigella induces extensive
destruction and inflammation of the intestinal epithelium, producing
ulcers and microabscesses that manifest with diarrheal stools containing blood and pus. Production of enterotoxins contributes to secretory
diarrhea, which can be seen early in shigellosis or as the sole manifestation. A single serotype of Shigella, S. dysenteriae type 1, elaborates the
Shiga toxin, which increases the severity of illness and is responsible for
the development of hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS).
Cryptosporidia sporozoites released from ingested cysts penetrate
intestinal epithelial cells and develop into trophozoites within the
intracellular but extracytoplasmic environment. After undergoing
asexual multiplication and sexual development, they are released in
the colon as infectious oocysts capable of causing autoinfection. Host
factors, in particular T-­cell function, play a critical role in disease
severity. Cyclospora cysts are not infectious in freshly passed stools
but must sporulate in the environment for 1-­2 weeks to become

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2362 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 387.5  Food-­Borne Noninfectious Illnesses
INCUBATION
PERIOD

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION
OF ILLNESS

ASSOCIATED
FOODS

Antimony

5 min-­8 hr
usually <1 hr

Vomiting, metallic
taste

Usually
self-­limited

Metallic container

Identification of
metal in
beverage or
food

Supportive care

Arsenic

Few hours

Vomiting, colic,
diarrhea

Several days

Contaminated
food

Urine
Can cause
eosinophilia

Gastric lavage, BAL
(dimercaprol)

Cadmium

5 min-­8 hr
usually <1 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
myalgia, increase in
salivation, stomach
pain

Usually
self-­limited

Seafood, oysters,
clams, lobster,
grains, peanuts

Identification of
metal in food

Supportive care

Ciguatera fish
poisoning
(ciguatera toxin)

2-­6 hr

GI: abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea

Days to weeks
to months

A variety of large
reef fish:
grouper, red
snapper,
amberjack, and
barracuda (most
common)

Radioassay for
toxin in fish or a
consistent history

Supportive care, IV
mannitol
Children more
vulnerable

3 hr

Neurologic:
paresthesias,
reversal of hot or
cold, pain, weakness

2-­5 days

Cardiovascular:
bradycardia,
hypotension,
increase in T-­wave
abnormalities

Copper

5 min-­8 hr
usually <1 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
blue or green
vomitus

Usually
self-­limited

Metallic container

Identification of
metal in beverage
or food

Supportive care

Mercury

1 wk or longer

Numbness, weakness
of legs, spastic
paralysis, impaired
vision, blindness,
coma
Pregnant women
and the developing
fetus are especially
vulnerable

May be
protracted

Fish exposed to
organic mercury,
grains treated
with mercury
fungicides

Analysis of blood,
hair

Supportive care

Mushroom toxins,
short-­acting
(muscimol,
muscarine,
psilocybin, Coprinus
atramentaria,
ibotenic acid)

<2 hr

Vomiting, diarrhea,
confusion, visual
disturbance,
salivation,
diaphoresis,
hallucinations,
disulfiram-­like
reaction, confusion,
visual disturbance

Self-­limited

Wild mushrooms
(cooking might
not destroy
these toxins)

Typical syndrome
and mushroom
identified or
demonstration of
the toxin

Supportive care

Mushroom toxins,
long-­acting
(amanitin)

4-­8 hr diarrhea;
24-­48 hr liver
failure

Diarrhea, abdominal
cramps, leading to
hepatic and renal
failure

Often fatal

Mushrooms

Typical syndrome
and mushroom
identified and/or
demonstration of
the toxin

Supportive care,
life-­threatening,
may need life
support

Nitrite poisoning

1-­2 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
Usually
cyanosis, headache,
self-­limited
dizziness, weakness,
loss of consciousness,
chocolate-­brown
blood

Cured meats, any
contaminated
foods, spinach
exposed to
excessive
nitrification

Analysis of the
food, blood

Supportive care,
methylene blue

ETIOLOGY

LABORATORY
TESTING

TREATMENT

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children

2363

Table 387.5  Food-­Borne Noninfectious Illnesses—cont’d
INCUBATION
PERIOD

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION
OF ILLNESS

ASSOCIATED
FOODS

Pesticides
(organophosphates
or carbamates)

Few minutes
to few hours

Nausea, vomiting,
abdominal cramps,
diarrhea, headache,
nervousness, blurred
vision, twitching,
convulsions,
salivation, meiosis

Usually
self-­limited

Any contaminated
food

Analysis of the
food, blood

Atropine; 2-­PAM
(pralidoxime)
is used when
atropine is not
able to control
symptoms;
rarely necessary
in carbamate
poisoning

Puffer fish
(tetrodotoxin)

<30 min

Paresthesias,
vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain,
ascending paralysis,
respiratory failure

Death usually
in 4-­6 hr

Puffer fish

Detection of
tetrodotoxin in
fish

Life-­threatening,
may need
respiratory
support

Scombroid
(histamine)

1 min-­3 hr

Flushing, rash, burning
sensation of skin,
mouth and throat,
dizziness, urticaria,
paresthesias

3-­6 hr

Fish: bluefin,
tuna, skipjack,
mackerel,
marlin, escolar,
and mahi

Demonstration
of histamine in
food or clinical
diagnosis

Supportive care,
antihistamines

Shellfish toxins
(diarrheic,
neurotoxic,
amnesic)

Diarrheic
shellfish
poisoning:
30 min-­2 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and
abdominal pain
accompanied by
chills, headache, and
fever

Hours to 2-­3
days

A variety of
Detection of the
shellfish, primarily toxin in shellfish;
mussels,
high-­pressure
oysters,
liquid
scallops, and
chromatography
shellfish from
the Florida coast
and the Gulf of
Mexico

Neurotoxic
shellfish
poisoning:
few minutes
to hours

Tingling and
numbness of lips,
tongue, and throat,
muscular aches,
dizziness, reversal of
the sensations of hot
and cold, diarrhea,
and vomiting

Amnesic
shellfish
poisoning:
24-­48 hr

Vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain
and neurologic
problems such as
confusion, memory
loss, disorientation,
seizure, coma

Shellfish toxins
(paralytic shellfish
poisoning)

30 min-­3 hr

Diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting leading
to paresthesias of
mouth and lips,
weakness,
dysphasia,
dysphonia,
respiratory paralysis

Days

Scallops,
mussels, clams,
cockles

Detection of toxin
in food or water
where fish are
located; high-­
pressure liquid
chromatography

Life-­threatening,
may need
respiratory
support

Sodium fluoride

Few minutes
to 2 hr

Salty or soapy taste,
numbness of mouth,
vomiting, diarrhea,
dilated pupils,
spasms, pallor,
shock, collapse

Usually
self-­limited

Dry foods (e.g., dry Testing of vomitus
milk, flour, baking
or gastric
powder, cake
washings
mixes)
Analysis of the
contaminated with food
NaF-­containing
insecticides and
rodenticides

Supportive care

Thallium

Few hours

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, painful
paresthesias, motor
polyneuropathy, hair
loss

Several days

Contaminated
food

Urine, hair

Supportive care

Tin

5 min-­8 hr
usually <1 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea

Usually
self-­limited

Metallic container

Analysis of the
food

Supportive care

ETIOLOGY

LABORATORY
TESTING

TREATMENT

Supportive care,
generally
self-­limiting

Elderly are
especially
sensitive to
amnesic shellfish
poisoning

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2364 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 387.5  Food-­Borne Noninfectious Illnesses—cont’d
ETIOLOGY

INCUBATION
PERIOD

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION
OF ILLNESS

ASSOCIATED
FOODS

LABORATORY
TESTING

TREATMENT

Vomitoxin

Few minutes
to 3 hr

Nausea, headache,
abdominal pain,
vomiting

Usually
self-­limited

Grains such as
wheat, corn,
barley

Analysis of the
food

Supportive care

Zinc

Few hours

Stomach cramps,
nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, myalgias

Usually self-­
limited

Metallic container

Analysis of the
food, blood and
feces, saliva or
urine

Supportive care

BAL, Bronchoalveolar lavage; GI, gastrointestinal.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Diagnosis and management of foodborne illnesses, MMWR. 53(RR-­4):1–33, 2004.

Table 387.6  Comparison of Three General Pathogenic Mechanisms of Enteric Infection
PARAMETER

TYPE OF INFECTION

Mechanism

Noninflammatory (enterotoxin or
adherence/superficial invasion)

Inflammatory, epithelial
destruction (invasion, cytotoxin)

Penetrating

Location

Proximal small bowel

Colon

Distal small bowel

Illness

Watery diarrhea

Dysentery

Enteric fever

Stool examination

No fecal leukocytes
Mild or no ↑ lactoferrin

Fecal polymorphonuclear
leukocytes
↑↑ Lactoferrin

Fecal mononuclear leukocytes

Examples

Vibrio cholerae
ETEC
Clostridium perfringens
Bacillus cereus
Staphylococcus aureus
Also*:
Giardia duodenalis
Rotavirus
Noroviruses
Cryptosporidium spp.
EPEC, EAEC
Cyclospora cayetanensis

Shigella
EIEC
STEC
Vibrio parahaemolyticus
Clostridioides difficile
Campylobacter jejuni
Entamoeba histolytica†

NTS
Yersinia enterocolitica
Campylobacter fetus

*Although not typically enterotoxic, these pathogens alter bowel physiology via adherence, superficial cell entry, cytokine induction, or toxins that inhibit cell function.
†Although amebic dysentery involves tissue inflammation, the leukocytes are characteristically pyknotic or absent, having been destroyed by the virulent amebae.
EAEC, Enteroaggregative E. coli; EIEC, enteroinvasive E. coli; EPEC, enteropathogenic E. coli; ETEC, enterotoxigenic E. coli, STEC, Shiga toxin–producing E. coli; NTS: nontyphoidal
Salmonella.

infectious; they are usually transmitted in contaminated produce and
water (see Table 387.3).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATION OF ACUTE
GASTROENTERITIS
General Findings

Diarrhea is usually defined as the passage of three or more abnormally
loose or liquid stools per day. Frequent passage of formed stools is not
diarrhea, nor is the passing of loose, pasty stools by breastfed babies.
Clinical clues as to the possible etiology of AGE are noted in Tables
387.1-­387.3 and Table 387.7.
In the past, many guidelines divided patients into subgroups for mild
(3–5%), moderate (6–9%), and severe (≥10%) dehydration; however,
it is difficult to distinguish between mild and moderate dehydration
based on clinical signs alone. Therefore current guidelines combine
mild and moderate dehydration and simply use none, some, and severe
dehydration. Commonly used guidelines include the World Health
Organization (WHO) Integrated Management of Childhood Illness
scale, the Clinical Dehydration Scale, the Modified Vesikari Score, and
the Gorelick scale, but the accuracy and applicability of these scales
varies by clinical setting and by the individual assigning the patients’
scores. The signs that best predict dehydration are prolonged capillary

refill time >2 seconds, abnormal skin turgor, hyperpnea (deep, rapid
breathing suggesting acidosis), dry mucous membranes, absent tears,
and general appearance (including activity level and thirst). As the
number of signs increases, so does the likelihood of dehydration.
Tachycardia, altered level of consciousness, and cold extremities with
or without hypotension suggest severe dehydration.

Viral Diarrhea

Symptoms of rotavirus AGE usually begin with vomiting followed by frequent passage of watery, nonbloody stools associated with fever in about
half the cases (see Table 387.1). The diarrhea lacks fecal leukocytes, but
stools from 20% of cases contain mucus. Recovery with complete resolution
of symptoms generally occurs within 7 days. Although disaccharide malabsorption is found in 10–20% of episodes, it is rarely clinically significant.
Other viral agents elicit similar symptoms and cannot be distinguished from rotavirus based on clinical findings. In an outbreak
setting, the pattern of a brief incubation period (12-­48 hours), short
duration of illness, and clustering of cases is shared by caliciviruses
and preformed bacterial toxin. However, unlike preformed toxins,
caliciviruses cause secondary infections, which confirm the contagious
nature of the outbreak. Diarrheal illnesses caused by enteric adenovirus infections tend to be more prolonged than rotavirus (7-­10 days),

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children
NSP4

nCa2 disrupts
Rota- cytoskeleton
virus

Para-cellular
water flow

Increased
Cl secretion

Replication
Disrupts
TJ

PLC

Cl
Zinc
secretion
from CFTR

Bacterial
toxins
CT
(Cholera, LT
E. coli)

2365

STa
EAST1
Guanylin
Uroguanylin
Yersinia spp.

GC-C

GM1

YoPs
IP3
NSP4

nCa2 from
ER stores

nCa2 from
ER stores

cAMP

cGMP

Crypt cell

Enterocyte
NSP4

Directly or via
ENS activation

Fig. 387.2 Pathogenesis of rotavirus infection and diarrhea. ENS, Enteric

nervous system; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; IP3, inositol trisphosphate; PLC,
phospholipase C; TJ, tight junction. (Adapted from Ramig RF. Pathogenesis
of intestinal and systemic rotavirus infection. J Virol. 2004;78:10213–10220.)

whereas astroviruses cause a shorter course (∼5 days), usually without
significant vomiting. The incubation period of SARS-­CoV-­2 varies
depending on circulating variant and the host’s vaccination status and
immunocompetence with symptoms of acute COVID-­19 developing
2-­14 days after exposure and symptoms of MIS-­C developing approximately ∼4 weeks after exposure, with or without preceding known
symptomatic COVID-­19. Acute COVID-­19 encompasses a spectrum
of disease ranging from mild congestion and headache to acute respiratory failure, hypercoagulability, and multisystem organ failure, but
it may be limited to AGE in some patients. Other gastrointestinal
manifestations of acute COVID-­19 include colitis, mesenteric adenitis, and pseudoappendicitis as a manifestation of mesenteric adenitis.
Whereas fever is present in fewer than half of acute COVID-­19 cases
in children, it is a diagnostic criterion of MIS-­C, in which abdominal pain and other gastrointestinal symptoms are a prominent feature,
often accompanied by rash, conjunctivitis, and lymphadenopathy, and
which may rapidly progress to cardiogenic shock if not identified and
treated promptly.

Bacterial Diarrhea

PK

Although there is considerable overlap, high fever >40°C, overt fecal
blood, abdominal pain, no vomiting before diarrhea onset, and high
stool frequency (>10 per day) are more common with bacterial pathogens (see Table 387.2). Although high fever and overt fecal blood are
often absent in bacterial enteritis, when present, there is a high probability of a bacterial etiology. The classical bacterial agents, NTS, Shigella, Campylobacter, and Yersinia, present with one of five syndromes.
1.	Acute diarrhea, the most common presentation, may be accompanied by fever and vomiting. Clinically silent bacteremia associated
with uncomplicated NTS AGE can be seen among otherwise healthy
children younger than 2 years living in industrialized countries.
2.	Bloody diarrhea or frank dysentery is classically caused by Shigella.
Watery diarrhea typically precedes dysentery and is often the sole
clinical manifestation of mild infection. Progression to dysentery
indicates colitis and may occur within hours to days. Patients with
severe infection may pass more than 20 dysenteric stools in one day.
Dysenteric illnesses due to Campylobacter have been confused with
inflammatory bowel disease.
3.	Invasive, nonfocal disease (enteric fever) is a febrile illness associated
with bacteremia without localized infection. Diarrhea may be mini-

Adenylate
cyclase

Fig. 387.3 Mechanism of secretory and penetrating diarrhea. cAMP,

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator through which chloride is secreted; cGMP, cyclic
guanosine monophosphate; YoPs, Yersinia outer proteins that alter host
cell functions to promote disease; CT, cholera toxin; EAST1, enteroaggregative E. coli ST; GC-­C, guanylate cyclase, the transmembrane
receptor for STa and other toxins; GM1, a ganglioside containing one
sialic acid residue that serves as the receptor for CT and LT; LT, heat
labile toxin; PK, protein kinase; STa, heat stable toxin A. (Modified from
Thapar M, Sanderson IR. Diarrhoea in children: an interface between
developing and developed countries. Lancet. 2004;363:641–653; and
Montes M, DuPont HL. Enteritis, enterocolitis and infectious diarrhea
syndromes. In Cohen J, Powderly WG, Opal SM, et al., eds. Infectious
Diseases, 2nd ed. London: Mosby; 2004. pp. 31–52.)

mal or absent. Although classically the result of S. Typhi or Paratyphi
A and B, enteric fever can result from systemic spread of the classical bacterial enteropathogens. Whereas enteric fever caused by S.
Typhi or Paratyphi A and B primarily affect preschool and school-­
age children in endemic countries, other bacterial enteropathogens
most often cause disease in infants (particularly <3 months), the
immunocompromised, and children with malnutrition. Additional
risk factors include hemolytic anemia and intravascular lesions for
NTS, and iron overload, cirrhosis, and chelation therapy for Yersinia
sepsis. The distinct clones of NTS that have arisen in sub-­Saharan
Africa described earlier often cause enteric-­fever type illnesses in the
absence of AGE. Shigella sepsis is rare and is seen most often in malnourished and immunocompromised hosts.
4.	Localized extraintestinal invasive infections can result from either
local invasion or bacteremic spread (see Table 387.7). Examples of
local invasion include mesenteric adenitis, appendicitis, and rarely
cholecystitis, mesenteric venous thrombosis, pancreatitis, and hepatic or splenic abscess. Bacteremic spread may result in pneumonia, osteomyelitis, meningitis (three conditions seen most commonly with NTS), abscesses, cellulitis, septic arthritis, and endocarditis.
Shigella can cause noninvasive contiguous infections such as vaginitis and urinary tract infections.
5.	Vertical transmission of Shigella, NTS, and Campylobacter can produce perinatal infection resulting in a spectrum of illness from isolated diarrhea or hematochezia to fulminant neonatal sepsis. One
species of Campylobacter, C. fetus, is particularly virulent in pregnant women and can result in chorioamnionitis, abortion, and neonatal sepsis and meningitis.
Crampy abdominal pain and nonbloody diarrhea are the first symptoms of STEC infection, sometimes with vomiting. Within several
days, diarrhea becomes bloody, and abdominal pain worsens. Bloody
diarrhea lasts between 1 and 22 days (median 4 days). In contrast to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2366 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Toxigenic
Lumen of
small
intestine

Glucose

Glucose

Na

Na

Glucose

Glucose
Na

Na

Na

H

H

HCO3

Na
H
HCO3

Cl

Villus

Cl

Glucose
Na

cAMP
Na

Na

HCO3

Cl

Inflammatory

Na

Glucose
Na

Na

Na

Na

H

H

H

cAMP
HCO3

HCO3

HCO3

Cl

Cl

Na

Cl

Inflammatory
cell

Lumen of
small intestine
Crypt

Cl
K
Na

cAMP Cl
K
Na

2Cl
K
Na
Cl

A

2Cl
K
Na

Cl
K
Na

Cl

2Cl
K
Na

B

Fig. 387.4 Movement of Na+ and Cl− in the small intestine. A, Movement in normal subjects. Na+ is absorbed by two different mechanisms in

absorptive cells from villi: glucose-­stimulated absorption and electroneutral absorption (which represents the coupling of Na+/H+ and Cl−/HCO3−
exchanges). B, Movement during diarrhea caused by a toxin and inflammation. (From Petri WA, Miller M, Binder HJ, et al. Enteric infections, diarrhea
and their impact on function and development. J Clin Invest. 2008;118:1277–1290.)

Shigella bacilli

M cell

Epithelial barrier
damage and more
Shigella enter

Colon
enterocyte

IL-8,
other
mediators

Fig. 387.5 Pathogenesis of Shigella

infection and diarrhea. IL, Interleukin.
(Adapted from Opal SM, Keusch GT.
Host responses to infection. In: Cohen
J, Powderly WG, Opal SM, et al., eds.
Infectious Diseases, 2nd ed. London:
Mosby; 2004. pp. 31–52.)

Cell-cell and
basolateral
invasion

Macrophage to
undergo apoptosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Neutrophils
attraction and
transmigration

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children
dysentery, the stools associated with STEC hemorrhagic colitis are
large volume and rarely accompanied by high fever. ETEC causes a
secretory watery diarrhea that affects infants and young children in
developing countries and is the major causative agents of traveler’s
diarrhea, accounting for about half of all episodes in some studies.
EPEC remains a leading cause of persistent diarrhea associated with
malnutrition among infants from developing countries. EIEC, which
is genetically, biochemically, and clinically nearly identical to Shigella,
causes rare food-­borne outbreaks in industrialized countries. EAEC
has been associated with persistent diarrhea in immunocompromised
persons and sporadic diarrhea in infants in countries with varying levels of economic development; however, some other studies have not
found an association with disease.
C. difficile toxin is associated with several clinical syndromes. The
most common is mild to moderate watery diarrhea, low-­grade fever,
and mild abdominal pain. Occasionally, the illness will progress to full-­
blown pseudomembranous colitis characterized by diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and fever. The colonic mucosa contains 2-­5 mm raised,
yellowish plaques. Fatal cases are associated with toxic megacolon, systemic toxicity, and multisystem organ failure, possibly related to systemic absorption of toxin. The illness associated with S. aureus and B.
cereus emetic toxin is dominated by vomiting, whereas diarrhea is the
major manifestation of C. perfringens and B. cereus enterotoxins.

Protozoal Diarrhea

Illnesses due to intestinal protozoa tend to be more prolonged, sometimes for 2 weeks or more, but are usually self-­limited in the otherwise
healthy host (see Table 387.3). In general, the duration and severity of
Cryptosporidium diarrhea is strongly influenced by the immune and
nutritional status of the host. A protozoal etiology should be suspected
when there is a prolonged diarrheal illness characterized by episodes
of sometimes explosive diarrhea with nausea, abdominal cramps, and
abdominal bloating. The stools are usually watery but can be greasy
and foul smelling due to concomitant malabsorption of fats, which is
more likely to occur if the parasite load is high. Occasionally, diarrhea
may alternate with constipation.
In addition to diarrhea, E. histolytica causes a range of other syndromes. Amebic dysentery is characterized by bloody or mucoid diarrhea, which may be profuse and lead to dehydration or electrolyte
imbalances. Amebic granulomas (amebomas) may form in the colon,
and extraintestinal disease most commonly manifests as liver abscesses
but may also spread to the lungs, pericardium, genitourinary tract,
skin, and, hematogenously, to the brain or other sites. Extraintestinal
Entamoeba disease may occur with or without intestinal disease.

INTESTINAL AND EXTRAINTESTINAL
COMPLICATIONS

The major complications of diarrhea from any cause are dehydration and
electrolyte or acid-­base derangements, which can be life-­threatening
(see Table 387.7). Avoiding delays in diagnosis and treatment and providing appropriate supportive care using either oral, enteral, or intravenous hydration can prevent or treat most of these conditions. Children
who experience frequent episodes of acute diarrhea or prolonged or
persistent episodes (seen especially in low-­resource settings) are at
risk for poor growth and nutrition and complications such as secondary infections and micronutrient deficiencies (iron, zinc, vitamin A).
Ensuring continued nutritional support during diarrheal episodes is
important because prolonged limitation of the diet may extend diarrheal symptoms. Reestablishing a normal diet generally restores villous
anatomy and function with resolution of loose stools.
Viral AGE illnesses are usually self-­limited and resolve after several
days. Rarely, intussusception is triggered by lymphoid hyperplasia
associated with viral AGE. Complications of bacterial AGE may be
the result of local or systemic spread of the organism; in malnourished
children and HIV-­infected populations, associated bacteremia is well
recognized. Toxic megacolon, intestinal perforation, and rectal prolapse can occur, particularly in association with Shigella in developing
countries and C. difficile. The most dreaded complication of pediatric diarrhea in the United States is HUS, the leading cause of acquired

2367

renal failure in children, which develops in 5–10% of patients infected
with STEC. It is usually diagnosed 2-­14 days after the onset of diarrhea.
HUS is unlikely to occur once diarrhea has remained resolved for 2 or 3
days with no evidence of hemolysis. Risk factors include age 6 months
to 4 years, bloody diarrhea, fever, elevated leukocyte count, and treatment with antibiotics and antimotility agents. Patients may no longer
excrete the organism at the time they develop HUS (see Chapter 560.5).
Pseudoappendicitis secondary to mesenteric adenitis is a notable
complication of Yersinia, sometimes Campylobacter and COVID-19.
Older children and adolescents are most often affected. It typically
presents with fever and abdominal pain with tenderness localized to
the right lower quadrant, with or without diarrhea, and can be confused with appendicitis. When available, ultrasound is the preferred
method for diagnosing true appendicitis; abdominal CT or MRI may
be helpful when ultrasound is not available.
Immune-­mediated complications that are thought to result from
immunologic cross reactivity between bacterial antigens and host tissues are more often seen in adults than children. These include reactive
arthritis following infection with the classical bacterial enteropathogens and Guillain-­Barré syndrome following Campylobacter infection.
Protozoan illnesses, when persistent, can lead to poor weight gain in
the young and in immunocompromised individuals, weight loss, malnutrition, or vitamin deficiencies. Infection with Entamoeba can cause
severe ulcerating colitis, colonic dilation, and perforation. The parasite
may spread systemically, most commonly causing liver abscesses. In
high-­risk settings, it is critical to exclude Entamoeba infection and tuberculosis before initiating corticosteroids for presumed ulcerative colitis.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The physician should also consider noninfectious diseases that can
present with bright red blood per rectum or hematochezia (Table
387.8). In an infant or young child without systemic symptoms, these
may include anal fissures, intermittent intussusception, juvenile polyps, and Meckel diverticulum. Necrotizing enterocolitis can cause
lower gastrointestinal bleeding in infants, especially premature neonates. Inflammatory bowel disease should be considered in older children. Examples of noninfectious causes of nonbloody diarrhea include
congenital secretory diarrheas, endocrine disorders (hyperthyroidism), neoplasms, food intolerance, and medications (particularly antibiotics). Noninfectious causes of chronic or relapsing diarrhea include
cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, milk protein, lactose, fructose, or sucrose
intolerance and other food allergies, congenital or acquired disaccharidase deficiency, and functional gastrointestinal disorders. Significant
abdominal pain should raise suspicion of other infectious processes in
the abdomen such as appendicitis and pelvic inflammatory disease.
Prominent vomiting with or without abdominal pain can be a manifestation of pyloric stenosis, intestinal obstruction, pancreatitis, appendicitis, and cholecystitis.

Clinical Evaluation of Diarrhea

In the initial evaluation of all patients with AGE, the physician should
focus on the patient’s hydration status and electrolyte balance, as well
as evidence of sepsis or invasive bacterial infection, which could complicate bacterial AGE (Fig. 387.6). Once the patient is stabilized, the
history and physical examination can focus on detecting risk factors
and exposures, as well as the clinical features that may suggest specific
etiologic agents.
Important elements of the medical history include the duration
of diarrhea and a description of stools (frequency, amount, presence
of blood or mucus), fever (duration, magnitude, pattern), vomiting
(onset, amount, and frequency), and the amount and type of solid and
liquid oral intake. Clinical signs of dehydration should be evaluated
(Table 387.9): urine output (number of wet diapers per day and time
since the last urination), whether eyes appear sunken, whether the
child is active, whether the child drinks vigorously, and the date and
value of the most recent weight measurement. A documented weight
loss can be used to calculate the fluid deficit. The past medical history
should identify comorbidities that might increase the risk or severity
of AGE.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2368 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 387.7  Intestinal and Extraintestinal Complications of Enteric Infections
COMPLICATION

ASSOCIATED ENTERIC PATHOGEN(S)

INTESTINAL COMPLICATIONS
Persistent diarrhea

All causes

Recurrent diarrhea (usually immunocompromised persons)

Shigella spp., NTS, Campylobacter spp., Clostridioides difficile, Yersinia
spp., Entamoeba histolytica, Cryptosporidium spp.

Postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome

Shigella spp., NTS, Campylobacter spp., C. difficile

Protein-­losing enteropathy

Shigella and Salmonella spp. rotavirus, CMV, Giardiasis, Strongyloides
stercoralis, tuberculosis, HIV

Toxic megacolon

Shigella spp., NTS, Campylobacter spp., C. difficile, Yersinia spp.,
E. histolytica, STEC

Intestinal perforation

Shigella spp., NTS, C. difficile, Yersinia spp., E. histolytica, STEC

Rectal prolapse

Shigella spp., NTS, Campylobacter spp., C. difficile, E. histolytica, STEC

Pseudomembranous colitis

Shigella spp., NTS, C. difficile, Yersinia spp., STEC

Appendicitis

Shigella spp., NTS, Yersinia spp., Schistosoma spp., Strongyloides
stercoralis, SARS-­CoV-­2

Intussusception

Shigella spp., NTS, Campylobacter spp., Yersinia spp., STEC

Chronic carriage

NTS

EXTRAINTESTINAL COMPLICATIONS
Dehydration, metabolic abnormalities, malnutrition, micronutrient
deficiency

All causes

Systemic invasion with bacteremia/parasitemia ± distant foci

Shigella spp., NTS, Campylobacter spp., Yersinia spp., E. histolytica

Local invasion
Mesenteric adenitis
Cholecystitis

Campylobacter spp. (rarely), Yersinia spp., COVID-19
NTS, SARS-­CoV-­2

Local noninvasive spread
Vulvovaginitis
Urinary tract infection

Shigella spp.
Shigella spp., Yersinia spp.

Seizures, encephalopathy

Shigella spp., STEC

Leukemoid reaction, bandemia

Shigella spp., Yersinia spp.

Pharyngitis, adenopathy, rash

Yersinia spp., SARS-­CoV-­2*

Fetal/placental infection

Campylobacter fetus, Shigella spp.

POSTINFECTIOUS COMPLICATIONS
Reactive arthritis

Shigella spp., NTS, Campylobacter spp., C. difficile, Yersinia spp.

Guillain-­Barré syndrome

Campylobacter spp.

Hemolytic uremic syndrome

Shigella dysenteriae type 1, STEC

Glomerulonephritis, myocarditis, pericarditis

Campylobacter spp., Yersinia spp., SARS-­CoV-­2

Immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy

Campylobacter spp.

Erythema nodosum

NTS, Campylobacter spp., Yersinia spp.

Hemolytic anemia

Campylobacter spp., Yersinia spp.

*Yersinia spp. is associated with a scarlatiniform rash, cervical adenopathy, and exudative pharyngitis whereas SARS-­CoV-­2 is typically associated with a nonexudative pharyngitis and
diffuse lymphadenopathy, and the rash of SARS-­CoV-­2 can be polymorphous.
NTS, Nontyphoidal Salmonella spp.; CMV, cytomegalovirus; STEC, Shiga toxin–producing E. coli.

Certain physical signs are best assessed before approaching the
child directly, so the child remains calm, including general appearance (activity, response to stimulation) and respiratory patterns.
Skin turgor is assessed by pinching a small skinfold on the lateral
abdominal wall at the level of the umbilicus. If the fold does not
promptly return to normal after release, the recoil time is quantified
as delayed slightly or ≥2 seconds. Excess subcutaneous tissue and
hypernatremia may produce a false-­negative test, and malnutrition
can prolong the recoil time. To measure capillary refill time, the
palmar surface of the child’s distal fingertip is pressed until blanching occurs, with the child’s arm at heart level. The time elapsed
until restoration of normal color after release usually exceeds 2

seconds in the presence of dehydration. Mucous membrane moisture level, presence of tears, and extremity temperature should also
be assessed.

Laboratory Diagnosis

Most cases of AGE do not require diagnostic laboratory testing. Stool
specimens may be examined for mucus, blood, neutrophils, or fecal
lactoferrin, a neutrophil product. The finding of more than five leukocytes per high-­power field or a positive lactoferrin assay in an infant
not breastfeeding suggests an infection with a classical bacterial enteropathogen; patients infected with STEC and E. histolytica usually have
negative tests.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children
Table 387.8  Differential Diagnosis of Acute Dysentery and
Inflammatory Enterocolitis
SPECIFIC INFECTIOUS PROCESSES
Bacillary dysentery (Shigella spp.; invasive Escherichia coli)
Campylobacteriosis (Campylobacter jejuni)
Amebic dysentery (Entamoeba histolytica)
Bilharzial dysentery (Schistosoma japonicum, S. mansoni)
Vibriosis (Vibrio cholera)
Salmonellosis (nontyphoidal Salmonella)
Enteric fever (Salmonella Typhi, Salmonella Paratyphi A, B, and C)
Yersiniosis (Yersinia enterocolitica)
PROCTITIS
Gonococcal (Neisseria gonorrhoeae)
Herpetic (herpes simplex virus)
Chlamydial (Chlamydia trachomatis)
Syphilitic (Treponema pallidum)
OTHER SYNDROMES
Necrotizing enterocolitis of the newborn
Enteritis necroticans
Pseudomembranous enterocolitis (Clostridioides difficile)
Typhlitis
CHRONIC INFLAMMATORY PROCESSES
Enteropathogenic and enteroaggregative Escherichia coli
Gastrointestinal tuberculosis
Gastrointestinal mycosis
Parasitic enteritis
SYNDROMES WITHOUT KNOWN INFECTIOUS CAUSE
Idiopathic ulcerative colitis
Crohn disease
Radiation enteritis
Ischemic colitis
Allergic enteritis

If yes, ask:
• For how long?
• Is there blood
in the stool?

Laboratory diagnosis of viral AGE may be helpful when an outbreak
is suspected, cases are linked to a suspected outbreak, or when cohorting of patients is considered to limit the spread of infection. The preferred method of testing norovirus is real-­time reverse-­transcription
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-­qPCR), available at most
public health and virology laboratories. Commercial multiplex PCR
tests are available in the United States for the diagnosis of bacterial,
parasitic, and viral enteric pathogens, including rotavirus, enteric
adenoviruses, astrovirus, norovirus, and sapovirus (see Table 387.1).
Although SARS-­CoV-­2 has been identified in enteric specimens in
research settings, the mainstay of clinical diagnosis remains upper
respiratory sampling for either PCR or immunoassay.
Stool cultures for detection of bacterial agents are costly, so requests
should be restricted to patients with clinical features predictive of
bacterial AGE, have moderate or severe disease, are immunocompromised, in outbreaks with suspected HUS, or have a highly suggestive
epidemiologic history. To optimize recovery of pathogens, stool specimens for culture need to be transported and plated quickly; if the latter is not quickly available, specimens might need to be transported
in special transport media. If antibiotics will be administered and the
child has not produced a stool sample, a rectal swab should be collected
promptly so as not to delay initiation of antibiotics. After dipping the
cotton tip into the medium that will be used for transport, it is gently
inserted into the child’s rectum and rotated 360 degrees. A properly
collected rectal swab is stained or covered with fecal material. Standard
stool culture methods performed in clinical microbiology laboratories
recover Shigella and Salmonella species. If Campylobacter, Yersinia, or
Vibrio species are suspected, the laboratory should be notified unless
media are routinely used for their detection. All bloody stools should
also be inoculated into media specific for detection of E. coli 0157:H7
or directly tested for the presence of Shiga-­like toxin (or both). Except
for C. difficile, nosocomial acquisition of a bacterial enteric pathogen
is very unlikely. Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) have replaced
stool culture in some settings; reflex culture is necessary to identify

Two of the following signs:

Does the child have diarrhea?

• Lethargic or unconscious
• Sunken eyes
• Not able to drink or drinking
poorly
• Skin pinch goes back very
slowly.

Look and feel:
Look at the child’s general
condition.
Is the child:

• If child has no other severe classification:
-Give fluid for severe dehydration (Plan C).
Severe
dehydration

For dehydration

Offer the child fluid. Is the child:

Two of the following signs:
• Restless irritable
• Sunken eyes
• Drinks eagerly, thirsty
• Skin pinch goes back slowly.

Not able to drink or drinking poorly?
Drinking eagerly, thirsty?
Pinch the skin of the abdomen.
Does it go back:
Very slowly (longer than 2
seconds)?
Slowly?

OR
If child also has another severe classification:
- Refer URGENTLY to hospital with mother
giving frequent sips of ORS on the way.
Advise the mother to continue breastfeeding.
• If child is two years or older and there is cholera
in your area, give antibiotic for cholera.

Lethargic or unconscious?
Restless and irritable?
Look for sunken eyes.

2369

• Give fluid and food for some dehydration (Plan B).

Some
dehydration

If child also has a severe classification:
- Refer URGENTLY to hospital with mother
giving frequent sips of ORS on the way.
Advise the mother to continue breastfeeding.
• Advise mother when to return immediately.
• Follow-up in 2 days if not improving.

Classify
diarrhea

Not enough signs to classify
as some or severe
dehydration
• Dehydration present

And if diarrhea
14 days or more

And if blood
in stool

No
dehydration

• Give fluid and food to treat diarrhea at home (Plan A).
• Advise mother when to return immediately.
• Follow-up in 2 days if not improving.

Severe
persistent
diarrhea

• Treat dehydration before referral unless the child has
another severe classification.
• Refer to hospital.

Persistent
diarrhea

• Advise the mother on feeding a child who has
PERSISTENT DIARRHEA.
• Give multivitamin, mineral supplement for two weeks
• Advise mother when to return immediately
• Follow-up in 5 days.

Dysentery

• Treat for 5 days with an oral antibiotic
recommended for Shigella.
• Advise mother when to return immediately
• Follow-up in 5 days.

• No dehydration

• Blood in the stool

Fig. 387.6 Algorithm showing the Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI) protocol for the recognition and management of diarrhea
in developing countries. ORS, Oral rehydration solution.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2370 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 387.9  Signs and Symptoms Associated with Dehydration
MINIMAL OR NO
DEHYDRATION

SYMPTOM

SOME DEHYDRATION

SEVERE DEHYDRATION

Mental statusC,G4,W

Well; alert

Normal, fatigued or restless,
irritable

Apathetic, lethargic, limp,
unconscious/comatose

ThirstW

Drinks normally; might refuse
liquids

Thirsty; eager to drink

Drinks poorly; unable to drink

Heart rateG10

Normal

Normal to increased

Tachycardia, with bradycardia in
most severe cases

Quality of pulsesG10

Normal

Normal to decreased

Weak, thready, or impalpable

Breathing G10

Normal

Normal; fast

Deep, fast

EyesC,G10,W

Normal

Slightly sunken

Deeply sunken

TearsC,G4

Present

Decreased

Absent

Mouth and tongue/mucous
membranesC,G4

Moist

Dry, “sticky” or “tacky”

Parched

SkinfoldG10,W

Instant recoil

Recoil in <2 sec (slow)

Recoil in >2 sec (very slow)

Capillary refillG4

Normal

Prolonged

Prolonged; minimal

Extremities

Warm

Cool

Cold; mottled; cyanotic

Urine outputG10

Normal to decreased

Decreased

Minimal

CDenotes inclusion in Clinical Dehydration Scale (CDS); CDS scores each category from 0 to 2 with an overall score of 0 = no dehydration (<3%), 1-­4 = some dehydration (<6%).
G4Denotes inclusion in 4-­point and 10-­point Gorelick scales: ≥2 Clinical Signs ≥5% ΔBW; ≥3 Clinical Signs ≥10% ΔBW.

G10Denotes items included in 10-­point Gorelick scale but not in the 4-­point Gorelick scale: ≥3 Clinical Signs ≥5% ΔBW; ≥7 Clinical Signs ≥10% ΔBW. Gorelick Scale uses “no or

minimal dehydration” and “moderate to severe dehydration.”

WDenotes inclusion in the World Health Organization (WHO) scale.

BW, Body weight.

antimicrobial sensitivities. Hence, stool microbiologic assays are generally not indicated for patients in whom diarrhea develops more than 3
days after admission unless the patient is immunocompromised or to
investigate a hospital outbreak (see Table 387.2).
For children older than 2 years who have recently received antibiotics or have other risk factors, evaluation for C. difficile infection may be
appropriate. The cytotoxin assay detects toxin B, but testing for toxin
A is also available in some laboratories; however, this test is laborious.
Several tests are commercially available to detect toxin-­producing C.
difficile in stool, including enzyme immunoassays (EIA) for toxins A
and B, cell culture cytotoxicity assay, PCR, and glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) immunoassay. The sensitivities of cell culture, PCR, and
GDH EIA are superior to that of toxin EIA. A multistep diagnostic
approach combining toxin testing with NAAT and/or GDH EIA may
improve the sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value of C.
difficile testing. Testing for C. difficile toxin in children younger than 2
years is discouraged because the organism and its toxins are commonly
detected in asymptomatic infants (see Table 387.2).
Evaluation for intestinal protozoa that cause diarrhea is usually indicated in patients who recently traveled to an endemic area, had contact
with untreated water, and manifest suggestive symptoms. Previously,
the most commonly used method was direct microscopy of stool for
cysts and trophozoites. However, this approach is time-­consuming and
lacks sensitivity, in part because shedding can be intermittent. Analyzing three specimens from separate days is optimal, and fecal concentration techniques provide some benefit. The sensitivity and specificity
of microscopy is substantially improved using immunofluorescence
antibodies that are commercially available for visualization of Cryptosporidium and Giardia cysts. In addition, EIAs are available for Cryptosporidium, Giardia, and Entamoeba that are more sensitive and specific
than direct microscopy and provide a useful diagnostic tool. (Not all
commercial kits distinguish between pathogenic E. histolytica and nonpathogenic E. dispar.) Molecular methods (NAATs and multiplex PCR
assays) have largely replaced microscopy and EIAs (see Table 387.3)
Several culture-­independent rapid multiplex molecular panels for
detection of viral, bacterial, and protozoal gastrointestinal pathogens

directly from stool samples are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), including xTag GPP (14 pathogens), Verigene
EP (9 pathogens), and the FilmArray GI Panel (22 pathogens). These
methods offer several advantages over conventional diagnostics, including reduced sample volume requirements, broad coverage without the
need to select specific tests, enhanced ability to detect co-infections,
increased sensitivity, and rapid turnaround. However, the available tests
do not provide strain specificity or susceptibility testing, so culture is
still necessary to guide outbreak detection and treatment decisions.
Most episodes of diarrheal dehydration are isonatremic and do not
warrant serum electrolyte measurements. Electrolyte measurements
are most useful in children with severe dehydration, when intravenous
fluids are administered, when there is a history of frequent watery
stools, yet the skin pinch feels doughy without delayed recoil, which
suggests hypernatremia, when the child is unable to drink due to
anorexia or emesis, and when inappropriate or inadequate rehydration
fluids have been administered at home. A suspicion for HUS prompts
a complete blood count with review of the peripheral smear, serum
electrolytes, and renal function tests. Patients with shigellosis can demonstrate bandemia or even a leukemoid reaction. Blood culture should
be obtained if there is concern for systemic bacterial infection. This
includes infants and children with fever and/or blood in the stool who
are younger than 3 months, are immunocompromised, or have hemolytic anemia or other risk factors. If diarrhea persists with no cause
identified, endoscopic evaluation may be indicated. Biopsy specimens
help in diagnosing inflammatory bowel disease or identifying infecting
agents that may mimic it. A sweat test is warranted if cystic fibrosis is
suspected.

TREATMENT

The broad principles of management of AGE in children include rehydration and maintenance ORS plus replacement of continued losses in
diarrheal stools and vomitus after rehydration, continued breastfeeding, and refeeding with an age-­appropriate, unrestricted diet as soon
as dehydration is corrected. Zinc supplementation is recommended for
children in developing countries.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children
Hydration

Children, especially infants, are more susceptible than adults to dehydration because of the greater basal fluid and electrolyte requirements
per kilogram and because they are dependent on others to meet these
demands (Table 387.10). Dehydration must be evaluated rapidly and
corrected in 4-­6 hours according to the degree of dehydration and
estimated daily requirements. When there is emesis, small volumes of
ORS can be given initially by a dropper, teaspoon, or syringe, beginning with as little as 5 mL at a time. The volume is increased as tolerated. The low-­osmolality WHO ORS containing 75 mEq of sodium, 64
mEq of chloride, 20 mEq of potassium, and 75 mmol of glucose/L, with
total osmolarity of 245 mOsm/L, is now the global standard of care and
more effective than home fluids. Soda beverages, fruit juices, and tea
and other home fluids are not suitable for rehydration or maintenance
therapy because they have inappropriately high glucose concentration
and osmolalities and low sodium concentrations. Tables 387.9 and
387.10 outline a clinical evaluation plan and management strategy for
children with moderate to severe diarrhea. Replacement for emesis or
stool losses is noted in Table 387.10. Oral rehydration can also be given
by a nasogastric tube if needed.
A small minority of children, including those with severe dehydration or unable to tolerate oral fluids, require initial intravenous rehydration, but oral rehydration is the preferred mode of rehydration and
replacement of ongoing losses. Signs of severe dehydration that might
necessitate intravenous resuscitation include are shown in Table 387.9.
Limitations to ORS include shock, decreased level of consciousness,
ileus, intussusception, carbohydrate intolerance (rare), severe emesis,
and high stool output (>10 mL/kg/hr).

Enteral Feeding and Diet Selection

Continued breastfeeding and refeeding with an age-­appropriate, unrestricted diet as soon as dehydration is corrected aids in recovery from
the episode. Foods with complex carbohydrates (rice, wheat, potatoes,
bread, and cereals), fresh fruits, lean meats, yogurt, and vegetables
should be reintroduced while ORS is given to replace ongoing losses
from emesis or stools and for maintenance. Fatty foods or foods high in

2371

simple sugars (juices, carbonated sodas) should be avoided. The usual
energy density of any diet used for the therapy of diarrhea should be
around 1 kcal/g, aiming to provide an energy intake of a minimum of
100 kcal/kg/day and a protein intake of 2-­3 g/kg/day. In selected circumstances when adequate intake of energy-­dense food is problematic,
the addition of amylase to the diet through germination techniques can
also be helpful.
If the normal diet includes infant formula, it should not be diluted,
or changed to a lactose-­free preparation unless lactose malabsorption
is evident. With the exception of acute lactose intolerance in a small
subgroup, most children with diarrhea are able to tolerate milk and
lactose-­containing diets. Withdrawal of milk and replacement with
specialized lactose-­free formulations are unnecessary. Although children with persistent diarrhea are not lactose intolerant, administration
of a lactose load exceeding 5 g/kg/day may be associated with higher
purging rates and treatment failure. Alternative strategies for reducing
the lactose load while feeding malnourished children who have prolonged diarrhea include addition of milk to cereals and replacement of
milk with fermented milk products such as yogurt.
Rarely, when dietary intolerance precludes the administration of
cow’s milk–based formulations or whole milk, it may be necessary to
administer specialized milk-­free diets such as a comminuted or blenderized chicken-­based diet or an elemental formulation. Although
effective in some settings, the latter are unaffordable in most developing countries. In addition to rice-­lentil formulations, the addition of
green banana or pectin to the diet has also been shown to be effective
in the treatment of persistent diarrhea. Figure 387.7 provides an algorithm for managing children with prolonged diarrhea in developing
countries.
Among children in low-­and middle-­income countries, where the
dual burden of diarrhea and malnutrition is greatest and where access
to proprietary formulas and specialized ingredients is limited, the use
of locally available age-­appropriate foods should be promoted for the
majority of acute diarrhea cases. Even among those children for whom
lactose avoidance may be necessary, nutritionally complete diets comprised of locally available ingredients can be used at least as effectively

Table 387.10  Summary of Treatment Based on Degree of Dehydration
DEGREE OF DEHYDRATION

REHYDRATION THERAPY

REPLACEMENT OF LOSSES

Some dehydration

Infants and children: ORS, 75 mL/kg over 3-­4 hr. Continue
breastfeeding. After 4 hr, give food every 3-­4 hr for
children who normally receive solid foods.

Infants and children:
<2 yr old: 50-­100 mL ORS for each diarrheal stool
or vomiting episode, up to ∼500 mL/day
≥2 yr old: 100-­200 mL ORS for each diarrheal
stool or vomiting episode, up to ∼1 L/day
Replace losses as above as long as diarrhea or
vomiting continues

Severe dehydration

Malnourished infants may benefit from smaller-­volume,
frequent boluses of 5-­10 mL/kg body weight due to
reduced capacity to increase cardiac output with larger
volume resuscitation.
Infants (<12 mo) and children (12 mo to 5 yr) without
malnutrition: Give 20-­30 mL/kg boluses of IV isotonic
crystalloid solution (e.g., Ringer lactate or normal saline
solution) over 30-­60 min. Repeat boluses as necessary
to restore adequate perfusion. Then give 70 mL/kg over
2.5-­5 hr. (Note the slower infusion times are for infants.)
If IV hydration is not possible, administer ORS 20 mL/kg/
hr × 6 hours via nasogastric tube. Reassess the infant or
child frequently and adjust infusion rate if needed.
Give ORS as soon as the child can drink. Allow to feed
(breast milk or solid food) as described for some
dehydration. Adjust electrolytes and administer dextrose
based on chemistry values.

Infants and children:
<10 kg body weight (children <2 yr): 50-­100
mL ORS for each diarrheal stool or vomiting
episode
>10 kg body weight (children ≥2 yr): 100-­200
mL ORS for each diarrheal stool or vomiting
episode
Adolescents and adults:
Ad libitum
Replace losses as above as long as diarrhea or
vomiting continue
If unable to drink, either administer ORS through
a nasogastric tube or give dextrose-­containing
IV fluids as appropriate based on chemistry
values

Note: Low-­osmolarity ORS can be given to all age-­groups, with any cause of diarrhea. It is safe in the presence of hypernatremia, as well as hyponatremia (except when edema
is present). Some commercially available formulations that can be used as ORS include Pedialyte Liters (Abbott Nutrition), CeraLyte (Cera Products), and Enfalac Lytren (Mead
Johnson). Popular beverages that should not be used for rehydration include apple juice, Gatorade, and commercial soft drinks.
ORS, Oral rehydration solution; IV, intravenous.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2372 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Persistent diarrhea
(diarrhea 14 days without severe malnutrition)*

SUSPECTED
SOME OR
SEVERE
DEHYDRATION

Assessment, resuscitation, and early stabilization
Intravenous and/or oral rehydration (hypo-osmolar ORS)
Treat electrolyte imbalance
Screen and treat associated systemic infections
Treat persistent diarrhea with blood in the
stools with an oral antibiotic effective for Shigella.

Continued breastfeeding
Reduced lactose load by
• Milk-cereal (usually rice-based) diet or
• Replacement of milk with yogurt
Micronutrient supplementation (zinc, vitamin A, folate)

Recovery

Continued or recurrent diarrhea
Poor weight gain

Follow-up for growth

Reinvestigate for infections
Second-line dietary therapy (comminuted chicken or elemental diets)
Continued diarrhea and dehydration

Fig. 387.7 Management algorithm
for persistent diarrhea. ORS, Oral rehydration solution.

as commercial preparations or specialized ingredients. These same
conclusions may also apply to the dietary management of children with
persistent diarrhea, but the evidence remains limited.

Zinc Supplementation

Zinc supplementation in children with diarrhea in developing countries leads to reduced duration and severity of diarrhea and could
potentially prevent a large proportion of cases from recurring. Zinc
administration for diarrhea management can significantly reduce all-­
cause mortality by 46% and hospital admission by 23%. In addition to
improving diarrhea recovery rates, administration of zinc in community settings leads to increased use of ORS and reduction in the inappropriate use of antimicrobials. All children older than 6 months of age
with acute diarrhea in at-­risk areas should receive oral zinc (20 mg/day
is recommended by most guidelines, but 5 mg/day and 10 mg/day may
be better tolerated and equally effective) in some form for 10-­14 days
during and continued after diarrhea. The role of zinc in well-­nourished,
zinc replete populations in developed countries is less certain.

Additional Therapies

The use of probiotic nonpathogenic bacteria for prevention and therapy of diarrhea has been successful in some settings, although the
evidence does not support a recommendation for their use in all settings. A variety of organisms (Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium) have a
good safety record; therapy has not been standardized, and the most
effective (and safe) organism has not been identified. Saccharomyces
boulardii is effective in antibiotic-­associated and in C. difficile diarrhea,
and there is some evidence that it might prevent diarrhea in daycare
centers. Two large randomized placebo-­controlled trials evaluating
the efficacy of two Lactobacillus-­based probiotic formulations failed
to reduce a clinical severity score in Canadian infants and preschool
children with AGE. Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG or a combination probiotic product containing L. rhamnosus R0011 and L. helveticus R0052
has shown variable efficacy; reduction is more evident in cases of childhood rotavirus diarrhea.

Reinvestigate to exclude intractable diarrhea of infancy
Intravenous hyperalimentation plus
Slow or continuous enteral alimentation

Ondansetron (oral mucosal absorption preparation) reduces the
incidence of emesis, thus permitting more effective oral rehydration,
and is well established in emergency management of AGE in high-­
resource settings, reducing intravenous fluid requirements and hospitalization. Because persistent vomiting can limit oral rehydration
therapy, a single sublingual dose of an oral dissolvable tablet of ondansetron (2 mg for children 8-15 kg, 4 mg for children 16-30 kg, and 8 mg
for children >31 kg) may be given off-label. However, most children
do not require specific antiemetic therapy; careful ORS is usually sufficient. Antimotility agents (loperamide) are contraindicated in children
with dysentery and probably have no role in the management of acute
watery diarrhea in otherwise healthy children. Similarly, antiemetic
agents, such as the phenothiazines, are of little value and are associated with potentially serious side effects (lethargy, dystonia, malignant
hyperpyrexia).

Antibiotic Therapy

Judicious antibiotic therapy for suspected or proven bacterial infections can reduce the duration and severity of illness and prevent complications (Table 387.11). Several factors justify limited use. First, most
episodes of AGE are self-­limited among otherwise healthy children.
Second, the increasing prevalence of antibiotic resistance has prompted
restricted use of these drugs. Third, antibiotics may worsen outcomes,
as some studies have shown that antibiotic therapy with STEC infection increases the risk of HUS and prolongs excretion of NTS without
improving clinical outcomes. Therefore antibiotics are used primarily
to treat severe infections, prevent complications in high-­risk hosts, or
to limit the spread of infection. Microbiologic (culture) confirmation
of the etiology and susceptibility testing should be sought before treatment if possible.
Treatment of C. difficile infection warrants special consideration
(see Table 387.11). Removal of the offending antibiotic, if possible,
is the first step. Antibiotic therapy directed against C. difficile should
be instituted if the symptoms are severe or persistent. In children,
oral vancomycin and metronidazole for 7-­14 days (first-­line agents)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children
displayed equivalent efficacy in a prospective randomized trial;
however, metronidazole may be preferred because of lower cost and
concerns about inducing vancomycin-­resistant enterococci. Twenty
percent of patients treated for C. difficile diarrhea have a relapse.
The first relapse should be treated with another course of antibiotics
based on severity of illness. For multiply recurrent disease, tapering and/or pulsed regimen of oral vancomycin over a 4-­to 6-­week
period has been proposed. Rifaximin is an alternative option in
children ≥12 years to treat persistent or recurrent C. difficile colitis,
and fecal microbiota transplant is being explored. Fidaxomicin is an
alternate agent approved for patients >6 months of age. The phase
3, multicenter, randomized, single-­blind SUNSHINE trial demonstrated equivalent clinical cure rates in pediatric patients receiving
either oral vancomycin or fidaxomicin and increased rates of global
cure in the fidaxomicin arm, but the study excluded patients with
life-­threatening and fulminant infection. In patients ≥18 years old, it
is now preferred over vancomycin as the first-­line therapy for the initial episode (whether severe or nonsevere) and recurrences. Bezlotoxumab, a monoclonal antibody against C. difficile toxins A and B,

2373

has been shown to reduce the recurrence rate and is recommended
in addition to standard antibiotic therapy for adults experiencing a
recurrence, but it has not been approved for use in children. Studies
are underway to determine the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics,
and efficacy of bezlotoxumab in children. In the absence of ongoing
symptoms, a test of cure is not necessary. The role of probiotics in
the prevention of C. difficile-­associated diarrhea in children has not
been established.
Antimicrobial therapy for parasitic infections is shown in Table
387.11. Antivirals such as remdesivir have not been studied for efficacy
in the treatment of AGE related to SARS-­CoV-­2 infection.

PREVENTION
Promotion of Exclusive Breastfeeding and Vitamin A

Exclusive breastfeeding (administration of no other fluids or foods for
the first 6 months of life) protects young infants from diarrheal disease
through the promotion of passive immunity and through reduction in
the intake of potentially contaminated food and water. In developing
countries, exclusive breastfeeding for the first 6 months of life is widely

Table 387.11  Antimicrobial Therapy for Infectious Diarrhea
ORGANISM

INDICATION FOR THERAPY

DOSAGE AND DURATION OF TREATMENT

Shigella spp.

In high-­income countries, judicious treatment
is recommended to curtail growing antibiotic
resistance because most shigellosis is
self-­limited. Treatment should be reserved
for severe disease (require hospitalization,
have systemic disease or complications),
immunocompromised, or to prevent or
mitigate outbreaks in certain settings (e.g.,
childcare or food handling). Also consider
treating patients with significant discomfort,
intestinal
comorbidities, institutional settings, or
household exposure to high-­risk individuals.
WHO recommends empiric antibiotics for all
children in developing countries with dysentery
assuming that most cases are caused by
Shigella.

First line:
• Ciprofloxacin* 20 mg/kg/day PO bid × 3 days (max. 1.5 g/day); OR
• Azithromycin†12 mg/kg once on first day, then 6 mg/kg once daily on
days 2 through 4 (total course: 4 days); OR
• Ceftriaxone 50-­100 mg/kg/day IV or IM, qd × 3 days for severe illness
requiring parenteral therapy.
Second line:
• Cefixime 8 mg/kg once daily for 3 days if susceptibility is known or
likely based on local data; OR
• Trimethoprim (TMP)-­sulfamethoxazole (SMX): 4 mg/kg/day of TMP and
20 mg/kg/day SMX twice a day for 5 days (if susceptibility known or
likely based on local data); OR
• Ampicillin 100 mg PO, divided qid, max 2 g/day for 5 days if
susceptibility known or likely based on local data (amoxicillin is not
effective presumably due to rapid gut absorption)

ETEC

Watery diarrhea in a traveler returning from an
endemic area that interferes with planned
activities or is persistent (>14 days).

First line:
• Azithromycin* 12 mg/kg once on first day, then 6 mg/kg once daily on
days 2 and 3 (total course: 3 days)
Second line:
• Ciprofloxacin† 15 mg/kg/day PO bid × 3 days; OR
• Children ≥12 yr: Rifaximin 600 mg/day (not per kilogram), divided tid ×
3 days

STEC

Avoid antimicrobials and antimotility drugs.

Salmonella,
nontyphoidal

Antibiotics for uncomplicated gastroenteritis
in normal hosts are ineffective, may prolong
excretion, and are not recommended.
Infection in infants younger than 3 mo and
patients with immunocompromise, malignancy,
chronic GI disease, severe colitis hemolytic
anemia, or HIV infection
Most strains are resistant to multiple antibiotics.

See treatment of Shigella. Patients without bacteremia can be treated
orally for 5-­7 days. Patients with bacteremia (proven or until blood
culture results are available in a high-­risk host) should be treated
parenterally until blood cultures clear and then transitioned to PO to
complete a total 7-­to 10-­day course. Focal or disseminated invasive
infections (e.g., osteomyelitis, meningitis) and bacteremic patients with
HIV/AIDS should be treated parenterally for 4-­6 wk. Depending on
susceptibilities, ampicillin, TMP-­SMX, or fluoroquinolones may be used.

Yersinia spp.

Antibiotics are not usually required for diarrhea,
which is usually self-­limited and clinical benefits
of antibiotics are not established.
Neonates and immunocompromised patients
and patients with bacteremia and/or focal
invasive infections should be treated.
Deferoxamine therapy should be withheld for
severe infections or associated bacteremia.

For bacteremia or focal invasive infections, use parenteral third-­
generation cephalosporins. Can also consider TMP-­SMX,
aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, tetracycline or doxycycline, or
chloramphenicol. Begin IV then switch to oral when clinically stable, for
a total course of 2-­6 wk.

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2374 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 387.11  Antimicrobial Therapy for Infectious Diarrhea—cont’d
ORGANISM

INDICATION FOR THERAPY

DOSAGE AND DURATION OF TREATMENT

Campylobacter
spp.

Dysentery, moderate and severe gastroenteritis
or at risk for severe disease (e.g., elderly,
pregnant, or immunocompromised), and
bacteremia or focal invasive infection.
Treatment of gastroenteritis appears effective if
given within 3 days of onset of illness.

For gastroenteritis or dysentery:
• Erythromycin PO 40 mg/kg/day divided qid × 5 days
• Azithromycin PO 10 mg/kg/day × 3 days
For bacteremia or focal invasive infection:
• Consider parenteral macrolides or carbapenems pending susceptibility
results. Fluoroquinolone resistance is >50% in some areas of the world.

Clostridioides
difficile

Colitis
• Discontinue inciting antibiotics if possible.
• Infectious disease consult suggested if
disease is persistent or recurrent.

First occurrence
Mild-­moderate:
• Metronidazole PO (or IV) 7.5 mg/kg/dose tid or qid × 10 days; max 500
mg per dose
• If failure to respond in 5-­7 days, consider switch to vancomycin PO 40
mg/kg/day divided qid × 10 days; max 125 mg/dose
• For metronidazole-­intolerant patients, start with vancomycin PO as
above
• For patients in whom oral therapy cannot reach the colon, add
vancomycin PR 500 mg/100 mL normal saline q8h prn until improvement
Severe:
• Vancomycin PO as above
Severe and complicated:
• Vancomycin PO as above PLUS metronidazole IV 30 mg/kg/day divided
qid, max 500 mg/dose
• If complicated with ileus or toxic colitis and/or significant abdominal
distension, give vancomycin PO PLUS metronidazole IV PLUS vancomycin
PR as above × 10 days
First recurrence
Mild-­moderate:
• Same regimen as for first occurrence
Severe:
• Vancomycin PO as above
Subsequent recurrences:
• DO NOT use metronidazole due to risk of neurotoxicity with repeated
or prolonged use
• Vancomycin PO pulsed or prolonged taper (recommend consulting ID
or GI for choice of regimen), OR
• Vancomycin × 10 days followed by rifaximin 400 mg/dose tid × 14-­20
days (N.B. that rifaximin is not approved in the United States for
children <12 yr old), OR
• Fidaxomicin × 10 days
Children 6 mo to 5 yr: 16 mg/kg/dose (max 200 mg/dose) bid
Children 6 yr and older: 200 mg/dose bid

Entamoeba
histolytica

• Asymptomatic cyst excreters
• Mild to moderate intestinal disease
• Severe intestinal or extraintestinal disease
(including liver abscess)

Asymptomatic cyst excreters:
• Iodoquinol PO 30-­40 mg/kg/day, (max 650 mg/dose) divided tid × 20
days; OR
• Paromomycin PO 25-­35 mg/kg/day divided tid × 7 days; OR
• Diloxanide furoate 20 mg/kg/day (max 500 mg/dose), orally, divided tid
× 10 days
Mild to moderate intestinal disease and severe intestinal or extraintestinal
disease:
• Metronidazole PO 30-­50 mg/kg/day divided tid × 7-­10 days; OR
• Children ≥3 yr: Tinidazole PO 50 mg/kg, single dose, max 2 g × 3 days,
OR 5 days for severe disease
FOLLOWED BY EITHER (to prevent relapse)
Iodoquinol PO 30-­40 mg/kg/day (max. 650 mg/dose) divided tid × 20 days;
OR
Paromomycin PO 25-­35 mg/kg/day divided tid × 7 days

Giardia
duodenalis

Persistent symptoms

• Tinidazole PO 50 mg/kg, single dose, max 2 g (for children ≥3 yr)
• Nitazoxanide PO
Age 1-­3 yr: 100 mg bid × 3 days
Age 4-­11 yr: 200 mg bid × 3 days
Age over 11 yr: 500 mg bid × 3 days
• Metronidazole PO 15 mg/kg/day (max 250 mg/dose), divided tid × 5–7
days

Cryptosporidium
spp.

Treat immunocompromised and HIV-­infected
hosts, although efficacy is equivocal.
Treatment may not be needed in normal hosts.

Immunocompetent children:
• Nitazoxanide, as for Giardia
Solid organ transplants:
• Nitazoxanide, as for Giardia, × 14 days or longer
HIV-­infected children:
• Combined antiretroviral therapy is the primary treatment
• Nitazoxanide, as for Giardia
• Paromomycin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 387 u Acute Gastroenteritis in Children

2375

Table 387.11  Antimicrobial Therapy for Infectious Diarrhea—cont’d
ORGANISM

INDICATION FOR THERAPY

DOSAGE AND DURATION OF TREATMENT

Cyclospora spp.

All symptomatic children

Age >2 mo: 8-­10 mg/kg/day TMP and 40-­50 mg/kg/day SMX PO divided
bid × 7-­10 days (HIV-­infected children may need longer courses)

Cystoisospora
spp.

Immunocompromised patients, symptoms
that do not resolve after 5-­7 days; treat
prophylactically in HIV-­infected patients with
CD4+ count <200 cells/mm3

• Age >2 mo: 8-­10 mg/kg/day TMP and 40-­50 mg/kg/day SMX PO
divided bid × 7-­10 days;
• Adults: 50-­75 mg/day pyrimethamine PO, either qd or divided bid
PLUS 10-­25 mg/day leucovorin PO; OR
• Ciprofloxacin 500 mg PO bid × 7 days

Blastocystis
hominis

The significance of B. hominis as a cause
of disease is controversial, so treatment
should be reserved for those with suggestive
symptoms and no other pathogen that could
be the cause.

• Metronidazole PO 35-­50 mg/kg/day divided tid × 10 days (max 500-­750
mg/dose); OR
• Age >2 mo: 8 mg/kg/day TMP and 40 mg/kg/day SMX PO divided BID
× 7 days; OR
• Nitazoxanide, as for Giardia, × 3 days; OR
• Age ≥3 yr: 50 mg/kg (max 2 g) tinidazole PO once

*Azithromycin and fluoroquinolones should be avoided in patients taking the antimalarial artemether. These drugs can prolong the QT interval on electrocardiogram and trigger
arrhythmias.
WHO, World Health Organization; PO, by mouth; prn, as needed; bid, two times a day; IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; qd, every day; ETEC, enterotoxigenic E. coli; qid, four times
a day; STEC, Shiga toxin–producing E. coli; SGI, gastrointestinal; tid, three times a day; ID, infectious diseases; GI, gastrointestinal; N.B., nota bene.

regarded as one of the most effective interventions to reduce the risk of
premature childhood mortality and has the potential to prevent 12% of
all deaths of children younger than 5 years of age. Vitamin A supplementation reduces all-­cause childhood mortality by 25% and diarrhea-­
specific mortality by 30%.

Rotavirus Immunization

Five live-­attenuated oral rotavirus vaccines are available internationally and WHO prequalified: the three-­dose pentavalent G1, G2, G3,
G4, P[8] human-­bovine vaccine (RotaTeq), the two-­dose monovalent
human G1P[8] vaccine (Rotarix), the three-­dose monovalent human-­
bovine 116E G6P[11] vaccine (Rotavac), and two formulations of the
three-­dose pentavalent G1, G2, G3, G4, G9 human-­bovine vaccine
(Rotasiil and Rotasiil Thermo). The result has been substantial reductions in rotavirus-­associated and all-­cause hospitalizations for diarrheal
disease in both vaccinated infants (direct protection) and unvaccinated
individuals (indirect, or herd protection), as well as reductions in office
visits for less severe rotavirus diarrhea. Reductions in all-­cause diarrhea deaths have been demonstrated in some countries since the introduction of these vaccines.
Programmatic uptake is lagging in low-­resource settings where most
severe disease and death occurs; however, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance,
has supported introduction of rotavirus vaccine into approximately 45
countries. Even though vaccine efficacy against severe rotavirus AGE is
lower (50–64%) in low-­resource compared with high-­resource countries; the number of severe rotavirus AGE prevented per vaccinated
child is higher because of the substantially greater baseline rate of
severe rotavirus gastroenteritis in developing countries. Vaccine (live
virus)-­associated rotavirus infection has been reported in children
with severe combined immunodeficiency disease, but the vaccine has
been shown to be safe in HIV-­infected populations. Because of suboptimal efficacy, alternative vaccine formulations are being explored,
including parenteral and neonatal vaccines.
Two licensed, efficacious two-­dose oral inactivated cholera vaccines
(Dukoral for children 2 years and older and Shanchol for children 1
year or older) are available in many countries but currently have no
specific indication in endemic and epidemic settings where they could
potentially reduce the burden of severe diarrhea and mortality in
young children. For travelers, a single-­dose live oral cholera vaccine
(Vaxchora) is licensed for adults in the United States.

Improved Water and Sanitary Facilities and
Promotion of Personal and Domestic Hygiene

Much of the reduction in diarrhea prevalence in the developed world
is the result of improvement in standards of hygiene, sanitation, and
water supply. Strikingly, an estimated 88% of all diarrheal deaths

worldwide can be attributed to unsafe water, inadequate sanitation,
and poor hygiene. Handwashing with soap and safe excreta disposal
can reduce the risk of diarrhea by 48% and 36%, respectively, whereas a
17% reduction is estimated as a result of improvements in water quality.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

387.1 Traveler’s Diarrhea
E. Adrianne Hammershaimb and Karen L. Kotloff
Traveler’s diarrhea is a common complication of visitors to developing
countries and is caused by a variety of pathogens, in part depending on
the season and the region visited. It is the most common (28%) travel-­
associated health problem in children. Traveler’s diarrhea can manifest
with watery diarrhea or as dysentery. Without treatment, 90% will have
resolved within a week and 98% within a month of onset. Some individuals develop more severe or persistent diarrhea and become dehydrated or unwell and may experience complications such as bacteremia
and intestinal perforation. Children younger than 2 years are at higher
risk for traveler’s diarrhea, as well as more severe disease. According to
FoodNet, the pathogens identified most commonly in travelers in the
United States were ETEC, C. jejuni, Shigella spp., and NTS. EAEC and
G. duodenalis are also important.

TREATMENT

For infants and children, rehydration, as discussed in Chapter 387,
is appropriate, followed by a standard diet. Adolescents and adults
should increase their intake of electrolyte-­rich fluids. Kaolin-­pectin,
anticholinergic agents, Lactobacillus, and bismuth salicylate are not
effective therapies. Loperamide, an antimotility and antisecretory
agent, reduces the number of stools in older children with watery diarrhea and improves outcomes when used in combination with antibiotics in traveler’s diarrhea. However, loperamide should not be used in
febrile or toxic patients with dysentery, in those with bloody diarrhea,
and in children younger than 6 years.
The effectiveness of antibiotics depends on the pathogen and its susceptibility profile. In forming a treatment plan, the potential side effects
should be weighed against the treatment need for a short-­lasting and
self-­limiting disease such as traveler’s diarrhea. Antibiotics are not recommended for mild diarrhea that is tolerable, is not distressing, and
does not interfere with planned activities but may be considered for
moderate diarrhea that is distressing and interferes with planned activities. Antibiotics are recommended for treatment of severe diarrhea
that is incapacitating or completely prevents planned activities and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2376 Part XVI u The Digestive System
for treatment of dysentery. When empiric therapy is required abroad,
azithromycin is suggested for young children, and fluoroquinolones
are recommended for older children and adults and as second-­line
therapy for younger children, depending on local pathogens and susceptibility patterns. Short-­duration (3 days) therapy is effective. Rifaximin is approved for use in children 12 years and older but should not
be used to treat bloody diarrhea. Rifamycin is an alternative to rifaximin that may be used in patients 18 years and older. Fluoroquinolones,
rifaximin, and rifamycin should be avoided in patients of all ages with
dysenteric diarrhea. Travelers should be reminded that diarrhea can be
a symptom of other severe diseases, such as malaria and MIS-­C. Therefore if diarrhea persists or additional symptoms such as fever occur,
travelers should seek medical advice. For up-­to-­date information on
local pathogens and resistance patterns, see www.cdc.gov/travel.
If the patient has returned home with diarrhea, a microbiologic
evaluation can be obtained before initiating antibiotic therapy. Prolonged diarrhea should prompt further investigation into possible
parasitic infections or NTS. Prophylactic antibiotics for travelers are
not recommended.

PREVENTION

In the pretravel visit, caregivers should be advised about diarrhea prevention, the signs, symptoms, and management of dehydration, and the
use of ORS. ORS and age-­appropriate antibiotics should be included
in a routine health packet. Travelers should drink bottled or canned
beverages or boiled water. They should avoid ice, salads, and fruit they
did not peel themselves. Food should be eaten hot, if possible. Raw or
poorly cooked seafood is a risk, as is eating in a restaurant rather than
a private home. Swimming pools and other recreational water sites can
also be contaminated.
Chemoprophylaxis is not routinely recommended for previously
healthy children or adults. Nonetheless, travelers should bring azithromycin (younger than 16 years of age) or ciprofloxacin (older than 16
years of age) and begin antimicrobial therapy if diarrhea develops.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 388

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The mechanisms of diarrhea are generally divided into secretory and
osmotic, but often diarrhea is a combination of both mechanisms. In addition, inflammation and motility disorders may contribute to diarrhea.
Secretory diarrhea is usually associated with large volume of watery stools
and persists when oral feeding is withdrawn. Osmotic diarrhea is dependent on oral feeding, and stool volumes are usually not as massive as in
secretory diarrhea (Fig. 388.1). The cessation of diarrhea after a 24-­hour
fasting trial may define “diet-­induced diarrhea,” which is mainly osmotic
in nature, whereas no or minimal change in stool volume and consistency despite fasting will suggest a secretory mechanism, also defined as
“electrolyte-­transport-­related diarrhea.”
Secretory diarrhea is characterized by active electrolyte and water
fluxes toward the intestinal lumen, resulting from either the inhibition of
neutral NaCl absorption in villous enterocytes or an increase in electrogenic chloride secretion in secretory crypt cells as a result of the opening
of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) chloride channel,
or both. The result is more secretion from the crypts than absorption in
the villi that persists during fasting. The other components of the enterocyte ion secretory machinery are (1) the Na-­K 2Cl co-transporter for the
electroneutral chloride entrance into the enterocyte; (2) the Na-­K pump,
which decreases the intracellular Na+ concentration, determining the driving gradient for further Na+ influx; and (3) the K+ selective channel, that
enables K+, once it has entered the cell together with Na+, to return to the
extracellular fluid.
Electrogenic secretion is induced by an increase of intracellular
concentration of cyclic adenosine monophosphate, cyclic guanosine
monophosphate, or calcium in response to microbial enterotoxins,
or to endogenous endocrine or nonendocrine molecules, including
inflammatory cytokines. Another mechanism of secretory diarrhea is
the inhibition of the electroneutral NaCl-­coupled pathway that involves
the Na+/H+ and the Cl−/HCO3− exchangers. Defects in the genes of the
Na+/H+ and the Cl−/HCO3− exchangers are responsible for congenital
sodium and congenital chloride diarrhea, respectively.
Osmotic diarrhea is caused by nonabsorbed nutrients in the intestinal lumen as a result of one or more of the following mechanisms: (1)
intestinal damage (e.g., enteric infection); (2) reduced absorptive surface area (e.g., active celiac disease); (3) defective digestive enzyme or
nutrient carrier (e.g., lactase deficiency); (4) decreased intestinal transit
time (e.g., functional diarrhea); and (5) nutrient overload, exceeding
the digestive capacity (e.g., overfeeding, sorbitol in fruit juice). Whatever the mechanism, the osmotic force generated by nonabsorbed solutes drives water into the intestinal lumen. A very common example of

Chronic Diarrhea

Osmotic

Secretory

Moderately increased
Diarrhea stops
Normal to increased
100 mOsm/kg

Very large
Diarrhea continues
Normal
50 mOsm/kg

Water

See also Chapters 382.3 and 385.
Chronic diarrhea is defined as stool volume of more than 10 g/
kg/day in toddlers/infants and greater than 200 g/day in older children that lasts for 4 weeks or more. Persistent diarrhea begins acutely
but lasts longer than 14 days. In practice this usually means having
loose or watery stools more than 3 times a day, with a deviation from
the previous regular stool pattern. Awakening at night to pass stool,
beyond the period of infancy, is often a sign of an organic cause of diarrhea. The epidemiology has two distinct patterns. In developing countries, chronic diarrhea is, in many cases, the result of an intestinal
infection that persists longer than expected. This syndrome is often
defined as protracted (persistent) diarrhea, but there is no clear
distinction between protracted (persistent) and chronic diarrhea. In
countries with higher socioeconomic conditions, chronic diarrhea is
less frequent, and the etiology often varies with age. The outcome of
diarrhea depends on the cause and ranges from benign, self-­limited
conditions, such as toddler’s diarrhea, to severe congenital diseases,
such as microvillus inclusion disease, which may lead to progressive
intestinal failure.

Water

Anat Guz-­Mark and Raanan Shamir

Fig. 388.1 Pathways of osmotic and secretory diarrhea. Osmotic di-

arrhea is caused by functional or structural damage of intestinal epithelium. Nonabsorbed osmotically active solutes drive water into the
lumen. Stool osmolality and ion gap are generally increased. Diarrhea
stops or improves dramatically in children when not eating. In secretory
diarrhea, ions are actively pumped into the intestine by the action of
exogenous and endogenous secretagogues. Usually there is no intestinal damage. Osmolality and ion gap are within normal levels. Large
volumes of stools are lost independent of food ingestion.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 388 u Chronic Diarrhea 2377
osmotic diarrhea is lactose intolerance. Lactose, if not absorbed in the
small intestine, reaches the colon, where it is fermented to short-­chain
organic acids, releasing hydrogen that is detected in the lactose breath
test, and generating an osmotic overload.
In many children chronic diarrhea may be caused by the combination of multiple mechanisms.

ETIOLOGY

Table 388.1 summarizes the main etiologies of chronic diarrhea in
infants and children.

Infectious

Enteric infections are by far the most frequent cause of persistent or
chronic diarrhea, both in developing and industrialized countries;
however, outcomes are often very different. In the former, comorbid
conditions, such as HIV/AIDS, malaria, or tuberculosis, may result in
malnutrition that impairs the child’s immune response, thereby potentiating the likelihood of prolonging diarrhea or acquiring another enteric
infection. Prolonged diarrhea in poor-­resource countries may lead to
undernutrition, which predisposes the child to additional episodes of
diarrhea. Sequential infections with the same or different pathogens may
also be responsible for chronic diarrhea. In developing countries, enteroadherent Escherichia coli and Giardia lamblia have been implicated in
chronic diarrhea, whereas, in developed countries, chronic infectious
diarrhea usually runs a more benign course and the etiology is often
viral, with rotavirus and norovirus playing major roles (Table 388.2).
Chronic diarrhea in travelers to or expatriates from developing countries may depend on the country of origin. Nonetheless, common pathogens include Giardia, E. coli, Shigella, Campylobacter, Salmonella, and
enteric viruses. Less common pathogens include amebiasis, Strongyloides,
and tropical spruce.
Table 388.1  Main Etiologies of Chronic Diarrhea in Children
Older and Younger than 2 Years of Age
ETIOLOGY

AGE <2 YR

AGE >2 YR

Infections

+++

+++

Postenteritis syndrome

+++

+++

Immune deficiency

++

Rare

Celiac disease

+++ (after gluten
introduction)

+++

Food allergy

+++

+

Inflammatory bowel disease

+ (rare)

+++

Pancreatic insufficiency

++

++

Cholestasis and insufficient
bile acids

++

++

Cystic fibrosis

++

+

Lactose intolerance

++ (mostly
postinfectious)

+++

Opportunistic microorganisms induce diarrhea exclusively, more
severely, or for more prolonged periods, in specific populations, such as
immunocompromised children. Specific agents cause chronic diarrhea or
exacerbate diarrhea in many chronic diseases. Clostridium difficile or cytomegalovirus act as opportunistic agents in patients with malignant diseases
as well as in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Cryptosporidium may induce severe and protracted diarrhea in AIDS patients.
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) results in chronic diarrhea by either a direct interaction between the microorganism and the
enterocytes, or the consequence of deconjugation and dihydroxylation of
bile salts and hydroxylation of fatty acids due to an increased proliferation of bacteria in the proximal intestine. Risk factors for SIBO in children
include acid-­
suppressive therapies, alterations in gastrointestinal (GI)
motility and anatomy, as well as poor sanitation conditions.
Postenteritis diarrhea syndrome (see Chapter 387) is a clinicopathologic condition in which small intestinal mucosal damage persists
after acute gastroenteritis. Sensitization to food antigens, secondary
disaccharidase deficiency, persistent infections, or reinfection with
another enteric pathogen may be responsible for causing postenteritis
diarrhea syndrome, which is thought to be related to dysregulation of
the intestinal microbiota. Functional diarrhea, which may be related to
the pathogenesis of irritable bowel syndrome, may be caused by complications of an acute gastroenteritis.

Inflammatory/Immunologic

Celiac disease (see Chapter 384) is a genetically determined immune-­
mediated intestinal disorder that affects about 1 in 100 individuals,
depending on geographic origin. In the genetically susceptible host,
gliadin, the major protein of gluten, reacts with the immune system
to cause inflammation and villous atrophy. A reduction of intestinal
absorptive surface is responsible for the diarrhea in celiac disease,
which is reversible upon elimination of gluten from the diet.
Food allergy (mainly cow’s milk protein allergy, see Chapter 192)
may present during infancy with chronic diarrhea. An abnormal immune
response to food proteins can cause a proctitis/colitis or an enteropathy,
which may result in inflammatory or malabsorptive diarrhea. Eosinophilic gastroenteropathy is characterized by an eosinophilic infiltration
of the intestinal wall and is strongly associated with atopy (see Chapter
383). However, although diarrhea in food allergy responds to withdrawal
of the responsible food, this does not always occur in eosinophilic gastroenteropathy, in which immune-­suppressive therapy may be needed.
IBDs, including Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, and IBD-­
undetermined, cause chronic diarrhea that is often associated with
abdominal pain, elevated inflammatory markers, and increased concentrations of fecal calprotectin or lactoferrin (see Chapter 382). The age of
onset of IBD is broad, with rare cases described in the first few months

Table 388.2  Comparative List of Prevalent Agents and
Conditions in Children with Persistent
Infectious Diarrhea in Industrialized and
Developing Countries
AGENT/DISEASE

Intestinal lymphangiectasia

+

+

INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES

Motility disorders

++

Rare

Short bowel syndrome

+++

+

Toddler’s and functional
diarrhea

++

++

Clostridium difficile
Enteroaggregative
Escherichia coli
Atypical E. coli

Excessive intake of fruit juices
and fluids

++

++

Congenital diarrheal disorders,
including structural
enterocyte defects and
enzymatic or transport
malabsorption syndromes

++

Unlikely

Astrovirus
Norovirus
Sapovirus
Rotavirus*
Small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth (SIBO)
Postenteritis diarrhea syndrome

DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Enteroaggregative E. coli
Atypical E. coli
Shigella spp.
Heat-­stable/heat-­labile
enterotoxin-­producing E. coli
Rotavirus*
Cryptosporidium
Giardia lamblia
Tropical sprue

*More frequent in industrialized than in developing countries as agent of chronic
diarrhea.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2378 Part XVI u The Digestive System
of life, and the peak incidence in childhood occurs in adolescence. The
severity of the symptoms is highly variable with a pattern characterized
by long periods of well-­being followed by exacerbations.
Autoimmune processes may target the intestinal epithelium, alone or
in association with extraintestinal symptoms. Autoimmune enteropathy is associated with the production of antienterocyte and antigoblet cell
antibodies, primarily immunoglobulin A, but also immunoglobulin G,
directed against components of the enterocyte brush border or cytoplasm
and by a cell-­mediated autoimmune response with mucosal T-­cell activation. An X-­linked immune-­dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy (IPEX syndrome) is associated with variable gene mutations and
phenotypes of chronic diarrhea (more on autoimmune enteropathy and
IPEX syndrome is available in Chapter 382.3).
Immune deficiency can present as chronic diarrhea in children. In
these cases (for example, severe combined immunodeficiency or AIDS)
the child can be infected by an opportunistic pathogen, can exhibit a
persistent diarrhea due to a pathogen usually causing an acute gastroenteritis, or be infected by multiple and recurrent different pathogens
causing mucosal damage to the intestines. Other immunoregulatory
defects, found in patients with agammaglobulinemia, isolated immunoglobulin A deficiency, and common variable immunodeficiency disorder, may result in mild persistent diarrhea.

Pancreatic Deficiency

Chronic diarrhea may be the manifestation of maldigestion caused by
exocrine pancreatic disorders (see Chapters 397 and 399.2). In most
patients with cystic fibrosis, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency results
in steatorrhea and protein malabsorption. In Shwachman-­Diamond
syndrome, exocrine pancreatic hypoplasia may be associated with
neutropenia, bone changes, and intestinal protein-­losing enteropathy.
Specific isolated pancreatic enzyme defects, such as lipase deficiency,
result in fat and/or protein malabsorption. Familial pancreatitis, associated with a pathogenic variant in the trypsinogen gene, may be associated with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and chronic diarrhea.
Pathogenic variants in CFTR, CTRC, PRSS1, PRSS2, SPINK 1, and
SPINK 5 are associated with hereditary pancreatitis.

Liver and Bile Acids Disorders

Liver disorders and cholestasis may lead to a reduction in the bile salts
pool resulting in fat malabsorption causing chronic diarrhea in the form
of steatorrhea. Bile acid loss may be associated with diseases affecting the
terminal ileum, such as Crohn disease, or following ileal resection. In primary bile acid malabsorption, neonates and young infants present with
chronic diarrhea and fat malabsorption caused by pathogenic variants of
the ileal bile transporter gene. In addition to the fat malabsorption, the
bile acid loss from the intestinal lumen is a form of secretory diarrhea by
itself (called cholerheic diarrhea or choleretic diarrhea, which is usually
associated with significant diaper dermatitis).

Carbohydrate Malabsorption

Rare genetic pathogenic variants (see Chapters 385.8 and 385.10) can cause
carbohydrate malabsorption. More commonly, lactose intolerance is secondary to lactase deficiency caused by intestinal mucosal damage (usually
as part of postenteritis syndrome, which is a self-­limited process). Depending on ethnicity, a progressive, age-­related, loss of lactase activity may begin
around 7 years of age and affects approximately 80% of the non-­White
population, and acquired hypolactasia may be responsible for chronic diarrhea in older children receiving cow’s milk (adult-­type lactase deficiency).
Similarly, fructose malabsorption is common in Western countries
with estimates as high as 40% of the population. These individuals cannot absorb fructose and often develop bloating, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and flatulence. Typically, they do not have liver disease. This is
in contrast to hereditary fructose intolerance, a rare genetic disorder
with incidence estimated to be 1 in 20,000-­30,000. This disease is associated with pathogenic variants in the ASDOB gene that encodes for the
aldolase B enzyme that is found primarily in the liver and is involved in
the metabolism of fructose. Individuals with hereditary fructose intolerance may have nausea, abdominal pain/bloating, vomiting, diarrhea,
and hypoglycemia. Continued ingestion of fructose results in hepatomegaly and eventually cirrhosis.

Protein-­Losing Enteropathy

Chronic diarrhea can be the manifestation of obstructed intestinal
lymphatic drainage, causing protein-­losing enteropathy with steatorrhea, diarrhea, and lymphopenia. Early-­onset protein-­losing enteropathy and lymphangiectasia, together with complement activation,
could be associated with congenital CD55 deficiency. Infantile-­onset
severe protein-­losing enteropathy and altered lipid metabolism could
be attributed to pathogenic variants in DGAT1.
Along with intestinal lymphangiectasia, many diseases that cause
intestinal mucosal injury can also result in a secondary protein-­losing
enteropathy, characterized by low serum protein levels and elevated
fecal α1-­antitrypsin (see Chapter 385.2).

Motility Disorders

Disorders of intestinal motility include abnormal development and function of the enteric nervous system, such as in Hirschsprung disease and
pediatric intestinal pseudoobstruction (PIPO), previously termed
chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction. PIPO encompasses both the
neurogenic and the myogenic forms, and is sometimes associated with
genitourinary manifestations. Other motility disorders may be secondary
to extraintestinal disorders, such as in hyperthyroidism and scleroderma.
Motility disorders are associated with either constipation or diarrhea, or
both, with the former usually dominating the clinical picture.

Short Bowel Syndrome

Short bowel syndrome is the single most frequent etiology of intestinal
failure in children (see Chapter 385.6). Many intestinal abnormalities
such as stenosis, segmental atresia, gastroschisis, and malrotation may
require surgical resection, but the most frequent primary cause of short
bowel is necrotizing enterocolitis. Rarely, a child can be born with congenital short bowel. In these conditions, the residual intestine may be
insufficient to carry on its digestive-­absorptive functions, resulting in
severe chronic diarrhea, malnutrition, and failure to thrive, requiring
long-­term treatment with parenteral nutrition.

Nonspecific Diarrhea, Including Toddler’s Diarrhea

The most benign and common etiology of chronic diarrhea is nonspecific diarrhea that encompasses functional diarrhea (or toddler’s
diarrhea) in children younger than 4 years of age and irritable bowel
syndrome in those, usually, 5 years of age and older. Toddler’s diarrhea
is defined by the daily painless recurrent passage of four or more large
unformed stools, for 4 or more weeks, with onset in infancy or preschool years. Nighttime defecation is usually absent. The child appears
unperturbed by the diarrhea, there is no evidence of failure to thrive,
and the symptoms resolve spontaneously by school age.
Diarrhea may also be the result of an excessive intake of fluids and
nonabsorbable carbohydrates. If the child’s fluid intake was >150 mL/
kg/24 hr, fluid intake should be reduced not to exceed 90 mL/kg/24 hr to
decrease the stool frequency and volume. If the dietary history suggests
that the child is ingesting significant amounts of fruit juice, especially apple
juice, then the consumption of juice should be decreased. Sorbitol, which is
a nonabsorbable sugar, is found in apple, pear, and prune juices and often
causes diarrhea in toddlers. Moreover, apple and pear juices contain higher
amounts of fructose than glucose, a feature postulated to cause diarrhea
in toddlers. In older children, irritable bowel syndrome is often associated
with abdominal pain and may be related to anxiety, depression, and other
psychological disturbances (see Chapter 389). When the cause of the diarrhea remains undetermined and the clinical course is inconsistent with
organic disorders, factitious disorder by proxy should be considered.

Congenital Diarrheal Disorders

The most severe etiology of chronic diarrhea includes a number of heterogeneous congenital conditions leading to syndromes often referred
to as intractable or protracted diarrhea. The genetic and molecular
basis of many causes of protracted diarrhea has been identified recently,
and the classification of congenital diarrheal disorders (CDDs) has
been proposed (Table 388.3), also referred to as congenital diarrheas
and enteropathies (CODEs). These terms represent a group of rare but
severe enteropathies, with a similar clinical presentation despite different pathogenesis and outcome. The diarrhea can be either secretory,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 388 u Chronic Diarrhea 2379
Table 388.3  Classification of Congenital Diarrheal Disorders Based on Their Molecular Defect and Their Inheritance
DEFECTS OF DIGESTION, ABSORPTION, AND TRANSPORT OF NUTRIENTS AND ELECTROLYTES
DISEASE

GENE NAME

GENES ENCODING BRUSH-­BORDER ENZYMES
Congenital lactase deficiency (LD)
LCT

TRANSMISSION AND
INCIDENCE

GENE LOCATION

MECHANISM

2q21.3

AR, 1 in 60,000 in Finland; lower
in other ethnic groups

Osmotic

Congenital sucrase-­isomaltase deficiency
(SID)

SI

3q26.1

AR, 1 in 5,000; higher incidence in
Greenland, Alaska, and Canada

Osmotic

Congenital maltase-­glucoamylase deficiency
(MGD)

Not defined

—

Few cases described

Osmotic

GENES ENCODING MEMBRANE CARRIERS
Glucose-­galactose malabsorption (GGM)
SLC5A1

22q13.1

AR, few hundred cases described

Osmotic

Fructose malabsorption (FM)

Not defined

—

Up to 40%

Osmotic

Fanconi-­Bickel syndrome (FBS)

SLC2A2

3q26.2

AR, rare, higher frequency in
consanguineous

Osmotic

Acrodermatitis enteropathica (ADE)

SLC39A4

8q24.3

AR, 1 in 500,000

Osmotic

Congenital chloride diarrhea (CCD)

SLC26A3

7q31.1

AR, sporadic; frequent in some
ethnicities

Osmotic

Lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI)

SLC7A7

14q11.2

AR, about 1 in 60,000 in Finland
and Japan; rare in other
ethnic groups

Osmotic

Primary bile acid malabsorption (PBAM)

SLC10A2
SLC51B

13q33.1
15q22.31

AR

Secretory

Cystic fibrosis (CF)

CFTR

7q31.2

AR, 1 in 2,500

Osmotic

GENES ENCODING PANCREATIC ENZYMES
Enterokinase deficiency (EKD)
PRSS7

21q21

AR

Osmotic

Hereditary pancreatitis (HP)

PRSS1
PRSS2
SPINK1
CTRC
CFTR

7q34
7q34
5q32
1p36.21
7q31.2

AD, cases with compound
pathogenic variants in different
genes; SPINK1 pathogenic
variants may also cause tropical
pancreatitis

Osmotic,
malabsorption

Congenital absence of pancreatic lipase
(APL)

PNLIP

10q25.3

AR

Osmotic,
malabsorption

4q27

AR, about 100 cases described;
higher frequency among
Ashkenazi Jews

Osmotic

GENES ENCODING PROTEINS OF LIPOPROTEIN METABOLISM
Abetalipoproteinemia (ALP)
MTP

Hypobetalipoproteinemia (HLP)

APOB
ANGPTL3

2p24.1
1p31.3

Autosomal codominant/AR

Osmotic

Chylomicron retention disease (CRD)

SAR1B

5q31.1

AR, about 40 cases described

Osmotic

GENES ENCODING OTHER TYPES OF PROTEINS
Congenital sodium diarrhea (CSD)
SPINT2 (only
syndromic CSD)
SLC9A3

19q13.2
5p15.33

AR

Osmotic

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome (SDS)

SBDS

7q11

AR

Osmotic

Activating guanylate cyclase-­C pathogenic
variant

GUCY2C

12p12.3

AD

Secretory

8q24.3

AR

Protein-­losing
enteropathy

AR; rare

Secretory

GENES ENCODING FOR OTHER ENZYMES
Defect in triglyceride synthesis
DGAT1

DEFECTS OF ENTEROCYTE DIFFERENTIATION AND POLARIZATION
Microvillus inclusion disease (MVID)
MYO5B
18q21.1
STX3
11q12.1
Congenital tufting enteropathy (CTE)

EPCAM

2p21

AR; 1 in 50,000-­100,000; higher
among Arabs

Secretory

Trichohepatoenteric syndrome (THE)

TTC37
SKIV2L

5q15
6p21.33

AR; 1 in 400,000

Secretory

Neonatal-­onset chronic diarrhea-­9 (DIAR9)

WNT2B

1p13.2

AR; few cases described

Osmotic

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2380 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 388.3  Classification of Congenital Diarrheal Disorders Based on Their Molecular Defect and Their Inheritance—cont’d
DEFECTS OF DIGESTION, ABSORPTION, AND TRANSPORT OF NUTRIENTS AND ELECTROLYTES
DISEASE

GENE NAME

TRANSMISSION AND
INCIDENCE

GENE LOCATION

MECHANISM

DEFECTS OF ENTEROENDOCRINE CELL DIFFERENTIATION
Congenital malabsorptive diarrhea (CMD),
NEUROG3
Enteric anendocrinosis

10q22.1

AR; few cases described

Osmotic

Proprotein convertase 1/3 deficiency (PCD)

PCSK1

5q15

AR

Osmotic

Intractable malabsorptive diarrhea of infancy
(DIAR11)

PERCC1

16p13.3

AR; few cases described in
Jewish Iraqi families

Presumed impaired
function of
enteroendocrine
cells (EECs)

21q22.3

AR; AD (1 family)

Inflammatory

DEFECTS OF MODULATION OF INTESTINAL IMMUNE RESPONSE
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type
AIRE
1 (APS1)
Immune dysfunction, polyendocrinopathy,
X-­linked (IPEX)

FOXP3

Xp11.23

X-­linked (autosomal cases
described), very rare

Inflammatory

IPEX-­like syndrome

CD25
STAT5b
STAT3
STAT1(GOF)
LRBA
CTLA4

Multiple

Not X-­linked

Inflammatory

CD55 deficiency

CD55

1q32.2

AR, rare

Protein-­losing
enteropathy

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; GOF, gain of function.

osmotic, or combined, depending on the specific defect. Often severe
diarrhea presents at birth or shortly thereafter, but in milder forms
diarrhea may go unrecognized for years. CDDs can be classified in four
groups: defects of digestion, absorption, and transport of nutrients
and electrolytes; defects of enterocyte differentiation and polarization;
defects of enteroendocrine cell (EEC) differentiation; and defects of
modulation of intestinal immune response.
Although CDDs are rare diseases, in most specific disorders the
genetic defect and transmission are known. The incidence of genetic
disorders associated with CDD can range from 1 in 2,500 for cystic
fibrosis, 1 in 5,000 for sucrose-­isomaltase deficiency, 1 in 60,000 for
congenital lactase deficiency, to 1 in 400,000 for trichohepatoenteric
syndrome. For most CDDs, such as IPEX syndrome or autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome type 1, the clinical application of exome
sequencing is likely to increase identification of more patients with
these rare causes of chronic diarrhea. Selected CDDs are more frequent
in ethnic groups where consanguineous marriages are common, or in
some geographic areas because of founder effects. Congenital lactase
deficiency is more common in Finland; lysinuric protein intolerance
has a higher incidence either in Finland and in Japan because of founder
effect, and a specific pathogenic variant is typically found in each of
the two ethnic groups. A defect in the DGAT1 gene was first identified using whole exome sequencing in an Ashkenazi Jewish family and
associated with the early onset of vomiting and nonbloody diarrhea
with protein-­losing enteropathy. In few families of Jewish Iraqi origin
with intractable diarrhea of infancy, a noncoding deletion was recently
identified on chromosome 16p13, presumably leading to impairment
in EEC function. For specific CDDs see Chapters 385.2 and 385.10.
Most cases of protracted diarrhea syndrome are not easily treated. The
natural history of protracted diarrhea is related to the primary intestinal disease or the specific defect in nutrient absorption. Although some
specific conditions may improve with nutritional therapy and dietary
eliminations (for example, glucose-­galactose malabsorption or congenital
protein-­losing enteropathy), most cases of CDDs result in chronic intestinal failure requiring long-­term parenteral nutrition, with poorer prognosis, and are more likely to be candidates for intestinal transplantation
(see Chapter 386). Some late-­onset CDDs may be relatively mild and are
recognized only later in life. Infantile-­onset or neonatal IBDs are a distinct

group of diseases, also occurring during infancy, characterized by more
inflammatory and often bloody component in stools (see Chapter 382.3).

EVALUATION OF PATIENTS

Because of the wide spectrum of etiologies, the medical approach should
be based on diagnostic algorithms that begin with assessment for infectious causes, and then consider the age of the child, growth, and clinical
and epidemiologic factors. Early onset in the neonatal period is rare and
may suggest a congenital or severe condition (see Chapter 382.3); however, infections and food allergy are more frequent in this age group, and
together with GI malformations should be high on the differential diagnosis. In later infancy and up to 2 years of age, infections and allergies are the
most common causes, while inflammatory diseases are more frequent in
older children and adolescents. Celiac disease as well as functional nonspecific diarrhea should always be considered independently of age because of
their relatively high frequency at all ages beyond early infancy.
Specific clues in the family and personal history may provide useful
indications, suggesting a congenital, allergic, or inflammatory etiology.
A history of polyhydramnios is consistent with congenital chloride/
sodium diarrhea (where a typical sonographic finding of dilated fetal
bowel loops is present), microvillus inclusion disease, cystic fibrosis,
and other CDDs, as well as a family history of a chronic or intractable
diarrhea in a relative presenting in the first month of life, and particularly consanguinity. An acute onset of diarrhea that runs a protracted
course suggests postenteritis diarrhea, secondary lactase deficiency,
SIBO, or the onset of nonspecific functional diarrhea. The association
of diarrhea with specific foods may indicate a nutrient basis, such as
intolerance to selected nutrients (fructose). Anthropometric evaluation is essential to understand if diarrhea has affected weight gain
and growth, providing estimation of the severity of diarrhea. Normal weight and growth strongly support functional diarrhea that
may respond to simple dietary management. It should be noted that
a child with functional diarrhea may be inappropriately “treated” with
a diluted hypocaloric diet in an effort to reduce the diarrhea, resulting
in impaired growth.
Initial clinical examination should include the evaluation of general
and nutritional status. Dehydration, marasmus, or kwashiorkor require
prompt supportive interventions to stabilize the patient. Nutritional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 388 u Chronic Diarrhea 2381
evaluation should start with the evaluation of the weight and height
curves, and anthropometric indices to determine the impact of diarrhea on growth. Weight is generally impaired before height, but with
time, linear growth also becomes affected, and both parameters may
be equally abnormal in the long term. Assessment of nutritional status includes a dietary history, physical examination, and biochemical
testing including nutritional investigations. Caloric intake should be
quantitatively determined, energy requirements determined, and the
relationship between weight modifications and energy intake should
be carefully considered. Assessment of body composition may be performed by measuring mid-­arm circumference and triceps skinfold
thickness or by bioelectrical impedance analysis, dual-­emission x-­ray
absorptiometry scans, or air plethysmography. Biochemical markers
including albumin, prealbumin, retinol binding protein, serum iron,
and transferrin may assist in grading malnutrition, as the half-­life of
serum proteins may distinguish between short-­and long-­term malnutrition. Evaluation of micronutrient concentrations should always
be considered. Zinc, magnesium, vitamin A, and folate deficiency are
associated with chronic diarrhea and should be provided if needed.
In infants with chronic diarrhea, feeding history must be carefully
obtained, providing clues for allergy or specific food intolerance, such
as cow’s milk protein allergy or sucrose-­isomaltase deficiency. Associated symptoms and selected investigations provide important diagnostic clues. Signs of general inflammation such as fever, mucoid or bloody
stools, and abdominal pain may suggest IBD. The presence of eczema
or asthma is associated with an allergic disorder, whereas specific
extraintestinal manifestations (arthritis, diabetes, thrombocytopenia,
etc.) may suggest an autoimmune disease. Specific skin lesions may be
suggestive of acrodermatitis enteropathica, which might respond to
zinc supplementation. Typical facial abnormalities and woolly hair are
associated with phenotypic diarrhea (trichohepatoenteric syndrome).

INVESTIGATIONS

Microbiologic investigation should include a thorough list of intestinal
bacterial, viral, and protozoan pathogens. Proximal intestinal bacterial
overgrowth may be determined using the lactulose hydrogen breath
test, but false-­positive tests are common (see Chapter 385.8).
Initial investigations of a child with chronic diarrhea beyond the
period of infancy should always include an assessment of intestinal
inflammation using fecal markers as calprotectin or lactoferrin, and
serology for celiac disease (see Chapter 384). The role of intestinal

mucosal biopsy is determined by the noninvasive diagnostic evaluation in consultation with a pediatric gastroenterologist.
Noninvasive assessment of digestive-­
absorptive function and of
intestinal inflammation plays a key role in the diagnostic workup
(Table 388.4). Abnormalities in the digestive-­absorptive function tests
suggest small bowel involvement, whereas intestinal inflammation, as
demonstrated by increased fecal calprotectin, supports colitis.
Determining the osmotic versus secretory nature of the diarrhea in
neonates and infants with protracted diarrhea is especially important.
The stool osmolar gap, sometimes called stool ion gap, is calculated as
290 mOsm/kg (or measured stool osmolality) minus [2 × (stool Na +
stool K)]. If the osmolar gap is above 100 mOsm/kg, fecal osmolality
is derived from ingested or nonabsorbed osmotically active solutes or
nonmeasured ions. In contrast, a low gap (<50 mOsm/kg) is typically
observed in secretory diarrhea. It is also important to measure Cl− concentration in the stool to rule out congenital chloride diarrhea, which
is characterized by low osmolar gap combined with high fecal Cl− loss
(>90 mmol/L).
Whereas most etiologies of chronic diarrhea can be exaggerated by
feeding and have osmotic or mixed nature to the stool, secretory diarrhea necessitates investigation for congenital defects in enterocytes,
defects in the intestinal immune response (IPEX and autoimmune
enteropathy), and disorders of bile acid malabsorption. Because of
the overlap between secretory and osmotic features of the diarrhea
in many diseases, a classification based on the response to bowel
rest was also introduced. Severe diarrhea that persists at bowel rest
is characteristic of congenital enteropathies (microvillus inclusion
disease, tufting enteropathy). Diarrhea that disappears at bowel rest
can imply carbohydrate or fat malabsorptive syndromes, as well as
defects in EECs. In most other etiologies the diarrhea can decrease
significantly, but not disappear, in response to bowel rest, including
some congenital diseases as well as acquired inflammatory and other
enteropathies.
Histology is important in establishing mucosal involvement, noting changes in the epithelial cells and villus/crypt ration, presence of
mucosal inflammation or in identifying specific intracellular inclusion
bodies caused by pathogens, such as cytomegalovirus, or the presence of parasites. Electron microscopy is essential to detect subcellular
structural abnormalities such as microvillus inclusion disease, though
the latter can be diagnosed with specific staining of the basal membrane on regular biopsies. Immunohistochemistry allows the study of

Table 388.4  Noninvasive Tests for Intestinal Digestive–Absorptive Function and Inflammation
TEST

NORMAL VALUES

IMPLICATION

α1-­Antitripsin concentration

<0.9 mg/g

Increased intestinal permeability/protein loss

Steatocrit

<2.5%-­fold (older than 2 yr) increase over
age-­related values (younger than 2 yr)

Fat malabsorption

Fecal-­reducing substances

Absent

Carbohydrate malabsorption

Elastase concentration

>200 μg/g

Pancreatic function

Chymotrypsin concentration

>7.5 units/g
>375 units/24 hr

Pancreatic function

Fecal occult blood

Absent

Blood loss in the stools/inflammation

Fecal calprotectin concentration

<100 μg/g (in children upto 4 yr of age)
<50 μg/g (older than 4 yr)

Intestinal inflammation

Fecal leukocytes

<5 per microscopic field

Colonic inflammation

Fecal lactoferrin

Absent

Inflammation

Nitric oxide in rectal dialysate

<5 μM of NO2−/NO3−

Rectal inflammation

Dual sugar (cellobiose/mannitol) absorption
test

Urine excretion ratio: 0.010 ± 0.018

Increased intestinal permeability

Xylose oral load

25 mg/dL

Reduced intestinal surface

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2382 Part XVI u The Digestive System
mucosal immunity as well as of other cell types (smooth muscle cells
and enteric neuronal cells).
Imaging may also have a role in the diagnostic approach. Abdominal
ultrasound may help in detecting liver and pancreatic abnormalities or
an increase in bowel wall thickness that suggests IBD. A preliminary
plain abdominal x-­ray is useful for detection of abdominal distention,
suggestive of intestinal obstruction, or increased retention of colonic
feces. Intramural or portal gas may be seen in necrotizing enterocolitis
or intussusception. Structural abnormalities such as diverticula, malrotation, stenosis, blind loop, and congenital short bowel, as well as
motility disorders, may be investigated through a barium meal and a
small bowel follow-­through. In older children, capsule endoscopy may
be considered to further assess intestinal inflammation or bleeding, and
capsule technology can be used to measure pressure, pH, and temperature through the GI tract, assessing motility. Bile malabsorption may
be explored by the retention of the bile acid analog 75Se-­homocholic
acid-­taurine (75SeHCAT) in the enterohepatic circulation.
Specific investigations should be carried out for specific diagnostic indications. Prick and patch test may support a diagnosis of food
allergy. However, an elimination diet with withdrawal of the suspected
harmful food from the diet and subsequent challenge is the most reliable strategy by which to establish a diagnosis.
Once infectious agents have been excluded and nutritional assessment performed, a stepwise approach to the child with chronic diarrhea may be applied. The main causes of chronic diarrhea should
be investigated, based on the features of the diarrhea (watery, fatty,
mucous, or bloody) and the specific nutrient(s) that is (are) affected.
The use of whole exome sequencing or specific molecular analysis may
be especially essential in children suspected of having CDD, and early
genomic testing is recommended in these circumstances. A step-­by-­
step diagnostic approach is important to minimize the unnecessary use
of invasive procedures as well as the cost, while optimizing the yield of
the diagnostic evaluation (Table 388.5).

TREATMENT

Chronic diarrhea associated with impaired nutritional status should
always be considered a serious disease, and therapy should be started
promptly. Treatment includes general supportive measures, nutritional
rehabilitation, elimination diet, and medications. The latter include
therapies for specific etiologies as well as interventions aimed at counteracting fluid secretion and/or promoting restoration of disrupted
intestinal epithelium. Because death may be caused by dehydration or
electrolyte abnormalities, replacement of fluid and electrolyte losses is
the most important early intervention.
Nutritional rehabilitation is often essential and is based on clinical and biochemical assessment. In moderate to severe malnutrition,
caloric intake should be carefully advanced to avoid the development of
refeeding syndrome and may be progressively increased to 50% or more
above the recommended dietary allowances to also allow catch-­up
growth. In children with steatorrhea, medium-­chain triglycerides may
be a major source of lipids. A lactose-­free diet should be considered
in children with chronic diarrhea. In these cases, lactose is generally
replaced by maltodextrin or a combination of complex carbohydrates.
A sucrose-­free formula is indicated in sucrase-­isomaltase deficiency.
Semi-­elemental or elemental diets have the dual purpose of overcoming food intolerance, which may be the primary cause of chronic
diarrhea, particularly in infancy and early childhood, and facilitating
nutrient absorption. The sequence of elimination should usually begin
from less to more restricted diets, that is, cow’s milk protein hydrolysate to amino-­acid–based formulas, depending on the child’s condition. In severely compromised infants, it may be prudent to start with
amino-­acid–based feeding.
When oral nutrition is not feasible or fails, enteral or parenteral
supplementation should be considered. Enteral nutrition may be
provided via nasogastric or gastrostomy tube and is indicated in a
child who is not able to be adequately fed orally. In extreme wasting
and in cases of significant intestinal mucosal damage or dysfunction,
enteral nutrition may not be tolerated, and parenteral nutrition is
required.

Micronutrient and vitamin supplementation are part of nutritional
rehabilitation, especially in malnourished children in developing
countries. Zinc supplementation is important in both prevention and
therapy of chronic diarrhea, since it promotes ion absorption, restores
epithelial proliferation, and stimulates immune response. Nutritional
rehabilitation has a general beneficial effect on the patient’s general
condition, intestinal function, and immune response.
Functional diarrhea in children may benefit from a diet based on the
“4 F” principles (reduce fructose and fluids, increase fat and fiber). The
use of probiotics (mostly Lactobacillus GG or Saccharomyces boulardii) in infectious and postinfectious diarrhea in children may be tried
as adjunctive therapy with reduction in symptom duration, but there
is insufficient evidence to recommend their routine use for chronic
diarrhea.
Pharmacologic therapy includes, based on the etiology, antiinfectious drugs, immune suppression, and drugs that may inhibit fluid
loss and promote cell growth. If a bacterial agent is detected, specific
antibiotics should be prescribed. Empiric antibiotic therapy may be
used in children with either small bowel bacterial overgrowth or with
suspected infectious diarrhea. Table 388.6 summarizes the antimicrobial treatment of infectious persistent diarrhea. Immune suppression

Table 388.5  Stepwise Diagnostic Approach to Children
and Infants with Chronic Diarrhea
INITIAL EVALUATION
Personal and family history:
Prenatal sonography;
feeding history; family history
of protracted diarrhea;
consanguinity
Physical examination: Signs of
malnutrition; dysmorphism;
skeletal abnormalities;
organomegaly; dermatitis

Infectious workup: Stool
cultures; parasites; viruses
Allergic workup: Elimination
diet trial

⬇
LABORATORY TESTS
Stool analysis: Stool volume
following fasting; stool
electrolytes and ion gap; pH and
reducing substances; steatocrit;
fecal leukocytes and calprotectin;
fecal elastase; α1-­antitrypsin

Blood and serum analysis:
Serum electrolytes; lipid
profile; albumin and
prealbumin; amylase and
lipase; inflammatory markers;
ammonia; celiac serology

⬇
IMAGING
Abdominal ultrasound: Bowel
wall thickening; liver and bile
disorders

X-­ray, contrast studies, computed
tomography, magnetic
resonance imaging: Congenital
malformation; signs of motility
disorders

⬇
ENDOSCOPIES AND INTESTINAL HISTOLOGY
Endoscopy and standard jejunal/colonic histology*; morphometry;
PAS staining; intestinal immunohistochemistry; electron microscopy

⬇
GENETIC INVESTIGATION
Specific molecular analysis

Whole exome sequencing

⬇
OTHER SPECIAL INVESTIGATIONS
Sweat test; specific carbohydrates breath tests; 75SeHCAT
measurement; antienterocyte antibodies; metabolic diseases
workup; motility studies; neuroendocrine tumor markers
*The decision to perform an upper or a lower endoscopy may be supported by
noninvasive tests.
PAS, Periodic acid–Schiff; 75SeHCAT, 75Se-­homocholic acid-­taurine.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 388 u Chronic Diarrhea 2383
Table 388.6  Antimicrobial Treatment for Persistent Diarrhea
DRUG
Antibiotics

Antiparasitic

INDICATIONS

DOSAGE

DURATION

Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole

Salmonella spp., Shigella spp.

6-­12 mg/kg/day (of trimethoprim) in 2 divided
doses daily per os

5-­7 days

Azithromycin

Shigella spp., Campylobacter

1 day: 12 mg/kg/day once daily per os
2-­5 days: 6 mg/kg/day once daily per os
* Alternative: 10 mg/kg/day once daily per os,
for 3 days

5 days

Ciprofloxacin

Shigella spp.

20-­30 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses, per os or IV

3 days

Ceftriaxone

Shigella spp.

50-­100 mg/kg/day once daily per IM or IV

2-­5 days

Metronidazole

Giardia, Amebiasis, Blastocystis,
Clostridium difficile

15-­35 mg/kg/day in 2-­3 divided doses per os

7-­10 days

Paromomycin

Amebiasis

25-­35 mg/kg/day in 3 divided doses per os

7 days

Vancomycin

C. difficile

40 mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses per os

10 days

Nitazoxanide

Amebiasis, Giardiasis, Blastocystis,
Cryptosporidiosis

100 mg every 12 hr for children ages 12-­47 mo
200 mg every 12 hr for children ages 4-­11 yr
500 mg every 12 hr for children older than 11 yr

3 days

Albendazole

Ascaris, hookworm, and pinworm
infection

400 mg

Once

*Depends on local susceptibility profile.
IM, Intramuscular; IV, intravenous; os, by mouth.

should be considered in selected conditions such as autoimmune
enteropathy and IBD.
Treatment may be also directed at modifying specific pathophysiologic processes. Secretion of ions may be reduced by antisecretory
agents, such as the enkephalinase inhibitor racecadotril. Some benefit
from absorbents, such as diosmectite, has been described, with reduction of diarrhea duration in infectious diarrhea. In diarrhea caused
by neuroendocrine tumors (NETs), microvillus inclusion disease and
enterotoxin-­induced severe diarrhea, a trial of somatostatin analog
octreotide may be considered. Zinc promotes both enterocyte growth
and ion absorption and may be effective when intestinal atrophy and
ion secretion are associated.
When therapeutic attempts and other nutritional supportive
measures have failed, the only option to treat children with intestinal failure, while maintaining adequate growth and development,
may be long-­
term parenteral nutrition or eventually intestinal
transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

388.1 Diarrhea from Neuroendocrine
Tumors
Shimon Reif and Raanan Shamir
The incidence of NETs originating in the GI tract is increasing globally.
Physicians’ awareness, endoscopic screening, and increased sensitivity of diagnostic tools may at least in part explain this trend. Most of
these tumors involve the gastro-­entero-­pancreatic tract. Neuroendocrine neoplasm cells possess features of both neural and epithelial cells.
The commonly perceived notion of NETs is of slow-­growing malignancies with a benign course. Although well-­differentiated GI-­NETs
may exhibit indolent clinical behavior, studies indicate that they are
frequently already metastatic at diagnosis, and in which case they are
neuroendocrine carcinomas.

The majority of NETs (75–90%) are not associated with elevated
hormone levels and do not cause a clinical syndrome such as diarrhea.
Functional tumors are tumors that make excess hormone, leading to
clinical syndromes. These include insulinoma, gastrinoma, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) secreting tumors, glucagonoma, and
somatostatinoma. A child with persisted watery secretary diarrhea
should be evaluated for a functional NET.
The most common NET in children is carcinoid, which is generally a low-­grade tumor, especially when it is small (<1 cm). It is
equally distributed between the small and large intestine and can
commonly be found in the appendix. Most carcinoids are found
incidentally and are asymptomatic, especially those that are located
in the appendix. Some NET patients (around 10%) will develop
secretory diarrhea requiring symptom control to optimize quality of life and clinical outcomes. Such patients are defined as having carcinoid syndrome, characterized by excessive production of
one or more peptides, which, when released into the circulation,
exert their endocrine effects and can be measured by radioimmunologic methods (in the plasma or as their urinary metabolites).
These peptides, therefore, also act as tumor markers. Compared to
carcinoid, VIPomas are much less frequent. Because VIP is a more
potent vasoactive peptide, it induces more profuse diarrhea, with
up to 70% of patients having volumes greater than 3 L/day. Though
rare as a cause of watery diarrhea, a NET should be considered in
the differential diagnosis when diarrhea is unusually severe or takes
a chronic course (resulting in electrolyte and fluid depletion). GI-­
NETs may be associated with flushing, palpitations, or bronchospasm. Family history may reveal multiple endocrine neoplasia
(MEN) 1 or 2 syndromes (Table 388.7).
Baseline tests should include plasma chromogranin A and urinary
5-­hydroxyindoloacetic acid (a metabolite of serotonin) and other specific
biochemistry being guided by the suspected syndrome (see Table 388.7).
Localization of any NET is best achieved using a multimodality
approach. Whole body CT or MRI with somatostatin receptor PET
screening may be required with gallium-­68 DOTATOC (synthetic
octreotate) PET.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2384 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 388.7  Diarrhea Caused by Neuroendocrine Tumors
TUMOR AND CELL TYPE

SIGNS OF HORMONE
HYPERSECRETION

SITE

MARKERS

Carcinoid

Intestinal argentaffin cells,
typically midgut, also
foregut and hindgut,
ectopic bronchial tree

Serotonin (5-­HT), urine
5-­HIAA* (diagnostic)
Also produce substance
P, neuropeptide K,
somatostatin, VIP
chromogranin A

Secretory diarrhea, crampy
abdominal pain, flushing,
wheezing (and cardiac
valve damage if foregut
site)

Resection
Somatostatin analog,
(palliative)
Genetic MEN-­1

THERAPY

Gastrinoma, Zollinger-­
Ellison syndrome

Pancreas, small bowel,
liver, and spleen

Gastrin

Multiple peptic ulcers,
secretory diarrhea

H2-­blockers, PPI, tumor
resection, (gastrectomy)
Genetic MEN-­1

Mastocytoma

Cutaneous, intestine, liver,
spleen

Histamine, VIP

Pruritus, flushing, apnea
If VIP, diarrhea

H1-­and H2-­blockers,
steroids, resection if
solitary

Medullary carcinoma

Thyroid C-­cells

Calcitonin, VIP,
prostaglandins

Secretory diarrhea

Radical thyroidectomy ±
lymphadenectomy
(genetic MEN-­2A/B,
familial MTC)

Ganglioneuroma,
pheochromocytoma,
ganglioneuroblastoma,
neuroblastoma

Chromaffin cells;
abdominal > other sites;
extraadrenal or adrenal

Metanephrines and
catecholamines, VIP
VMA, HMA in
neuroblastoma

Hypertension, tachycardia,
paroxysmal palpitations,
sweating, anxiety, watery
diarrhea†

Perioperative α-­adrenergic
(BP) and β-­adrenergic
blockade with volume
support tumor resection
Genetic MEN-­2 (RET
gene), VHL, NF-­1, SDH

Somatostatinoma

Pancreas

Somatostatin

Secretory diarrhea,
steatorrhea,
cholelithiasis, diabetes

Resection
Genetic MEN-­1

VIPoma

Pancreas

VIP, prostaglandins

Secretory diarrhea,
achlorhydria,
hypokalemia

Somatostatin analogs,
resection
Genetic MEN-­1

*Bold indicates major markers.
†Diarrhea has been reported only in adult patients with pheochromocytoma.
BP, Blood pressure; H1, histamine receptor type 1; H2, histamine receptor type 2; HMA, homovanillic acid; MEN-­1, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1; MTC, medullary thyroid
carcinoma; NF-­1, neurofibromatosis type 1; PPI, proton pump inhibitor; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase; VHL, von Hippel-­Lindau disease; VIP, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide;
VMA, vanillylmandelic acid.

Therapeutic interventions to be considered include surgical, pharmacologic, and radioisotope therapy; choice of therapy is based on
disease extent and location, tumor grade, pace of disease progression,
symptoms, and comorbidities.
Tumor resection is the treatment of choice when the tumor is
small and localized. The goals of resection are twofold: (1) management of the endocrine syndrome to control symptoms and (2) tumor
control to improve survival. However, resection can precipitate life-­
threatening adrenergic crises. When arising in the appendix, carcinoid
tumors less than 2 cm in size can be managed by simple appendectomy. When greater than 2 cm in size or arising from the base of the
appendix, a right hemicolectomy is indicated. Fortunately, in pediatric patients, metastases are rare; when they occur, it is usually in the
liver. Tumor histochemistry will confirm the NET type and classification. Pharmacologic treatment may include the use of long-­acting
somatostatin analogues as first-­line therapy. This usually results in a
pronounced improvement of symptoms including diarrhea. However,
many patients become resistant to somatostatin. Diarrhea caused by

pancreatic insufficiency, secondary to somatostatin analog use, is often
oily and malodorous and should be treated with pancreatic enzyme
replacement. Everolimus is an oral medication and a more specific target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor, and has been reported as add-­on
treatment to octreotide, primarily in adult patients. The tyrosine kinase
inhibitor sunitinib is another option. Data suggest a positive effect of
ondansetron, a serotonin-­3-­receptor antagonist, on diarrhea. Peptide
receptor radioisotope therapy also has been reported as a therapeutic
modality.
Diarrhea and flushing associated with the carcinoid syndrome can
be debilitating. Telotristat ethyl is an inhibitor of tryptophan hydroxylase that acts to reduce serotonin levels and has emerged as a promising
agent for control of refractory carcinoid syndrome diarrhea.
The diagnosis of NET in children should prompt a genetic referral to
exclude a familial syndrome.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 389 u Disorders of Brain-­Gut ­Interaction (Functional ­Gastrointestinal Disorders)

Chapter 389

Disorders of Brain-­Gut
­Interaction (Functional
­Gastrointestinal
Disorders)
Asim Maqbool, Chris A. Liacouras,
Jefferson N. Brownell, and Paul J. Ufberg
Disorders of brain-­gut interaction (DBGI), formerly classified as
functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs), comprise a group of
conditions that relate to the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and cannot
be completely explained by other underlying etiologies such as GI,
anatomic, physiologic, or biochemical abnormalities. Conversely,
DBGI are defined as a group of disorders classified by GI symptoms related to any combination of motility disturbances, visceral
hypersensitivity, altered mucosal and immune function, gut microbiota, and/or central nervous system processing. DBGI are common
worldwide in children of all ages and often pose diagnostic challenges, as there is no anatomic or laboratory-­based testing that can
be used to define them. The symptom-­based criteria employed to
classify DBGI have been developed and reevaluated through multiple iterations by expert consensus under the auspices of the Rome
Foundation and are thus referred to, in their most recent form, as
the Rome IV criteria. In this newest iteration, published in May
2016, the term functional gastrointestinal disorders has been retired
due to its nonspecificity and potential for stigma in favor of the
more specific DBGI. The criteria defining DBGI strive not to be
entirely based on diagnoses of exclusion, but rather aim to be based
on objective, unambiguous, and accurate criteria derived from the
presentation as elicited during a medical history and clinical examination. They aim to provide a uniform, reliable, and reproducible
framework to minimize unnecessary evaluations that are likely to
have low diagnostic yield or relevance. It is important to recognize
that DBGI may coexist or interact with other organic GI disorders,
such as inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, or chronic pancreatitis; at the same time, DBGI themselves exist as related entities on a spectrum with considerable overlap. Ongoing research
has implicated a complex interaction between gut microbiota and
host immune responses, altered motility, visceral hypersensitivity,
genetic factors, and the enteric nervous system in the pathophysiology of DBGI (Fig. 389.1). Furthermore, DBGI may be influenced
by psychosocial stressors or a result of an otherwise benign episode of abdominal pain (Fig. 389.2). Early life physical or psychologic stressors may manifest later via DBGI. Maladaptive responses
or lack of adequate coping skills may complicate the treatment of
DBGI but may also allow for a valuable approach to management
using behavioral therapies.
DBGI in children encompass two age-groups: infants/toddlers and
children/adolescents. Rumination syndrome, functional constipation,
and cyclical vomiting span both age-­groups (Fig. 389.3).

DISORDERS OF BRAIN-­GUT INTERACTION IN
INFANTS AND TODDLERS

Infant regurgitation is the most common DBGI in the first year of life
and describes effortless retrograde and involuntary passage of gastric
contents from the stomach cephalad and is more commonly referred
to as gastroesophageal reflux (Table 389.1). When refluxate reaches
the oropharynx and is visible, it is labeled as regurgitation. This phenomenon is normal for healthy infants unless there are complications

2385

associated with the process, such as esophageal inflammation, dysphagia, feeding difficulties, inadequate oral intake to meet needs leading
to failure to thrive, or the inability to protect the airway with risk for
aspiration; in this setting gastroesophageal reflux disease is the correct
designation (see Chapter 369). Unlike vomiting, regurgitation does not
include the forceful expulsion of gastric contents. The peak incidence
of infant regurgitation is 4 months of age, followed by a decline in frequency through 12 months of age.
Infant rumination is defined as a habitual regurgitation of gastric
contents into the oropharynx to allow for mastication and swallowing
(Table 389.2). It is thought to be a form of self-­stimulation and may
occur in the setting of emotional or sensory deprivation. The regurgitation of gastric contents is effortless, and the refluxate can be chewed
and reswallowed instead of expelled from the oropharynx. Infant rumination occurs between 3 and 8 months of age and does not respond to
measures used to manage regurgitation. This phenomenon does not
occur during socialization/interaction with individuals, does not occur
during sleep, and is not associated with distress. Empathy and nurturing lay the foundation for management.
Cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) is characterized by repeated episodes of stereotypical vomiting punctuated by periods of normal health
in between. It has been reported in infants and children younger than
3 years of age and is most common between ages 2 and 7. The median
age of presentation is 4 years (see Chapter 390).
Infant colic (see Chapter 23.1) is a normal developmental process
associated with fussiness, irritability, and difficulty consoling the infant
(Table 389.3). A trigger is not identifiable; the unexplained episodes
of apparent discomfort are often quite stressful to the caregivers and
identifying a cause may be their main concern. Infant colic typically
occurs between 1 and 4 months of age, with episodes of crying occurring more often in the afternoon or evening. The behavior tends to
peak after 4-­6 weeks, followed by a gradual decline to resolution about
12 weeks after initial onset. The typical behavior usually leads to consultation with a pediatrician or a pediatric gastroenterologist out of
suspicion for abdominal pain despite the absence of any correlating
evidence. Associated behaviors, including facial grimace, abdominal
distension, increasing gas, skin flushing, and drawing legs up to the
abdomen are nondiagnostic but may be worrisome to the caregiver.
Patients are often treated for gastroesophageal reflux, gas, or suspected allergy, leading to unnecessary dietary changes and medication use. Treatment includes multiple approaches based on caregiver
vulnerabilities. Approaches may include reassuring the caregiver
through demonstration that a held, rocked infant may be soothed,
prospectively logging crying and other behaviors, and ensuring that
caregiver exhaustion is addressed via support system. Probiotics have
been investigated as a possible treatment; however, systematic reviews
have not demonstrated any beneficial effect. Regardless of the primary
approach, providing reassurance, education, and ensuring adequate
coping skills and support for caregivers is key. Infant colic ultimately
resolves on its own.
Functional diarrhea is often also referred to as toddler’s diarrhea
or chronic nonspecific diarrhea of toddlerhood and describes the daily
painless passage of three or more large unformed stools for four or
more weeks in a well-­nourished child. The stools often contain visibly
undigested food and mucus, which may be distressing to the caregiver.
The onset is typically in infancy or preschool years and excludes steatorrhea and other malabsorptive etiologies (Table 389.4). Nutritional
factors such as excessive total calorie intake, as well as excessive dietary
intake of the sugar alcohol sorbitol and the carbohydrate fructose, coupled with a low-­fat diet, have been implicated in this osmotic process.
An evaluation of the diet for other possible etiologies as well as assessment for infections, inflammation, and medication use including antibiotics and laxatives is important. In addition, assessments of growth
as well as ruling out fecal impaction and encopresis via digital rectal
examination are important. Dietary changes such as reducing fruit
juice and processed fructose intake are helpful in resolving symptoms.
Care should be taken to not overly restrict the child’s diet in an effort
to avoid simple sugars. Fiber supplementation may be of some benefit,
but evidence is lacking.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2386 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Stress,
anxiety

Fig. 389.1 Intestinal immune activation

model of functional gastrointestinal disorders. It is hypothesized that, in a genetically
primed host, environmental factors induce
immune activation. Antigen presentation
of luminal antigens, such as pathogens or
food peptides, to T cells drives maturation
of naive T cells to T-­helper (TH) 2 cells. The
release of associated cytokines (interleukin
[IL]-­4, IL-­5, and IL-­14) promotes the activation and recruitment of eosinophils (Eos), B
cells, and mast cells. In addition to the traditional TH2 pathway, secretion of IL-­23 from
antigen-­
presenting cells, such as dendritic
cells, B cells, and macrophages, promotes
TH17 differentiation. The production of
granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating
factor (GM-­CSF) from Th17 further drives Eos
recruitment. Degranulation of mast cells and
eosinophils results in the release of inflammatory mediators, which can damage the
intestinal barrier and stimulate and damage
enteric nerve fibers, which induces visceral
hypersensitivity and motility disturbances
resulting in gastrointestinal symptoms. α4β7
gut homing T cells are a marker of intestinal
inflammation in both functional dyspepsia
and irritable bowel syndrome, and correlate
with delayed gastric emptying. Duodenal
motor dysfunction might also impair duodenal acid clearance, inducing intestinogastric
reflex responses that impair accommodation
of the gastric fundus, and increase transient
lower esophageal sphincter relaxations leading to gastroesophageal reflux. Signaling
cascades, leading to further cytokine release,
might result in extraintestinal symptoms, such
as anxiety and fatigue. The site and extent of
intestinal immune activation can define the
phenotype (i.e., proximal intestinal involvement might give rise to functional heartburn,
or functional dyspepsia, more distal involvement to irritable bowel syndrome, functional
constipation, or functional diarrhea). CRF,
Corticotropin-­releasing factor; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; Ig, immunoglobulin;
TNF, tumor necrosis factor; EBP, enhancer
binding protein; SCF, stem cell factor; NGF,
nerve growth factor. (From Black CJ, Drossman DA, Talley NJ, et al. Functional gastrointestinal disorders: advances in understanding
and management. Lancet. 2020;396:16644–
16674. Fig. 2.)

Hypothalamus
CRF
Pituitary

Increased transient
lower esophageal
sphincter relaxations

Fundic disaccommodation
and food redistribution,
with antral distension

ACTH
Adrenal
glands

Slow gastric emptying
Acid

Small intestinal
homing T cells

Cytokines

Cortisol

Altered microbiome

Food antigens, postinfection,
pathogens, smoking

Visceral hypersensitivity or dysmotility

Gut Lumen

Epithelium
Antigen-presenting cell

Lamina propria
B cell

TH2

Eotaxin 1

IL-4

TNF
IL-23, Il-6,
IL-12

Eos

IL-14

IL-5

IgE, IgG4
IL-13

GM-CSF

Mast cell
activation

Degranulation

TH17
IL-23

EBP, SCF, NGF
Histamine

Muscle fiber

Serotonin

Infant dyschezia describes apparent discomfort before defecation in
an infant less than 9 months of age. Infants with dyschezia will strain
before defecation for 10-­20 minutes with associated screaming, crying, and possible red/purple facial discoloration. Typically, stools are
passed several times daily and are not associated with other health
problems or anatomic abnormalities. Dyschezia is the result of discoordinated abdominal and pelvic floor musculature contraction, raising
the intraabdominal pressure. A good medical history and examination
to rule out anatomic or neuromuscular abnormalities are key. Normal
growth is to be expected. Reassurance provides the basis of management, and most caregivers will accept the explanation that the infant
needs to learn the proper mechanics to stool, relaxing the pelvic floor
while bearing down. Laxative, suppository, or digital manipulation is
not required and may be counterproductive. Infant dyschezia typically
resolves after 3-­4 weeks of symptoms.
Functional constipation (see Chapter 378.3) is associated with
chronic stool retention, often the result of deliberate withholding as
the child voluntarily tries to avoid defecation due to fear or pain. To

Nerves

meet criteria for functional constipation, infants and children must
have symptoms for 1 month, including at least two of five criteria listed
in Table 389.5. There is often an episode of acute constipation that
prompts further avoidance, creating a cycle of pain and withholding.
In infancy, the onset is often at the time of diet changes with either the
introduction of solid foods or the transition to cow’s milk at 12 months
of age. In toddlerhood, the initiation of toilet training often correlates
with onset of constipation.
In addition to the clinical criteria, symptoms may include hematochezia due to an anal fissure. Though the blood coating the stool is
often distressing to caregivers, the blood loss associated with constipation is typically not clinically significant. Physical examination may
reveal a palpable abdominal mass, small amounts of fecal matter or a
midline fissure on perianal exam, or a hard mass of stool in the rectal
vault on digital rectal exam. It should be noted that if the history is typical for functional constipation, a digital rectal examination may not be
necessary until treatment failure, if there is diagnostic uncertainty, or
an anatomic malformation is suspected. Digital manipulation of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 389 u Disorders of Brain-­Gut ­Interaction (Functional ­Gastrointestinal Disorders)

2387

Early life, genetic, and environmental factors
Social support, culture,
trauma, infection, sex,
and ethnicity

Abuse, parental beliefs and
behaviors, social learning,
diet, and use of antibiotics

Brain
Psychological factors
• Psychological comorbidity
• Cognitive-affective processing
• Health anxiety and somatization
• Gastrointestinal-speciﬁc anxiety
• Coping mechanisms
• Life stress

Gut–brain axis
Brain CNS
and gut ENS

CNS structure and function
• Structural brain abnormalities
• Functional network connectivity
• Visceral hypersensitivity
• Emotional arousal and cognitive
modulation
• Conditioned responses
• Neurotransmitters

Physiology

FGID presentation

Outcomes

• Motility
• Sensation
• Altered duodenal microbiome
• Gut permeability
• Secretion
• Immune-cell inﬁltration
• Inﬂammatory cytokines

• Symptoms
• Severity
• Behavior

• Quality of life
• Daily function
• Medications
• Hospital and general
practitioner visits

Infant regurgitation

389.2 Biopsychosocial model
of functional gastrointestinal disorders
(FGID). CNS, Central nervous system;
ENS, enteric nervous system. (From Black
CJ, Drossman DA, Talley NJ, et al. Functional gastrointestinal disorders: advances in understanding and management.
Lancet. 2020;396:16644–1674. Fig. 1, p
1667.)

Table 389.1  Diagnostic Criteria for Infant Regurgitation

Rumination syndrome

Infant rumination syndrome

Fig.

Cyclic vomiting syndrome

Must include both of the following in otherwise healthy infants 3 wk
to 12 mo of age:

Functional nausea / vomiting*
Aerophagia

1.	Regurgitation 2 or more times per day for 3 or more weeks
2.	No retching, hematemesis, aspiration, apnea, failure to thrive,
feeding or swallowing difficulties, or abnormal posturing

Infant colic
Functional dyspepsia*
Irritable bowel syndrome*

From Benninga MA, Nurko S, Faure C, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: neonate/toddler. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1443–1455.e2.

Abdominal migraine*
FAP-NOS*
Infant dyschezia
Functional diarrhea

Table 389.2  Diagnostic Criteria for Infant Rumination
Syndrome

Functional constipation
Functional nonretentive fecal incontinence
0

2

4

6

8

months

10

12

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

years

Fig. 389.3 Age distribution of functional gastrointestinal disorders in

infants, toddlers, children, and adolescents. *History may not be reliable below this age. FAP-­NOS, Functional abdominal pain-­not otherwise specified. (Modified from Benninga MA, Nurko S, Faure C, et al.
Childhood functional gastrointestinal disorders: neonate/toddler. Gastroenterology. 2016;150:1443–1455.e2.)

anal canal and rectum may further traumatize the child in whom painful defecation has prompted withholding behaviors.
The differential diagnosis for constipation is extensive. In infancy,
care must be taken to exclude, via history or physical exam, etiologies including anatomic obstructions, Hirschsprung disease, spinal
and neuromuscular abnormalities, and metabolic disorders. A defecation history extending to the first 24 hours of life is particularly
important, as 90% of healthy infants and fewer than 10% of infants
with Hirschsprung disease will pass their first bowel movement within

Must include all of the following for at least 2 mo:
1.	Repetitive contractions of the abdominal muscles, diaphragm,
and tongue
2.	Effortless regurgitation of gastric contents, which are either
expelled from the mouth or rechewed and reswallowed
3.	Three or more of the following:
a.	Onset between 3 and 8 mo
b.	Does not respond to management for gastroesophageal reflux
disease and regurgitation
c.	Unaccompanied by signs of distress
d.	Does not occur during sleep and when the infant is interacting
with individuals in the environment
From Benninga MA, Nurko S, Faure C, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: neonate/toddler. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1443–1455.e2.

the first 24 hours of life. Assessment for associated signs and symptoms and growth trends are important, as growth is often affected in
the previously mentioned disorders. Red flags are noted in Table 389.6.
Management involves naming and explaining the diagnosis, dietary
and lifestyle changes, and early use of medications to soften stool with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2388 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 389.3  Diagnostic Criteria for Infant Colic

Table 389.6  Potential Alarm Features in Constipation

For clinical purposes, must include all of the following:

Passage of meconium >48 hours in a term newborn
Constipation starting in the first month of life
Family history of Hirschsprung disease
Ribbon stools
Blood in the stools in the absence of anal fissures
Failure to thrive
Bilious vomiting
Severe abdominal distension
Abnormal thyroid gland or newborn screen
Abnormal position of the anus
Absent anal or cremasteric reflex
Decreased lower extremity strength/tone/reflex
Sacral dimple
Tuft of hair on lower spine
Gluteal cleft deviation
Anal scars

1.	An infant who is <5 mo of age when the symptoms start and stop
2.	Recurrent and prolonged periods of infant crying, fussing, or
irritability reported by caregivers that occur without obvious cause
and cannot be prevented or resolved by caregivers
3.	No evidence of infant failure to thrive, fever, or illness
“Fussing” refers to intermittent distressed vocalization and has been
defined as “behavior that is not quite crying but not awake and
content either.” Infants often fluctuate between crying and fussing,
so that the two symptoms are difficult to distinguish in practice
For clinical research purposes, a diagnosis of infant colic must meet
the preceding diagnostic criteria and also include both of the
following:
1.	Caregiver reports infant has cried or fussed for 3 or more hours
per day during 3 or more days in 7 days in a telephone or face-­to-­
face screening interview with a researcher or clinician
2.	Total 24-­hr crying plus fussing in the selected group of infants is
confirmed to be 3 hours or more when measured by at least one
prospectively kept, 24-­hr behavior diary
From Benninga MA, Nurko S, Faure C, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: neonate/toddler. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1443–1455.e2.

Table 389.4  Diagnostic Criteria for Functional Diarrhea
Must include all of the following:
1.	Daily painless, recurrent passage of four or more large, unformed
stools
2.	Symptoms last more than 4 wk
3.	Onset between 6 and 60 mo of age
4.	No failure to thrive if caloric intake is adequate
From Benninga MA, Nurko S, Faure C, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: neonate/toddler. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1443–1455.e2.

Table 389.5  Diagnostic Criteria for Functional
Constipation
Must include 1 mo of at least two of the following in infants up to 4 yr
of age:
1.	Two or fewer defecations per week
2.	History of excessive stool retention
3.	History of painful or hard bowel movements
4.	History of large-­diameter stools
5.	Presence of a large fecal mass in the rectum
In toilet-­trained children, the following additional criteria may be
used:
6.	At least one episode per week of incontinence after the
acquisition of toileting skills
7.	History of large-­diameter stools that may obstruct the toilet
From Benninga MA, Nurko S, Faure C, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: neonate/toddler. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1443–1455.e2.

daily osmotic laxatives preferred over stimulant laxatives. The primary
goal is to achieve painless defection to facilitate resolution of the fear
and withholding around defecation. Avoidance of toilet training until
symptoms resolve and the child shows interest or willingness to proceed are generally advocated. Behavior modification including reassurance and positive incentive reward systems are useful.

DISORDERS OF BRAIN-­GUT INTERACTION IN
OLDER CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS

DBGI in children and adolescents are divided by symptoms into nausea and vomiting disorders, abdominal pain disorders, and defecation

From Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: child/adolescent. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1456–1468.e2. Table 3.

disorders. For individual diagnoses, the term functional is still used in
some cases.

Nausea and Vomiting Disorders

Cyclic vomiting syndrome describes stereotypical, episodic attacks of
vomiting with intervening periods of normal health and no vomiting
symptoms (see Chapter 390). Per the Rome IV criteria, at least two
episodes must occur in a 6-­month period and not be attributable to
another condition (Table 389.7). CVS can occur from infancy to adulthood, with 46% of patients having symptom onset at or before 3 years
of age. In younger patients, extra care must be taken to rule out metabolic and anatomic disorders, as there is a higher likelihood of these
disorders at younger ages. Chronic cannabis use in adolescents can be
associated with repeated episodes of nausea and vomiting, termed the
cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (see Chapter 157.3), and should
be excluded in this age-­group.
Functional nausea and functional vomiting may coexist or may
occur independently of one another and describe isolated nausea or
isolated vomiting (Table 389.8). Importantly, these conditions occur
without coincident abdominal pain. The presentation may be accompanied by autonomic symptoms such as diaphoresis, pallor, tachycardia, and dizziness. The differential diagnosis includes anatomic,
inflammatory, infectious, and motility etiologies. Anxiety and other
behavioral conditions can be present with these DBGI and should be
evaluated for and managed accordingly; children with functional nausea or functional vomiting should undergo psychologic evaluation. In
children with psychologic comorbidities, cognitive-behavioral therapy
or other psychologic interventions are appropriate. Cyproheptadine
and transcutaneous gastric stimulation may be effective in the management of nausea.
Rumination syndrome in children and adolescents is defined
similarly to the condition in infants, with the added notation that
the effortless regurgitation of stomach contents may be associated
with an unpleasant sensation or discomfort such as abdominal pressure or burning (Table 389.9). Repeated regurgitation and remastication or oral repulsion of the regurgitated gastric contents occurs soon
after ingesting foodstuffs and does not occur during sleep. It is not
preceded by active expulsion of gastric contents/retching and cannot
be explained by any other medical condition. The diagnosis does not
require prior failure of treatment for gastroesophageal reflux. A triggering event can often be identified before symptoms, which may occur
following resolution of an infectious illness or with psychosocial stress.
In adolescents, eating disorders may present similarly and must be
ruled out. Other GI issues to be considered include anatomic, infectious, inflammatory, and motility disorders. An important distinction between rumination and other GI etiologies of vomiting includes
effortless versus forceful regurgitation, and the time course, which is
usually immediately following ingestion of foodstuffs. As with most

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 389 u Disorders of Brain-­Gut ­Interaction (Functional ­Gastrointestinal Disorders)
Table 389.7  Diagnostic Criteria for Cyclic Vomiting
Syndrome
Must include all of the following:
1.	The occurrence of two or more periods of intense, unremitting
nausea and paroxysmal vomiting, lasting hours to days within a
6-­mo period
2.	Episodes are stereotypical in each patient
3.	Episodes are separated by weeks to months with return to
baseline health between episodes
4.	After appropriate medical evaluation, the symptoms cannot be
attributed to another condition

Table 389.8  Diagnostic Criteria* for Functional Nausea
and Functional Vomiting
FUNCTIONAL NAUSEA
Must include all of the following fulfilled for the last 2 mo:
1.	Bothersome nausea as the predominant symptom, occurring at
least twice per week, and generally not related to meals
2.	Not consistently associated with vomiting
3.	After appropriate evaluation, the nausea cannot be fully
explained by another medical condition
FUNCTIONAL VOMITING
Must include all of the following:
1.	On average, one or more episodes of vomiting per week
2.	Absence of self-­induced vomiting or criteria for an eating disorder
or rumination
3.	After appropriate evaluation, the vomiting cannot be fully
explained by another medical condition
*Criteria fulfilled for at least 2 mo before diagnosis.
From Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: child/adolescent. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1456–1468.

Table 389.9  Diagnostic Criteria* for Rumination Syndrome
in Children
Must include all of the following:
1.	Repeated regurgitation and rechewing or expulsion of food that:
a.	Begins soon after ingestion of a meal
b.	Does not occur during sleep
2.	Not preceded by retching
3.	After appropriate evaluation, the symptoms cannot be fully
explained by another medical condition. An eating disorder must
be ruled out
*Criteria fulfilled for at least 2 mo before diagnosis.
From Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: child/adolescent. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1456–1468.

DBGI, a thorough understanding of the disorder and motivation to
overcome it are key to treatment. Because rumination syndrome is
essentially a learned habit, therapy focusing on managing the habit has
proven effective. Deep breathing exercises to counteract the noxious
stimulus are often employed to change the pressure differential and
prevent regurgitation of gastric contents.
Aerophagia is often seen in neurocognitively impaired patients. It
involves excessive air swallowing occurring throughout the day with
progressive abdominal distention and with repetitive passage of gas via
belching and/or flatus. Abdominal distension and flatus symptoms may
be more severe in those children who cannot belch. Symptoms cannot
be attributed to any other causes such as partial obstructions, small
bowel bacterial overgrowth, GI dysmotility (pseudoobstruction), or to
malabsorptive disorders. In children with age-­appropriate cognition
and neurologic status, chewing gum and gulping down liquids may be
risk factors for aerophagia. Abdominal pain, nausea, and early satiety
are possible associated GI symptoms; sleeping difficulty, headaches,
and dizziness are also reported. Anxiety is a frequent comorbidity and

2389

Table 389.10  Diagnostic Criteria* for Functional Dyspepsia
Must include one or more of the following bothersome symptoms at
least 4 days/mo:
1.	Postprandial fullness.
2.	Early satiation.
3.	Epigastric pain or burning not associated with defecation.
4.	After appropriate evaluation, the symptoms cannot be fully
explained by another medical condition.
Within functional dyspepsia, the following subtypes are now
adopted:
1.	Postprandial distress syndrome includes bothersome postprandial
fullness or early satiation that prevents finishing a regular
meal. Supportive features include upper abdominal bloating,
postprandial nausea, or excessive belching.
2.	Epigastric pain syndrome, which includes all of the following:
bothersome (severe enough to interfere with normal activities)
pain or burning localized to the epigastrium. The pain is not
generalized or localized to other abdominal or chest regions and
is not relieved by defecation or passage of flatus. Supportive
criteria can include (1) burning quality of the pain but without a
retrosternal component and (2) the pain is commonly induced or
relieved by ingestion of a meal but may occur while fasting.
*Criteria fulfilled for at least 2 mo before diagnosis.
From Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: child/adolescent. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1456–1468.

may contribute to the behavior. Treatment is multidisciplinary and
may include behavioral therapy, deep breathing, and potentially medications to relieve anxiety.

Abdominal Pain Disorders

Functional dyspepsia (FD) describes postprandial fullness, early satiety, or epigastric pain or burning that is exclusive of defecation and not
fully explainable by another or an underlying medical condition (Table
389.10). Subtypes of FD include postprandial distress syndrome (symptoms may preclude finishing a meal or be manifest by bloating, nausea,
and excessive belching following a meal) as well as epigastric pain syndrome (epigastric pain/burning sufficient to preclude or disrupt normal
activities, with pain not generalizable or localizable to other abdominal
or chest regions, and not relieved by defecation or passage of flatus).
Multiple pathophysiologic mechanisms have been proposed for FD; it
is likely that each or multiple etiology contributes. An impaired gastric
accommodation, visceral hypersensitivity, food allergy, delayed gastric
emptying, and post-­viral gastroparesis have all been implicated. The
differential diagnosis includes GI etiologies of epigastric pain, including gastritis, esophagitis, and pancreatitis, among others. These etiologies can be guided by family, personal, and medical histories, exam,
and by the nature of symptoms including abdominal pain and other
alarm features (Tables 389.11 and 389.12). Initial treatment measures
include a trial of dietary and lifestyle changes including avoiding spicy
foods, caffeine, fatty foods, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs). Gastric acid reduction therapy may be initiated. Assessment by a pediatric gastroenterologist and upper endoscopy are often
performed. Treatment with cyproheptadine to improve gastric accommodation in patients with early satiety or attempts to treat visceral
hypersensitivity in children with FD are reasonable, safe, and supported by available evidence. Low-­dose tricyclic antidepressant therapy
with amitriptyline may have efficacy in refractory cases. Early satiety
may also respond to prokinetic medications such as erythromycin or
metoclopramide. Percutaneous electrical stimulation of the stomach is
a potential option for patients with FD refractory to standard therapy.
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) can be classified into the same four
subtypes as adult IBS, depending on stool pattern: IBS with constipation (IBS-­C), IBS with diarrhea (IBS-­D), IBS with constipation and
diarrhea, and unspecified IBS. Diagnosis of IBS requires abdominal
pain on four or more days per month associated with defecation and/or
a change in frequency of stool from baseline and/or a change in form/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2390 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 389.11  Alarm Symptoms Usually Needing Further
Investigations in Children with Chronic
Abdominal Pain
• Pain that wakes up the child from sleep
• Persistent right upper or right lower quadrant pain
• Significant vomiting (bilious vomiting, protracted vomiting,
cyclical vomiting, or worrisome pattern to the physician)
• Unexplained fever
• Genitourinary tract symptoms
• Dysphagia
• Odynophagia
• Chronic severe diarrhea or nocturnal diarrhea
• Gastrointestinal blood loss
• Involuntary weight loss
• Deceleration of linear growth
• Delayed puberty
• Family history of inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, and
peptic ulcer disease

Table 389.12  Alarm Signs Usually Needing Further
Investigations in Children with Chronic
Abdominal Pain
• Localized tenderness in the right upper quadrant
• Localized tenderness in the right lower quadrant
• Localized fullness or mass
• Hepatomegaly
• Splenomegaly
• Jaundice
• Costovertebral angle tenderness
• Arthritis
• Spinal tenderness
• Perianal disease
• Abnormal or unexplained physical findings
• Hematochezia
• Anemia

appearance of stool (Table 389.13). Symptoms, including the predominant stool pattern, severity of pain, and functional impairment, reflect
the degree of disordered brain-­gut interaction. Visceral sensitivity may
be attenuated or amplified by psychosocial stressors as well as mucosal
proinflammatory cytokines related to infections or alterations in the
gut microbiota.
As with other DBGI, the GI differential diagnosis includes anatomic,
infectious, inflammatory, and motility disorders as well as conditions
associated with malabsorption. Differentiation between those GI disorders and IBS is guided by the history, physical, and often biochemical markers of inflammation, particularly fecal calprotectin (see Tables
389.11 and 389.12). Management of symptoms may include dietary
modification (under the guidance of a registered dietitian to prevent
inadequate intake) to reduce or restrict foods that may provoke symptoms or cause gas (see section on fiber and the FODMAPS [fermentable oligo-­di-­monosaccharides and polyols] discussion Chapter 60).
The use of probiotics has been effective in reducing symptoms in children with IBS, likely through production of short-­chain fatty acids;
drug therapy for IBS is noted in Table 389.14. In small trials, peppermint was effective in reducing pain in children with IBS. Cognitivebehavioral therapy is important to identify possible psychosocial
stressors and to help identify coping mechanisms to maximize daily
function and quality of life. Small studies have suggested that transcutaneous neurostimulation may also be efficacious.
Abdominal migraine shares some features with CVS. Stereotypical
patterns and symptoms afflict the patient, are typically of acute onset,
intense, lasting for at least an hour, either periumbilical or generalized in location, and usually are debilitating (Table 389.15). Episodes
may also include associated anorexia, nausea, emesis, headaches,
photophobia, and pallor. Episodes are separated by weeks to months,
with at least two attacks occurring over a 6-­month period. Between
bouts, children return to baseline functioning and are symptom free.

Table 389.13  Diagnostic Criteria* for Irritable Bowel
Syndrome
Must include all of the following:
1.	Abdominal pain at least 4 days/mo associated with one or more
of the following:
a.	Related to defecation
b.	A change in frequency of stool
c.	A change in form (appearance) of stool
2.	In children with constipation, the pain does not resolve with
resolution of the constipation (children in whom the pain resolves
have functional constipation, not irritable bowel syndrome)
3.	After appropriate evaluation, the symptoms cannot be fully
explained by another medical condition
*Criteria fulfilled for at least 2 mo before diagnosis.
From Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: child/adolescent. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1456–1468.

Table 389.14  Recommendations for Treatment of Irritable
Bowel Syndrome
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR TREATMENT OF IRRITABLE BOWEL
SYNDROME (IBS)
• Mild symptoms often respond to dietary changes.
• Antispasmodics can be used as needed for abdominal pain or
postprandial symptoms.
• Antidepressants can improve abdominal pain and global
symptoms. They may be considered for patients with moderate to
severe symptoms.
IBS WITH CONSTIPATION (IBS-­C)
• Fiber may relieve constipation in patients with mild symptoms.
• Polyethylene glycol can increase the frequency of bowel
movements but may not improve overall symptoms or abdominal
pain.
• Lubiprostone or linaclotide can be tried in patients whose
symptoms have not responded to polyethylene glycol.
IBS WITH DIARRHEA (IBS-­D)
• Taken as needed, loperamide can reduce postprandial urgency
and stool frequency, but it does not improve global symptoms.
• Rifaximin and eluxadoline have been modestly more effective
than placebo in relieving symptoms.
From Drugs for irritable bowel syndrome. The Medical Letter. 2016;58(1504):121–126.

Table 389.15  Diagnostic Criteria* for Abdominal Migraine
Must include all of the following occurring at least twice:
1.	Paroxysmal episodes of intense, acute periumbilical, midline,
or diffuse abdominal pain lasting 1 hour or more (should be the
most severe and distressing symptom)
2.	Episodes are separated by weeks to months
3.	The pain is incapacitating and interferes with normal activities
4.	Stereotypical pattern and symptoms in the individual patient
5.	The pain is associated with two or more of the following:
a.	Anorexia
b.	Nausea
c.	Vomiting
d.	Headache
e.	Photophobia
f.	Pallor
6.	After appropriate evaluation, the symptoms cannot be fully
explained by another medical condition
*Criteria fulfilled for at least 6 mo before diagnosis.
From Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: child/adolescent. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1456–1468.

Triggers may vary, but common triggers include sleep hygiene disruption, fatigue, and travel, and are usually alleviated by sleep. The differential diagnosis includes anatomic obstructions or abnormalities
predisposing to intermittent obstruction of the GI or urologic tract,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 389 u Disorders of Brain-­Gut ­Interaction (Functional ­Gastrointestinal Disorders)
infectious or inflammatory conditions, hepatobiliary and pancreatic
disorders, neurologic and metabolic conditions, and psychiatric disorders. Frequently, a family history of migraine headaches or abdominal migraines is present. Preventing exposure to known triggers once
identified is important; further treatment depends on the frequency
and severity of episodes as well as their impact on quality of life. Acute
episodes may be treated similarly to migraine headaches with abortive
medications such as triptans. Similar to CVS prophylaxis, cyproheptadine, amitriptyline, and propranolol may be effective. Oral pizotifen
(antiserotonin, antihistamine) has been shown in small studies to be
an effective prophylactic agent as well. Antimigraine therapies such as
triptans may be effective in aborting bouts. A large number of children
may have their symptom pattern evolve into migraine headaches as
they progress toward adulthood.
Functional abdominal pain not otherwise specified (FAP-­NOS)
describes pain that occurs at least 4 times per month with either intermittent or continuous abdominal pain not associated with a particular
activity or coincident to another physiologic event such as menses or
eating and cannot be explained by any other underlying medical condition. These episodes occur in less than a 2-­month span. In many ways,
it is a DBGI of exclusion, as it does not meet criteria for either IBS,
FD, or abdominal migraine. Psychosocial stressors may play a role, and
behavioral approaches may be helpful to identify and manage stressors and other exacerbating factors. Pharmacologic data is limited, but
small trials have suggested efficacy of amitriptyline and citalopram,
though it should be noted that the latter is associated with suicidal ideation in adolescent patients.

DEFECATION DISORDERS

Functional constipation in children and adolescents describes
decreased defecation frequency associated with volitional stool retention, similar to the classification in infants and toddlers. Large, hard,
painful bowel movements are again a hallmark of the disorder, though
patients in this age-­group may also demonstrate fecal incontinence
related to overflow of liquid stool beyond a large rectal stool ball as well
as large-­diameter stools that obstruct the toilet (Table 389.16). Onset
in children peaks at the time of toilet training; in older children and
adolescent, withholding may be triggered by a social stressor such as a
major change in the school or home environment. Repeated distension
of the rectum with large, hard stool over time may reduce the sensation
to defecate and may lead to encopresis, the unintentional passage of
liquid stool. Children experiencing encopresis often do not smell the
stool that has passed, leading to embarrassment in social situations.
Anorexia, abdominal distention, and pain are often coincident, though
notably children do not meet criteria for IBS-­C.
The diagnosis is based on medical history and physical examination.
In addition to the clinical criteria, symptoms may include hematochezia due to an anal fissure. Though the blood coating the stool is often
distressing to caregivers, the blood loss associated with constipation is
typically not clinically significant. Physical examination may reveal a
palpable abdominal mass, small amounts of fecal matter or a midline
fissure on perianal exam, or a hard mass of stool in the rectal vault on
digital rectal exam. It should be noted that if the history is typical for
functional constipation, a digital rectal examination may not be necessary until treatment failure, diagnostic uncertainty, or an anatomic
malformation is suspected. Digital manipulation of the anal canal and
rectum may further traumatize the child or adolescent in whom painful
defecation has prompted withholding behaviors. An abdominal x-­ray
is not required to make the diagnosis, and the stool burden observed
rarely correlates with historical defecation pattern. The diameter of the

2391

Table 389.16  Diagnostic Criteria for Functional Constipation
in Children with Chronic Abdominal Pain
Must include two or more of the following occurring at least once
per week for a minimum of 1 month with insufficient criteria for a
diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome:
1.	Two or fewer defecations in the toilet per week in a child of a
developmental age of at least 4 years
2.	At least one episode of fecal incontinence per week
3.	History of retentive posturing or excessive volitional stool
retention
4.	History of painful or hard bowel movements
5.	Presence of a large fecal mass in the rectum
6.	History of large-­diameter stools that can obstruct the toilet
After appropriate evaluation, the symptoms cannot be fully
explained by another medical condition.
From Hyams JS, Di Lorenzo C, Saps M, et al. Childhood functional gastrointestinal
disorders: child/adolescent. Gastroenterology. 2016;150(6):1456–1468.

rectum and any rectal stool on x-­ray may be helpful to illustrate the
degree of stool accumulation in the rectum.
The differential diagnosis for constipation in children and adolescents is similar to infants and toddlers, though metabolic and anatomic
abnormalities are much less likely to present in older children and adolescents. As in younger children, alarm symptoms should be assessed;
in the absence of these symptoms, further testing is not indicated (see
Table 389.6). Management includes disimpaction of the rectal stool
ball followed by maintenance therapy with osmotic laxatives to soften
stools for ease of passage, dietary changes to optimize fiber intake (a
general rule is that daily fiber intake in grams can be approximated by
adding age in years plus 5 to 10), and behavioral approaches similar to
those employed for younger children (see Chapter 378.3).
Nonretentive fecal incontinence (NFI) describes the passage of
stool in the absence of fecal retention that occurs in inappropriate settings for a specific society and culture, and that occurs without evidence
of another or underlying medical condition in a child 4 years of age
or older over at least a 1-­month period. These patients otherwise have
normal defecatory patterns and function, as well as normal colonic
transit time, differentiating and distinguishing them from functional
constipation. Another key difference is that children with NFI will
have passage of their entire rectal contents as opposed to the smears
or small amounts of stool in patients with functional constipation and
encopresis. Psychologic comorbidities are frequent in children with
NFI. A thorough medical history and physical examination including a
comprehensive neurologic and digital rectal exam are required to fully
appreciate what factors are involved in this condition. The diagnosis
should be based on an otherwise normal defecation frequency, absence
of an abdominal or rectal mass, a normal neurologic exam, and a normal transit marker study. Given the significant comorbidity of behavior
and emotional axis issues, involvement of behavioral health professionals is essential to the evaluation and management of this condition.
Therapy focuses on proactive regular toilet use. Unfortunately, biofeedback therapy, helpful in other disorders of defecation dynamics, has not
proven beneficial in children with NFI.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2392 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 390

Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome
Asim Maqbool, Prasanna K. Kapavarapu,
and Chris A. Liacouras
Cyclic vomiting syndrome (CVS) is an idiopathic disorder manifested
as episodic vomiting, usually of sudden onset and high intensity/frequency (4/hr:12-­15 episodes per day) of vomiting, with eventual resolution and return to a normal baseline between attacks (Fig. 390.1).
Typical bouts last for 24-­48 hours and usually respond promptly to
hydration. To meet the criteria for CVS, identifiable organic disorders are excluded following an appropriate workup (Fig. 390.2). The
guidelines for the frequency of episodes to fulfill the CVS criteria differ
between societies. The North American Society of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition (NASPGHAN) consensus statement in 2008 on CVS requires at least five vomiting episodes in any
interval period or a minimum of three episodes in a 6-­month period,
whereas the 2016 Rome IV criteria on childhood functional gastrointestinal (GI) disorders requires at least two or more episodes in a
6-­month period (Table 390.1).
The prevalence of CVS in children is estimated at ∼2% in predominantly White populations, although it does occur in those of African or
Asian descent, and Hispanic ethnicity. There is a slight female predominance. The median age of onset is 5 years, but it can begin in infancy

and adolescence. Typically, there is a delay of 2.5 years in making the
diagnosis despite multiple episodes and emergency room visits. The
natural history of CVS is that most children outgrow it during preadolescence or adolescence, and of those, many will develop migraines.
There are also later pediatric-­onset (mean age 13 years) and adult-­
onset (mean age 32 years) subgroups indicating that in a minority it
can begin or persist in adulthood.
One key clinical feature of CVS is its consistent and stereotypical pattern of vomiting within individuals. Typically, symptoms
start at the same time, often during early morning hours, last the
same duration, and demonstrate identical autonomic symptoms of
pallor and listlessness, unrelenting nausea, abdominal pain, and
in less than half, headaches and photophobia. About half of cases
occur on a cycle as often as monthly; some cycle as infrequently
as every 3-­4 months. Other patients have unpredictable sporadic
vomiting that may be associated with a specific trigger. Potential
triggers include infectious illnesses, stress and especially excitement
(holidays), sleep deprivation (sleepovers), dietary triggers (chocolate, monosodium glutamate), food allergy, onset of menses, and
weather changes. Typically, the vomiting is intense, with greater
than four bouts of emesis per hour at the peak, and can include
gastric contents or frequent dry heaves. Although most attacks last
2 days, an episode can last anywhere from hours and rarely up to 10
days. CVS attacks are debilitating, often necessitating IV rehydration, and resulting in hospitalization. Seasonal variation apparently
occurs in approximately a third of patients, with more attacks in
winter and fewer during summer.
Subgroups of CVS include migraine-­related, with either personal
history of migraines or family history of migraines; Sato variant,
driven by hyperresponsive hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­
adrenal axis

Interepisodic phase

Prodromal phase

Emetic phase

Recovery phase

Lasts weeks to months.
The child resumes completely
normal or baseline health;
5–12% of children experience
mild nausea and emesis
(“coalescent” CVS).

Lasts minutes to
hours.
>90% of patients
experience
identifiable
prodrome with
symptoms such
as nausea,
sweating,
abdominal pain or
“pressure,” fatigue
or weakness,
feeling hot
and/or cold, having
an urge to defecate,
and insomnia.
The child is still
able to take oral
and retain oral
medication.

Lasts from a few hours to several days.
Children experience relentless nausea,
vomiting, and retching. The vomiting is
typically projectile, forceful, and may contain
bile or blood, peaks at 6 times/hour.
The nausea persists even after
evacuation of gastric contents, often
described as the most distressing symptom,
only relieved by sleep. Other symptoms
include abdominal pain (70–80%),
headache, photosensitivity,
phonosensitivity, diarrhea, cold sweats,
hot flashes, excessive salivation,
and vertigo. Patients may be lethargic
and withdrawn or agitated, with
inability to walk and communicate
effectively. Unusual behaviors can be
observed such as drinking compulsively,
taking long hot shower or bath,
drowning in fetal position in a
dark and quite room.

Can be very quick
or gradual and
patients are
suddenly able to
eat and interact

Fig. 390.1 Temporal pattern of cyclic vomiting syndrome. Schematic representation of the four phases. (From Raucci U, Borrelli O, Di Nardo G,
et al. Cyclic vomiting syndrome in children. Frontiers Neurol. 2020;11:Article 583425. Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 390 u Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome

2393

Child with periodic
episodes of vomiting*

Electrolytes, glucose, BUN,
creatinine, ABG test

UGI tract series to evaluate
for malrotation

• Severe alteration of
mental status
• Abnormal eye
movements
• Papilledema
• Motor asymmetry
• Gait abnormality

Possible underlying etiology

Bowel obstruction
from malrotation,
postoperative
adhesions/strictures,
gallbladder disease,
choledochal cyst,
hepatitis, pancreatitis,
uretero-pelvic junction
obstruction, peptic
disease, acute
intermittent porphyria

Urea cycle defects,
fatty acid oxidation,
amino acid
metabolism, and
mitochondrial
disorders

Increased intracranial
pressure (posterior
fossa or hypothalamic
tumor, chiari
malformation,
hydrocephalus,
subdural hematoma),
autonomic seizures,
metabolic
encephalopathy

Amylase and lipase,
ALT and GGT,
abdominal ultrasound
and/or abdominal CT
scan of abdomen and
pelvis;
UGI endoscopy; urinary
-aminolevulinic acid
and porphobilinogen

Electrolyte for anion
gap, urine ketones,
lactate, ammonia,
serum amino acids,
urine organic acids,
plasma carnitine and
acylcarnitine

Brain MRI, EEG,
screening metabolic
evaluation

Red flags

Attacks precipitated by:
• Intercurrent illness
• Fasting
• High protein meal

Testing

Evaluate the presence of
alarming sign/symptom

• No red flags
• Normal first line
investigation

• Bilious vomiting
• Severe abdominal
pain or tenderness
• Hematemesis

Results of testing explains vomiting
No
Probable CVS

Yes
Treat or refer accordingly

Fig. 390.2 Algorithm for the evaluation of children with cyclic vomiting pattern. *Fulfilling clinical criteria for CVS (see Table 390.1). ABG, Arterial-­
blood gas; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; CVS, cyclic vomiting syndrome; GGT, γ-­glutamyl-­transferase; UGI, upper gastrointestinal. (From Raucci U,
Borrelli O, Di Nardo G, et al. Cyclic vomiting syndrome in children. Frontiers Neurol. 2020;11:Article 583425. Fig. 2.)

(elevated cortisol levels), hypertension, extreme lethargy, and presenting with more severe and prolonged CVS episodes; catamenial
CVS, occurring in adolescent girls who are hormonally sensitive
and presenting with CVS episodes either within a day, prior or post
menstrual period; underlying mitochondrial dysfunction, associated

with single nucleotide polymorphisms and evidence of improvement
with mitochondrial supplements like coenzyme Q10; and the coalescent form, presenting with daily nausea between episodes of emesis
(which becomes less frequent). CVS may also be more common in
children with autism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2394 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 390.1  North American Society for Pediatric
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition,
International Classification of Headache
Disorders 3, and Rome IV Diagnostic Criteria

Table 390.2  Diagnostic Tests for Ruling Out Conditions in
the Differential Diagnosis with Cyclic Vomiting
Syndrome
CONDITION

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING

NASPGHAN
1.	At least five attacks in any interval or a minimum of three attacks
during a 6-­mo period
2.	Episodic attacks of intense nausea and vomiting lasting 1 hour to
10 days, occurring at least 1 wk apart
3.	Stereotypical pattern and symptoms in the individual patient
4.	Vomiting during attacks at least 4 times per hour for at least 1
hour
5.	Return to baseline health between episodes
6.	Not attributed to another disorder

GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Peptic ulcer disease
Upper GI endoscopy

ICHD-­3
A.	At least five attacks of intense nausea and vomiting fulfilling
criteria B and C
B.	Stereotypical in the individual patient and recurring with
predictable periodicity
C.	All of the following:
1.	Nausea and vomiting occur ≥4 times per hour
2.	Attacks last ≥1 hour and up to 10 days
3.	Attacks occur ≥1 wk apart
D.	Complete freedom from symptoms between attacks
E.	Not attributable to another disorder

Gastroparesis

Scintigraphic gastric emptying
study

Hepatitis

Abdominal ultrasound

Pancreatitis

Abdominal ultrasound

Cholecystitis

Abdominal ultrasound

Biliary tract anomalies

Hepatobiliary scintigraphy,
endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography,
magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography

Malrotation with volvulus,
postoperative adhesions/
strictures

Upper GI series with small bowel
follow-­through, abdominal CT
scans, upper GI endoscopy

Chronic intestinal
pseudoobstruction

Plain abdominal x-­ray, upper
GI series with small bowel
follow-­through, antroduodenal
manometry

Note: History and physical exam do not show sign of gastrointestinal
disease
PEDIATRIC ROME IV
1.	Two or more periods of intense unremitting nausea and
paroxysmal vomiting, lasting hours to days within a 6-­mo period
2.	Episodes are stereotypical in each patient
3.	Episodes separated by weeks to months with return to baseline
health between episodes
4.	Symptoms not attributed to another medical condition
ADULT ROME IV
Stereotypical episodes of vomiting regarding onset (acute) and
duration (<1 wk)
1.	≥3 discrete episodes in the prior year and two episodes in past 6
mo, occurring ≥1 wk apart
2.	Absence of vomiting between episodes, but other milder
symptoms can be present between cycles
Supportive remarks
1.	Personal or family history of migraine headaches
Criteria must be fulfilled for the last 6 mo with symptom onset at
least 3 mo before diagnosis.
Note: All respective criteria must be met to meet consensus definitions for both
NASPGHAN, ICHD-­3, and Rome IV.
NASPGHAN, North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and
Nutrition; ICHD-­3, International Classification of Headache Disorders 3.
From Kovacic K, Li BUK. Cyclic vomiting syndrome: a narrative review and guide to
management. Headache. 2021;61:231–243. Table 1.

Multiple comorbid disorders can further comprise quality of life
between episodes; these include anxiety, constipation-­
predominant
irritable bowel syndrome, chronic fatigue or limited stamina, sleep disorders, postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome, daily nausea, and
complex regional pain syndrome. There is often a positive family history
of migraines in children with CVS; attacks of both conditions share many
clinical features. Although the pathophysiology is not fully known, there
is suggestive evidence that an overresponsive hypothalamic-­pituitary-­
adrenal axis (including corticotropin-­releasing factor), autonomic nervous system dysregulation (sympathetic predominance), mitochondrial

EXTRAINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Central Nervous System
Mass

Brain MRI, Brain CT

Hydrocephalus

Brain MRI, Brain CT

Subdural hematoma

Brain CT

Autonomic seizures

EEG

Renal Disorders
Ureteropelvic junction
obstruction

Abdominal ultrasound

Nephrolithiasis

Abdominal ultrasound,
abdominal CT

Metabolic Disorders

Ammonia, organic acids, lactate,
amino gap

From Raucci U, Borrelli O, Di Nardo G, et al. Cyclic vomiting syndrome in children.
Frontiers Neurol. 2020;11:Article 583425. Table 3.

dysfunction (16519T and 3010A), and nuclear pathogenic variants
(RYR2) may play contributory roles.
Patients with chronic vomiting should always be evaluated for
potential etiologies other than CVS. The differential diagnosis includes
GI anomalies (malrotation, duplication cysts, choledochal cysts, recurrent intussusceptions), CNS disorders (neoplasm, epilepsy, vestibular
pathology), nephrolithiasis, cholelithiasis, hydronephrosis, metabolic-­
endocrine disorders (urea cycle, mitochondrial disorders, fatty acid
metabolism, Addison disease, porphyria, hereditary angioedema,
familial Mediterranean fever), chronic appendicitis, and inflammatory bowel disease (see Fig. 390.2; Tables 390.2 and 390.3). Laboratory
evaluation is based on a careful history and physical examination and
may include, if indicated, endoscopy, contrast upper GI radiography,
brain MRI, and metabolic studies (lactate, organic acids, ammonia).
Bilious emesis usually suggests a small bowel obstruction and is considered a red flag; however, children with CVS may have bile-­stained
emesis. A tender abdomen is also unusual for CVS and warrants further workup. Acute and chronic appendicitis can mimic CVS. Prior

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 390 u Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome
Table 390.3  Relevant Causes of Vomiting in Metabolic
Disorders
ASSOCIATED OR NOT WITH ENCEPHALOPATHY
Organic acidurias
Urea cycle disorders
Fatty acid oxidation disorders
MCT1 defect
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like
episodes (MELAS)
Glutaric aciduria type I
ASSOCIATED WITH ACIDOSIS/KETOACIDOSIS
Organic acidurias
Mitochondrial diseases
ASSOCIATED WITH KETOSIS ONLY
Ketolysis defects
ASSOCIATED WITH SEVERE ABDOMINAL PAIN
Porphyrias (acute intermittent porphyria, coproporphyria)
ASSOCIATED WITH HEPATOPATHY
Organic acidurias
Urea cycle disorders
Galactosemia
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Tyrosinemia type I
Fatty acid oxidation disorders
From Raucci U, Borrelli O, Di Nardo G, et al. Cyclic vomiting syndrome in children.
Frontiers Neurol. 2020;11:Article 583425, Table 5.

abdominal surgery may increase risk for adhesion-­
related partial
bowel obstructions.
Non-­GI causes of frequent vomiting include renal, metabolic,
endocrine, and neurologic disorders. Renal abnormalities to
consider include acute or chronic ureteropelvic junction (UPJ)
obstruction presenting with hydronephrosis (Dietl’s crisis) and
nephrolithiasis. The clinician must also consider metabolic disorders, especially in the infant or toddler less than 2 years of age.
Fasting or high-­protein meals that provoke emesis raise a red flag
for metabolic disorders, such as disorders of fatty acid oxidation,
organic acidemias, or partial ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. Acute intermittent porphyria can present in the adolescent
triggered by alcohol or medications. Endocrine disorders, including
diabetic ketoacidosis, Addison disease, and pheochromocytoma,
can mimic CVS episodes. Although an atypical presentation, CNS
tumors can have episodic vomiting and papilledema; altered mental
status and focal neurologic findings are red flags requiring neuroimaging. Pregnancy can present with CVS-­like symptoms.
The management of acute CVS episodes includes early and
aggressive hydration (especially with dextrose in normal saline),
which may shorten episodes in addition to correcting fluid losses.
Reducing extraneous sensory stimulation, similar to the management approach for migraines, may also be beneficial (Table 390.4).
Regardless of intervention, episodes will eventually spontaneously
resolve with return to a normal baseline. Triptans can be used as an
abortive medication in patients with the migraine-­related subgroup
of CVS, a family history of migraines, at the onset of symptoms.
Ondansetron may reduce nausea and emesis. Sedation may reduce
severity or stop a CVS episode; drugs include antihistamines such
as diphenhydramine and promethazine. Lorazepam or rectal diazepam can also be used. These measures are empiric; a lack of evidence base limits our understanding of efficacy. For rare but severe
refractory cases, general anesthetics have been used. A dramatic
change in presentation of attacks suggests a red flag such as acute
hydronephrosis or small bowel obstruction from volvulus.

2395

Table 390.4  Abortive and Rescue Pharmacotherapy
ANTI-­MIGRAINE
Sumatriptan 20 mg intranasal at episode onset and may repeat once
vs 25 mg PO once vs 3-­6 mg SC once
SE: Chest and neck burning, coronary vasospasm, headache
Alternatives: Rizatriptan, zolmitriptan, frovatriptan (longer half-­life)
ANTIEMETIC
Ondansetron 0.2-­0.3 mg/kg per dose (≤12 mg) q4-­6h IV/PO/rectal/
topical
SE: Headache, drowsiness, dry mouth
Alternatives: Granisetron
Aprepitant 3-day regimen:
Weight <15 kg: 80 mg at start of episode on day 1, followed by 40
mg on days 2 and 3
Weight 15-20 kg: 80 mg on days 1, 2, and 3
Weight >20 kg: 125 mg on day 1 and 80 mg on days 2 and 3
Fosaprepitant 3-­4 mg/kg (max. 150 mg) IV day one (aprepitant days
2-­3)
SEDATIVE
Lorazepam 0.05-­0.1 mg/kg per dose q6h IV/PO: useful adjunct to
ondansetron
SE: Sedation, respiratory depression
Chlorpromazine 0.5-­1 mg/kg per dose q6h IV/PO
SE: Drowsiness, hypotension, seizures, dystonic reaction
Diphenhydramine 1.25 mg/kg per dose q6h IV/PO: useful adjunct to
chlorpromazine
SE: Hypotension, sedation, dizziness
ANALGESIC
Ketorolac 0.5-­1 mg/kg per dose q6h IV/PO
SE: Gastrointestinal bleeding, dyspepsia
IV, Intravenous; PO, orally; SC, subcutaneously; SE, side effects.
Modified from Kovacic K, Li BUK. Cyclic vomiting syndrome: a narrative review and
guide to management. Headache. 2021;61:231–243. Table 3.

Prophylactic management begins with lifestyle measures (maintenance fluid intake, adequate calories, sleep hygiene, and exercise),
including avoidance of known triggering foods (allergens, chocolate,
aged cheese, monosodium glutamate; Table 390.5). Recommendations
for prophylactic regimens include cyproheptadine in patients <5 years
of age and amitriptyline in patients ≥5 years; propranolol serves as a
secondary agent in both age-­groups. When standard care fails, the
addition of anticonvulsants such as topiramate has been implemented.
For those with catamenial CVS, low-­dose estrogen oral contraceptives or medroxyprogesterone acetate may prevent episodes. For those
with Sato variant, CVS treatment with angiotensin-­converting enzyme
(ACE)-­inhibitors or β blockers for acute hypertension may be helpful.
Supplements such as coenzyme Q10, l-­carnitine, and riboflavin have
been reported to be useful adjuncts for those with underlying mitochondrial dysfunction. Treatment of comorbid disorders, especially
anxiety (cognitive behavioral therapy, antianxiety agents) and postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (fluids, salt, fludrocortisone),
may be needed for effective management of CVS. Newer drugs that are
being explored in the management of CVS include mirtazapine and
aprepitant. Mirtazapine is an antidepressant medication and is a potent
antagonist of 5HT2 and 5HT3 receptors, with anti-­migraine properties.
It is of potential benefit in migraine-­related CVS, starting at 7.5 mg at
bed time, with a maximum dose of 15 mg; common side effects include
drowsiness and increased appetite. Aprepitant is a neurokinin-­1 receptor (NK1R) antagonist used in postoperative and chemotherapy-­related
nausea and vomiting. In CVS, aprepitant is used for both prophylaxis
and abortive purposes. In children, aprepitant has been shown to
decrease the number of vomiting episodes per hour/frequency of episodes per year/number of hospitalizations per year and increase the
interval period in between the episodes. Common reported side effects
of aprepitant include headache, hiccups, neutropenia, and fatigue.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2396 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 390.5  Prophylactic Lifestyle Changes and Pharmacologic Options for Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome
LIFESTYLE MEASURES
Reassurance and anticipatory
guidance

• Episodes are not intentional
• The natural history of CVS is that it will resolve with time

Avoidance of triggers

• Identify dietary triggers (“vomit diary”) and avoid precipitating factors
• Triggering foods may include chocolate, cheese, monosodium glutamate
• Fasting a common trigger
• Excitement a potential trigger
• Excessive activity/exhaustion
• Avoid sleep deprivation and practice good sleep hygiene

Managing triggers

• Provide supplemental energy as carbohydrates for fasting-­induced episodes
• Provision of snacks between meals, before sleep, and before exertion

Migraine headache–type lifestyle
interventions

• Aerobic exercise and avoidance of overexertion
• Regular mealtime schedule—avoid skipping meals
• Avoid/moderate caffeine intake

PROPHYLACTIC PHARMACOLOGIC APPROACHES
AGE <5 YR

AGE ≥5 YR

Antihistamines:
• Cyproheptadine
• 0.25-­0.5 mg/kg/day in two daily divided
doses or as a single dose qhs
• Side effects of increased appetite, weight
gain, and sedation
• Pizotifen
β blockers: (second choice)
• Propranolol
• 0.25-­1 mg/kg/day, most often 10 mg
2-­3×/day.
• Side effects include lethargy and reduced
exercise tolerance
• Contraindicated in asthma, diabetes,
heart disease, depression
• Taper over 1-­2 wk to discontinue

Tricyclic antidepressants:
• Amitriptyline
• Begin at 0.25-­0.5 mg/kg qhs and increase
weekly by 5-­10 mg until achieve 1-­1.5
mg/kg
• Monitor ECG for prolonged QTc interval
at baseline before initiation and 10 days
after peak dose achieved
• Side effects: constipation, sedation,
arrhythmias, behavioral changes
Alternatives: nortriptyline
β blockers: (second choice):
• Propranolol
Other agents:
Anticonvulsants:
• Phenobarbital 2 mg/kg qhs
• Side effects: sedation, cognitive impairment
Alternatives:
• Topiramate, valproic acid, gabapentin,
levetiracetam

DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS
• L-­Carnitine 50-­100 mg/kg/day divided 2-­3×/day, maximum dose of 2 g 2×/day
• Coenzyme Q10 mg/kg/day divided 2-­3×/day, maximum dose 100 mg 3×/day
Medications listed in table are for off-­label use.
CVS, Cyclic vomiting syndrome; qhs, every night at bedtime.
Modified from Li BU, Lefevre F, Chelimsky GG, et al. North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition consensus statement on the diagnosis and
management of cyclic vomiting syndrome. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2008;47(3):379–393.

Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) involves the endocannabinoid system (ECS), which plays a major role in nausea and vomiting. Cannabinoid receptors (CBRs) consist of cannabinoid receptor 1
(CB1R) and cannabinoid receptor 2 (CB2R); the current hypothesis is
that CBR agonists inhibit vomiting and CB1R antagonists initiate or
potentiate vomiting. The current theory is that with chronic cannabis
use, there is a paradoxical effect with downregulation of CB1R, which
in turn potentiates vomiting in CHS. CHS shares many features with

CVS, including patterns of onset, frequency, and duration. CHS, however, differs from CVS in that it is associated with prolonged cannabis
use (>2 years), and relief of episodes occurs following sustained cessation (>6 months) of cannabis use. Another common feature across
CHS is the observed association with pathologic bathing behavior, specifically, prolonged hot showers (see Chapter 157.3).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 391 u Acute Appendicitis

Chapter 391

Acute Appendicitis
José H. Salazar and John J. Aiken
Acute appendicitis remains the most common acute surgical condition
in children and a major cause of childhood morbidity and healthcare
costs, mostly associated with complicated/perforated appendicitis
(PA). The peak incidence of acute appendicitis occurs in children in
the second decade, and approximately 100,000 children are treated in
children’s hospitals for appendicitis each year. The broad spectrum of
clinical presentation in acute appendicitis has been associated with
significant practice variation in evaluation, diagnostic measures, and
treatment of abdominal pain and suspected appendicitis. The traditional strategy of the liberal use of computed tomography (CT) to avoid
misdiagnosis and early surgery to avoid progression to perforation has
lacked validation in large reviews and resulted in high negative appendectomy rates and excessive radiation exposure. Perforation rates have
remained ∼40% and negative appendectomy rates as high as 10% in the
past 2 decades. In current practice, most centers have adopted clinical
practice guidelines (CPGs) combining history, physical examination
findings, laboratory data, and appendicitis risk scoring systems to standardize care, improve diagnostic accuracy and outcomes, and direct
cost-­conscious resource use. Appendiceal ultrasound has emerged as
a highly sensitive and specific imaging modality for diagnosis and led
to a significant decrease in the use of CT and radiation exposure in the
initial evaluation of children presenting with abdominal pain and possible suspected appendicitis. Although prompt appendectomy remains
the standard treatment in acute appendicitis, advances in imaging
techniques, improved antibiotic regimens, increased use of percutaneous drainage procedures by interventional radiologists, and emerging
data on high success rates with initial antibiotic treatment alone have
led to an increase in the initial nonoperative management of both simple and complicated (abscess, phlegmon) appendicitis. Laparoscopic
appendectomy (LA, a minimally invasive technique) has emerged as
the preferred surgical approach for both simple and PA, with an open
surgical approach reserved as an alternative for selected cases or when
attempted LA is technically difficult and/or deemed unsafe.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of acute appendicitis increases with age, from a rate of
1-­2 per 10,000 children from birth to 4 years of age, to a rate of 19-­28
per 10,000 children younger than age 14 years annually. Children have
a lifetime risk of 7–9%, and appendicitis is diagnosed in 1–8% of children presenting to the emergency department (ED) for evaluation of
abdominal pain. Appendicitis is most common in older children, with
peak incidence between the ages of 10 and 18 years; it is rare in children
younger than 5 years of age (<5% of cases) and extremely rare (<1% of
cases) in children younger than 3 years of age.
Infants with appendicitis are often misdiagnosed with sepsis, and
because of the diagnostic delay, they present in advanced stages of the
disease. Most infant cases are primary, but some may be associated
with Hirschsprung disease, cystic fibrosis, inguinal hernia, prematurity, meconium plug syndrome, or complex multiorgan syndromes.
Mortality is low (<0.01%), but morbidity remains high, mostly in
association with PA. Up to 40% of children have PA at presentation,
and perforation rates approach 90% in young children (<3 years). Children with simple (nonperforated) appendicitis typically recover easily,
with a low complication rate and rapid return to premorbid state and
full activities. In contrast, PA is associated with substantial postoperative morbidity, including readmission rates estimated at 12.8%, postoperative intraabdominal abscess rates ∼20%, surgical site infection
(SSI) rate ∼20%, prolonged length of stay (LOS), need for prolonged
antibiotic exposure, increased postoperative use of CT, and significant
delay in return to wellness and normal activities.

2397

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The clinical entity of acute appendiceal inflammation followed by perforation, abscess formation, and peritonitis is most likely a disease of
multiple etiologies, the final common pathway of which involves invasion of the appendiceal wall by bacteria. Genetic, environmental, and
infectious etiologies (bacterial, viral, fungal, and parasitic) have all
been implicated in acute appendicitis. One pathway to acute appendicitis begins with luminal obstruction; inspissated fecal material, lymphoid hyperplasia, ingested foreign body, parasites, and tumors have
been described. Obstruction of the appendiceal lumen initiates a progressive cascade involving increasing intraluminal pressure, lymphatic
and venous congestion and edema, impaired arterial perfusion, ischemia of the appendiceal wall, bacterial proliferation and invasion of the
wall, and necrosis. This sequence correlates with the clinical disease
progression from simple appendicitis to gangrenous appendicitis and,
thereafter, appendiceal perforation.
Because the appendix has the highest concentration of gut-­associated
lymphoid tissue (GALT) in the intestine, some have hypothesized that
the appendix may have an immune function similar to that of the thymus or bursa of Fabricius. Submucosal lymphoid follicles, which can
obstruct the appendiceal lumen, are few at birth but multiply steadily
during childhood, reaching a peak in number during the teen years,
when acute appendicitis is most common.
Enteric infection likely plays a role in many cases of acute appendicitis in association with mucosal ulceration and invasion of the appendiceal wall by bacteria. Bacteria such as Yersinia, Salmonella, and Shigella
spp. and viruses such as infectious mononucleosis, mumps, coxsackievirus B, and adenovirus are implicated. In addition, case reports
demonstrate the occurrence of appendicitis from ingested foreign
bodies, in association with carcinoid tumors of the appendix, Ascaris
infestation, and rarely, after blunt abdominal trauma. Children with
cystic fibrosis have an increased incidence of appendicitis; the cause
is believed to be the abnormal thickened mucus. Appendicitis in neonates is rare and warrants diagnostic evaluation for cystic fibrosis and
Hirschsprung disease.
Appendectomy decreases the risk of ulcerative colitis and increases
the risk of recurrent Clostridium difficile–associated colitis. Appendicoliths and appendicitis are more common in developed countries
with refined, low-­fiber diets than in developing countries with a high-­
fiber diet; no causal relationship has been established between lack of
dietary fiber and appendicitis. A family history is associated with a
nearly threefold increased appendicitis risk, and genetic factors may
account for 30% of appendicitis risk.

Clinical Features

Appendicitis in children has an immensely broad spectrum of clinical presentation; <50% of cases have the classic presentation. The signs
and symptoms in acute appendicitis can vary depending on the timing of presentation, patient age, the abdominal/pelvic location of the
appendix, and most importantly, individual variability in the evolution
of the disease process. Children early in the disease process can appear
well and demonstrate mild symptoms, minimal findings on physical
examination, and normal laboratory studies, whereas those with perforation and advanced peritonitis can demonstrate severe illness with
bowel obstruction, renal failure, and septic shock. Most patients with
appendicitis demonstrate an insidious onset of illness characterized by
generalized nonspecific malaise or anorexia in the first 12 hours, and a
steady, escalating progression in severity of signs and symptoms over
2-­3 days with increasing abdominal pain, vomiting, fever, and tachycardia; perforation is common beyond 48 hours of illness. Thus the
opportunity for diagnosis before perforation in acute appendicitis in
children is most often brief (48-­72 hours), and a high percentage of
patients are perforated at presentation.
Abdominal pain is consistently the primary symptom in acute appendicitis; beginning shortly (hours) after the onset of illness. There are no
somatic pain fibers within the appendix; therefore early appendiceal
inflammation results in pain that is vague, poorly localized, unrelated
to activity or position, often colicky, and periumbilical in location as a
result of visceral inflammation from a distended appendix. Progression

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2398 Part XVI u The Digestive System
of the inflammatory process in the next 24 hours leads to involvement
of the adjacent parietal peritoneal surfaces, resulting in somatic pain
localized to the right lower quadrant (RLQ)—thus the classic description of periumbilical mid-­abdominal pain migrating to the RLQ. The
position of the appendix is a critical factor affecting interpretation of presenting signs and symptoms and accurate diagnosis. When the appendix
is in a retrocecal or pelvic position, a slower progression of illness is
typical and clinical presentation is likely to be delayed. Localized pain
in the RLQ leads to spasm in the overlying abdominal wall muscles,
and now the pain is predictably exacerbated by movement. The child
often describes marked discomfort with the bumpy car ride to the hospital, moves cautiously, and has difficulty getting onto the examining
room stretcher. Nausea and vomiting occur in more than half of the
patients and typically follow the onset of abdominal pain by several
hours. Anorexia is a classic and consistent finding in acute appendicitis, but occasionally affected patients are hungry. Diarrhea and urinary
symptoms are also common, particularly in cases of PA when there is
likely inflammation near the rectum and possible abscess in the pelvis.
Painful voiding may not be from dysuria, but pressure transmitted to
an inflamed peritoneum. As it progresses, appendicitis is often associated with adynamic ileus, leading to the complaint of constipation and
possible misdiagnosis.
Because enteric infections can cause appendicitis, diarrhea may be
a manifestation and gastroenteritis may be the assumed diagnosis.
In contrast to gastroenteritis, the abdominal pain in early appendicitis is constant (not cramping or relieved by defecation), the emesis
may become bile stained and persistent, and the clinical course worsens steadily rather than demonstrating a waxing and waning pattern
often seen in viral gastroenteritis. Fever is common in appendicitis
and typically low-­grade unless perforation has occurred. Most patients
demonstrate at least mild tachycardia, likely secondary to pain and
dehydration. The temporal progression of symptoms from vague, mild
pain, malaise, and anorexia to severe localized pain, fever, and vomiting typically occurs rapidly (24-­48 hours) in the majority of cases. If
the diagnosis is delayed beyond 48 hours, perforation is likely (>65%).
When several days have elapsed in the progression of appendicitis,
patients typically develop signs and symptoms evidencing advanced
disease, including worsening and diffuse pain, abdominal distention,
and bilious emesis suggestive of developing small bowel obstruction.
The retrocecal appendix can demonstrate symptoms suggestive of septic arthritis of the hip or a psoas muscle abscess.
A primary focus in the management of appendicitis is the avoidance
of sepsis and the infectious complications leading to increased morbidity, mostly seen with PA.
Bacteria can be cultured from the serosal surface of the appendix
before microscopic or gross perforation and bacterial invasion of the
mesenteric veins (pylephlebitis) can result (rarely) in thrombosis and
possible liver abscess or portal hypertension. A period after perforation
of lessened abdominal pain and acute symptoms has been described,
presumably with the elimination of pressure within the appendix. If,
after perforation, the omentum or adjacent intestine is able to wall off
the fecal contamination, the evolution of illness is less predictable and
delay in presentation is likely. If perforation leads to diffuse peritonitis, the child generally has escalating diffuse abdominal pain and rapid
development of toxicity evidenced by dehydration and signs of sepsis,
including hypotension, oliguria, acidosis, and high-­grade fever. Young
children have a poorly developed omentum and are often unable to
control the spread of infection. Perforation and abscess formation with
appendicitis can lead to intestinal fistula formation, scrotal cellulitis
and abscess through a patent processus vaginalis (indirect inguinal
hernia), or small bowel obstruction. The most likely diagnosis in children who present with signs and symptoms of mechanical small bowel
obstruction who have not had prior abdominal surgery is complicated
appendicitis.

Physical Examination

Although the hallmark of diagnosing acute appendicitis remains a
careful and thorough history and physical examination, all clinicians know the arcane nature of acute appendicitis, the consistent or

typical clinical features are not present in all patients, and the diagnosis can be a humbling experience even for the most experienced
clinicians. A primary focus of the initial assessment is attention to
the temporal evolution of the illness in relation to specific presenting
signs and symptoms. In some patients, the diagnosis can be made on
history and physical examination alone; in current practice the selective use of advanced imaging has improved diagnostic accuracy and
resulted in significant progress in the lowering of negative appendectomy rates.
Physical examination begins with inspection of the child’s demeanor
and the appearance of the abdomen. Because appendicitis most often
has an insidious onset, children rarely present <12 hours from the
onset of illness. Children with early appendicitis (18-­36 hours) typically appear mildly ill and move tentatively, hunched forward, and
often with a slight limp favoring the right side. Supine, they often
lie quietly on their right side with their knees pulled up to relax the
abdominal muscles, and when asked to lie flat or sit up, they move cautiously and might use a hand to protect the RLQ. Early in appendicitis, the abdomen is typically flat; abdominal distention suggests more
advanced disease characteristic of perforation or developing small
bowel obstruction. Auscultation can reveal normal or hyperactive
bowel sounds in early appendicitis, which are replaced by hypoactive
bowel sounds as the disease progresses to perforation. The judicious use
of morphine analgesia to relieve abdominal pain does not change diagnostic accuracy or interfere with surgical decision-­making, and patients
should receive adequate pain control. Localized abdominal tenderness is
the single most reliable finding in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis.
McBurney described the classic point of localized tenderness in acute
appendicitis, which is the junction of the lateral and middle thirds of
the line joining the right anterior-­superior iliac spine and the umbilicus, but the tenderness can also localize to any of the aberrant locations of the appendix. Localized tenderness is a later and less consistent
finding when the appendix is retrocecal in position (>50% of cases).
In cases of an appendix localized entirely in the pelvis, tenderness on
abdominal examination may be minimal. A gentle touch on the child’s
arm at the beginning of the examination with the reassurance that the
abdominal examination will be similarly gentle can help to establish
trust and increase the chance for a reliable and reproducible examination. The examination is best initiated in the left lower abdomen, so
that the immediate part of the exam is not uncomfortable, and conducted in a counterclockwise direction, moving gently to the left upper
abdomen, right upper abdomen, and, lastly, the right lower abdomen.
This should alleviate anxiety, allow relaxation of the abdominal musculature, and enhance trust. The examiner makes several circles of the
abdomen with sequentially more pressure. A soft, compressible, nontender abdominal wall is reassuring. In appendicitis, any abdominal
wall movement, including coughing (Dunphy sign), may elicit pain.
A consistent finding in acute appendicitis is guarding—rigidity of the
overlying abdominal wall muscles in the RLQ. This rigidity may be voluntary, to protect the area of tenderness from the examiner’s hand, or
involuntary, if the inflammation has progressed to peritonitis causing
spasm of the overlying muscle.
Abdominal tenderness may be vague or even absent early in the
course of appendicitis and is often diffuse after rupture. Rebound
tenderness and referred tenderness (Rovsing sign) are also consistent
findings in acute appendicitis but are not always present. Rebound
tenderness is elicited by deep palpation of the abdomen followed by
the sudden release of the examining hand. This is often very painful
to the child and has demonstrated poor correlation with peritonitis,
so it should be avoided. Gentle finger percussion is a better test for
peritoneal irritation. Similarly, digital rectal examination is uncomfortable and unlikely to contribute to the evaluation of appendicitis
in most cases in children. Psoas and obturator internus signs are pain
with passive stretch of these muscles. The psoas sign is elicited with
active right thigh flexion or passive extension of the hip and is typically
positive in cases of a retrocecal appendix. The obturator sign is demonstrated by adductor pain after internal rotation of the flexed thigh
and typically positive in cases of a pelvic appendix. Physical examination may demonstrate a mass in the RLQ representing an inflammatory

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 391 u Acute Appendicitis
100
Frequency of symptoms (%)

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Abdominal
distention

Emesis

Abdominal
tenderness

Refusal of
feeds

Fever

Fig. 391.1 Frequency of presenting symptoms in neonatal appendicitis. (Data from Raveenthiran V. Neonatal appendicitis (Part 1): a review
of 52 cases with abdominal manifestation. J Neonatal Surg. 2015;4:4.)

Table 391.1

Pediatric Appendicitis Scores

FEATURE

SCORE

Fever >38°C (100.4°F)

1

Anorexia

1

Nausea/vomiting

1

Cough/percussion/hopping tenderness

2

Right lower quadrant tenderness

2

Migration of pain

1

Leukocytosis >10,000 (109/L)

1

Polymorphonuclear neutrophilia >7,500 (109/L)

1

Total

10

From Acheson J, Banerjee J. Management of suspected appendicitis in children. Arch
Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2010;95:9–13.

mass (phlegmon) around the appendix or a localized intraabdominal
abscess (fluid collection).
Appendicitis in infants and toddlers does not follow the characteristic features observed in older children. Perforation is observed in most
infants at presentation. The diagnosis is often delayed, and the initial
impression is often sepsis (Fig. 391.1)

APPENDICITIS RISK SCORING SYSTEMS

Several risk scoring systems have become commonly used tools to
promote standardization of the approach to the child with abdominal
pain and suspected appendicitis. The clear aim is to maximize diagnostic accuracy in acute appendicitis and guide imaging evaluation
and resource use. They all combine the predictive value of consistent
symptoms, physical examination findings, and laboratory data yielding a numerical score. The systems most widely used are the Alvarado
score and the Pediatric Appendicitis Score (PAS). The PAS combines
elements of history (migration of pain, anorexia, nausea, vomiting)
with physical examination findings (RLQ tenderness, rebound tenderness, fever) and laboratory data (white blood cell [WBC] >10,000,
polymorphonuclear neutrophils >75%) to assign a risk score in the low,
intermediate, or high-­risk range for acute appendicitis (Table 391.1).
Scores of ≤4 suggest a very low likelihood of appendicitis, whereas
scores ≥8 are highly sensitive and specific for appendicitis. Intermediate scores, between 4 and 7 on the PAS, are considered inconclusive
and typically trigger advanced imaging studies. Targeted (appendiceal)
ultrasound has demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity (∼90%)
in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis in centers experienced with
the technique and has become the initial imaging study of choice for

2399

suspected appendicitis. The notable benefits of ultrasound compared
to CT scan include that it is well-­tolerated, is noninvasive, and lacks
ionizing radiation exposure. CT is reserved for cases of nonvisualization of the appendix on ultrasound or when the ultrasound findings
are inconclusive.
The use of appendicitis risk scoring systems in conjunction with
clinical judgment has demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for
acute appendicitis (80–90%), and their application has reduced practice variability, improved diagnostic accuracy, decreased preoperative
radiation exposure, and enabled efficient resource use—all important
elements of current quality improvement and safety initiatives. Their
greatest value to date appears to be in predicting patients who have
a low likelihood of the diagnosis of appendicitis (negative predictive
value) and can avoid imaging studies, and particularly ionizing radiation exposure.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

A variety of laboratory tests have been used in the evaluation of children with suspected appendicitis. Individually, none are very sensitive
or specific for appendicitis, but collectively they can affect the clinician’s level of suspicion and decision-­making to proceed with pediatric
surgery consultation, discharge, or imaging studies.
A complete blood count with differential and urinalysis are obtained.
The leukocyte count in early appendicitis may be normal and typically
is only mildly elevated (11,000-­16,000/mm3) with a left shift as the illness progresses in the initial 24-­48 hours. Whereas a normal WBC
count never completely eliminates appendicitis, a count <8,000/mm3
in a patient with a history of illness longer than 48 hours should be
viewed as highly suspicious for an alternative diagnosis. The leukocyte
count may be markedly elevated (>20,000/mm3) in PA and rarely in
nonperforated cases; a markedly elevated WBC count, other than in
cases of advanced PA, should raise suspicion of an alternative diagnosis. Urinalysis often demonstrates a few white or red blood cells as a
result of the proximity of the inflamed appendix to the ureter or bladder, but it should be free of bacteria. The urine is often concentrated
and contains ketones from diminished oral intake and vomiting. Gross
hematuria is uncommon, and in association with purpuric skin lesions
and arthritis may indicate IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura).
Electrolytes and liver chemistries are generally normal unless there
has been a delay in diagnosis, leading to severe dehydration and/or
sepsis. Amylase and liver enzymes are only helpful to exclude alternative diagnoses such as pancreatitis and cholecystitis and are not
commonly obtained if appendicitis is the strongly suspected diagnosis. C-­reactive protein (CRP) increases in proportion to the degree of
appendiceal inflammation. It has not demonstrated high sensitivity
or specificity in the diagnosis of appendicitis; some studies have demonstrated an association between disease severity (PA and abscess
formation) and elevated CRP levels. In this context, CRP may have a
role in identifying patients with complicated appendicitis, which may
be managed initially nonoperatively with antibiotics and drainage of
fluid collections.

IMAGING STUDIES

After a thorough initial evaluation, including history, physical examination, review of vital signs, and laboratory studies, if the diagnosis is
uncertain, radiographic studies can substantially improve diagnostic
accuracy.

Plain Radiographs

In the majority of cases, appendiceal ultrasound and CT scan have
become the predominant studies in inconclusive cases of acute appendicitis. Plain abdominal radiographs may be helpful in rare select cases
of abdominal pain/suspected appendicitis. Plain abdominal x-­rays may
demonstrate several findings suggestive of acute appendicitis, including sentinel loops of bowel and localized ileus, scoliosis from psoas
muscle spasm, a colonic air-­fluid level above the right iliac fossa (colon
cutoff sign), a RLQ soft tissue mass, or a calcified appendicolith (5–10%
of cases); they are normal in 50% of patients, have a low sensitivity,
and are not generally recommended (Fig. 391.2). Plain films are most

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2400 Part XVI u The Digestive System
helpful in evaluating complicated cases in which small bowel obstruction or free air is suspected.

Ultrasound

Ultrasound has emerged as the first-­choice tool for children requiring an imaging study in the evaluation of suspected acute appendicitis.
Ultrasound has demonstrated sensitivity and specificity approaching 90% in pediatric centers experienced with the technique and has

A

substantial advantages, including low cost, ready availability, rapidity,
and avoidance of sedation, contrast agents, and radiation exposure.
Ultrasound can be particularly helpful in adolescent females, a group
with a high negative appendectomy rate (normal appendix found at
surgery), because of its ability to evaluate for ovarian pathology without ionizing radiation. Graded abdominal compression is used to displace the cecum and ascending colon and identify the appendix, which
has a typical target appearance (Fig. 391.3). The ultrasound criteria for
appendicitis include wall thickness >6 mm, luminal distention, lack of
compressibility, a complex mass in the RLQ, or an appendicolith. The
visualized appendix usually coincides with the site of localized pain
and tenderness. In addition, ultrasound may identify PA on initial
evaluation; initial management of PA has increasingly moved toward
percutaneous drainage procedures, broad-­spectrum antibiotics, and
nonoperative treatment. An enlarged appendix (>6 mm), hyperemia,
noncompressibility of the appendiceal wall, localized tenderness, and
associated mesenteric fat stranding or fluid are all consistent with
acute appendicitis. Findings that suggest advanced appendicitis on
ultrasound include asymmetric wall thickening, abscess formation,
associated free intraabdominal/pelvic fluid, surrounding tissue edema,
and decreased local tenderness to compression. The main limitation of
ultrasound is an inability to visualize the appendix, which is reported in
25–60% of cases. It has been postulated that a normal appendix must
be visualized to exclude the diagnosis of appendicitis by ultrasound;
however, one report concluded that in patients with a nonvisualized
appendix on ultrasound imaging, no evidence of secondary inflammatory changes, and an absolute neutrophil count <8,000/mm3, the likelihood of appendicitis was <3%. Certain conditions predictably decrease
the sensitivity and reliability of ultrasound for appendicitis, including
obesity, bowel distention, and uncontrolled pain.

Computed Tomography

B
Fig. 391.2 Calcified appendicoliths are seen in a coned-­down anteroposterior view of the right lower quadrant (A) and in the resected appendix of a 10-­yr-­old female with acute appendicitis (B). (From Kuhn JP,
Sloviso TL, Haller JO. Caffrey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004:1682.)

CT scan has been the gold-­standard imaging study for evaluating
children with suspected appendicitis and has a sensitivity of 97%,
specificity 99%, positive predictive value 98%, and negative predictive value 98% (Figs. 391.4 and 391.5). The advantages of CT imaging
include ready availability, rapid acquisition time, and lack of operator dependency. CT carries the significant negative effects of exposure
of children to ionizing radiation and increased costs. The exam can
be performed using intravenous and enteral (oral or rectal) contrast;
however, the administration of enteral contrast has several drawbacks,
including delay in diagnostic evaluation, increasing abdominal distention, risk of emesis and aspiration, and increasing radiation exposure
without demonstrable improvement in accuracy of diagnosis. The use
of oral contrast should be reserved for patients in whom alternative

RLQ Long

A

B

C

Fig. 391.3 Ultrasound examination of patients with appendicitis. A, Transverse ultrasound scan of the appendix demonstrates the characteristic

“target sign.” In this case, the innermost portion is sonolucent, compatible with fluid or pus. B, Longitudinal view of another patient demonstrates
the alternating hyperechoic and hypoechoic layers with an outermost hypoechoic layer, suggesting periappendiceal fluid. C, Longitudinal ultrasound scan of the right lower quadrant demonstrates a dilated, noncompressible appendix. The bright echo within the appendix represents an
appendicolith with acoustic shadowing (arrow). (From Kuhn JP, Slovis TL, Haller JO. Caffrey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 10th ed. Philadelphia:
Mosby; 2004:1684.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 391 u Acute Appendicitis

2401

diagnoses are suspected, particularly Crohn disease. Because the finding of fat stranding in surrounding tissues is a key component of CT
evaluation for appendicitis, CT is less reliable in thin children with
minimal body fat.
The avoidance of enteral contrast, targeted CT imaging, and the use
of pediatric-­specific protocols can significantly lower radiation dosages
without sacrificing diagnostic accuracy. The use of appendicitis risk
scoring systems in conjunction with CPGs and increasing experience
with appendiceal ultrasound have led to a decreased use of CT scans
(<6.6% in most reports), without negatively affecting time to appendectomy or negative appendectomy rates.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging

A

MRI is at least equivalent to CT in diagnostic accuracy for appendicitis
and does not involve ionizing radiation; however, its use in the evaluation of appendicitis is limited because it is less available, is associated
with higher costs, and does not offer equivalent access for drainage of
fluid collections. MRI may prove most useful in adolescent females
when ultrasound imaging is equivocal. The use of MRI is becoming
more common in institutions with high resources, and it has become a
good alternative to CT in cases with equivocal ultrasound.

DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

B
Fig. 391.4 A, Phlegmon (black arrow) is noted around the enlarged

appendix (white arrow) in perforated appendicitis. B, Extraluminal air
is shown adjacent to the wall-­
enhanced appendix (arrow) in perforated appendicitis. (From Yeung KW, Chang MS, Hsiao CP. Evaluation
of perforated and non-­perforated appendicitis with CT. Clin Imaging.
2004;28:422–427, Figs. 1 and 3)

A

B
Fig. 391.5 A, Precontrast-­enhanced CT reveals an appendicolith (ar-

row) in perforated appendicitis. B, Postcontrast-­enhanced CT (1 cm
below the level in A) reveals intraluminal air in the appendix (curved arrow) associated with ileal wall enhancement in perforated appendicitis.
(From Yeung KW, Chang MS, Hsiao CP. Evaluation of perforated and
non-­perforated appendicitis with CT. Clin Imaging. 2004;28:422–427,
Fig. 5.)

Acute appendicitis is believed to be a time-­sensitive condition; thus
any delay in diagnosis or treatment may lead to an increased risk of
perforation and its attendant morbidity. The misdiagnosis of appendicitis is second only to meningitis as a cause of medical malpractice
suits in pediatric emergency care. A careful history and physical examination remain primary in the initial assessment of a child presenting
with abdominal symptoms. The classic history in acute appendicitis,
although possibly not most common, is a 24-­hour history of diffuse
mid-­abdominal pain that migrates and becomes localized to the RLQ.
Patients should have a WBC count with differential analysis, as this is
a component of most appendicitis risk scoring systems. A urinalysis is
also typically obtained and a pregnancy test in appropriately selected
patients. CPGs have become common practice in many centers for
evaluation of patients with abdominal pain and suspected appendicitis to reduce practice variability and improve diagnostic accuracy and
resource use. CPGs have been shown to have high positive and negative predictive values (∼95%) and to decrease both LOS and costs without increasing morbidity or complications. These guidelines combine
initial history, physical examination, and laboratory data with predictive risk scoring systems to cohort patients into low, intermediate, and
high risk for the diagnosis of acute appendicitis. In general, low-­risk
patients can be discharged without imaging studies, high-­risk patients
would have pediatric surgical consultation, and the inconclusive or
intermediate-­risk group would most predictably benefit from a period
of observation or proceeding with advanced imaging studies. If the
initial assessment leads to a high level of suspicion for appendicitis,
pediatric surgical consultation should be the next step, with the likelihood of an appendectomy without further studies. In patients with a
low concern for appendicitis, the child may be discharged with family education regarding the natural history and progression of acute
appendicitis and advice to return for repeat evaluation if the child is
not improving on liquids and a bland diet in the next 24 hours. The
group of patients with an intermediate-­risk score would proceed with
targeted ultrasound of the appendix if the center has experience with
the technique. If the ultrasound study is unable to visualize the appendix, or the appendix is visualized but the findings are inconclusive, the
next options would include admission for a period of observation and
planned reassessment, CT imaging or MRI, or diagnostic laparoscopy.
The use of observation units, where the child may be observed with
intravenous fluids, serial vital signs, and planned reexaminations, is
another strategy. At the end of a period of observation, typically 12-­
24 hours, the clinician decides on discharge based on reassuring clinical status, proceeds to diagnostic laparoscopy and appendectomy, or
proceeds with advanced imaging evaluation. The period of observation can occur at home provided the patient is physiologically well; a
hospital-­based observational unit has the advantage of being able to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2402 Part XVI u The Digestive System
provide intravenous fluids. An observation strategy seems most useful
in patients who present with a brief history of illness (<12 hours) when
advanced imaging studies predictably have lower sensitivity and specificity. If observed patients remain equivocal, advanced imaging should
be more reliable further into the disease process.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The list of illnesses that can mimic acute appendicitis is extensive
because many gastrointestinal, gynecologic, and inflammatory disorders can manifest with similar illness history, signs, and symptoms.
Differential diagnosis, even limited to common conditions, includes
gastroenteritis, mesenteric adenitis, Meckel diverticulitis, intussusception, inflammatory bowel disease, diabetes mellitus, sickle cell disease, streptococcal pharyngitis, lower lobe pneumonia, cholecystitis,
pancreatitis, urinary tract infection (UTI), infectious enteritis, and,
in females, ovarian torsion, ectopic pregnancy, ruptured/hemorrhagic
ovarian cysts, and pelvic inflammatory disease (including tubo-­ovarian
abscess). Epiploic appendagitis, an inflammation of the fat-­filled structures on the antimesenteric surface of the colon, may present with
acute lower quadrant abdominal pain after torsion, thrombosis, and
ischemic injury to the structure. Viral infections, bacterial infections,
and parasitic infections can all closely mimic acute appendicitis. Intestinal tract lymphoma, tumors of the appendix (carcinoid in children),
and ovarian tumors are rare but can also masquerade as acute appendicitis. Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura can initially present as severe
abdominal pain. Urinary tract causes of abdominal pain include UTI,
nephrolithiasis, and pyelonephritis. In patients with pyelonephritis,
the fever and WBC count are likely much higher, symptoms of dysuria will be present, and the tenderness is located more in the flank
or costovertebral angle. Rarely, appendicitis may recur in the stump
of a previous appendectomy. Children younger than 3 years of age and
adolescent females have historically proven to be at particularly high risk
for an incorrect diagnosis.
Viral illnesses are common in children, often are associated with
abdominal pain and vomiting, and thus mimic acute appendicitis. The
classic patient with acute appendicitis describes abdominal pain as the
preeminent symptom, and in general, symptoms of systemic illness
such as headache, chills, and myalgias are infrequent in appendicitis
and common when viral illness is the correct diagnosis.
Infection with SARS-­
CoV-­
2 (COVID-­
19) or associated with the
development of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­
C) has produced a pseudo-­appendicitis picture with RLQ pain, mesenteric adenopathy, fat stranding, and phlegmon formation. Additional
features of COVID-­19 are usually, but not always, present (Fig. 391.6).
The diagnosis of appendicitis in adolescent females is especially
challenging, and some series report negative appendectomy rates as

A

high as 30–40%. Ovarian cysts are often acutely painful as a result of
rupture, rapid enlargement, or hemorrhage. Rupture of an ovarian follicle associated with ovulation often causes midcycle lateralizing pain
(mittelschmerz), but there is no progression of symptoms and systemic
illness is absent. Ovarian tumors and torsion can also mimic acute
appendicitis, although ovarian torsion is typically characterized by the
acute onset of severe pain and is associated with more frequent and
forceful nausea and vomiting than is typically seen in early appendicitis. In pelvic inflammatory disease, the pain is typically suprapubic,
bilateral, and of longer duration. The need for accurate urgent diagnosis in females is influenced by concern that PA can predispose the
patient to future ectopic pregnancy or tubal infertility, although data
have not consistently demonstrated increased incidence of infertility
after PA. For these reasons, adjunct diagnostic studies (ultrasound,
CT, MRI, or diagnostic laparoscopy) should be used more liberally in
females to keep negative appendectomy rates low.
Torsion of an undescended testis and epididymitis are common but
should be discovered on physical exam. Meckel diverticulitis is an infrequent condition, but the clinical presentation closely mimics appendicitis. The diagnosis is rarely made before surgery. Primary spontaneous
peritonitis (PSP) is classically seen in prepubertal females or patients
with either nephrotic syndrome or cirrhosis and is frequently mistaken
for appendicitis.
Atypical presentations of appendicitis are expected in association
with other conditions such as pregnancy, Crohn disease, steroid treatment, and immunosuppressive therapy. Appendicitis in association
with Crohn disease often has a protracted presentation with an atypical
pattern of recurring but localized abdominal pain. It should be recognized that missed appendicitis is the most common cause of small
bowel obstruction in children without a history of prior abdominal
surgery.

ANTIBIOTICS

Antibiotics should be initiated promptly once the diagnosis of appendicitis is made or highly suspected. Antibiotics substantially lower the incidence of postoperative wound infections (SSIs) and intraabdominal
abscesses—the source of the majority of the substantial morbidity and
costs in PA. Many believe the time from onset of illness to the initiation
of antibiotics has more impact on postoperative complication rates,
LOS, and overall costs than time from diagnosis to surgery.
The antibiotic regimen should be directed against the typical bacterial flora found in the appendix, including anaerobic organisms (Bacteroides, Clostridia, and Peptostreptococcus spp.) and gram-­negative
aerobic bacteria (Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter, and Klebsiella spp.). Many antibiotic combinations have demonstrated equivalent efficacy in controlled trials in terms of wound

B

Fig. 391.6 Initial CT scan of a patient with COVID-19 presenting as mesenteric adenopathy. Axial image (A) and coronal reformat (B) of abdominopelvic CT with intravenous contrast agent in a 17-­yr-­old male demonstrate enlarged lymph nodes (straight arrows) and adjacent fat stranding (curved arrows). (From Noda S, Ma J, Romberg EK, et al. Severe COVID-­19 initially presenting as mesenteric adenopathy. Pediatr Radiol.
2021;51:140–143, Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 391 u Acute Appendicitis
infection rate, resolution of fever, LOS, and incidence of complications.
Historically, a triple-­antibiotic regimen consisting of ampicillin, gentamicin, and clindamycin was standard. Exhaustive studies of different
antibiotic regimens have been performed, mostly aimed at lowering
costs and frequency of dosing while maintaining efficacy. Both piperacillin/tazobactam and cefoxitin have demonstrated equivalent effectiveness and may decrease LOS and pharmaceutical costs compared to
the triple-­antibiotic regimen.
For simple (nonperforated) appendicitis, one preoperative dose of
a single broad-­spectrum agent (piperacillin/tazobactam) or equivalent
is sufficient. In PA, the antibiotic is continued intravenously for 2-­3
days postoperatively until the child is afebrile (≥24 hours), tolerating a
general diet, and ready for discharge. Some centers prefer to add metronidazole in PA to augment coverage of anaerobes. The decision to
discharge patients with PA managed with up-­front appendectomy on
a course of oral antibiotics (typically 3-­5 days) remains controversial.
The literature does not support improved outcomes with PA if antibiotics are extended beyond a 4-­to 5-­day course.

SURGICAL INTERVENTION

Once the diagnosis of appendicitis is confirmed or highly suspected, the
standard treatment for acute appendicitis, both simple and complicated,
in current practice is most often prompt appendectomy. LA (a minimally
invasive technique) is the preferred surgical approach (65–70%) in both
simple and PA, with open appendectomy markedly declining in the past
decade. The laparoscopic approach has demonstrated slight improvement in clinical outcome measures (wound infection rate, intraabdominal abscess, analgesic requirements, wound cosmesis, and return to full
activity); however, costs can be higher. The laparoscopic approach (diagnostic laparoscopy/LA) has particular advantages for obese patients, when
alternative diagnoses are suspected, and in adolescent females to evaluate
for ovarian pathology and alternative diagnoses while avoiding the ionizing radiation associated with CT imaging. The operation should proceed
semi-­electively within 12-­24 hours of diagnosis. Children with appendicitis are typically at least mildly dehydrated and should receive supportive
care before surgery, including fluid resuscitation to correct hypovolemia
and electrolyte abnormalities, antipyretics to lower fever, and broad-­
spectrum antibiotics. These important fundamentals of care ensure safe
anesthesia and optimize outcomes. In most cases, preoperative management can be accomplished during the period of diagnostic evaluation and
prompt appendectomy can be performed. Pain management begins even
before a definitive diagnosis is made, and consultation of a pain service, if
available, is appropriate. Emergency surgery (middle of the night) is rarely
indicated in acute appendicitis and should only be performed in the rare
circumstance when physiologic resuscitation requires urgent control of
advanced intraabdominal sepsis not amenable to percutaneous drainage
by interventional radiology or when this is not available. No correlation
has been demonstrated between timing of surgery and perforation rates
or postoperative morbidity when the operation proceeds within 24 hours
of diagnosis. When comparing emergent appendectomy (within 5 hours
of admission) with urgent appendectomy (within 17 hours of admission),
no differences in PA, operative time, readmission rate, postoperative complications, LOS, or hospital charges have been noted. In addition, occasionally unexpected pathology (appendiceal tumors, intestinal lymphoma,
congenital renal anomalies, Crohn disease) is discovered at operation,
and intraoperative consultation with other specialists and/or frozen section evaluation may be required. The laparoscopic approach, in conjunction with standardized, expedited postoperative recovery protocols, and
improved (single drug) and shorter-­duration antibiotic regimens have led
to decreased LOS in both simple and complicated (perforated) appendicitis. The average LOS in most centers is approximately 24 hours for simple
appendicitis and 4-­5 days for perforated cases that recover without postoperative complications. In simple appendicitis, some centers have initiated
same-­day discharge.

PERFORATED APPENDICITIS

A major area of focus and challenge in the management of acute appendicitis is the group of patients with delayed presentation (>48 hours)
of symptoms. Because acute appendicitis often has an insidious onset

2403

of generalized malaise, as many as 40–50% of patients have delayed
presentation. This cohort of patients has a high incidence of PA at presentation (40–59%) and a 56% greater LOS stay than those presenting
within ≤24 hours of the onset of symptoms. The risk for development
of postoperative complications (SSI, intraabdominal abscess, small
bowel obstruction) approaches 20–30% for children with PA versus
an approximately 3% risk of complications in patients with simple
appendicitis.
Management options for children presenting with PA include up-­
front appendectomy after a brief period of stabilization with intravenous fluids and antibiotics, antibiotics alone, and antibiotics in
conjunction with percutaneous drainage of intraabdominal fluid collections/abscesses. The past decade has witnessed a substantial trend
toward nonoperative management in children with delayed presentation and suspected PA to avoid the high complication rate in these
patients and the potential technical challenges of operative treatment
in the setting of marked intraabdominal inflammation/peritonitis.
Based on patient status, findings on imaging studies, and availability of
experienced interventional radiologists, initial nonoperative management of PA with percutaneous drainage of fluid collections, intravenous fluids, and broad-­spectrum antibiotics has demonstrated success
in >80% of patients. Antibiotics are initiated and typically continued
intravenously for 1-­2 days along with pain control. If the child demonstrates clinical recovery by resolution of fever and pain and can tolerate
a general diet, the child is converted to oral antibiotics and discharged
to complete an outpatient antibiotic course (typically 7-­10 days of ciprofloxacin/metronidazole or amoxicillin/clavulanate). A patient who
fails to demonstrate clinical recovery proceeds to prompt appendectomy. This nonoperative management, and particularly the transition
to oral antibiotics, has contributed to a decreased LOS and costs in the
management of PA. Patients who do not have up-­front appendectomy
will require a decision regarding interval appendectomy (IA) in 4-­6
weeks, provided the child does not fail nonoperative management after
discharge by recurrence of pain, fever, or vomiting.

NONOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF
UNCOMPLICATED APPENDICITIS

Multiple studies in adults have demonstrated highly effective treatment
of appendicitis with antibiotics alone. In addition, other conditions
similar to appendicitis, such as diverticulitis, intraabdominal abscess
in Crohn disease, and tubo-­ovarian abscess, are primarily treated with
antibiotics alone, with surgery reserved for failures of medical management. These outcomes have led many centers to evaluate initial
nonoperative management of acute (simple) appendicitis in children,
and currently several randomized controlled studies are ongoing.
Advantages of the antibiotic-­alone/nonoperative approach in acute
appendicitis include avoidance of surgical complications and the risk
of general anesthesia and an operative procedure that may not be necessary. Selection criteria for nonoperative management are designed
to exclude signs and symptoms suggestive of PA and typically include
duration of symptoms <48 hours, age >7 years, imaging confirmation
of acute non-­PA, appendiceal diameter <1.2 cm, absence of appendicolith, abscess, or phlegmon, and WBC >5,000 and <18,000 cells/μL. The
clinical pathway for children enrolled consists of an initial 1-­2 days of
intravenous broad-­spectrum antibiotics and pain control. If the child
demonstrates clinical recovery by resolution of pain and fever and is
tolerating a general diet, he or she is discharged to complete 7-­10 days
of oral antibiotics. If the child does not demonstrate clinical recovery,
prompt appendectomy is performed. Early nonoperative trials found
that predictors of failure of nonoperative management included pain
>48 hours in duration, presence of an appendicolith, inflammatory
mass or abscess on imaging, and elevated laboratory values (WBC
>18,000, CRP >4 mg/dL). The largest prospective trial (nonrandomized, treatment assigned by parent selection) comparing surgery and
medical management of appendicitis in the United States followed
patients for 1 year. Out of the children who were initially treated medically, 37% underwent an appendectomy within 1 year. Multiple reports
indicate a more rapid return to full activities; however, patients with
nonoperative management had more subsequent ED visits, advanced

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2404 Part XVI u The Digestive System
imaging studies, and hospitalizations compared with those managed
operatively at the first visit. Controversies remain in the initial nonoperative management of PA.

Chapter 392

Surgical Conditions of the
Anus and Rectum

RECURRENT APPENDICITIS

Prospective studies of the incidence of early recurrent appendicitis
(within 1 year) describe a range between 10% and 30% in patients initially managed nonoperatively. The lifetime risk of recurrent appendicitis in children treated nonoperatively is unknown, but the few data
that have been published beyond the 1-­year follow-­up suggest that the
risk for recurrent appendicitis continues to increase past the first year.
Currently under review is the need for delayed appendectomy (IA) in
patients with complicated appendicitis initially managed nonoperatively. Although the trend in cases of PA at presentation is toward initial nonoperative management, the data remain uncertain, and there
are no convincing data to recommend one approach in all patients.

INTERVAL APPENDECTOMY

In patients with PA initially treated nonoperatively, the decision to proceed with IA, typically in 4-­6 weeks, is another area of management
lacking consensus. Traditionally, most surgeons recommended IA to
avoid recurrent appendicitis and to confirm the original diagnosis, citing
reports that demonstrated an incidence of unexpected pathology in 30%
of IA specimens. This has been questioned, with nonoperative management of simple appendicitis gaining acceptance and many debating the
risk of recurrent appendicitis (5–20%), believing it to be lower. The lifetime risk of recurrent appendicitis is unknown. Decision-­making for IA
must be individualized to balance the risks of recurrent appendicitis with
the risks of anesthesia and comorbid conditions such as obesity, congenital heart disease, chronic respiratory conditions, and others.

INCIDENTAL APPENDICOLITHS

The question of the incidental appendicolith is an intriguing one for
pediatric practitioners. These are patients who do not have appendicitis
but are found to have an appendicolith on imaging studies. An appendicolith is defined as a calcification within the appendiceal lumen. In
adults, incidental appendicoliths identified by CT scans vary in incidence from <1% to as high as 10%. They have a characteristic dense and
laminated appearance when compared to other lower abdominal calcifications, including phleboliths (venous calcifications) and, in females,
ovarian calcifications, most commonly seen in ovarian tumors. They
can be appreciated on plain film, ultrasound, and CT scan. When an
appendicolith is noted in the evaluation of a child with abdominal pain
and suspected appendicitis, the finding of the appendicolith confirms
the diagnosis; surgical consultation and prompt appendectomy are
indicated. Appendicoliths may be noted in the evaluation of patients
who have no signs of appendicitis, such as imaging obtained after
trauma or for nonspecific abdominal complaints in patients with a low
likelihood of appendicitis. The concern in this setting is that the appendicolith may increase the eventual development of acute appendicitis.
In addition, there is the concern that should appendicitis develop in
association with an appendicolith, there may be a rapidly escalating
course and early perforation. Some physicians believe that a persistent
appendicolith may be associated with recurrent RLQ/iliac fossa pain.
Incidental appendicoliths may be transient and in most short-­term
follow-­up studies have a low risk of subsequent acute appendicitis.
In addition, the lifetime risk for the development of appendicitis in
patients with an incidental appendicolith is approximately 5%, which
is not different from the normal population. The risk of subsequent
appendicitis may be higher in those presenting with abdominal pain
or those younger than 19 years of age. Radiographically detected incidental appendicoliths are usually managed with observation, planned
follow-­up, and patient education for signs of acute appendicitis. After
discussing the risks and benefits with the family and persistence of the
appendicolith, an individualized approach is best between the physician and the family relative to elective appendectomy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

392.1 Anorectal Malformations
Christina M. Shanti
To fully understand the spectrum of anorectal anomalies, it is necessary to consider the importance of the sphincter complex, a mass of
muscle fibers surrounding the anorectum (Fig. 392.1). This complex is
the combination of the puborectalis, levator ani, external and internal
sphincters, and the superficial external sphincter muscles, all meeting
at the rectum. Anorectal malformations are defined by the relationship
of the rectum to this complex and include varying degrees of stenosis to complete atresia. The incidence is 1/3,000 live births. Significant
long-­term concerns focus on bowel control and urinary and sexual
functions.

EMBRYOLOGY

The hindgut forms early as the part of the primitive gut tube that
extends into the tail fold in the second week of gestation. At about day
13, it develops a ventral diverticulum, the allantois, or primitive bladder. The junction of the allantois and hindgut becomes the cloaca, into
which the genital, urinary, and intestinal tubes empty. This is covered
by a cloacal membrane. The urorectal septum descends to divide this
common channel by forming lateral ridges, which grow in and fuse by
the middle of the seventh week. Opening of the posterior portion of
the membrane (the anal membrane) occurs in the eighth week. Failures in any part of these processes can lead to the clinical spectrum of
anogenital anomalies.
Imperforate anus can be divided into low lesions, where the rectum has descended through the sphincter complex, and high lesions,
where it has not. Most patients with imperforate anus have a fistula.
There is a spectrum of malformation in males and females. In males,
low lesions usually manifest with meconium staining somewhere on
the perineum along the median raphe (Figs. 392.2A and 392.3). Low
lesions in females also manifest as a spectrum from an anus that is
only slightly anterior on the perineal body to a fourchette fistula that
opens on the moist mucosa of the introitus distal to the hymen (Fig.
392.4A). A high imperforate anus in a male has no apparent cutaneous
opening or fistula, but it usually has a fistula to the urinary tract, either
the urethra or the bladder (Fig. 392.2B). Although there is occasionally a rectovaginal fistula, in females, high lesions are usually cloacal
anomalies in which the rectum, vagina, and urethra all empty into a
common channel or cloacal stem of varying length (see Fig. 392.4B).

A

B

Fig. 392.1 Normal anorectal anatomy in relation to pelvic structures.

A, Male. B, Female. (From Peña A. Atlas of Surgical Management of
Anorectal Malformations. New York: Springer-­Verlag; 1989: 3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 392 u Surgical Conditions of the Anus and Rectum
Internal
sphincter

2405

The interesting category of males with imperforate anus and no fistula
occurs mainly in children with trisomy 21. The most common lesions
are the rectourethral bulbar fistula in males and the rectovestibular fistula in females; the second most common lesion in both sexes is the
perianal fistula (Fig. 392.5).

ASSOCIATED ANOMALIES

Puborectalis

A

B

External
sphincter

Fig. 392.2 Imperforate anus in males. A, Low lesions. B, High lesions.
(From Peña A. Atlas of Surgical Management of Anorectal Malformations. New York: Springer-­Verlag; 1989:7, 26.)

Many anomalies are associated with anorectal malformations (Table
392.1). The most common are anomalies of the kidneys and urinary
tract in conjunction with abnormalities of the sacrum. This complex
is often referred to as caudal regression syndrome. Males with a rectovesical fistula and patients with a persistent cloaca have a 90% risk
of urologic defects. Other common associated anomalies are cardiac
anomalies and esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal
fistula. These can cluster in any combination in a patient. When combined, they are often accompanied by abnormalities of the radial aspect
of the upper extremity and are termed the VACTERL (vertebral, anal,
cardiac, tracheal, esophageal, renal, limb) anomalad.
Anorectal malformations, particularly anal stenosis and rectal
atresia, can also present as the Currarino triad, which includes sacral
agenesis, a presacral mass, and anorectal stenosis. These patients
present with a funnel-­appearing anus, have sacral bony defects on
plain x-­ray, and have a presacral mass (teratoma, meningocele, dermoid cyst, enteric cyst) on exam or imaging. It is an autosomal dominant disorder caused in most patients by a pathogenic variant in the
MNX1 gene.
A good correlation exists between the degree of sacral development
and future function. Patients with an absent sacrum usually have permanent fecal and urinary incontinence. Spinal abnormalities and different degrees of dysraphism are often associated with these defects.
Tethered cord occurs in approximately 25% of patients with anorectal
malformations. Untethering of the cord can lead to improved urinary
and rectal continence in some patients, although it seldom reverses
established neurologic defects. The diagnosis of spinal defects can be
screened for in the first 3 months of life by spinal ultrasound, although
MRI is the imaging method of choice if a lesion is suspected. In older
patients, MRI is needed.

MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS
Low Lesions

Fig. 392.3 This male infant has a rectoperineal fistula with a subepi-

thelial tract filled with either mucus or meconium that extends into the
scrotal raphe. (From Rentea RM, Levitt MA. Anorectal atresia and cloacal malformations. In Holcomb III GW, Murphy JP, St. Peter SD, eds.
Holcomb and Ashcraft’s Pediatric Surgery, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 35.2, p. 578.)

A

B

Fig. 392.4 Imperforate anus in females. A, Vestibular fistula. B, Cloaca. (From Peña A. Atlas of Surgical Management of Anorectal Malformations. New York: Springer-­Verlag; 1989: 50, 60.)

Examination of a newborn includes the inspection of the perineum.
The absence of an anal orifice in the correct position leads to further
evaluation. Mild forms of imperforate anus are often called anal stenosis or anterior ectopic anus. These are typically cases of an imperforate
anus with a perineal fistula. The normal position of the anus on the
perineum is approximately halfway (0.5 ratio) between the coccyx and
the scrotum or introitus. Although symptoms, primarily constipation,
have been attributed to anterior ectopic anus (ratio: <0.34 in females,
<0.46 in males), many patients have no symptoms.
If no anus or fistula is visible, there may be a low lesion or covered
anus. In these cases, there are well-­formed buttocks and often a thickened raphe or bucket handle. After 24 hours, meconium bulging may
be seen, creating a blue or black appearance. In these cases, an immediate perineal procedure can often be performed, followed by a dilation
program.
In a male, the perineal (cutaneous) fistula can track anteriorly along
the median raphe across the scrotum and even down the penile shaft
(see Fig. 392.3). This is usually a thin track, with a normal rectum often
just a few millimeters from the skin. Extraintestinal anomalies are seen
in <10% of these patients.
In a female, a low lesion enters the vestibule or fourchette (the moist
mucosa outside the hymen but within the introitus). In this case, the
rectum has descended through the sphincter complex. Children with
a low lesion can usually be treated initially with perineal manipulation and dilation. Visualizing these low fistulas is so important in the
evaluation and treatment that one should avoid passing a nasogastric
tube for the first 24 hours to allow the abdomen and bowel to distend,
pushing meconium down into the distal rectum.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2406 Part XVI u The Digestive System

A

B

C

D

Fig. 392.5 Preoperative and postoperative images of anorectal malformations. A, Preoperative rectoperineal fistula. B, Radiograph with cross-­
table lateral film showing neonate in prone position and gas below the coccyx. C, Postoperative appearance after a posterior sagittal anorectoplasty.
D, Postoperative large, patulous, and prolapsed anoplasty. (From Bischoff A, Bealer J, Pená A. Controversies in anorectal malformations. Lancet
Child/Adolesc. 2017;1:323–330.)

Table 392.1

Associated Malformations

GENITOURINARY
Vesicoureteric reflux
Renal agenesis
Renal dysplasia
Ureteral duplication
Cryptorchidism
Hypospadias
Bicornuate uterus
Vaginal septa

Persistent Cloaca

In persistent cloaca, the embryologic stage persists in which the rectum,
urethra, and vagina communicate in a common orifice, the cloaca. It is
important to realize this anomaly, because the repair often requires repositioning the urethra and vagina as well as the rectum. Children of both
sexes with a high lesion require a colostomy before repair.

VERTEBRAL
Spinal dysraphism
Tethered chord
Presacral masses
Meningocele
Lipoma
Dermoid
Teratoma

Rectal Atresia

CARDIOVASCULAR
Tetralogy of Fallot
Ventricular septal defect
Transposition of the great vessels
Hypoplastic left-­heart syndrome
GASTROINTESTINAL
Tracheoesophageal fistula
Duodenal atresia
Malrotation
Hirschsprung disease
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Spina bifida
Tethered cord

High Lesions

In females with high imperforate anus, there may be the appearance
of a rectovaginal fistula. A true rectovaginal fistula is rare. Most are
either the fourchette fistulas described earlier or are forms of a cloacal
anomaly.

In a male with a high imperforate anus, the perineum appears flat.
There may be air or meconium passed via the urethra when the fistula
is high, entering the bulbar or prostatic urethra, or even the bladder. In
rectobulbar urethral fistulas (the most common in males), the sphincter
mechanism is satisfactory, the sacrum may be underdeveloped, and an
anal dimple is present. In rectoprostatic urethral fistulas, the sacrum is
poorly developed, the scrotum may be bifid, and the anal dimple is
near the scrotum. In rectovesicular fistulas, the sphincter mechanism
is poorly developed, and the sacrum is hypoplastic or absent. In males
with trisomy 21, all the features of a high lesion may be present, but
there is no fistula, the sacrum and sphincter mechanisms are usually
well developed, and the prognosis is good.

Rectal atresia is a rare defect occurring in only 1% of anorectal anomalies. It has the same characteristics in both sexes. The unique feature
of this defect is that affected patients have a normal anal canal and a
normal anus. The defect is often discovered while rectal temperature is
being taken. An obstruction is present approximately 2 cm above the
skin level. These patients need a protective colostomy. The functional
prognosis is excellent because they have a normal sphincteric mechanism (and normal sensation), which resides in the anal canal.

APPROACH TO THE PATIENT

Evaluation includes identifying associated anomalies (see Table 392.1).
Careful inspection of the perineum is important to determine the
presence or absence of a fistula. If the fistula can be seen, it is a low
lesion. The invertogram, or upside-­down x-­ray, is of little value, but a
prone cross-­table lateral plain x-­ray at 24 hours of life (to allow time
for bowel distention from swallowed air) with a radiopaque marker
on the perineum can demonstrate a low lesion by showing the rectal
gas bubble <1 cm from the perineal skin (see Fig. 392.5). A plain x-­ray
of the entire sacrum, including both iliac wings, is important to identify sacral anomalies and the adequacy of the sacrum. An abdominal-­
pelvic ultrasound and voiding cystourethrogram must be performed.
The clinician should also pass a nasogastric tube to identify esophageal
atresia and should obtain an echocardiogram. In males with a high
lesion, the voiding cystourethrogram often identifies the rectourinary
fistula. In females with a high lesion, more invasive evaluation, including vaginogram and endoscopy, is often necessary for careful detailing
of the cloacal anomaly.
Good clinical evaluation and a urinalysis provide enough data in
80–90% of male patients to determine the need for a colostomy. Voluntary sphincteric muscles surround the most distal part of the bowel
in cases of perineal and rectourethral fistulas, and the intraluminal
bowel pressure must be sufficiently high to overcome the tone of those
muscles before meconium can be seen in the urine or on the perineum.
The presence of meconium in the urine and a flat bottom are considered indications for the creation of a colostomy. Clinical findings consistent with the diagnosis of a perineal fistula represent an indication

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 392 u Surgical Conditions of the Anus and Rectum
for an anoplasty without a protective colostomy. Ultrasound is valuable
not only for the evaluation of the urinary tract, but it can also be used
to investigate spinal anomalies in the newborn and to determine how
close to the perineum the rectum has descended.
More than 90% of the time, the diagnosis in females can be established on perineal inspection. The presence of a single perineal orifice
is a cloaca. A palpable pelvic mass (hydrocolpos) reinforces this diagnosis. A vestibular fistula is diagnosed by careful separation of the labia,
exposing the vestibule. The rectal orifice is located immediately in front
of the hymen within the female genitalia and in the vestibule. A perineal fistula is easy to diagnose. The rectal orifice is located somewhere
between the female genitalia and the center of the sphincter and is surrounded by skin. Less than 10% of these patients fail to pass meconium
through the genitalia or perineum after 24 hours of observation. Those
patients can require a prone cross-­table lateral film.

OPERATIVE REPAIR

Sometimes a perineal fistula, if it opens in a good position, can be
treated by simple dilation. Hegar dilators are employed, starting with a
No. 5 or 6 and letting the baby go home when the mother can use a No.
8. Twice-­daily dilatations are done at home, increasing the size every
few weeks until a No. 14 is achieved. By 1 year of age, the stool is usually
well formed and further dilation is not necessary. By the time No. 14 is
reached, the examiner can usually insert a little finger. If the anal ring is
soft and pliable, dilation can be reduced in frequency or discontinued.
Occasionally, there is no visible fistula, but the rectum can be seen to
be filled with meconium bulging on the perineum, or a covered anus is
otherwise suspected. If confirmed by plain x-­ray or ultrasound of the
perineum that the rectum is <1 cm from the skin, the clinician can do a
minor perineal procedure to perforate the skin and then proceed with
dilation or do a simple perineal anoplasty.
When the fistula orifice is close to the introitus or scrotum, it is often
appropriate to move it back surgically. This also requires postoperative
dilation to prevent stricture formation. This procedure can be done any
time from the newborn period to 1 year. It is preferable to wait until
dilatations have been done for several weeks and the child is bigger. The
anorectum is a little easier to dissect at this time. The posterior sagittal
approach of Peña is used, making an incision around the fistula and
then in the midline to the site of the posterior wall of the new location.
The dissection is continued in the midline, using a muscle stimulator
to be sure there is adequate muscle on both sides. The fistula must be
dissected cephalad for several centimeters to allow posterior positioning without tension. If appropriate, some of the distal fistula is resected
before the anastomosis to the perineal skin.
In children with a high lesion, a double-­barrel colostomy is performed. This effectively separates the fecal stream from the urinary tract.
It also allows the performance of an augmented pressure colostogram
before repair to identify the exact position of the distal rectum and the
fistula. The definitive repair or posterior sagittal anorectoplasty (PSARP)
is performed at about 1 year of age. A midline incision is made, often
splitting the coccyx and even the sacrum. Using a muscle stimulator, the
surgeon stays strictly in the midline and divides the sphincter complex
and identifies the rectum. The rectum is then opened in the midline, and
the fistula is identified from within the rectum. This allows a division of
the fistula without injury to the urinary tract. The rectum is then dissected proximally until enough length is gained to suture it to an appropriate perineal position. The muscles of the sphincter complex are then
sutured around (and especially behind) the rectum.
Other operative approaches (such as an anterior approach) are
used, but the most popular procedure is by laparoscopy. This operation allows division of the fistula under direct visualization and identification of the sphincter complex by transillumination of perineum.
Other imaging techniques in the management of anorectal malformations include 3D endorectal ultrasound, intraoperative MRI, and
colonoscopy-­assisted PSARPs, which may help perform a technically
better operation. None of these other procedures or innovations has
demonstrated improved outcomes.
A similar procedure can be done for female high anomalies with
variations to deal with separating the vagina and rectum from within

2407

the cloacal stem. When the stem is longer than 3 cm, this is an especially difficult and complex procedure.
Usually the colostomy can be closed 6 weeks or more after the
PSARP. Two weeks after any anal procedure, twice-­daily dilatations are
performed by the family. By doing frequent dilatations, each one is not
so painful and there is less tissue trauma, inflammation, and scarring.

OUTCOME

The ability to achieve rectal continence depends on both motor and
sensory elements. There must be adequate muscle in the sphincter
complex and proper positioning of the rectum within the complex.
There must also be intact innervation of the complex and of sensory
elements, as well as the presence of these sensory elements in the anorectum. Patients with low lesions are more likely to achieve true continence. They are also, however, more prone to constipation, which leads
to overflow incontinence. It is very important that all these patients are
followed closely and that the constipation and anal dilation are well
managed until toilet training is successful. Tables 392.2 and 392.3 outline the results of continence and constipation in relation to the malformation encountered.
Children with high lesions, especially males with rectoprostatic urethral fistulas and females with cloacal anomalies, have a poorer chance
of being continent, but they can usually achieve a socially acceptable
defecation (without a colostomy) pattern with a bowel management

Table 392.2

Types of Anorectal Malformation by Sex

MALE (PERCENTAGE CHANCE OF BOWEL CONTROL*)
Rectoperineal fistula (100%)
Rectourethral bulbar fistula (85%)
Imperforate anus without fistula (90%)
Rectourethral prostatic fistula (65%)
Rectobladder neck fistula (15%)
FEMALE (PERCENTAGE CHANCE OF BOWEL CONTROL*)
Rectoperineal fistula (100%)
Rectovestibular fistula (95%)
Imperforate anus without fistula (90%)
Rectovaginal fistula (rare anomaly)†
Cloaca (70%)‡
*Provided patients have a normal sacrum, no tethered cord, and they receive a
technically correct operation without complications.
†Rectovaginal anomalies are extremely unusual; usually their prognosis is like
rectovestibular fistula.
‡Cloaca represents a spectrum; those with a common channel length <3 cm have the
best functional prognosis.
From Bischoff A, Bealer J, Peña A. Controversies in anorectal malformations. Lancet
Child/Adolesc. 2017;1:323–330.

Table 392.3  Constipation and Type of Anogenital
Malformation
TYPE

PERCENTAGE

Vestibular fistula

61

Bulbar urethral fistula

64

Rectal atresia/stenosis

50

Imperforate with no fistula

55

Perineal fistula

57

Long cloaca

35

Prostatic fistula

45

Short cloaca

40

Bladder neck fistula

16

Modified from Levitt MA, Peña A. Outcomes from the correction of anorectal
malformations. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2005;17:394–401.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2408 Part XVI u The Digestive System
program. Often, the bowel management program consists of a daily
enema to keep the colon empty and the patient clean until the next
enema. If this is successful, an antegrade continence enema (ACE) procedure, sometimes called the Malone or Malone antegrade continence
enema (MACE) procedure, can improve the patient’s quality of life.
These procedures provide access to the right colon either by bringing
the appendix out the umbilicus in a nonrefluxing fashion or by putting
a plastic button in the right lower quadrant to access the cecum. The
patient can then sit on the toilet and administer the enema through
the ACE, thus flushing out the entire colon. Antegrade regimens can
produce successful 24-­hour cleanliness rates of up to 95%. Of special
interest is the clinical finding that most patients improve their control
with growth. Patients who wore diapers or pull-­ups to primary school
are often in regular underwear by high school. Some groups have taken
advantage of this evidence of psychologic influences to initiate behavior modification early with good results.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

392.2 Anal Fissure
Christina M. Shanti
Anal fissure is a laceration of the anal mucocutaneous junction. It is
an acquired lesion of unknown etiology. Although likely secondary to
the forceful passage of a hard stool, it is mainly seen in infants younger
than 1 year of age when the stool is frequently quite soft. Fissures may
be the consequence and not the cause of constipation.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A history of constipation is often described, with a recent painful bowel
movement corresponding to the fissure formation after passing of hard
stool. The patient then voluntarily retains stool to avoid another painful bowel movement, exacerbating the constipation, resulting in harder
stools. Complaints of pain on defecation and bright red blood on the
surface of the stool are often elicited.
The diagnosis is established by inspection of the perineal area. The
infant’s hips are held in acute flexion, the buttocks are separated to
expand the folds of the perianal skin, and the fissure becomes evident
as a minor laceration. Often a small skin appendage is noted peripheral to the lesion. This skin tag represents epithelialized granulomatous tissue formed in response to chronic inflammation. Findings on
rectal examination can include hard stool in the ampulla and rectal
spasm.

TREATMENT

The parents must be counseled as to the origin of the laceration and
the mechanism of the cycle of constipation. The goal is to ensure that
the patient has soft stools to avoid overstretching the anus. The healing process can take several weeks or even several months. A single
episode of impaction with passing of hard stool can exacerbate the
problem. Treatment requires that the primary cause of the constipation
be identified (see Chapter 378.3). The use of dietary and behavioral
modification and a stool softener is indicated. Parents should titrate
the dose of the stool softener based on the patient’s response to treatment. Stool softening is best done by increasing water intake or using
an oral polyethylene glycolate such as MiraLAX or GlycoLax. Surgical
intervention, including stretching of the anus, “internal” anal sphincterotomy, or excision of the fissure, is not indicated or supported by
scientific evidence.
Chronic anal fissures in older patients are associated with constipation, prior rectal surgery, Crohn disease, and chronic diarrhea. They
are managed initially like fissures in infants, with stool softeners with
the addition of sitz baths. Topical 0.2% glyceryl trinitrate reduces anal
spasm and heals fissures, but it is often associated with headaches.
Calcium channel blockers, such as 2% diltiazem ointment and 0.5%
nifedipine cream, are more effective and cause fewer headaches than
glyceryl trinitrate. Injection of botulinum toxin from 12.5 to 25 units

is also effective and probably chemically replicates the action of internal sphincterotomy, which is the most effective treatment in adults,
although seldom used in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

392.3 Perianal Abscess and Fistula
Christina M. Shanti
Perianal abscesses usually manifest in infancy (∼75% ≤1 year) and are
of unknown etiology. Fistula appears to be secondary to the abscess
rather than the cause. Links to congenitally abnormal crypts of Morgagni have been proposed, suggesting that deeper crypts (3-­10 mm
rather than the normal 1-­2 mm) lead to trapped debris and cryptitis
(Fig. 392.6).
Conditions associated with the risk of an anal fistula in older children
include Crohn disease, tuberculosis, pilonidal disease, hidradenitis,
HIV, trauma, foreign bodies, dermal cysts, sacrococcygeal teratoma,
actinomycosis, lymphogranuloma venereum, and radiotherapy.
The most common organisms isolated from perianal abscesses are
mixed aerobic (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Staphylococcus
aureus) and anaerobic (Bacteroides spp., Clostridium, Veillonella) flora.
A total of 10–15% yield pure growth of E. coli, S. aureus, or Bacteroides
fragilis. There is a strong male predominance in those affected who are
younger than 2 years of age, whereas the distribution is more equal in
older patients, where the etiology shifts to associated conditions such
as inflammatory bowel disease, leukemia, or immunocompromised
states.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

In younger patients, symptoms are usually mild and can consist of
low-­grade fever, mild rectal pain, and an area of perianal cellulitis (Fig.
392.7). Often these spontaneously drain and resolve without treatment. In older patients with underlying predisposing conditions, the
clinical course may be more serious. A compromised immune system
can mask fever and allow rapid progression to toxicity and sepsis.
Abscesses in these patients may be deeper in the ischiorectal fossa or
even supralevator in contrast to those in younger patients, which are
usually adjacent to the involved crypt.
Progression to fistula in patients with perianal abscesses occurs in
20–50% of cases and usually manifests with drainage from the perineal skin or multiple recurrences. Similar to abscess formation, fistulas have a strong male predominance. Histologic evaluation of fistula
tracts typically reveals an epithelial lining of stratified squamous cells
associated with chronic inflammation. It might also reveal an alternative etiology such as the granulomas of Crohn disease or even evidence
of tuberculosis.

Column of Morgagni
Dentate line

Anal
canal

Transitional
zone

Anal crypt

Anal gland
Anoderm

Fig. 392.6 Anatomy of the anal canal. (Adapted from Brunicardi FC,

Anderson DK, Billar TR, et al. Schwartz's Principles of Surgery, 8th ed.
New York: McGraw-­Hill; 2004.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 392 u Surgical Conditions of the Anus and Rectum

2409

Internal
hemorrhoid

Fig. 392.7 Perianal abscesses are often seen in male infants. The

abscess typically presents as a fluctuant, tender mass in the perianal
region. Incision and drainage is the initial management of these abscesses if conservative measures have failed. (From Sullins VF, Jarboe
M, Calkins CM. Acquired anorectal disorders. In: Holcomb III GW, Murphy JP, St. Peter SD, eds. Holcomb and Ashcraft’s Pediatric Surgery, 7th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 37.1, p. 613.)

TREATMENT

Treatment is rarely indicated in infants with no predisposing disease
because the condition is often self-­limited. Even in cases of fistulization, conservative management (observation) is advocated because the
fistula often disappears spontaneously. In one study, 87% of fistulas (in
97/112 infants) closed after a mean of 5 months of observation and
conservative management (sitz baths). Antibiotics are not useful in
these patients. When dictated by patient discomfort, abscesses may be
incised and drained under local anesthesia. Fistulas requiring surgical intervention may be treated by fistulotomy (unroofing or opening),
fistulectomy (excision of the tract leaving it open to heal secondarily),
or placement of a seton (heavy suture threaded through the fistula,
brought out the anus, and tied tightly to itself). In patients with inflammatory bowel disease, topical tacrolimus has been effective.
Older children with predisposing diseases might also do well
with minimal intervention. If there is little discomfort and no fever
or other sign of systemic illness, local hygiene and antibiotics may
be best. The danger of surgical intervention in an immunocompromised patient is the creation of an even larger, nonhealing wound.
There certainly are such patients with serious systemic symptoms
who require more aggressive intervention along with treatment of
the predisposing condition. Broad-­spectrum antibiotic coverage
must be administered, and wide excision and drainage are mandatory in cases involving sepsis and expanding cellulitis.
Fistulas in older patients are mainly associated with Crohn disease,
a history of pull-­through surgery for the treatment of Hirschsprung
disease, or, in rare cases, tuberculosis. Those fistulas are often resistant
to therapy and require treatment of the predisposing condition.
Complications of treatment include recurrence and, rarely,
incontinence.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

392.4 Hemorrhoids
Christina M. Shanti
Hemorrhoidal disease occurs in both children and adolescents, often
related to a diet deficient in fiber and poor hydration. In younger

External
hemorrhoid

Fig. 392.8 Formation of hemorrhoids.

children, the presence of hemorrhoids should also raise the suspicion
of portal hypertension. A third of patients with hemorrhoids require
treatment.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Presentation depends on the location of the hemorrhoids. External
hemorrhoids occur below the dentate line (Fig. 392.8; see Fig. 392.6)
and are associated with extreme pain and itching, often because of
acute thrombosis. Internal hemorrhoids are located above the dentate
line and manifest primarily with bleeding, prolapse, and occasional
incarceration.

TREATMENT

In most cases, conservative management with dietary modification, decreased straining, and avoidance of prolonged time spent
sitting on the toilet results in resolution of the condition. Discomfort may be treated with topical analgesics or antiinflammatories
such as Anusol (pramoxine) and Anusol-­HC (hydrocortisone) and
sitz baths. The natural course of thrombosed hemorrhoid involves
increasing pain, which peaks at 48-­72 hours, with gradual remission
as the thrombus organizes and involutes over the next 1-­2 weeks.
In cases where the patient with external hemorrhoids presents with
excruciating pain soon after the onset of symptoms, thrombectomy
may be indicated. This is best accomplished with local infiltration
of bupivacaine 0.25% with epinephrine 1:200,000, followed by incision of the vein or skin tag and extraction of the clot. This provides immediate relief; recurrence is rare, and further follow-­up is
unnecessary.
Internal hemorrhoids can become painful when prolapse leads
to incarceration and necrosis. Pain usually resolves with reduction
of hemorrhoidal tissue. Surgical treatment is reserved for patients
failing conservative management. Techniques described in adults
include excision, rubber banding, stapling, and excision using
the LigaSure device. Complications are rare (<5%) and include
recurrence, bleeding, infection, nonhealing wounds, and fistula
formation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2410 Part XVI u The Digestive System

392.5 Rectal Mucosal Prolapse
Christina M. Shanti
Rectal mucosal prolapse is the exteriorization of the rectal mucosa
through the anus. In the unusual occurrence when all the layers of the
rectal wall are included, it is called procidentia or rectocele. Most cases
of rectal tissue protruding through the anus are prolapse and not polyps, hemorrhoids, intussusception, or other tissue.
Most cases of prolapse are idiopathic. The onset is often between 1
and 5 years of age. It usually occurs when the child begins standing and
then resolves by approximately 3-­5 years of age when the sacrum has
taken its more adult shape and the anal lumen is oriented posteriorly.
Thus the entire weight of the abdominal viscera is not pushing down on
the rectum, as it is earlier in development.
Other predisposing factors include intestinal parasites (particularly in endemic areas), malnutrition, diarrhea, ulcerative colitis,
pertussis, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome, meningocele (more often associated with procidentia owing to the lack of perineal muscle support), cystic fibrosis, and chronic constipation. Patients treated
surgically for imperforate anus can also have varying degrees of
rectal mucosal prolapse. This is particularly common in patients
with poor sphincteric development. Rectal prolapse is also seen
with higher incidence in patients with mental issues and behavior
problems. These patients are particularly difficult to manage and
are more likely to fail medical treatment.

Fig. 392.9 This 2-­year-­old child developed persistent rectal prolapse.

The prolapse occurred several times daily and was not responsive to
medical management. The child underwent submucosal sclerotherapy
with 5% morrhuate sodium and the prolapse resolved. (From Sullins
VF, Jarboe M, Calkins CM. Acquired anorectal disorders. In Holcomb
III GW, Murphy JP, St. Peter SD, eds. Holcomb and Ashcraft’s Pediatric
Surgery, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 37.8, p. 616.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Rectal mucosal prolapse usually occurs during defecation, especially
during toilet training. Reduction of the prolapse may be spontaneous
or accomplished manually by the patient or parent. In severe cases,
the prolapsed mucosa becomes congested and edematous, making it
more difficult to reduce (Fig. 392.9). Rectal prolapse is usually painless or produces mild discomfort. If the rectum remains prolapsed after
defecation, it can be traumatized by friction with undergarments, with
resultant bleeding, wetness, and potentially ulceration. The appearance
of the prolapse varies from bright red to dark red and resembles a beehive. It can be as long as 10-­12 cm. See Chapter 393 for a distinction
from a prolapsed polyp.

TREATMENT

Initial evaluation should include tests to rule out any predisposing
conditions, especially cystic fibrosis and sacral root lesions. Reduction of protrusion is aided by pressure with warm compresses.
An easy method of reduction is to cover the finger with a piece
of toilet paper, introduce it into the lumen of the mass, and gently
push it into the patient’s rectum. The finger is then immediately
withdrawn. The toilet paper adheres to the mucous membrane,
permitting release of the finger. The paper, when softened, is later
expelled.
Conservative treatment consists of careful manual reduction of the
prolapse after defecation, attempts to avoid excessive pushing during
bowel movements (with the patient’s feet off the floor), use of laxatives
and stool softeners to prevent constipation, avoidance of inflammatory
conditions of the rectum, and treatment of intestinal parasitosis when
present. If all this fails, surgical treatment may be indicated. Existing
surgical options are associated with some morbidity, and therefore
medical treatment should always be attempted first.

Sclerosing injections have been associated with complications such
as neurogenic bladder. We have found linear cauterization effective and
with few complications other than recurrence. In the operating room,
the prolapse is re-­created by traction on the mucosa. Linear burns are
made through nearly the full thickness of the mucosa using electrocautery. One can usually make eight linear burns on the outside and four
on the inside of the prolapsed mucosa. In the immediate postoperative period, prolapse can still occur, but in the next several weeks, the
burned areas contract and keep the mucosa within the anal canal. The
Delorme mucosal sleeve resection addresses mucosal prolapse via a
transanal approach by incising, prolapsing, and amputating the redundant mucosa. The resulting mucosal defect is then approximated with
absorbable suture.
For patients with procidentia or full-­
thickness prolapse or
intussusception of the rectosigmoid (usually from myelodysplasia
or other sacral root lesions), other, more invasive options exist.
Those most commonly in use by pediatric surgeons today include
a modification of the Thiersch procedure, which involves placing
a subcutaneous suture to narrow the anal opening. Complications
include obstruction, fecal impaction, and fistula formation. Laparoscopic rectopexy is effective and can be performed as an outpatient.
The Altemeier perineal rectosigmoidectomy is a transanal, full-­
thickness resection of redundant bowel with a primary anastomosis
to the anus.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 393 u Tumors of the Digestive Tract

Chapter 393

Tumors of the Digestive
Tract
Stacey G. Zahler, Mohammad Nasser
Kabbany, and Karen F. Murray
Tumors of the digestive tract in children are also commonly syndromic
tumors and tumors with known genetic association (Table 393.1).
They usually manifest as painless rectal bleeding, but when large they
can cause obstruction or serve as lead points for intussusception.
Most intestinal polyps in children can be generally classified into two
groups: hamartomatous (as seen in juvenile polyps and Peutz-­Jeghers
syndrome) or adenomatous (as seen in familial adenomatous polyposis
syndrome).

HAMARTOMATOUS TUMORS

Hamartomas are benign tumors composed of tissues that are normally
found in an organ but that are not organized normally. Juvenile, retention, or inflammatory polyps are hamartomatous polyps, which represent the most common intestinal tumors of childhood, occurring in
1–2% of children. Patients generally present in the first decade, most
often at ages 2-­5 years, and rarely at younger than 1 year. Polyps may
be found anywhere in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, most commonly
in the rectosigmoid colon, with one third located proximal to splenic
flexure; they are often solitary but may be multiple.
Histologically, juvenile polyps are composed of hamartomatous collections of mucus-­filled glandular and stromal elements with inflammatory infiltrate, covered with a thin layer of epithelium (Fig. 393.1A).
These polyps are often bulky, vascular, and prone to bleed as their
growth exceeds their blood supply with resultant mucosal ulceration,
or autoamputation with bleeding from a residual central artery.
Patients often present with painless rectal bleeding after defecation.
Bleeding is generally scant and intermittent; rarely presenting findings can include iron-­deficiency anemia and/or hypoalbuminemia.
Extensive bleeding can occur but is generally self-­limited, requiring
supportive care until the bleeding stops spontaneously after autoamputation. Occasionally endoscopic polypectomy is required for control of
bleeding. Abdominal pain or cramps are uncommon unless associated
with intussusception. Patients can present with prolapse, with a dark,
edematous, pedunculated mass protruding from the rectum. Mucus
discharge and pruritus are associated with prolapse.
Patients presenting with rectal bleeding require a thorough workup;
differential diagnosis includes anal fissure, other intestinal polyposis
syndromes, Meckel’s diverticulum, inflammatory bowel disease, intestinal infections, IgA vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein purpura), angiodysplasia, or coagulopathy.
Diagnosis and therapy are best accomplished via endoscopy. Polyps
may be visualized via ultrasound or cross-­sectional imaging, but this
provides no therapeutic advantage. Colonoscopy affords opportunity for
biopsy, polypectomy by snare cautery, and visualization of synchronous
lesions; up to 50% of children have one or more additional polyps, and
approximately 20% may have more than five polyps. Retrieved polyps
should be sent for histologic evaluation for definitive diagnosis.

Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome

Patients with juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) present with multiple
juvenile polyps—usually five or more—but typically 50-­200 are present within the GI tract. The incidence of JPS is between 1:10,000 and
1:160,000. Polyps are most likely isolated to the colon (98%) but may
be distributed throughout the GI tract. There is often a family history
(20–50%) with an autosomal dominant pattern of variable penetrance.
Alterations in transforming growth factor-­
β pathways have been

2411

identified in some JPS patients and families; pathogenic variants in
SMAD4 or BMPR1A are found in 50–60% of patients with JPS. Genetic
testing is available for both of these variants. Patients with the SMAD4
pathogenic variant may have hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
and should be evaluated for brain and lung vascular malformations.
A clinical diagnosis of JPS is established by the presence of one of the
following: a lifetime total of five or more juvenile polyps in the colon,
juvenile polyps outside the colon, or any number of juvenile polyps in
a patient with a family history of JPS.
Histologically, these polyps are identical to solitary juvenile polyps;
however, the risk of malignant transformation is greatly increased (10–
50%). Malignancy occurs most commonly in the colorectal region,
although gastric, upper GI, and pancreatic tumors have been described.
The risk of malignancy is greater in patients with increased polyp
burden and a positive family history. These patients should therefore
undergo routine esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy starting at 12-­15 years of age. Age at which surveillance of the upper GI
tract should begin varies between guidelines. It is not required during
teenage years per current published pediatric guidelines unless symptomatic. Serial polypectomy or polyp biopsy should be undertaken if
possible. If dysplasia or malignant degeneration is found, a total colectomy is indicated.
Juvenile polyposis of infancy is characterized by early polyp formation (in patients younger than 2 years of age) and may be associated
with protein-­losing enteropathy, hypoproteinemia, anemia, failure to
thrive, and intussusception. Early endoscopic or surgical intervention may be needed.

Peutz-­Jeghers Syndrome

Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder
(incidence: ∼1:120,000 total population) characterized by mucocutaneous pigmentation and extensive GI hamartomatous polyposis. Macular pigmented lesions may be dark brown to dark blue and are found
primarily around the lips and oral mucosa, although these lesions may
also be found on the hands, feet, or perineum (Fig. 393.2). Lesions can
fade by puberty or adulthood, though buccal pigmentation can persist.
Polyps are primarily found in the small intestine (in order of prevalence: jejunum, ileum, duodenum) but may also infiltrate gastric or
colonic regions. Histologically, polyps are defined by normal epithelium surrounding bundles of smooth muscle arranged in a branching or
frondlike pattern called arborization (see Fig 393.1B). They may show
“pseudo-­invasion,” which may be mistaken for malignancy. Symptoms
arising from GI polyps in PJS are similar to those of other polyposis
syndromes—namely bleeding and abdominal cramping from obstruction or recurrent intussusception. Patients have a 68% risk of intussusception during childhood and may require repeated laparotomies and
intestinal resections.
The diagnosis of PJS is made clinically in patients with at least
two histologically proven PJS polyps or any number of PJS polyps in
patients with a known family history. Diagnosis also can be made in
individuals with a family history of PJS with characteristic mucocutaneous hyperpigmentation. Genetic testing can reveal pathogenic variants in LKB1/STK11 (19p13.3), a serine-­threonine kinase that acts as a
tumor suppressor gene. Up to 94% of patients with clinical characteristics of PJS have a pathogenic variant at this locus. Only 50% of patients
with PJS have an affected family member, suggesting a high rate of de
novo mutations
Patients with PJS have increased risk of GI and extraintestinal malignancies. Lifetime cancer risk has been reported to be in the range of
47–93%. Colorectal, breast, and reproductive tumors are most common. Even though risk of GI malignancy in childhood is quite low, GI
surveillance for polyps should begin in childhood (by age 8 years of
age or when symptoms occur) with upper and lower endoscopy. The
small bowel may be evaluated radiographically, with magnetic resonance enterography, endoscopically with balloon or push enteroscopy,
or with video capsule endoscopy. Polyps larger than 1.5 cm should
be removed, although resection does not lower the cancer risk and is
mainly to avoid complications. Patients with PJS should be monitored
for signs of precocious puberty given their risk of having sex cord/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 393.1  General Features of the Inherited Colorectal Cancer Syndromes
POLYP
DISTRIBUTION

AGE OF
ONSET

HAMARTOMATOUS POLYPS
Juvenile polyposis Large and small
intestine,
gastric polyps

First decade

SYNDROME

RISK OF
COLON CANCER

GENETIC
LESION

CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS

ASSOCIATED
LESIONS

∼10–50%

SMAD4, BMPR1A
Autosomal
dominant

Possible
rectal bleeding,
abdominal pain,
intussusception

Congenital
abnormalities
in 20% of the
nonfamilial type,
clubbing, AV
malformations
Orocutaneous
melanin pigment
spots

Peutz-­Jeghers
syndrome

Small and large
intestine

First decade

Increased

LKB1/STK11
Autosomal
dominant

Possible
rectal bleeding,
abdominal pain,
intussusception

Cowden syndrome

Colon

Second decade

13–18%

PTEN gene

Macrocephaly,
breast/thyroid/
endometrial
cancers,
developmental
delay

Bannayan-­
Riley-­Ruvalcaba
syndrome

Colon

Second decade

Increased

PTEN gene

Macrocephaly,
speckled penis,
thyroid/breast
cancers,
hemangiomas,
lipomas

16 yr (range:
8-­34 yr)

100%

5q (APC gene),
autosomal
dominant

Rectal bleeding,
abdominal pain,
bowel obstruction

Desmoids, CHRPE,
upper GI polyps,
osteoma,
hepatoblastoma,
thyroid cancer

ADENOMATOUS POLYPS
Familial adeno­
Large intestine,
matous polyposis
often >100
(FAP)

Attenuated
familial adeno­
matous polyposis
(AFAP)

Colon (fewer in
number)

>18 yr

Increased

APC gene

Same as FAP

Fewer associated
lesions

MYH-­associated
polyposis

Colon

>20 yr

High risk

MYH autosomal
recessive

Same as FAP

May be confused
with sporadic
FAP or AFAP; few
extraintestinal
findings

Gardner syndrome

Large and small
intestine

16 yr (range:
8-­34 yr)

100%

5q (APC gene)

Rectal bleeding,
abdominal pain,
bowel obstruction

Desmoid tumors,
multiple
osteomas,
fibromas,
epidermoid
cysts

Hereditary
nonpolyposis
colon cancer
(Lynch syndrome)

Large intestine

40 yr

30%

DNA mismatch repair
genes (MMR)
Autosomal dominant

Rectal bleeding,
abdominal pain,
bowel obstruction

Other tumors
(e.g., ovary,
ureter, pancreas,
stomach)

APC, adenomatous polyposis coli; AV, arteriovenous; CHRPE, congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium; GI, gastrointestinal; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog.

A

B

C

Fig. 393.1 Representative histologic sections of commonly found polyps in pediatric patients. A, Juvenile polyp. Cystically dilated and irregular

colonic crypts within an inflamed, expanded stroma. B, Peutz-­Jeghers polyp. Small bowel with large arborizing bundles of smooth muscle and otherwise normal epithelial component. C, Adenomatous polyp. Enlarged, hyperchromatic, and stratified nuclei confined to a tubular configuration.
(Images courtesy Dr. Thomas Plesec, Cleveland Clinic.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 393 u Tumors of the Digestive Tract

Fig. 393.2 Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome. Characteristic bluish brown to
black spots were first noted in early childhood on the lips of this boy
who later developed hamartomatous gastrointestinal polyps. (From
Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 6th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 11.46, p. 312.)

stromal tumors, particularly large-­cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumors.
Screening for breast, gynecologic, and testicular cancers should be
routine after age 18 years.

Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog Hamartoma Tumor
Syndromes

Pathogenic variants in the tumor suppressor gene PTEN are associated
with several rare autosomal dominant syndromes, including Cowden
syndrome, Bannayan-­
Riley-­
Ruvalcaba syndrome, and Proteus and
Proteus-­like syndrome. These patients present with multiple hamartomas in the skin (99%), brain, breast, thyroid, endometrium, and GI
tract (60%). Other extraintestinal manifestations include macrocephaly, developmental delay, lipomas, and genital pigmentation. Patients
have 9–18% lifetime risk of colorectal cancer. However, this risk is low
in childhood. They also have increased risk of thyroid, breast, uterine,
renal, and skin malignancies.

ADENOMATOUS TUMORS
Adenomatous Polyposis Coli-­Associated Polyposis
Syndromes

Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is the most common genetic
polyposis syndrome (incidence 1:5,000-­1:17,000 persons) and is characterized by numerous adenomatous polyps throughout the colon and
extraintestinal manifestations. FAP and related syndromes (attenuated
FAP; Gardner and Turcot syndromes) are linked to pathogenic variants
in the APC gene, a tumor suppressor mapped to 5q21, which is part of
the WNT signaling pathway. APC regulates degradation of β-­catenin, a
protein with roles in regulation of the cytoskeleton, tissue architecture
organization, cell migration and adherence, and numerous other functions. Intracellular accumulation of β-­catenin may be responsible for
colonic epithelial cell proliferation and adenoma formation. More than
400 pathogenic variants in the APC gene have been described, and up
to 30% of patients present with no family history (sporadic variants).
There is an association between disease phenotype and the location of
the APC gene alteration. For example, a more severe colonic phenotype
is associated with pathogenic variants between codons 1250 and 1464,
specifically variants that include codon 1309.
Polyps generally develop late in the first or second decades of life
(mean age of presentation is 16 years). At the time of diagnosis, five
or more adenomatous polyps are present in the colon and rectum. By
young adulthood, the number of polyps typically increases to hundreds
or even thousands. Adenomatous polyps (or adenomas) are precancerous lesions within the surface epithelium of the intestine, displaying
various degrees of dysplasia (see Fig. 393.1C). Without intervention,

2413

the risk of developing colon cancer is 100% by the fifth decade of life
(average age of cancer diagnosis is 40 years). Other GI adenomas can
develop, particularly in the stomach and duodenum (50–90%). The
risk of periampullary or duodenal carcinoma is significantly elevated
(4–12% lifetime risk) and represents, along with desmoid tumors, the
most common cause of death after colorectal cancer. Extraintestinal
malignancies occur at an increased rate in FAP, including hepatoblastoma in young patients (1.6% before age 5 years) and follicular or papillary thyroid cancer in adolescents.
Extraintestinal manifestations of FAP may be present from birth or
develop in early childhood. Lesions include congenital hypertrophy of
retinal pigment epithelium, desmoid tumors, epidermoid cysts, osteomas, fibromas, lipomas, and supernumerary, impacted, or missing
teeth. Many of these nonmalignant soft tissue tumors appear before
intestinal polyps develop. Expression of extraintestinal findings can
depend on the location of the APC gene alteration.
Other syndromes associated with APC pathogenic variants include
Gardner syndrome, classically characterized by multiple colorectal
polyps, desmoid tumors, and soft tissue tumors, including fibromas,
osteomas (typically mandibular), epidermoid cysts, and lipomas. Once
thought to be a distinct clinical entity, Gardner syndrome shares many
characteristics with FAP. Up to 20% of FAP patients present with the
classic extraintestinal manifestations once associated with Gardner
syndrome. Some (but not all) cases of Turcot syndrome are also related
to APC. These patients present with colorectal polyposis and primary
brain tumors (medulloblastoma). Attenuated FAP is characterized by a
significantly increased risk of colorectal cancer but fewer polyps than
classic FAP (average: 30 polyps). The average age of cancer diagnosis in
this form of FAP is 50-­55 years. Upper GI tumors and extraintestinal
manifestations may be present but are less common.
The clinical presentation of FAP is variable. Polyps are generally sessile, of variable size, and initially asymptomatic. If symptoms develop,
they can include rectal bleeding (possibly with secondary anemia),
cramping, and diarrhea. The presence of symptoms at presentation does
not correlate with malignant changes. Diagnosis should be suspected
from family history, and ensuing colonoscopy is confirmatory. Histologic examination of biopsied polyps reveals adenomatous architecture
(as opposed to inflammatory or hamartomatous polyps found in other
polyposis syndromes) with varying degrees of dysplasia. Genetic testing for APC variants is clinically available, and index patients should
be tested. If a pathogenic variant is identified, affected family members
should be screened and appropriate genetic counseling should be provided. If the index patient does not demonstrate a defined variant, family members may undergo genetic testing, which might identify novel
APC alterations. Children with identified APC mutations must undergo
careful surveillance, with colonoscopy every 1-­2 years starting early in
the second decade of life or earlier if symptomatic. Once polyps are
identified, colonoscopy should be performed annually. Patients should
also have upper endoscopy in the third decade of life to monitor for gastric and especially duodenal lesions, earlier if symptomatic or if there is
family history of aggressive duodenal adenoma burden or cancer.
Treatment of FAP requires prophylactic proctocolectomy to prevent inevitable colon cancer. Prophylactic colectomy should be planned
in the late teens or early twenties, earlier if significant polyposis burden or malignancy is suspected. Ileoanal pull-­through procedures
restore bowel continuity, with acceptable functional outcomes. Surgical approaches include ileal pouch anal anastomosis (with J-­pouch)
versus ileorectal anastomosis; the type of surgery depends on rectal
and colonic polyp burden and surgeon preference. It is very important to note that ongoing surveillance of the ileal pouch or rectal cuff
is warranted after surgery. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents,
such as sulindac, and cyclooxygenase-­2 inhibitors, such as celecoxib,
might inhibit polyp progression. No guidelines have been established,
however, and their efficacy in preventing malignant transformation of
existing polyps is unknown.

Carcinoma

Primary carcinomas of the esophagus, stomach, or colon are extremely
rare in children. Development of adenocarcinoma in adolescence or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2414 Part XVI u The Digestive System
early adulthood may be associated with a genetic predisposition or
syndrome such as FAP, hereditary nonpolyposis colon carcinoma, PJS,
radiation exposure, or inflammatory bowel disorders such as Crohn
disease or ulcerative colitis.
Colorectal carcinoma (CRC), though rare (reported incidence
of 1 case per 1,000,000 persons younger than 19 years of age), is the
most common primary GI carcinoma in children. Patients with long-­
standing ulcerative colitis are at increased risk. Many cases are spontaneous (i.e., not associated with a genetic predisposition or syndrome);
associated genetic syndromes occur in 3–5% of all CRC cases (see
Table 393.1). Histologically, tumors tend to be poorly differentiated
and pathologically aggressive. Patients may be asymptomatic, or they
present with nonspecific signs and symptoms such as abdominal pain,
constipation, and vomiting. Delay in diagnosis is common. Adolescents
and young adults present with advanced-­stage disease more often than
in older patients; microscopic or gross metastases are often present
at the time of diagnosis. Surgical resection is the primary treatment
modality, although with delayed presentation and advanced-­stage disease, complete resection may not be possible. Complete resection is
necessary for cure, however. Chemotherapy is standard treatment for
patients with more advanced, surgically unresectable disease, though
its efficacy is variable. Targeted immunotherapy agents such as monoclonal antibodies against epidermal growth factor receptor or vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor are gaining traction as useful systemic therapies. Radiation therapy has a limited role in patients with
metastatic disease.

OTHER GASTROINTESTINAL TUMORS
Lymphoma

Lymphoma is the most common GI malignancy in the pediatric population. Approximately 30% of children with non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
present with abdominal tumors. Immunocompromised patients have
an increased incidence of lymphoma. Predisposing conditions include
HIV/AIDS, agammaglobulinemia, long-­
standing celiac disease,
and bone marrow or solid-­organ transplantation. Examples of non-­
Hodgkin lymphoma subtypes that commonly occur in the GI tract are
Burkitt lymphoma and posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorder
(PTLD). Lymphoma can occur anywhere in the GI tract, but it most
commonly occurs in the distal small bowel and ileocecal region; for
instance, Burkitt lymphoma is classically located at the terminal ileum.
Presenting symptoms include crampy abdominal pain, vomiting,
obstruction, bleeding, or palpable mass. Lymphoma should be considered in patients older than 3 years of age who present with intussusception. Treatment consists of a combination of surgical resection and
chemotherapy, and the intensity of chemotherapy regimens depends
on the extent of the tumor burden.

Nodular Lymphoid Hyperplasia

Lymphoid follicles in the lamina propria and submucosa of the gut normally aggregate in Peyer patches, most prominently in the distal ileum.
These follicles can become hyperplastic, forming nodules that protrude
into the lumen of the bowel during times of developmental lymphoid
proliferation such as early childhood and adolescence. Some suggested
etiologies are infectious (classically Giardia), allergic, or immunologic.
Nodular lymphoid hyperplasia has been described in infants with
enterocolitis secondary to dietary protein sensitivity. This phenomenon
has also been described in patients with inflammatory bowel disease and
Castleman disease. Patients may be asymptomatic or, especially in cases
of immunodeficiency, may present with abdominal pain, rectal bleeding, diarrhea, or intussusception. Nodular lymphoid hyperplasia usually resolves spontaneously. The use of antiinflammatory medications
or elimination diets is unlikely to change the clinical course, although
in cases with severe pain or bleeding, corticosteroids may be effective.

Gastroenteric Neuroendocrine Tumors

Gastroenteric neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) arise from neuroendocrine cells found in the intestines (and in the pancreas; however,
pancreatic NETs will not be discussed here). These tumors can be
low, intermediate, or high-­grade tumors, depending on the Ki-­67

proliferative index on histopathology (i.e., how rapidly the cells proliferate). The World Health Organization (WHO) classification separates
NETs from “neuroendocrine carcinomas.” NETs can be functional or
nonfunctional; some NETs overproduce and secrete hormones such as
gastrin, serotonin, or ectopic hormones such as adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH). Several heritable tumor syndromes are associated with gastroenteric NETs, including multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 1 (MEN1), von Hippel-­Lindau (VHL) disease, tuberous sclerosis
(TSC), or neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). Two of the most common
NETs of the GI tract in children and adolescents are carcinoid tumors
and gastrinomas.

Carcinoid Tumor

Carcinoid tumors are neuroendocrine tumors of enterochromaffin
cells, which can occur throughout the GI tract, but in children they are
typically found in the appendix. This is often an incidental diagnosis
at the time of appendectomy. Complete surgical resection of small
tumors (<1 cm) with clear surgical margins is curative. Appendiceal
tumors >1.5 cm are at increased risk for nodal metastasis and thus
mandate further bowel resection, typically a right hemicolectomy.
Carcinoid tumors outside the appendix (small intestine, rectum,
stomach) are more likely to metastasize. Serum tumor markers may be
helpful in monitoring for development of metastatic disease—chromogranin A is the most sensitive tumor marker for intestinal NETs. Carcinoid tumors of the midgut can metastasize to the liver and give rise
to a constellation of symptoms called carcinoid syndrome. Serotonin,
5-­hydroxytryptophan, or histamine may be secreted by the tumor, and
elevated serum levels cause cramps, diarrhea, vasomotor disturbances
(flushing), bronchoconstriction, and right heart failure. The diagnosis
is confirmed by elevated urinary 5-­hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-­HIAA).
Symptomatic relief of carcinoid syndrome may be achieved with administration of somatostatin analogs (i.e., octreotide). Treatment of metastatic NETs is again surgical resection, and the extent of resection may
be curative or palliative, depending on the goals of care and risk of surgical morbidity. Because NETs tend to be slow-­growing, some patients
may be closely monitored for periods without surgical intervention.
Chemotherapy has been used, including medications such as temozolomide, 5-­fluorouracil, and cisplatin. Clinical trials studying various targeted systemic therapies are ongoing. A mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) inhibitor, called everolimus, is FDA-­approved for the treatment
of nonfunctional NETs based on the results of several clinical trials.

Gastrinoma

A malignant NET that arises in the duodenum or the pancreas is called
gastrinoma, and these tumors secrete gastrin, which causes gastric acid
hypersecretion and Zollinger-­Ellison syndrome. Clinical symptoms of
gastrinoma include diarrhea (because of large amounts of acid secretion into the duodenum), abdominal pain, peptic ulcer disease, and
bleeding. Strictures and perforation may develop with more severe disease. Unfortunately, about 75–80% of patients with gastrinoma present
with metastases to the liver or lymph nodes at diagnosis, and approximately 12% can have bone metastases at diagnosis as well. Treatment of
gastrinoma includes proton pump inhibitors and surgical resection.

Leiomyoma

Leiomyomas are rare benign tumors that can arise anywhere in the GI
tract, although most often in the stomach, jejunum, or distal ileum.
Age of presentation is variable, from the newborn period through adolescence. Patients may be asymptomatic or can present with an abdominal mass, obstruction, intussusception, volvulus, or pain and bleeding
from central necrosis of the tumor. Surgical resection is the treatment
of choice. Pathologically, these tumors may be difficult to distinguish
from malignant leiomyosarcomas. Smooth muscle tumors occur with
increased incidence in children with HIV or those requiring immunosuppression after transplantation.

Gastrointestinal Stromal Cell Tumors

Gastrointestinal stromal cell tumors (GISTs) are intestinal mesenchymal tumors that probably arise from interstitial cells of Cajal or their

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 394 u Inguinal Hernias
precursors. Historically, these may have been diagnosed as tumors
of smooth muscle or neural cell origin. The WHO recognized GIST
in 1990 as a distinct neoplasm. Typically, GISTs arise in adults, after
the third decade of life. Cases have also been reported in the pediatric
population, generally in adolescents with a female predominance. A
minority of pediatric cases were reported with Carney’s triad (gastric
gastrointestinal stromal tumor, pulmonary chondroma, and extraadrenal paraganglioma) or a history of neurofibromatosis. In children,
tumors are most commonly found in the stomach, though they can
occur anywhere in the GI tract or even the mesentery or omentum.
Many patients (∼45%) present with metastatic disease primarily to the
lymph nodes, although metastases to the peritoneum or liver occur as
well. Patients may be asymptomatic for years to decades or can present with an abdominal mass, lower GI bleeding, or obstruction. Treatment consists of surgical resection of local disease. Recurrence rates
are high, and early postoperative surveillance is recommended. GISTs
occurring in adults are typically associated with pathogenic variants
in the KIT oncogene. This alteration is less commonly found in pediatric GISTs (∼15%). Adjuvant systemic therapy for KIT+ lesions can
be given, and typically tyrosine kinase inhibitors (such as imatinib,
sunitinib, or dasatinib) are used. These medications are conveniently
available as oral therapy. Patients with persistent, recurrent, or metastatic disease may benefit from treatment.

Vascular Tumors

Vascular malformations and hemangiomas are rare in children. The
usual presentation is painless rectal bleeding, which may be chronic
or acute, with massive or even fatal hemorrhage. There are usually no
associated symptoms, although intussusception has been described.
Half of patients have associated cutaneous hemangiomas or telangiectasia. These lesions may be associated with blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, and other syndromes.
About half of these lesions are in the colon and can be identified on
colonoscopy. During acute bleeding episodes, bleeding can be localized via nuclear medicine bleeding scans, mesenteric angiography, or
endoscopy. Colonic bleeding may be controlled by endoscopic means.
Surgical intervention is required occasionally for isolated lesions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 394

Inguinal Hernias
José H. Salazar and John J. Aiken
Inguinal hernias are one of the most common conditions seen in pediatric practice, with an overall incidence of 0.8–4.5% in term infants
and children and increasing to nearly 30% in premature and low birthweight (<1 kg) infants. Most inguinal hernias in infants and children
are congenital indirect hernias (99%) because of a patent processus
vaginalis (PV), an evagination of peritoneum in the inguinal area
important in testicular descent. There is rarely any defect or deficiency
in the abdominal wall musculature in congenital indirect inguinal
hernia. Inguinal hernias are more common in males compared with
females (8:1 ratio), but females have a higher incidence of bilateral
inguinal hernias (∼25%) compared with males (∼12%). Two other
types of inguinal hernia are seen rarely in children: direct (acquired)
hernia (0.5–1.0%) and femoral hernia (<0.5%). Femoral hernias are
substantially more common in females (2:1 ratio). Approximately 50%
of inguinal hernias manifest clinically in the first year of life, most in

2415

the first 6 months. The incidence of incarceration in untreated hernias
varies between 6% and 18% across ages. The risk of incarceration is
greatest in infancy, with some reports of incarceration rates of 30–40%
in the first year of life, mandating prompt identification and operative
repair to minimize morbidity and complications related to incarceration and strangulation. Laparoscopic hernia (LH) repair has increasingly emerged in many pediatric centers as an effective alternative to
traditional open hernia (OH) repair.

EMBRYOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Indirect inguinal hernias in infants and children are congenital and
result from an arrest of embryologic development—failure of obliteration of the PV rather than a weakness in the abdominal wall musculature. The pertinent developmental anatomy of indirect inguinal hernia
relates to development of the gonads and descent of the testes through
the inguinal canal and into the scrotum late in gestation. The testes
descend from the urogenital ridge in the retroperitoneum to the area
of the internal ring by about 28 weeks of gestation. The final descent of
the testes into the scrotum occurs late in gestation, between weeks 28
and 36, guided by the PV and the gubernaculum. The PV, an outpouching of peritoneum in the inguinal region, is present in the developing
fetus at 12 weeks of gestation. The PV develops lateral to the deep inferior epigastric vessels and descends anteriorly along the spermatic cord
within the cremasteric fascia through the internal inguinal ring. The
testis accompanies the PV as it exits the abdomen and descends into
the scrotum. The gubernaculum testis forms from the mesonephros
(developing kidney), attaches to the lower pole of the testis, and directs
the testis through the internal ring, inguinal canal, and into the scrotum. The testis passes through the inguinal canal in a few days but takes
about 4 weeks to migrate from the external ring to its final position in
the scrotum. The cordlike structures of the gubernaculum occasionally pass to ectopic locations (perineum or femoral region), resulting
in ectopic testes.
In the last few weeks of gestation or shortly after birth, the layers
of the PV normally fuse together and obliterate the patency from the
peritoneal cavity through the inguinal canal to the testis. The PV also
obliterates distally just above the testes, and the portion of the PV that
envelops the testis becomes the tunica vaginalis. In females, the PV
obliterates earlier, at approximately 7 months of gestation, and may
explain why females demonstrate a much lower incidence of inguinal
hernia. Proper closure of the PV effectively seals off the opening from
the abdominal cavity into the inguinal region, containing the abdominal viscera within the abdominal cavity. Failure of the PV to close permits fluid or abdominal viscera to escape the abdominal cavity into the
extraabdominal inguinal canal and accounts for a variety of inguinal-­
scrotal abnormalities commonly seen in infancy and childhood. Involution of the left-­sided PV precedes that of the right, which is consistent
with the increased incidence of indirect inguinal hernias on the right
side (60%).
The ovaries descend into the pelvis from the urogenital ridge but do
not exit from the abdominal cavity. The cranial portion of the gubernaculum in females differentiates into the ovarian ligament, and the
inferior aspect of the gubernaculum becomes the round ligament,
which passes through the internal ring and terminates in the labia
majora. The PV in females is also known as the canal of Nuck.
Androgenic hormones produced by the fetal testis, adequate end-­
organ receptors, and mechanical factors such as increased intraabdominal pressure combine to regulate complete descent of the testis.
The testes and spermatic cord structures (spermatic vessels and vas
deferens) are located in the retroperitoneum but are affected by
increases in intraabdominal pressure as a consequence of their intimate attachment to the descending PV. The genitofemoral nerve also
has an important role: it innervates the cremaster muscle, which develops within the gubernaculum, and experimental division or injury to
both nerves in the fetus prevents testicular descent. Failure of regression of smooth muscle (present to provide the force for testicular
descent) has also been postulated to play a role in the development
of indirect inguinal hernias. Several studies have investigated genes
involved in the control of testicular descent for their role in closure of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 394 u Inguinal Hernias
precursors. Historically, these may have been diagnosed as tumors
of smooth muscle or neural cell origin. The WHO recognized GIST
in 1990 as a distinct neoplasm. Typically, GISTs arise in adults, after
the third decade of life. Cases have also been reported in the pediatric
population, generally in adolescents with a female predominance. A
minority of pediatric cases were reported with Carney’s triad (gastric
gastrointestinal stromal tumor, pulmonary chondroma, and extraadrenal paraganglioma) or a history of neurofibromatosis. In children,
tumors are most commonly found in the stomach, though they can
occur anywhere in the GI tract or even the mesentery or omentum.
Many patients (∼45%) present with metastatic disease primarily to the
lymph nodes, although metastases to the peritoneum or liver occur as
well. Patients may be asymptomatic for years to decades or can present with an abdominal mass, lower GI bleeding, or obstruction. Treatment consists of surgical resection of local disease. Recurrence rates
are high, and early postoperative surveillance is recommended. GISTs
occurring in adults are typically associated with pathogenic variants
in the KIT oncogene. This alteration is less commonly found in pediatric GISTs (∼15%). Adjuvant systemic therapy for KIT+ lesions can
be given, and typically tyrosine kinase inhibitors (such as imatinib,
sunitinib, or dasatinib) are used. These medications are conveniently
available as oral therapy. Patients with persistent, recurrent, or metastatic disease may benefit from treatment.

Vascular Tumors

Vascular malformations and hemangiomas are rare in children. The
usual presentation is painless rectal bleeding, which may be chronic
or acute, with massive or even fatal hemorrhage. There are usually no
associated symptoms, although intussusception has been described.
Half of patients have associated cutaneous hemangiomas or telangiectasia. These lesions may be associated with blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, and other syndromes.
About half of these lesions are in the colon and can be identified on
colonoscopy. During acute bleeding episodes, bleeding can be localized via nuclear medicine bleeding scans, mesenteric angiography, or
endoscopy. Colonic bleeding may be controlled by endoscopic means.
Surgical intervention is required occasionally for isolated lesions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 394

Inguinal Hernias
José H. Salazar and John J. Aiken
Inguinal hernias are one of the most common conditions seen in pediatric practice, with an overall incidence of 0.8–4.5% in term infants
and children and increasing to nearly 30% in premature and low birthweight (<1 kg) infants. Most inguinal hernias in infants and children
are congenital indirect hernias (99%) because of a patent processus
vaginalis (PV), an evagination of peritoneum in the inguinal area
important in testicular descent. There is rarely any defect or deficiency
in the abdominal wall musculature in congenital indirect inguinal
hernia. Inguinal hernias are more common in males compared with
females (8:1 ratio), but females have a higher incidence of bilateral
inguinal hernias (∼25%) compared with males (∼12%). Two other
types of inguinal hernia are seen rarely in children: direct (acquired)
hernia (0.5–1.0%) and femoral hernia (<0.5%). Femoral hernias are
substantially more common in females (2:1 ratio). Approximately 50%
of inguinal hernias manifest clinically in the first year of life, most in

2415

the first 6 months. The incidence of incarceration in untreated hernias
varies between 6% and 18% across ages. The risk of incarceration is
greatest in infancy, with some reports of incarceration rates of 30–40%
in the first year of life, mandating prompt identification and operative
repair to minimize morbidity and complications related to incarceration and strangulation. Laparoscopic hernia (LH) repair has increasingly emerged in many pediatric centers as an effective alternative to
traditional open hernia (OH) repair.

EMBRYOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Indirect inguinal hernias in infants and children are congenital and
result from an arrest of embryologic development—failure of obliteration of the PV rather than a weakness in the abdominal wall musculature. The pertinent developmental anatomy of indirect inguinal hernia
relates to development of the gonads and descent of the testes through
the inguinal canal and into the scrotum late in gestation. The testes
descend from the urogenital ridge in the retroperitoneum to the area
of the internal ring by about 28 weeks of gestation. The final descent of
the testes into the scrotum occurs late in gestation, between weeks 28
and 36, guided by the PV and the gubernaculum. The PV, an outpouching of peritoneum in the inguinal region, is present in the developing
fetus at 12 weeks of gestation. The PV develops lateral to the deep inferior epigastric vessels and descends anteriorly along the spermatic cord
within the cremasteric fascia through the internal inguinal ring. The
testis accompanies the PV as it exits the abdomen and descends into
the scrotum. The gubernaculum testis forms from the mesonephros
(developing kidney), attaches to the lower pole of the testis, and directs
the testis through the internal ring, inguinal canal, and into the scrotum. The testis passes through the inguinal canal in a few days but takes
about 4 weeks to migrate from the external ring to its final position in
the scrotum. The cordlike structures of the gubernaculum occasionally pass to ectopic locations (perineum or femoral region), resulting
in ectopic testes.
In the last few weeks of gestation or shortly after birth, the layers
of the PV normally fuse together and obliterate the patency from the
peritoneal cavity through the inguinal canal to the testis. The PV also
obliterates distally just above the testes, and the portion of the PV that
envelops the testis becomes the tunica vaginalis. In females, the PV
obliterates earlier, at approximately 7 months of gestation, and may
explain why females demonstrate a much lower incidence of inguinal
hernia. Proper closure of the PV effectively seals off the opening from
the abdominal cavity into the inguinal region, containing the abdominal viscera within the abdominal cavity. Failure of the PV to close permits fluid or abdominal viscera to escape the abdominal cavity into the
extraabdominal inguinal canal and accounts for a variety of inguinal-­
scrotal abnormalities commonly seen in infancy and childhood. Involution of the left-­sided PV precedes that of the right, which is consistent
with the increased incidence of indirect inguinal hernias on the right
side (60%).
The ovaries descend into the pelvis from the urogenital ridge but do
not exit from the abdominal cavity. The cranial portion of the gubernaculum in females differentiates into the ovarian ligament, and the
inferior aspect of the gubernaculum becomes the round ligament,
which passes through the internal ring and terminates in the labia
majora. The PV in females is also known as the canal of Nuck.
Androgenic hormones produced by the fetal testis, adequate end-­
organ receptors, and mechanical factors such as increased intraabdominal pressure combine to regulate complete descent of the testis.
The testes and spermatic cord structures (spermatic vessels and vas
deferens) are located in the retroperitoneum but are affected by
increases in intraabdominal pressure as a consequence of their intimate attachment to the descending PV. The genitofemoral nerve also
has an important role: it innervates the cremaster muscle, which develops within the gubernaculum, and experimental division or injury to
both nerves in the fetus prevents testicular descent. Failure of regression of smooth muscle (present to provide the force for testicular
descent) has also been postulated to play a role in the development
of indirect inguinal hernias. Several studies have investigated genes
involved in the control of testicular descent for their role in closure of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2416 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Peritoneal
cavity

Obliterated
processus
vaginalis
Vas deferens
Tunica
vaginalis

Normal

Hydrocele

Complete
inguinal
hernia

Inguinal
hernia

Hydrocele
of cord

Fig. 394.1 Hernia and hydroceles. (Modified from Scherer LR III, Grosfeld JL. Inguinal and umbilical anomalies. Pediatr Clin North Am.
1993;40:1121–1131.)

the patent PV—for example, hepatocyte growth factor and calcitonin
gene–related peptide. Unlike in adult hernias, there does not appear to
be any deficiency in collagen synthesis associated with inguinal hernia
in children (Fig. 394.1).
A direct inguinal hernia results from a weakness in the abdominal wall musculature in the inguinal region, specifically the transverse
abdominis muscle, which forms the floor of the inguinal canal. A direct
inguinal hernia originates medial to the deep inferior epigastric vessels and is external to the cremasteric fascia; the hernia sac protrudes
directly through the posterior wall of the inguinal canal and does
not protrude through the external ring. A femoral hernia originates
medial to the femoral vein and descends inferior to the inguinal ligament along the femoral canal.

Incidence

The incidence of congenital indirect inguinal hernia in full-­term newborn infants is estimated at 3.5–5.0%. The incidence of hernia in preterm and low birthweight infants is considerably higher, ranging from
9% to 11%, and approaches 30% in very low birthweight infants (<1,000
g) and preterm infants (<28 weeks of gestation). Inguinal hernia is
much more common in males than in females, with a male-­to-­female
ratio of approximately 8:1. Approximately 60% of inguinal hernias
occur on the right side, 30% are on the left side, and 10% are bilateral. The incidence of bilateral hernias is higher in females (20–40%)
and young children (<2 years). An increased incidence of congenital
inguinal hernia has been documented in twins and in family members
of patients with inguinal hernia. There is a history of another inguinal
hernia in the family in 11.5% of patients. The sisters of affected females
are at the highest risk, with a relative risk of 17.8. In general, the risk of
brothers of a sibling is approximately 4-­5, as is the risk of a sister of an
affected brother. Both a multifactorial threshold model and autosomal
dominance with incomplete penetrance and sex influence have been
suggested as an explanation for this pattern of inheritance.
Inguinal hernia, scrotal hydrocele (communicating and noncommunicating), and hydrocele of the spermatic cord are conditions
resulting from varying degrees of failure of closure of the PV. Closure
of the PV is often incomplete at birth and continues postnatally; the
rate of patency is inversely proportional to the age of the child. It has
been estimated that the patency rate of the PV is as high as 80% at
birth and decreases to ∼40% during the first year of life and that ∼20%
of males have a persistent patency of the PV at 2 years of age. Patency
of the PV after birth is an opening from the abdominal cavity into the
inguinal region, and therefore a potential hernia, but not all patients
will develop a clinical hernia. An inguinal hernia occurs clinically
when intraabdominal contents escape the abdominal cavity and enter
the inguinal region through the PV patency. Depending on the extent
of patency of the PV, the hernia may be confined to the inguinal region
or pass down into the scrotum. Complete failure of obliteration of the
PV, mostly seen in infants, predisposes to a complete inguinal hernia

Table 394.1  Predisposing Factors for Hernias
Prematurity
Urogenital
• Cryptorchidism
• Exstrophy of the bladder or cloaca
• Ambiguous genitalia
• Hypospadias/epispadias
Increased peritoneal fluid
• Ascites
• Ventriculoperitoneal shunt
• Peritoneal dialysis catheter
Increased intraabdominal pressure
• Repair of abdominal wall defects
• Severe ascites (chylous)
• Meconium peritonitis
Chronic respiratory disease
• Cystic fibrosis
Connective tissue disorders
• Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
• Hunter-­Hurler syndrome
• Marfan syndrome
• Mucopolysaccharidosis

characterized by a protrusion of abdominal contents into the inguinal
canal and extending into the scrotum. Obliteration of the PV distally
(around the testis) with patency proximally results in the classic indirect inguinal hernia with a bulge in the inguinal canal.
A hydrocele occurs when only fluid enters the patent PV; the swelling may exist only in the scrotum (scrotal hydrocele), only along the
spermatic cord in the inguinal region (hydrocele of the spermatic
cord), or extend from the scrotum through the inguinal canal and
even into the abdomen (abdominal-­scrotal hydrocele). A hydrocele is
termed a communicating hydrocele if it demonstrates fluctuation in
size, often increasing in size after activity and, at other times, being
smaller when the fluid decompresses into the peritoneal cavity often
after lying recumbent. Occasionally, hydroceles develop in older children after trauma, inflammation, torsion of the appendix testes, or in
association with tumors affecting the testis.
Although reasons for failure of closure of the PV are unknown, it is
more common in cases of testicular nondescent (cryptorchidism) and
prematurity. In addition, persistent patency of the PV is twice as common on the right side, presumably related to later descent of the right
testis and interference with obliteration of the PV from the developing
inferior vena cava and external iliac vein. Table 394.1 lists the risk factors
identified as contributing to failure of closure of the PV and to the development of clinical inguinal hernia. The incidence of inguinal hernia in
patients with cystic fibrosis is approximately 15%, believed to be related
to an altered embryogenesis of the Wolffian duct structures, which

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 394 u Inguinal Hernias
leads to an absent vas deferens and infertility in males with this condition. There is also an increased incidence of inguinal hernia in patients
with testicular feminization syndrome and other disorders of sexual
development. The rate of recurrence after repair of an inguinal hernia in
patients with a connective tissue disorder approaches 50%, and often the
diagnosis of connective tissue disorders in children results from investigation after development of a recurrent inguinal hernia.

Clinical Presentation and Diagnosis

An inguinal hernia typically appears as an intermittent, asymptomatic
bulge or mass in the inguinal region or scrotum, most often noted on
routine physical examination or by a parent; after bathing or urination
are classic presentations. In females, the mass typically occurs in the
upper portion of the labia majora. The bulge or mass is most visible
at times of irritability or increased intraabdominal pressure (crying,
straining, coughing). Most inguinal hernias present clinically in young
children, approximately 50% in the first year, and most are asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic. The classic history from the parents
is of intermittent groin, labial, or scrotal swelling that spontaneously
reduces but that is gradually enlarging or is more persistent and is
becoming more difficult to reduce. Rarely an incarcerated hernia may
present in an infant with emesis, dehydration, and abdominal distention
suggestive of gastroenteritis or a bowel obstruction. The hallmark sign of
an inguinal hernia on physical examination is a smooth, firm mass that
emerges through the external inguinal ring lateral to the pubic tubercle
and enlarges with increased intraabdominal pressure. When the child
relaxes, the hernia typically reduces spontaneously or can be reduced
by gentle pressure, first posteriorly to free it from the external ring and
then upward toward the peritoneal cavity. In males, the hernia sac contains intestines; female infants often have an ovary and fallopian tube
in the hernia sac.
The diagnosis of inguinal hernia is clinical and generally is made by
history and physical examination. Methods used to demonstrate the
hernia on examination vary depending on the age of the child. A quiet
infant can be made to strain the abdominal muscles by stretching the
infant out supine on the bed with legs extended and arms held straight
above the head. Most infants struggle to get free, thus increasing the
intraabdominal pressure and pushing out the hernia. Older children
can be asked to perform the Valsalva maneuver by blowing up a balloon or coughing. The older child should be examined while standing, and examination after voiding also can be helpful. With increased
intraabdominal pressure, the protruding mass is obvious on inspection
of the inguinal region or can be palpated by an examining finger invaginating the scrotum to palpate at the external ring. Another subtle and
less definitive test is the silk glove sign, which describes the feeling of the
layers of the hernia sac as they slide over the spermatic cord structures
with rolling of the spermatic cord beneath the index finger at the pubic
tubercle. In the absence of a bulge, the finding of increased thickness of
the inguinal canal structures on palpation also suggests the diagnosis of
an inguinal hernia. It is important on examination to note the position
of the testes because retractile testes are common in infants and young
males and can mimic an inguinal hernia with a bulge in the region of
the external ring. Because in the female patient approximately 20–25%
of inguinal hernias are sliding hernias (the contents of the hernia sac
are adherent within the sac and therefore not reducible), a fallopian
tube or ovary can be palpated in the inguinal canal as a firm, slightly
mobile, nontender mass in the labia or inguinal canal. A femoral hernia appears as a protrusion on the medial aspect of the thigh, below the
inguinal region, and does not enter the scrotum or labia.
Because most hernias in young children reduce spontaneously, the
physical examination in the office can be equivocal. Infants and children with a strong history suggestive of inguinal hernia and an equivocal clinical examination may be offered ultrasound or referral to a
pediatric surgeon. Diagnostic laparoscopy has been increasingly used
to evaluate for suspected inguinal hernia; particularly in infants where
the risk of incarceration and potential injury to the intestines or testis
is high. In an older child with low risk of incarceration, the parents can
be reassured and educated relative to the low risk of incarceration and
morbidity. If an inguinal hernia is present, it will predictably become

2417

increasingly observed. A plan for a period of observation is thoughtful
and safe, and the parents can be asked to take a digital image at home
if the bulge is noted.

EVALUATION OF ACUTE INGUINAL-­SCROTAL
SWELLING

Commonly in pediatric practice, an inguinal-­scrotal mass appears suddenly in an infant or child and is associated with pain and discomfort.
The differential diagnosis includes incarcerated inguinal hernia, acute
hydrocele, torsion of an undescended testis, infection (epididymitis/
orchitis), and suppurative inguinal lymphadenitis. Differentiating
between the incarcerated inguinal hernia and the acute hydrocele is
probably the most difficult. The infant or child with an incarcerated
inguinal hernia is likely to have associated findings suggesting intestinal obstruction, such as colicky abdominal pain, abdominal distention,
vomiting, and cessation of stool, and may appear ill. Plain radiographs,
if obtained, typically demonstrate distended intestines with multiple
air-­fluid levels. The infant with an acute hydrocele may have discomfort but is consolable and tolerates feedings without signs or symptoms
suggesting intestinal obstruction.
On examination of the child with the acute scrotal hydrocele, the
clinician may note that the mass is somewhat mobile. In addition, the
inguinal region is flat and the mass confined to the scrotum. With the
incarcerated hernia, there is a lack of mobility of the groin mass and
marked swelling or a mass extending from the scrotal mass through
the inguinal area and up to and including the internal ring. An experienced clinician can selectively use a bimanual examination to help
differentiate groin abnormalities. The examiner palpates the internal
ring per rectum, with the other hand placing gentle pressure on the
inguinal region over the internal ring. In cases of an indirect inguinal
hernia, intraabdominal viscera can be palpated extending through the
internal ring.
Another method used in diagnostic evaluation is transillumination
to ascertain if the mass contains only fluid (hydrocele) versus intestine
(hernia); however, it must be noted that transillumination can be misleading because the thin wall of the infant’s intestine can approximate
that of the hydrocele wall, and both may transilluminate. This is also the
reason aspiration to assess the contents of a groin mass is discouraged.
Ultrasonography can help distinguish between a hernia, a hydrocele,
and lymphadenopathy and is a simple and well-­tolerated test. An expeditious diagnosis is important to avoid the potential complications of
an incarcerated hernia, which can develop rapidly. Diagnostic laparoscopy is an effective and reliable tool in this setting by pediatric surgeons
but requires general anesthesia.
The occurrence of suppurative adenopathy in the inguinal region
can be confused with an incarcerated inguinal hernia. Examination of
the watershed area of the inguinal lymph nodes might reveal a superficial infected or crusted skin lesion. In addition, the swelling associated
with inguinal lymphadenopathy is typically located more inferior and
lateral than the mass of an inguinal hernia, and there may be other
associated enlarged nodes in the area. Torsion of an undescended testis
can manifest as a painful erythematous mass in the groin. The absence
of a gonad in the scrotum in the ipsilateral side should clinch this diagnosis. Infectious etiologies typically demonstrate swelling and tenderness of the testis, but often there is associated urinary symptoms and
the swelling is confined to the scrotum and does not extend into the
inguinal canal.

Incarcerated Hernia

Incarceration is a common consequence of untreated inguinal hernia
in infants and presents as a nonreducible mass in the inguinal canal,
scrotum, or labia. Contained structures can include the small bowel,
appendix, omentum, colon, bladder, or, rarely, Meckel diverticulum.
In females, the ovary, fallopian tube, or both are commonly incarcerated. Rarely, the uterus in infants can also be pulled into the hernia
sac. A strangulated hernia is one that is tightly constricted in its passage through the inguinal canal, and as a result, the hernia contents
have become ischemic or gangrenous. The incidence of incarceration
of an inguinal hernia is between 6% and 18% throughout childhood

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2418 Part XVI u The Digestive System
years, and two thirds of incarcerated hernias occur in the first year of
life. The greatest risk is in infants younger than 6 months of age, with
reported incidences of incarceration between 25% and 30%. Reports
vary, but many believe a history of prematurity imparts an increased
risk of incarceration in the first year of life.
Although incarceration may be tolerated in adults for years, most
nonreducible inguinal hernias in children, unless treated, rapidly progress to strangulation with potential infarction of the hernia contents or
intestinal obstruction. Initially, pressure on the herniated viscera leads
to impaired lymphatic and venous drainage. This leads to swelling of
the herniated viscera, which further increases the compression in the
inguinal canal, ultimately resulting in total occlusion of the arterial
supply to the trapped viscera. Progressive ischemic changes take place,
culminating in gangrene and/or perforation of the herniated viscera.
The testis is at risk of ischemia because of compression of the testicular
blood vessels by the strangulated hernia. In females, herniation/incarceration of the ovary places it at risk of torsion with resultant ischemia.
The symptoms of an incarcerated hernia are irritability, feeding
intolerance, and abdominal distention in the infant; pain presents in
the older child. Within a few hours, the infant becomes inconsolable;
lack of flatus or stool signals complete intestinal obstruction. A somewhat tense, nonfluctuant mass is present in the inguinal region and
can extend down into the scrotum or labia. The mass is well defined,
firm, and does not reduce. With the onset of ischemic changes, the pain
intensifies, and the vomiting becomes bilious or feculent. Blood may
be noted in the stools. The mass is typically markedly tender, and there
is often edema and erythema of the overlying skin. The testes may be
normal, demonstrate a reactive hydrocele, or may be swollen and hard
on the affected side because of venous congestion resulting from compression of the spermatic veins and lymphatic channels at the inguinal
ring by the tightly strangulated hernia mass. Abdominal radiographs
demonstrate features of partial or complete intestinal obstruction, and
gas within the incarcerated bowel segments may be seen below the
inguinal ligament or within the scrotum.

Ambiguous Genitalia

Infants with disorders of sexual development commonly present with
inguinal hernias, often containing a gonad, and require special consideration. In female infants with inguinal hernias, particularly if the
presentation is bilateral inguinal masses, testicular feminization syndrome should be suspected (>50% of patients with testicular feminization have an inguinal hernia; see Chapter 628). Conversely, the true
incidence of testicular feminization in all female infants with inguinal
hernias is difficult to determine but is approximately 1%. In phenotypic females, if the diagnosis of testicular feminization is suspected
preoperatively, the child should be screened with a buccal smear for
Barr bodies and appropriate genetic evaluation before proceeding with
the hernia repair. The diagnosis of testicular feminization is occasionally made at the time of operation by identifying an abnormal gonad
(testis) within the hernia sac or absence of the uterus on laparoscopy or
rectal exam. In the normal female infant, the uterus is easily palpated
as a distinct midline structure beneath the symphysis pubis on rectal
examination. Preoperative diagnosis of testicular feminization syndrome or other disorders of sexual development such as mixed gonadal
dysgenesis and selected pseudohermaphrodites enables the family to
receive genetic counseling, and gonadectomy can be accomplished at
the time of the hernia repair if indicated.

Indications for Surgery

The presence of an inguinal hernia in the pediatric age-­group constitutes
the indication for operative repair. An inguinal hernia does not resolve
spontaneously, and prompt repair eliminates the risk of incarceration
and the associated potential complications, particularly in the first
6-­12 months of life. The timing of operative repair depends on several
factors, including age, general condition of the patient, and comorbid
conditions. In full-­term, healthy infants (younger than 1 year) with an
inguinal hernia, repair should proceed promptly (within 2-­3 weeks)
after diagnosis because as many as 70% of incarcerated inguinal hernias requiring emergency operation occur in infants younger than 11

months. In addition, the incidence of complications associated with
elective hernia repair (intestinal injury, testicular atrophy, recurrent
hernia, wound infection) are low (∼1%) but rise to as high as 18–20%
when repair is performed emergently at the time of incarceration. The
incidence of testicular atrophy after incarceration in infants younger
than 3 months of age has been reported as high as 30%. Therefore an
approach emphasizing prompt elective repair in infants is warranted;
anesthetic risks must be considered when determining timing of elective surgery for inguinal hernia repair. The risk factors for apnea after
general anesthesia include prematurity, multiple congenital anomalies,
history of apnea and bradycardia, chronic lung disease, postconceptual age <60 weeks at the time of surgery, and anemia. Unfortunately,
although this group of patients would be ideal for inguinal hernia repair
under regional (spinal/caudal) anesthesia, inguinal hernia repair in this
group is often remarkably technically challenging even for experienced
pediatric surgeons, and success is elusive under regional techniques.
The outcome advantage of a regional technique is lost if additional
intravenous sedation is required. Institutional policies vary, but in
general, full-­term infants <50 weeks postconceptual age and preterm
infants <55 weeks postconceptual age should be observed after repair
for a minimum of 12 hours postoperatively and potentially overnight
after general anesthesia for the development of apnea and bradycardia.
In children older than 1 year, the risk of incarceration is less, and
the repair can be scheduled with less urgency. For the routine reducible hernia, the operation should be carried out electively shortly after
diagnosis. Elective inguinal hernia repair in healthy children can be
safely performed in an outpatient setting, with an expectation for full
recovery within 48 hours. A regional caudal block or local inguinal
nerve block using local anesthetic is useful to diminish perioperative
pain and optimize recovery. Prophylactic antibiotics are not routinely
used except for associated conditions, such as congenital heart disease
or the presence of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. The operation should be
performed at a facility with the ability to admit the patient to an inpatient unit as needed should concerns or complications arise.
There is controversy as to the optimal timing of inguinal herniorrhaphy in preterm and low birthweight infants. In the past 2 decades,
most pediatric surgeons have planned hernia repair shortly before discharge from the neonatal intensive care unit. This group has a high
rate of incarceration but also a high risk of anesthesia-­related postoperative complications with elective surgery, such as apnea, bradycardia, inability to extubate, hemodynamic instability (5–10%), and
even cardiopulmonary arrest. In addition, this group has an increased
rate of postoperative surgical-­related complications such as wound
infection (5–10%) and recurrent hernia (10%). At present, studies to
develop evidence-­based data for timing of inguinal hernia repair in
premature infants are ongoing, but there is a lack of consensus, and
patients should be individualized, with important consultation with
both neonatology and pediatric anesthesia. The operation for inguinal
hernia repair is most often performed under general anesthesia, but it
can be performed under spinal/caudal anesthesia in selected high-­risk
infants in whom avoidance of intubation is preferable (e.g., because of
chronic lung disease or bronchopulmonary dysplasia). In this setting,
open repair (OH) is preferable to the laparoscopic approach, as it can
be performed under local/regional techniques.
An incarcerated, irreducible hernia without evidence of strangulation in a clinically stable patient should initially be managed nonoperatively, unless there is evidence of bowel obstruction, peritonitis,
or hemodynamic instability, because 70–95% of incarcerated inguinal hernias are successfully reduced. Manual reduction is performed
using a surgical technique called taxis, first with traction caudad and
posteriorly to free the mass from the external inguinal ring, and then
upward to reduce the contents back into the peritoneal cavity. Reduction attempts usually require sedation (intravenous) and analgesics,
and thus appropriate experience with monitoring and airway management are critical concerns. In addition, if reduction of the incarcerated hernia is successful, the infant may rapidly become somnolent and
apneic, requiring important supportive measures by skilled personnel.
Other techniques advocated to assist in the nonoperative reduction of
an incarcerated inguinal hernia include elevation of the lower torso

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 394 u Inguinal Hernias
and legs. Ice packs should be avoided in infants because of the risk
of hypothermia but may be used for brief periods in the older child.
If reduction is successful but difficult, the patient should be observed
for several hours to ensure that feedings are tolerated and there is no
concern that necrotic intestine was reduced; fortunately, this is an
uncommon occurrence. Given the risk of early recurrent incarceration
after a successful reduction, it is recommended that herniorrhaphy be
performed after a brief period (1-­4 days), by which time there is less
edema, handling of the sac is easier, and the risk of complications is
reduced.
If the inguinal hernia is unable to be reduced, or there is concern
for an incomplete reduction, then operative reduction should be performed emergently. In addition, for any patient who presents with a
prolonged history of incarceration of an inguinal hernia, signs of
peritoneal irritation, or small bowel obstruction, surgery and operative reduction and repair of the hernia should be urgently performed.
Initial management includes nasogastric intubation, intravenous fluids, and administration of broad-­spectrum antibiotics. When fluid
and electrolyte imbalance has been corrected and the child’s condition is satisfactory, exploration is undertaken. In current practice, the
laparoscopic approach may have advantages, as the abdominal cavity
insufflation expands the internal ring, potentially aiding reduction of
the incarcerated viscera and enabling visualization of the viscera for
possible ischemic injury and/or perforation. The risk of postoperative
complications such as testicular atrophy, bowel ischemia, wound infections, and recurrence of hernia is increased after emergency inguinal
hernia repair: 4.5–33% compared with 1% in elective hernia repairs in
healthy, full-­term infants.
A common presentation in female patients is an irreducible ovary in
the inguinal hernia in an otherwise asymptomatic patient. The inguinal
mass is soft and nontender to gentle exam, and there is no swelling or
edema; thus there are no findings suggesting strangulation. This represents a sliding hernia, with the fallopian tube and ovary fused to the
wall of the hernia sac preventing reduction to the abdominal cavity.
Overzealous attempts to reduce the hernia are unwarranted and potentially harmful to the tube and ovary. The risk that incarceration, most
often resulting from torsion of the ovary in this setting, will lead to
strangulation is not known. Most pediatric surgeons recommend elective repair of the hernia within 24-­48 hours.
The appearance of necrotic ovaries and testes at the time of operation does not consistently provide evidence of irreversible damage or
predict future functionality. Multiple studies report that even when
ovaries appear persistently ischemic after relief of incarceration and
detorsion, most ovaries, if preserved, will recover and demonstrate evidence of follicular development. Similarly, ischemic-­appearing testes
after relief of incarceration survive in as much as 50% of cases. Testicular atrophy occurs in 2.5–15% of incarcerated hernias. Given the
potential for retained functionality, the current recommendation is to
avoid testicular resection unless frank necrosis is present.

Open Inguinal Hernia Repair

The operation is performed through a small (2-­3 cm) inguinal skin
crease incision. The procedure involves opening of the inguinal canal;
reduction of the contents of the hernia sac if present, careful separation
of the hernia sac from the cremasteric muscle fibers, spermatic cord
vessels, and vas deferens to avoid injury to these structures in the inguinal canal, division of the hernia sac, and high ligation of the hernia sac
at the internal ring, thus preventing protrusion of abdominal contents
into the inguinal canal. A communicating hydrocele is approached with
the same technique, separation of the spermatic cord structures from
the hernia sac, high ligation of the proximal portion of the hernia sac,
and opening of the distal sac to relieve the hydrocele. In older children
with a noncommunicating hydrocele, the approach may be through a
scrotal incision with avoidance of manipulation of the spermatic cord
vessels and vas deferens. Open inguinal hernia repair has a low rate of
recurrence, vas deferens injury, and testicular atrophy (∼1–2%).
In females, surgical repair is technically simpler because the hernia sac and round ligament can be ligated without concern for injury
to the ovary and its blood supply, which generally remain within the

2419

abdomen. The hernia sac and round ligament are divided from their
distal attachment in the labia majora, proximal dissection away from
the cremasteric muscle fibers to the internal ring, and high ligation at
the internal ring. In female infants, opening of the sac to visualize the
ovary and fallopian tube may help avoid injury to these structures during suture ligation of the sac and also rule out testicular feminization
syndrome. If the ovary and fallopian tube are within the sac and not
reducible, the sac is suture ligated distal to these structures, and the
internal ring is closed after reducing the sac and its contents to the
abdominal cavity.

Laparoscopic Inguinal Hernia Repair

Laparoscopic repair (LH) is used by most pediatric surgeons. There are
several techniques described, both transperitoneal and preperitoneal,
depending on surgeon preference. The laparoscopic technique is fundamentally a high ligation of the indirect inguinal hernia sac (PV) at
the internal ring to prevent protrusion of abdominal viscera into the
inguinal canal. The laparoscopic technique affords confirmation of the
diagnosis and inspection of the contralateral side for the presence of a
hernia or a patent PV (potential hernia). Reported advantages of laparoscopic repair (LH) compared with open repair (OH) include better
cosmesis, shorter length of stay (LOS), faster recovery, and greater ability to visualize and repair a contralateral hernia.
In LH, the inguinal canal is not explored, and the spermatic cord
structures are not manipulated, which may portend reduced risk to
the testicular blood supply or vas deferens, particularly in younger
patients. Disadvantages of LH in infants and younger children are the
increased risk associated with general anesthesia, the potential hemodynamic effects of abdominal insufflation (e.g., acidosis, compromised
venous return), and technical challenges of the LH technique. Operative times have been similar for the OH and LH approaches; however,
there is wide variability with the LH technique based on the experience
of the surgeon and surgical team. Laparoscopic procedures in infants
should always be performed expeditiously and with low insufflation
pressure to avoid the risk of cardiorespiratory compromise and development of acidosis. Postoperative pain in both techniques is managed
with oral acetaminophen for 24-­48 hours; older children may require
a brief period of postoperative NSAIDs or narcotics. In a prospective,
randomized study, the laparoscopic approach was associated with
decreased pain, parental perception of faster recovery, and parental
perception of better wound cosmesis. At present, outcomes, recurrence
rates, recovery metrics, complications, and family satisfaction appear
similar for both approaches (OH and LH), and evidence is lacking to
recommend one approach over the other.

Contralateral Inguinal Exploration

Most children (85%) present with a unilateral inguinal hernia. Controversy exists regarding when to proceed with contralateral groin
exploration. The only purpose of contralateral exploration is to avoid
the occurrence of a hernia on that side at a later date. The advantages
of contralateral exploration include avoidance of parental anxiety and
possibly a second anesthesia, the cost of additional surgery, and the risk
of contralateral incarceration. The disadvantages of exploration include
potential injury to the spermatic cord vessels, vas deferens, and testis
and increased operative and anesthesia time.
Laparoscopy enables assessment of the contralateral side without
risk of injury to the spermatic cord structures or testis. When performing OH repair, the laparoscope can be introduced through an umbilical
incision or by passing a 30-­degree or 70-­degree oblique scope through
the OH sac before ligation of the hernia sac on the involved side. If
patency of the contralateral side is demonstrated, the surgeon can proceed with bilateral hernia repair, and if the contralateral side is properly obliterated, exploration and potential complications are avoided.
When performing LH, visualization of the contralateral side is easily
performed. The downside of this approach includes the risks associated
with laparoscopy and that laparoscopy cannot differentiate between a
patent PV and a true hernia (Figs. 394.2 and 394.3). In experienced
hands, ultrasound has been proven to be a good alternative to surgical approaches to explore the contralateral groin. Infants and children

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2420 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Patent processus
vaginalis
Vas deferens
entering internal
ring

of muscular weakness is small and pediatric tissues have greater elasticity, primary repair is usually possible. Prosthetic material (mesh) for
direct hernia repair or other approaches, such as preperitoneal repair,
are rarely required in the pediatric age-­group. The older child with
a direct inguinal hernia and a connective tissue disorder may be the
exception, and a laparoscopic approach and prosthetic material in such
a case can be useful for repair.

FEMORAL HERNIA
Spermatic vessels
entering internal
ring

Fig. 394.2 Laparoscopic image of patent processus vaginalis on right
side.

Femoral hernias are rare in children (<1% of groin hernias in children). They are more common in females than in males (2:1 ratio).
They are extremely rare in infancy and occur typically in older children, believed to most often be an acquired defect. Femoral hernias
represent a protrusion through the femoral canal. The bulge of a femoral hernia is located below the inguinal ligament and typically projects
on the medial aspect of the proximal thigh. Femoral hernias are more
often missed clinically than direct hernias on physical examination or
at the time of indirect hernia repair. Repair of a femoral hernia involves
closure of the defect at the femoral canal, generally suturing the inguinal ligament to the pectineal ligament/fascia.

COMPLICATIONS
Spermatic
vessels

Obliterated
processus
vaginalis

Vas deferens

Fig. 394.3 Diagnostic laparoscopic image of obliterated processus
vaginalis on left side.

with risk factors for development of an inguinal hernia or with medical conditions that increase the risk of general anesthesia should be
approached with a low threshold for routine contralateral exploration.

DIRECT INGUINAL HERNIA

Direct inguinal hernias are rare in children, approximately 0.5–1%.
Direct hernias appear as groin masses that extend toward the femoral vessels with exertion or straining. The etiology is from a muscular
defect or weakness in the floor of the inguinal canal medial to the epigastric vessels. Thus direct inguinal hernias in children are generally
considered an acquired problem. In one third of cases, the patient has a
history of a prior indirect hernia repair on the side of the direct hernia,
which suggests a possible missed direct hernia at the initial surgery
or injury to the floor muscles of the inguinal canal at the time of the
first herniorrhaphy. Patients with connective tissue disorders such as
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome or Marfan syndrome and mucopolysaccharidosis such as Hunter-­Hurler syndrome are at increased risk for the
development of direct inguinal hernias either independently or after
indirect inguinal hernia repair.
Operative repair of a direct inguinal hernia involves strengthening
of the floor of the inguinal canal, and many standard techniques have
been described, similar to repair techniques used in adults. The repair
can be performed through a single limited incision, and therefore LH
does not offer a significant advantage. Recurrence after repair, in contrast to that in adults, is extraordinarily rare. Because typically the area

Complications after elective inguinal hernia repair are uncommon
(∼1.5%) but significantly higher in association with incarceration
(∼10%). The major risk of elective inguinal hernia repair in infants
and children relates to the need for general anesthesia, and spinal/
caudal anesthesia should be considered based on the experience
of the surgeon and anesthesia team. Surgical complications can
be related to technical factors (recurrence, iatrogenic cryptorchidism or trapped testicle, inadvertent injury to the vas deferens or
spermatic vessels) or to the underlying process, such as bowel ischemia, gonadal infarction, and testicular atrophy after incarceration.
Because LH repair generally does not involve inguinal exploration
or manipulation of the testicular vessels or vas deferens, the risk of
injury is potentially lower, but supportive data are unavailable at
present.

Wound Infection

Wound infection occurs in <1% of elective inguinal hernia repairs in
infants and children, but the incidence increases to 5–7% in association
with incarceration and emergent repair. The patient typically develops
fever and irritability 3-­5 days after the surgery, and the wound demonstrates warmth, erythema, and fluctuance. Management consists of
opening and draining the wound, a short course of antibiotics, and a
daily wound dressing. The most common organisms are gram-­positive
(Staphylococcus and Streptococcus spp.), and consideration should be
given to coverage of methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus. The
wound generally heals in 1-­2 weeks with low morbidity and a good
cosmetic result.

Recurrent Hernia

The recurrence rate of inguinal hernias after elective inguinal hernia
repairs is generally reported as 0.5–1.0%, with rates as high as 2% for
premature infants. The rate of recurrence after emergency repair of an
incarcerated hernia is much higher, reported as 3–6% in most large
series. The true incidence of recurrence is most certainly even higher,
given the problem of accurate long-­term follow-­up. In the group of
patients who develop recurrent inguinal hernia, the recurrence occurs
in 50% within 1 year of the initial repair and in 75% by 2 years. Recurrence of an indirect hernia may be the result of a technical problem
in the original procedure, such as failure to identify the sac properly,
failure to perform high ligation of the sac at the level of the internal
ring, or a tear in the sac that leaves a strip of peritoneum along the cord
structures. Recurrence as a direct hernia can result from injury to the
inguinal floor (transversalis fascia) during the original procedure or,
more likely, failure to identify a direct hernia during the original exploration. Patients with connective tissue disorders (collagen deficiency) or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 395 u Embryology, Anatomy, and Physiology of the Pancreas
conditions that cause increased intraabdominal pressure (ventriculoperitoneal shunts, ascites, chronic lung disease, peritoneal dialysis) are
at increased risk for recurrence.

Iatrogenic Cryptorchidism (Trapped Testicle)

Iatrogenic cryptorchidism describes malposition of the testis after
inguinal hernia repair. This complication is usually related to disruption of the testicular attachment in the scrotum at the time of hernia
repair or failure to recognize an undescended testis during the original
procedure, allowing the testes to retract, typically to the region of the
external ring. At the completion of inguinal hernia repair, the testis
should be placed in a dependent intrascrotal position. If the testis will
not remain in this position, proper fixation in the scrotum should be
performed at the time of the hernia repair.

Incarceration

Incarceration of an inguinal hernia can result in injury to the intestines,
the fallopian tube and ovary, or the ipsilateral testis. The incidence of
incarceration of a congenital indirect inguinal hernia is reported as
6–18% throughout childhood and as high as 30% for infants younger
than 6 months of age. Intestinal injury requiring bowel resection is
uncommon, occurring in only 1–2% of incarcerated hernias. In cases
of incarceration in which the hernia is reduced nonoperatively, the
likelihood of intestinal injury is low; however, these patients should
be observed closely for 6-­12 hours after reduction of the hernia for
signs and symptoms of intestinal obstruction, such as fever, vomiting, abdominal distention, or bloody stools. Laparoscopy affords the
opportunity to inspect the reduced viscera for injury or necrosis in
select cases.
The reported incidence of testicular infarction and subsequent testicular atrophy with incarceration is 4–12%, with higher rates among the
irreducible cases requiring emergency operative reduction and repair.
The testicular insult can be caused by compression of the gonadal vessels by the incarcerated hernia mass or as a result of damage incurred
during operative repair. Young infants are at highest risk, with testicular infarction rates reported as high as 30% in infants younger than
2-­3 months of age. These problems underscore the need for prompt
reduction of incarcerated hernias and early repair once the diagnosis is
known to avoid repeat episodes of incarceration.

Injury to the Vas Deferens and Male Fertility

Similar to the gonadal vessels, the vas deferens can be injured as a
consequence of compression from an incarcerated hernia or during operative repair. This injury is almost certainly underreported
because it is unlikely to be recognized until adulthood and, even
then, possibly only if the injury is bilateral. Although the vulnerability of the vas deferens has been documented in many studies, no good
data exist as to the actual incidence of this complication. One review
reported an incidence of injury to the vas deferens of 1.6% based on
pathology demonstrating segments of the vas deferens in the hernia
sac specimen; this may be overstated, because others have shown that
small glandular inclusions found in the hernia sac can represent müllerian duct remnants and are of no clinical importance. The relationship between male fertility and previous inguinal hernia repair is also
unknown. There appears to be an association between infertile males
with testicular atrophy and abnormal sperm count and a previous
hernia repair. A relationship has also been reported between infertile males with spermatic autoagglutinating antibodies and previous
inguinal hernia repair. The proposed etiology is that operative injury
to the vas deferens during inguinal hernia repair might result in
obstruction of the vas with diversion of spermatozoa to the testicular
lymphatics, and this breach of the blood-­testis barrier produces an
antigenic challenge, resulting in formation of spermatic autoagglutinating antibodies.

2421

Section 5

Exocrine Pancreas
Chapter 395

Embryology, Anatomy,
and Physiology of the
Pancreas
Steven L. Werlin and Michael Wilschanski

INTRODUCTION

The human pancreas develops from the ventral and dorsal domains
of the primitive duodenal endoderm beginning at about the fifth
week of gestation (Fig. 395.1). The larger dorsal anlage, which develops into the tail, body, and part of the head of the pancreas, grows
directly from the duodenum. The smaller ventral anlage develops
as one or two buds from the primitive liver and eventually forms
the major portion of the head of the pancreas. At about the 17th
week of gestation, the dorsal and ventral anlagen fuse as the buds
develop and the gut rotates. The ventral duct forms the proximal
portion of the major pancreatic duct of Wirsung, which opens into
the ampulla of Vater. The dorsal duct forms the distal portion of the
duct of Wirsung and the accessory duct of Santorini, which empties
independently in approximately 5% of people. Variations in fusion
might account for pancreatic developmental anomalies. Pancreatic
agenesis has been associated with a base pair deletion in the insulin promoter factor 1-­HOX gene, PDX1 (PAGEN1), PTF1A (PAGEN
2), and GATA 6 haploinsufficiency genes. Other genes involved in
pancreatic organogenesis include the IHH, SHH or sonic hedgehog
gene, SMAD2, and TGF-­1β genes.
The pancreas lies transversely in the upper abdomen between the
duodenum and the spleen in the retroperitoneum (Fig. 395.2). The
head, which rests on the vena cava and renal vein, is adherent to the
C loop of the duodenum and surrounds the distal common bile duct.
The tail of the pancreas reaches to the left splenic hilum and passes
above the left kidney. The lesser sac separates the tail of the pancreas
from the stomach.
By the 13th week of gestation, exocrine and endocrine cells can
be identified. Primitive acini containing immature zymogen granules are found by the 16th week. Mature zymogen granules containing amylase, trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, and lipase are present
at the 20th week. Centroacinar and duct cells, which are responsible
for water, electrolyte, and bicarbonate secretion, are also found by
the 20th week. The final three-­dimensional structure of the pancreas consists of a complex series of branching ducts surrounded
by grapelike clusters of epithelial cells. Cells containing glucagon
are present at the 8th week. Islets of Langerhans appear between the
12th and 16th weeks.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2422 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Stomach

Gall
bladder

A

Ventral
pancreas

Dorsal
pancreas

Minor
papilla

Dorsal
pancreas

B

Ventral
pancreas

Major
papilla

C

Accessory
pancreatic
duct
(Santorini)

Major
pancreatic
duct
(Wirsung)

Fig. 395.1 Development of the exocrine pancreas. A, Gestational age 6 wk. B, Gestational age 7-­8 wk. The ventral pancreas has rotated but has
not yet fused with the dorsal pancreas. C, The ventral and dorsal pancreatic ductal systems have fused. (From Werlin SL. The exocrine pancreas. In:
Kelly VC, ed. Practice of Pediatrics, vol 3. Hagerstown, MD: Harper and Row, 1980: Fig. 16.1.)

Aorta

Spleen
Duodenum

Pancreas
Body

Head

Tail

Left
kidney

Jejunum
Uncinate
process

Fig. 395.2 Anterior view of the pancreas and relationship to neigh-

boring structures. (From Werlin SL. The exocrine pancreas. In: Kelly VC,
ed. Practice of Pediatrics, vol 3. Hagerstown, MD: Harper and Row,
1980: Fig. 16.2.)

395.1 Pancreatic Anatomic Abnormalities
Steven L. Werlin and Michael Wilschanski
Complete or partial pancreatic agenesis is a rare condition. Complete
agenesis is associated with severe neonatal diabetes and usually death
at an early age (see Chapter 629). Partial or dorsal pancreatic agenesis
is often asymptomatic but may be associated with diabetes, congenital
heart disease, polysplenia, and recurrent pancreatitis. Pancreatic agenesis is also associated with malabsorption.
An annular pancreas results from incomplete rotation of the left
(ventral) pancreatic anlage, which may be a result of recessive pathogenic variants in the IHH or SHH genes. Patients usually present in
infancy with symptoms of complete or partial bowel obstruction
or in the fourth or fifth decade. There is often a history of maternal

polyhydramnios. Other congenital anomalies, such as Down syndrome, tracheoesophageal fistula, intestinal atresia, imperforate anus,
malrotation and cardiorenal abnormalities, and pancreatitis, may be
associated with annular pancreas. Some children present with chronic
vomiting, pancreatitis, or biliary colic. The treatment of choice is duodenojejunostomy. Division of the pancreatic ring is not attempted
because a duodenal diaphragm or duodenal stenosis often accompanies annular pancreas.
Ectopic pancreatic rests in the stomach or small intestine occur
in approximately 3% of the population. Most cases (70%) are found
in the upper intestinal tract. Recognized on barium contrast studies
by their typical umbilicated appearance, they are rarely of clinical
importance. On endoscopy, they are irregular, yellow nodules 2-­4
mm in diameter. A pancreatic rest may rarely be the lead point of an
intussusception, produce hemorrhage, or cause bowel obstruction.
Pancreas divisum, which occurs in 5–15% of the population, is
the most common pancreatic developmental anomaly. Because of
the failure of the dorsal and ventral pancreatic anlagen to fuse, the
tail, body, and part of the head of the pancreas drain through the
small accessory duct of Santorini rather than the main duct of Wirsung. Some researchers believe that this anomaly may be associated
with recurrent pancreatitis when there is relative obstruction of the
outflow of the ventral pancreas. Diagnosis is made by endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography or by magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography. Pancreatitis in patients with pancreas
divisum may be associated with pathogenic CFTR variants. Sphincterotomy is not recommended unless other anomalies are present or
the patient has classic pancreatobiliary-­type pain, recurrent pancreatitis, or chronic pancreatitis, and no other etiology is found.
Choledochal cysts are dilations of the biliary tract and usually
cause biliary tract symptoms, such as jaundice, pain, and fever. On
occasion, the presentation may be pancreatitis. The diagnosis is usually made with ultrasonography, CT or biliary scanning, or magnetic
resonance cholangiopancreatography. Similarly, a choledochocele—an
intraduodenal choledochal cyst—may manifest with pancreatitis. The
diagnosis can be difficult and require magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, or
endoscopic ultrasound.
A number of rare conditions, such as Ivemark (pathogenic variant in
GDF gene) and Johanson-­Blizzard (pathogenic variant in UBR1 gene)
syndromes, include pancreatic dysgenesis or dysfunction among their
features. Many of these syndromes include renal and hepatic dysgenesis along with the pancreatic anomalies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 397 u Disorders of the Exocrine Pancreas

395.2 Pancreatic Physiology
Steven L. Werlin and Michael Wilschanski
The acinus is the functional unit of the exocrine pancreas. Acinar
cells are arrayed in a semicircle around a lumen. Ducts that drain
the acini are lined by centroacinar and ductular cells. This arrangement allows the secretions of the various cell types to mix.
The acinar cell synthesizes, stores, and secretes more than 20
enzymes, which are stored in zymogen granules, some in inactive
forms. The relative concentration of the various enzymes in pancreatic juice is affected and perhaps controlled by the diet, probably by regulating the synthesis of specific messenger RNA. The
main enzymes involved in digestion include amylase, which splits
starch into maltose, isomaltose, and maltotriose; dextrins; and trypsin and chymotrypsin, endopeptidases secreted by the pancreas as
inactive proenzymes. Trypsinogen is activated in the gut lumen by
enterokinase, a brush-­border enzyme. Trypsin can then activate
trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, and procarboxypeptidase into
their respective active forms. Pancreatic lipase requires colipase, a
coenzyme also found in pancreatic fluid, for activity. Lipase liberates fatty acids from the 1 and 3 positions of triglycerides, leaving
a monoglyceride.
The stimuli for exocrine pancreatic secretion are neural and
hormonal. Acetylcholine mediates the cephalic phase; cholecystokinin (CCK) mediates the intestinal phase. CCK is released from
the duodenal mucosa by luminal amino acids and fatty acids. Feedback regulation of pancreatic secretion is mediated by pancreatic
proteases in the duodenum. Secretion of CCK is inhibited by the
digestion of a trypsin-­sensitive, CCK-­releasing peptide released in
the lumen of the small intestine or by a monitor peptide released in
pancreatic fluid.
Centroacinar and duct cells secrete water and bicarbonate. Bicarbonate secretion is under feedback control and is regulated by duodenal
intraluminal pH. The stimulus for bicarbonate production is secretin
in concert with CCK. Secretin cells are abundant in the duodenum.
Although normal pancreatic function is required for digestion, maldigestion occurs only after considerable reduction in pancreatic function; lipase and colipase secretion must be decreased by 90–98% before
fat maldigestion occurs.
Although amylase and lipase are present in the pancreas early in
gestation, secretion of both amylase and lipase is low in infants. Adult
levels of these enzymes are not reached in the duodenum until late
in the first year of life. Digestion of the starch found in many infant
formulas depends in part on the low levels of salivary amylase that
reach the duodenum. This explains the diarrhea that may be seen in
infants who are fed formulas high in glucose polymers or starch. Neonatal secretion of trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen is at approximately 70% of the level found in the 1-­year-­old infant. The low levels
of amylase and lipase in duodenal contents of infants may be partially
compensated by salivary amylase and lingual lipase. This explains the
relative starch and fat intolerance of premature infants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 396

Pancreatic Function Tests
Michael Wilschanski and Steven L. Werlin
Pancreatic function can be measured by direct and indirect methods.
An indirect test, the measurement of fecal elastase, which is the standard
screening test for pancreatic insufficiency, has a sensitivity and specificity

2423

>90%. When compared with a 72-­hour fecal fat content in both pancreatic insufficient and sufficient patients, an elastase value of 100 μg/g stool
has a 99% predictive value in ruling out pancreatic insufficiency based on
an abnormal fecal fat finding. Falsely abnormal results can occur in many
enteropathies and when the stool is very loose.

DIRECT TESTS

Classically, a triple-­lumen tube was used to isolate the pancreatic
secretions in the duodenum. Measurement of bicarbonate concentration and enzyme activity (trypsin, chymotrypsin, lipase, and amylase)
is performed on the aspirated secretions. This test is cumbersome and
infrequently used in children. Endoscopic collection of pancreatic
secretions after stimulation with secretin and/or cholecystokinin is the
commonly used direct test.
A 72-­hour stool collection for quantitative analysis of fat content is
the gold standard for the diagnosis of malabsorption. The collection
can be performed at home, and the parent is asked to keep a careful
dietary record, from which fat intake is calculated. A preweighed, sealable plastic container is used, which the parent keeps in the freezer.
Freezing helps to preserve the specimen and reduce odor. Infants are
dressed in disposable diapers with the plastic side facing the skin so
that the complete sample can be transferred to the container. Normal
fat absorption is >93% of intake. The presence of fat malabsorption
does not differentiate between pancreatic dysfunction and enteropathies, such as celiac disease. Qualitative examination of the stool for
microscopic fat globules can give false-­
positive and false-­
negative
results.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 397

Disorders of the Exocrine
Pancreas
Steven L. Werlin and Michael Wilschanski
DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH PANCREATIC
INSUFFICIENCY

Other than cystic fibrosis (CF), conditions that cause pancreatic
insufficiency are very rare in children. They include Shwachman-­
Diamond syndrome (SDS), Johanson-­
Blizzard syndrome, Ivemark syndrome, Pearson syndrome, isolated enzyme deficiencies
(see Chapter 385.8), enterokinase deficiency, chronic pancreatitis, protein-­calorie malnutrition (see Chapters 64 and 385.7), and
IMNEPD (infantile onset multisystem neurologic, endocrine, and
pancreatic disease).

CYSTIC FIBROSIS

See Chapter 454.
By the end of the first year of life, 85–90% of children with CF
have pancreatic insufficiency, which, if untreated, will lead to malnutrition. Treatment of the associated pancreatic insufficiency
leads to improvement in absorption, better growth, and more normal stools. Pancreatic function can be monitored in children with
CF with serial measurements of fecal elastase. Between 10–15%
of children present with a neonatal intestinal obstruction called
meconium ileus; in later life, a common intestinal complication
is distal intestinal obstruction syndrome, which is unique to CF.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2424 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Ten percent of CF patients develop severe liver disease. Between
10–15% of CF patients are pancreatic sufficient, and their presentation tends to be later in life, including recurrent pancreatitis, male
infertility, and chronic bronchiectasis. CF is part of the newborn
screen in every state in the United States and in most countries in
the Western world. Pathogenic gene variant specific therapy has
caused great improvements in pulmonary function and weight gain,
which is probably a direct effect on the gastrointestinal tract. The
first drug to be released, Ivacaftor, reduced the number of episodes
of pancreatitis in CF patients who were prone to recurrent pancreatitis; in younger patients, fecal elastase was significantly increased.

SHWACHMAN-­DIAMOND SYNDROME

See Chapter 171.
SDS is an autosomal recessive syndrome (1/20,000 births) caused by
a pathogenic variant of the Shwachman-­Bodian-­Diamond syndrome
(SBDS) gene on chromosome 7, which causes ribosomal dysfunction
in 90–95% of patients. Signs and symptoms of SDS include pancreatic insufficiency, neutrophil chemotaxis defects, metaphyseal dysostosis, failure to thrive, short stature, and neutropenia, which may be
cyclic. Some patients with SDS have liver or kidney involvement, dental
disease, or learning difficulty. SDS is a common cause of congenital
neutropenia.
Patients typically present in infancy with poor growth and steatorrhea. More varied phenotypes have been described, including absence
of pancreatic lipomatosis on imaging, normal fecal elastase levels,
and normal skeletal survey. These children can be readily differentiated from those with CF by their normal sweat chloride levels, lack of
pathogenic variants in the CF gene, characteristic metaphyseal lesions,
and fatty pancreas characterized by a hypodense appearance on CT
and MRI scans (Fig. 397.1).
Despite adequate pancreatic replacement therapy and correction
of malabsorption, poor growth commonly continues. Pancreatic
insufficiency is often transient, and steatorrhea frequently spontaneously improves with age. Recurrent pyogenic infections (otitis

media, pneumonia, osteomyelitis, dermatitis, sepsis) are frequent
and are a common cause of death. Thrombocytopenia is found in
70% of patients and anemia in 50%. Development of aplastic anemia or a myelodysplastic syndrome can occur, with transformation
to acute myeloid leukemia in 24%. The pancreatic acini are replaced
by fat with little fibrosis. Islet cells and ducts are normal. Bone marrow transplant is the treatment of choice in patients who develop
acute myeloid leukemia.

PEARSON SYNDROME

Pearson (marrow-­pancreas) syndrome is caused by a contiguous mitochondrial gene depletion involving several mitochondrial genes affecting oxidative phosphorylation, which manifests in infants with severe
macrocytic anemia and variable thrombocytopenia. The bone marrow
demonstrates vacuoles in erythroid and myeloid precursors as well as
ringed sideroblasts. In addition to its role in severe bone marrow failure, pancreatic insufficiency contributes to growth failure. Mitochondrial DNA mutations are transmitted through maternal inheritance to
both sexes or are sporadic.

JOHANSON-­BLIZZARD SYNDROME

The features of Johanson-­Blizzard syndrome include exocrine pancreatic deficiency, aplasia or hypoplasia of the alae nasi, congenital deafness, hypothyroidism, developmental delay, short stature, ectodermal
scalp defects, absence of permanent teeth, urogenital malformations,
and imperforate anus. This syndrome is caused by a pathogenic variant
in the UBR1 gene found on chromosome 15.

ISOLATED ENZYME DEFICIENCIES

Isolated deficiencies of trypsinogen, enterokinase, lipase, and colipase have been reported. Although enterokinase is a brush-­border
enzyme, deficiency causes pancreatic insufficiency because enterokinase is required to activate trypsinogen to trypsin in the duodenum. Deficiencies of trypsinogen or enterokinase manifest with
failure to thrive, hypoproteinemia, and edema. Isolated amylase
deficiency is typically developmental and resolves by age 2-­3 years.

OTHER SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH
PANCREATIC INSUFFICIENCY

Fig. 397.1 CT appearance of the pancreas in a patient with
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome. Note that the pancreas (arrow) retains
a typical size and shape, but it is highly fatty and therefore appears as a
very low-­density structure. (Courtesy Prof. Peter Durie, Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario.)

Pancreatic agenesis, congenital pancreatic hypoplasia, and congenital rubella are rare causes of pancreatic insufficiency. Pancreatic
insufficiency has also been reported in celiac disease and inflammatory bowel disease. It may occur in duodenal atresia and stenosis and may also be seen in infants with familial or nonfamilial
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia after a 95–100% pancreatectomy
to control hypoglycemia. Pathogenic variants in at least six genes
have been described. Pancreatic insufficiency, which may be found
in children with celiac disease and undernutrition, recovers with
nutritional rehabilitation.
Infantile onset multisystem neurology endocrine and pancreatic disease (IMNEPD) is a rare disease caused by pathogenic
variants in the PTRH2 gene. Neurologic features dominate the phenotype (microcephaly, intellectual disability, cerebellar atrophy,
deafness, and neuropathy), but pancreatic insufficiency is seen in
most patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 398 u Treatment of Pancreatic Insufficiency

Chapter 398

Treatment of Pancreatic
Insufficiency
Michael Wilschanski and Steven L. Werlin
The most important treatment of pancreatic insufficiency (PI) is pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy (PERT). In modern enzyme capsules, the enzymes are enterically coated to protect the enzymes from
degradation by gastric acid and from autodigestion in the small intestine. It is common for patients to change from one product to another
using a 1:1 lipase ratio and then titrating for maximum efficacy (Table
398.1).
The North American CF Foundation has published dosing guidelines based on age and fat ingestion (Table 398.2). Because these
products contain excess protease compared with lipase, the dosage is
estimated from the lipase requirement. The final dosage of PERT for
children is often established by trial and error. An adequate dose is
one that is followed by resumption of normal growth and the return of
stools to normal fat content, which, when desired, can be verified by a
72-­hour fecal fat collection and normalization of stool consistency and
color. Because there is no elastase in enzyme preparations, fecal elastase

Table 398.1  FDA-­Approved Pancreatic Enzyme
Replacement Products for Exocrine
Pancreatic Insufficiency*
DRUG

AVAILABLE STRENGTHS
IMMEDIATE-­RELEASE

Viokace (Allergan)‡,§,||

10,440 or 20,880 units of lipase¶
DELAYED-­RELEASE

Creon (AbbVie)

3,000, 6,000, 12,000, 24,000, or 36,000 USP
units of lipase¶,**

Pancreaze (Janssen)

2,600, 4,200, 10,500, 16,800, or 21,000 units of
lipase¶,**

Pertzye (Digestive
Care)

4,000, 8,000, 16,000, or 24,000 units of
lipase¶,**

Zenpep (Allergan)

3,000, 5,000, 10,000, 15,000, 20,000, 25,000,
or 40,000 units of lipase¶,**

*Pancrelipase products are not interchangeable. All of these products contain a combination
of porcine-­derived lipases, proteases, and amylases.
‡Viokace is only approved for use in adults.
§Should be used in combination with a proton pump inhibitor to maximize absorption

in the duodenum.
||FDA-­approved only for treatment of adults with EPI because of chronic pancreatitis or

pancreatectomy.
¶Should not be crushed or chewed.

**Capsules can be opened and contents sprinkled on soft acidic food (pH ≤ 4.5) such
as applesauce.
From The Medical Letter. Pancreatic enzyme replacement products. Med Lett.
2017;59(1531):170.

2425

Table 398.2  Pancreatic Enzyme Replacement Therapy:
North American CF Foundation Consensus
Statement
Infants (up to 12 mo)

2,000-­4,000 U lipase/120 mL
breast milk or formula

12 mo to 4 yr

1,000 U lipase/kg/meal initially,
then titrate per response

Children >4 yr and adults

500 U lipase/kg/meal initially, up
to maximum of 2,500 U lipase/
kg/meal or 10,000 U lipase/
kg/day or 4,000 U lipase/g fat
ingested per day

PLUS: one half the standard meal dose to be given with snacks.

cannot be used to monitor appropriateness of PERT dosage. Enzyme
replacement should be divided and given at the beginning of and during the meal. Enzymes should not be chewed, crushed, or dissolved in
food, which would allow gastric acid to penetrate the enteric coating
and destroy the enzymes. Enzymes must also be given with snacks that
contain fat. Increasing enzyme supplements beyond the recommended
dose does not improve absorption, might retard growth, and can cause
fibrosing colonopathy (see later).
A major concern has been the ingestion of enzymes by infants.
The importance of correct enzyme ingestion in infants and children
is obvious, but there may be difficulty in feeding the infant microspheres, however small they may be. Enterically coated microspheres can be mixed with applesauce for oral use or crushed for
use in tube feeding. Patients treated with this approach do achieve
growth and weight gain. Pancreatic enzymes specifically prepared
for infants and young children with smaller granules have been
developed.
Treatment of exocrine PI by oral enzyme replacement usually corrects protein malabsorption, but steatorrhea is difficult to correct completely. Factors contributing to fat malabsorption include inadequate
dosage, incorrect timing of doses in relation to food consumption or
gastric emptying, lipase inactivation by gastric acid, and the observation that chymotrypsin in the enzyme preparation digests and thus
inactivates lipase.
When adequate fat absorption is not achieved, gastric acid neutralization with an H2-­receptor antagonist or, more commonly, a proton
pump inhibitor, decreases enzyme inactivation by gastric acid and thus
improves delivery of lipase into the intestine. Enteric coating also protects lipase from acid inactivation.
Untoward effects secondary to PERT include allergic reactions and
kidney stones. Fibrosing colonopathy, consisting of colonic fibrosis and
strictures, can occur 7-­12 months after severe overdose of PERT. This
iatrogenic complication is now very uncommon.
Fat-­soluble vitamin supplements are required by PI patients because
of the ongoing mild to moderate fat malabsorption that occurs despite
PERT.
Knowledge of novel mechanisms affecting absorption, such as intestinal microbiota, may, in the future, be therapeutic targets in the treatment of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2426 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 399

Pancreatitis
399.1 Acute Pancreatitis
Steven L. Werlin and Michael Wilschanski
Acute pancreatitis (AP) is the most common pancreatic disorder in
children; 50 or more cases are usually seen in major pediatric centers
per year. In children, blunt abdominal injuries, multisystem disease
such as the hemolytic uremic syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease, biliary stones or microlithiasis (sludging), and drug toxicity are the
most common etiologies. Although many drugs and toxins can induce
AP in susceptible persons, in children, valproic acid, l-­asparaginase,
6-­mercaptopurine, and azathioprine are the most common causes of
drug-­induced pancreatitis. Alcohol should be considered in adolescents. Other cases follow organ transplantation or are caused by infections, metabolic disorders, or mutations in susceptibility genes. Only
10–20% of cases are idiopathic (Table 399.1).
After an initial insult, such as ductal disruption or obstruction, there
is premature activation of trypsinogen to trypsin within the acinar cell.
Trypsin then activates other pancreatic proenzymes, leading to autodigestion, further enzyme activation, and release of active proteases.
Lysosomal hydrolases co-localize with pancreatic proenzymes within
the acinar cell. Pancreastasis (similar in concept to cholestasis) with
continued synthesis of enzymes occurs. Lecithin is activated by phospholipase A2 into the toxic lysolecithin. Prophospholipase is unstable
and can be activated by minute quantities of trypsin. After the insult,
cytokines and other proinflammatory mediators are released.
The healthy pancreas is protected from autodigestion by pancreatic proteases that are synthesized as inactive proenzymes; digestive
enzymes that are segregated into secretory granules at pH 6.2 by low
calcium concentration, which minimizes trypsin activity; the presence
of protease inhibitors both in the cytoplasm and zymogen granules;
and enzymes that are secreted directly into the ducts.
Histopathologically, interstitial edema appears early. Later, as the
episode of pancreatitis progresses, localized and confluent necrosis,
blood vessel disruption leading to hemorrhage, and an inflammatory
response in the peritoneum can develop.
The diagnosis of pancreatitis in children is made when two of three
of the following are present: abdominal pain; serum amylase and/or
lipase activity at least 3 times greater than the upper limit of normal;
and imaging findings characteristic of, or compatible with, AP.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The severity of AP in children has been defined by a consensus
committee.
Mild Acute Pancreatitis: AP that is not associated with organ failure, local or systemic complications, and usually resolves within the
first week after presentation. This is the most common form of pediatric AP.
The patient with mild AP has moderate to severe abdominal
pain, persistent vomiting, and possibly fever. The pain is epigastric
or in either upper quadrant and steady, often resulting in the child’s
assuming an antalgic position with hips and knees flexed, sitting
upright, or lying on the side. The child is uncomfortable, irritable,
and appears acutely ill. The abdomen may be distended and tender, and a mass may be palpable. The pain can increase in intensity
for 24-­48 hours, during which time vomiting may increase and the
patient can require hospitalization for fluid and electrolyte therapy
and analgesia. There is no other organ failure, and imaging does
not demonstrate peri-­or pancreatic necrosis. The prognosis for

complete recovery in the acute uncomplicated case after 4-­7 days
is excellent.
Moderately Severe Acute Pancreatitis: AP with either transient
organ failure/dysfunction (lasting <48 hours) or development of
local or systemic complications, such as exacerbation of previously
diagnosed comorbid disease (such as lung or kidney disease). Imaging may reveal sterile (peri-­) pancreatic necrosis. The prognosis for
these patients is also excellent, but recovery may be prolonged.
Severe Acute Pancreatitis: AP with development of other organ
dysfunction (lung, cardiac, renal) that persists longer than 48 hours.
Persistent organ failure may be single or multiple. Severe AP is uncommon in children. In this life-­threatening condition, the patient is
acutely ill with severe nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Shock,
high fever, jaundice, ascites, hypocalcemia, and pleural effusions can
occur. A bluish discoloration may be seen around the umbilicus (Cullen sign) or in the flanks (Grey Turner sign). The pancreas is necrotic
and can be transformed into an inflammatory hemorrhagic mass. The
mortality rate, which is approximately 20%, is related to the systemic
inflammatory response syndrome with multiple organ dysfunction,
shock, renal failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, disseminated
intravascular coagulation, gastrointestinal bleeding, and systemic or
intraabdominal infection. The percentage of necrosis seen on CT and
failure of pancreatic tissue to enhance on CT (suggesting necrosis) predicts the severity of the disease.

DIAGNOSIS

AP is usually diagnosed by measurement of serum lipase and amylase activities. Serum lipase is considered the test of choice for
AP because it is more specific than amylase for acute inflammatory pancreatic disease and should be determined when pancreatitis is suspected. The serum lipase rises by 4-­8 hours, peaks at
24-­48 hours, and remains elevated 8-­14 days longer than serum
amylase. Serum lipase greater than 7 times the upper limit of normal obtained within 24 hours of presentation may predict a severe
course. Serum lipase can be elevated in nonpancreatic diseases. The
serum amylase level is typically elevated for up to 4 days. A variety
of other conditions can also cause hyperamylasemia without pancreatitis (Table 399.2). Elevation of salivary amylase can mislead the
clinician to diagnose pancreatitis in a child with abdominal pain.
The laboratory can separate amylase isoenzymes into pancreatic
and salivary fractions. Initially serum amylase levels are normal in
10–15% of patients.
Other laboratory abnormalities that may be present in AP include
hemoconcentration, coagulopathy, leukocytosis, hyperglycemia,
glucosuria, hypocalcemia, elevated γ-­
glutamyl transpeptidase, and
hyperbilirubinemia.
X-­ray of the chest and abdomen might demonstrate nonspecific
findings such as atelectasis, basilar infiltrates, elevation of the hemidiaphragm, left-­(rarely right-­) sided pleural effusions, pericardial
effusion, and pulmonary edema. Abdominal x-­rays might demonstrate a sentinel loop, dilation of the transverse colon (cutoff sign),
ileus, pancreatic calcification (if recurrent), blurring of the left
psoas margin, a pseudocyst, diffuse abdominal haziness (ascites),
and peripancreatic extraluminal gas bubbles.
CT has a major role in the diagnosis and follow-­up of children
with pancreatitis. Findings can include pancreatic enlargement; a
hypoechoic, sonolucent edematous pancreas; pancreatic masses;
fluid collections; and abscesses (Fig. 399.1). Normal imaging studies
at the time of diagnosis are not uncommon. In adults, CT findings
are the basis of a widely accepted prognostic system (Table 399.3).
Ultrasonography is more sensitive than CT for the diagnosis of biliary stones. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)
and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) are
essential in the investigation of recurrent pancreatitis, nonresolving pancreatitis, and disease associated with gallbladder pathology.
Endoscopic ultrasonography also helps visualize the pancreaticobiliary system. Complications of AP are noted in Table 399.4.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 399 u Pancreatitis 2427
Table 399.1  Etiology of Acute and Recurrent Pancreatitis in Children
DRUGS AND TOXINS
Acetaminophen overdose
Alcohol
Anabolic androgenic steroids
l-­Asparaginase
Azathioprine
Cannabis
Carbamazepine
Cimetidine
Cisplatin
Corticosteroids
Cytosine arabinoside
Dapsone
Didanosine
Enalapril
Erythromycin
Estrogen
Furosemide
Glucagon-­like peptide-­1 agents
Interferon-­α
Isoniazid
Lamivudine
Lisinopril
6-­Mercaptopurine
Methyldopa
Mesalamine
Metronidazole
Organophosphate poisoning
Pentamidine
Procainamide
Retrovirals: DDC (dideoxycytidine), DDI (dideoxyinosine), tenofovir
Rifampin
Sulfonamides: mesalamine, 5-­aminosalicytates, sulfasalazine,
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole
Sulindac
Tetracycline
Thiazides
Valproic acid
Venom (spider, scorpion, Gila monster lizard)
Vincristine
Volatile hydrocarbons
GENETIC
Cationic trypsinogen gene (PRSS1)
Carboxypeptidase A1 (CPA1)
Chymotrypsin C gene (CTRC)
Cystic fibrosis gene (CFTR)
Trypsin inhibitor gene (SPINK1)

OBSTRUCTIVE
Ampullary disease
Ascariasis
Biliary tract malformations
Choledochal cyst
Choledochocele
Cholelithiasis, microlithiasis, and choledocholithiasis (stones or
sludge)
Duplication cyst
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
complication
Pancreas divisum
Pancreatic ductal abnormalities
Postoperative
Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Tumor
SYSTEMIC DISEASE
Autoimmune pancreatitis (IgG4-­related systemic disease)
Brain tumor
Collagen vascular diseases
Congenital partial lipodystrophy
Crohn disease
Diabetes mellitus (ketoacidosis)
Head trauma
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
Hemochromatosis
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Hyperlipidemia: types I, IV, V
Hyperparathyroidism/hypercalcemia
Kawasaki disease
Malnutrition
Organic acidemia
Peptic ulcer
Periarteritis nodosa
Renal failure
Scorpion venom
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Transplantation: bone marrow, heart, liver, kidney, pancreas
Vasculitis
TRAUMATIC
Blunt injury
Burns
Child abuse
Hypothermia
Surgical trauma
Total-­body cast

INFECTIOUS
Ascariasis
COVID-­19
Coxsackie B virus
Echovirus
Enterovirus
Epstein-­Barr virus
Hepatitides A, B
Herpes viruses
Influenzae A, B
Leptospirosis
Malaria
Measles
Mumps
Mycoplasma
Rabies
Rubella
Reye syndrome: varicella, influenza B
Septic shock
Thyroid fever

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2428 Part XVI u The Digestive System
TREATMENT

The aims of medical management are to relieve pain (often needing
opioids) and restore metabolic homeostasis. Analgesia should be given
in adequate doses. Fluid, electrolyte, and mineral balance should be
restored and maintained. Intravenous fluids (lactated Ringer’s solution)
Table 399.2  Differential Diagnosis of Hyperamylasemia
PANCREATIC PATHOLOGY
Acute or chronic pancreatitis
Complications of pancreatitis (pseudocyst, ascites, abscess)
Factitious pancreatitis
SALIVARY GLAND PATHOLOGY
Parotitis (mumps, Staphylococcus aureus, cytomegalovirus, HIV,
Epstein-­Barr virus)
Sialadenitis (calculus, radiation)
Eating disorders (anorexia nervosa, bulimia)
INTRAABDOMINAL PATHOLOGY
Biliary tract disease (cholelithiasis)
Peptic ulcer perforation
Peritonitis
Intestinal obstruction
Appendicitis

PROGNOSIS

Children with mild AP do well and recover within 4-­5 days. When
pancreatitis is associated with trauma or systemic disease, the prognosis is typically related to the associated medical conditions.

SYSTEMIC DISEASES
Metabolic acidosis (diabetes mellitus, shock)
Renal insufficiency, transplantation
Burns
Pregnancy
Drugs (morphine)
Head injury
Cardiopulmonary bypass

A

D

is often required to correct hypovolemia because of poor fluid intake
and the fluid losses secondary to capillary leak from the systemic
inflammatory response syndrome. Excessive fluids should be avoided;
fluid therapy should be titrated to improve vital signs and renal function. Nasogastric suction is useful in patients who are vomiting. Early
refeeding decreases the complication rate and length of stay. In patients
with pancreatitis who are not vomiting, oral nutrition should not be
stopped. Recovery is usually complete within 4-­5 days.
Prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended in inflammatory
pancreatitis or with sterile necrosis, but broad-­spectrum antibiotics are used to treat infected areas of pancreatic necrosis. Elevated
serum procalcitonin levels suggest infection. Gastric acid secretion
is suppressed with proton pump inhibitors. Enteral alimentation by
mouth, nasogastric tube, or nasojejunal tube (in severe cases or for
those intolerant of oral or nasogastric feedings) within 2-­3 days of
onset reduces the length of hospitalization, complication rate, and
survival in patients with severe AP. In children, surgical therapy
of nontraumatic AP is rarely required but may include drainage of
necrotic material or abscesses. Endotherapy for common bile duct
stones, ductal strictures, and for drainage of fluid collections is the
standard of care when indicated.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

B

C

E

F

Fig. 399.1 CT and MRI appearance of pancreatitis. A, Mild acute pancreatitis. Arterial phase spiral CT. Diffuse enlargement of pancreas without

fluid accumulation. B, Severe acute pancreatitis. Lack of enhancement of the pancreatic parenchyma because of the necrosis of the entire pancreatic
gland. C, Pancreatic pseudocyst. A round fluid collection with thin capsule is seen within the lesser sac. D, Acute severe pancreatitis and peripancreatic abscess formation. Peripancreatic abscess formation is observed within the peripancreatic and the left anterior pararenal space. E, Pancreatic
necrosis. A well-­defined fluid attenuation collection in the pancreatic bed (white arrows) seen on contrast-­enhanced CT imaging. F, The same collection is more complex appearing on the corresponding T2-­weighted MR image. The internal debris and necrotic tissue are better appreciated
because of the superior soft tissue contrast of MRI (black arrows). (A-­D from Elmas N. The role of diagnostic radiology in pancreatitis. Eur J Radiol.
2001;38[2]:120–132. Figs. 1, 3b, 4a, and 5; E and F from Soakar A, Rabinowitz CB, Sahani DV. Cross-­sectional imaging in acute pancreatitis. Radiol
Clin North Am. 2007;45[3]:447–460. Fig. 14.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 399 u Pancreatitis 2429
Table 399.3  Revised Definitions of Morphologic Features
of Acute Pancreatitis
INTERSTITIAL EDEMATOUS PANCREATITIS
Acute inflammation of the pancreatic parenchyma and peripancreatic
tissues but without recognizable tissue necrosis
CECT criteria
• Pancreatic parenchyma enhancement by intravenous contrast
agent
• No peripancreatic necrosis
NECROTIZING PANCREATITIS
Inflammation associated with pancreatic parenchymal necrosis and/
or peripancreatic necrosis
CECT criteria
• Lack of pancreatic parenchymal enhancement by intravenous
contrast agent
• Presence of findings of peripancreatic necrosis
ACUTE PANCREATITIS FLUID COLLECTION
Peripancreatic fluid associated with interstitial edematous pancreatitis
with no associated peripancreatic necrosis. Applies only to areas
of peripancreatic fluid seen within the first 4 wk after onset of
interstitial edematous pancreatitis and without the features of a
pseudocyst.
CECT criteria
• Occurs in the setting of interstitial edematous pancreatitis
• Homogeneous collection with fluid density
• Confined by normal peripancreatic fascial planes
• No definable wall encapsulating the collection
• Adjacent to pancreas (no intrapancreatic extension)
PANCREATIC PSEUDOCYST
An encapsulated collection of fluid with a well-­defined inflammation
wall, usually outside the pancreas, with little or no necrosis.
Usually occurs more than 4 wk after onset of interstitial edematous
pancreatitis.
CECT criteria
• Well circumscribed; usually round or oval
• Homogeneous fluid density
• No nonliquid component
• Well-­defined wall that is wholly encapsulated
• Maturation usually needs >4 wk after onset of acute pancreatitis;
occurs after interstitial edematous pancreatitis
ACUTE NECROTIC COLLECTION
A collection containing variable amounts of both fluid and necrosis
associated with necrotizing pancreatitis; the necrosis can include
the pancreatic parenchyma and/or the peripancreatic tissue.
CECT criteria
• Occurs only in the setting of acute necrotizing pancreatitis
• Heterogeneous and nonliquid density of varying degrees in
different locations (some seem homogeneous early in their
course)
• No definable wall encapsulating the collection
• Intrapancreatic and/or extrapancreatic
WALLED-­OFF NECROSIS
A mature, encapsulated collection of pancreatic and/or peripancreatic
necrosis that has developed a well-­defined inflammatory wall.
Usually occurs >4 wk after onset of necrotizing pancreatitis.
CECT criteria
• Heterogeneous with liquid and nonliquid density, with varying
locations (some can seem homogeneous)
• Well-­defined wall that is wholly encapsulated
• Intrapancreatic and/or extrapancreatic
• Maturation usually needs 4 wk after onset of acute necrotizing
pancreatitis
CECT, Contrast-­enhanced CT.
From PA Banks, TL Bollen, C Dervenis, et al. The Acute Pancreatitis Classification
Working Group Classification of acute pancreatitis—2012: revision of the Atlanta
classification and definitions by international consensus. Gut. 2013;62:102–111.

Table 399.4  Complications of Acute Pancreatitis
LOCAL
Pseudocyst
Sterile necrosis
Infected necrosis
Abscess
GI bleeding
• Pancreatitis-­related
• Splenic artery or splenic artery pseudoaneurysm rupture
• Splenic vein rupture
• Portal vein rupture
• Splenic vein thrombosis leading to gastroesophageal variceal
bleeding
• Pseudocyst or abscess hemorrhage
• Postnecrosectomy bleeding
Nonpancreatitis-­related
• Mallory-­Weiss tear
• Alcoholic gastropathy
• Stress-­related mucosal gastropathy
Splenic complications
• Infarction
• Rupture
• Hematoma
• Splenic vein thrombosis
Fistulization to or obstruction of the small intestine or colon
Hydronephrosis
SYSTEMIC
Respiratory failure
Renal failure
Shock
Hyperglycemia
Hypocalcemia
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Fat necrosis (subcutaneous nodules)
Retinopathy
PSYCHOSIS
From Tenner S, Steinberg WM. Acute pancreatitis. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt
LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 10th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2016: Box 58.7, p. 991.

399.2 Acute Recurrent and Chronic
Pancreatitis
Steven L. Werlin and Michael Wilschanski
Acute recurrent pancreatitis (ARP) is defined as ≥2 distinct episodes
of AP with intervening return of enzymes to baseline. Chronic pancreatitis (CP) is defined as the presence of typical abdominal pain plus
characteristic imaging findings including pancreatic calcifications,
inflammation and fibrosis, or exocrine insufficiency plus imaging findings, or endocrine insufficiency plus imaging findings. Most children
with CP describe a history of ARP and tend to be older at the time of
diagnosis compared with children with ARP, suggesting that ARP and
CP are a disease continuum. CP without prior AP or ARP may occur.
ARP and CP in children are often caused by pathogenic gene variants or congenital anomalies of the pancreatic or biliary ductal system
(Tables 399.5 and 399.6). Variants in PRSS1 (cationic trypsinogen),
SPINK1 (pancreatic trypsin inhibitor), in the cystic fibrosis gene
(CFTR), CPA1, and chymotrypsin C (CTRC) may all lead to CP (Fig.
399.2).
Cationic trypsinogen has a trypsin-­sensitive cleavage site. Loss of
this cleavage site in the abnormal protein permits uncontrolled activation of trypsinogen to trypsin, which leads to autodigestion of the
pancreas. Pathogenic variants in PRSS1 act in an autosomal dominant
fashion with incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. Symptoms often begin in the first decade but are usually mild at the onset.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2430 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Although spontaneous recovery from each attack occurs in 4-­7 days,
episodes become progressively more severe. Hereditary pancreatitis
may be diagnosed by the presence of the disease in successive generations of a family. An evaluation during symptom-­free intervals may be
Table 399.5  Factors Contributing to the Etiology of
Chronic Pancreatitis
NO. (%)*
Chronic pancreatitis patients with
history of ≥1 episode acute
pancreatitis

73 (96)

Risk factors for pancreatitis
Genetic

51 (67)

PRSS1

33 (43)

SPINK1

14 (19)

CFTR

11 (14)

CTRC

2 (3)

CPA1

∼1%

Autoimmune

3 (4)

Obstructive

25 (33)

Pancreas divisum

15 (20)

Sphincter of Oddi dysfunction

1 (1)

Gallstones

3 (4)

Pancreatic duct malunion

2 (3)

Pancreatic duct obstruction

1 (1)

Other

unrewarding until calcifications, pseudocysts, or pancreatic exocrine
and endocrine insufficiency develop (Fig. 399.3; see Fig. 399.2). CP is a
risk factor for the development of pancreatic cancer. Multiple variants
of PRSS1 associated with hereditary pancreatitis have been described.
Trypsin inhibitor acts as a fail-­safe mechanism to prevent uncontrolled autoactivation of trypsin. Pathogenic variants in SPINK1 have
been associated with ARP or CP. In SPINK1 variants, this fail-­safe
mechanism is lost; this gene may be a modifier gene and not the direct
etiologic factor.
Pathogenic variants of CFTR that are associated with pancreatic
sufficiency, or which do not typically produce pulmonary disease,
can cause CP, possibly because of ductal obstruction. Patients with
genotypes associated with mild phenotypic effects have a greater risk
of developing pancreatitis than those with genotypes associated with
moderate to severe phenotypes.
Pathogenic variants in the chymotrypsin C gene, which cause a
loss of function, may also cause recurrent pancreatitis. Indications for
genetic testing include recurrent episodes of AP, CP, a family history of
pancreatitis, or unexplained pancreatitis in children. Pathogenic variants in carboxypeptidase A1 (CPA1) have been associated with early
onset (<10 years) of CP.
Other conditions associated with chronic, relapsing pancreatitis are
hyperlipidemia (types I, IV, and V), hyperparathyroidism, and ascariasis. Previously, most cases of recurrent pancreatitis in childhood were
considered idiopathic; with the discovery of gene families associated
with recurrent pancreatitis, this has changed. Congenital anomalies of
the ductal systems, such as pancreas divisum, are also more common
than previously recognized.

5 (7)

Toxic/metabolic

8 (11)

Alcohol (determined by doctor)

1 (1)

Passive smoking (exposure)

3 (4)

Hyperlipidemia

1 (1)

Medication

1 (1)

Metabolic disease

1 (1)

None cited

8 (11)

PRSS1, serine protease 1; SPINK1, pancreatic trypsin inhibitor; CFTR, cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator; CTRC, chymotrypsin C; CPA1, carboxypeptidase
A1.
*The total exceeds 100% because some children have more than one factor.
Modified from Schwarzenberg SJ, Bellin M, Husain SZ, et al. Pediatric chronic
pancreatitis is associated with genetic risk factors and substantial disease burden.
J Pediatr. 2015;166:890–896. Table II.

Fig. 399.2 Chronic pancreatitis. Computed tomogram showing calci-

fication in the head of the pancreas (black arrow) and dilated pancreatic
duct (arrow) in a 12-­yr-­old patient. (Courtesy Dr. Janet Reid. From Wyllie
R, Hyams JS, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2006.)

Table 399.6  Classification of Chronic Pancreatitis
CHRONIC CALCIFYING PANCREATITIS
Alcohol
Smoking
Genetic
Idiopathic
Juvenile-­onset
Tropical

CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PANCREATITIS
Stricture
Blunt trauma
Endoscopic stenting
Acute pancreatitis
Anastomotic stricture
Tumor
Adenocarcinoma
IPMN
Serous cystadenoma Islet cell tumor

STEROID-­RESPONSIVE PANCREATITIS
Autoimmune Pancreatitis
Type 1
Type 2 (IDCP)

IDCP, Idiopathic duct-­centric pancreatitis; IPMN, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.
From Majumder S, Chari ST. Chronic pancreatitis. Lancet. 2016;387:1957–1966. Fig 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 399 u Pancreatitis 2431
Table 399.7  Chronic Disorders Recognized to Be Part of
IgG4-­Related Disease
Autoimmune pancreatitis (lymphoplasmacytic sclerosing pancreatitis)
Eosinophilic angiocentric fibrosis (affecting the orbits and upper
respiratory tract)
Fibrosing mediastinitis
Hypertrophic pachymeningitis
Idiopathic hypocomplementemic tubulointerstitial nephritis with
extensive tubulointerstitial deposits
Inflammatory pseudotumor (affecting the orbits, lungs, kidneys, and
other organs)
Küttner tumor (affecting the submandibular glands)
Mikulicz disease (affecting the salivary and lacrimal glands)
Multifocal fibrosclerosis (commonly affecting the orbits, thyroid
gland, retroperitoneum, mediastinum, and other tissues and
organs)
Periaortitis and periarteritis
Inflammatory aortic aneurysm
Retroperitoneal fibrosis (Ormond disease)
Riedel thyroiditis
Sclerosing mesenteritis
Conditions once regarded as individual disorders now recognized to
be part of IgG4-­related disease

A

From Kamisawa T, Zen Y, Pillai S, Stone JH. IgG4-­related disease. Lancet.
2015;385:1460–1471. Panel 1.

B
Fig. 399.3 Examples of ultrasound and multidetector images in pa-

tients with chronic pancreatitis. A, Transabdominal ultrasound scan
showing a uniformly swollen, hypoechoic pancreas (arrow) typical of autoimmune pancreatitis. B, Multidetector CT showing pancreatic calculi
in an atrophic pancreas (long arrow) and a pseudocyst at the tail of the
pancreas (short arrow). (From Braganza JM, Lee SH, McCloy RF, McMahon MJ. Chronic pancreatitis. Lancet. 2011;377:1184–1197. Fig. 5.)

Autoimmune pancreatitis (AIP) typically manifests with jaundice,
abdominal pain, and weight loss. The pancreas is typically enlarged and
is hypodense on CT. The pathogenesis is unknown. Type 1 is a systemic
disease and is associated with high serum immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4).
In addition to pancreatitis in type 1 disease, the patient may have retroperitoneal fibrosis, orbital inflammation, aortitis, sclerosing cholangitis, cutaneous vasculitis, pulmonary fibrosis, and sialadenitis. These
extrapancreatic features may also be present in the absence of pancreatitis (Table 399.7). Tissue biopsy shows fibrosis, plasmacytosis, and
positive staining for IgG4; serum IgG4 levels are not always elevated.
Type 2 is limited to diffuse or focal involvement of just the pancreas.
IgG4 levels are normal. Both types respond to steroids. Children with
AIP typically have type 2.

Juvenile tropical pancreatitis is the most common form of CP in
developing equatorial countries. The highest prevalence is in the Indian
state of Kerala. Tropical pancreatitis occurs during late childhood or
early adulthood, manifesting with abdominal pain and irreversible
pancreatic insufficiency followed by diabetes mellitus within 10 years.
The pancreatic ducts are obstructed with inspissated secretions, which
later calcify. This condition is associated with pathogenic variants in
SPINK in 50% of cases.
A thorough diagnostic evaluation of every child with more than
one episode of pancreatitis is indicated. Serum lipid, calcium, and
phosphorus levels are determined. Stools are evaluated for ascaris,
and a sweat test is performed. Plain abdominal films are evaluated
for the presence of pancreatic calcifications. Abdominal ultrasound
or CT scanning is performed to detect the presence of a pseudocyst. The biliary tract is evaluated for the presence of stones. After
genetic counseling, evaluation of PRSS1, SPINK1, CFTR, CPA1, and
CRTC genotypes can be measured. Electrophysiologic tests such as
nasal potential difference testing may be recommended when the
diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (CF) is uncertain.
MRCP and ERCP are techniques that can be used to define the
anatomy of the gland and are mandatory if surgery is considered.
MRCP is the test of choice when endotherapy is not being considered and should be performed as part of the evaluation of any
child with idiopathic, nonresolving, or recurrent pancreatitis and in
patients with a pseudocyst before drainage. In these cases, a previously undiagnosed anatomic defect that may be amenable to endoscopic or surgical therapy may be detected. Endoscopic treatments
include sphincterotomy, stone extraction, drainage of pseudocysts,
and insertion of pancreatic or biliary endoprosthetic stents. These
treatments allow the successful nonsurgical management of conditions previously requiring surgical intervention.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2432 Part XVI u The Digestive System
resolve spontaneously. It is recommended that the patient with acute
pancreatitis undergo an ultrasonographic evaluation 4 weeks after resolution of the acute episode for an evaluation of possible pseudocyst
formation.

Chapter 400

Pancreatic Fluid
Collections

TREATMENT OF FLUID COLLECTIONS AND
NECROSIS

Percutaneous and endoscopic drainage of pseudocysts have replaced
open surgical drainage, except for complicated or recurrent pseudocysts. Whereas a pseudocyst must be allowed to mature for 4-­6 weeks
before surgical drainage is attempted, percutaneous or endoscopic
drainage can be attempted earlier. In some cases, endoscopic creation
of a cyst-­gastrostomy is performed. When a surgical treatment is
planned, an MRCP or ERCP is performed to define anatomic abnormalities and aid the surgeon in planning the approach. EUS is helpful
when an endoscopic approach is chosen.
Necrotizing pancreatitis includes both pancreatic gland necrosis
and peripancreatic fat necrosis. In the initial phases, the necrotic collection is a mix of semisolid and solid tissue. Over a period of 4 weeks
or longer, the collection becomes more liquid and becomes encapsulated by a visible wall. At this point, the process is termed walled-­off
pancreatic necrosis. Sterile necrosis does not require therapy except in
the rare case of a collection that obstructs a nearby viscus (e.g., duodenal, bile duct, or gastric obstruction).
The development of infected necrosis is the main indication for
broad-­spectrum antibiotic therapy. The development of fever, leukocytosis, an elevated procalcitonin level, and increasing abdominal pain
suggests infection of the necrotic tissue. A CT scan may reveal evidence
of air bubbles in the necrotic cavity.

Michael Wilschanski and Steven L. Werlin
Pancreatic pseudocyst formation is an uncommon sequela to acute or
chronic pancreatitis. A pancreatic pseudocyst is a circumscribed collection of fluid rich in pancreatic enzymes, blood, and necrotic tissue,
typically located in the lesser sac of the abdomen. Pancreatic pseudocysts are usually complications of pancreatitis, although in children
they frequently occur after abdominal trauma. They can enlarge or
extend in almost any direction, thus producing a wide variety of symptoms (Fig. 400.1; see also Fig. 399.1C).
A pancreatic pseudocyst is suggested when an episode of pancreatitis fails to resolve or when a mass develops after an episode of pancreatitis. Clinical features usually include pain, nausea, and vomiting,
but many patients are asymptomatic. The most common signs are a
palpable mass in 50% of patients and jaundice in 10%. Other findings
include ascites and pleural effusions (usually left-­sided).
Pancreatic pseudocysts can be detected by transabdominal ultrasonography, CT scan, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP), endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP),
and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS). Because of its ease, availability, and
reliability, ultrasonography is the first choice. Sequential ultrasonography studies have demonstrated that most small pseudocysts (<6 cm)

<4
weeks

Interstitial edematous
pancreatitis

Necrotizing
pancreatitis

Acute (peri)pancreatic
fluid collection

Acute necrotic
collection

Homogenous fluid
adjacent to
pancreas without a
recognizable wall

Pancreatic pseudocyst
4
weeks

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

An encapsulated,
well-defined, usually
extrapancreatic fluid
collection with
minimal solids

Intra- and/or extrapancreatic necrotic
collection without
a well-defined wall

Walled off necrosis
Intra- and/or extrapancreatic necrotic
collection with a
well-defined wall

Fig. 400.1 Classification of acute pan-

creatitis and associated fluid collections.
Based on international consensus according to the Acute Pancreatitis Classification
Working Group (revised Atlanta criteria).
(From Trikudanathan, G, Wolbrink DRJ, van
Santvoort HC, et al. Current concepts in severe acute and necrotizing pancreatitis: an
evidence-­
based approach. Gastroenterol.
2019;156:1994–2007e3. Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 401 u Pancreatic Tumors

Chapter 401

Pancreatic Tumors
Meghen B. Browning, Steven L. Werlin, and
Michael Wilschanski
Pancreatic tumors can be of either endocrine or nonendocrine origin.
Tumors of endocrine origin include gastrinomas and insulinomas, which
are more typically seen in nonpancreatic sites. These occur in the autosomal
dominantly inherited multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN-­1) and are
often benign. Hypoglycemia accompanied by higher-­than-­expected insulin
levels or refractory gastric ulcers (Zollinger-­Ellison syndrome) indicate the
possibility of a functional endocrine pancreatic tumor (see Chapter 381.1).
The treatment of choice is surgical removal. If the primary tumor cannot be
found, or if it has metastasized, cure might not be possible. Treatment with a
high dose of a proton pump inhibitor to inhibit gastric acid secretion is then
indicated. Insulinomas and persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of
infancy produce symptomatic hypoglycemia caused by pathogenic variants
in a variety of genes, most commonly GUUD1 and KATP. Massive subtotal
or total pancreatectomy is the treatment of choice when medical treatment
fails. These children might then develop pancreatic insufficiency and diabetes as a complication of surgery.
Nonfunctioning pancreatic endocrine tumors make up most of the
remainder of the pancreatic endocrine tumors (PETs). Diagnosis is
either incidental, because they tend to be asymptomatic, or made after
the tumors are large enough to have mass effects. The nonfunctioning
PETs, as well as the even-­more-­rare functioning PETs, are less likely to be
histologically benign. Pancreatic tumors secreting a variety of hormones,
including glucagon, somatostatin, parathyroid hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone, and pancreatic polypeptide, have been described (Table
401.1). The treatment is surgical resection when possible.
The watery diarrhea–hypokalemia–acidosis syndrome is usually
produced by the secretion of vasoactive intestinal peptide by a non–α-­
cell tumor (VIPoma). Vasoactive intestinal peptide levels are often,
but not always, increased in the serum. Again, treatment is surgical
removal of the tumor. When this is not possible, symptoms may be
controlled by the use of octreotide acetate (cyclic somatostatin [Sandostatin]), a synthetic analog of somatostatin.

2433

Pancreatoblastomas, pancreatic adenocarcinomas, and sarcomas of
the pancreas are also rarely encountered. Pancreatoblastoma, a malignant
embryonal tumor that secretes α-­fetoprotein and can contain both endocrine and exocrine elements, is the most common pancreatic neoplasm
in young children (<10 years of age). Genetic associations include familial
adenomatous polyposis and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndromes. Presurgical
chemotherapy should be considered for lesions not primarily resectable.
Resection can be curative. The effectiveness of adjuvant chemotherapy is
less clear. Sarcomas are very rarely primarily pancreatic but may include
Ewing family tumors (Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal
tumor), rhabdomyosarcoma, or undifferentiated soft tissue sarcomas. They
are treated with multimodality therapy, including chemotherapy and either
resection or radiation. The pancreas can be a site of metastases for any of
these entities. Histologically benign tumors, such as teratomas and vascular
anomalies, may also rarely involve the pancreas.
Carcinoma of the exocrine pancreas, or ductal adenocarcinoma,
is a major problem in adults, accounting for 2% of diagnoses and
5% of deaths from cancer. However, it is exceptionally rare in childhood. Pathogenic variants in the PRSS1 and MEN-­1 genes lead to an
increased incidence of pancreatic cancer in adult life but do not appear
to account for pediatric cases. Acinar cell carcinoma is very rarely
seen in children. The solid pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas,
also called Frantz tumor, is the most common pancreatic tumor in
adolescents. It is a more indolent pancreatic carcinoma usually found
in adolescent/young adult females. Typical presenting symptoms are
abdominal pain, mass, or jaundice. The treatment of choice is total surgical removal. Prognosis is very good.
Pancreatic lesions in von Hippel-­Lindau disease are usually benign
and cystic. Cystadenomas, familial adenocarcinomas, and islet cell
tumors are less common. Metastases have been reported, but effective
adjuvant therapy has not been established.
Prognosis is good for completely resected endocrine tumors but very
poor for sarcomas and carcinomas, except for rare subtypes. Children
who survive partial or complete pancreatectomy may have decreased
pancreatic exocrine and endocrine reserve.
Inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors (resembling IgG4-related
lesions) may cause obstruction and be identified during evaluation for
pain or jaundice. Pancreatic tumors and other entities, including intrapancreatic accessory spleens, may be found incidentally during imaging.
Pancreatic imaging and biopsy when indicated confirm the diagnosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 401.1  Syndromes Associated with Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (pNETs)*
INCIDENCE/106/YR

SYNDROME

MALIGNANCY (%)

HORMONE

Insulinoma

1-­2

<10

Insulin

Gastrinoma (ZES)

0.5-­1.5

60–90

Gastrin

VIPoma (Verner-­Morrison syndrome,
WDHA, pancreatic cholera)

0.05-­0.2

>60

VIP

Glucagonoma

0.01-­0.1

50–80

Glucagon

Somatostatinoma

Rare

>70

Somatostatin

GRFoma

Unknown

>30

GH-­RF

ACTHoma

Uncommon

>95%

ACTH

pNET secreting PTH-­rP

Rare

84%

PTH-­rP

Pancreatic carcinoid tumor

Rare (<1% of all carcinoids)

77%

Serotonin, tachykinins

pNET secreting renin

Rare

Unknown

Renin

pNET secreting erythropoietin

Rare

Unknown

Erythropoietin

pNET secreting luteinizing hormone

Rare

Unknown

Luteinizing hormone

pNET secreting cholecystokinin (CCKoma)

Rare

Unknown

CCK

*These syndromes may also be caused by a GI-­NET (carcinoid).
GH-­RF, Growth hormone–releasing factor; PP, pancreatic polypeptide; PTH-­rP, parathyroid hormone–related protein; VIP, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide; WDHA, watery diarrhea,
hypokalemia, achlorhydria; ZES, Zollinger-Ellison syndrome; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone.
From Jensen RT, Norton JA, Oberg K. Neuroendocrine tumors. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 33.1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2434 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Section 6

The Liver and Biliary
System
Chapter 402

Morphogenesis of the
Liver and Biliary System
Stacey S. Huppert and William F. Balistreri
During the early embryonic process of gastrulation, the three embryonic germ layers (endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm) are formed.
The definitive endoderm is an epithelial sheet that occupies the ventral surface of the early embryo by approximately the second week of
human gestation. The digestive and respiratory organs, as well as the
thymus and thyroid, are all derived from the definitive endoderm.
Hepatogenesis can be divided into three distinct processes. First,
through unknown mechanisms, the ventral foregut endoderm intrinsically acquires competence to receive signals arising from the cardiac
mesoderm and the septum transversum mesenchyme (Fig. 402.1A).
The thickened epithelium of the ventral foregut endoderm is visible
morphologically just before the onset of hepatic-­specific gene expression. “Pioneer” transcription factors, including the Forkhead Box
A (FOXA) and GATA protein families, have the unique ability to
engage closed and silent chromatin locally, converting it to an open
and permissive chromatin state marking genes as competent. However,
hepatic-­specific genes will be expressed only if they are induced by
additional transcription factors. There are no known hepatic-­specific
molecular markers associated with the morphologic initial ventral
foregut endoderm thickening.
Signals originating from the mesoderm lead to specification of cells
that have the potential to form the liver and activate hepatic-­specific
genes (see Fig. 402.1B). Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) from the

Competence
Ventral view

cardiac mesoderm and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) from septum transversum mesenchyme cells coordinately specify the hepatic—
and suppress the pancreas—transcriptional programs in the cells of the
ventral foregut endoderm.
The newly specified hepatic cells initially compose a columnar epithelium that transitions to a single-­layer of pseudostratified epithelium
attached to a laminin-­containing basement membrane. The basement
membrane is then broken down, and the hepatic cells delaminate from
the ventral foregut endoderm and migrate in a rostral ventral direction into the septum transversum in the third to fourth week of human
gestation to initiate liver morphogenesis (see Fig. 402.1C). After foregut
closure, the hepatic cells proliferate and continue to migrate into the
surrounding mesenchyme, interacting to form a bud that becomes vascularized. The rostral hepatic bud gives rise to the liver, including the
intrahepatic bile ducts, and the caudal hepatic bud develops into the
gallbladder and the extrahepatic common bile duct. The gallbladder
anlage is visible around the seventh week of human gestation. Careful
orchestration of signals between epithelial, mesenchymal, and endothelial cells are required to guide hepatogenesis (Table 402.1).

HEPATIC ARCHITECTURE

Within the ventral mesentery, proliferation of migrating cells forms
anastomosing hepatic cords, with the network of primitive liver progenitors (i.e., hepatoblasts), sinusoids, and septal mesenchyme establishing the basic architectural pattern of the liver lobule (Fig. 402.2).
The hepatic lobules are identifiable in the sixth week of human gestation. The bile canalicular structures, including microvilli and junctional complexes, are specialized intralobular network channels; these
appear very early in gestation, and large canaliculi bounded by several
hepatocytes are seen by the sixth to seventh week of human gestation.
The caudal part (pars cystica) of the hepatic diverticulum becomes
the gallbladder, cystic duct, and common bile duct. The distal portions
of the right and left hepatic ducts develop from the extrahepatic ducts,
whereas the proximal portions develop from the first intrahepatic ductal plates. The extrahepatic bile ducts and the developing intrahepatic
biliary tree maintain luminal continuity and patency from the beginning of organogenesis (see Fig. 402.2C).
Fetal hepatic blood flow is derived from the hepatic artery and from
the portal and umbilical veins, which form the portal sinus. The portal venous inflow is directed mainly to the right lobe of the liver and
umbilical flow primarily to the left. The ductus venosus shunts blood
from the portal and umbilical veins to the hepatic vein, bypassing the

Specification
Ventral view

Morphogenesis
Sagittal view

Head
folds

Head
folds

Gut
tube

Rostral
Cardiac
mesoderm

Cardiac
mesoderm

Caudal

A

Caudal
hepatic bud
Gallbladder
anlage

Dorsal
pancreatic
bud
Hepatic
domain

Ventral
foregut
endoderm

B

Lateral
pancreatic
domains

Rostral
hepatic bud

Ventral
pancreatic
bud

Septum
transversum
mesenchyme

C

Fig. 402.1 Processes involved in early liver development. A, The ventral foregut endoderm acquires competence to receive signals arising from

the cardiac mesoderm and septum transversum mesenchyme. B, Specific cells of the ventral foregut endoderm undergo specification and activation
of liver-­specific genes under the influence of mesodermal signals. C, Liver morphogenesis is initiated as the newly specified cells migrate into the
septum transversum under the influence of signaling molecules and extracellular matrix released by septum transversum mesenchymal cells and of
primitive endothelial cells.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 402 u Morphogenesis of the Liver and Biliary System
Table 402.1  Selected Growth Factors, Receptors, Protein
Kinases, and Transcription Factors Required
for Normal Liver Development in Animal
Models
INDUCTION OF HEPATIC FATE THROUGH CARDIAC MESODERM
• Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) 1, 2, 8
• FGF receptors 1, 4
INDUCTION OF HEPATIC FATE THROUGH SEPTUM
TRANSVERSUM
• Bone morphogenetic proteins 2, 4, 7
STIMULATION OF HEPATOBLAST GROWTH AND
PROLIFERATION
• Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)
• HGF receptor c-­met
• “Pioneer” transcription factors Foxa1, Foxa2, FoxA3, and Gata4,
Gata6
• Transcription factors Xbp1, Foxm1b, Hlx, Hex, Prox1, Tbx3
• Wnt signaling pathway, β-­catenin
SPECIFICATION OF HEPATOCYTE LINEAGE
• HGF
• Transcription factors
• Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) 1α, 4α, 6, Cebpa
SPECIFICATION OF CHOLANGIOCYTE LINEAGE
• Jagged 1 (Notch ligand) and Notch receptors 1, 2
• Transforming growth factor-­β and its downstream effectors Smad
2, Smad 3
• Hippo/Yap
• HNF6, HNF1β, Cebpb, Sox9, Sox4

B

A
Liver in
septum

Vitelline
Hepatic duct
vein
C
Gallbladder
Stomach

Foregut

Liver cord
Common
bile duct
Sinusoids
Bile canaliculi
Bile duct
Bile ductule
Branch of hepatic artery
Branch of portal vein

Liver

Space of Disse
Central
vein
Hepatic plate

D

Fig. 402.2 Hepatic morphogenesis. A, Ventral outgrowth of hepatic

diverticulum from foregut endoderm in the 3.5-­wk embryo. B, Between
the two vitelline veins, the enlarging hepatic diverticulum buds off epithelial (liver) cords that become the liver parenchyma, around which the
endothelium of capillaries (sinusoids) align (4-­wk embryo). C, Hemisection of embryo at 7.5 wk. D, Three-­dimensional representation of the
hepatic lobule as present in the newborn. (From Andres JM, Mathis RK,
Walker WA. Liver disease in infants. Part I: developmental hepatology
and mechanisms of liver dysfunction. J Pediatr. 1977;90:686–697.)

sinusoidal network. After birth, the ductus venosus becomes obliterated when oral feedings are initiated. The fetal oxygen saturation is
lower in portal than in umbilical venous blood; accordingly, the right

2435

hepatic lobe has lower oxygenation and greater hematopoietic activity
than the left hepatic lobe.
The transport and metabolic activities of the liver are facilitated by
the structural arrangement of liver cell cords, which are formed by
rows of hepatocytes, separated by sinusoids that converge toward the
tributaries of the hepatic vein (the central vein) located in the center
of the lobule (see Fig. 402.2D). This establishes the pathways and patterns of flow for substances to and from the liver. In addition to arterial
input from the systemic circulation, the liver also receives venous input
from the gastrointestinal tract via the portal system. The products of
the hepatobiliary system are released by two different paths: through
the hepatic vein and through the biliary system back into the intestine.
Plasma proteins and other plasma components are secreted by the liver.
Absorbed and circulating nutrients arrive through the portal vein or
the hepatic artery and pass through the sinusoids and past the hepatocytes to the systemic circulation at the central vein. Biliary components
are transported via the series of enlarging channels from the bile canaliculi through the bile ductule to the common bile duct. The intrahepatic bile duct system relies on its intricate three-­dimensional structure
to access all of the hepatocytes and effectively clear bile out of the liver.
Hepatocytes and cholangiocytes (i.e., bile duct epithelial cells)
originate from the bipotential hepatoblast progenitor. Single-­cell RNA
sequencing data suggest that hepatoblasts enter the hepatocyte transcriptional program after hepatic specification from ventral foregut
endodermal progenitors and transcriptionally move in unison toward
the hepatocyte fate. The synchronicity suggests that the hepatocyte
lineage specification is the default cell identity. Cholangiocyte differentiation is more nonsynchronous. Individual hepatoblasts upregulate
the cholangiocyte transcriptional program coincident with repression of the hepatocyte transcriptional program. Cholangiocyte identity is initiated specifically in portal vein regions around the seventh
to tenth week of human gestation, reinforcing that hepatoblasts are
not pre-­fated to the cholangiocyte transcriptional program but rather
their location and signals arising from a niche influence their ultimate
fate. Potential cholangiocytes form a temporary structure, termed the
intrahepatic ductal plate, encircling the portal veins (Fig. 402.3A).
Primitive ductal structures are asymmetrically composed of lumen-­
forming cells. The portal vein adjacent cells express early cholangiocyte
markers, and parenchymal adjacent cells still express hepatoblast and
hepatocyte markers. Remodeling of the ductal plate or tubulogenesis
begins around the 11th to 15th week of human gestation starting at
the larger hilar portal vein regions and moving toward the peripheral
region of liver following the portal vein system. Newly committed
cholangiocytes are incorporated into a homogeneous intrahepatic bile
duct network encircling the portal vein (see Fig. 402.3B). The final rearrangement of the hierarchical intrahepatic bile duct network is thought
to be associated with hepatocyte excretion of bilirubin into bile (see
Fig. 402.3C). The intrahepatic bile duct architecture remains incomplete in the human liver periphery during the first years of life. If the
unincorporated ductal plate or primitive ductal cells do not receive, or
are unresponsive to, the proper signals, they may contribute to ductal plate malformation. This histopathologic lesion has been observed
in liver biopsies of a variety of liver conditions, including congenital
hepatic fibrosis, Caroli disease, biliary atresia, and autosomal dominant
polycystic liver disease.

METABOLIC FUNCTIONS OF THE LIVER

The liver reaches a peak relative size of approximately 10% of the fetal
weight at the ninth week of human gestation. Early in development, the
liver is a primary site of hematopoiesis. In the seventh week of human
gestation, hematopoietic cells outnumber functioning hepatocytes in
the hepatic anlage. These early hepatocytes are smaller than at maturity (∼20 μm vs 30-­35 μm) and contain less glycogen. Near term, the
hepatocyte mass expands to dominate the organ, as cell size and glycogen content increase. Hematopoiesis is virtually absent by the second
postnatal month in full-­term infants. As the density of hepatocytes
increases with gestational age, the relative volume of the sinusoidal
network decreases. The liver constitutes 5% of body weight at birth but
only 2% in an adult.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2436 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Intrahepatic
ductal
plate

Homogeneous
intrahepatic bile duct
network

Hierarchical
intrahepatic bile duct
network

Portal vein
endothelium
Peripheral

Portal vein
mesenchyme

Primitive
ductal
structure

Biliary
plexus

Hilar

A

B

C

Several metabolic processes are immature in a healthy newborn
infant, owing in part to the fetal patterns of activity of various enzymatic processes. Many fetal hepatic functions are carried out by the
maternal liver, which provides nutrients and serves as a route of elimination of metabolic end products and toxins. Fetal liver metabolism is
devoted primarily to the production of proteins required for growth.
Toward term, primary functions become production and storage of
essential nutrients, excretion of bile, and establishment of processes of
elimination. Extrauterine adaptation requires de novo enzyme synthesis. Modulation of these processes depends on substrate and hormonal
input via the placenta and on dietary and hormonal input in the postnatal period.

Carbohydrate Metabolism

The liver regulates serum glucose levels closely via several processes, including storage of excess carbohydrate as glycogen, a
polymer of glucose readily hydrolyzed to glucose during fasting. To
maintain serum glucose levels, hepatocytes produce free glucose by
either glycogenolysis or gluconeogenesis. Immediately after birth,
an infant is dependent on hepatic glycogenolysis. Gluconeogenic
activity is present at a low level in the fetal liver and increases rapidly after birth. Fetal glycogen synthesis begins at about the ninth
week of gestation, with glycogen stores most rapidly accumulated
near term, when the liver contains 2-­3 times the amount of glycogen
of adult liver. Most of this stored glycogen is used in the immediate postnatal period. Re-­accumulation is initiated at about the second week of postnatal life, and glycogen stores reach adult levels at
approximately the third week in healthy full-­term infants. In preterm infants, serum glucose levels fluctuate in part because efficient
regulation of the synthesis, storage, and degradation of glycogen
develops only near the end of full-­term gestation. Dietary carbohydrates such as galactose are converted to glucose, but there is a
substantial dependence on gluconeogenesis for glucose in early life,
especially if glycogen stores are limited.

Protein Metabolism

During the rapid fetal growth phase, specific decarboxylases that are
rate limiting in the biosynthesis of physiologically important polyamines have higher activities than in the mature liver. The rate of
synthesis of albumin and secretory proteins in the developing liver parallels the quantitative changes in the endoplasmic reticulum. Synthesis
of albumin appears at the seventh to eighth week in the human fetus
and increases in inverse proportion to that of α-­fetoprotein, which
is the dominant fetal protein. By the third to fourth month of gestation, the fetal liver is able to produce fibrinogen, transferrin, and low-­
density lipoproteins. From this period on, fetal plasma contains each of

Fig. 402.3 Process of intrahepatic bile duct
formation. A, Cholangiocytes are specified in
the region adjacent to the portal vein system
forming transient ductal plate. B, Ductal plates
are quickly remodeled into luminal or primitive
ductal structures surrounded by asymmetric
gene expressing cells. These luminal structures
form a dense homogeneous network that is
communicating with the extrahepatic bile duct.
C, Upon hepatocyte bile production, secretion,
and canalicular membrane lengthening, the homogenous network begins to reorganize into a
hierarchical network.

the major protein classes at concentrations considerably below those
achieved at maturity.
The postnatal patterns of protein synthesis vary with the class of
protein. Lipoproteins of each class rise abruptly in the first week
after birth to reach levels that vary little until puberty. Serum albumin concentrations are low in a neonate (∼2.5 g/dL), reaching adult
levels (∼3.5 g/dL) after several months. Levels of ceruloplasmin
and complement factors increase slowly to adult values in the first
year. In contrast, transferrin levels at birth are similar to those of an
adult, decline for 3-­5 months, and rise thereafter to achieve their
final concentrations. Low levels of activity of specific proteins have
implications for the nutrition of an infant. A low level of cystathionine γ-­lyase (cystathionase) activity impairs the trans-­sulfuration
pathway by which dietary methionine is converted to cysteine. Consequently, the latter must be supplied in the diet. Similar dietary
requirements might exist for other sulfur-­containing amino acids,
such as taurine.

Lipid Metabolism

Fatty acid oxidation provides a major source of energy in early life, complementing glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. Newborn infants are
relatively intolerant of prolonged fasting, owing in part to a restricted
capacity for hepatic ketogenesis. Rapid maturation of the ability of the
liver to oxidize fatty acid occurs in the first few days after birth. Milk
provides the major source of calories in newborns; this high-­fat, low-­
carbohydrate diet mandates active gluconeogenesis to maintain blood
glucose levels. When the glucose supply is limited, ketone body production from endogenous fatty acids can provide energy for hepatic
gluconeogenesis and an alternative fuel for brain metabolism. When
carbohydrates are in excess, the liver produces triglycerides. Metabolic processes involving lipids and lipoproteins are predominantly
hepatic; liver immaturity or disease affects lipid concentrations and
lipoproteins.

Biotransformation

Newborn infants have a decreased capacity to metabolize and detoxify certain drugs, owing to underdevelopment of the hepatic microsomal component that is the site of the specific oxidative, reductive,
hydrolytic, and conjugation reactions required for these biotransformations. The major components of the monooxygenase system, such
as cytochrome P450, cytochrome-­c reductase, and the reduced form
of nicotinamide-­adenine dinucleotide phosphate, are present in low
concentrations in fetal microsomal preparations. In full-­term infants,
hepatic uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase and enzymes
involved in the oxidation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are
expressed at very low levels.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 402 u Morphogenesis of the Liver and Biliary System
Age-­
related differences in pharmacokinetics vary from compound to compound. The half-­life of acetaminophen in a newborn
is similar to that of an adult, whereas theophylline has a half-­life of
approximately 100 hours in a premature infant, as compared with
5-­6 hours in an adult. These differences in metabolism, as well as
factors such as binding to plasma proteins and renal clearance,
determine appropriate drug dosage to maximize effectiveness and
to avoid toxicity. Dramatic historical examples of the susceptibility
of newborn infants to drug toxicity are the responses to chloramphenicol (the gray baby syndrome) or to benzoyl alcohol and its
metabolic products, which involve ineffective glucuronide and glycine conjugation, respectively. The low concentrations of antioxidants (vitamin E, superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase) in
the fetal and early newborn liver lead to increased susceptibility to
deleterious effects of oxygen toxicity and oxidant injury through
lipid peroxidation.
Conjugation reactions, which convert drugs or metabolites into
water-­soluble forms that can be eliminated in bile, are also catalyzed
by hepatic microsomal enzymes. Newborn infants have decreased
activity of hepatic uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase,
which converts unconjugated bilirubin to the readily excreted glucuronide conjugate and is the rate-­limiting enzyme in the excretion
of bilirubin. There is rapid postnatal development of transferase
activity irrespective of gestational age, which suggests that birth-­
related, rather than age-­related, factors are of primary importance
in the postnatal development of activity of this enzyme. Microsomal activity can be stimulated by administration of phenobarbital, rifampin, or other inducers of cytochrome P450. Alternatively,
drugs such as cimetidine can inhibit microsomal P450 activity.

2437

Table 402.2  Causes of Impaired Bile Acid Metabolism and
Enterohepatic Circulation
DEFECTIVE BILE ACID SYNTHESIS OR TRANSPORT
• Inborn errors of bile acid synthesis
• Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis
• Intrahepatic cholestasis (neonatal hepatitis)
• Acquired defects in bile acid synthesis secondary to severe liver
disease
ABNORMALITIES OF BILE ACID DELIVERY TO THE BOWEL
• Celiac disease (sluggish gallbladder contraction)
• Extrahepatic bile duct obstruction (e.g., biliary atresia, gallstones)
ALTERED ENTEROHEPATIC CIRCULATION OF BILE ACIDS
• External bile fistula
• Cystic fibrosis
• Small bowel bacterial overgrowth syndrome (with bile acid
precipitation, increased jejunal absorption, and “short-­circuiting”)
• Drug-­induced entrapment of bile acids in intestinal lumen (e.g.,
cholestyramine)
BILE ACID MALABSORPTION
• Primary bile acid malabsorption (absent or inefficient ileal active
transport)
• Secondary bile acid malabsorption
• Ileal disease or resection
DEFECTIVE UPTAKE OR ALTERED INTRACELLULAR METABOLISM
• Parenchymal disease
• Regurgitation from cells
• Portosystemic shunting
• Cholestasis

Hepatic Excretory Function

Hepatic excretory function and bile flow are closely related to
hepatic bile acid excretion and enterohepatic recirculation. Bile
secretion is first noted at the 12th week of human gestation. Bile
acids, the major products of cholesterol degradation, are incorporated into mixed micelles with cholesterol and phospholipid.
These micelles act as efficient vehicles for solubilization and intestinal absorption of lipophilic compounds, such as dietary fats and
fat-­soluble vitamins. Secretion of bile acids by the liver cells is the
major determinant of bile flow in the mature animal. Accordingly,
maturity of bile acid metabolic processes affects overall hepatic
excretory function, including biliary excretion of endogenous and
exogenous compounds.
In humans, the two primary bile acids, cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid, are synthesized in the liver. Before excretion,
they are conjugated with glycine or taurine. In response to a meal,
contraction of the gallbladder delivers bile acids (micelles) to the
intestine to assist in fat digestion and absorption. After mediating fat digestion, the bile acids themselves are reabsorbed from the
terminal ileum through specific active transport processes. They
return to the liver via portal blood, are taken up by liver cells, and
are re-­excreted in bile. In an adult, this enterohepatic circulation
involves 90–95% of the circulating bile acid pool. Bile acids that
escape ileal reabsorption reach the colon, where the bacterial flora,
through dihydroxylation and deconjugation, produce the secondary bile acids, deoxycholic and lithocholic acid. In an adult, the
composition of bile reflects the excretion of the primary and also
the secondary bile acids, which are reabsorbed from the distal intestinal tract.
Intraluminal concentrations of bile acids are low in newborn infants
and increase rapidly after birth. The expansion of the bile acid pool is

important because bile acids are required to stimulate bile flow and
absorb lipids, a major component of the diet of a newborn. Nuclear
receptors, such as farnesoid X receptor (FXR), control intrahepatic
bile acid homeostasis through several mechanisms, including regulation of expression of the genes encoding two key proteins, cholesterol
7α-­hydroxylase (CYP7A1) and bile salt export pump (BSEP). These
proteins are important for bile acid synthesis and canalicular secretion, respectively. Neonatal expression of these nuclear receptors varies
depending on the studied animal model.
Because of inefficient ileal reabsorption of bile acids and the low rate
of hepatic clearance of bile acids from portal blood, serum concentrations of bile acids are commonly elevated in healthy newborns, often
to levels that would suggest liver disease in older persons. Transient
phases of physiologic cholestasis and physiologic steatorrhea can often be
observed in low birthweight infants and in full-­term infants after perinatal stress, such as hypoxia or infection, but are otherwise uncommon
in healthy full-­term newborns.
Many of the processes related to immaturity of the newborn in liver
morphogenesis and function, as discussed earlier, are implicated in the
increased susceptibility of infants to liver disease associated with parenteral nutrition. The reduced bile acid pool size, hepatic glutathione
depletion, and deficient sulfation contribute to production of toxic lithocholic acid and thus to cholestasis, whereas deficiencies of essential
amino acids, including taurine and cysteine, and excessive lipid infusion can lead to hepatic steatosis in these infants. Beyond the neonatal
period, disturbances in bile acid metabolism may be responsible for
diverse effects on hepatobiliary and intestinal function (Table 402.2).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2438 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 403

Manifestations of Liver
Disease
James E. Squires and William F. Balistreri
PATHOLOGIC MANIFESTATIONS

Congenital and acquired alterations in hepatic structure and function
(acute or chronic) can be manifest by varying patterns of reaction of
the liver to cell injury. Hepatocyte injury can be caused by infection
(viral, bacterial, parasitic), drugs or toxins, hypoxia, immunologic
and structural disorders, or inborn errors of metabolism. The injury
results in inflammatory cell infiltration and cell death (necrosis), which
may be followed by a healing process of scar formation (fibrosis) and,
potentially, nodule formation (regeneration). Cirrhosis is the result of
any progressive fibrotic liver disease.
Cholestasis is an alternative or concomitant response to injury
caused by extrahepatic or intrahepatic obstruction to bile flow. Substances that are normally excreted in bile, such as bile acids, conjugated
bilirubin, cholesterol, and trace elements, accumulate in serum. Bile
pigment accumulation in liver parenchyma can be seen in liver biopsy
specimens. In extrahepatic obstruction, bile pigment may be visible in
the intralobular bile ducts or throughout the parenchyma as bile lakes
or infarcts. In intrahepatic cholestasis, an injury to hepatocytes or an
alteration in hepatic physiology leads to a reduction in the rate of secretion of solute and water. Etiologies include alterations in enzymatic or
canalicular transporter activity, permeability of the bile canalicular
apparatus, organelles responsible for bile secretion, or ultrastructure of
the cytoskeleton of the hepatocyte. The result may be clinically indistinguishable from obstructive cholestasis.
Cirrhosis, defined histologically by the presence of bands of fibrous
tissue that link central and portal areas and form parenchymal nodules,
is an end stage of any prolonged acute or chronic liver disease. Cirrhosis can be macronodular, with nodules of various sizes (up to 5 cm)
separated by broad septa, or micronodular, with nodules of uniform
size (<1 cm) separated by fine septa; mixed forms occur. The progressive scarring results in altered hepatic blood flow, with further impairment of liver cell function. Increased intrahepatic resistance to portal
blood flow leads to portal hypertension.
The liver can be secondarily involved in neoplastic (metastatic) and
nonneoplastic (storage diseases, fat infiltration) processes, as well as
several systemic conditions and infectious processes. The liver can be
affected by chronic passive congestion (congestive heart failure) or
acute hypoxia, with hepatocellular damage.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Hepatomegaly

Enlargement of the liver can be caused by several mechanisms (Table
403.1). Normal liver size estimations are based on age-­related clinical
indices, such as the degree of extension of the liver edge below the costal margin, the span of dullness to percussion, or the length of the vertical axis of the liver, as estimated from imaging techniques. In children,
the normal liver edge can be felt up to 2 cm below the right costal margin. In a newborn infant, extension of the liver edge more than 3.5 cm
below the costal margin in the right midclavicular line suggests hepatic
enlargement. Measurement of liver span is carried out by percussing
the upper margin of dullness and by palpating the lower edge in the
right midclavicular line. This may be more reliable than an extension
of the liver edge alone. The two measurements may correlate poorly.
The liver span increases linearly with body weight and age in both
sexes, ranging from approximately 4.5-­5.0 cm at 1 week of age to
approximately 7-­8 cm in males and 6.0-­6.5 cm in females by 12 years
of age. The lower edge of the right lobe of the liver extends downward

(Riedel lobe) and can normally be palpated as a broad mass in some
people. An enlarged left lobe of the liver is palpable in the epigastrium
of some patients with cirrhosis. Downward displacement of the liver by
the diaphragm (hyperinflation) or thoracic organs can create an erroneous impression of hepatomegaly.
Examination of the liver should note the consistency, contour, tenderness, and presence of any masses or bruits, as well as assessment of
spleen size, along with documentation of the presence of ascites and
any stigmata of chronic liver disease.
Ultrasound is useful in assessment of liver size and consistency,
along with gallbladder size. Gallbladder length normally varies from
1.5 to 5.5 cm (average: 3 cm) in infants to 4 to 8 cm in adolescents;
width ranges from 0.5 to 2.5 cm for all ages. Gallbladder distention
may be seen in infants with sepsis. The gallbladder is often absent or
abnormal in infants with biliary atresia.

Jaundice (Icterus)

Yellow discoloration of the sclera, skin, and mucous membranes is a
sign of hyperbilirubinemia (see Chapter 137). Clinically apparent jaundice in children and adults occurs when the serum concentration of
bilirubin reaches 2-­3 mg/dL (34-­51 μmol/L); the neonate might not
appear jaundiced until the bilirubin level is >5 mg/dL (>85 μmol/L).
Jaundice may be the earliest and only sign of hepatic dysfunction. Liver
disease must be suspected in the infant who appears only mildly jaundiced but has dark urine or acholic (light-­colored) stools. Immediate
evaluation to establish the cause is required.
Measurement of the total serum bilirubin concentration allows
quantitation of jaundice. Bilirubin occurs in plasma in four forms:
unconjugated bilirubin tightly bound to albumin; free or unbound bilirubin (the form responsible for kernicterus, because it can cross cell
membranes); conjugated bilirubin (the only fraction to appear in urine);
and δ fraction (bilirubin covalently bound to albumin), which appears
in serum when hepatic excretion of conjugated bilirubin is impaired in
patients with hepatobiliary disease. The δ fraction permits conjugated
bilirubin to persist in the circulation and delays resolution of jaundice.
Although the terms direct and indirect bilirubin are used equivalently
with conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin, this is not quantitatively
correct, because the direct fraction includes both conjugated bilirubin
and δ bilirubin.
Investigation of jaundice in an infant or older child must include
determination of the accumulation of both unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia might indicate
increased production, hemolysis, reduced hepatic removal, or altered
metabolism of bilirubin (Table 403.2). Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia reflects decreased excretion by damaged hepatic parenchymal
cells or disease of the biliary tract, which may be a result of obstruction, sepsis, toxins, inflammation, and genetic or metabolic disease
(Table 403.3).

Pruritus

Intense generalized itching can occur in patients with chronic liver
disease, often in association with cholestasis (conjugated hyperbilirubinemia). Symptoms can be generalized or localized (commonly to
palms and soles), are usually worse at night, are exacerbated with stress
and heat, and are relieved by cool temperatures. Pruritus is unrelated
to the degree of hyperbilirubinemia; deeply jaundiced patients can be
asymptomatic.
The pathogenesis of pruritus remains unknown; however, multiple
suspected pruritogens have been reported, including bile acids, histamine, serotonin, progesterone metabolites, endogenous opioids, the
potent neuronal activator lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), and the LPA-­
forming enzyme, autotaxin (ATX). Ultimately, a multifactorial process
is suspected, as evidenced by the symptomatic relief of pruritus after
administration of various therapeutic agents, including bile acid–
binding agents (cholestyramine), choleretic agents (ursodeoxycholic
acid), opiate antagonists (naltrexone), antihistamines, serotonin reuptake inhibitors (sertraline), antibiotics, and ileal bile acid transporter
(IBAT) inhibitors. Plasmapheresis, molecular adsorbent recirculating
system therapy, and surgical diversion of bile (partial and total biliary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 403 u Manifestations of Liver Disease

2439

Table 403.1  Causes of Hepatomegaly in Infants and Children
INFECTION AND INFLAMMATION
Viral hepatitis (hepatitis A, B, C, D, E; EBV; adenovirus, adeno-associated
virus, echovirus, TORCH)
Autoimmune hepatitis
Sepsis
Perinatal infections
Allograft rejection
Graft-­versus-­host disease
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Systemic granulomatous disorders with hepatic involvement
Sarcoid
Tuberculosis
Hepatic abscess (bacterial and parasitic)
Parasitic infection
Visceral larva migrans
Schistosomiasis
Leishmaniasis
Malaria
Liver flukes
Kupffer cell hyperplasia
Macrophage activation syndrome
Gestational alloimmune liver disease
BILIARY OBSTRUCTION
Biliary atresia
Choledochal cysts
Stricture of common bile duct
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
INFILTRATION
Extramedullary hematopoiesis
Erythroblastosis fetalis
Thalassemias
Metastatic tumors
Neuroblastoma
Wilms tumor
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
Langerhans cell histiocytosis

STORAGE/METABOLIC DISEASE
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Wilson disease
Infants of diabetic mothers
Glycogen storage disease
Galactosemia
Tyrosinemia
Cystic fibrosis
Gaucher disease
Niemann-­Pick disease
Gangliosidoses
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Mitochondrial hepatic disorders including DNA depletion syndrome
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Amyloidosis
Hepatic porphyrias
EXPANSION OF EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX
Cirrhosis
Fibrocystic disease (congenital hepatic fibrosis)
STEATOSIS
Malnutrition
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (obesity)
Cystic fibrosis
Parenteral nutrition
Diabetes mellitus
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Galactosemia
Wolman disease
Cholesterol ester storage disease
Mitochondrial hepatopathies
β-­Oxidation defects
Medication toxicity (tetracycline, valproic acid)
HEPATIC MALIGNANCY/TUMOR
Primary or metastatic
VASCULAR CONGESTION
Congestive heart failure
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Venoocclusive disease (VOD): radiation, high-­dose chemotherapy,
stem cell transplant, bush tea, pyrrolizidine alkaloids, familial VOD
with immunodeficiency
CYSTIC DISEASE
Fibrocystic disease
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
Caroli syndrome
Isolated polycystic liver disease

EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; TORCH, toxoplasmosis, other infections, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus.
From Telega GW. Hepatomegaly. In Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 17.1, p.
307.

diversion) have been used in attempts to provide relief for medically
refractory pruritus.

Spider Angiomas

Vascular spiders (telangiectasias), characterized by central pulsating arterioles from which small, wiry venules radiate, may be seen in
patients with chronic liver disease. These are usually most prominent
in the superior vena cava distribution area (on the face and chest).
Their size varies between 1 and 10 mm, and they exhibit central clearing with pressure. They presumably reflect altered estrogen metabolism
in the presence of hepatic dysfunction.

Palmar Erythema

Blotchy erythema, most noticeable over the thenar and hypothenar
eminences and on the tips of the fingers, is also noted in patients with
chronic liver disease. Abnormal serum estradiol levels and regional
alterations in peripheral circulation have been identified as possible
causes.

Xanthomas

The marked elevation of serum cholesterol levels (to >500 mg/dL)
associated with some forms of chronic cholestasis, especially Alagille
syndrome, can cause the deposition of lipid in the dermis and subcutaneous tissue. Brown nodules can develop, first over the extensor
surfaces of the extremities; rarely, xanthelasma of the eyelids develops.

Portal Hypertension

Portal hypertension occurs when there is increased portal resistance
and/or increased portal flow. The portal system drains the splanchnic
area (abdominal portion of the gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, and
spleen) into the hepatic sinusoids. Normal portal pressure is between
1 and 5 mm Hg. Portal hypertension is defined as a portal pressure
greater than or equal to 6 mm Hg. Clinically significant portal hypertension exists when pressure exceeds a threshold of 10-­12 mm Hg. Portal hypertension is the main complication of cirrhosis and is directly
responsible for two of the most common and potentially lethal complications: ascites and variceal hemorrhage.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2440 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 403.2  Differential Diagnosis of Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
Physiologic Jaundice
Breastfeeding/Breast Milk Jaundice
Polycythemia
Diabetic mother
Fetal transfusion (maternal, twin)
Intrauterine hypoxemia
Delayed cord clamping
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Neonatal thyrotoxicosis
Hemolysis
Isoimmune
Rh incompatibility
ABO incompatibility
Other (M, S, Kidd, Kell, Duffy)
Autoimmune
Cold antibody
Warm antibody
Erythrocyte membrane defects
Hereditary spherocytosis
Hereditary elliptocytosis
Infantile pyknocytosis
Erythrocyte enzyme defects
Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase
Pyruvate kinase
Hexokinase
Other
Hemoglobinopathy
Thalassemia
Sickle cell anemia

Sepsis
Hemangioma
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria
HUS
Familial TTP (ADAM TS 13)
Hemolysis from Wilson disease
Infection
Intestinal Obstruction
Pyloric stenosis
Intestinal atresia
Hirschsprung disease
Cystic fibrosis
Enclosed Hematoma (Cephalohematoma, Ecchymoses)
Congestive Heart Failure
Hypoxia
Acidosis
Hypothyroidism or Hypopituitarism
Drugs/Toxins
Maternal oxytocin
Vitamin K
Antibiotics
Phenol disinfectants
Herbs
Familial Disorders of Bilirubin Metabolism
Gilbert syndrome
Crigler-­Najjar syndrome types I and II
Lucey-­Driscoll syndrome

TTP, Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura; HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome.
Modified from Telega GW. Jaundice. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023:
Table 18.2, p. 326.

Ascites

Ascites is a consequence of increased hydrostatic and osmotic pressures within the hepatic and mesenteric capillaries resulting in transfer
of fluid from the blood vessels to the lymphatics that overcomes the
drainage capacity of the lymphatic system. Ascites can also be associated with nephrotic syndrome and other urinary tract abnormalities,
metabolic diseases (such as lysosomal storage diseases), congenital
or acquired heart disease, and hydrops fetalis. Factors favoring the
intraabdominal accumulation of fluid include decreased plasma colloid (albumin) osmotic pressure, increased capillary hydrostatic pressure, increased ascitic colloid osmotic fluid pressure, and decreased
ascitic fluid hydrostatic pressure. Abnormal renal sodium retention
plays a central role.

Gastrointestinal Bleeding

Chronic liver disease may manifest as gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
Bleeding may result from portal hypertensive gastropathy, gastric
antral vascular ectasia, or varix rupture. Variceal hemorrhage is
classically from an esophageal origin but may be caused by gastric, duodenal, peristomal, or rectal varices. Variceal hemorrhage
results from increased pressure within the varix, which leads to
changes in the diameter of the varix and increased wall tension.
When the variceal wall strength is exceeded, physical rupture of
the varix results. Given the high blood flow and pressure in the
portosystemic collateral system, coupled with the lack of a natural mechanism to tamponade variceal bleeding, the rate of hemorrhage can be striking.

Encephalopathy

Hepatic encephalopathy can be manifest as any neurologic dysfunction, but it is most likely to present in subtle forms such as deterioration of school performance, sleep disturbances, depression, or

emotional outbursts. It can be recurrent and precipitated by intercurrent illness, drugs, bleeding, or electrolyte and acid-­base disturbances. The appearance of hepatic encephalopathy depends on the
presence of portosystemic shunting, alterations in the blood-­brain
barrier, and the interactions of toxic metabolites with the central
nervous system. Postulated causes include altered ammonia metabolism, synergistic neurotoxins, decreased cerebral oxygen metabolism and blood flow, or false neurotransmitters with plasma amino
acid imbalance.

Endocrine Abnormalities

Endocrine abnormalities are more common in older adolescents and
adults with hepatic disease than in children. They reflect alterations
in hepatic synthetic, storage, and metabolic functions, including those
concerned with hormonal metabolism in the liver. Proteins that bind
hormones in plasma are synthesized in the liver, and steroid hormones
are conjugated in the liver and excreted in the urine; failure of such
functions can have clinical consequences. Endocrine abnormalities can
also result from malnutrition or specific deficiencies.

Renal Dysfunction

Systemic disease or toxins can affect the liver and kidneys simultaneously, or parenchymal liver disease can produce secondary impairment of renal function. In hepatobiliary disorders, there may be renal
alterations in sodium and water economy, impaired renal concentrating ability, and alterations in potassium metabolism. Ascites in
patients with cirrhosis may be related to inappropriate retention of
sodium by the kidneys and expansion of plasma volume, or it may be
related to sodium retention mediated by diminished effective plasma
volume.
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) is defined as functional renal failure in patients with end-­stage liver disease. The pathophysiology of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 403 u Manifestations of Liver Disease

2441

Table 403.3  Mechanistic Classification of the Etiologies of Cholestasis
EXTRAHEPATIC DUCTS
Biliary atresia
Choledochal cyst
Spontaneous bile duct perforation
Choledocholithiasis, biliary sludge
Duct compression (may also be intrahepatic; e.g., hepatoblastoma,
neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, neonatal leukemia,
systemic juvenile xanthogranuloma, Langerhans cell
histiocytosis)
Bile duct stenosis, stricture
INTRAHEPATIC DUCT OBSTRUCTION/FORMATION
Alagille syndrome
“Nonsyndromic paucity of interlobular bile ducts” (e.g., Williams
syndrome)
Cystic fibrosis
Ductal plate malformations: congenital hepatic fibrosis;
ARPKD; Caroli disease; Ivemark, Jeune, Joubert,
Bardet-­Biedl syndromes
Sclerosing cholangitis
CANALICULAR MEMBRANE TRANSPORTERS
PFIC type 1, BRIC, Nielsen syndrome (familial Greenland cholestasis)
PFIC type 2 (bile salt export pump deficiency)
PFIC type 3 (MDR3 deficiency)
Tight junction protein 2 deficiency
Farnesoid X receptor variants
MYO5B deficiency
Neonatal Dubin-­Johnson syndrome
Villin functional defect
Overload of excretory mechanism capacity: ABO blood group
incompatibility with hemolysis
HEPATOCYTE TIGHT JUNCTIONS
Neonatal ichthyosis–sclerosing cholangitis syndrome–claudin-­1 protein
Familial hypercholanemia caused by TJP2 (zonulin-­2) deficiency
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS
First-­degree: BASD
3-­Oxo-­Δ4-­steroid 5β-­reductase deficiency
3β-­Hydroxy-­Δ5-­C27-­steroid dehydrogenase/isomerase deficiency
Oxysterol 7α-­hydroxylase deficiency
Familial hypercholanemia due to BAAT deficiency
Second-­degree: organelle dysfunction
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome (cholesterol formation)
Peroxisomal disorders: Zellweger, infantile Refsum, neonatal ALD
INFECTIOUS
Bacterial: sepsis (endotoxemia, e.g., UTI, gastroenteritis)
Listeria
Syphilis
TB
VIRAL
Herpes viruses: CMV, HSV, HHV-­6, varicella
Parvovirus B19
Hepatitis A, B, C
Enterovirus: coxsackieviruses, echoviruses, “numbered” enteroviruses
Adenovirus
Adeno-associated virus
Rubella
HIV
Paramyxovirus

PROTOZOAL
Toxoplasmosis
TOXIC
Parenteral nutrition–associated liver disease
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Drugs: maternal amphetamines, anticonvulsants; infant antifungals
ENDOCRINE
Panhypopituitarism
Hypothyroidism, cortisol deficiency
McCune-­Albright syndrome
Donohue syndrome (leprechaunism)
METABOLIC
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Galactosemia
Fructosemia (hereditary fructose intolerance)
Glycogen storage disease type IV (Andersen disease)
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Tyrosinemia type I
Niemann-­Pick disease type C
Gaucher disease
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis
Farber disease
Wolman disease
β-­Oxidation defects: short-­ and long-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase
deficiencies
Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-­Lamy syndrome)
Mucolipidosis II (I-­cell disease)
Urea cycle defects
Citrin deficiency (formerly type II citrullinemia)
Mitochondrial respiratory chain disorders
Growth retardation, amino aciduria, cholestasis, iron overload, lactic
acidosis, and early death (GRACILE)
Wilson disease (>5 yr)
IMMUNE MEDIATED
Gestational alloimmune liver disease
Neonatal or acquired lupus erythematosus
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia with giant cell hepatitis
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Autoimmune hepatitis
OTHER
Hypoxic/ischemic/vascular
Shock/hypoperfusion/hypoxia
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Cardiac insufficiency (congenital heart disease, arrhythmia)
Multiple hemangiomata
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
ARC syndrome (arthrogryposis–renal tubular dysfunction–cholestasis;
defective vacuolar protein sorting)
Chromosomal: trisomy 17, 18, 21
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Hardikar syndrome
Lymphedema cholestasis syndrome (Aagenaes syndrome)
Kabuki syndrome
North American Indian childhood cirrhosis (UTP4 variant)
Pseudo-­TORCH (PTORCH-1) syndrome (OCLN variant)
“Idiopathic neonatal hepatitis”
COACH syndrome (coloboma, oligophrenia, ataxia, cerebellar vermis
hypoplasia, hepatic fibrosis)

ALD, Adrenoleukodystrophy; ARC, arthrogryposis-­renal-­cholestasis; ARPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; BAAT, bile acid coenzyme A: amino acid N-­acyltransferase;
BASD, bile acid synthetic defects; BRIC, benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis; CMV, cytomegalovirus; HHV-­6, human herpesvirus type 6; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus;
HSV, herpes simplex virus; PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis; TORCH, toxoplasmosis, other (syphilis, varicella-­zoster, parvovirus B19), rubella, cytomegalovirus, and
herpes infections; UTI, urinary tract infection.
Modified from Telega GW. Jaundice. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 18.3, p. 327.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2442 Part XVI u The Digestive System
hepatorenal syndrome is related to splanchnic vasodilation, mesenteric angiogenesis, and decreased effective blood volume with
resulting decreased renal perfusion. The hallmark is intense renal
vasoconstriction (mediated by hemodynamic, humoral, or neurogenic
mechanisms) with coexistent systemic vasodilation. The diagnosis is
supported by the findings of oliguria (<1 mL/kg/day), a characteristic
pattern of urine electrolyte abnormalities (urine sodium <10 mEq/L,
fractional excretion of sodium of <1%, urine:plasma creatinine ratio
<10, and normal urinary sediment), absence of hypovolemia, and
exclusion of other kidney pathology. Both acute (HRS-­AKI) and
chronic (HRS-­CKD) forms have been described. The best treatment
of HRS is timely liver transplantation, with complete renal recovery
expected.

Pulmonary Involvement

Hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) is characterized by the typical
triad of hypoxemia, intrapulmonary vascular dilations, and liver disease. There is intrapulmonic right-­to-­left shunting of blood resulting
from enlarged pulmonary vessels that prevents adequate exposure to
oxygen-­rich alveoli of red blood cells traveling through the center of
the vessel. Shunting of vasodilatory mediators from the mesentery
away from the liver is thought to contribute. HPS should be suspected
and investigated in the child with chronic liver disease with a history
of shortness of breath or exercise intolerance and clinical examination
findings of cyanosis (particularly of the lips and fingers), digital clubbing, and oxygen saturations <96%, particularly in the upright position. Treatment is timely liver transplantation; resolution of pulmonary
involvement usually follows.
Portopulmonary hypertension is a condition characterized by
an increase in the resistance to pulmonary arterial blood flow in the
setting of portal hypertension. It is defined by a pulmonary arterial
pressure >25 mm Hg at rest and above 30 mm Hg with exercise, elevated pulmonary vascular resistance with pulmonary arterial occlusion pressure, or a left ventricular end diastolic pressure of <15 mm
Hg. Although the pathophysiology is unclear, deficiency in endothelial prostacyclin synthase and increased circulating endothelin­1 have been implicated as a cause for the vasculopathy. Autopsy
studies have demonstrated the coexistence of portal hypertension,
microscopic pulmonary artery thromboembolism, endothelial and
smooth muscle proliferation, and platelet aggregates contributing
to portopulmonary hypertension development. Symptoms suggesting a diagnosis include exertional dyspnea, fatigue, syncope,
palpitations, and chest pain. Pulmonary artery–directed therapy is
the cornerstone of management, along with consideration of liver
transplant.

Recurrent Cholangitis

Ascending infection of the biliary system is often seen in pediatric
cholestatic disorders, most commonly because of gram-­
negative
enteric organisms such as Escherichia coli, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas,
and Enterococcus. Liver transplantation is the definitive treatment
for recurrent cholangitis, especially when medical therapy is not
effective.

Miscellaneous Manifestations of Liver Dysfunction

Nonspecific signs of acute and chronic liver disease include anorexia,
which often affects patients with anicteric hepatitis and with cirrhosis associated with chronic cholestasis; abdominal pain or distention
resulting from ascites, spontaneous peritonitis, or visceromegaly;
malnutrition and growth failure; and bleeding, which may be a result
of altered synthesis of coagulation factors (biliary obstruction with
vitamin K deficiency or excessive hepatic damage) or to portal hypertension with hypersplenism. In the presence of hypersplenism, there
can be decreased synthesis of specific clotting factors, production of
qualitatively abnormal proteins, or alterations in platelet number and
function. Altered drug metabolism can prolong the biologic half-­life of
commonly administered medications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

403.1 Evaluation of Patients with Possible
Liver Dysfunction
James E. Squires and William F. Balistreri
Adequate evaluation of an infant, child, or adolescent with suspected
liver disease begins with an appropriate and accurate history, a carefully performed physical examination, and skillful interpretation of
signs and symptoms. Further evaluation is aided by judicious selection of diagnostic tests, followed using imaging modalities and/or a
liver biopsy (Fig. 403.1). Most of the so-­called liver “function” tests do
not measure any specific hepatic function: a rise in serum aminotransferase levels reflects liver cell injury, an increase in immunoglobulin
levels reflects an immunologic response to injury, or an elevation in
serum bilirubin levels can reflect any of several disturbances of bilirubin metabolism (see Tables 403.2 and 403.3). Any single biochemical assay provides limited information, which must be placed in the
context of the entire clinical picture. The most cost-­efficient approach
is to become familiar with the rationale, implications, and limitations
of a selected group of tests so that specific questions can be answered.
Young infants with cholestatic jaundice should be evaluated promptly
to identify patients needing specific medical treatment or surgical
intervention.
For a patient with suspected liver disease, evaluation addresses the
following issues in sequence: Is liver disease present? If so, what is its
nature? What is its severity? Is specific treatment available? How can
we monitor the response to treatment? What is the prognosis? Importantly, more recent rapid genotype testing and gene chip technologies
have transformed the field of diagnostics. These advances, paired with
a greater understanding of the genetic basis for many pediatric liver
diseases, are enabling more accurate and timely diagnoses while simultaneously eliminating the need for more invasive, costly, and time-­
intensive testing.

BIOCHEMICAL TESTS

Laboratory tests commonly used to screen for or to confirm a suspicion of liver disease include measurements of serum aminotransferase (Table 403.4), bilirubin (total and fractionated), alkaline
phosphatase (AP), and gamma glutamyl-­transpeptidase (GGT) levels, as well as determinations of prothrombin time (PT) or international normalized ratio (INR) and serum albumin level. These tests
are complementary, provide an estimation of synthetic and excretory
functions, and might suggest the nature of the disturbance (inflammation or cholestasis).
The severity of the liver disease may be reflected in clinical signs
or biochemical alterations. Clinical signs include encephalopathy,
variceal hemorrhage, worsening jaundice, apparent shrinkage of
liver mass owing to massive necrosis, or onset of ascites. Biochemical alterations reflective of severity include hypoglycemia, acidosis,
hyperammonemia, electrolyte imbalance, continued hyperbilirubinemia, marked hypoalbuminemia, or a prolonged PT or INR that is
unresponsive to parenteral administration of vitamin K.
Acute liver cell injury (parenchymal disease) caused by viral hepatitis, drug-­or toxin-­
induced liver disease, shock, hypoxemia, or
metabolic disease is best suggested by a marked increase in serum aminotransferase levels. Cholestasis (obstructive disease) involves regurgitation of bile components into serum; the serum levels of total and
conjugated bilirubin and serum bile acids are elevated. Elevations in
serum AP, 5′ nucleotidase, and GGT levels are also sensitive indicators of obstruction or inflammation of the biliary tract. Fractionation
of the total serum bilirubin level into conjugated and unconjugated
bilirubin fractions helps to distinguish between elevations caused by
processes such as hemolysis and those caused by hepatic dysfunction.
A predominant elevation in the conjugated bilirubin level provides a
relatively sensitive index of hepatocellular disease or hepatic excretory
dysfunction.
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT, serum glutamate pyruvate transaminase) is liver specific, whereas aspartate aminotransferase (AST,
serum glutamic-­
oxaloacetic transaminase) is derived from other

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 404 u Cholestasis 2445
differences in density of liver parenchyma, the average liver attenuation
coefficient being reduced with fatty infiltration.
MRI is a useful alternative that limits radiation exposure. Magnetic
resonance cholangiography can be of value in differentiating biliary
tract lesions. MRI with Eovist (gadoxetate disodium) can assist in
the detection and characterization of known or suspected focal liver
lesions. In differentiating obstructive from nonobstructive cholestasis,
CT scanning or MRI identifies the precise level of obstruction more
often than ultrasound. Either CT scanning or ultrasound may be used
to guide percutaneously placed fine needles for biopsies, aspiration of
specific lesions, or cholangiography.
Elastography is a novel noninvasive method to assess for liver stiffness,
a measure of the development of hepatic fibrosis in patients with liver
disease. Both ultrasound and MR methods have been developed. These
noninvasive techniques allow for monitoring fibrosis progression and
development of cirrhosis, characterization of hepatic tumors, improved
diagnostic capabilities in certain disease processes such as biliary atresia,
and prognostic stratification of diseases such as nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease and NASH.
Radionuclide scanning relies on selective uptake of a radiopharmaceutical agent. Commonly used agents include technetium-­99m–
labeled sulfur colloid, which undergoes phagocytosis by Kupffer cells;
99mTc-­
iminodiacetic acid agents, which are taken up by hepatocytes
and excreted into bile in a fashion similar to bilirubin; and gallium-­67,
which is concentrated in inflammatory and neoplastic cells. The anatomic resolution possible with hepatic scintiscans is generally less than
that obtained with CT scanning, MRI, or ultrasound.
The 99mTc-­sulfur colloid scan can detect focal lesions (tumors, cysts,
abscesses) >2-­3 cm in diameter. This modality can help to evaluate
patients with possible cirrhosis and with patchy hepatic uptake and a
shift of colloid uptake from liver to bone marrow.
Cholangiography, direct visualization of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary tree after injection of opaque material, may be required in
some patients to evaluate the cause, location, or extent of biliary obstruction. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography with a fine needle is the
technique of choice in infants and young children. The likelihood of opacifying the biliary tract is excellent in patients in whom CT scanning, MRI,
or ultrasound demonstrates dilated ducts. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography has been used to outline the biliary ductal system.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography is an alternative
method of examining the bile ducts in older children. The papilla of
Vater is cannulated under direct vision through a fiberoptic endoscope,
and contrast material is injected into the biliary and pancreatic ducts
to outline the anatomy. The advantage of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography is that it allows therapeutic interventions of the
extrahepatic biliary tree (stone extraction, stent placement).
Selective angiography of the celiac, superior mesenteric, or hepatic artery
can be used to visualize the hepatic or portal circulation. Both arterial and
venous circulatory systems of the liver can be examined. Angiography is
often required to define the blood supply of tumors before surgery and is
useful in the study of patients with known or presumed portal hypertension. The patency of the portal system, the extent of collateral circulation,
and the caliber of vessels under consideration for a shunting procedure can
be evaluated. MRI can provide similar information.

DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH TO INFANTS WITH
JAUNDICE

Well-­appearing infants can have cholestatic jaundice. Biliary atresia and
neonatal hepatitis are the most common causes of cholestasis in early
infancy. Biliary atresia portends a poor prognosis unless it is identified
early. The best outcome for this disorder is with early surgical reconstruction (45-­60 days of age). History, physical examination, and the detection
of a conjugated hyperbilirubinemia via examination of total and direct bilirubin are the first steps in evaluating the jaundiced infant (see Fig. 403.1).
Consultation with a pediatric gastroenterologist should be sought early in
the course of the evaluation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 404

Cholestasis
Simon Lam and William F. Balistreri
404.1 Neonatal Cholestasis
Simon Lam and William F. Balistreri
Neonatal cholestasis is defined as conjugated hyperbilirubinemia occurring within the neonatal period. Cholestasis implies impediment to
normal bile flow. In contrast to unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, cholestasis (conjugated bilirubin elevation of any degree) in the neonate is
always pathologic, and prompt differentiation of the cause is imperative.
Neonatal cholestasis occurs in approximately 1 in 2,500 live births.
Although the clinical features for the diverse causes of neonatal cholestasis can be similar, the differential diagnosis remains broad, including infections, endocrine disorders, genetic/metabolic conditions, and
various forms of mechanical obstruction. One approach is to evaluate the pathologies of the biliary system with an anatomic perspective,
from the large extrahepatic bile ducts, to the smaller intrahepatic bile
ducts, to the bile canaliculus, to the membrane transporters on the
hepatocyte, and finally to the level of the hepatocyte (Fig. 404.1).

DISORDERS OF THE EXTRAHEPATIC BILE DUCTS
Biliary Atresia

Biliary atresia is an important cause of neonatal cholestasis and the leading
indication for pediatric liver transplantations worldwide. The prevalence
of biliary atresia varies from 1 in 3,000 in French Polynesia to 1 in 12,000-­
22,000 in North America and Europe. In most cases, infants with biliary
atresia appear well but are jaundiced with a history of acholic stools (i.e.,
stools devoid of pigment appearing white or pale colored) (Fig. 404.2).
Biliary atresia splenic malformation (BASM) syndrome affects 15% of
patients with biliary atresia and is associated with other congenital abnormalities, including situs inversus (heterotaxia syndrome), congenital heart
disease, intestinal malformation, primary ciliary dyskinesia, Kabuki syndrome, caudal regression syndrome, and polysplenia. The pathogenesis
of biliary atresia is unknown. For nonsyndromic biliary atresia, it appears
that bile duct destruction may be initiated in utero but is primarily a progressive postnatal event. Evidence for this includes elevated levels of conjugated/direct bilirubin in the first 1-3 days after birth. Leading hypotheses
include (1) a complex interplay between genetic predisposition/susceptibility, (2) prenatal or postnatal biliary injury from viruses, toxins, or vascular insults, (3) increased susceptibility to ongoing biliary injury caused
by a descending glycocalyx on the apical surface of the cholangiocytes or
abnormal intracellular glutathione production, and (4) aberrant immune
responses. Biliary atresia has been discordant among identical twins. The
final common pathway is an obliterative cholangiopathy, leading to the
destruction of the biliary tree, most commonly at the porta hepatis. Bile is
therefore unable to flow through the atretic region of the extrahepatic bile
ducts, causing increased pressure and reflux of biliary contents back into
the intrahepatic biliary system resulting in hepatic injury, inflammation,
and fibrosis (Fig. 404.3). Because bile is not excreted into the small bowel,
fat/fat-­soluble vitamin digestion is impaired, and stools are acholic. If left
untreated, end-­stage liver disease usually occurs by 2 years of life.
Typical abdominal ultrasound findings include nonvisualization of
the gallbladder, a small-­contracted gallbladder, and nonvisualization of
the common bile duct. The triangular cord sign has also been reported
as a specific ultrasound finding for biliary atresia, but may lack sensitivity. Notably, dilation of intrahepatic ducts is not a feature consistent
with biliary atresia. Characteristic features on liver biopsy include bile
duct proliferation, bile duct plugs, and portal stromal edema. Although
abdominal ultrasonography and liver biopsies are helpful in the diagnostic workup for biliary atresia, an intraoperative cholangiogram
remains the gold standard for diagnosis. After catheterization of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2446 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Neonatal
cholestasis

Extrahepatic
bile ducts

Biliary atresia

Choledochal
malformation

Intrahepatic
bile ducts

Gallstones
and sludge

Bile duct
paucity

Decreased
canalicular
flow

Dysfunctional
plasma
membrane
transporters

Hepatocellular
injury

Infection

Drugs

Inborn errors
of metabolism

“Idiopathic”
neonatal
cholestasis

Fig. 404.1 Conceptual approach to neonatal cholestasis. There are areas of overlap: patients with biliary atresia will have some degree of intrahe-

patic/hepatocellular injury. Additional patients with “idiopathic” neonatal hepatitis may be determined in the future to be related to an enzyme or
membrane transporter defect.

I

IIa
Porta hepatis

Gallbladder

Porta hepatis

Common
hepatic duct
Common
bile duct

Cystic duct

Gallbladder

Common
hepatic duct

Bowel

Bowel

IIb

III
Porta hepatis

Gallbladder

Fig. 404.2 Acholic stools from a 1-­mo-­old patient with biliary atresia.
(Courtesy Dr. S. Lam.)

Porta hepatis

Common
hepatic duct
Common
bile duct

Cystic duct
Bowel

gallbladder, a diagnosis of biliary atresia is made if contrast does not
fill the intrahepatic biliary tree or drain into the small bowel. After
the diagnosis is confirmed, the Kasai hepatoportoenterostomy (KPE)
is typically performed. The atretic biliary remnant is removed and a
Roux-­en-­Y jejunostomy is anastomosed to the biliary hilum to reestablish bile flow; this remains the accepted surgical intervention for
patients with biliary atresia (Fig. 404.4). A prompt diagnosis of biliary atresia is key because the timing of surgical correction is strongly
linked to the prognosis. Historically, KPE performed before 60 days

Common
bile duct

Cystic duct

Intrahepatic
ducts

Gallbladder

Common
hepatic duct
Common
bile duct

Cystic duct
Bowel

Fig. 404.3 Biliary atresia classified according to the area of involve-

ment (gray colored). Type I: Atresia of the distal bile duct with patent
proximal extrahepatic bile duct. Type IIa: Atresia of the common hepatic duct. Type IIb: Atresia of the common hepatic duct, cystic duct,
and common bile duct. Type III: Nonpatency of the entire extrahepatic
biliary system and intrahepatic bile ducts at the hilum. (Modified from
A-­Kader HH, Feerick J, Rodriguez-­Davalos M. After two centuries biliary
atresia remains the darkest chapter in pediatric hepatology. Ann Pediatr
Child Health. 2015;3:1044, Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 404 u Cholestasis 2447
Liver
Stomach

Small
intestine

Fig. 404.4 Hepatoportoenterostomy (Kasai procedure). The atretic

Type Ia

Type Ib

Type II

Type III

Type IVa

Type IVb

biliary remnant is removed and a Roux-­en-­Y jejunostomy is anastomosed to the biliary hilum to reestablish bile flow. (Courtesy National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes
of Health. https://www.niddk.nih.gov/news/media-­library/18094.)

of life was used as the benchmark surgical intervention. However, the
earlier that the KPE is established, the better the outcome. A national
study across all Canadian centers showed that when the KPE was performed at ≤30 days of age, survival with the native liver at 4 years of age
was higher than when the surgery was performed between 31 and 90
days. Given the strong impact of early intervention with KPE, biliary
atresia screening programs have been implemented in select countries.
Clearly any infant with jaundice persisting beyond the first few weeks
of life should have serum total and conjugated bilirubin levels assessed.
In Taiwan, the national rate of KPE before 60 days of age increased
from 60% to 74% after the implementation of a biliary atresia stool
card screening program. Similarly, the proportion of patients with
total bilirubin <2 mg/dL 3 months post-­KPE, an important prognostic
marker for survival with native liver, significantly increased from 37%
to 60% after the implementation of the program. A two-­stage screening
protocol assessing conjugated bilirubin levels in the state of Texas also
led to a significant decrease in the age at which patients with biliary
atresia underwent the KPE. The first stage was performed before
60 hours of life; the second stage was performed at 2 weeks of age if an
elevated conjugated bilirubin was detected in the first stage. Stage two
conjugated bilirubin levels that were increasing or were greater than
1 mg/dL were considered positive and underwent further testing. A
novel serum biomarker, matrix metalloproteinase 7 (MMP7), has been
identified as a possible sensitive and specific marker for biliary atresia.

Choledochal Malformations

Choledochal malformations, formerly known as choledochal cysts, are
rare congenital dilations of the biliary tree (Fig. 404.5). With a 4:1 female
predominance, these malformations have also been reported to be more
common in the Asian population, with an incidence of approximately 1 in
13,000 compared with 1 in 100,000-­150,000 in Western populations. The
underlying pathogenesis is unknown; however, the presence of an anomalous pancreaticobiliary ductal union present in approximately 90% of
patients may contribute to the development of choledochal malformations.
Leading hypotheses suggest that an anomalous pancreaticobiliary union
leads to reflux of pancreatic contents into the common bile duct, causing
chronic inflammation and biliary damage leading to cystic changes.
Approximately 80% of choledochal malformations are detected in
infancy and early childhood. Although these lesions are often first discovered by ultrasonography, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP) and, less commonly, an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, may be needed to further characterize the malformation
according to the Todani classification (see Fig. 405.5).

Type V

Fig. 404.5 These diagrams depict the five classifications for chole-

dochal cyst according to Todani. (From Todani T, Watanabe Y, Narusue
M, et al. Congenital bile duct cysts: classification, operative procedures,
and review of thirty-­seven cases including cancer arising from choledochal cyst. Am J Surg. 1977;134:263–269.)

In the neonatal period, choledochal malformations present with
cholestasis and clay-­colored stools; duodenal obstruction has also been
reported. If untreated, long-­term complications include cholangitis,
pancreatitis, portal hypertension, and liver dysfunction. Importantly,
biliary malignancies have also been associated with choledochal malformations, particularly with type I and IV malformations. Therefore
although the approach differs based on subtype, surgical excision is the
treatment of choice. The exceptions are type III cysts (choledochocele),
which may be managed by endoscopic sphincterotomy. In those with
extensive intrahepatic involvement (type IVa and V) not amenable to
surgical resection, orthotropic liver transplantation may be required if
symptomatic chronic liver disease develops.

Choledocholithiasis and Biliary Sludge

Choledocholithiasis in the neonatal age-­group is rare. The incidence of
biliary sludge or inspissated bile causing cholestasis has been reported to
affect 1 in 175,000 births. Both choledocholithiasis and biliary sludge are
often detected by abdominal ultrasound. In patients with choledocholithiasis, a stone is typically visualized, whereas biliary sludge is suspected
when low-­level echoes are seen without evidence of choledocholithiasis
on abdominal ultrasound. Factors altering bile acid composition, such as
hemolytic disease, or bile flow, such as fasting or use of parenteral nutrition, contribute to the formation of sludge and stones. Ceftriaxone, a third-­
generation cephalosporin, has been identified as a risk factor in neonates;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2448 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 404.1  Classic Criteria Based on Five Body Systems
for a Diagnosis of Alagille Syndrome
SYSTEM/PROBLEM

DESCRIPTION

Liver/cholestasis

Usually presenting as jaundice with
conjugated hyperbilirubinemia in
the neonatal period, often with pale
stools

Dysmorphic facies

Broad forehead; deep-­set eyes,
sometimes with upslanting
palpebral fissures; prominent ears;
straight nose with bulbous tip;
and pointed chin giving the face a
somewhat triangular appearance

Congenital heart disease

Most frequently peripheral pulmonary
artery stenosis, but also pulmonary
atresia, atrial septal defect,
ventricular septal defect, and
tetralogy of Fallot

Axial skeleton/vertebral
anomalies

“Butterfly” vertebrae may be seen on
an anteroposterior radiograph and
occasionally hemivertebrae, fusion
of adjacent vertebrae, and spina
bifida occulta

Eye/posterior embryotoxon

Anterior chamber defects, most
commonly posterior embryotoxon,
which is prominence of the
Schwalbe ring at the junction of the
iris and cornea

Fig. 404.6 Posterior embryotoxon. (From Turnpenny PD, Ellard S.

Alagille syndrome: pathogenesis, diagnosis and management. Eur J
Hum Genet. 2012;20:251–257, Fig. 1.)

From Turnpenny PD, Ellard S. Alagille syndrome: pathogenesis, diagnosis and
management. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012;20(3):251–257, Table 1.

biliary sludge has been reported to occur in 30–46% of children after a
mean of 9 days. It is thought that high drug concentrations in the biliary
system may precipitate with calcium salts, causing sludge or gallstones.
Both choledocholithiasis and biliary sludge in the infant is usually managed conservatively because cholestasis usually resolves with
spontaneous passage of the stone or sludge. Ursodeoxycholic acid
has also been used to treat gallstones and sludge. However, its ability
to significantly alter the natural history has not been demonstrated.
Endoscopic or surgical interventions are rarely required, but may be
reserved for those with severe disease.

INTRAHEPATIC DISORDERS
Alagille Syndrome

Alagille syndrome (ALGS) is a multisystem autosomal dominant disorder
with hepatic, ophthalmologic (i.e., posterior embryotoxon), cardiac (i.e.,
peripheral pulmonary stenosis), skeletal (i.e., butterfly vertebrae), renal,
and vascular involvement (i.e., moyamoya or aneurysms) (Table 404.1).
Characteristic triangular facies, a prominent forehead, deep-­set eyes, bulbous nose tip, and pointed chin may be noted. ALGS is caused by pathogenic variants in the JAG1 gene in 98% of patients and the NOTCH2 gene
in the remaining 2%. Other genes associated with paucity of bile ducts, but
not typical ALGS, include KDM6A and HNF1β. The estimated prevalence
of ALGS is approximately 1 in 30,000 live births. A clinical diagnosis can
also be made in the presence of cholestatic liver disease and associated eye
(Fig. 404.6), heart, skeletal (Fig. 404.7), and facial features.
The majority of patients with ALGS are diagnosed within the first year
of life, with many presenting with cholestasis and elevated liver enzymes.
Cholestasis is thought to be a result of the paucity of intrahepatic bile ducts,
a characteristic hepatic manifestation of AGLS, defined as an intrahepatic
bile duct–to–hepatic artery ratio in the portal areas of <0.5; this is present
in 75–100% of patients. However, bile duct paucity may not be present in
the newborn period, and the liver biopsy may show inflammation and bile
ductular proliferation. In addition, nonvisualization of the extrahepatic
biliary tree because of intrahepatic disease may lead to a misdiagnosis
of biliary atresia in some cases. Therefore expert review of histologic and

Fig. 404.7 Butterfly vertebrae seen in the thoracic and upper lumbar regions. The child had undergone cardiac surgery, hence the
presence of visible wires. (From Turnpenny PD, Ellard S. Alagille syndrome: pathogenesis, diagnosis and management. Eur J Hum Genet.
2012;20:251–257, Fig. 2.)

radiographic studies is essential to making the correct diagnosis. The spectrum of bile duct paucity is noted in Figure 404.8.
In general, cholestasis in patients with ALGS typically worsens until
5-­6 years of age and then stabilizes or improves in some children. Pruritus, a prominent and debilitating complication of this condition, can
be noted within the first 6 months of life. Choleretics, rifampin, sertraline, and naltrexone have been traditionally used in attempts to reduce
pruritus in patients with ALGS. Clinical approval of apical sodium-­
dependent bile acid transporter inhibitors (also known as ileal bile acid
cotransporters) (such as maralixibat and odevixibat) offers an option
for debilitating pruritus and reducing serum bile acid levels.
End-­stage liver disease develops in approximately 18% of children,
but cardiac and vascular complications are the leading causes of mortality. Therefore a multisystem approach is critical to ensure adequate
care for a patient with ALGS.

CYSTIC FIBROSIS–ASSOCIATED LIVER DISEASE

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by a pathogenic variant in the CFTR gene.
The incidence of CF varies based on ethnicity, from 1 in 2,500 in Northern Europe to 1 in 350,000 in the Japanese population. In Europe and
North America, newborn screening for CF is widely available. Sweat
chloride measurements and genetic testing are required to confirm

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 404 u Cholestasis 2449
15

16
14

Infants

11

12

Older children

10

8

8

6

6

5

3

2

2

5

5

4

4

4

1 1

rs #
th
e

c
O

at
hi
Id
io
p

SS
C

rla
p
ve

C
AI
-O

PS

ille
Al
ag

ia
at
re
s

Bi
lia
ry

PF

IC
ˆ

0

Fig. 404.8 Etiologic spectrum of ductal paucity. ^PFIC type 2 and

type 3 were present in 14 and 1 infants and 3 and 3 older children, respectively. SSC was secondary to Langerhans cell histiocytosis in 2 children. #Other etiologies included in infants: cystic fibrosis (n = 1), giant
cell hepatitis (n = 1), cytomegalovirus infection (n = 1), Caroli syndrome
(n = 1), and Niemann-­
Pick type C (n = 1), whereas in older children:
oxcarbazepine-­induced vanishing bile duct syndrome (n = 1), congenital
portosystemic shunt (n = 1), myeloproliferative disorder (n = 1), and hereditary fructose intolerance (n = 1). AI-­Overlap, Autoimmune-­overlap;
PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis; PSC, primary sclerosing cholangitis; SSC, secondary sclerosing cholangitis. (From Meena
BL, Khanna R, Bihari C, et al. Bile duct paucity in childhood – spectrum,
profile, and outcome. Eur J Pediatr. 2018;177:1261–1289.)

the diagnosis. Cholestasis can be the first presenting symptom of CF-­
associated liver disease and has been reported to be present in approximately 6% of infants with CF. Infants with meconium ileus have been
identified to be at increased risk for developing cholestasis in the neonatal period.
The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR),
expressed on the apical surface of the biliary epithelial cells, functions to regulate chloride and bicarbonate secretion into the biliary
canaliculus to provide adequate hydration for bile flow. When CFTR
is nonfunctional or dysfunctional, the secretions become thick, leading to biliary obstruction. Postmortem examination of infants with CF
revealed excessive mucus within the biliary tree.
Cholestasis in most infants with CF resolves by 9-­10 months of age
without significant sequelae. However, reports of clinically significant
CF-­associated liver disease causing liver failure and death have been
reported in early childhood.

DISORDERS OF PLASMA MEMBRANE TRANSPORTERS
Progressive Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis

Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC) is the term used to
denote a group of autosomal recessive disorders affecting bile acid
transport (Table 404.2). Notably, all PFIC disorders typically present
with low or normal GGT cholestasis except for PFIC3, which is associated with high GGT concentrations. Genetic testing is available to
aid in the diagnosis of these disorders. PFIC1 is caused by a pathogenic variant in ATP8B1 encoding for a P-­type ATPase (FIC1) highly
expressed on the apical membrane of epithelial cells. Although its exact
role is unknown, it likely functions as an aminophospholipid flippase
to maintain homeostasis within the phospholipid bilayer by translocating phospholipids from the outer leaflet into the inner leaflet of the
plasma membrane. Loss of ATP8B1 may result in an imbalance in the
distribution of phospholipids, leading to instability of the canalicular
membrane and decreased function of the transmembrane proteins,
including the bile acid transporter (i.e., ABCB11). ATP8B1 is expressed
on other epithelial cells, including the pancreas and small intestines.
Therefore extrahepatic manifestations of ATP8B1 (FIC1) deficiency
include diarrhea, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, and sensorineural hearing loss. The liver histology was first described in Amish
descendants with the surname Byler. Characteristic findings of “bland
cholestasis” include preserved liver architecture with canalicular cholestasis and mild ductular proliferation. Inflammation is typically not a

prominent feature with the absence of giant cells. On electron microscopy, the bile has a granular appearance and has been referred to as
Byler bile. Progression to end-­stage liver disease may occur. Significant
diarrhea and hepatic steatosis have been reported in children after liver
transplantation.
PFIC2 is caused by a pathogenic variant in ABCB11 encoding the
bile salt export pump (BSEP) located on the canalicular membrane of
the hepatocyte. BSEP actively transports bile acids out of the hepatocyte
into the canaliculus against a large concentration gradient. Pathogenic
variants in ABCB11 (BSEP deficiency) lead to the inability to transport
bile acids, resulting in cholestasis. In contrast to PFIC1, liver histology
shows features of neonatal hepatitis with disruption of the liver architecture and giant cell transformation. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
may reveal the absence of the BSEP protein; however, the presence of
staining does not exclude a dysfunctional protein. Medical therapies
are generally supportive; there are currently no proven approaches to
halt progression toward cirrhosis. Hepatocellular carcinoma is a recognized complication of this condition, with 10 patients diagnosed before
5 years of age in one report. Most children will eventually require liver
transplantation. Notably, recurrence of BSEP deficiency has been
reported in the liver allograft, likely the result of recipient antibody
production against the BSEP protein in the transplanted liver.
PFIC3 is caused by a pathogenic variant in ABCB4 encoding the
class III multidrug resistance P-­glycoprotein (MDR3) located on the
canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte. MDR3 functions as an aminophospholipid floppase, transporting phosphatidylcholine (PC) from
the inner leaflet to the outer leaflet (canalicular lumen) of the plasma
membrane. With an abundance of PC in the canalicular lumen, mixed
micelles containing PC, cholesterol, and excreted bile acids can be
formed, thus protecting the biliary tree against the detergent properties
of the bile acids. In the absence of available PC, biliary injury results
from exposure to inadequately solubilized bile acids. Unlike other
forms of PFIC, MDR3 deficiency is associated with elevated serum γ-­
glutamyl transferase (GGT) concentrations. Liver biopsies may show
portal inflammation, fibrosis, and prominent ductal proliferation.
Medical and surgical therapies are limited; however, ursodeoxycholic
acid (UDCA), a hydrophilic bile acid, may have a role. In a single-­
center study, 77% of children with a clinical diagnosis of PFIC3 showed
normalization or improvement in liver enzymes during treatment with
UDCA. Furthermore, patients who responded to UDCA also showed
resolution of hepatosplenomegaly and pruritus. Liver histology in four
children also showed decreased fibrosis after 2 years of UDCA administration. However, response to UDCA has been linked to the type of
pathogenic variant, with no response in children with a truncated protein from premature stop codons.
PFIC4 is caused by a pathogenic variant in TJP2 encoding the tight
junction protein 2, a cytosolic component for several classes of cell-­cell
junctions; TJP2 plays an important role in the localization of paracellular structures. When dysfunctional, the tight junctions between hepatocytes are impaired, predisposing to reflux of bile into the paracellular
spaces and resulting in hepatocellular injury. Hepatocellular carcinoma
has been reported. Extrahepatic manifestations include neurologic and
respiratory involvement, thought to be related to the widespread distribution of the TJP2 protein. Histologic characteristics include nonspecific features with intracellular cholestasis and scant giant cells. There
are no proven effective medical therapies, and liver transplantation has
only been reported in a small number of patients.
PFIC5 is caused by a pathogenic variant in NR1H4 encoding for the
farnesoid X receptor (FXR), a master regulator of bile acid homeostasis.
All patients described had severe liver dysfunction and coagulopathy
not responsive to vitamin K beginning within the first several months
of life. Progression to liver failure has been reported within the first 2
years of life with worsening coagulopathy, hypoglycemia, and hyperammonemia. Liver biopsy features include ductular reaction, diffuse
giant cell transformation, intralobular cholestasis with variable degrees
of inflammation, and fibrosis. None of the reported patients showed
BSEP expression. Outcomes are universally poor, necessitating liver
transplantation. Survival after liver transplantation has been reported
to be satisfactory, but graft steatosis has been noted.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2450 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 404.2  Progressive Intrahepatic Familial Cholestasis Genetics and Transporter Defects and Associated γ-­Glutamyl
Transferase Levels
LOCUS

GENE

DEFECT

GGT

PFIC-­1
BRIC-­1

18q21-­22

ATP8B1/FIC1

ATP-­dependent amino-­
phospholipid transport

Normal

PFIC-­2
BRIC-­2

2q24

ABCB11/BSEP

ATP-­dependent bile acid
transport

Normal

PFIC-­3

7q21

ABCB4/MDR3

ATP-­dependent
translocation of
phosphatidylcholine

High

PFIC-­4

TJP2

Tight junction protein

Normal

PFIC-­5

NR1H4/FXR

Nuclear bile acid receptor

Normal

PFIC-­6

MYO5B

Myosin5b

Normal

BRIC, Benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis; GGT, γ-­glutamyl transferase; PFIC, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis.
From Loomes KM, Emerick KM. Pediatric cholestatic liver disease. In: Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021:
Table 70.2, p. 771.

PFIC6 is caused by a pathogenic variant in MYO5B encoding for
myosin 5B. MYO5B deficiency has also been linked to microvillus
inclusion disease, in which some patients develop low GGT cholestasis. It is recognized that a form of low GGT cholestasis, resembling
other PFIC disorders, can develop in the absence of intestinal disease
in patients with MYO5B defects. Histologic features show giant cell
hepatitis, fibrosis, and hepatocellular cholestasis. IHC reveals abnormal
organization of both BSEP and MDR3 in the canaliculi and a granular
and patchy pattern in the subcanalicular area. The prognosis for patients
with PFIC6 appears to be better than with other forms of PFIC, with the
median age of 5 years without progressive liver failure in the first case
series reported. Cholestatic liver disease has developed in some patients
who had undergone isolated intestinal transplant because of intestinal
failure. This has prompted some to advocate for the consideration of a
combined liver-­intestine transplant in this patient population.

Endocrinopathies

Congenital hypothyroidism has long been associated with neonatal
cholestasis. In a single-­center study, 35% of patients with congenital
hypothyroidism presented with cholestasis. Liver biopsies in these
infants revealed intracellular bile pigment accumulation and variable giant cell formation. The pathogenesis remains unknown, but it
is postulated that hormones, including thyroid hormone, regulate bile
production and flow. Although screening for congenital hypothyroidism using thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH) is common in many
countries, central hypothyroidism resulting from pan-­hypopituitarism
(i.e., septo-­optic dysplasia) may be missed because of a falsely low
TSH. Prompt recognition and treatment are vital, as delayed treatment
in congenital hypothyroidism may have severe neurodevelopmental
consequences and lead to death in those with adrenal insufficiency.
Fortunately, cholestasis usually resolves after appropriate hormone
supplementation, and progression of liver disease is not expected.

HEPATOCYTE INJURY

Infections, drugs, metabolic disorders, and genetic conditions should
also be considered as causes of cholestasis in an infant.

Infections

Bacterial, fungal, and viral infections may manifest as neonatal cholestasis. In a single-­center study, urinary tract infections were found
in 7.5% of asymptomatic, afebrile infants less than 8 weeks of age presenting with jaundice. Infections may result in hepatic injury through
direct invasion from hepatotrophic microorganisms (i.e., cytomegalovirus [CMV]), or secondarily by exposure to endotoxins released from
microbe membranes. In animal models, endotoxin has been shown to
decrease bile flow. In sepsis, perfusion to the liver may also be impaired.
Congenital infections are unique to neonates and require particular
attention. The so-­called “TORCHeS” infections (Toxoplasma gondii,
rubella, CMV, herpes simplex virus, and syphilis) are recognized causes

of neonatal cholestasis. Although some affected infants are born with
stigmata of a congenital infection, such as thrombocytopenic purpura in
congenital rubella syndrome, others may present with neonatal cholestasis alone. Therefore is it important to assess for congenital infections in
the cholestatic infant, as treatment and additional screening may be necessary upon diagnosis (i.e., hearing tests in congenital CMV infection).

Infusions, Drugs, and Medications

Although a multitude of drugs and medications can cause cholestasis,
parenteral nutrition–associated liver disease (PNALD) is a common
iatrogenic cause of cholestasis, particularly in the neonatal intensive
care unit. Typically observed in infants requiring parenteral nutrition for more than 2 weeks, other risk factors for the development of
PNALD include prematurity, low birthweight, nil per os (NPO), long
duration of parenteral nutrition, imbalanced amino acid composition,
bacteremia, and abdominal surgeries. The lipid emulsion used also has
a significant impact on the development of PNALD. Specifically, soybean lipid emulsions contain ω-­6 fatty acids and plant-­based cholesterol products called phytosterols. ω-­6 Fatty acids are thought to be
proinflammatory, whereas phytosterols can impair bile flow caused by
inefficient metabolism in the liver. In contrast, fish oil emulsions are
rich in ω-­3 fatty acids, which are antiinflammatory and do not contain
phytosterols, thus protecting the liver against PNALD. The availability
of SMOF—a soy, medium-­chain triglyceride (MCT), olive oil, and fish
oil emulsion—also offers the benefits of an ω-­3 rich emulsion but also
contains adequate essential fatty acids. Clinical trials have shown that
SMOF was hepatoprotective in preterm infants, resulting in a lower incidence of PNALD with a lower peak bilirubin level and was associated
with decreased hospital length of stay. UDCA may also provide some
benefit to patients with PNALD; it was well tolerated without reported
adverse events. Therefore the benefits of reducing liver enzymes must
be weighed against the unknown efficacy of UDCA. Fortunately, as
parenteral nutrition is weaned and enteral feeds are increased, PNALD
resolves in most patients without long-­term sequelae.

Alpha1-­Antitrypsin Deficiency

α1-­Antitrypsin (A1AT) deficiency is the most common form of inherited neonatal cholestasis, occurring in approximately 1 in 2,000-­3,500
live births in North America. This autosomal recessive disorder is diagnosed by a low serum A1AT level, protein electrophoresis to identify
pathologic phenotypes—most commonly ZZ—and molecular testing.
Pathogenic variants in the SERPINA1 gene may result in abnormal
folding of the A1AT protein within the rough endoplasmic reticulum.
The misfolded A1AT protein is unable to be secreted out of the hepatocyte, and intracellular accumulation leads to autophagy, mitochondrial
injury, and progression to hepatocellular injury. It should be noted that
A1AT is also an acute-­phase reactant and may be falsely elevated during systemic inflammation; therefore a normal A1AT level in this clinical context may not exclude a diagnosis of A1AT deficiency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 404 u Cholestasis 2451
A large Swedish study prospectively screened 200,000 newborns to identify those with A1AT deficiency; neonatal cholestasis occurred in ∼11%
of infants with the ZZ phenotype. A multicenter study of 350 patients
with A1AT deficiency with a mean follow-­up time of 2.5 years reported
a slightly increased risk of developing portal hypertension in those with
a history of neonatal cholestasis compared with those without, although
there was no difference in the risk of liver transplantation or death.

Inborn Errors of Metabolism

Galactosemia is a rare inborn error of galactose metabolism cause by
a deficiency in the galactose-­1-­phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT),
galactokinase (GALK), or UDP-­
galactose-­
4′-­epimerase (GALE)
enzyme. As such, galactose cannot be metabolized to glucose, leading
to hypoglycemia and accumulation of toxic intermediate metabolites
causing vomiting; feed intolerance; and hepatic, neurologic, ocular,
and renal injury. An association between galactosemia and Escherichia
coli sepsis has also been reported. Although rare, neonatal cholestasis
may be the presenting symptom of an infant with galactosemia. Early
diagnosis with enzyme and genetic testing and treatment with a strict
galactose-­free diet are essential to preserving neurologic function. Fortunately, many countries have adopted galactosemia as part of their
newborn metabolic screen, which has aided in the early diagnosis and
improved outcomes of these patients.
Type I tyrosinemia is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a
defect in the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH) enzyme required
for tyrosine metabolism. Accumulation of metabolites upstream of
the FAH enzyme, including fumarylacetoacetate, succinylacetate, and
succinylacetone, may precipitate hepatic and renal injury. Infants with
tyrosinemia can be present with cholestasis, but usually also have evidence of hepatic dysfunction, including severe coagulopathy out of
keeping with the degree of hepatocellular injury. High urine succinylacetone levels are highly suggestive of tyrosinemia type I. Treatment
with nitisinone, a potent inhibitor of tyrosine degradation, and dietary
therapy are the mainstays of therapy to prevent acute and chronic complications of tyrosinemia type I.
Hereditary fructose intolerance (HFI) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by the deficiency of aldolase B enzyme. In
the absence of aldolase B activity, large amounts of fructose-­1-­
phosphate accumulate in the liver, leading to depletion of inorganic phosphate and adenosine triphosphate (ATP). As a result of
depleted inorganic phosphate, new ATP cannot be generated, leading to hepatocyte necrosis and liver dysfunction. Although breast
milk is fructose free, common infant formulas may contain fructose
in various forms. Furthermore, sucrose, a disaccharide made up of
glucose and fructose monosaccharides, is a common component of
oral medications for infants. Therefore a careful review of unexpected fructose exposure should be undertaken in infants with liver
dysfunction in which HFI is suspected. A diagnosis is confirmed
by measuring enzyme activity or through molecular testing. Symptoms resolve with the institution of a strict fructose-­free diet, and
patients are expected to develop normally.
Lysosomal and peroxisomal disorders, including Niemann-­Pick
type A and C and Zellweger syndrome, respectively, are another group
of conditions that may present with neonatal cholestasis. Typically,
these conditions are multisystemic resulting in neurologic, cardiac, and
hematologic manifestations depending on the disorder. Liver biopsies
may show accumulation of storage materials within organelles on electron microscopy. The diagnosis is usually confirmed by genetic testing.
Mitochondrial hepatopathies result from deletion or depletion
of mitochondrial genes including POLG1, DGUOK, and MPV17
(Table 404.3). These conditions typically present with neonatal
cholestasis and may evolve into neonatal acute liver failure characterized by lactic acidosis, coagulopathy, hypoglycemia, and hyperammonemia. An elevated lactate-­to-­pyruvate ratio >25 mol/mol
is suggestive of a mitochondrial disorder. Liver biopsy may reveal
microsteatosis and abnormal mitochondrial staining or abnormal
architecture on electron microscopy. There is often multisystem
involvement, including neurologic, cardiac, and musculoskeletal

Table 404.3  Phenotypic Classification of Primary
Mitochondrial Hepatopathies
RC (electron transport) defects (OXPHOS)
• Neonatal liver failure
• Complex I deficiency
• Complex IV deficiency (SCO1 variants)
• Complex III deficiency (BCS1L variants)
• Coenzyme Q deficiency
• Multiple complex deficiencies (transfer and elongation factor
variants)
• mtDNA depletion syndrome (DUGOK, MPV17, POLG, SUCLG1,
C10orf2/Twinkle variants)
• Later-­onset liver dysfunction or failure
• Alpers-­Huttenlocher disease (POLG variants)
• Pearson marrow pancreas syndrome (mtDNA deletion)
• Mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy (TYMP
variants)
• NNH (MPV17 variants)
Fatty acid oxidation defects
• Long-­chain 3 hydroxyacyl-­coenzyme A dehydrogenase
• Carnitine palmitoyltransferase I and II deficiencies
• Carnitine-­acylcarnitinetranslocase deficiency
Urea cycle enzyme deficiencies
Electron transfer flavoprotein and electron transfer flavoprotein
dehydrogenase deficiencies
Phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (mitochondrial) deficiency;
nonketotic hyperglycemia
Citrin deficiency; neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin
deficiency (SLC25A13 variants)
NN, Navajo neurohepatopathy; OXPHOS, oxidative phosphorylation; RC, respiratory
chain.
From Lee WS, Sokol RJ. Mitochondrial hepatopathies: advances in genetics,
therapeutic approaches, and outcomes. J Pediatr. 2013;163(4):942–948, Table 1.

manifestations of mitochondrial dysfunction. Prognosis is poor
with limited proven therapies.

Bile Acid Synthesis Defects

Bile acid synthesis defects are a rare cause of neonatal cholestasis.
Liver injury is postulated to result from the accumulation of hepatotoxic intermediate metabolites and absence of the normal trophic and
choleretic effects of primary bile acids. Inborn errors of bile acid biosynthesis typically present with a form of low GGT cholestasis and low
serum bile acid levels. Clinical presentation may vary from neonatal
cholestasis to neonatal acute liver failure. Characteristic urine bile acid
profiles may indicate specific enzyme defects. Supplementation with
cholic acid may be helpful; however, patients who do not respond to
bile acid replacement therapy may require liver transplantation.

Gestational Alloimmune Liver Disease

Gestational alloimmune liver disease (GALD) is a rapidly progressive disease characterized by iron deposition in the liver, heart, salivary
glands, and endocrine organs without increased iron stores in the reticuloendothelial system. Infants present with liver dysfunction within
the first few days of life. Familial cases and repeated miscarriages are
commonly reported. The postulated pathophysiology involves maternal sensitization to fetal liver antigens. As a result, maternal antibodies
against the fetal liver are transported across the placenta causing fetal
liver injury in utero. Liver injury results in decreased hepatic hepcidin expression and thus dysregulated iron update into the developing
fetus. Laboratory findings include hypoglycemia, hyperbilirubinemia,
hypoalbuminemia, elevated ferritin, and coagulopathy. The diagnosis
is usually confirmed by salivary biopsy or MRI demonstrating extrahepatic siderosis in the pancreas, myocardium, or thyroid follicles. Liver
biopsies almost universally show cirrhosis, and positive staining for
C5b-­9 membrane attack complex has also been reported. The differential diagnosis is noted in Table 404.4. Treatment with exchange transfusion and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) has been shown to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2452 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 404.4  Typical Laboratory Findings in Neonatal Liver Failure
GALD

HLH

VIRAL

ISCHEMIC

Transaminase levels
(IU/L)

Normal/mild increase
(<100)

Moderate/significant
increase (>1,000)

Moderate increase
(100-­500)

MITOCHONDRIAL

Significant increase
(>1,000)

Significant increase
(>1,000-­6,000)

INR

Significant increase

Moderate/significant
increase

Moderate/significant
increase

Moderate/significant
increase

Moderate/significant
increase

Ferritin level (ng/mL)

800-­7,000

Significant increase
(>20,000)

Variable

Significant increase
(>20,000)

Variable depending
on underlying cause
of ischemia

Triglyceride levels

Normal

Increased

Normal

Normal

Normal

Hypoglycemia

Yes

Often

Yes

Often

Variable

Lactic acidosis

Normal

Normal

Increased

Normal

Often

α-­Fetoprotein level
(for age)

Increased

Normal

Normal/increased

Normal

Normal

Cholestasis

Progressive after birth

Moderate/significant

Moderate

None/mild at
presentation

Mild/moderate

HLH, Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
From Larson-­Nath C, Vitola BE. Neonatal acute liver failure. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:25–39: Table 2; with data from Sundaram et al. J Pediatr. 2011;159:813–818; Taylor et al. Liver
Transpl. 2016;22(5):677–685; Bitar et al. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2017;64(1):70–75; Fellman et al. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2011;16(4):222–228.

improve outcomes and reduce the need for liver transplantation. Given
the high rate of recurrence of GALD in future pregnancies of affected
mothers, maternal treatment with weekly IVIG beginning at 18 weeks
gestational age should be considered and has been shown to decrease
GALD in the developing fetus.

OTHER SYNDROMES ASSOCIATED WITH
NEONATAL CHOLESTASIS
Neonatal Ichthyosis and Sclerosing Cholangitis

Neonatal ichthyosis and sclerosing cholangitis (NISCH) syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive condition caused by pathogenic
variants in claudin-­1 (CLDN1), a membrane protein needed for the
formation of tight junctions between cells. Infants may present with
dry scaly skin, alopecia, and jaundice within the first few weeks
of life. Defects in CLDN1 (similar to TJP2 deficiency) increase
paracellular leakage and regurgitation of the toxic components of
bile, leading to bile duct injury and cholestasis. Liver histology is
variable, with most infants having evidence of hepatocellular cholestasis and bile duct plugs. Ductular proliferation, portal fibrosis,
ductopenia, and characteristic findings of sclerosing cholangitis on
cholangiogram have been described later in adolescence. Severity
of liver disease is also variable ranging from transient neonatal cholestasis to progressive cirrhosis requiring liver transplantation.

Lymphedema-­Cholestasis Syndrome (Aagenaes
Syndrome)

Lymphedema-­cholestasis syndrome is a rare cholestatic disorder
manifest by cholestasis with pale stools by 1 week of life. On liver
biopsy, multinucleated giant cell hepatitis was described in affected
patients. The clinical course is variable, but jaundice reportedly resolves
by 1-­5 years of age. Intermittent episodes of cholestasis may recur but
typically resolve in a period of months. Lower extremity lymphedema
develops during the prepuberty period in all patients and can be disfiguring. Pathogenesis remains unknown, but a locus has been mapped to
chromosome 15q and is thought to play a role in the abnormal development of lymphatic structures. The natural history of liver disease
has been reported to be favorable, with cirrhosis developing in a small
minority of patients.

Arthrogryposis, Renal Dysfunction, and Cholestasis

Arthrogryposis, renal dysfunction, and cholestasis (ARC) syndrome is a rare and autosomal recessive disorder caused by VPS33B
or VIPAR pathogenic variants. Prominent clinical features include
arthrogryposis, renal tubular acidosis, and a low GGT cholestasis. Additional features include agenesis of the corpus callosum,
deafness, hypothyroidism, ichthyosis, recurrent infections, and
congenital cardiac defects. With abnormal platelet count and function having also been described, life-­threatening bleeding has been
reported both spontaneously and after liver biopsy in affected
patients. VPS33B or VIPAR plays a role in intracellular vesicular
trafficking pathways, cell polarity, and membrane protein localization. As such, abnormal localization of canalicular membrane
proteins, including BSEP and MDR3, have been reported in liver
biopsies of patients with ARC syndrome and may contribute to
the pathogenesis of cholestasis. Although the prognosis has been
reported to be poor, successful liver transplantation for severe
intractable pruritus and poor quality of life has been reported.

IDIOPATHIC NEONATAL HEPATITIS

Idiopathic neonatal hepatitis was a term used to describe infants with
neonatal cholestasis for which a specific cause could not be determined. However, with the advent of molecular testing, the number of
patients with “idiopathic neonatal hepatitis” is decreasing owing to the
expanding knowledge of the molecular causes of cholestasis.

Management

Management of patients with neonatal cholestasis requires the clinician
to identify the cause of cholestasis while ruling out conditions that require
prompt intervention. Delayed diagnosis of sepsis, pan-­hypopituitarism,
or inborn errors of metabolism may have fatal consequences. Similarly,
failure to promptly treat galactosemia or congenital hypothyroidism can
have devastating neurologic sequelae. In patients with biliary atresia, the
most common indication for pediatric liver transplant worldwide, early
surgical intervention with KPE has been shown to improve survival with
the native liver. Table 404.5 provides a framework for the initial investigation of a patient with neonatal cholestasis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 404.5  Etiologies and Suggested Investigations for Patients with Neonatal Cholestasis
ETIOLOGY

RECOMMENDED INVESTIGATIONS

General investigations for all infants with cholestasis

DISORDERS OF EXTRAHEPATIC BILE DUCTS
Biliary atresia
Choledochal malformation and choledocholithiasis/
microlithiasis
INTRAHEPATIC DISORDERS
Alagille syndrome
Cystic fibrosis

CBC and differential, ALT, AST, total and conjugated bilirubin, GGT and ALP, INR,
albumin, blood glucose
Abdominal ultrasound with Doppler
Review newborn metabolic screen
Urinalysis
MMP7, liver biopsy, intraoperative cholangiogram, examination of the biliary remnant
Abdominal US, MRCP

Ophthalmologic examination, chest x-­ray, echocardiogram, liver biopsy, and genetic
testing for JAG1 and NOTCH2
Sweat chloride, CFTR testing

Membrane transporter defects
• PFIC1

ATP8B1 genetic testing

• PFIC2

ABCB11 genetic testing

• PFIC3

MDR3 genetic testing

• PFIC4

TJP2 genetic testing

• PFIC5

NR1H4 (FXR) genetic testing

• PFIC6

MYO5B genetic testing

• ARC syndrome

VPS33B and VIPAR genetic testing

• NISCH syndrome

CLDN1 genetic testing

Endocrinopathies
• Hypothyroidism

TSH, free T4

• Hypopituitarism

TSH, free T4, cortisol and electrolytes, MRI brain

Hepatocyte injury
• Infection

Complete blood count and differential, blood and urine cultures, urinalysis, “ToRCHeS”
screen

• Total parental nutrition

History

Inborn errors of metabolism
• Galactosemia

Galactose-­1-­phosphate uridyltransferase enzyme activity, genetic testing for GALT,
GALK, or GALE

• Tyrosinemia

Urine succinylacetone, FAH genetic testing

• Hereditary fructose intolerance

Aldolase B (ALDOB) enzyme activity and genetic testing

Bile acid synthesis defect

Serum bile acids, urine bile acid profile, genetic testing

α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency

Blood α1-­antitrypsin concentrations, electrophoretic phenotyping, SERPINA1 genetic
testing

Lysosomal disorders
• Neimann Pick A and C

Genetic testing for SMPD1 for Neimann Pick A and NPC1 or NPC2 genes for Neimann
Pick C

• Cholesterol esterase storage disease/Wolman

Liposomal acid lipase enzyme testing and LIPA genetic testing

• Mucopolysaccharidoses

Urine screen for glycosaminoglycans. Genetic testing for specific pathogenic variants
associated with mucopolysaccharidoses

Peroxisomal biogenesis disorders
• Z
 ellweger syndrome
• Infantile Refsum

Very long-chain fatty acid concentrations, genetic testing for PEX genes

Mitochondrial hepatopathy

Ammonia, lactate, pyruvate, creatinine kinase, echocardiogram, genetic testing for
mitochondrial genes

Gestational alloimmune liver disease

MRI, buccal biopsy, serum ferritin, total iron-­binding capacity ammonia

CBC, Complete blood count; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; GGT, gamma-­glutamyl transferase; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; INR, international
normalized ratio; MMP7, matrix metalloproteinase 7; US, ultrasound; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; JAG1, jagged-­1; NOTCH2, notch receptor 2; CFTR,
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; ATP8B1, ATPase phospholipid transporting 8B1; ABCB11, ATP-­binding cassette subfamily B member 11; MDR3, class III
multidrug resistance P-­glycoproteins; TJP2, tight junction protein 2; NR1H4, nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group H member 4; MYO5B, myosin VB; VPS33B, vacuolar protein sorting-­
associated protein 33B; VIPAR, VPS33B interacting protein, apical-­basolateral polarity regulator, Spe-­39 homolog; CLDN1, claudin 1; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone; GALT,
galactose-­1-­phosphate uridylyl transferase; GALK, galactokinase; GALE, UDP-­galactose-­4′-­epimerase; FAH: fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase; SERPINA1, serpin family A member 1;
SMPD1, sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1; NPC1, NPC intracellular cholesterol transporter 1; NPC2, NPC intracellular cholesterol transporter 2; LIPA, lysosomal acid lipase.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2454 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 404.6  Recommended Nutritional Support for
Children with Cholestasis
ENERGY/NUTRIENT

REQUIREMENT

Energy

∼130% of requirement for age

Fat

30–50% of total calories
Start with MCT/LCT = 30%/70% of total fat
calories

Protein

∼130–150% of requirement for age

Carbohydrate

40–60% of total calories

Vitamin A

<10 kg: 5,000 IU/day
>10 kg: 10,000 IU/day

Vitamin D

Cholecalciferol: 2,000-­5,000 IU/day

Vitamin E

D-­alpha-­tocopheryl polyethylene glycol
1000 succinate: 15-­25 IU/kg/day

Vitamin K

2-­5 mg/day

Calcium

Meet DRI

Adapted from Mouzaki M, Bronsky J, Gupte G, et al. Nutrition support of children
with chronic liver diseases: a joint position paper of the North American Society for
Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition and the European Society for
Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
2019;69(4):498–511.

In infants with chronic cholestasis, growth failure and malnutrition are major concerns. Bile is an essential component of lipid
digestion; therefore cholestasis leads to fat maldigestion and fat-­
soluble vitamin deficiencies (i.e., vitamin A, D, E, and K). Caloric
support by an MCT-­containing formula may be helpful, as MCT
can be absorbed in a bile acid–independent manner. Supplementation with aqueous vitamin A, D, E, and K formations should be
considered to avoid the complications of fat-­soluble vitamin deficiencies. Table 404.6 has been adapted to provide initial guidance
toward nutritional support in children with neonatal cholestasis.
Regular monitoring of anthropometrics and fat-­soluble vitamin levels is needed to ensure patients are provided with adequate nutrition for growth and development.

404.2 Cholestasis in the Older Child
Simon Lam and William F. Balistreri
Cholestasis with onset after the neonatal period is most often caused
by acute viral hepatitis or exposure to hepatotoxic drugs. However,
many of the conditions causing neonatal cholestasis can also cause
chronic cholestasis in older patients (see Table 403.3). Consequently, older children and adolescents with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia should be evaluated for acute and chronic viral hepatitis,
α1-­antitrypsin deficiency, Wilson disease, liver disease associated
with inflammatory bowel disease, sclerosing cholangitis, autoimmune hepatitis, drug-­induced liver injury, and the syndromes of
intrahepatic cholestasis. Other causes include obstruction related to
cholelithiasis, abdominal tumors, enlarged lymph nodes, or hepatic
inflammation resulting from drug ingestion. Management of cholestasis in the older child is similar to that proposed for neonatal
cholestasis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 405

Metabolic Diseases of the
Liver
Julie Bonn and William F. Balistreri
INTRODUCTION

Metabolic liver diseases in children, although individually rare, altogether
represent a significant cause of morbidity and mortality. This is because the
liver has a central role in synthetic, degradative, and regulatory pathways
involving carbohydrate, protein, lipid, trace element, and vitamin metabolism. Therefore inborn errors of metabolism will result in metabolic abnormalities, specific enzyme deficiencies or defects, and disorders of protein
transport that can have primary or secondary effects on the liver (Table
405.1). Liver disease can arise when absence of an enzyme produces a
block in a metabolic pathway, when unmetabolized substrate accumulates
proximal to a block, when deficiency of an essential substance produced
distal to an aberrant chemical reaction develops, or when synthesis of an
abnormal metabolite occurs. The spectrum of pathologic changes includes
hepatocyte injury, with subsequent failure of other metabolic functions,
often resulting in cirrhosis and/or liver cancer; abnormal storage of lipid,
glycogen, or other products manifested as hepatomegaly, often with complications specific to deranged metabolism (hypoglycemia with glycogen
storage disease); and absence of structural change despite profound metabolic effects, as seen in patients with urea cycle defects. Clinical manifestations of metabolic diseases of the liver mimic infections, intoxications, and
hematologic and immunologic diseases (Table 405.2).
Many metabolic diseases are detected in expanded newborn metabolic screening programs (see Chapter 104). Clues are provided by
family history of a similar illness or by the observation that the onset
of symptoms is closely associated with a change in dietary habits; in
patients with hereditary fructose intolerance, symptoms follow ingestion of fructose (sucrose). Clinical and laboratory evidence often
guides the evaluation. Liver biopsy offers morphologic study and
permits enzyme assays, as well as quantitative and qualitative assays
of various other constituents (e.g., hepatic copper content in Wilson
disease). Genetic/molecular diagnostic approaches are also available.
Such studies require cooperation of experienced laboratories and
careful attention to collection and handling of specimens. Treatment
depends on the specific type of defect, and although relatively uncommon, altogether metabolic diseases of the liver account for up to 10% of
the indications for liver transplantation in children, a number that may
be underestimated given the acute nature of some of these conditions,
precluding complete diagnostic investigation before transplantation.

405.1 Inherited Deficient Conjugation of
Bilirubin (Familial Nonhemolytic
Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia)
Julie Bonn and William F. Balistreri
Bilirubin is the metabolic end product of heme. Before excretion into
bile, it is first glucuronidated and made water-­soluble by the enzyme
bilirubin-­
uridine diphosphoglucuronate glucuronosyltransferase
(UDPGT). UDPGT activity is deficient or altered in three genetically
and functionally distinct disorders (Crigler-­Najjar [CN] syndromes
type I and II and Gilbert syndrome), producing congenital nonobstructive, nonhemolytic, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. UGT1A1

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2454 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 404.6  Recommended Nutritional Support for
Children with Cholestasis
ENERGY/NUTRIENT

REQUIREMENT

Energy

∼130% of requirement for age

Fat

30–50% of total calories
Start with MCT/LCT = 30%/70% of total fat
calories

Protein

∼130–150% of requirement for age

Carbohydrate

40–60% of total calories

Vitamin A

<10 kg: 5,000 IU/day
>10 kg: 10,000 IU/day

Vitamin D

Cholecalciferol: 2,000-­5,000 IU/day

Vitamin E

D-­alpha-­tocopheryl polyethylene glycol
1000 succinate: 15-­25 IU/kg/day

Vitamin K

2-­5 mg/day

Calcium

Meet DRI

Adapted from Mouzaki M, Bronsky J, Gupte G, et al. Nutrition support of children
with chronic liver diseases: a joint position paper of the North American Society for
Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition and the European Society for
Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
2019;69(4):498–511.

In infants with chronic cholestasis, growth failure and malnutrition are major concerns. Bile is an essential component of lipid
digestion; therefore cholestasis leads to fat maldigestion and fat-­
soluble vitamin deficiencies (i.e., vitamin A, D, E, and K). Caloric
support by an MCT-­containing formula may be helpful, as MCT
can be absorbed in a bile acid–independent manner. Supplementation with aqueous vitamin A, D, E, and K formations should be
considered to avoid the complications of fat-­soluble vitamin deficiencies. Table 404.6 has been adapted to provide initial guidance
toward nutritional support in children with neonatal cholestasis.
Regular monitoring of anthropometrics and fat-­soluble vitamin levels is needed to ensure patients are provided with adequate nutrition for growth and development.

404.2 Cholestasis in the Older Child
Simon Lam and William F. Balistreri
Cholestasis with onset after the neonatal period is most often caused
by acute viral hepatitis or exposure to hepatotoxic drugs. However,
many of the conditions causing neonatal cholestasis can also cause
chronic cholestasis in older patients (see Table 403.3). Consequently, older children and adolescents with conjugated hyperbilirubinemia should be evaluated for acute and chronic viral hepatitis,
α1-­antitrypsin deficiency, Wilson disease, liver disease associated
with inflammatory bowel disease, sclerosing cholangitis, autoimmune hepatitis, drug-­induced liver injury, and the syndromes of
intrahepatic cholestasis. Other causes include obstruction related to
cholelithiasis, abdominal tumors, enlarged lymph nodes, or hepatic
inflammation resulting from drug ingestion. Management of cholestasis in the older child is similar to that proposed for neonatal
cholestasis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 405

Metabolic Diseases of the
Liver
Julie Bonn and William F. Balistreri
INTRODUCTION

Metabolic liver diseases in children, although individually rare, altogether
represent a significant cause of morbidity and mortality. This is because the
liver has a central role in synthetic, degradative, and regulatory pathways
involving carbohydrate, protein, lipid, trace element, and vitamin metabolism. Therefore inborn errors of metabolism will result in metabolic abnormalities, specific enzyme deficiencies or defects, and disorders of protein
transport that can have primary or secondary effects on the liver (Table
405.1). Liver disease can arise when absence of an enzyme produces a
block in a metabolic pathway, when unmetabolized substrate accumulates
proximal to a block, when deficiency of an essential substance produced
distal to an aberrant chemical reaction develops, or when synthesis of an
abnormal metabolite occurs. The spectrum of pathologic changes includes
hepatocyte injury, with subsequent failure of other metabolic functions,
often resulting in cirrhosis and/or liver cancer; abnormal storage of lipid,
glycogen, or other products manifested as hepatomegaly, often with complications specific to deranged metabolism (hypoglycemia with glycogen
storage disease); and absence of structural change despite profound metabolic effects, as seen in patients with urea cycle defects. Clinical manifestations of metabolic diseases of the liver mimic infections, intoxications, and
hematologic and immunologic diseases (Table 405.2).
Many metabolic diseases are detected in expanded newborn metabolic screening programs (see Chapter 104). Clues are provided by
family history of a similar illness or by the observation that the onset
of symptoms is closely associated with a change in dietary habits; in
patients with hereditary fructose intolerance, symptoms follow ingestion of fructose (sucrose). Clinical and laboratory evidence often
guides the evaluation. Liver biopsy offers morphologic study and
permits enzyme assays, as well as quantitative and qualitative assays
of various other constituents (e.g., hepatic copper content in Wilson
disease). Genetic/molecular diagnostic approaches are also available.
Such studies require cooperation of experienced laboratories and
careful attention to collection and handling of specimens. Treatment
depends on the specific type of defect, and although relatively uncommon, altogether metabolic diseases of the liver account for up to 10% of
the indications for liver transplantation in children, a number that may
be underestimated given the acute nature of some of these conditions,
precluding complete diagnostic investigation before transplantation.

405.1 Inherited Deficient Conjugation of
Bilirubin (Familial Nonhemolytic
Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia)
Julie Bonn and William F. Balistreri
Bilirubin is the metabolic end product of heme. Before excretion into
bile, it is first glucuronidated and made water-­soluble by the enzyme
bilirubin-­
uridine diphosphoglucuronate glucuronosyltransferase
(UDPGT). UDPGT activity is deficient or altered in three genetically
and functionally distinct disorders (Crigler-­Najjar [CN] syndromes
type I and II and Gilbert syndrome), producing congenital nonobstructive, nonhemolytic, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. UGT1A1

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 405 u Metabolic Diseases of the Liver

2455

Table 405.1  Inborn Errors of Metabolism that Affect the
Liver

Table 405.2  Clinical Manifestations that Suggest the
­Possibility of Metabolic Disease

COMMON DISORDERS OF CARBOHYDRATE METABOLISM
Disorders of galactose metabolism
• Galactosemia (galactose-­1-­phosphate uridyltransferase
deficiency)
Disorders of fructose metabolism
• Hereditary fructose intolerance (aldolase deficiency)
• Fructose-­1,6 diphosphatase deficiency
Glycogen storage diseases
• Type I
• Von Gierke Ia (glucose-­6-­phosphatase deficiency)
• Type Ib (glucose-­6-­phosphatase transport defect)
• Type III Cori/Forbes (glycogen debrancher deficiency)
• Type IV Andersen (glycogen branching enzyme deficiency)
• Type VI Hers (liver phosphorylase deficiency)
Congenital disorders of glycosylation (multiple subtypes)

Recurrent vomiting, failure to thrive, short stature
Dysmorphic features
Jaundice, hepatomegaly (± splenomegaly), fulminant hepatic failure,
edema/anasarca
Hypoglycemia, organic acidemia, lactic acidemia, hyperammonemia,
bleeding (coagulopathy)
Developmental delay, hypotonia, progressive neuromuscular
deterioration, seizures, myopathy, neuropathy
Cardiac dysfunction/failure
Unusual odors
Rickets
Cataracts
Multiorgan involvement
Family history

DISORDERS OF AMINO ACID AND PROTEIN METABOLISM
Disorders of tyrosine metabolism
• Hereditary tyrosinemia type I (fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase
deficiency)
• Tyrosinemia, type II (tyrosine aminotransferase deficiency)
Inherited urea cycle enzyme defects
• CPS deficiency (carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency)
• OTC deficiency (ornithine transcarbamoylase deficiency)
• Citrullinemia type I (argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency)
• Argininosuccinic aciduria (argininosuccinate deficiency)
• Argininemia (arginase deficiency)
• N-­AGS deficiency (N-­acetylglutamate synthetase deficiency)
Maple serum urine disease (multiple possible defects*)
DISORDERS OF LIPID METABOLISM
Wolman disease (lysosomal acid lipase deficiency)
Cholesteryl ester storage disease (lysosomal acid lipase deficiency)
Homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (low-­density lipoprotein
receptor deficiency)
Gaucher disease type I (β-­glucocerebrosidase deficiency)
Niemann-­Pick type C (NPC 1 and 2 variants)
DISORDERS OF BILE ACID METABOLISM
Defects in bile acid synthesis (several specific enzyme deficiencies)
Zellweger syndrome—cerebrohepatorenal (multiple pathogenic
variants in peroxisome biogenesis genes)
DISORDERS OF METAL METABOLISM
Wilson disease (ATP7B pathogenic variants)
Hepatic copper overload
Indian childhood cirrhosis
Neonatal hemochromatosis
DISORDERS OF BILIRUBIN METABOLISM
Crigler-­Najjar (bilirubin-­uridine diphosphoglucuronate
glucuronosyltransferase pathogenic variants)
• Type I
• Type II
Gilbert disease (bilirubin-­uridine diphosphoglucuronate
glucuronosyltransferase polymorphism)
Dubin-­Johnson syndrome (multiple drug-­resistant protein 2
pathogenic variants)
Rotor syndrome
MISCELLANEOUS
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Citrullinemia type II (citrin deficiency)
Cystic fibrosis (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
pathogenic variants)
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (ferrochelatase deficiency)
Polycystic kidney disease
Mitochondrial hepatopathies (see Table 404.4 and Chapter 409)
*Maple syrup urine disease can be caused by mutations in branched-­chain α-­
keto dehydrogenase, keto acid decarboxylase, lipoamide dehydrogenase, or
dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase.

is the primary UDPGT isoform needed for bilirubin glucuronidation.
Complete absence of UGT1A1 activity causes CN type I, while CN
type II is caused by decreased UGT1A1 activity to ∼10% of normal.

Gilbert syndrome, the most common hereditary hyperbilirubinemia syndrome, occurs in 5–10% of the White population. Common
polymorphisms resulting in a TA insertion in the promoter region of
UGT1A1 lead to decreased binding of the TATA binding protein and
decrease normal gene activity by ∼30%. Snapback primer genotyping
can distinguish all UGT1A1 promoter genotypes and can provide a
definitive diagnosis. Unlike the CN syndromes, Gilbert syndrome usually occurs after puberty, is not associated with chronic liver disease,
and no treatment is required. Disease manifestations include fluctuating mild elevations in total serum bilirubin concentration from 1
to 6 mg/dL with no evidence of liver injury or hemolysis. Fasting or
dehydration may result in visible jaundice. Because UGT1A1 catalyzes
water-­soluble glucuronidation and detoxification of multiple substrates
other than bilirubin (i.e., drugs, hormones, environmental toxins, and
aromatic hydrocarbons), pathogenic variants in the UGT1A1 gene are
implicated in cancer risk and predispose to drug toxicity and episodic
jaundice specifically in cancer chemotherapy.

CRIGLER-­NAJJAR SYNDROME TYPE I
(GLUCURONYL TRANSFERASE DEFICIENCY)

CN type I is a rare, autosomal recessive disease caused by homozygous
or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the UGT1A1 gene
that result in a premature stop codon or frameshift pathogenic variant
and complete absence of UGT1A1 activity. At least 59 pathogenic variants have been identified to date. Parents of affected children have partial defects in conjugation, as determined by hepatic-­specific enzyme
assay or by measurement of glucuronide formation, but have normal
serum unconjugated bilirubin levels.

Clinical Manifestations

Severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia develops in homozygous
affected infants in the first 3 days of life. Without treatment, serum
unconjugated bilirubin concentrations reach 25-­35 mg/dL in the
first month, which can cause kernicterus. Stools are pale yellow.
Persistent unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia at levels >20 mg/dL
without hemolysis after the first week of life should suggest the
syndrome.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of CN type I is based on the early age of onset and the
extreme level of bilirubin elevation in the absence of hemolysis. In
affected infants, bile contains no bilirubin glucuronide and bilirubin
concentration in bile is <10 mg/dL compared with normal concentrations of 50-­100 mg/dL. The diagnosis is established by measuring
hepatic glucuronyl transferase activity in a liver specimen obtained
by percutaneous liver biopsy; open liver biopsy should be avoided
because surgery and anesthesia can precipitate kernicterus. DNA
diagnosis is also available and may be preferable. Identification of
the heterozygous state in parents also strongly suggests the diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia
is discussed in Chapter 137.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2456 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Treatment

The serum unconjugated bilirubin concentration should be maintained at <20 mg/dL for the first few weeks of life, and even lower in
low birthweight infants. This usually requires repeated exchange transfusions and phototherapy in the immediate neonatal period. Oral calcium phosphate supplementation renders phototherapy more effective,
as it forms complexes with bilirubin in the gut. Phenobarbital therapy,
through CYP450 enzyme induction, should be considered to determine responsiveness and differentiation between CN types I and II. In
patients with type I, there is no response to phenobarbital treatment.
The risk of kernicterus persists into adult life, although the serum
bilirubin levels required to produce brain injury beyond the neonatal
period are considerably higher (usually >35 mg/dL). Therefore phototherapy is generally continued through the early years of life. In older
infants and children, phototherapy is used mainly during sleep so as
not to interfere with normal activities. Despite the administration of
increasing intensities of light for longer periods, the serum bilirubin
response to phototherapy decreases with age. Additional adjuvant
therapy using agents that bind photobilirubin products such as cholestyramine or agar can also be used to interfere with the enterohepatic
recirculation of bilirubin.
Prompt treatment of intercurrent infections, febrile episodes, and
other types of illness might help prevent the later development of
kernicterus, which can occur at bilirubin levels of 45-­55 mg/dL. All
reported patients with CN type I have eventually experienced severe
kernicterus by young adulthood.
Orthotopic liver transplantation cures the disease and has been successful in a small number of patients. Isolated hepatocyte transplantation has been reported as bridge therapy to liver transplantation, with
most, but not all, patients eventually requiring orthotopic transplantation. Other therapeutic modalities have included plasmapheresis
and limitation of bilirubin production. The latter option, inhibiting
bilirubin generation, is possible via inhibition of heme oxygenase
using metalloporphyrin therapy. Finally, gene therapy using adeno-­
associated viral vectors has shown promise in a murine model and is in
clinical trials in humans.

CRIGLER-­NAJJAR SYNDROME TYPE II (PARTIAL
GLUCURONYL TRANSFERASE DEFICIENCY)

CN type II is an autosomal recessive disease caused by homozygous
missense pathogenic variants in UGT1A1 resulting in reduced (partial)
enzymatic activity. More than 45 pathogenic variants have been identified to date. Type II disease can be distinguished from type I by the
marked decline in serum bilirubin level that occurs in type II disease
after treatment with phenobarbital secondary to an inducible phenobarbital response element on the UGT1A1 promoter.

Clinical Manifestations

When this disorder appears in the neonatal period, unconjugated
hyperbilirubinemia usually occurs in the first 3 days of life; serum
bilirubin concentrations can be in a range compatible with physiologic
jaundice or can be at pathologic levels. The concentrations characteristically remain elevated into and after the third week of life, persisting in
a range of 1.5-­22 mg/dL; concentrations in the lower part of this range
can create uncertainty about whether chronic hyperbilirubinemia is
present. Development of kernicterus is unusual. Stool color is normal,
and the infants are without clinical signs or symptoms of disease. There
is no evidence of hemolysis. Liver enzymes, albumin, and prothrombin
time/international normalized ratio (PT/INR) are typically normal.

Diagnosis

The concentration of bilirubin in the bile is nearly normal in patients
with CN type II. Jaundiced infants and young children with type II
respond readily to 5 mg/kg/day of oral phenobarbital, with a decrease
in serum bilirubin concentration to 2-­3 mg/dL in 7-­10 days.

Treatment

Long-­term reduction in serum bilirubin levels can be achieved with
continued administration of phenobarbital at 5 mg/kg/day. Therapy
must be lifelong. The cosmetic and psychosocial benefit should be
weighed against the risks of an effective dose of the drug because there
is a small long-­term risk of kernicterus even in the absence of hemolytic
disease. Orlistat, an irreversible inhibitor of intestinal lipase, increases
fecal fat excretion and may decrease plasma unconjugated bilirubin
concentrations (∼10%) in patients with CN types I and II.

INHERITED CONJUGATED HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA

Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia can be caused by rare autosomal recessive conditions characterized by asymptomatic mild jaundice. In these
conditions, the transfer of bilirubin and other organic anions from the
hepatocyte into bile is defective. Chronic mild conjugated hyperbilirubinemia is usually detected during adolescence or early adulthood but
can occur as early as 2 years of age. The results of other routine liver
tests are normal. Jaundice can be exacerbated by infection, pregnancy,
oral contraceptives, alcohol consumption, and surgery. There is usually
no morbidity, and life expectancy is normal.

DUBIN-­JOHNSON SYNDROME

Dubin-­Johnson syndrome is an autosomal recessive inherited defect
in hepatocyte secretion of bilirubin glucuronide. The defect in hepatic
excretory function is not limited to conjugated bilirubin excretion but
also involves several organic anions normally excreted from the liver
cell into bile. Disease results from absent function of MRP2, encoded
by the gene ABCC2, an adenosine triphosphate–dependent canalicular transporter. More than 10 different pathogenic variants, including
compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the CMOAT gene, have
been identified and either affect localization of MRP2 with resultant
increased degradation or impair MRP2 transporter activity in the canalicular membrane. Bile acid excretion and serum bile acid levels are
normal. Total urinary coproporphyrin excretion is normal in quantity,
but coproporphyrin I excretion increases to approximately 80% with a
concomitant decrease in coproporphyrin III excretion. Normally, coproporphyrin III is >75% of the total. Cholangiography fails to visualize
the biliary tract, and x-­ray of the gallbladder is also abnormal. Liver
histology demonstrates normal architecture, but hepatocytes contain
black pigment similar to melanin. Liver function is normal, and the
prognosis is excellent. The most commonly reported symptoms are
abdominal pain and fatigue, jaundice, dark urine, and slight enlargement of the liver. Jaundice fluctuates in intensity and is aggravated by
intercurrent disease. Rarely, Dubin-­Johnson can present in the neonatal period with severe conjugated hyperbilirubinemia with serum bilirubin >20 mg/dL and hepatosplenomegaly. No treatment is indicated
for disease that presents outside of the neonatal period.

Rotor Syndrome

Rotor syndrome is an autosomal recessive disease resulting from biallelic inactivating pathogenic variants in SLCO1B1 and SLCO1B3 that
result in functional deficiencies of both OATP1B1 and OATP1B protein. Importantly, these pathogenic variants may confer significant
drug toxicity risk. These patients present similarly to Dubin-­Johnson
syndrome, with asymptomatic mild and fluctuating conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, with total serum bilirubin levels between 2 and 5 mg/
dL. Unlike Dubin-­Johnson syndrome, total urinary coproporphyrin
excretion is elevated with a relative increase in the amount of the coproporphyrin I isomer. If liver biopsy is performed, there is no abnormal
pigmentation, in contrast to Dubin-­Johnson. The gallbladder is normal
by roentgenography. Rotor syndrome is benign, and no treatment is
indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 405 u Metabolic Diseases of the Liver

405.2 Wilson Disease
Julie Bonn and William F. Balistreri
Wilson disease (hepatolenticular degeneration) is an autosomal recessive disorder that can be associated with liver disease, degenerative
changes in the brain, psychiatric symptoms, and Kayser-­
Fleischer
(K-­F) rings in the cornea (Fig. 405.1 and Table 405.3). The incidence
is approximately 1/30,000 births worldwide. Specific treatment is
available; however, this disease is progressive and potentially fatal if
untreated. Prompt diagnostic evaluation for Wilson disease in all
patients over age 5 presenting with any form of liver disease facilitates
expeditious initiation of treatment of the disease, appropriate genetic
counseling, and screening of first-­degree relatives and also allows
appropriate treatment of non-­Wilsonian liver disease once copper toxicosis is ruled out.

PATHOGENESIS

The variant gene for Wilson disease is found on chromosome 13
(13q14.3) and encodes ATP7B, a copper transporting P-­type adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), which is mainly expressed in
hepatocytes and is critical for biliary copper excretion and for copper incorporation into ceruloplasmin. Absence or malfunction of
ATP7B results in decreased biliary copper excretion and diffuse
accumulation of copper in the cytosol of hepatocytes. With time,
liver cells become overloaded and copper is redistributed to other
tissues, including the brain and kidneys, causing toxicity, primarily
as a potent inhibitor of enzymatic processes. Ionic copper inhibits
pyruvate oxidase in the brain and ATPase in membranes, leading to
decreased adenosine triphosphate-­phosphocreatine and potassium
content of tissue.
More than 500 pathogenic variants have been identified, of which
>380 have a confirmed role in disease pathogenesis; genetic testing should be able to identify a pathologic variant. Most patients
are compound heterozygotes. Pathogenic variants that abolish gene
function are associated with an onset of disease symptoms as early
as 3 years of age, when Wilson disease might not typically be considered in the differential diagnosis. Milder variants can be associated with neurologic symptoms or liver disease as late as 80 years of
age. The most commonly occurring disease-­causing ATP7B pathogenic variants result in a protein that binds copper but is unable to
effectively traffic to the apical surface of hepatocytes to perform its
copper-­exporting function.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Forms of Wilsonian hepatic disease include asymptomatic hepatomegaly (with or without splenomegaly), subacute or chronic hepatitis,
and acute hepatic failure (with or without hemolytic anemia). Cryptogenic cirrhosis, portal hypertension, ascites, edema, variceal bleeding,

2457

Table 405.3  The Most Common Clinical Manifestations of
WD and Their Frequency of Disease Diagnosis
WD PRESENTATION
AND FREQUENCY
Hepatic (40–60%)

SYMPTOMS
Asymptomatic elevation of liver enzymes
(aminotransferases)
Acute hepatitis (e.g., jaundice, abdominal
pain)
Acute liver failure (coagulopathy, jaundice,
encephalopathy)
Liver cirrhosis symptoms (compensated or
decompensated) (fatigue, spider naevi,
portal hypertension, splenomegaly,
bleeding)

Neurologic (40–50%)

Involuntary movements (tremor, dystonia,
ataxia, ballism, chorea, parkinsonian
syndrome)
Speech disturbances: dysarthria
(extrapyramidal, dystonic, cerebellar,
mixed, unclassified)
Dysphagia
Autonomic dysfunction (e.g., salivation,
electrocardiographic abnormalities,
orthostatic hypotension)
Gait and balance disturbances

Psychiatric (10–25%)

Personality disorders (e.g., abnormal,
antisocial behavior, irritability, disinhibition)
Mood disorders (bipolar disorders,
depression, suicidal attempts)
Psychosis and other psychiatric alterations
(rarely: e.g., psychosis, anorexia, sleep
disturbances)
Cognitive impairment

Ophthalmologic (K-­F
ring: 90–100% in
neurologic patients,
40–50% in hepatic
and 20–30% in
presymptomatic);
SC (1,2–25%)

Kayser–Fleischer ring (K-­F ring); sunflower
cataract (SC)

Other (lack of
systematic
multicenter data,
mostly case reports,
series reports, or
single-­center
studies)

Renal (tubular dysfunction, nephrolithiasis
and nephrocalcinosis, aminocyduria,
hypercalciuria, hyperphosphaturia)
Bone (osteoporosis, chondrocalcinosis,
osteoarthritis, joints pain)
Heart (cardiac arrhythmia, cardiomyopathy,
myopathy)
Skin (hyperpigmentation of lower legs,
azure lunulae (“sky-­blue moon”) of the nails,
anetoderma, xerosis, acanthosis nigricans,
subcutaneous lipomas, dermatomyositis)
Hematopoietic system (thrombocytopenia,
hemolytic anemia, leukopenia)
Gynecologic abnormalities (menstrual
irregularity, delayed puberty, gynecomastia)

Fig. 405.1 Kayser-­Fleischer ring. Brown discoloration at the outer
margin of the cornea caused by deposition of copper in Descemet’s
membrane. Here it is clearly seen against the light green iris. Slit-­lamp
examination is required for secure detection. (From Ala A, Walker AP,
Ashkan K, et al. Wilson’s disease. Lancet. 2007;369:397–408.)

Endocrinologic abnormalities (glucose
intolerance, parathyroid insufficiency,
disorders of growth)
From Litwin T, Dusek P, Szafranski T, et al. Psychiatric manifestations in Wilson’s disease:
possibilities and difficulties for treatment. Therap Adv Psychopharmacol. 2018;8(7):199–
221, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2458 Part XVI u The Digestive System
or other effects of hepatic dysfunction (delayed puberty, amenorrhea,
coagulation defects) can be manifestations of Wilson disease.
Disease presentations are variable, with a tendency to familial
patterns. Liver disease is the most common disease manifestation
in children and can precede neurologic symptoms by as long as 10
years. Females are 3 times more likely than males to present with
acute hepatic failure. When Wilson disease presents after age 20,
neurologic symptoms are the most common manifestation.
Neurologic disorders can develop insidiously or precipitously, with
intention tremor, dysarthria, rigid dystonia, parkinsonism, choreiform
movements, lack of motor coordination, deterioration in school performance, psychosis, or behavioral changes. K-­F rings are absent in
young patients with hepatic Wilson disease up to 50% of the time but
are present in 95% of patients with neurologic symptoms. Psychiatric manifestations include depression, personality changes, anxiety,
obsessive-­compulsive behavior, or psychosis.
Coombs-­negative hemolytic anemia may be an initial manifestation, possibly related to the release of large amounts of copper from
damaged hepatocytes; this form of Wilson disease is usually fatal without liver transplantation. During hemolytic episodes, urinary copper
excretion and serum free copper levels are markedly elevated. Manifestations of renal Fanconi syndrome and progressive renal failure with
alterations in tubular transport of amino acids, glucose, and uric acid
may be present. Unusual manifestations include arthritis, pancreatitis,
nephrolithiasis, infertility or recurrent miscarriages, cardiomyopathy,
and hypoparathyroidism.

PATHOLOGY

All grades of hepatic injury occur in patients with Wilson disease,
with steatosis, hepatocellular ballooning and degeneration, glycogen granules, minimal inflammation, and enlarged Kupffer cells
being most common. The earliest histologic feature of Wilson disease is mild steatosis, which may mimic nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease or nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Additionally, the lesion
may be indistinguishable from that of autoimmune hepatitis. With
progressive parenchymal damage, fibrosis and cirrhosis develop.
Ultrastructural changes primarily involve the mitochondria and
include increased density of the matrix material, inclusions of lipid
and granular material, and increased intracristal space with dilation
of the tips of the cristae.

DIAGNOSIS

Wilson disease should be considered in children and teenagers with
unexplained acute or chronic liver disease, neurologic symptoms of
unknown cause, acute hemolysis, psychiatric illnesses, behavioral
changes, Fanconi syndrome, or unexplained bone (osteoporosis,
fractures) or muscle disease (myopathy, arthralgia). The clinical
suspicion is confirmed by study of indices of copper metabolism.
Most patients with Wilson disease have decreased serum ceruloplasmin levels (<20 mg/dL). The failure of copper to be incorporated into ceruloplasmin leads to a plasma protein with a shorter
half-­life and therefore a reduced steady-­state concentration of ceruloplasmin in the circulation. Serum ceruloplasmin levels should be
interpreted with caution. Acute inflammatory states and elevated
estrogen levels (pregnancy, hormone therapy, or use of oral contraception) can falsely increase ceruloplasmin levels. Additionally,
serum ceruloplasmin may be low in autoimmune hepatitis, celiac
disease, familial aceruloplasminemia, or carriers of ATP7B pathogenic variants (mild variants of Menkes disease: occipital horn syndrome) who do not show copper overload disease. The serum free
copper level may be elevated in early Wilson disease (>1.6 μmol/L),
and urinary copper excretion (normally <40 μg/day) is increased
to >100 μg/day and often up to 1,000 μg or more per day. Typical
urinary copper excretion in patients with untreated Wilson disease
is >1.6 μmol/24 hr in adults and >0.64 μmol/24 hr in children. In
equivocal cases, the response of urinary copper output to chelation
may be of diagnostic help. Before a 24-­hour urine collection patients

are given two 500-­mg oral doses of d-­penicillamine 12 hours apart;
affected patients excrete >1,600 μg/24 hr.
Demonstration of K-­F rings, which might not be present in
younger children, requires a slit-­lamp examination by an ophthalmologist. After adequate treatment, K-­F rings resolve. Liver biopsy
can determine the extent and severity of liver disease and for measuring the hepatic copper content (normally <10 μg/g dry weight)
but is only required if clinical signs and noninvasive tests do not
allow a final diagnosis or if another liver disorder is suspected.
Hepatic copper accumulation is the hallmark of Wilson disease, and
measurement of hepatic parenchymal copper concentration is the
method of choice for diagnosis. Hepatic copper content >250 μg/g
dry weight (>4 μmol/g dry weight) is the best biochemical evidence
for Wilson disease, but lowering the threshold to 1.2 μmol/g dry
weight improves sensitivity without significantly affecting specificity. Intermediate levels of hepatic copper may be present in asymptomatic carriers. In later stages of Wilson disease, hepatic copper
content can be unreliable because cirrhosis leads to variable hepatic
copper distribution and sampling error.
First-­degree relatives of patients with Wilson disease should be screened
for presymptomatic disease. This screening should include determination
of the serum ceruloplasmin level and 24-­hr urinary copper excretion. If
these results are abnormal or equivocal, liver biopsy should be carried out
to determine morphology and hepatic copper content. Genetic screening
by either linkage analysis or direct DNA gene analysis is possible, especially
if the mutation for the proband case is known or the patient is from an area
where a specific gene variant is prevalent, such as in Central and Eastern
Europe, where the H1069Q variant is present in 50–80% of patients.

TREATMENT

Once the diagnosis of Wilson disease is made, lifelong treatment
should be initiated and is focused on limiting copper uptake and
promoting copper excretion through dietary and pharmacologic
measures. The normal diet contains 2-­5 mg of copper per day. For
patients with Wilson disease, the dietary intake of copper should be
restricted to <1 mg/day. High copper content foods such as liver,
shellfish, nuts, and chocolate should be avoided. If the copper content of the drinking water exceeds 0.1 mg/L, it may be necessary to
demineralize the water.
The initial treatment in symptomatic patients is the administration of copper-­chelating agents, which leads to rapid excretion of
excess deposited copper. Chelation therapy is managed with oral
administration of triethylene tetramine dihydrochloride (Trien,
TETA, trientine) at a dose of 750-1500 mg/day in two or three
divided doses, with 750 or 1000 mg used for maintenance therapy,
for adults and 20 mg/kg/day rounded to the nearest 250 mg, given
in two or three divided doses for children. d-­penicillamine (β,β-­
dimethylcysteine) can be used as an alternative at a maximum of
1000-1500 mg/day in two to four divided doses before meals for
adults and 20 mg/kg/day, rounded to the nearest 250 mg and given
in two or three divided doses for pediatric patients. In response
to chelation, urinary copper excretion increases, with marked
improvement in hepatic and neurologic function and the disappearance of K-­F rings.
Approximately 10–50% of patients initially treated with penicillamine for neurologic symptoms have a worsening of their condition. Toxic effects of penicillamine occur in 10–20% and consist
of hypersensitivity reactions (i.e., Goodpasture syndrome, systemic
lupus erythematosus, and polymyositis), interaction with collagen
and elastin, deficiency of other elements such as zinc, and aplastic
anemia and nephrosis. Because penicillamine is an antimetabolite
of vitamin B6, additional amounts of this vitamin are necessary. For
these reasons, trientine is the preferred alternative and is considered first-­line therapy for some patients. Trientine has few known
side effects. Ammonium tetrathiomolybdate is another alternative chelating agent under investigation for patients with neurologic disease; initial results suggest that significantly fewer patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 405 u Metabolic Diseases of the Liver
experience neurologic deterioration with this drug compared
to penicillamine. The initial dose is 120 mg/day (20 mg between
meals 3 times daily and 20 mg with meals 3 times daily). Side effects
include anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and mild elevations
of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase
(AST). Because of its extensive decoppering effect, ammonium tetrathiomolybdate also has antiangiogenic effects.
Zinc has also been used as adjuvant therapy, maintenance therapy, or primary therapy in presymptomatic patients, owing to its
unique ability to impair the gastrointestinal absorption of copper.
Zinc acetate can be given to adults at a dose of 50 mg of elemental
zinc 3 times a day, and 25 mg 3 times a day in children over age 5
years. Side effects are predominantly limited to gastric irritation but
also include reduced leukocyte chemotaxis and elevations in serum
lipase and/or amylase. Guidelines recommend that all symptomatic
patients with Wilson disease receive a chelating agent (penicillamine or trientine). Patients should be counseled not to suddenly
stop these medications, because sudden discontinuation of therapy
can precipitate fulminant Wilson disease. Zinc may have a role as a
first-­line therapy in patients with neurologic disease, but exclusive
monotherapy with zinc in symptomatic liver disease is controversial
and not recommended. Antioxidants (vitamin E and curcumin) and
pharmacologic chaperones (4-­phenylbutyrate and curcumin) may
have a role as adjunctive treatment, but more research is needed.

PROGNOSIS

Untreated patients with Wilson disease can die of hepatic, neurologic, renal, or hematologic complications. Medical therapy is rarely
effective in those presenting with acute liver failure. The prognosis
for patients receiving prompt and continuous penicillamine is variable and depends on the time of initiation of and the individual
response to chelation. Liver transplantation should be considered for
patients with acute liver failure or decompensated cirrhosis caused
by Wilson disease. Liver transplantation for progressive neurologic
disease remains controversial. Liver transplantation is curative, with
a 5-­year survival rate of 85–90%. In asymptomatic siblings of affected
patients, early institution of chelation or zinc therapy can prevent disease manifestations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

405.3 Indian Childhood Cirrhosis
Julie Bonn and William F. Balistreri
Indian childhood cirrhosis (ICC) is a chronic liver disease of infants
and young children unique to the Indian subcontinent, but variants
of this syndrome have been described in other populations and have
been named accordingly (Tyrolean or North American childhood
cirrhosis). ICC-­like disease has also been reported in the Middle
East, West Africa, and Central America. Affected children present with jaundice, pruritus, lethargy, and hepatosplenomegaly with
rapid progression to cirrhosis. Untreated severe ICC has a mortality
of 40–50% within 4 weeks. Histologically, ICC is characterized by
hepatocyte necrosis, Mallory bodies, intralobular fibrosis, inflammation, and excess hepatic copper deposition. Treatment is supportive, especially in the late stages of disease. Copper chelation
with d-­penicillamine has been beneficial in open-­label preicteric
cases of ICC; however, it is unclear whether these cases were simply less severely affected and would have spontaneously improved
without treatment.
The etiology of ICC has remained elusive. It was once believed that
excess copper ingestion in the setting of a genetic susceptibility to copper toxicosis was the most likely cause. Epidemiologic data demonstrate that the copper toxicity theory is unlikely. The increased hepatic
copper content, usually >700 μg/g dry weight, seen in ICC is only seen

2459

in the late stages of disease and is accompanied by even higher levels of
zinc, a non-­hepatotoxic metal. Furthermore, the copper-­contaminated
utensils used to feed babies and implicated in excess copper ingestion
are found in only 10–15% of all cases. The current hypothesis implicates the postnatal use of local hepatotoxic therapeutic remedies,
although the exact causative agent is unknown. North American ICC
is caused by pathogenic variants in the UTP4 gene; it is seen in the
Ojibway-­Cree nation of Quebec.
Over the past few decades, as the awareness of the disease has
increased, the incidence of ICC has decreased to the point of being
virtually eliminated in some areas of India. However, established and
atypical cases are probably being missed because of lack of histologic
confirmation and lack of awareness of the protean manifestations and
natural history of this disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

405.4 Neonatal Hemochromatosis
Julie Bonn and William F. Balistreri
See Chapter 404.
Neonatal hemochromatosis (NH) is a rare form of fulminant liver
disease that manifests in the first few days of life. NH is associated with
siderosis of extrahepatic tissues, similar to hereditary hemochromatosis, but is unrelated to the familial forms of hereditary hemochromatosis that occur in adulthood. Gestational alloimmune liver disease
(GALD) has been identified as the cause of nearly all cases of NH, but
they are not synonymous. GALD has a high rate of recurrence in families, with over 90% probability that subsequent infants will be affected.
During gestation, the maternal immune system becomes sensitized
to an unknown fetal hepatocyte cell surface antigen. Maternal immunoglobulin G (IgG) to this fetal antigen then crosses the placenta and
induces hepatic injury via immune system activation. The defining feature of GALD is complement-­mediated hepatocyte injury, the evidence
for which comes from detection of the C5b-­9 complex by immunohistochemistry on liver tissue of affected infants. Additional evidence of a
gestational insult is given by the fact that affected infants may be born
prematurely or with intrauterine growth restriction. Severely affected
infants may also have renal hypoplasia and dysgenesis.
Excess non-­
transferrin-­
bound iron in GALD results from fetal
liver injury that causes reduced synthesis of key iron regulatory and
transport proteins. The pattern of extrahepatic siderosis appears to be
determined by the normal capacity of various tissues to import non-­
transferrin-­bound iron and not export cellular iron. It is thought that
fetal liver injury is the primary event leading to the development of the
NH phenotype, providing further evidence that this is not a primary
iron overload disease.
GALD can be a rapidly fatal, progressive illness characterized
by hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia, hypoprothrombinemia, hypoalbuminemia, hyperferritinemia, and hyperbilirubinemia (see Table
404.4). The coagulopathy is refractory to therapy with vitamin
K. Liver biopsy demonstrates severe liver injury with acute and
chronic inflammation, fibrosis, and cirrhosis; in some cases there
are no surviving hepatocytes. The diagnosis is established in the
neonate with severe liver injury and evidence of extrahepatic siderosis either by MRI indicating increased iron deposition in organs
such as the pancreas or heart or by increased iron staining in oral
submucosal gland biopsy. The differential diagnosis includes other
causes of neonatal hepatic failure such as citrin deficiency, herpes
simplex virus (HSV) hepatitis, and familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (see Table 404.4).
The survival rate (50–80%) depends on the severity of the initial
presentation and response to therapy. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) combined with double volume exchange transfusion
has been shown to remove the injury-­causing maternal IgG and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2460 Part XVI u The Digestive System
improve outcomes in infants with GALD. Liver transplantation
should also be an early consideration. Recurrences of GALD in
subsequent pregnancies may be modified with IVIG administered
to the mother once weekly from the 18th week of gestation until
delivery. The largest experience reports 48 women with previous
infants with GALD who successfully delivered 52 babies after IVIG
treatment. The majority of infants had biochemical evidence of liver
disease with elevated serum α-­fetoprotein and ferritin. All infants
survived with medical therapy or no therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

405.5 Miscellaneous Metabolic Diseases of
the Liver
Julie Bonn and William F. Balistreri

α1-­ANTITRYPSIN DEFICIENCY

α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder caused
by a pathogenic variant in the SERPINA1 gene. α1-­Antitrypsin,
a protease inhibitor (Pi) synthesized by the liver, protects lung
alveolar tissues from destruction by neutrophil elastase (see
Chapter 442). α1-­Antitrypsin is present in more than 20 different
codominant alleles, only a few of which are associated with defective Pis. The most common allele of the Pi system is M, and the
normal phenotype is PiMM. The Z allele predisposes to clinical
deficiency; patients with liver disease are usually PiZZ homozygotes and have serum α1-­antitrypsin levels <2 mg/mL (∼10–20%
of normal). The incidence of the PiZZ genotype in the White
population is estimated at 1 in 2,000-­4,000 live births. A small
percentage of patients homozygous for deficiency of the major
serum Pi α1-­antitrypsin develop neonatal cholestasis or later-­onset
childhood cirrhosis. Compound heterozygotes PiZ, PiSZ, and
PiZI are not a cause of liver disease alone but can act as modifier
genes, increasing the risk of progression in other liver diseases such
as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and hepatitis C. The null phenotype only causes lung disease and results from either stop codons
in the coding exon of the SERPINA1 gene or complete deletion of
SERPINA1 coding exons leading to the absence of α1-­antitrypsin
protein.
Newly formed α1-­antitrypsin polypeptide normally enters the
endoplasmic reticulum, where it undergoes enzymatic modification and folding before transport to the plasma membrane, where it
is excreted as a 55-­kDa glycoprotein. In affected patients with PiZZ,
the rate at which the α1-­antitrypsin polypeptide folds is decreased,
and this delay allows the formation of polymers that are retained
in the endoplasmic reticulum. How the polymers cause liver damage is not completely elucidated, but research indicates that accumulation of abnormally folded protein leads to activation of stress
and proinflammatory pathways in the endoplasmic reticulum and
hepatocyte programmed cell death. In liver biopsies from patients,
polymerized α1-­
antitrypsin peptides can be seen by electron
microscopy and histochemically as periodic acid–Schiff-­positive
diastase-­resistant globules, primarily in periportal hepatocytes, but
also in Kupffer cells and biliary epithelial cells. The pattern of neonatal liver injury can be highly variable, and liver biopsies might

demonstrate hepatocellular necrosis, inflammatory cell infiltration,
bile duct proliferation, periportal fibrosis, or cirrhosis.
The course of liver disease is highly variable in patients with α1-­
antitrypsin deficiency. Prospective studies in Sweden have shown
that only 10% of patients develop clinically significant liver disease
by their fourth decade, indicating that other genetic traits or environmental factors likely influence the development of liver disease.
Infants with liver disease are indistinguishable from other infants
with “idiopathic” neonatal hepatitis, of whom they constitute
approximately 5–10%. Jaundice, acholic stools, and hepatomegaly
are present in the first week of life, but the jaundice usually clears by
2-­4 months of age. Complete resolution, persistent liver disease, or
the development of cirrhosis can follow. Older children can present
with asymptomatic hepatomegaly or manifestations of chronic liver
disease or cirrhosis with evidence of portal hypertension. Patients
with cirrhosis due to α1-­antitrypsin deficiency are at high risk for
developing hepatocellular carcinoma. Emphysema is not typically
observed in children, but an increased risk for developing asthma is
reported. Cigarette smoking promotes development of lung disease,
so parents should be counseled on smoking cessation and exposure
reduction as part of their anticipatory guidance, and older children
and adolescents should be advised not to smoke or use electronic
cigarettes and given cessation counseling if they do (see Chapter
157.2).
Treatment is supportive, although research is ongoing to develop
therapies for α1-­antitrypsin deficiency–associated liver disease that
stimulate intracellular degradation of the abnormally folded Z protein
polymers. Liver transplantation is indicated for hepatocellular carcinoma or end-­stage liver disease with portal hypertension, with survival
rates of ∼90%.

CITRIN DEFICIENCY

Neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency
(NICCD) presents in the first few months of life with manifestations that initially may be indistinguishable from other causes of
neonatal cholestasis, especially biliary atresia. Patients may have
jaundice, hepatomegaly, liver dysfunction with coagulopathy, fatty
liver infiltration, and hyperammonemia with or without hypoglycemia. Presymptomatic patients may be identified from the newborn
metabolic screen with hypergalactosemia, hypermethionemia, and
hyperphenylalaninemia, but not all patients are identified by newborn screening.
Pathogenic variants in the SLC25A13 gene cause NICCD with
an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. SLC25A13 encodes
citrin, a mitochondrial carrier protein (calcium binding aspartate-­
glutamate carrier) involved in the urea cycle, gluconeogenesis, and
glycolysis. Pathogenic variants are more common in those of East
Asian descent. Affected infants have hypergalactosemia, elevated
bile acids, vitamin K–dependent coagulopathy, and elevated levels
of citrulline and methionine. Treatment is supportive in the form of
providing fat-­soluble vitamin supplementation and dietary feeding
with a low-­galactose/-­lactose formula enriched with medium-­chain
triglycerides. More severely affected patients can develop liver failure requiring liver transplantation in the first year of life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 406 u Viral Hepatitis 2461
disease), immune dysregulation (hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis),
infiltrative disorders (malignancies), toxins and medications, metabolic
disorders (Wilson disease, cystic fibrosis), and infection (Epstein-­Barr
virus, varicella, malaria, leptospirosis, syphilis) should be ruled out.

Chapter 406

Viral Hepatitis
Michael E. Rogers and William F. Balistreri
Viral hepatitis continues to be a major health problem in both
developing and developed countries, but there has been significant
progress in efforts to recognize and to treat infected subjects. This
disorder is caused by at least five known pathogenic hepatotropic
viruses: hepatitides A (HAV), B (HBV), C (HCV), D (HDV), and E
(HEV) viruses (Table 406.1). Many other viruses (and diseases) can
cause hepatitis, usually as a component of a multisystem disease.
These include herpes simplex viruses (1, 2, 6a, 6b), cytomegalovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus, varicella-­zoster virus, HIV, rubella, measles,
adenoviruses, adeno-associated virus, enteroviruses, parvovirus B19,
arboviruses, and perhaps SARS-­CoV-­2 (Table 406.2).
The hepatotropic viruses are a heterogeneous group of infectious
agents that cause similar acute clinical illness. In most pediatric
patients, the acute phase causes no or mild clinical disease. Morbidity is
related to rare cases of acute liver failure (ALF) in susceptible patients
or to the development of a chronic disease state and attendant complications that several of these viruses (HBV, HCV, HDV) may cause.

ISSUES COMMON TO ALL FORMS OF VIRAL
HEPATITIS
Differential Diagnosis

Although often asymptomatic or nonspecific, the clinical features that
may raise the suspicion of viral hepatitis is clinical icterus, with yellow skin and/or mucous membranes. The liver is usually enlarged and
tender to palpation and percussion. Splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy may be present. Clinical signs of bleeding, altered sensorium, or
hyperreflexia should be carefully sought, because they mark the onset
of encephalopathy and ALF.
The differential diagnosis varies with the age of presentation. In the
newborn period, infection is a common cause of conjugated hyperbilirubinemia; the infectious cause is either a bacterial agent (e.g.,
Escherichia coli, Listeria, syphilis) or a nonhepatotropic virus (e.g.,
enteroviruses, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus, which
may also cause a nonicteric severe hepatitis). Metabolic diseases (α1-­
antitrypsin deficiency, cystic fibrosis, tyrosinemia), anatomic causes
(biliary atresia, choledochal cysts), and inherited forms of intrahepatic
cholestasis should always be excluded.
In later childhood, extrahepatic obstruction (gallstones, primary
sclerosing cholangitis, pancreatic pathology), inflammatory conditions (autoimmune hepatitis, juvenile inflammatory arthritis, Kawasaki

Table 406.1  Features of the Hepatotropic Viruses
VIROLOGY

HAV
RNA

HBV
DNA

Incubation (days)

15-­19

60-­180

Transmission
Parenteral
Fecal-­oral
Sexual
Perinatal

Rare
Yes
No
No

Chronic infection
Fulminant disease

HCV
RNA

HDV
RNA

HEV
RNA

14-­160

21-­42

21-­63

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
Rare
Uncommon
(5–15%)

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
No
No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Rare

Yes

Rare

Yes

Yes

HAV, Hepatitis A virus; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; HDV, hepatitis D
virus; HEV, hepatitis E virus.

Pathogenesis

The acute response of the liver to hepatotropic viruses involves a direct
cytopathic and/or an immune-­mediated injury. The entire liver is
involved. Necrosis is usually most marked in the centrilobular areas. An
acute mixed inflammatory infiltrate predominates in the portal areas
but also affects the lobules. The lobular architecture remains intact,
although balloon degeneration and necrosis of single cells or groups
of parenchymal cells commonly occur. Fatty change is rare. Bile duct
proliferation, but not bile duct damage, is common. Diffuse Kupffer cell
hyperplasia is noticeable in the sinusoids. Neonates often respond to
hepatic injury by forming giant cells. In fulminant hepatitis, parenchymal collapse occurs on the described background. With recovery, the
liver morphology returns to normal within 3 months of the acute infection. If chronic hepatitis develops, the inflammatory infiltrate settles in
the periportal areas and often leads to progressive scarring.

Common Biochemical Profiles in the Acute
Infectious Phase

Acute liver injury caused by these viruses manifests in three main
liver biochemical profiles. These serve as an important guide to
diagnosis, supportive care, and monitoring in the acute phase of the
infection for all viruses. As a reflection of cytopathic injury to the
hepatocytes, there is a rise in serum levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST). The magnitude
of enzyme elevation does not correlate with the extent of hepatocellular necrosis and has little prognostic value. There is usually slow
improvement over several weeks, but AST and ALT levels lag the
serum bilirubin level, which tends to normalize first. Rapidly falling
aminotransferase levels can predict a poor outcome, particularly if
their decline occurs in conjunction with a rising bilirubin level and
a prolonged international normalized ratio (INR) or prothrombin
time (PT); this combination of findings usually indicates that massive
hepatic injury has occurred.
Cholestasis, defined by elevated serum conjugated bilirubin levels,
results from abnormal bile flow at the canalicular and cellular level
because of hepatocyte damage and inflammatory mediators. Elevation
of serum alkaline phosphatase, 5-­nucleotidase, and γ-­glutamyl transpeptidase levels marks cholestasis. Absence of cholestatic markers does
not rule out progression to chronicity in HCV or HBV infections.
Altered synthetic function is the most important marker of liver
injury. Synthetic dysfunction is reflected by abnormal protein synthesis (prolonged PT, high INR, low serum albumin levels), metabolic
disturbances (hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, hyperammonemia), poor
clearance of medications dependent on liver function, and altered sensorium with increased deep tendon reflexes (hepatic encephalopathy).
Monitoring of synthetic function should be the main focus in clinical follow-­up to define the severity of the disease. In the acute phase,
the degree of liver synthetic dysfunction guides treatment and helps
to establish intervention criteria. Abnormal liver synthetic function is a
marker of liver failure and is an indication for prompt referral to a transplant center. Serial assessment is necessary because liver dysfunction
does not progress linearly.

HEPATITIS A

Hepatitis A virus is responsible for most forms of acute and benign
hepatitis. Although fulminant hepatic failure caused by HAV can
occur, it is rare (<1% of cases in the United States) and occurs more
often in adults than in children and in hyperendemic communities.

Etiology

HAV is an RNA virus, a member of the picornavirus family. It is heat
stable and has a limited host range—namely, the human and other
primates.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2462 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 406.2  Causes and Differential Diagnosis of Hepatitis in Children
INFECTIOUS
Hepatotropic viruses
HAV
HBV
HCV
HEV
HDV
HFV
HGV
TT virus
Non–hepatitis A-­E viruses
SYSTEMIC INFECTION THAT MAY INCLUDE HEPATITIS
Adenovirus
Arbovirus
Coxsackievirus
Cytomegalovirus
Dengue virus
Enterovirus
Epstein-­Barr virus
Herpes simplex viruses (1, 2, 6)
Human immunodeficiency virus
Lassa fever
Paramyxovirus (measles)
Parvovirus
Rubella
Varicella-­zoster
Yellow fever
Unknown
NONVIRAL LIVER INFECTIONS
Abscess
Amebiasis
Bacterial sepsis
Brucellosis
Fitz-­Hugh-­Curtis syndrome
Histoplasmosis
Leptospirosis
Syphilis

Tuberculosis
Other
AUTOIMMUNE/INFLAMMATORY
Chronic autoimmune hepatitis
Other (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile idiopathic arthritis)
Celiac disease
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
METABOLIC
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Glycogen storage disease
Tyrosinemia
Wilson disease
Other
TOXIC
Iatrogenic/drug induced (e.g., acetaminophen)
Environmental (e.g., pesticides)
Mushroom poisoning
Hepatotoxic herbal agents (pyrrolizidine alkaloids, other toxins)
ANATOMIC
Choledochal cyst
Biliary atresia
Other
HEMODYNAMIC
Shock
Congestive heart failure
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Venoocclusive disease
Other
NONALCOHOLIC FATTY LIVER DISEASE
Idiopathic
Sclerosing cholangitis
Reye syndrome
Other

Modified from Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Box 75.1, p. 820.

Epidemiology

HAV infection occurs throughout the world but is most prevalent in
developing countries. In the United States, 30–40% of the adult population has evidence of previous HAV infection. In 2018, more than
12,000 cases of HAV were reported in the United States to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The overall incidence rate
was 3.8 cases per 100,000 population, an increase from recent years
(specifically in patients over the age of 20 years). However, as a result
of aggressive implementation of childhood vaccination programs, the
prevalence of symptomatic HAV cases worldwide has declined significantly. Nonetheless, outbreaks in developing countries and in daycare
centers (where the spread of HAV from young, nonicteric, infected
children can occur easily) as well as multiple foodborne and waterborne outbreaks have justified the implementation of intensified universal vaccination programs.
HAV is highly contagious. Transmission is almost always by person-­
to-­person contact through the fecal-­oral route. Perinatal transmission
occurs rarely. HAV infection during pregnancy or at the time of delivery does not appear to result in increased complications of pregnancy
or clinical disease in the newborn. In the United States, increased risk
of infection is found in contacts with infected persons, childcare centers, and household contacts. Infection is also associated with contact

with contaminated food or water and after travel to endemic areas.
Common-­source foodborne and waterborne outbreaks continue to
occur, including several caused by contaminated shellfish, frozen berries, and raw vegetables; no known source is found in about half of the
cases.
The mean incubation period for HAV is approximately 3 weeks.
Fecal excretion of the virus starts late in the incubation period, reaches
its peak just before the onset of symptoms, and resolves by 2 weeks
after the onset of jaundice in older subjects. The duration of fecal viral
excretion is prolonged in infants. The patient is therefore contagious
before clinical symptoms are apparent and remains so until viral shedding ceases.

Clinical Manifestations

HAV is responsible for acute hepatitis only. Often, this is an anicteric
illness, with clinical symptoms indistinguishable from other forms of
viral gastroenteritis, particularly in young children.
The illness is more likely to be symptomatic in older adolescents or
adults, in patients with underlying liver disorders, and in those who
are immunocompromised. It is characteristically an acute febrile illness
with an abrupt onset of anorexia, nausea, malaise, vomiting, and jaundice. The typical duration of illness is 7-­14 days (Fig. 406.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 406 u Viral Hepatitis 2463
Other organ systems can be affected during acute HAV infection.
Regional lymph nodes and the spleen may be enlarged. The bone marrow may be moderately hypoplastic, and aplastic anemia has been
reported. Tissue in the small intestine might show changes in villous structure, and ulceration of the gastrointestinal tract can occur,
especially in fatal cases. Acute pancreatitis and myocarditis have been
reported, though rarely, and nephritis, arthritis, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, and cryoglobulinemia can result from circulating immune
complexes.

Diagnosis

Acute HAV infection is diagnosed by detecting antibodies to HAV, specifically, anti-­HAV (immunoglobulin [Ig] M) by radioimmunoassay or,
rarely, by identifying viral particles in stool. An HAV viral polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) assay is commercially available (Table 406.3).
Anti-­HAV is detectable when the symptoms are clinically apparent,
and it remains positive for 4-­6 months after the acute infection. A neutralizing anti-­HAV (IgG) is usually detected within 8 weeks of symptom onset and is measured as part of a total anti-­HAV in the serum.
Anti-­HAV (IgG) confers long-­term protection. Rises in serum levels
of ALT, AST, bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, 5′-­nucleotidase, and γ-­
glutamyl transpeptidase are almost universally found and do not help
to differentiate the cause of hepatitis.

Jaundice

1

Treatment

There is no specific treatment for hepatitis A. Supportive treatment
consists of intravenous hydration as needed and antipruritic agents
and fat-­soluble vitamins for the prolonged cholestatic form of disease. There is no benefit to the use of corticosteroid treatment during
acute illness. Serial monitoring for signs of ALF is prudent and, if
ALF is diagnosed, a prompt referral to a transplantation center can
be lifesaving.
Patients infected with HAV are contagious for 2 weeks before and
approximately 7 days after the onset of jaundice and should be excluded
from school, childcare, or work during this period. Careful handwashing is necessary, particularly after changing diapers and before
preparing or serving food. In hospital settings, contact and standard
precautions are recommended for 1 week after onset of symptoms.

IgM anti-HAV

Immunoglobulin

HAV in stool

5
3
4
6
12
Mo after exposure
Fig. 406.1 The serologic course of acute hepatitis A. ALT, Alanine
aminotransferase; HAV, hepatitis A virus; IgM, immunoglobulin class M.
(From Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 22nd
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004:913.)
0

Although most patients achieve full recovery, distinct complications
can occur. ALF from HAV infection is an infrequent complication.
Those at risk for this complication are elderly adults, but also immunocompromised patients or those with underlying liver disorders. The
height of HAV viremia may be linked to the severity of hepatitis. In
the United States, HAV represents <0.5% of pediatric-­age ALF; HAV
is responsible for up to 3% mortality in the adult population with ALF.
In endemic areas of the world, HAV constitutes up to 40% of all cases
of pediatric ALF. HAV can also progress to a prolonged cholestatic syndrome that waxes and wanes over several months. Pruritus and fat
malabsorption are problematic and require symptomatic support with
antipruritic medications and fat-­soluble vitamin supplementation. This
syndrome occurs in the absence of any liver synthetic dysfunction and
resolves without sequelae.

Prevention

Anti-HAV

Symptoms
ALT

Complications

2

Indications for intramuscular administration of Ig include preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis (Table 406.4). Ig is recommended
for preexposure prophylaxis for susceptible travelers to countries
where HAV is endemic, and it provides effective protection for up to
2 months. HAV vaccine given any time before travel is preferred for
preexposure prophylaxis in healthy persons, but Ig ensures an appropriate prophylaxis in children younger than 6 months old, patients allergic
to a vaccine component, or those who elect not to receive the vaccine.
If travel is planned in <2 weeks, older patients, immunocompromised

Table 406.3  Diagnostic Blood Tests: Serology and Viral Polymerase Chain Reaction
HAV

HBV

ACUTE/ACTIVE INFECTION
Anti-­HAV IgM (+)
Blood PCR positive*

VACCINE RESPONSE
Anti-­HAV IgG (+)

HDV

HEV

Anti-­HBc IgM (+)

Anti-­HCV (+)

Anti-­HDV IgM (+)

Anti-­HEV IgM (+)

HBsAg (+)
Anti-­HBs (−)
HBV DNA (+) (PCR)

HCV RNA (+) (PCR)

Blood PCR positive
HBsAg (+)
Anti-­HBs (−)

Blood PCR positive*

Anti-­HCV (+)
Blood PCR (−)

Anti-­HDV IgG (+)
Blood PCR (−)

Anti-­HEV IgG (+)
Blood PCR (−)

Anti-­HBc IgG (+)
HBsAg (+)
Anti-­HBs (−)
PCR (+) or (−)

Anti-­HCV (+)
Blood PCR (+)

Anti-­HDV IgG (+)
Blood PCR (−)
HBsAg (+)
Anti-­HBs (−)

N/A

Anti-­HBs (+)
Anti-­HBc (−)

N/A

N/A

N/A

PAST INFECTION (RECOVERED)
Anti-­HAV IgG (+)
Anti-­HBs (+)
Anti-­HBc IgG (+)†
CHRONIC INFECTION
N/A

HCV

*Research tool.
†Still poses a risk for reactivation.
HAV, Hepatitis A virus; HBs, hepatitis B surface; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; Ig, immunoglobulin; PCR, polymerase chain reaction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2464 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 406.4  Indications and Updated Dosage
Recommendations for GamaSTAN S/D
Human Immune Globulin for Preexposure
and Postexposure Prophylaxis Against
Hepatitis A Infection
UPDATED DOSAGE
RECOMMENDATION

INDICATION
Preexposure prophylaxis
Up to 1 mo of travel
Up to 2 mo of travel
2 mo of travel or longer

0.1 mL/kg
0.2 mL/kg
0.2 mL/kg (repeat every 2 mo)

Postexposure prophylaxis

0.1 mL/kg

From Nelson NP. Updated dosing instruction for immune globulin (human) GamaSTAN
S/D for hepatitis A virus prophylaxis. MMWR. 2017;66(36):959–960.

hosts, and those with chronic liver disease or other medical conditions
should receive both Ig and the HAV vaccine.
Ig prophylaxis in postexposure situations should be used as soon
as possible (it is not effective if administered more than 2 weeks after
exposure). It is exclusively used alone for children younger than 12
months old or in whom vaccine is contraindicated (e.g., serious allergy
to the vaccine). Ig in combination with HAV vaccine may be used in
patients older than 40 years of age, with HAV vaccine preferred in
healthy persons 12 months to 40 years old. An alternative approach is
to immunize previously unvaccinated patients who are 12 months old
or older with the age-­appropriate vaccine dosage as soon as possible.
Ig is not routinely recommended for sporadic nonhousehold exposure
(e.g., protection of hospital personnel or schoolmates). The vaccine has
several advantages over Ig, including long-­term protection, availability,
and ease of administration, with cost similar to, or less than, that of Ig.

Vaccine

The availability of at least three inactivated, highly immunogenic,
and safe HAV vaccines has had a major impact on the prevention of
HAV infection. These vaccines are approved for children older than
12 months. They are administered intramuscularly in a two-­
dose
schedule, with the second dose given 6-­12 months after the first dose.
Seroconversion rates in children exceed 90% after an initial dose and
approach 100% after the second dose; protective antibody titer persists
for longer than 10 years in most patients. The immune response in
immunocompromised persons, older patients, and those with chronic
illnesses may be suboptimal; in those patients, combining the vaccine
with Ig for preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis is indicated.
HAV vaccine may be administered simultaneously with other vaccines.
A combination HAV and HBV vaccine is approved in adults older than
age 18. For healthy persons at least 12 months old, vaccine is preferable
to Ig for preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis (see Table 406.3).
In the United States and some other countries, universal vaccination
is recommended for all children older than 12 months. Nevertheless,
studies show <50% of U.S. adolescents have received even a single dose
of the vaccine and <30% have received the complete vaccine series. The
vaccine is effective in curbing outbreaks of HAV because of rapid seroconversion and the long incubation period of the disease.

Prognosis

The prognosis for the patient with HAV is excellent, with no long-­term
sequelae. The only feared complication is ALF. Nevertheless, HAV
infection remains a major cause of morbidity; it has a high socioeconomic impact during epidemics and in endemic areas.

HEPATITIS B
Etiology

HBV, a member of the Hepadnaviridae family, has a circular, partially
double-­
stranded DNA genome composed of approximately 3,200
nucleotides. Four constitutive genes have been identified: the S (surface),

C (core), X, and P (polymer) genes. The surface of the virus includes
particles, designated as the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), which
consist of 22-­nm-­diameter spherical particles and 22-­nm-­wide tubular
particles with a variable length of up to 200 nm. The inner portion of
the virion contains the hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg), the nucleocapsid that encodes the viral DNA, and a nonstructural antigen called
the hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), a nonparticulate soluble antigen
derived from HBcAg by proteolytic self-­cleavage. HBeAg serves as a
marker of active viral replication and usually correlates with the HBV
DNA levels. Replication of HBV occurs predominantly in the liver but
also occurs in the lymphocytes, spleen, kidney, and pancreas.

Epidemiology

HBV has been detected worldwide, with an estimated 250 million
persons chronically infected. The areas of highest prevalence of HBV
infection are sub-­Saharan Africa, China, parts of the Middle East, the
Amazon basin, and the Pacific Islands. In the United States, the indigenous population in Alaska had the highest prevalence rate before
the implementation of their universal vaccination programs. An estimated 1.25 million persons in the United States are chronic HBV carriers, with approximately 300,000 new cases of HBV occurring each
year, the highest incidence being among adults 20-­39 years of age. One
in four chronic HBV carriers will develop serious sequelae in their
lifetime. The number of new cases in children reported each year is
thought to be low but is difficult to estimate because many infections
in children are asymptomatic. In the United States, since the first vaccine for HBV was introduced, the overall incidence of HBV infection has been reduced by more than half. Since the implementation
of universal vaccination programs in Taiwan and the United States,
substantial progress has been made toward eliminating HBV infection
in children in these countries. In fact, in Alaska, where HBV neared
epidemic proportions, universal newborn vaccination with mass
screening and immunization of susceptible Alaska indigenous peoples
virtually eliminated symptomatic HBV and secondary hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC).
HBV is present in high concentrations in blood, serum, and serous
exudates and in moderate concentrations in saliva, vaginal fluid, and
semen. Efficient transmission occurs through blood exposure and
sexual contact. Risk factors for HBV infection in children and adolescents include acquisition by intravenous drugs or blood products,
contaminated needles used for acupuncture or tattoos, sexual contact,
institutional care, and intimate contact with carriers. No risk factors
are identified in approximately 40% of cases. HBV is not thought to
be transmitted via indirect exposure, such as sharing toys. After infection, the incubation period ranges from 45 to 160 days, with a mean of
approximately 120 days. In children, the most important risk factor for
acquisition of HBV remains perinatal exposure to an HBsAg-­positive
mother. The risk of transmission is greatest if the mother is HBeAg-­
positive; up to 90% of these infants become chronically infected if
untreated. Additional risk factors include high maternal HBV viral
load (HBeAg/HBV DNA titers) and delivery of a prior infant who
developed HBV despite appropriate prophylaxis. In most perinatal cases, serologic markers of infection and antigenemia appear 1-­3
months after birth, suggesting that transmission occurred at the time
of delivery. Virus contained in amniotic fluid or in maternal feces or
blood may be the source. Immunoprophylaxis with hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) and the HBV immunization, given within 12 hours
of delivery, is highly effective in preventing infection and protects
>95% of neonates born to HBsAg-­positive mothers. Of the ∼22,000
infants born each year to HBsAg-­positive mothers in the United States,
>98% receive immunoprophylaxis and are thus protected. Infants who
fail to receive the complete vaccination series (e.g., homeless children,
international adoptees, and children born outside the United States)
have the highest incidence of developing chronic HBV. These and all
infants born to HBsAg-­positive mothers should have follow-­up HBsAg
and anti-­HBs testing to determine appropriate follow-­up. The mothers
(HBeAg positive) of these infants who develop chronic HBV infection
should receive antiviral therapy during the third trimester for subsequent pregnancies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 406 u Viral Hepatitis 2465
HBsAg is inconsistently recovered in human milk of infected mothers. Breastfeeding of nonimmunized infants by infected mothers does
not seem to confer a greater risk of hepatitis than does formula feeding.
The risk of developing chronic HBV infection, defined as being
positive for HBsAg for longer than 6 months, is inversely related to the
age of acquisition. In the United States, although <10% of infections
occur in children, these infections account for 20–30% of all chronic
cases. This risk of chronic infection is 90% in children younger than
1 year; the risk is 30% for those 1-­5 years of age and 2% for adults.
Chronic HBV infection is associated with the development of chronic
liver disease and HCC. The carcinoma risk is independent of the presence of cirrhosis and was the most prevalent cancer-­related death in
young adults in Asia, where HBV was endemic.
HBV has 10 genotypes (A-­J). A is pandemic, B and C are prevalent in
Asia, D is seen in Southern Europe, E in Africa, F in the United States,
G in the United States and France, H in Central America, I in Southeast
Asia, and J in Japan. Genetic variants have become resistant to some
antiviral agents.

Pathogenesis

The acute response of the liver to HBV is similar to that of other
viruses. Persistence of histologic changes in patients with hepatitis B
indicates development of chronic liver disease. HBV, unlike the other
hepatotropic viruses, is a predominantly noncytopathogenic virus that
causes injury mostly by immune-­mediated processes. The severity of
hepatocyte injury reflects the degree of the immune response, with the
most complete immune response associated with the greatest likelihood of viral clearance but also the most severe injury to hepatocytes.
The first step in the process of acute hepatitis is infection of hepatocytes
by HBV, resulting in expression of viral antigens on the cell surface. The
most important of these viral antigens may be the nucleocapsid antigens—HBcAg and HBeAg. These antigens, in combination with class
I major histocompatibility proteins, make the cell a target for cytotoxic
T-­cell lysis.
The mechanism for development of chronic hepatitis B is less well
understood. To permit hepatocytes to continue to be infected, the core
protein or major histocompatibility class I protein might not be recognized, the cytotoxic lymphocytes might not be activated, or some other,
yet unknown mechanism might interfere with destruction of hepatocytes. This tolerance phenomenon predominates in the perinatally
acquired cases, resulting in a high incidence of persistent HBV infection in children with no or little inflammation in the liver, normal liver
enzymes, and markedly elevated HBV viral load. Although end-­stage

liver disease rarely develops in those patients, the inherent HCC risk is
high, possibly related, in part, to uncontrolled viral replication cycles.
ALF has been seen in infants of chronic carrier mothers who have
anti-­HBe or are infected with a precore-­variant strain. This fact led to
the postulate that HBeAg exposure in utero in infants of chronic carriers likely induces tolerance to the virus once infection occurs postnatally. In the absence of this tolerance, the liver is massively attacked by
T cells and the patient presents with ALF.
Immune-­mediated mechanisms are also involved in the extrahepatic conditions that can be associated with HBV infections. Circulating immune complexes containing HBsAg can result in polyarteritis
nodosa, membranous or membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis,
polymyalgia rheumatica, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, and Guillain-­
Barré syndrome.

Clinical Manifestations

Many acute cases of HBV infection in children are asymptomatic, as
evidenced by the high carriage rate of serum markers in persons who
have no history of acute hepatitis (Table 406.5). The usual acute symptomatic episode is similar to that of HAV and HCV infections but may
be more severe and is more likely to include involvement of the skin
and joints (Fig. 406.2).
The first biochemical evidence of HBV infection is elevation of
serum ALT levels, which begin to rise just before development of
fatigue, anorexia, and malaise, at approximately 6-­7 weeks after exposure. The illness is preceded, in a few children, by a serum sickness–like
prodrome marked by arthralgia or skin lesions, including urticarial,
purpuric, macular, or maculopapular rashes. Papular acrodermatitis,
Gianotti-­Crosti syndrome, can also occur. Other extrahepatic conditions associated with HBV infections in children include polyarteritis
nodosa, glomerulonephritis, and aplastic anemia. Jaundice is present
in approximately 25% of acutely infected patients and usually begins
approximately 8 weeks after exposure and lasts approximately 4 weeks.
In the usual course of resolving HBV infection, symptoms persist for
6-­8 weeks. The percentage of children in whom clinical evidence of
hepatitis develops is higher for HBV than for HAV, and the rate of
ALF is also greater. Most patients do recover, but the chronic carrier
state complicates up to 10% of cases acquired in adulthood. The rate
of development of chronic infection depends largely on the mode and
age of acquisition and occurs in up to 90% of perinatally infected cases.
Cirrhosis and HCC are only seen with chronic infection. Chronic HBV
infection has three identified phases: immune tolerant, immune active,
and inactive. Most children fall in the immune-­tolerant phase, against

Table 406.5  Typical Interpretation of Test Results for Hepatitis B Virus Infection
HBsAg

TOTAL ANTI-­HBc

IgM ANTI-­HBc

ANTI-­HBs

HBV DNA

INTERPRETATION

−

−

−

−

−

Never infected

+

−

−

−

+ or −

Early acute infection; transient (up to 18 days) after
vaccination

+

+

+

−

+

Acute infection

−

+

+

+ or −

+ or −

Acute resolving infection

−

+

−

+

−

Recovered from past infection and immune

+

+

−

−

+

Chronic infection

−

+

−

−

+ or −

False-­positive (i.e., susceptible), past infection, “low-­
level” chronic infection, or passive transfer of anti-­HBc
to infant born to HBsAg-­positive mother

−

−

−

+

−

Immune if anti-­HBs concentration is ≥10 mIU/mL after
vaccine series completion; passive transfer after hepatitis
B immune globulin administration

−, Negative; +, positive; anti-­HBc, antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; anti-­HBs, antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV DNA, hepatitis B
virus deoxyribonucleic acid; IgM, immunoglobulin class M.
From Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, et al. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.
MMWR. 2018;67(1):1–29, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2466 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Jaundice
Symptoms

Anti-HBc

CAUSE OF FLARE

ALT
IgM anti-HBc
HBeAg
HBV DNA (PCR)

Anti-HBs

HBsAg
0

1

Table 406.6  Causes of Hepatitis Flares in Patients with
Chronic Hepatitis B

2

3
4
5
6
12
Months after exposure
Fig. 406.2 The serologic course of acute hepatitis B. ALT, Alanine
aminotransferase; HBc, hepatitis B core; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen;
HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV DNA, hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid; IgM, immunoglobulin class M; PCR, polymerase chain
reaction. (From Goldman L, Ausiello D, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 22nd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2004:914.)

which no effective therapy has been developed. Most treatments target
the immune active phase of the disease, characterized by active inflammation, elevated ALT/AST levels, and progressive fibrosis. Spontaneous HBeAg seroconversion, defined as the development of anti-­HBe
and loss of HBeAg, occurs in the immune-­tolerant phase, albeit at low
rates of 4–5% per year. It is more common in childhood-­acquired HBV
rather than in perinatally transmitted infections. Seroconversion can
occur over many years, during which time significant damage to the
liver may take place. There are no large studies that accurately assess
the lifetime risks and morbidities of children with chronic HBV infection, making decisions regarding the rationale, efficacy, and timing of
still less-­than-­ideal treatments difficult. Reactivation of chronic infection has been reported in immunosuppressed children treated with
chemotherapy, biologic immunomodulators such as infliximab, or
T-­cell–depleting agents, leading to an increased risk of ALF or to rapidly progressing fibrotic liver disease (Table 406.6).

COMMENT

Spontaneous

Factors that precipitate viral replication
are unclear

Immunosuppressive
therapy

Flares are often observed during
withdrawal of the agent; preemptive
antiviral therapy is required

Antiviral therapy for HBV
Interferon
Nucleoside analog
During treatment
Drug-­resistant HBV
On withdrawal

HIV treatment

Genotypic variation
Precore and core
promoter variants
Superinfection with
other hepatitis viruses

Flares are often observed during the
second to third month of therapy in
30% of patients; may herald virologic
response
Flares are no more common than with
placebo
Severe consequences can occur in
patients with advanced liver disease
Flares are caused by the rapid
reemergence of wild-­type HBV; severe
consequences can occur in patients
with advanced liver disease
Flares can occur as a result of the direct
toxicity of HAART or with immune
reconstitution; HBV increases the risk
of antiretroviral drug hepatotoxicity
Fluctuations in serum alanine
aminotransferase levels are common
with precore variants
May be associated with suppression of
HBV replication

HAART, Highly active antiretroviral therapy; HBV, hepatitis B virus.
From Wells JT, Perillo R. Hepatitis B. In Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds.
Sleisenger and Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 10th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2016: Table 79.1.

Diagnosis

The serologic profile of HBV infection is more complex than for HAV
infection and differs depending on whether the disease is acute or
chronic (Fig. 406.3, see Table 406.5). Several antigens and antibodies
are used to confirm the diagnosis of acute HBV infection (see Table
406.3). Routine screening for HBV infection requires assay of multiple
serologic markers (HBsAg, anti-­HBc, anti-­HBs). HBsAg is an early
serologic marker of infection and is found in almost all infected persons; its rise closely coincides with the onset of symptoms. Persistence
of HBsAg beyond 6 months defines the chronic infection state. During
recovery from acute infection, because HBsAg levels fall before symptoms wane, IgM antibody to HBcAg (anti-­HBc IgM) might be the only
marker of acute infection. Anti-­HBc IgM rises early after the infection and remains positive for many months before being replaced by
anti-­HBc IgG, which then persists for years. Anti-­HBs marks serologic
recovery and protection. Only anti-­HBs is present in persons immunized with hepatitis B vaccine, whereas both anti-­HBs and anti-­HBc
are detected in persons with resolved infection. HBeAg is present in
active acute or chronic infection and is a marker of infectivity. The
development of anti-­HBe, termed seroconversion, marks improvement
and is a goal of therapy in chronically infected patients. HBV DNA
can be detected in the serum of acutely infected patients and chronic
carriers. High DNA titers are seen in patients with HBeAg, and they
typically fall once anti-­HBe develops.

Complications

ALF with coagulopathy, encephalopathy, and cerebral edema occurs
more commonly with HBV than the other hepatotropic viruses. The
risk of ALF is further increased when there is coinfection or superinfection with HDV or in an immunosuppressed host. Mortality

Acute Hepatitis B

1-5%

Fulminant
hepatitis

Recovery Rate:
Death/OLT

Neonates 5%
1-5 yr old 70%

Persistent Infection

5 yr old 95%
Develop immunity

Carrier

Chronic hepatitis

Cirrhosis/HCC

Fig. 406.3 Natural history of hepatitis B virus infection. HCC, Hepatocellular carcinoma; OLT, orthotopic liver transplant.

from ALF is >30%, and liver transplantation is the only effective
intervention. Supportive care aimed at sustaining patients and early
referral to a liver transplantation center can be lifesaving. As mentioned, HBV infection can also result in chronic hepatitis, which can
lead to cirrhosis, end-­stage liver disease complications, and HCC.
Membranous glomerulonephritis with deposition of complement
and HBeAg in glomerular capillaries is a rare complication of HBV
infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 406 u Viral Hepatitis 2467
Treatment

Treatment of acute HBV infection is largely supportive. Close monitoring for liver failure and extrahepatic morbidities is key. Treatment
of chronic HBV infection is in evolution; no drug currently achieves
consistent, complete eradication of the virus. The natural history of
chronic HBV infection in children is complex, and there is a lack of
reliable long-­term outcome data on which to base treatment recommendations. Treatment of chronic HBV infection in children should
be individualized and done under the care of a pediatric hepatologist
experienced in treating the disease.
The goal of treatment is to reduce viral replication, defined by having
undetectable HBV DNA in the serum and development of anti-­HBe,
termed seroconversion. The development of anti-­HBe transforms the
disease into an inactive form, thereby decreasing infectivity, active liver
injury and inflammation, fibrosis progression, and the risk of HCC.
Treatment is only indicated for patients in the immune-­active form of
the disease, as evidenced by elevated ALT and/or AST, who have fibrosis on liver biopsy, putting the child at higher risk for cirrhosis during
childhood.

Treatment Strategies

Interferon-­α2b (IFN-­
α2b) has immunomodulatory and antiviral
effects. It has been used in children, with long-­term viral response
rates similar to the 25% rate reported in adults. IFN use is limited by
its subcutaneous administration, treatment duration of 24 weeks, and
side effects (flulike symptoms, marrow suppression, depression, retinal changes, autoimmune disorders). IFN is further contraindicated in
decompensated cirrhosis. One advantage of IFN, compared with other
treatments, is that viral resistance does not develop with its use.
Lamivudine is an oral synthetic nucleoside analog that inhibits the
viral enzyme reverse transcriptase. In children older than 2 years of
age, its use for 52 weeks resulted in HBeAg clearance in 34% of patients
with an ALT >2 times normal; 88% remained in remission at 1 year. It
has a good safety profile. Lamivudine must be used for ≥6 months after
viral clearance, and the emergence of a variant viral strain (YMDD)
poses a barrier to its long-­term use. Combination therapy in children using IFN and lamivudine did not seem to improve the rates of
response in most series.
Adefovir (a purine analog that inhibits viral replication) is approved
for use in children older than 12 years of age, in whom a prospective
1-­year study showed 23% seroconversion. No viral resistance was
noted in that study but has been reported in adults.
Entecavir (a nucleoside analog that inhibits replication) is currently
approved for use in children older than 2 years of age. Prospective data
have shown a 21% seroconversion rate in adults with minimal resistance developing. Patients in whom resistance to lamivudine developed have an increased risk of developing resistance to entecavir.
Tenofovir (a nucleotide analog that inhibits viral replication) is also
approved for use in children older than 12 years of age. Prospective
data have shown a 21% seroconversion rate with a very low rate of
developing resistance. Patients with lamivudine-­resistant variants do
not appear to have an increased rate of resistance. Concern exists over
long-­term use and bone mineral density.
Peginterferon-­α2 has the same mechanism of action as IFN but
is given once weekly. This formulation has not been approved in the
United States but is recommended for the treatment of chronic HBV
in other countries. Patients most likely to respond to currently available drugs have low serum HBV DNA titers, are HBeAg-­positive, have
active hepatic inflammation (ALT greater than twice the upper limit
of normal for at least 6 months), and have recently acquired disease.
Immune-­tolerant patients—those with normal ALT and AST and who
are HBeAg-­positive with elevated viral load—are currently not considered for treatment, although the emergence of new treatment paradigms
is promising for this large, yet hard-­to-­treat, subgroup of patients.

Prevention

The most effective prevention strategies have resulted from the
screening of pregnant mothers and the use of HBIG and hepatitis B
vaccine in infants (Tables 406.7 to 406.10). In HBsAg-­positive and

Table 406.7  Strategy to Eliminate Hepatitis B Virus
Transmission in the United States*
• Screening of all pregnant women for HBsAg
HBV DNA testing for HBsAg-­positive pregnant women, with
suggestion of maternal antiviral therapy to reduce perinatal
transmission when HBV DNA is >200,000 IU/mL
Prophylaxis (HepB vaccine and hepatitis B immunoglobulin) for
infants born to HBsAg-­positive† women
• Universal vaccination of all infants beginning at birth‡,§ as a
safeguard for infants born to HBV-­infected mothers not identified
prenatally
• Routine vaccination of previously unvaccinated children age
<19 yr
• Vaccination of adults at risk for HBV infection, including those
requesting protection from HBV without acknowledgment of a
specific risk factor
*Sources: Mast EE, Margolis HS, Fiore AE, et al. A comprehensive immunization
strategy to eliminate transmission of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States:
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
Part 1: immunization of infants, children, and adolescents, MMWR Recomm Rep.
2005;54(No. RR-­16):1–31; Mast EE, Weinbaum CM, Fiore AE, et al. A comprehensive
immunization strategy to eliminate transmission of hepatitis B virus infection in
the United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices (ACIP). Part II: immunization of adults, MMWR Recomm Rep. 2006;55(No.
RR-­16):1–33.
†Refer to Table 406.8 for prophylaxis recommendations for infants born to women with
unknown HBsAg status.
‡Within 24 hr of birth for medically stable infants weighing ≥2,000 g.
§Refer to Table 406.8 for birth dose recommendations for infants weighing <2,000 g.
HBsAg, Hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus.
From Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, et al. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection
in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices. MMWR. 2018;67(1):1–29, Box 2.

HBeAg-­positive mothers, a 10% risk of chronic HBV infection exists
compared with 1% in HBeAg-­negative mothers. This knowledge offers
screening strategies that may affect both mother and infant by using
antiviral medications during the third trimester. Guidelines suggest
that mothers with an HBV DNA viral load >200,000 IU/mL receive
an antiviral such as telbivudine, lamivudine, or tenofovir during the
third trimester, especially if they had a previous child who developed
chronic HBV after receiving HBIG and the hepatitis B vaccine. This
practice has proven safe, with normal growth and development in
infants of treated mothers.
Household, sexual, and needle-­sharing contacts of patients with
chronic HBV infection should be identified and vaccinated if they
are susceptible to HBV infection. Patients should be advised about
the perinatal and intimate contact risk of transmission of HBV. HBV
is not spread by breastfeeding, kissing, hugging, or sharing water or
utensils. Children with HBV should not be excluded from school, play,
childcare, or work, unless they are prone to biting. A support group
might help children to cope better with their disease. Families should
not feel obligated to disclose the diagnosis, as this information may
lead to prejudice or mistreatment of the patient or the patient’s family.
All patients positive for HBsAg should be reported to the state or local
health department.
HBIG is indicated only for specific postexposure circumstances and
provides only temporary protection (3-­6 months). It plays a pivotal
role in preventing perinatal transmission when administered within 12
hours of birth.

Universal Vaccination

Two single-­
antigen vaccines (Recombivax HB and Engerix-­
B) are
approved for children and are the only preparations approved for infant
dosing under 6 weeks of life. Heplisav-­B is approved only for people 18
years of age and older. Combination vaccines can be used for subsequent immunization dosing and enable integration of the HBV vaccine into the regular immunization schedule. The safety profile of the
HBV vaccine is excellent. The most reported side effects are pain at the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2468 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 406.8  Hepatitis B Vaccine Schedules for Infants by Infant Birthweight and Maternal Hepatitis B Surface Antigen Status
MATERNAL
HBsAg STATUS

BIRTHWEIGHT
≥2,000 g

<2,000 g

DOSE

AGE

Positive

1
HBIG‡
2
3

Birth (≤12 hr)
Birth (≤12 hr)
1-­2 mo
6 mo§

Unknown*

1
2
3

Birth (≤12 hr)
1-­2 mo
6 mo§

Negative

1
2
3

Birth (≤24 hr)
1-­2 mo
6-­18 mo§

Positive

1
HBIG
2
3
4
1
HBIG
2
3
4
1

Birth (≤12 hr)
Birth (≤12 hr)
1 mo
2-­3 mo
6 mo§
Birth (≤12 hr)
Birth (≤12 hr)
1 mo
2-­3 mo
6 mo§
Hospital discharge
or age 1 mo
2 mo
6-­18 mo§

Unknown

Negative

SINGLE-­ANTIGEN + COMBINATION VACCINE†

SINGLE-­ANTIGEN VACCINE

2
3

DOSE

AGE

1
HBIG
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4

Birth (≤12 hr)
Birth (≤12 hr)
2 mo
4 mo
6 mo§
Birth (≤12 hr)
2 mo
4 mo
6 mo§
Birth (≤24 hr)
2 mo
4 mo
6 mo§

1
HBIG
2
3
4
1
HBIG
2
3
4
1

Birth (≤12 hr)
Birth (≤12 hr)
2 mo
4 mo
6 mo§
Birth (≤12 hr)
Birth (≤12 hr)
2 mo
4 mo
6 mo§
Hospital discharge or age
1 mo
2 mo
4 mo
6 mo§

2
3
4

*Mothers should have blood drawn and tested for HBsAg as soon as possible after admission for delivery; if the mother is found to be HBsAg positive, the infant should receive HBIG
as soon as possible but no later than age 7 days.
†Pediarix should not be administered before age 6 wk.
‡HBIG should be administered at a separate anatomic site from the vaccine.
§The final dose in the vaccine series should not be administered before age 24 wk (164 days).
HBIG, Hepatitis B immune globulin; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen.
From Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, et al. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.
MMWR. 2018;67(1):1–29, Table 3.

Table 406.9  Recommended Doses of Hepatitis B Vaccine by Group and Vaccine Type
SINGLE-­ANTIGEN VACCINE
RECOMBIVAX

COMBINATION VACCINE

ENGERIX

TWINRIX†

PEDIARIX*

Age-­Group (yr)

Dose (μg)

Vol (mL)

Dose (μg)

Vol (mL)

Dose (μg)

Vol (mL)

Dose (μg)

Vol (mL)

Birth-­10

5

0.5

10

0.5

10*

0.5

N/A

N/A

11-­15

10‡

1

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

11-­19

5

0.5

10

0.5

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A
1

≥20

N/A

N/A

20†

HEMODIALYSIS PATIENTS AND OTHER IMMUNE-­COMPROMISED PERSONS
<20
5
0.5
10
0.5

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

≥20

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

10

40

1

1

20

40

1

2

*Pediarix is approved for use in persons age 6 wk through 6 yr (before the seventh birthday).
†Twinrix is approved for use in persons age ≥18 yr.
‡Adult formulation administered on a two-­dose schedule.
N/A, Not applicable.
From Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, et al. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices.
MMWR. 2018;67(1):1–29, Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 406 u Viral Hepatitis 2469
Table 406.10  Hepatitis B Vaccine Schedules for Children,
Adolescents, and Adults
SCHEDULE* (INTERVAL
REPRESENTS TIME IN
MONTHS FROM FIRST DOSE)

AGE GROUP
Children (1-­10 yr)

0, 1, and 6 mo
0, 1, 2, and 12 mo

Adolescents (11-­19 yr)

0, 1, and 6 mo
0, 12, and 24 mo
0 and 4-­6 mo†
0, 1, 2, and 12 mo
0, 7 days, 21-­30 days, 12 mo‡

Adults (≥20 yr)

0, 1, and 6 mo
0, 1, 2, and 12 mo
0, 1, 2, and 6 mo§
0, 7 days, 21-­30 days, 12 mo‡

*Refer to package inserts for further information. For all ages, when the hepatitis B
vaccine schedule is interrupted, the vaccine series does not need to be restarted. If
the series is interrupted after the first dose, the second dose should be administered
as soon as possible, and the second and third doses should be separated by
an interval of at least 8 wk. If only the third dose has been delayed, it should be
administered as soon as possible. The final dose of the vaccine must be administered
at least 8 wk after the second dose and should follow the first dose by at least 16 wk;
the minimum interval between the first and second doses is 4 wk. Inadequate doses
of hepatitis B vaccine or doses received after a shorter-­than-­recommended dosing
interval should be readministered, using the correct dosage or schedule. Vaccine
doses administered ≤4 days before the minimum interval or age are considered valid.
Because of the unique accelerated schedule for Twinrix, the 4-­day guideline does not
apply to the first three doses of this vaccine when administered on a 0-­day, 7-­day, 21
to 30-­day, and 12-­mo schedule (new recommendation).
†A two-­dose schedule of Recombivax adult formulation (10 μg) is licensed for
adolescents age 11-­15 yr. When scheduled to receive the second dose, adolescents
age >15 yr should be switched to a three-­dose series, with doses two and three
consisting of the pediatric formulation administered on an appropriate schedule.
‡Twinrix is approved for use in persons age ≥18 yr and is available on an accelerated
schedule with doses administered at 0, 7, 21-­30 days, and 12 mo.
§A four-­dose schedule of Engerix administered in two-­1 mL doses (40 μg) on a 0-­, 1-­, 2-­,
and 6-­mo schedule is recommended for adult hemodialysis patients.
From Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, et al. Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection
in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices. MMWR. 2018;67(1):1–29, Table 4.

injection site (up to 29% of cases) and fever (up to 6% of cases). Seropositivity is 90–95% with all vaccines, achieved after the second dose in
most patients. The third dose serves as a booster and may have an effect
on maintaining long-­term immunity. For immunocompromised individuals, annual anti-­HBs testing should be considered, with a fourth
booster dose given when anti-­HBs concentrations are <10 mIU/mL.
Similar consideration may be given to children with cystic fibrosis,
liver disease, or celiac disease if there is an ongoing risk for HBV exposure. In infants whose birthweight is <2,000 g born to HBsAg-­positive
mothers (or if their HBsAg status remains unknown), a fourth dose is
recommended at 6 months of age (the birth dose does not count as part
of the three-­dose series) and these infants should be checked for anti-­
HBs and HBsAg after completing these shots. In this group of infants,
if the anti-­HBs level is <10 mIU/mL, they should repeat the three-­dose
series. Despite declines in the anti-­HBs titer in time, most healthy vaccinated persons remain protected against HBV infection.
HBV vaccination recommendations are as noted in Tables 406.8 to
406.10.
Postvaccination testing for HBsAg and anti-­HBs should be done at
9-­18 months. If the result is positive for anti-­HBs, the child is immune
to HBV. If the result is positive for HBsAg only, the parent should be
counseled and the child evaluated by a pediatric hepatologist. If the
result is negative for both HBsAg and anti-­HBs, a second complete
hepatitis B vaccine series should be administered, followed by testing
for anti-­HBs to determine if subsequent doses are needed.
Administration of four doses of vaccine is permissible when combination vaccines are used after the birth dose; this does not affect vaccine response.

Postexposure Prophylaxis

Recommendations for postexposure prophylaxis for prevention of
hepatitis B infection depend on the conditions under which the person is exposed to HBV (see Table 406.10). Vaccination should never
be postponed if written records of the exposed person’s immunization
history are not available, but every effort should still be made to obtain
those records.

Special Populations

Patients with cirrhosis may not respond as well to the HBV vaccine,
and repeat anti-­HBs titers should be performed. Adult studies suggest a higher dosage or shorter interval between dosages may increase
immunization effectiveness. Patients with inflammatory bowel disease
frequently have not been immunized or did not develop complete
immunity to HBV, as demonstrated by inadequate anti-­HBs levels.
These patients may be at risk for fulminant HBV (reactivation) when
immunosuppression is started as part of their treatment regimen, specifically with biologic agents such as infliximab.

Prognosis

In general, the outcome after acute HBV infection is favorable, despite
a risk of ALF. The risk of developing chronic infection brings the risks
of liver cirrhosis and HCC to the forefront. Perinatal transmission
leading to chronicity is responsible for the high incidence of HCC in
young adults in endemic areas. Importantly, HBV infection and its
complications are effectively controlled and prevented with vaccination, and multiple clinical trials are ongoing in an effort to improve and
guide treatment regimens.

HEPATITIS C
Etiology

HCV is a single-­stranded RNA virus, classified as a separate genus
within the Flaviviridae family, with marked genetic heterogeneity. It has
at least six major genotypes and numerous subtypes and quasi-­species,
which permit the virus to escape host immune surveillance. Genotype
variation might partially explain the differences in clinical course and
response to treatment. Genotype 1 (a and b) is the most common genotype in the United States. The advent of direct-­acting antiviral (DAA)
therapy has brought a new and highly successful approach to the treatment and cure of hepatitis C.

Epidemiology

DAA therapy has made a major impact on decreasing the prevalence
of HCV in the United States. However, HCV continues to be a major
cause of chronic liver disease in adults and is associated with >10,000
deaths per year. Approximately 2.5 million people in the United States
and 70 million people worldwide are estimated to be currently infected
with HCV. The reported global estimated viremic prevalence in children with HCV (age 0-­17 years) is hypothesized to be around 3.25 million children as of 2018. Appropriate identification and screening for
infected individuals should be implemented.
Risk factors for HCV transmission in the United States included
blood transfusion before 1992; with current blood donor screening
practices, the risk of HCV transmission is approximately 0.001% per
unit transfused. Illegal drug use with exposure to blood or blood products from HCV-­infected persons accounts for the majority of adult
cases in the United States. Sexual transmission, especially through multiple sexual partners, is the second most common cause of infection.
Other risk factors include occupational exposure, but approximately
10% of new infections have no known transmission source. In children,
perinatal transmission is the most prevalent mode of transmission (see
Table 406.1). HCV infection rates in the United States in women of
childbearing age and those who are pregnant have increased in parallel
with the rising opioid epidemic. Based on the most recent census data,
an estimated 29,000 women with HCV infection give birth each year in
the United States, with the majority of their infants being infected with
HCV. HIV coinfection and high viremia titers (HCV RNA-­positive) in
the mother can increase the transmission rate to 20%. The incubation
period is 7-­9 weeks (range: 2-­24 weeks).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2470 Part XVI u The Digestive System
In 2020, the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF)
and the CDC issued updated recommendations that encourage clinicians to screen all adults age 18-­79 years for HCV infection. The
USPSTF recommendations specifically suggest HCV screening for all
pregnant women. This is important because the rate of HCV infection in pregnant women has continued to increase, with an associated
increase in the number of infants exposed to HCV. The mode of delivery (vaginal vs cesarean section) does not typically affect risk of transmission. HCV RNA may be detected in breast milk and colostrum;
however, breastfeeding does not appear to increase the rate of HCV
transmission (with the exception of HIV coinfected mothers).

Pathogenesis

The pattern of acute hepatic injury is indistinguishable from that of
other hepatotropic viruses. In chronic cases, lymphoid aggregates or
follicles in portal tracts are found, either alone or as part of a general
inflammatory infiltrate of the portal areas. HCV appears to cause
injury primarily by cytopathic mechanisms, but immune-­mediated
injury can also occur. The cytopathic component appears to be mild
because the acute illness is typically the least severe of all hepatotropic
virus infections.

Clinical Manifestations

Acute HCV infection tends to be mild and insidious in onset (Fig.
406.4; see also Table 406.1). ALF rarely occurs. HCV is the most likely
of all these viruses to cause chronic infection (Fig. 406.5). Of affected
adults, <15% clear the virus; the rest develop chronic hepatitis. In
pediatric studies, 20–40% of children achieved spontaneous sustained
clearance of the virus within the first 5 years of life.
Chronic HCV infection is also clinically silent until a complication
develops. Serum aminotransferase levels fluctuate and are sometimes
normal, but histologic inflammation is universal. Progression of liver
fibrosis is slow over several years, unless comorbid factors are present, which can accelerate fibrosis progression. Approximately 25% of
infected patients ultimately progress to cirrhosis, liver failure, and,
occasionally, primary HCC within 20-­30 years of the acute infection.
Although progression is rare within the pediatric age range, cirrhosis
and HCC from HCV have been reported in children. The long-­term
morbidities constitute the rationale for diagnosis and treatment in children with HCV.
Chronic HCV infection can be associated with small vessel vasculitis and is a common cause of essential mixed cryoglobulinemia.
Other extrahepatic manifestations predominantly seen in adults
include cutaneous vasculitis, porphyria cutanea tarda, lichen planus,
peripheral neuropathy, cerebritis, polyarthritis, membranoproliferative

glomerulonephritis, and nephrotic syndrome. Antibodies to smooth
muscle, antinuclear antibodies, and low thyroid hormone levels may
also be present.

Diagnosis

In children older than 18 months of age, diagnostic criteria are the same
as those established for adults. Clinically available assays for detection
of HCV infection are based on detection of antibodies to HCV antigens
(anti-­HCV) or detection of viral RNA (see Table 406.3); neither can
predict the severity of liver disease.
The most widely used serologic test is the third-­generation enzyme
immunoassay to detect anti-­HCV. The predictive value of this assay
is greatest in high-­risk populations, but the false-­positive rate can be
as high as 50–60% in low-­risk populations. False-­negative results also
occur because antibodies remain negative for as long as 1-­3 months
after clinical onset of illness. Anti-­HCV is not a protective antibody
and does not confer immunity; it is usually present simultaneously
with the virus. The next step is to verify viral infection by detecting
HCV RNA. This is accomplished via PCR testing. The diagnosis of
chronic HCV infection is made based on the presence of detectable
HCV RNA for more than 6 months. The quantitative PCR also aids in
monitoring response to therapy.
For infants under 18 months of age, the diagnosis may be confounded by the passive transfer of maternal antibodies, which can last
for 1 year or more postnatally. Thus anti-­HCV testing is of limited
value during the first year of life. Diagnosis in this age-­group can be
reliably established by HCV RNA positivity on two or more occasions
after 2 months of age. Criteria for spontaneous clearance requires two
negative HCV RNA tests spread at least 6 months apart, followed by
negative anti-­HCV testing after 18 months of age.
Screening for HCV should include all patients with the following risk
factors: history of illegal drug use (even if only once), receiving clotting
factors made before 1987 (when inactivation procedures were introduced) or blood products before 1992, hemodialysis, idiopathic liver
disease, and children born to HCV-­infected women (qualitative PCR in
infancy and anti-­HCV after 12-­18 months of age). In children, it is also
important to consider whether the mother has any of the risk factors
noted earlier that would increase her possibility of developing HCV.
Determining HCV genotype is also important, particularly when
therapy is considered, as certain DAA therapies may only target specific genotypes. Newer pangenotypic DAA agents, however, will hopefully lead to the practice of genotyping becoming moot in the near
future (as discussed later).
Aminotransferase levels typically fluctuate during HCV infection
and do not correlate with the degree of liver fibrosis. A liver biopsy was

Acute hepatitis C

Symptoms +/−

1%

Fulminant hepatic failure

Anti-HCV

HCV RNA
Titer

20-40%

60-80%

Eradication

Death/OLT

Persistent infection

Serum ALT
HCC
Normal
0

1

2

3

4

Months

5

6

1

2

3

4

Years

Normal
aminotransferase
level

Chronic
hepatitis

4%

20%

Time after exposure

Fig. 406.4 Typical course of acute hepatitis C virus infection followed
by recovery. Symptoms may or may not be present during acute infection. Anti-­HCV, Antibody to HCV; ALT, alanine aminotransferase. (Modified from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, www.cdc.
gov/hepatitis/Resources/Professionals/Training/Serology/training.htm#
one.)

Cirrhosis
20-30 yr
Fig. 406.5 Natural history of hepatitis C virus infection. HCC,
Hepatocellular carcinoma; OLT, orthotopic liver transplant. (From
Hochman JA, Balistreri WF. Chronic viral hepatitis: always be current!
Pediatr Rev. 2003;24[12]:399–410.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 406 u Viral Hepatitis 2471
previously the only means to assess the presence and extent of hepatic
fibrosis, outside of overt signs of chronic liver disease. Newer noninvasive modalities using ultrasound or magnetic resonance elastography,
however, are now used to estimate the degree of fibrosis and decrease
the need for biopsy. This technology, coupled with newer drug regimens, has eliminated the need for liver biopsy in many cases of HCV
infection. A liver biopsy is now primarily indicated to rule out other
causes of overt liver disease.

Complications

The risk of ALF caused by HCV is low, but the risk of chronic hepatitis is the highest of all the hepatitis viruses. In adults, risk factors for
progression to hepatic fibrosis include older age, obesity, being male,
and even moderate alcohol ingestion (two 1-­oz. drinks per day). Progression to cirrhosis or HCC is a major cause of morbidity and one of
the most common indications for liver transplantation in adults in the
United States.

Treatment

The arrival of DAA therapies has led to a paradigm shift in the treatment and eradication of HCV in all populations. These DAAs are now
available and have been shown to be as safe and effective in children
(>3 years) and adolescents as in the adult populations. Pegylated-­
interferon (PEG-­IFN) and ribavirin (RBV), the initial recommended
combination for treatment of HCV in children and adolescents, are no
longer recommended.
The goal of treatment is to achieve a sustained viral response (SVR),
defined as the absence of viremia at a variable period after stopping the
medications. SVR is associated with improved histology and decreased
risk of morbidities. DAA therapies can achieve SVR after 8-­12 weeks
of treatment, as compared with the RBV and PEG-­IFN combination,
which required 48 weeks of treatment, close monitoring, and significant side effect profiles including pancytopenia. Furthermore, regimens of PEG-­IFN have sustained efficacy of 50% in achieving SVR,
whereas DAA regimens have been shown to be consistently more effective (SVR >95%) in children.
DAAs target three HCV proteins involved in the life cycle of this
virus: (1) the nonstructural protein 3/4A (NS3/4A) protease inhibitors
(PIs), which work by inhibiting HCV polyprotein processing; (2) NS5A
inhibitors, which inhibit viral replication and assembly; and (3) NS5B
polymerase inhibitors, which block HCV RNA replication. By combining two or more of these classes of drugs with different mechanisms
attacking HCV, DAAs are able to achieve high SVR rates.
Several phase 2 clinical trials have been completed, revealing the
safety and efficacy of DAA therapy in children as young as 3 years of
age. For example, the first pediatric trial showed the safety and efficacy of the combination of ledipasvir (90 mg) and sofosbuvir (400 mg)
for treatment of HCV genotype 1 over a 12-­week period in children
ages 12-­17 years. This combination is Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approved for children as young as 3 years of age.
It is important to note that one of the main obstacles is determining an age when a young child is capable of daily compliance with the
medications for the recommended 8-­to 12-­week period. The arrival
of DAA therapies in the form of granules is a promising strategy for
younger children who cannot swallow whole tablets. These granules
can be sprinkled on a spoonful of nonacidic soft food (e.g., pudding or
peanut butter). SVR has been achieved in 97% of patients as young as 3
years in phase 2 clinical trials using this formulation of delivery.
Treatment recommendations involve obtaining HCV PCR at baseline
(before initiation of DAA therapy), at 12 weeks, and at 24 weeks post
initiation of therapy. As long as there was no evidence of long-­term damage (e.g., fibrosis, cirrhosis), then patients can have a repeat HCV PCR
assessment at 1 year after completion of therapy to affirm SVR.

Newer Treatments

Pangenotypic agents, capable of being >92% effective at achieving SVR
for all genotypes, have now been FDA approved for children ≥3 years.
These include the agents sofosbuvir-­velpatasvir, given at once-­daily

weight-­based dosing for 12 weeks, and the combination of glecaprevir-­
pibrentasvir at three weight-­based doses per day for 8 weeks. Thus the
need to obtain expensive genotype testing may be unnecessary. With
the rapid development of new medications and regimens, frequent
review of up-­to-­date resources, such as www.hcvguidelines.org, will be
vital to provide optimal care (Table 406.11).

Prevention

No vaccine is yet available to prevent HCV, although ongoing research
suggests this will be possible in the future. Currently available Ig preparations are not beneficial, likely because preparations produced in the
United States do not contain high titers of antibodies to HCV, because
blood and plasma donors are screened for anti-­HCV and excluded from
the donor pool. Broad neutralizing antibodies to HCV were found to
be protective and might pave the road for vaccine development.
Once HCV infection is identified, patients should be screened
yearly with a liver ultrasound and serum α-­fetoprotein for HCC and
for any clinical evidence of liver disease. Vaccinating the affected
patient against HAV and HBV will prevent superinfection with these
viruses and the increased risk of developing severe liver failure. Beginning education to families on DAA therapies and initiating treatment
at 3 years of age (or as soon as the child is developmentally ready
to complete therapy) are also crucial to prevent the development of
fibrosis. However, children with evidence of liver fibrosis should continue to be closely monitored even after eradication of their underlying HCV. Fortunately, adult studies are emerging that reveal mild
reversal of fibrosis by DAA treatment. However, for patients with
evidence of high-­grade fibrosis or cirrhosis, they are still at high risk
of developing HCC even after achieving SVR. More histologic data
are needed to further support the hypothesis of improved liver scarring post DAA treatment. Children with evidence of fibrosis must be
closely followed, given the continued risk of complications such as
HCC and portal hypertension.

Prognosis

DAA therapies have revolutionized treatment for HCV and allow for
resolution of the underlying hepatitis in young children and adolescents before development of irreversible chronic liver disease (fibrosis,
cirrhosis, HCC). The World Health Organization (WHO) in 2016 set
the ambitious goal of eliminating HCV by 2030, and these new DAA
therapeutic agents have provided an important step toward achieving
this goal.

HEPATITIS D
Etiology

HDV, the smallest known animal virus, is considered defective because
it cannot produce infection without concurrent HBV infection. The
36-­nm-­diameter virus is incapable of making its own coat protein; its
outer coat is composed of excess HBsAg from HBV. The inner core of the
virus is single-­stranded circular RNA that expresses the HDV antigen.

Epidemiology

HDV can cause an infection at the same time as the initial HBV infection (coinfection), or HDV can infect a person who is already infected
with HBV (superinfection). Transmission usually occurs by intrafamilial or intimate contact in areas of high prevalence, which are primarily
developing countries (see Table 406.1). In areas of low prevalence, such
as the United States, the parenteral route is far more common. HDV
infections are uncommon in children in the United States but must be
considered when ALF occurs. The incubation period for HDV superinfection is approximately 2-­8 weeks; with coinfection, the incubation
period is similar to that of HBV infection.

Pathogenesis

Liver pathology in HDV-­associated hepatitis has no distinguishing features except that damage is usually severe. In contrast to HBV, HDV
causes injury directly by cytopathic mechanisms. The most severe cases
of HBV infection appear to result from coinfection of HBV and HDV.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2472 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 406.11  Completed Studies with Direct-­Acting Antiviral Combinations in Children with Chronic Hepatitis C Virus
Infection
THERAPY (DURATION)

HCV GENOTYPE

PARTICIPANT AGE
IN YEARS (N)

YEAR

SVR12 (%)

Ledipasvir 90 mg + sofosbuvir 400 mg (12 wk)

1

12-­17 (100)

2016

98

Sofosbuvir 400 mg + ribavirin (variable)

2 or 3

12-­17 (52)

2017

98

Sofosbuvir 400 mg + ribavirin (variable)

1 or 3

5-­18 (35)

2017

97

Ledipasvir 45 mg + sofosbuvir 200 mg (12 wk)

1,4-­6

12-­17 (144)

2018

99

Ledipasvir 45 mg + sofosbuvir 200 mg (12 wk)

1

6-­11 (90)

2018

98

Ledipasvir 90 mg + sofosbuvir 400 mg (12 wk)

4

12-­18 (40)

2018

100

Ledipasvir + sofosbuvir ± ribavirin (variable)

7-­18 (22)

2018

91

Ledipasvir 22.5 mg + sofosbuvir 100 mg (12 wk)

4

0.5 (1)

2018

100

Ledipasvir 45 mg + sofosbuvir 200 mg (12 wk)

4

6-­12 (20)

2018

95

Ledipasvir + sofosbuvir (variable)

1 or 4

6-­18 (9)

2019

100

Ledipasvir 90 mg + sofosbuvir 400 mg (12 wk)

4

11-­17.5 (51)

2019

100

Ledipasvir 90 mg + sofosbuvir 400 mg (8 wk)

1

12-­17 (14)

2019

100

Ledipasvir 90 mg + sofosbuvir 400 mg (12 wk)

4

13, 16 (2)

2019

100

Ledipasvir 180 mg + sofosbuvir 400 mg (12 wk)

not performed

12-­18 (46)

2020

98

Ledipasvir 45 mg + sofosbuvir 200 mg (8 or 12 wk)

4

3-­6 (22)

2020

100

Ledipasvir 90 mg + sofosbuvir 400 mg (12 wk)

4

9-­12 (100)

2020

100

Sofosbuvir 400 mg + ribavirin (variable)

1 or 4

3-­11 (54)

2020

98

Ledipasvir + sofosbuvir (variable)

1 or 4

3 to <6 (34)

2020

97

Glecaprevir 300 mg + pibrentasvir 120 mg (8-­16 wk)

1-­4

12-­17 (47)

2020

100

Elbasvir + grazoprevir (12 wk)

1 or 4

3-­17 (57)

2020

100

Sofosbuvir + velpatasvir (12 wk)

1-­4, 6

3-­17 (216)

2020

92

Ledipasvir 45 mg + sofosbuvir 200 mg (8 wk)

4

4-­10 (30)

2020

100

Sofosbuvir + velpatasvir (12 wk)

1-­6

3-­17 (160)

2021

92

Glecaprevir + pibrentasvir (8 wk)

1-­6

3-­12 (81)

2021

96

Clinical Manifestations

The symptoms of hepatitis D are similar to, but usually more severe than,
those of the other hepatotropic viruses. The clinical outcome for HDV
infection depends on the mechanism of infection. In coinfection, acute
hepatitis, which is much more severe than for HBV alone, is common,
but the risk of developing chronic hepatitis is low. In superinfection, acute
illness is rare and chronic hepatitis is common. The risk of ALF is highest
with superinfection. Hepatitis D should be considered in any child who
experiences ALF.

Diagnosis

HDV has not been isolated, and no circulating antigen has been identified. The diagnosis is made by detecting IgM antibody to HDV; the
antibodies to HDV develop approximately 2-­4 weeks after coinfection
and approximately 10 weeks after a superinfection. A test for anti-­HDV
antibody is commercially available. PCR assays for viral RNA are available as research tools (see Table 406.2).

Treatment

The treatment is based on supportive measures once an infection is
identified. There are no specific HDV-­targeted treatments to date. The
treatment is mostly based on controlling and treating HBV infection,
without which HDV cannot induce hepatitis. Small research studies
suggest that IFN is the preferred treatment regimen, but ongoing studies still seek the ideal management strategy, and the regimen should be
personalized for each patient.

Prevention

There is no vaccine for hepatitis D. Because HDV replication cannot
occur without hepatitis B coinfection, immunization against HBV also
prevents HDV infection. Hepatitis B vaccines and HBIG are used for
the same indications as for hepatitis B alone.

HEPATITIS E
Etiology

HEV has been cloned using molecular techniques. This RNA virus has
a nonenveloped sphere shape with spikes and is similar in structure to
the caliciviruses.

Epidemiology

Hepatitis E is the epidemic form of viral hepatitis. Transmission is fecal-­
oral (often waterborne) and is associated with shedding of 27-­to 34-­nm
particles in the stool (see Table 406.1). The highest prevalence of HEV
infection has been reported in the Indian subcontinent, the Middle East,
Southeast Asia, and Mexico, especially in areas with poor sanitation. The
prevalence, however, appears to be increasing in the United States and
other developed countries and has been postulated to be the most common cause of acute hepatitis and jaundice in the world. The mean incubation period is approximately 40 days (range: 15-­60 days).

Pathogenesis

HEV appears to act as a cytopathic virus. The pathologic findings are
similar to those of the other hepatitis viruses.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 406 u Viral Hepatitis 2473
Clinical Manifestations

The clinical illness associated with HEV infection is similar to that of
HAV but is often more severe. As with HAV, chronic illness does not
occur—the sole exception noted to date is chronic hepatitis E occurring in immunosuppressed patients (e.g., post-­transplant). In addition
to often causing a more severe episode than HAV, HEV tends to affect
older patients, with a peak age between 15 and 34 years. HEV is a major
pathogen in pregnant women, in whom it causes ALF with a high fatality incidence. HEV could also lead to decompensation of preexisting
chronic liver disease.

Diagnosis

Recombinant DNA technology has resulted in the development of
antibodies to HEV particles, and IgM and IgG assays are available to
distinguish between acute and resolved infections (see Table 406.3).
IgM antibody to viral antigen becomes positive after approximately 1
week of illness. Viral RNA can be detected in stool and serum by PCR.

Prevention

A recombinant hepatitis E vaccine is highly effective in adults. No
evidence suggests that Ig is effective in preventing HEV infections. Ig
pooled from patients in endemic areas might prove to be effective.

Acute Hepatitis of Unknown Etiology

In 2021 and 2022 multiple medical centers in over 35 countries
reported cases of acute and often severe hepatitis. Clinical manifestations included jaundice, emesis, diarrhea, and hepatomegaly; fever was
not always present. Liver enzyme (ALT, AST) and bilirubin levels were
elevated in most; ∼77% had hepatic failure requiring liver transplantation. Adenovirus (type 41) was detected by PCR in blood but not consistently in liver biopsy specimens (by immune histopathology, electron
microscopy, or PCR). Adeno-associated virus 2 has been recovered in
both plasma and liver tissue from most patients. A collaborative registry from 25 centers reported a median age of onset of 41 months (range
<1-­16 years) with ∼27% requiring intensive care unit (ICU)–level
care. In that cohort, only 22% had evidence of adenovirus infection.
The WHO working case definition is noted in Table 406.12. Treatment
is supportive, as indicated for other etiologies of acute hepatitis and
hepatic failure. The use of corticosteroids is controversial (especially
with adenoviremia); some centers have used cidofovir, an inhibitor of
viral (adenovirus) DNA polymerases.
Until further clarification of the etiology, the initial evaluation must
include the traditional viral, immune, and toxic etiologies of hepatitis
and acute hepatic failure (see Table 406.2)

APPROACH TO ACUTE OR CHRONIC HEPATITIS

Identifying deterioration of the patient with acute hepatitis and the
development of ALF is a major contribution of the primary care provider (Fig. 406.6). If ALF is identified, the clinician should immediately
refer the patient to a transplantation center; this can be lifesaving.
Table 406.12  WHO Working Case Definitions of Severe
Acute Hepatitis of Unknown Etiology
• Confirmed case: Not available at present
• Probable case: A person presenting with an acute hepatitis
(nonhepatitis A-­E1) with serum transaminase >500 IU/L (AST or
ALT), who is 16 yr and younger, since October 1, 2021
• Epidemiologically linked: A person presenting with an acute
hepatitis (nonhepatitis A-­E1) of any age who is a close contact of a
probable case, since October 1, 2021
1If hepatitis A-­E serology results are pending but other criteria are met, these can be

reported and will be classified as “pending classification.” Cases with other explanations
for their clinical presentation are discarded. Delta testing is not required, as it is only
undertaken in persons who are HBsAg positive to establish presence of coinfection.
From World Health Organization: Disease Outbreak News. Acute hepatitis of unknown
aetiology in children – Multi-­country. Geneva: World Health Organization, July 12, 2022.
Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-­outbreak-­news/item/2022-­DON400.

Once chronic infection is identified, close follow-­up and referral to
a pediatric hepatologist is recommended to enroll the patient in appropriate treatment trials. Treatment of chronic HBV in children should
preferably be delivered within, or using data from, pediatric controlled
trials, as indications, timing, regimen, and outcomes remain to be
defined and cannot be extrapolated from adult data. New DAA therapies have changed the approach to treatment of HCV in children as
young as 3 years of age. All patients with chronic viral hepatitis should
avoid as much as possible further insult to the liver; HAV and HBV
vaccines are recommended. Patients must avoid alcohol consumption
and obesity, and they should exercise care when taking new medications, including nonprescription drugs and herbal medications.
International adoption and ease of travel continue to change the epidemiology of hepatitis viruses. In the United States, chronic HBV and
HCV have a high prevalence among international adoptee patients;
vigilance is required to establish early diagnosis in order to offer appropriate treatment and prophylactic measures to limit viral spread.
Chronic hepatitis can be a stigmatizing disease for children and their
families. The pediatrician should offer, with proactive advocacy, appropriate support for them and needed education for their social circle.
Scientific data and information about support groups are available for
families on the websites for the American Liver Foundation (www.liv
erfoundation.org) and the North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition (www.naspghan.org) and
through pediatric gastroenterology centers.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.
Jaundice

“Safety tests”
and physical
exam
PT or INR
Glucose
NH3
Renal
CBC
Neuro status

Liver
synthetic
dysfunction

Yes

Refer to
transplantation
center

No
Evidence of
chronic liver
disease

Yes

Ascites
Varices
Hepatosplenomegaly No
Spider angiomas
Clubbing
Failure to thrive

Refer to
transplantation
center
Close
monitoring
Physical exam
Lab tests

Viral serologies Negative
Anti-HAV IgM
Anti-HCV
Anti-HBs
Anti-HBc IgM
HBsAg

Universal
Precautions

Refer to
transplantation
center

HCV
Refer to Peds
Gastroenterology

Yes
Deterioration

No

Prophylaxis

HAV

Refer to Peds
Gastroenterology
Prophylaxis

Positive
HBV

Labs at 6 mo

HBsAg ( )
Anti-HBs ( )
Chronic carrier

HBsAg ( )
Anti-HBs (+)
Recovery

Refer to Peds
Gastroenterology

Fig. 406.6 Algorithm showing the clinical approach to viral hepatitis.

CBC, Complete blood count with differential; HAV, hepatitis A virus;
HBc, hepatitis B core; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; IgM, immunoglobulin M; INR, international normalization ratio; NH3, ammonia; PT, prothrombin time.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2474 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 407

Liver Abscess
Hilary E. Miller-­Handley and
Joshua K. Schaffzin
Liver abscesses typically have one of two infectious etiologies: pyogenic, meaning involving bacteria, or parasitic, such as with amebiasis, ascariasis, or toxocariasis. Liver abscesses are typically difficult to
detect because of their nonspecific presentation, and diagnosis requires
a high index of suspicion. Radiographic diagnosis is often contributory,
but further confirmation is often indicated to differentiate infectious
abscess from hydatid cyst and noninfectious causes, such as malignancy (primary hepatic or metastasis). The differential diagnosis also
includes traumatic injury (including procedural, such as a misplaced
vascular catheter).
Pyogenic liver abscesses (PLA) are uncommon in children but have
been reported in all ages. Bacteria can invade the liver through one of
four sources: hematogenously through the hepatic artery (e.g., in the
presence of bacteremia), through the biliary tract, through the portal
vein (portal sepsis), and directly by contiguous infection. In neonates,
a portal vein source can include the umbilical vein (e.g., in the presence of omphalitis or injury caused by an umbilical venous catheter).
PLA of unknown source are classified as cryptogenic. Children with
hepatobiliary malignancy, liver transplantation, primary immune
deficiency disorders (i.e., chronic granulomatous disease [CGD] and
hyper-­IgE syndrome), and gastrointestinal pathology are at increased
risk for a liver abscess. Diabetes mellitus is a risk factor associated with
PLA in adults; however, it is not as clearly linked in children. PLA are
also uncommon in adults, although the annual incidence is higher in
Southeast Asia (estimated 17.6/100,000 population) than in the United
States or Europe (estimated 2-­5/100,000 population). They tend to
occur more frequently in males and with older age.
Clinical signs and symptoms of PLA are nonspecific and can
include fever, chills, malaise, fatigue, nausea, abdominal pain (with
or without right upper quadrant tenderness), and hepatomegaly;
jaundice is uncommon. The most common abnormal laboratory

A

findings are elevated inflammatory markers and hypoalbuminemia.
Hepatic function testing can be abnormally elevated, and leukocytosis is common. Radiologic confirmation is often obtained by ultrasound or CT (Fig. 407.1). Chest x-­rays may show elevation of the
right hemidiaphragm with a right pleural effusion. Solitary lesions of
the right hepatic lobe are most common, although solitary abscesses
can appear in any hepatic lobe or as multiple disseminated lesions
(such as with disseminated candidiasis, bartonellosis, or, rarely,
brucellosis).
Cultures of pyogenic liver abscesses are often polymicrobial. In children, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus spp., enteric gram-­negative
organisms (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae), and anaerobic
organisms are most common. In immunocompromised children, particularly those with CGD, Serratia spp. and Aspergillus spp. are also
commonly identified. Among adults, E. coli and K. pneumoniae are
the most common organisms, and aerobic gram-­positive and anaerobic organisms are less common. Blood cultures are positive in about
25–35% of individuals with a PLA and may be helpful to determine a
therapy plan.
Because of the wide range of causative organisms (i.e., aerobic
gram-­negative, S. aureus, and anaerobic organisms) empiric antimicrobial treatment needs to be broad. Potential empiric antimicrobial choices include piperacillin-­tazobactam, ampicillin-­sulbactam,
or metronidazole with a third-­generation cephalosporin. Depending on local prevalence and degree of suspicion, vancomycin may
be added to cover methicillin-­resistant S. aureus. Therapy should
be modified based on culture susceptibilities. Treatment duration
is not standardized and should be based on fever resolution, clinical and inflammatory marker improvement, and serial ultrasound
monitoring. Many sources recommend completing 4-­6 weeks of
therapy, with the first 2 weeks administered parentally. Depending on the size and extent of the lesion(s), percutaneous or surgical drainage may be added to obtain samples for cultures and to
shorten illness duration. Percutaneous options include single-­pass
needle or catheter aspiration, or insertion of a continuously draining catheter. In adults, unless there is evidence of rupture or spread,
percutaneous drainage should be attempted first for large lesions
(≥5-­7 cm in diameter). Numerous case series of PLA in premature
infants described complete resolution with antibiotic therapy alone,
and some advocate for this as an initial approach in smaller lesions.
Resolution can be monitored by trending inflammatory markers
and/or serial imaging.

B
Fig. 407.1 CT (A and B) and ultrasound (C) images of

C

D

E

a cryptogenic liver abscess in a 16-­yr-­old male without
known risk factors. The lesion was drained percutaneously, and cultures grew multiple anaerobic organisms
(Fusobacterium nucleatum and Parvimonas micra). He
was successfully treated with 2 wk of parenteral followed
by 4 wk of oral therapy and was followed with serial ultrasounds 5 days (D) and 34 days (E) after drainage.
(Courtesy Dr. Alexander Towbin, Cincinnati Children’s
Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 408 u Liver Disease Associated with Systemic Disorders

2475

Chapter 408

Liver Disease Associated
with Systemic Disorders
Batul Kaj-­Carbaidwala and
William F. Balistreri

A

Liver involvement in systemic illnesses can be the result of the primary
pathologic process, secondary to inflammatory or immune responses,
or as a complication of therapy.

INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE

B
Fig. 407.2 Amebic abscess. A, Sonogram demonstrates a hypoecho-

genic mass in the right lobe of the liver with a more hypoechoic surrounding rim. B, CT scan demonstrates a low-­attenuation mass in the
right lobe of the liver with a prominent halo. (From Kuhn JP, Slovis TL,
Haller JO. Caffrey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 10th ed. Philadelphia:
Mosby, 2004: p. 1473.)

Amebic liver abscess (ALA) is the most common extraintestinal manifestation of Entamoeba histolytica infection. Although
more common in endemic areas, cases can be diagnosed in the
United States among travelers to, and immigrants from, endemic
areas. Presentation can be delayed by months to years. ALA is more
common among adults aged 18-­55 years, and males predominate.
Amoebic trophozoites invade colonic mucosa and reach the liver
through the portal circulation. Patients may not have an associated
colitis. Fever, right upper quadrant pain, anorexia, and weight loss
are often present. Laboratory evaluation typically reveals a leukocytosis without eosinophilia and increased alkaline phosphatase.
Ultrasonography or CT demonstrates the abscess (Fig. 407.2).
Diagnosis of ALA is often confirmed by serum ELISA. Serology
is considered reliable in nonendemic areas but can be prone to false
negatives early in the infection and cannot distinguish active infection from previous exposure. Testing for E. histolytica presence in
stool is specific but not very sensitive, and patients with ALA may
not have detectable organisms in their stool. Most sensitive and
specific among stool assays is polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
followed by stool antigen detection. Least reliable is microscopy
because E. histolytica cannot easily be distinguished microscopically from its clinically benign relatives Entamoeba dispar and Entamoeba moshkovskii.
Before effective treatment, ALA-­associated mortality was high; it
has since decreased significantly. Treatment involves 7-­10 days of
a nitroimidazole (most commonly metronidazole) to kill trophozoites, followed by 7 days of a luminal agent (such as paromomycin) to kill colonic cysts. Patients with large abscesses (≥5-­7 cm in
diameter) may benefit from percutaneous aspiration in addition to
medical therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Hepatobiliary involvement in patients with inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD, see Chapter 382) is relatively common; up to 30%
of patients will have elevated liver enzymes, and 5% may develop
chronic hepatobiliary diseases. Autoimmune diseases (primary
sclerosing cholangitis [PSC], autoimmune hepatitis [AIH], PSC-­
AIH overlap syndrome, and immunoglobulin G4 [IgG4] sclerosing
cholangitis) are commonly associated with IBD. Drug-­induced liver
injury has been associated with both induction and maintenance
therapies (thiopurines, methotrexate, 5-­ASA, biologics). IBD-­related
malnutrition can lead to hepatic steatosis and cholelithiasis. Poor
intestinal health increases the risk of developing hepatic abscesses
secondary to bacterial translocation and systemic infection. Hypercoagulability in IBD can predispose to infarction, Budd-­Chiari, and
portal venous thrombosis). Figure 408.1 shows a diagnostic approach
in IBD patients with abnormal liver tests.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is the most common hepatobiliary disease associated with IBD, occurring in 2–8% of adult patients
with ulcerative colitis and less often in Crohn disease. Up to 90% of
patients with PSC have ulcerative colitis. In children with IBD, PSC
typically occurs in the second decade of life, at a median age of 14 years.
PSC is characterized by progressive inflammation and fibrosis of intra-­
and extrahepatic bile ducts, with eventual progression to cirrhosis and
end-­stage liver disease. Small-­and large-­duct disease differs in phenotype, with small-­duct PSC reported to confer lower mortality and
incidence of cholangiocarcinoma and longer transplant-­free survival.
Concomitant PSC-­IBD is a distinct entity with multifactorial pathogenesis, including genetic predisposition, altered intestinal microbiome,
and immune-­mediated processes. Distinguishing features of PSC-­IBD
include pancolitis, rectal sparing and backwash ileitis in patients with
UC-­PSC and extensive colitis in Crohn-­PSC. The clinical course is
milder but with subclinical persistent intestinal inflammation. Presentation of PSC is typically asymptomatic with elevated liver enzymes
(particularly serum alkaline phosphatase and gamma glutamyl transferase) and bilirubin. Ten percent to 15% of adults present with symptoms of anorexia, weight loss, pruritus, fatigue, right upper quadrant
pain, and jaundice; intermittent acute cholangitis can also occur. Diagnosis is made with cholangiography demonstrating characteristic multifocal stricturing and dilation of the intra-­and extrahepatic bile ducts
(referred to as beading). Liver biopsy reveals periductal fibrosis and
inflammation, fibroobliterative cholangitis, and portal fibrosis. Biopsy
is not necessary for diagnosis but can be helpful when imaging findings
are not clear (e.g., in small-­duct disease) or when overlap syndrome
is suspected. There are no approved pharmacologic therapies for PSC.
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), corticosteroids, immunomodulators,
and oral antibiotics (such as vancomycin) have been studied, without
clear improvement in survival or long-­term outcomes. UDCA is widely
used in children with PSC; it may improve pruritus and lab parameters;
however, it has not been shown to alter the clinical course. Endoscopic
intervention (stents, dilatation) for dominant strictures is reserved for
patients with symptoms or complications of biliary obstruction. Liver

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 408 u Liver Disease Associated with Systemic Disorders

2475

Chapter 408

Liver Disease Associated
with Systemic Disorders
Batul Kaj-­Carbaidwala and
William F. Balistreri

A

Liver involvement in systemic illnesses can be the result of the primary
pathologic process, secondary to inflammatory or immune responses,
or as a complication of therapy.

INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE

B
Fig. 407.2 Amebic abscess. A, Sonogram demonstrates a hypoecho-

genic mass in the right lobe of the liver with a more hypoechoic surrounding rim. B, CT scan demonstrates a low-­attenuation mass in the
right lobe of the liver with a prominent halo. (From Kuhn JP, Slovis TL,
Haller JO. Caffrey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 10th ed. Philadelphia:
Mosby, 2004: p. 1473.)

Amebic liver abscess (ALA) is the most common extraintestinal manifestation of Entamoeba histolytica infection. Although
more common in endemic areas, cases can be diagnosed in the
United States among travelers to, and immigrants from, endemic
areas. Presentation can be delayed by months to years. ALA is more
common among adults aged 18-­55 years, and males predominate.
Amoebic trophozoites invade colonic mucosa and reach the liver
through the portal circulation. Patients may not have an associated
colitis. Fever, right upper quadrant pain, anorexia, and weight loss
are often present. Laboratory evaluation typically reveals a leukocytosis without eosinophilia and increased alkaline phosphatase.
Ultrasonography or CT demonstrates the abscess (Fig. 407.2).
Diagnosis of ALA is often confirmed by serum ELISA. Serology
is considered reliable in nonendemic areas but can be prone to false
negatives early in the infection and cannot distinguish active infection from previous exposure. Testing for E. histolytica presence in
stool is specific but not very sensitive, and patients with ALA may
not have detectable organisms in their stool. Most sensitive and
specific among stool assays is polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
followed by stool antigen detection. Least reliable is microscopy
because E. histolytica cannot easily be distinguished microscopically from its clinically benign relatives Entamoeba dispar and Entamoeba moshkovskii.
Before effective treatment, ALA-­associated mortality was high; it
has since decreased significantly. Treatment involves 7-­10 days of
a nitroimidazole (most commonly metronidazole) to kill trophozoites, followed by 7 days of a luminal agent (such as paromomycin) to kill colonic cysts. Patients with large abscesses (≥5-­7 cm in
diameter) may benefit from percutaneous aspiration in addition to
medical therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Hepatobiliary involvement in patients with inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD, see Chapter 382) is relatively common; up to 30%
of patients will have elevated liver enzymes, and 5% may develop
chronic hepatobiliary diseases. Autoimmune diseases (primary
sclerosing cholangitis [PSC], autoimmune hepatitis [AIH], PSC-­
AIH overlap syndrome, and immunoglobulin G4 [IgG4] sclerosing
cholangitis) are commonly associated with IBD. Drug-­induced liver
injury has been associated with both induction and maintenance
therapies (thiopurines, methotrexate, 5-­ASA, biologics). IBD-­related
malnutrition can lead to hepatic steatosis and cholelithiasis. Poor
intestinal health increases the risk of developing hepatic abscesses
secondary to bacterial translocation and systemic infection. Hypercoagulability in IBD can predispose to infarction, Budd-­Chiari, and
portal venous thrombosis). Figure 408.1 shows a diagnostic approach
in IBD patients with abnormal liver tests.
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is the most common hepatobiliary disease associated with IBD, occurring in 2–8% of adult patients
with ulcerative colitis and less often in Crohn disease. Up to 90% of
patients with PSC have ulcerative colitis. In children with IBD, PSC
typically occurs in the second decade of life, at a median age of 14 years.
PSC is characterized by progressive inflammation and fibrosis of intra-­
and extrahepatic bile ducts, with eventual progression to cirrhosis and
end-­stage liver disease. Small-­and large-­duct disease differs in phenotype, with small-­duct PSC reported to confer lower mortality and
incidence of cholangiocarcinoma and longer transplant-­free survival.
Concomitant PSC-­IBD is a distinct entity with multifactorial pathogenesis, including genetic predisposition, altered intestinal microbiome,
and immune-­mediated processes. Distinguishing features of PSC-­IBD
include pancolitis, rectal sparing and backwash ileitis in patients with
UC-­PSC and extensive colitis in Crohn-­PSC. The clinical course is
milder but with subclinical persistent intestinal inflammation. Presentation of PSC is typically asymptomatic with elevated liver enzymes
(particularly serum alkaline phosphatase and gamma glutamyl transferase) and bilirubin. Ten percent to 15% of adults present with symptoms of anorexia, weight loss, pruritus, fatigue, right upper quadrant
pain, and jaundice; intermittent acute cholangitis can also occur. Diagnosis is made with cholangiography demonstrating characteristic multifocal stricturing and dilation of the intra-­and extrahepatic bile ducts
(referred to as beading). Liver biopsy reveals periductal fibrosis and
inflammation, fibroobliterative cholangitis, and portal fibrosis. Biopsy
is not necessary for diagnosis but can be helpful when imaging findings
are not clear (e.g., in small-­duct disease) or when overlap syndrome
is suspected. There are no approved pharmacologic therapies for PSC.
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), corticosteroids, immunomodulators,
and oral antibiotics (such as vancomycin) have been studied, without
clear improvement in survival or long-­term outcomes. UDCA is widely
used in children with PSC; it may improve pruritus and lab parameters;
however, it has not been shown to alter the clinical course. Endoscopic
intervention (stents, dilatation) for dominant strictures is reserved for
patients with symptoms or complications of biliary obstruction. Liver

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2476 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Abnormal liver tests in IBD patient
First step:
Persistent
abnormality?

Flare or recent surgery?

Yes

No

Follow up 3 months and reassess

Persistent
abnormalities

Normal

STOP

Second
step:
Consider
chronic liver
disease

Hepatocellular pattern

Cholestatic pattern

Steatosis
DILI
AIH
PSC (rare)

Third step:
Assessment

PSC
NRH
Granulomatous hepatitis
Amyloidosis

Serological tests, autoantibodies,
ultrasound, transient elastography, MRCP

Liver biopsy

Fig. 408.1 Algorithm showing diagnostic approach to elevated liver enzymes in patients with IBD. AIH, Autoimmune hepatitis; DILI, drug induced

liver injury; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; NRH, nodular regenerative hyperplasia; PSC, primary sclerosing cholangitis.
(From Restellini S, Chazouillères O, Frossard JL. Hepatic manifestations of inflammatory bowel diseases. Liver Int. 2017;37[4]:475–489. Fig 3)

transplantation remains the only definitive treatment for PSC, with
high 5-­year survival rates but a relapse rate of ∼20% in the allograft.
Other management considerations include enteral supplementation
to mitigate malnutrition related to chronic liver disease and antibiotic
treatment of ascending cholangitis.
PSC is strongly associated with hepatobiliary malignancies (cholangiocarcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, gallbladder carcinoma)
with a reported incidence varying between 9% and 14% in adults.
Concomitant PSC-­IBD also confers increased risk of colorectal carcinoma. There are no universal surveillance guidelines for children
with PSC-­IBD given the rarity of malignancy. In adults, ultrasound
or MRCP with or without serum CA 19-­9 assessment every 6-­12
months are generally recommended.
PSC-­autoimmune hepatitis overlap is a less common, unique phenotype with clinical and serologic features of AIH, as well as pruritus,
cholestasis, histologic bile duct abnormalities, and/or abnormal cholangiography. Prevalence is estimated to be ∼2% of children with IBD.
Immunosuppressive medication (corticosteroids, azathioprine) is the
mainstay of therapy for PSC-­AIH overlap syndrome; however, long-­
term outcomes are not as favorable as in AIH alone. Long-­term survival in children with overlap syndrome appears to be similar to those
with PSC, with an overall median (50%) survival with native liver of
12.7 years.

CRITICAL ILLNESS

Mechanisms of liver injury in patients with sepsis/critical illness
include hypoxic hepatitis because of ischemia and shock, cholestasis
related to altered bile flow, drug-­induced hepatocellular damage, and
distinct pathologies, such as secondary sclerosing cholangitis. The
management of critical illness–associated liver injury involves prompt
recognition, early initiation of antimicrobials, and otherwise supportive care.

Bacterial sepsis should be excluded in any critically ill patient who
develops cholestasis in the absence of markedly elevated serum aminotransferase or alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels, even when other signs
of infection are not evident. Gram-­negative bacteremia is most common in these patients, in particular Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Lipopolysaccharides, bacterial
endotoxins, and proinflammatory cytokines are thought to produce
cholestatic liver injury either by impairing bile formation in hepatocytes or altering bile flow via disruption of canalicular transporters.
Liver biopsy shows intrahepatic cholestasis with little or no hepatocyte
necrosis. Kupffer cell hyperplasia and an increase in inflammatory cells
are also common.
Secondary sclerosing cholangitis is a distinct entity in critical illness characterized by inflammation, fibrosis, and destruction of the
bile ducts that can quickly progress to cirrhosis. It is thought to occur
because of the vulnerability of biliary epithelium to hypoxia, leading to
apoptosis or necrosis. Major risk factors include severe systemic hypotension, trauma, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and systemic
inflammatory response syndrome.

CELIAC DISEASE

Celiac disease (see Chapter 384) is an autoimmune condition triggered by ingestion of gluten. Liver involvement in patients with celiac
disease presents either as mild to moderate hepatitis with or without
prolonged prothrombin time, or secondary to associated autoimmune
disorders. In the former, histology demonstrates mild periportal and
lobular inflammation. Celiac hepatitis refers to liver injury in patients
with confirmed celiac disease in whom serum biochemistries and histology normalizes after establishment of a gluten-­free diet. The exact
mechanism remains unclear; it has been proposed that increased intestinal permeability may allow toxins, cytokines, and antigens to reach
the liver and produce liver injury through release of proinflammatory

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 408 u Liver Disease Associated with Systemic Disorders

2477

Table 408.1  Host-­and Parenteral Nutrition–Related Factors in Development of Intestinal Failure–Associated Liver Disease
FACTORS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF INTESTINAL FAILURE–ASSOCIATED LIVER DISEASE
HOST

TOTAL PARENTERAL NUTRITION

• Incompletely expressed enzyme activity
• Inadequate bile salt uptake and excretion
• Liver injury from endotoxins, inflammatory cytokines
• Impaired biliary excretion
• Prolonged parenteral nutrition (PN) exposure
• SBBO, dilated bowel, mucosal atrophy → increased bacterial
translocation → recurrent sepsis / direct endotoxin mediated
liver injury
• Impaired enterohepatic circulation
• Decreased cholecystokinin release → biliary stasis
• Extensive small bowel resection → more severe hepatic fibrosis

EXCESS MACRONUTRIENTS

• Glucose → Hyperinsulinism → Steatosis
• Lipid minimization strategies may
require additional dextrose calories

AMINO ACID DEFICIENCY

• Decreased taurine conjugation of bile
acids
• Choline deficiency worsens steatosis

LIPIDS

• Hepatotoxic phytosterols in soy-based
lipids
• Omega-­6 LCPUFA is proinflammatory
• Antioxidant imbalance

MINERALS / TRACE ELEMENTS

• Mg, Cu, Al accumulate in cholestasis
causing hepatocellular injury

SBBO, small bowel bacterial overgrowth; LCPUFA, long-­chain polyunsaturated fatty acids; Mg, manganese; Cu, copper; Al, aluminum.

mediators. Autoimmune liver diseases (AIH, primary sclerosing cholangitis) have been associated with celiac disease; these are best treated
with combination of gluten-­free diet and immunosuppressive medications. Children with persistent, unexplained elevation of serum aminotransferase levels should be evaluated for celiac disease, given up to 9%
reported incidence of celiac disease in this setting.

CARDIAC DISEASE

Cardio-­hepatic interactions are complex and bidirectional; congestive
heart failure (see Chapter 491), congenital cyanotic heart disease (see
Chapters 475-­480) and acute ischemic shock can all lead to liver injury.
There exist distinct cardiac disorders associated with cirrhosis and
end-­stage liver disease. Various mechanisms are thought to contribute to liver injury in cardiac disease: (1) elevated central venous pressure transmitted to hepatic veins and ultimately hepatocytes results in
centrilobular hepatocellular atrophy (congestive hepatopathy); and (2)
decreased cardiac output leads to decreased hepatic arterial blood flow,
causing centrilobular hepatocellular necrosis due to ischemia. Congenital cyanotic heart disease (hypoplastic left heart syndrome and coarctation of the aorta) are occasionally associated with hepatic necrosis
or acute liver failure. Patients with hepatic manifestations of cardiac
disease may present with lactic acidosis, elevated aminotransferase
levels, cholestasis, prolonged prothrombin time, hyperammonemia,
and hypoglycemia because of impaired hepatocellular metabolism.
Jaundice, tender hepatomegaly, and, in some cases, ascites and splenomegaly can also occur.
Acute cardiogenic liver injury (shock liver or ischemic hepatitis) occurs after circulatory disturbances and can cause a dramatic
rise in serum aminotransferase levels to >1,000 units/mL. These
rapidly return to normal when perfusion and cardiac function
improve, with delayed-­onset hyperbilirubinemia that can persist
for days to weeks.
Fontan-­associated liver disease (FALD) is a distinct clinical entity
that occurs in patients who have undergone surgical palliation for
single ventricle heart disease. Chronically elevated systemic venous
pressure after the Fontan procedure causes venous congestion and
impaired hepatic blood flow. Patients almost invariably develop progressive hepatic fibrosis, which can lead to cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Annual risk of HCC in
FALD-­cirrhosis is reported as 1.5–5%; cases have been reported of
HCC occurring in early adolescence.
The aim of therapy in all causes of cardiac-­associated liver disease is to improve cardiac output, reduce systemic venous pressures,
and correct hypoxemia. Even mild liver disease may increase mortality after cardiac surgery, with poorer outcomes in patients with
progressive liver disease. Combined heart-­liver transplant should
be considered in Fontan patients with evidence of cirrhosis, especially if decompensated.

INTESTINAL FAILURE ASSOCIATED LIVER DISEASE

Intestinal failure–associated liver disease (IFALD; previously referred
to as parenteral nutrition–associated liver disease) in children is characterized by progressive cholestasis, biliary cirrhosis, and steatohepatitis (see Chapters 385.6 and 386). Advanced IFALD is one of the most
important factors contributing to mortality of children on long-­term
parenteral nutrition (PN) and is a major indication for intestinal and
multivisceral transplantation. Host-­and PN-­related factors contribute
to its development (Table 408.1). The pathogenesis of IFALD is multifactorial; sepsis, bacterial translocation, excess caloric intake, high
amounts of protein, fat, or carbohydrate, nutrient deficiencies, and toxicities related to components such as manganese, aluminum, and copper can all contribute to hepatic injury. The type (soy-­based), volume,
and frequency of lipid administered are important risk factors. Prolonged enteral fasting compromises mucosal integrity and increases
bacterial mucosal translocation. Fasting also decreases release of cholecystokinin, which leads to biliary stasis, cholestasis, and formation of
biliary sludge and gallstones, which can exacerbate hepatic dysfunction. Sepsis, especially gram-­negative bacteremia, can also exacerbate
liver damage. Clinical manifestations range from mildly elevated serum
aminotransferase levels to severe cholestatic liver injury, cirrhosis with
portal hypertension and, rarely, hepatocellular carcinoma. Histologic
findings include macrovesicular steatosis, canalicular cholestasis, and
periportal inflammation.
In addition to cholestasis, biliary complications of intravenous (IV)
nutrition include cholelithiasis and the development of biliary sludge,
associated with thick, inspissated gallbladder contents. Hepatic steatosis or elevated serum aminotransferase levels can also occur in the
absence of cholestasis, particularly in older children. This is generally
mild and resolves after total PN (TPN) is discontinued. Serum bilirubin and bile acid levels remain within the normal range. Other causes
of liver disease should also be considered, especially if evidence of
hepatic dysfunction persists despite weaning from TPN and initiating
enteral feeds. If serum ALP or aminotransferase levels remain elevated,
liver biopsy may be necessary for accurate diagnosis.
Strategies in the management of IFALD aim to prevent or reverse the
disease (Table 408.2). General goals include early initiation of enteral
nutrition, minimization of fasting, and advancement of enteral feeds
as tolerated. Improved TPN solutions that meet the specific needs of
neonates can prevent deficiencies and toxicities. Introducing alternate
sources of IV lipid, including fish oil and olive oil to provide more
omega-­3 fatty acids (and less of the harmful omega-­6 fatty acids), have
been beneficial. Ursodeoxycholic acid is widely used and may be beneficial in improving bile flow.

CYSTIC FIBROSIS

Cystic fibrosis (CF; see Chapter 454) is an autosomal recessive
genetic disorder characterized by impaired chloride transport

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2478 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 408.2  Evidence-­Based IFALD Prevention and
Treatment Strategies for Children on TPN
PREVENTION

EXAMPLES

Advancing enteral nutrition

Prokinetic and anti-diarrheal agents to
improve enteral tolerance
Medical induction of intestinal
adaptation, i.e., glucagon-­like
peptide 2 (GLP-­2) agonist
Surgical lengthening procedures; serial
transverse enteroplasty (STEP), Bianchi

Modifying lipid emulsions

**Lipid dose reduction
*Use of combined lipid emulsion
(soybean oil, medium chain
triglyceride, olive oil, and fish oil)

Cycling TPN

Non-­continuous TPN, with time off in a
24-­hr period

Microbiome therapies

Addition of various pre-­or probiotics

Prevention of central line
infections

Antibiotic treatment to prevent
bacterial translocation and small
bowel bacterial overgrowth
Use of ethanol locks

Prevention of cholestasis

***Oral choleretic agent:
urso-­deoxycholic acid
**Trophic (small volume) feedings
TREATMENT

Modifying lipid emulsions

Use of combined lipid emulsion
(soybean oil, medium chain
triglyceride, olive oil, and fish oil)
**Use of fish oil emulsion

Organ transplantation

Consider isolated intestinal or
liver-intestinal transplantation

*Possibly effective
**Probably effective
***Proven effective
Adapted from Lee WS, Chew KS, Ng RT, et al. Intestinal failure-­associated liver disease
(IFALD): insights into pathogenesis and advances in management. Hepatol Int.
2020;14(3):305–316.

across the apical membranes of epithelial cells in numerous organs.
Up to 40% of patients with CF develop some form of hepatobiliary
disease, usually in the first 2 decades of life. Hepatobiliary complications account for approximately 2.5% of overall mortality in
patients with CF, with development of portal hypertension being a
key prognostic factor.
Manifestations range from liver enzyme elevations to cirrhosis with
portal hypertension. This can be related to recurrent infections, drug
hepatotoxicity, steatosis (because of diabetes, chronic diarrhea, pancreatic insufficiency, malnutrition), cardiopulmonary disease–associated
hepatic congestion, biliary disease (neonatal cholestasis, sclerosing
cholangitis, micro-­gallbladder, gallbladder dysfunction or pigmentary
cholelithiasis) and the distinct clinical entity of cystic fibrosis-­related
liver disease (CLFD); the latter includes two main, sometimes concomitant, entities: primary focal biliary fibrosis and porto-­sinusoidal
vascular disease. The precise pathogenesis of CFLD remains incompletely understood but is likely multifactorial (Fig. 408.2). Genetic factors associated with increased risk of CFLD include the presence of
two abnormal CFTR alleles without residual function or presence of
SERPINA1 Z allele. Clinical risk factors include older age, pancreatic
insufficiency, male sex, and a history of meconium ileus.
Focal biliary fibrosis is the pathognomonic liver lesion in patients
with CF, characterized by periductal inflammation, bile duct proliferation, and increased fibrosis within focal portal tracts. Most patients are
asymptomatic. Liver stiffness measurements may aid in differentiating
focal fibrosis from steatosis. Gradual progression to multi-­lobular cirrhosis can occur and result in portal hypertension and end-­stage liver
disease in 1–8% of patients.
Porto-­sinusoidal vascular disease occurs more frequently in adults
than in children and presents as noncirrhotic portal hypertension.
Features that may suggest this diagnosis include evidence of portal
hypertension without hepatic parenchymal changes, marked splenomegaly, and development of porto-­systemic shunts. A macronodular
liver, likely related to regenerative nodular hyperplasia, is a common
finding. Liver stiffness measures, however, are typically lower than with
cirrhotic portal hypertension, which can aid in differentiation. Typical histologic features include obliterative portal venopathy, nodular
regenerative hyperplasia, arterialization, periportal vessels, aberrant
portal vessels, irregular portal tracts with centrilobular vein distribution, and sinusoidal dilatation.
Management of CFLD is primarily supportive and targeted at symptoms, including through optimization of nutrition and management
of portal hypertensive complications. Treatment with oral UDCA
(10-­15 mg/kg/day) is widespread, but the survival benefit and effect on

Decreased CFTR function in biliary epithelium
Biliary obstruction and
cholangiocyte damage
Decreased chloride,
bicarbonate + water transport
into bile →
• Increased bile viscosity +
reduced flow
• Retention of hydrophobic
bile acids
• Loss of cholangiocyte
alkaline barrier

Gut dysbiosis and increased intestinal permeability
Secondary to slow intestinal
transit, repeated exposure
to antibiotics, PERT
• Innate immune
dysregulation
• Release of pro-inflammatory
cytokines
• Altered bile acid
homeostasis

Endothelial CFTR defects

Cystic fibrosisrelated liver disease
• Focal biliary fibrosis
• Porto-sinusoidal
vascular disease

Development of microthrombi and sinusoidal
endothelial damage
• Increased platelet
aggregation
• Decreased nitric oxide
• Increased oxidative stress

Fig. 408.2 Proposed mechanisms in the development of cystic fibrosis-­related liver disease. PERT, Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy. (Data

from Dana J, Debray D, Beaufrère A, et al. Cystic fibrosis-­related liver disease: clinical presentations, diagnostic and monitoring approaches in the
era of CFTR modulator therapies. J Hepatol. 2021;S0168-­8278:02115–2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 408 u Liver Disease Associated with Systemic Disorders
clinical course remains controversial. Surgical porto-­systemic shunts
(distal splenorenal, portocaval) are useful in patients with refractory
portal hypertensive complications. Liver transplantation may be offered
in severe cases of parenchymal disease with acceptable long-­term outcomes with combined liver-­lung transplantation being offered at some
centers. CFTR modulator therapies have shifted the paradigm of pulmonary and nutritional management in CF; however, their role in preventing or reversing CFLD remains unclear. All currently approved
modulators may cause elevated liver enzymes; however, small studies
have yielded promising results in improving CFLD.

BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTATION

Liver disease after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (SCT, see
Chapters 177-­181) occurs in up to 90% of patients in the first 100 days.
Etiologies are listed in Table 408.3. Graft-­versus-­host disease (GVHD),
drug toxicity, and sepsis are the most common causes of liver dysfunction after allogeneic SCT. Diagnosis is often challenging because of the
coexistence of multiple risk factors. Clinical course, symptoms and
signs, liver biochemistries, and viral serology are helpful in making
the correct diagnosis. Percutaneous liver biopsy may be necessary; histology can show extensive bile duct injury in GVHD, viral inclusions
in cytomegalovirus disease, or the characteristic endothelial lesion in
sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS). Prompt and accurate diagnosis is key because treatment for GVHD with corticosteroids may
worsen infectious hepatitis, and delayed treatment in SOS can lead to
poorer outcomes. Management of liver disease post-­HSCT is mainly
supportive. Oral UDCA can decrease the incidence of severe liver disease in patients undergoing SCT and has been shown to reduce the
incidence of SOS and transplant-­related mortality in adults.
Graft-­versus-­host disease (see Chapter 179) results from donor immunocompetent cells triggering an inflammatory response in recipient
organs. Acute GVHD comprises a triad of hepatitis, dermatitis, and enteritis, and usually occurs within 100 days of hematopoietic SCT (HSCT;
typically at time of engraftment, 14-­21 days after HSCT). Serum aminotransferase and bilirubin levels are markedly elevated. Chronic GVHD
occurs later, with liver involvement (slowly progressive cholestasis) in up to
80%. Histologic features of GVHD include loss of intralobular bile ducts,
endothelial injury of hepatic and portal venules, and hepatocellular necrosis. Treatment of GVHD varies depending on organ system involved (e.g.,
skin, intestine) and acute vs chronic presentation. Therapy comprises systemic corticosteroids, optimization of maintenance immunosuppression,
and newer agents like ruxolitinib (JAK inhibitor), and it is recommended
that management occur in collaboration with the hematopoietic stem cell
transplant team. Oral UDCA has also been shown to be beneficial, particularly in chronic GVHD.
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS; hepatic venoocclusive
disease) usually develops in the first 21 days after SCT. The incidence
ranges from 5–39% in pediatric patients, with reported mortality rates
ranging from 0–47%. Risk factors for SOS are listed in Table 408.4.
Pathogenesis is thought to be related to sinusoidal endothelial cell
activation and hepatocyte damage from accumulation of toxic metabolites because of conditioning regimens. Patients typically present with
jaundice, painful hepatomegaly, rapid weight gain, and ascites. Severe
SOS has high morbidity and mortality, with multisystem organ failure.
Diagnostic criteria for SOS include presence of hepatomegaly, right
upper quadrant pain, ascites, weight gain >5% from baseline, and bilirubin >2 mg/dL before day 21 post HSCT. Exclusion of other causes
of liver disease is also necessary. Liver biopsy is generally not needed
for diagnosis, and indeed can be contraindicated because of the bleeding risk. However, the classic histologic features of sinusoidal dilatation, erythrocyte extravasation in space of Disse, collagen deposition
in sinusoids and small hepatic veins and centrilobular necrosis, are
diagnostic.
Treatment of SOS is with defibrotide, a mixture of oligonucleotides
that has antithrombotic and thrombolytic properties. There is a survival benefit of defibrotide in both children and adults. Few significant
adverse events are noted; bleeding and infection are the most common
adverse effects seen in patients with severe SOS.

2479

Table 408.3  Etiologies of Liver Disease After Hematopoietic
Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT)
Sepsis (viral, bacterial, fungal)
Toxicity (chemotherapy, PN, radiation)
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
Acute and chronic GVHD
Hemosiderosis / iron overload
Cholecystitis
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction
PN, Parenteral nutrition; GVHD, graft-­versus-­host disease.

Table 408.4  Risk Factors for the Development of
Sinusoidal Obstruction Syndrome (SOS) After
Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
(HSCT)
PATIENT-­RELATED FACTORS

HSCT-­RELATED FACTORS

Younger age
Hematologic malignancy
Disease relapse state
Preexisting liver disease
Previous liver radiation therapy
Chronic viral hepatitis
Iron overload

Allogenic transplant
Bone marrow–derived stem cells
Fever during conditioning
therapy
Second transplant
Myeloablative conditioning
Drug hepatotoxicity

HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES

Hepatic dysfunction in patients with sickle cell anemia (see
Chapter 511.1) or thalassemia (see Chapter 511.10) result from
acute or chronic viral hepatitis, chronic iron overload, venous
thrombosis, biliary obstruction (cholestasis, cholelithiasis), or acute
hepatic crisis (sequestration, ischemic necrosis). Cholelithiasis and
chronic iron overload (because of frequent blood transfusions) are
common and treatable. Oral chelation therapy (commonly with
deferasirox) in iron overload has been demonstrated to reverse or
stabilize hepatic fibrosis in patients with thalassemia. Surgical and
endoscopic management of gallstones may be necessary, especially
in patients with choledocholithiasis.

Sickle Cell Disease

The pathogenesis of hepatobiliary manifestations in sickle cell disease
(SCD) is shown in Figure 408.3. Hepatic sickle cell crisis or “sickle
hepatopathy” occurs in ∼10% of patients, when sickled cells obstruct
small vessels and sinusoids. This leads to ischemia, inflammation,
endothelial dysfunction, and, when flow is restored, reperfusion injury,
manifest as intense RUQ pain and tenderness, fever, leukocytosis, and
jaundice. Bilirubin levels may be markedly elevated; serum ALP levels may be only moderately elevated. Prompt diagnosis is key to allow
early institution of therapy, although this can be challenging because
of overlapping symptoms and signs with other hepatobiliary disorders
detailed above. In general, hepatic sickle cell crisis is self-­limited and
symptoms resolve within 1-­3 weeks. However, along the spectrum of
sickle crises is the distinct entity of sickle cell intrahepatic cholestasis
(SCIC), thought to be caused by the trapping of sickle cells in sinusoids
causing localized hypoxia, hepatocyte ballooning and intra-­canalicular
cholestasis. This too manifests as hepatomegaly, abdominal pain,
hyperbilirubinemia, and coagulopathy but can progress to acute liver
failure, multiorgan dysfunction and death. Management of hepatic
crises involves exclusion of biliary complications, supportive care, and
exchange transfusion if there is evidence of liver synthetic dysfunction or (prolonged prothrombin time) or clinical concern for SCIC.
Liver transplantation in SCD (in setting of cirrhosis, end-­stage liver
disease, and severe SCIC) remains controversial. Although there are
some positive experiences reported in adults (with acceptable 5-­year
survival rates), there remain limited data in children and many clinical challenges. Preoperative optimization in tertiary centers involving

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2480 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Sickling of red cells

Obstruction of sinusoids

Hemolysis

lschemia of hepatocytes

Acute hepatic crisis
Intra-hepatic cholestasis

Acute hepatic
sequestration

lschemia of bile ducts

Increased bilirubin
load in bile

Cholangiopathy

Biliary lithiasis

Fig. 408.3 Pathogenesis of liver disease in sickle cell disease. (From Lacaille F, Allali S, de Montalembert M. The liver in sickle cell disease. J Pediatr
Gastroenterol Nutr. 2021;72:5–10. Fig 1.)

transplant hepatology and hematology teams is paramount, with attention to transfusion parameters, potential drug toxicity, nephroprotective measures, and intraoperative management to prevent acute crises.
Of course, hepatic crises may recur in the allograft, with potential for
allograft dysfunction and loss.

HISTIOCYTIC DISORDERS

Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH, see Chapter 556.1) is a rare
disorder characterized by proliferation and accumulation of Langerhans cells (dendritic antigen-­presenting histiocytes). It can affect
single or multiple organs, with common sites being bone, skin,
pituitary gland, spleen, lungs, and lymph nodes. In the liver, histiocytosis can cause hepatocellular dysfunction and/or a mass lesion.
Liver involvement in LCH should be suspected in patients with
hepatomegaly, ascites, and/or biochemical evidence of liver injury
(elevated liver enzymes, bilirubin, or prothrombin time). Liver
biopsy demonstrates Langerhans cell infiltrates (identified with
positive immunohistochemical staining for CD1a and S100 antigen). Hepatic LCH carries a high mortality rate (30–50%, compared
to <10% in patients without liver involvement). Three-­year survival
with liver involvement is >96% compared to 52% with liver involvement. In children, LCH is an important cause of secondary sclerosing cholangitis, which can lead to chronic liver disease and need for
liver transplantation.
Treatment approaches in LCH vary by clinical severity; those
with single-­organ involvement and mild disease may be observed
or offered immunomodulator monotherapy (oral 6 mercaptopurine, methotrexate, and others). Those with hepatic or multiorgan
involvement may need to undergo systemic chemotherapy.
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) (see Chapter
556.2) is a multiorgan, severe, and potentially fatal inflammatory
process from excessive activation of lymphocytes and macrophages.
Hepatobiliary manifestations include elevated aminotransferases
(50–100%), cholestasis (50%), and hepatomegaly (90%). Acute
liver failure may also occur. Liver biopsy shows portal inflammatory infiltrates, hemophagocytosis, and Kupffer cell hyperplasia but
is not routinely obtained because of coagulopathy. The mainstay
of treatment of HLH involves etoposide-­based chemotherapy and
bone marrow transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

408.1 Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
Sarah H. Orkin and William F. Balistreri
The term nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) spans a wide
spectrum of histologic liver disease, from nonalcoholic fatty liver
(NAFL; steatosis without inflammation) to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH; steatosis with lobular inflammation); the latter may
then progress to fibrosis and end-­stage liver disease (ESLD) requiring liver transplantation (Figs. 408.4 and 408.5). In fact, NASH
currently is the fastest rising indication for liver transplantation in
young adults. The burden of pediatric NAFLD is large; it is the most
common cause of chronic liver disease in children and currently
affects 1 in 10 youth in the general population, and 1 in 3 youth
with obesity. Obesity has contributed to an increased prevalence of
NAFLD in children; the severity of obesity is associated with more
severe liver disease.
Known risk factors for pediatric NAFLD include male sex, Hispanic ethnicity, genetic predisposition (see Fig. 408.4), obesity,
insulin resistance, obstructive sleep apnea, celiac disease, and psychotropic drug use (see Fig. 408.4). There is a lower prevalence of
NAFLD in Black children. Autopsy data suggest that 10% of all children, and 38% of children with obesity age 2-­19 years old have histologically confirmed NAFLD. Up to 25% of affected children may
already have advanced fibrosis at the time of first liver biopsy. There
are currently no available clinical, biochemical, or radiographic
variables to help predict which children will have severe histologic
disease on liver biopsy or who will be at risk of rapid progression.
Recommendations in adults are to screen at-­risk patients (see Fig. 408.4)
with liver function tests as well as additional testing to exclude other
diagnoses (chronic hepatitis). If there is evidence of liver disease,
hepatic ultrasonography and noninvasive assessment of liver stiffness
are indicated (see Fig. 408.5D,E).
Most patients with NAFLD are asymptomatic. The North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition
Clinical Practice Guideline recommend assessing the serum alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) level as a screening tool for children starting
between 9-­11 years of age who are either obese (body mass index
[BMI] ≥95th%) or overweight (BMI ≥ 85th% and <95th% with additional metabolic risk factors). In the United States, sex-­specific cutoffs for serum ALT values have been determined to be 22 mg/dL in
females and 26 mg/dL in males, and values persistently greater than

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 408 u Liver Disease Associated with Systemic Disorders
NAFLD spectrum
NAFL

NASH

Compensated
cirrhosis

Decompensated
cirrhosis

*
Fibrosis
progression

Hepatocellular
carcinoma
Factors associated with NAFLD and NASH progression
Comorbid illness
• Type 2 diabetes
• Insulin resistance
• Dyslipidemia
• Obesity
• Hypertension
• Hypopituitarism

Genetic factors
• PNPLA3
• TM6SF2
• GCKR
• MBOAT7
• HSD17B13

Environmental factors
• Fructose
• Cholesterol
• Alcohol
• Exercise
• Coffee

Fig. 408.4 Spectrum of NAFLD. Factors in black type have an es-

tablished association with NAFLD and NASH progression (broadly
classified into comorbid illness, genetic factors, and environmental
factors). Green type indicates a protective factor. NAFL, Nonalcoholic fatty liver; NAFLD, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease; NASH,
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. *Fibrosis regression. (From Powell EE,
Wong VWS, Rinella M. Non-­alcoholic fatty liver disease. Lancet. 2021;
397:2212–2222. Fig. 2.)

2481

two times the sex-­specific upper limit of normal, in the absence of
any other identified etiology for liver disease is generally regarded
as presumed NAFLD. Most children presenting with obesity and
elevated liver enzymes and presumed or confirmed NAFLD will
have a negative workup for any alternative etiology for liver disease.
Although imaging modalities such as ultrasonography or magnetic
resonance imaging with proton-­density fat fraction and magnetic
resonance elastography (MRI-­PDFF /MRE) can be used to evaluate
the degree of steatosis and fibrosis by using liver stiffness on MRE as
a surrogate for fibrosis, the gold standard for diagnosis of NAFLD is
liver biopsy examination.
Histologically, NAFLD is diagnosed when steatosis involves >5%
of hepatocytes (see Fig. 408.5). Other pertinent histologic characteristics include the presence and severity of lobular inflammation,
cellular ballooning, and fibrosis (graded 0-­4). The NASH Clinical
Research Network has developed a validated tool for histologic
assessment. Unlike adults, NASH in children manifest two distinct
histologic types: Type 1 NASH resembles adult histologic findings
with steatosis and balloon degeneration of hepatocytes and/or periportal fibrosis while Type 2 NASH includes steatosis and portal
inflammation.
During evaluation other causes of steatosis should be kept in mind.
Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency (LAL-­D), an autosomal recessive
disorder due to pathogenic variants in LIPA gene, may result in hepatic
steatosis. However, in contrast to NAFLD, patients with LAL-­D usually demonstrate microvesicular or mixed micro-­and macrovesicular
steatosis, and not macrovesicular changes alone.
Children diagnosed with NAFLD should be screened for celiac
disease plus comorbid conditions, including diabetes, hypertension,

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 408.5 Histologic and radiologic assessment of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. A, Nonalcoholic fatty liver is characterized by macrovesicular

steatosis with no or little necroinflammation. Large round nonstaining areas represent lipid droplets in hepatocytes (arrow; hematoxylin and eosin
stain; magnification ×40). B, Apart from fat accumulation, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is characterized by the presence of lobular inflammation and hepatocyte ballooning. At the center of the image is a ballooned hepatocyte surrounded by inflammatory cells (arrow; hematoxylin
and eosin stain; magnification ×40). C, As disease progresses, accumulating liver fibrosis will eventually result in cirrhosis. On the right of this image
is a cirrhotic nodule surrounded by thick fibrous tissue. In some cases, steatosis and necroinflammation might reduce or disappear as the disease
progresses to cirrhosis, a condition referred to as burned-­out NASH (Sirius red; magnification ×10). D, Ultrasonography, the most common method
to diagnose fatty liver, characterized by bright liver echotexture (bracket) and blurring of deeper structures (arrow). E, Vibration-­controlled transient
elastography, a point-­of-­care measurement of liver stiffness for the estimation of fibrosis that can also estimate hepatic steatosis using the controlled
attenuation parameter. The machine is equipped with an M-­mode ultrasound for the localization of liver parenchyma (arrowhead). The elastogram
(arrow) represents the measurement of liver stiffness. A steeper slope indicates that the shear-­wave velocity is higher, and the liver is stiffer. F, Magnetic resonance elastography of a patient with NASH cirrhosis, currently one of the most accurate noninvasive tests of liver fibrosis, with the color
scheme reflecting stiffness in different parts of the liver. Red shows areas with greater stiffness (circle). (From Powell EE, Wong VWS, Rinella M. Non-­
alcoholic fatty liver disease. Lancet. 2021;397:2212–2222. Fig. 1.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2482 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 408.5  Potential Use of Off-­Label Therapy for Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis in Adults
KEY ADVERSE
EVENTS

CONTRAINDICATIONS
AND CAUTIONS

Improves insulin
sensitivity and
diabetic control

Weight gain, fluid
retention, bone
loss, and might
increase bladder
cancer

Contraindicated in
patients with New
York Heart Association
(NYHA) class III or IV
heart failure; maximum
dose 15 mg if used in
combination with
gemfibrozil or other
strong CYP2C8 inhibitors

Several small* to
moderate† randomized
controlled trials; data on
clinical outcomes based
on a retrospective cohort
study with propensity
score matching

Neutral metabolic
effects

A meta-­analysis
suggests a
small increase in
overall mortality
at high doses;
might increase
risk of bleeding,
prostate cancer,
heart failure, and
hemorrhagic
stroke

Caution in patients with
high cardiovascular risk
and those at high risk of
bleeding

Improves hepatic
steatosis and
necroinflammation

Several small* to
moderate† randomized
controlled trials

Improves diabetic
control, reduces
major adverse
cardiovascular
events and
weight

Nausea, vomiting,
dyspepsia,
diarrhea, and
constipation

Discontinue GLP-­1
agonists immediately in
case of acute pancreatitis;
might cause acute
kidney injury rarely;
semaglutide might
increase diabetic
retinopathy complications

Improves hepatic
steatosis,
necroinflammation, and
liver enzymes

Several small* randomized
controlled trials with
noninvasive tests; two
small* uncontrolled
paired liver biopsy
studies

Improves diabetic
control; modest
weight reduction;
might have
renoprotective
benefits;
canagliflozin and
empagliflozin
reduce major
adverse
cardiovascular
events

Genitourinary
infection, acute
kidney injury,
and euglycemic
diabetic
ketoacidosis;
might increase
the risk of
fractures and
limb amputations

Contraindicated if
estimated glomerular
filtration rate is less
than 45 mL/min per
1.73 m2

EFFECTS ON THE LIVER

QUALITY OF EVIDENCE

OTHER BENEFITS

Pioglitazone

Improves hepatic
steatosis and
necroinflammation and
can improve fibrosis

Several small* to
moderate† phase 2
randomized controlled
trials

Vitamin E

Improves hepatic
steatosis and
necroinflammation;
might prevent liver
decompensation and
mortality in patients with
advanced liver fibrosis

GLP-­1 agonists‡

SGLT2
inhibitors§

*Small was defined as less than 50 participants in the active group.
†Moderate was defined as 50–100 participants in the active group.
‡For example, liraglutide and semaglutide.
§For example, canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, and empagliflozin.
From Powell EE, Wong VWS, Rinella M. Non-­alcoholic fatty liver disease. Lancet. 2021;397:2212–2222.

dyslipidemia, and obstructive sleep apnea, and should be followed
clinically at least annually. Counseling against use of alcohol should
be provided, as well as minimization of other potentially hepatotoxic
drugs, when medically feasible. Prior vaccination against hepatitis A
and B should be verified.
There are no approved medical therapies for treatment of pediatric NAFLD. Thus the current management requires lifestyle modification, specifically diet and physical activity changes targeted at weight
reduction. A key dietary change includes removal or reduction of sugar
sweetened beverages because fructose can be taken up in an insulin-­
independent fashion and is a prime contributor to hepatic inflammation and steatosis.

Many studies have investigated therapeutic options for treatment
of pediatric NAFLD. Vitamin E has been shown to improve balloon
degeneration in a subset of children with NASH. Other potential
therapeutic options being investigated include thiazolidinediones
(pioglitazone), glucagon-­
like peptide 1 receptor agonists (GLP-­
1
agonists), and sodium-­glucose cotransporter-­2 inhibitors (SGLT2
inhibitors) as well as bariatric surgery for obesity (Table 408.5). Furthermore, emerging data on the role of the gut microbiome in the
pathogenesis of NAFLD has positioned the gut flora as a suggested
therapeutic target.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 409 u Mitochondrial Hepatopathies

2483

conditions in which mitochondrial oxidative injury may be involved
in the pathogenesis of liver injury.

Chapter 409

Mitochondrial
Hepatopathies

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Sindhu Pandurangi and William F. Balistreri
A wide variety of mitochondrial disorders are associated with liver disease. Hepatocytes contain a high density of mitochondria because the
liver, with its biosynthetic and detoxifying functions, is highly dependent on adenosine triphosphate. Defects in mitochondrial function
can lead to impaired oxidative phosphorylation, increased generation
of reactive oxygen species, impairment of other metabolic pathways,
and activation of mechanisms of cellular death.
Mitochondrial disorders can be divided into primary, in which
the mitochondrial defect is the primary cause of the disorder, and
secondary, in which mitochondrial function is affected by exogenous
injury or a genetic variant that affects nonmitochondrial proteins
(see Chapter 107.4). Primary mitochondrial disorders can be caused
by pathogenic variants affecting mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or
by nuclear genes that encode mitochondrial proteins or cofactors
(Table 409.1; see also Chapter 404). Specific patterns may be noted
(Table 409.2). Secondary mitochondrial disorders include diseases
with an uncertain etiology, such as Reye syndrome; disorders caused
by endogenous or exogenous toxins, drugs, or metals; and other

Mitochondrial respiratory chain disorders of all types affect 1 in 20,000
children younger than 16 years of age; liver involvement has been
reported in 10–20% of patients with respiratory chain defect. Primary
mitochondrial disorders, including mtDNA depletion syndromes
(MDSs), occur in 1 in 5,000 live births and are a known cause of acute
liver failure in children <2 years of age.
More than 200 pathogenic variants, deletions, insertions, and rearrangements that involve mtDNA and nuclear DNA and encodes mitochondrial proteins are identified. Mitochondrial genetics are unique
because mitochondria can replicate, transcribe, and translate their
mitochondrial-­derived DNA independently. A typical hepatocyte contains approximately 1,000 copies of mtDNA. Oxidative phosphorylation (the process of adenosine triphosphate production) occurs in the

Table 409.2  Hepatic Phenotypes of Mitochondrial
Cytopathies
• Infantile liver failure
• Neonatal cholestasis
• Pearson syndrome
• Alpers disease
• Chronic liver disease
• Drug-­induced mitochondrial toxicity
From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 5th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2016: Box 71.2, p. 876.

Table 409.1  Genotypic Classification of Primary Mitochondrial Hepatopathies and Organ Involvement
GENE

RESPIRATORY CHAIN
COMPLEX

HEPATIC HISTOLOGY

OTHER ORGANS
INVOLVED

Deletion

Multiple (Pearson)

Steatosis, fibrosis

Kidney, heart, CNS, muscle

Sideroblastic anemia, variable
thrombocytopenia and neutropenia,
persistent diarrhea

MPV17

I, III, IV

Steatosis

CNS, muscle,
gastrointestinal tract

Adult-­onset multisystemic involvement:
myopathy, ophthalmoplegia, severe
constipation, parkinsonism

DGUOK

I, III, IV

Steatosis, fibrosis

Kidneys, CNS, muscle

Nystagmus, hypotonia, renal Fanconi
syndrome, acidosis

MPV17

I, III, IV

Steatosis, fibrosis

CNS, PNS

Hypotonia

SUCLG1

I, III, IV

Steatosis

Kidneys, CNS, muscle

Myopathy, sensorineural hearing loss,
respiratory failure

POLG1

I, III, IV

Steatosis, fibrosis

CNS, muscle

Liver failure preceded by neurologic
symptoms, intractable seizures, ataxia,
psychomotor regression

C10orf2/Twinkle

I, III, IV

Steatosis

CNS, muscle

Infantile-­onset spinocerebellar ataxia,
loss of skills

BCS1L

III (GRACILE)

CNS ±, muscle ±, kidneys

Fanconi-­type renal tubulopathy

SCO1

IV

Steatosis, fibrosis

TRMU

I, III, IV

Steatosis, fibrosis

EFG1

I, III, IV

Steatosis

CNS

Severe, rapidly progressive
encephalopathy

EFTu

I, III, IV

Unknown

CNS

Severe lactic acidosis, rapidly fatal
encephalopathy

CLINICAL FEATURES

Muscle
Infantile liver failure with subsequent
recovery

CNS, Central nervous system; GRACILE, growth restriction, aminoaciduria, cholestasis, iron overload, lactic acidosis, and early death; PNS, peripheral nervous system.
From Lee WS, Sokol RJ. Mitochondrial hepatopathies: advances in genetics, therapeutic approaches, and outcomes. J Pediatr. 2013;163:942–948. Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2484 Part XVI u The Digestive System
respiratory chain located in the inner mitochondrial membrane and is
divided into five multienzyme complexes: reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide coenzyme Q reductase (complex I), succinate–coenzyme Q reductase (complex II), reduced coenzyme Q–cytochrome-­c
reductase (complex III), cytochrome-­c oxidase (complex IV), and
adenosine triphosphate synthase (complex V). The respiratory chain
peptide components are encoded by both nuclear and mtDNA genes;
thus pathogenic variants in either genome can result in disorders of
oxidative phosphorylation. Thirteen essential polypeptides are synthesized from the small 16.5-­kilobase circular double-­stranded mtDNA.
mtDNA also encodes the 24 transfer RNAs required for intramitochondrial protein synthesis, whereas nuclear genes encode more than
70 respiratory chain subunits and an array of enzymes and cofactors
required to maintain mtDNA, including DNA polymerase-­γ (POLG),
thymidine kinase 2, and deoxyguanosine kinase.
The expression of mitochondrial disorders is complex, and epidemiologic studies are hampered by technical difficulties in collecting and
processing the tissue specimens needed to make accurate diagnoses,
the variability in clinical presentation, and the fact that most disorders
display maternal inheritance with variable penetrance (see Chapter
97). mtDNA undergoes pathogenic variant generation 10 times more
often than nuclear DNA because of a lack of introns, protective histones, and an effective repair system in mitochondria. Mitochondrial
genetics also displays a threshold effect in that the type and severity
of pathogenic variants required for clinical expression varies among
people and organ systems; this is explained by the concept of heteroplasmy, in which cells and tissues harbor both normal and pathologic
variant mtDNA in various amounts because of random partitioning
during cell division. Pathogenic variants, deletions, or duplications in
either mitochondrial or nuclear genes can cause disease, and variants
in nuclear genes that control mtDNA replication, transcription, and
translation may lead to MDS or to a translational disorder.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Defects in oxidative phosphorylation can affect any tissue to a variable degree, with the most energy-­dependent organs being the most
vulnerable. One should consider the diagnosis of a mitochondrial disorder in a patient of any age who presents with progressive, multisystem
involvement that cannot be explained by a specific diagnosis. Certain
mitochondrial disorders have characteristic gastrointestinal presentations, including vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, failure to thrive, and
abdominal pain. Pearson marrow-­pancreas syndrome manifests with
sideroblastic anemia and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, whereas
mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy manifests
with chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction and cachexia. Hepatic presentations range from chronic cholestasis, hepatomegaly, cirrhosis, and
steatosis to fulminant hepatic failure and death. Patients with certain
mitochondrial diseases may have normal or minimally elevated lactate
levels even in the setting of a metabolic crisis. The lactate-­to-­pyruvate
molar ratio (L:P) has been proposed as a screening test for mitochondrial disorders because it reflects the equilibrium between the product and substrate of the reaction catalyzed by lactase dehydrogenase.
An L:P ≥ 25 has been considered to be highly suggestive of respiratory
chain dysfunction; however, an elevated lactate or an elevated L:P can
also represent secondary mitochondrial dysfunction occurring as a
result of severe liver disease.

PRIMARY MITOCHONDRIAL HEPATOPATHIES
Neonatal Liver Failure

A common presentation of respiratory chain defects is severe liver
failure manifested as jaundice, hypoglycemia, coagulopathy, renal dysfunction, and hyperammonemia, with onset within the first few weeks
to months of life. Cytochrome-­c oxidase (complex IV) is the most
common deficiency in these infants, although complexes I and III and
MDSs are also implicated (see Tables 409.1 and Chapter 404). The key
biochemical features include a markedly elevated plasma lactate concentration, an elevated molar ratio of plasma lactate to pyruvate (L:P)
(>25), and a raised ratio of β-­hydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate (>4.0).
Symptoms are nonspecific and include lethargy and vomiting. Most

patients additionally have neurologic involvement that manifests as a
weak suck, recurrent apnea, or myoclonic epilepsy. Liver biopsy shows
predominantly microvesicular steatosis, cholestasis, bile duct proliferation, glycogen depletion, and iron overload. With standard therapy, the
prognosis is poor, and most patients die from liver failure or infection
in the first few months of life.

Alpers Syndrome (Alpers-­Huttenlocher Syndrome or
Alpers Hepatopathic Poliodystrophy)

Diagnostic criteria include refractory mixed-­type seizures with a focal
component; psychomotor regression that is episodic and triggered by
intercurrent infections; and hepatopathy with or without acute liver
failure. Alpers syndrome manifests from infancy up to 8 years of age
with seizures, hypotonia, feeding difficulties, psychomotor regression,
and ataxia. Patients develop hepatomegaly and jaundice and have a
slower progression to liver failure than those with cytochrome-­c oxidase deficiency. Elevated blood or cerebrospinal fluid lactate and pyruvate levels are supportive of the diagnosis, in addition to characteristic
electroencephalographic findings (high-­amplitude slow activity with
polyspikes), asymmetric abnormal visual evoked responses, and low-­
density areas or atrophy in the occipital or temporal lobes on computed
tomography scanning of the brain. In some patients, complex I deficiency has been found in liver or muscle mitochondria. The disease is
inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion; pathogenic variants in the
catalytic subunit of the nuclear gene mtDNA POLG have been identified in multiple families with Alpers syndrome, leading to the advent of
molecular diagnosis for Alpers syndrome. Patients with POLG pathogenic variants are susceptible to valproate-­induced liver dysfunction.

Mitochondrial DNA Depletion Syndrome

MDS is characterized by a tissue-­specific reduction in mtDNA copy
number, leading to deficiencies in complexes I, III, and IV. MDS manifests with phenotypic heterogeneity; multisystem and localized disease
forms include myopathic, hepatocerebral, and liver-­restricted presentations. Infants with the hepatocerebral form present in the neonatal
period. The first symptoms are metabolic; these rapidly progress to
hepatic failure with hypoglycemia and vomiting. This stage is followed
by neurologic involvement affecting the central and peripheral systems.
Laboratory studies are characterized by lactic acidosis, hypoglycemia,
and markedly elevated α-­fetoprotein in plasma. In some patients, iron
overload has been found with elevated transferrin saturation, high ferritin levels, and iron accumulation in hepatocytes and Kupffer cells.
Death usually occurs by 1 year of age. Spontaneous recovery has been
reported in a patient with liver-­restricted disease. Inheritance is autosomal recessive and pathogenic variants in the nuclear deoxyguanosine kinase gene (DGUOK) have been identified in many patients
with hepatocerebral MDS. Thymidine kinase 2 has been implicated in
the myopathic form; no known genetic defect has been identified in
liver-­restricted MDS. Multiple other nuclear genes including POLG,
MPV17, Twinkle helicase gene, and SUCLG1 have been implicated
in hepatocerebral MDS. Greater than 100 affected individuals with
MPV17 MDS have been identified, most with early-­onset hepatic and
neurologic manifestations, although rare late-­onset neuromyopathic
phenotypes have also been identified.
Liver biopsies of patients with MDS show microvesicular steatosis, cholestasis, focal cytoplasmic biliary necrosis, and cytosiderosis
in hepatocytes and sinusoidal cells. Ultrastructural changes are characteristic, with oncocytic transformation of mitochondria, which is
characterized by mitochondria with sparse cristae, granular matrix,
and dense or vesicular inclusions. If the native DNA-­encoded complex
II is normal and the activities of the other complexes are decreased,
one should investigate mtDNA copy numbers for an MDS. Diagnosis
is established by the demonstration of a low ratio of mtDNA (<10%) to
nuclear DNA in affected tissues and/or genetic testing. Importantly, the
sequence of the mitochondrial genome is normal.

Navajo Neurohepatopathy

Navajo neurohepatopathy (NNH) is an autosomal recessive sensorimotor neuropathy with progressive liver disease found only in Navajo

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 409 u Mitochondrial Hepatopathies
people of the southwestern United States. The incidence is 1 in 1,600
live births. Diagnostic criteria include sensory neuropathy, motor
neuropathy, corneal anesthesia, and liver disease. Metabolic or infectious complications include failure to thrive, short stature, delayed
puberty, or systemic infection. Affected individuals have evidence of
central nervous system demyelination on radiographic imaging and
peripheral nerves biopsies. An MPV17 gene variant is implicated in the
pathogenesis of NNH. Interestingly, this is the same gene implicated
in MDS (see earlier), demonstrating that NNH may be a specific type
of MDS found only in Navajos. NNH is divided into three phenotypic
variations based on age of presentation and clinical findings.
Classic NNH appears in infancy with severe progressive neurologic
deterioration manifesting clinically as weakness, hypotonia, loss of
sensation with accompanying acral mutilation, corneal ulcerations,
and poor growth. Liver disease, present in the majority of patients, is
secondary and variable; it includes asymptomatic elevations of liver
function tests, Reye syndrome–like episodes, and hepatocellular carcinoma or cirrhosis. γ-­Glutamyl transpeptidase levels tend to be higher
than in other forms of NNH. Liver biopsy might show chronic portal
tract inflammation and cirrhosis but shows less cholestasis, hepatocyte
ballooning, and giant cell transformation than in other forms of NNH.
Infantile NNH manifests between the ages of 1 and 6 months with
jaundice and failure to thrive and progresses to liver failure and death
by 2 years of age. Patients have hepatomegaly with moderate elevations in aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and
γ-­glutamyl transpeptidase. Liver biopsy demonstrates pseudoacinar
formation, multinucleate giant cells, portal and lobular inflammation,
canalicular cholestasis, and microvesicular steatosis. Progressive neurologic symptoms are not usually noticed at presentation but develop
later.
Childhood NNH manifests from age 1-­5 years with the acute onset
of fulminant hepatic failure leading to death within months. Most
patients also have evidence of neuropathy at presentation. Liver biopsies are similar to those in infantile NNH, except for significant hepatocyte ballooning and necrosis, bile duct proliferation, and cirrhosis,
which are also seen.
There is no effective treatment for any of the forms of NNH, and
neurologic symptoms often preclude liver transplantation. The identical MPV17 pathogenic variant is seen in patients with both the infantile and classic forms of NNH, highlighting the clinical heterogeneity
of NNH.

Pearson Syndrome

Pearson marrow-­pancreas syndrome has a neonatal-­onset with severe
macrocytic anemia, variable neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, and
ringed sideroblasts in the bone marrow. Diarrhea and fat malabsorption develop in early childhood secondary to extensive pancreatic fibrosis, acinar atrophy, and partial villous atrophy of the small intestine.
The liver involvement includes hepatomegaly, steatosis, and cirrhosis.
Liver failure and death have been reported before the age of 4 years.
Other features of the syndrome include renal tubular disease, photosensitivity, diabetes mellitus, hydrops fetalis, and the late development
of visual impairment, tremor, ataxia, proximal muscle weakness, external ophthalmoplegia, and a pigmentary retinopathy. Methylglutaconic
aciduria is a useful diagnostic marker. Large deletions of mtDNA are
reported in most patients, resulting in deficiency of complexes I and
III. mtDNA deletions can be detected in patients’ cultured fibroblasts
as well as in peripheral blood lymphocytes.

Villous Atrophy Syndrome

Children with this disease present with severe anorexia, vomiting,
chronic diarrhea, and villous atrophy in the first year of life. Hepatic
involvement includes mild elevation of aminotransferase levels, hepatomegaly, and steatosis. Lactic acidosis is worsened with high-­dextrose
intravenous infusions or enteral nutrition. Diarrhea improves by 5
years of age in association with the normalization of intestinal biopsies.
Subsequently, patients develop retinitis pigmentosa, cerebellar ataxia,
sensorineural deafness, and proximal muscle weakness, with eventual death late in the first decade of life. The disease is attributed to a

2485

mtDNA rearrangement defect. A complex III deficiency was found in
the muscle of affected patients.

GRACILE Syndrome

The acronym GRACILE summarizes the most important clinical features, namely fetal growth restriction (birthweight about −4 SD), aminoaciduria (caused by Fanconi-­type tubulopathy), cholestasis (with
steatosis and cirrhosis), iron overload, severe lactic acidosis, and early
death. The syndrome is associated with pathogenic variants of the
complex III assembly factor BCS1L. The liver histology shows microvesicular steatosis and cholestasis with abundant iron accumulation in
hepatocytes and Kupffer cells. The liver iron content decreases slightly
with age, concomitantly with increasing fibrosis and cirrhosis. Abnormal aminotransferase levels and coagulation are noted, but the cause of
death seems to be related more to energy depletion than to liver failure.
About half of these patients die within the first 2 weeks of life.

Pathogenic Variants in Nuclear Translation and
Elongation Factor Genes

Pathogenic variants in nuclear translation factor genes (TRMU) of the
respiratory chain enzyme complexes have been identified as the etiology of acute liver failure manifesting at ages 1 day to 6 months. The
respiratory chain deficit was similar to that seen in MDS, where the
activity of the native DNA-­encoded complex II was normal whereas
complexes I, III, and IV were decreased. The elongation factor EFG1
(gene GFM1) variant was associated with fetal growth restriction, lactic acidosis, and liver dysfunction that progresses into liver failure and
death. The variant in the elongation factor EFTu manifests as severe lactic acidosis and lethal encephalopathy with mild hepatic involvement.

Secondary Mitochondrial Hepatopathies

Secondary mitochondrial hepatopathies are caused by exposure to a
hepatotoxic metal, drug, toxin, or endogenous metabolite. In the past,
the most common secondary mitochondrial hepatopathy was Reye
syndrome, the prevalence of which peaked in the 1970s and had a mortality rate of >40%. Although mortality has not changed, the prevalence
has decreased from >500 cases in 1980 to fewer than four cases annually since 1994. The decline in the reported incidence of Reye syndrome
may be partially related to more accurate modern diagnosis of infectious, genetic, metabolic, or toxic disease, thus reducing the percentage
of idiopathic or true cases of Reye syndrome. Reye syndrome is precipitated in a genetically susceptible person by the interaction of a viral
infection (influenza, varicella) and salicylate and/or antiemetic use.
Clinically it is characterized by a preceding viral illness that appears
to be resolving and the acute onset of vomiting and encephalopathy
(Table 409.3). Neurologic symptoms can rapidly progress to seizures,
coma, and death. Liver dysfunction is invariably present when vomiting develops, with coagulopathy and elevated serum levels of aspartate
aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, and ammonia. Importantly, patients remain anicteric and serum bilirubin levels are normal.
Liver biopsies show microvesicular steatosis without evidence of liver
inflammation or necrosis. Death is usually secondary to increased
intracranial pressure and cerebral herniation. Patients who survive
Table 409.3  Clinical Staging of Reye Syndrome and
Reye-­Like Diseases
Symptoms at the time of admission:
I. Usually quiet, lethargic, and sleepy, vomiting, laboratory
evidence of liver dysfunction
II.	Deep lethargy, confusion, delirium, combativeness,
hyperventilation, hyperreflexia
III.	Obtunded, light coma ± seizures, decorticate rigidity, intact
pupillary light reaction
IV.	Seizures, deepening coma, decerebrate rigidity, loss of
oculocephalic reflexes, fixed pupils
V. Coma, loss of deep tendon reflexes, respiratory arrest, fixed
dilated pupils, flaccidity/decerebration (intermittent); isoelectric
electroencephalogram

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2486 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 409.4  Diseases That Present a Clinical or Pathologic
Picture Resembling Reye Syndrome

Table 409.5  Tiered Investigations in Suspected
Mitochondrial Liver Disease

• Metabolic disease
• Organic aciduria
• Disorders of oxidative phosphorylation
• Urea cycle defects (carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, ornithine
transcarbamylase)
• Defects in fatty acid oxidation metabolism
• Acyl–coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiencies
• Systemic carnitine deficiency
• Hepatic carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency
• 3-­OH, 3-­methylglutaryl-­coenzyme A lyase deficiency
• Fructosemia
• Infantile liver failure syndrome 1. Caused by leucyl-­tRNA
synthetase (LARS) gene variants
• Central nervous system infections or intoxications (meningitis),
encephalitis, toxic encephalopathy
• Hemorrhagic shock with encephalopathy
• Drug or toxin ingestion (salicylate, valproate)

TIER 1
Pre-­/postprandial plasma lactate, glucose, FFA, and 3-­OH
Plasma carnitine, acylcarnitines
Plasma amino acids, creatine kinase, thymidine
Urinary organic acids, amino acids, tubular resorption phosphate,
albumin/creatinine ratio CSF lactate/protein (if feasible)
Electrocardiography and echocardiography
Electroencephalography and visual-­evoked potentials
Pathogenic variants in POLG, DGUOK, MPV17, and TRMU

have full recovery of liver function but should be carefully screened
for fatty-­acid oxidation and fatty-­acid transport defects (Table 409.4).
Acquired abnormalities of mitochondrial function can be caused by
several drugs and toxins, including valproic acid, cyanide, amiodarone,
chloramphenicol, iron, the emetic toxin of Bacillus cereus, and nucleoside analogs. Valproic acid is a branched fatty acid that can be metabolized into the mitochondrial toxin 4-­envalproic acid. Children with
underlying respiratory chain defects appear more sensitive to the toxic
effects of this drug, and valproic acid is reported to precipitate liver
failure in patients with Alpers syndrome and cytochrome-­c oxidase
deficiency. Nucleoside analogs directly inhibit mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes. The reverse transcriptase inhibitors zidovudine,
didanosine, stavudine, and zalcitabine―used to treat patients infected
with HIV―inhibit DNA POLG of mitochondria and can block elongation of mtDNA, leading to mtDNA depletion. Other conditions that
can lead to mitochondrial oxidative stress include cholestasis, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, α1-­antitrypsin deficiency, and Wilson disease.

DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION

Screening tests include common biochemical tests (comprehensive
metabolic profile, INR, α-­fetoprotein, CPK, phosphorus, complete
blood cell count, ammonia, lactate, pyruvate, serum ketone bodies:
both quantitative 3-­
hydroxybutyrate and quantitative acetoacetate,
total free fatty acids, serum acylcarnitine profile; serum-­free and total
carnitines, urine organic acids, and serum amino acids) (Table 409.5).
These results will guide subsequent confirmatory testing to establish
a molecular diagnosis. Genotyping, including single gene or panel
screening for common mitochondrial disease, is used in clinical practice. Whole exome or genome sequencing is also helpful and is replacing single gene or gene panel testing. However, the identification of
multiple gene variants of uncertain significance will require detailed
clinical and biochemical confirmation for interpretation. Tissue (liver
biopsy, skin fibroblast, and muscle biopsy) may be needed to make a
specific biochemical diagnosis.

TREATMENT OF MITOCHONDRIAL HEPATOPATHIES

There is no effective therapy for most patients with mitochondrial
hepatopathies; neurologic involvement often precludes orthotopic liver
transplantation. Patients with mitochondrial disorders remain at risk
for transplant-­related worsening of their underlying metabolic disease,
especially patients with POLG-­related disease. Children who receive

TIER 2
Tissue analysis
Liver biopsy: (if feasible). Tissue for light microscopy, electron
microscopy, and Oil Red O stain
Frozen tissue for respiratory chain enzyme activity analysis and
mtDNA copy number
Muscle biopsy: Tissue for light microscopy, electron microscopy, Oil
Red O stain, and histochemistry for respiratory chain complexes
Frozen tissue for respiratory chain enzyme activity analysis and
mtDNA copy number
Skin biopsy: Set up for fibroblast culture
TIER 3
Cranial MRI/MRS
TIER 4
Extended molecular screening. This will be guided by the clinical
phenotype, results of the tissue analysis, and local facilities.
Currently suggested genes should include SUCLG1, BCS1L, SOC1,
TFSM, TWINKLE, ACAD9, EARS2, GFM1, RRM2B, TK2, and
SUCLA2.
FFA, Free fatty acid; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
From Wyllie R, Hyams JS, Kay M, eds. Pediatric Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 5th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2016: Box 71-­3, p. 876.

liver transplants for DGUOK MDS have decreased rates of survival
post-­transplant than those who are transplanted for other diseases.
Liver transplantation for MPV17-­related mtDNA depletion syndrome
is associated with poor post-­transplant outcomes because of multiorgan
failure and sepsis. Several therapeutic drug combinations―including
antioxidants, vitamins, cofactors, and electron acceptors―have been
proposed, but no randomized controlled trials have been completed
to evaluate them.
Treatment strategies are supportive and include the infusion of
sodium bicarbonate for acute metabolic acidosis, transfusions for
anemia and thrombocytopenia, and exogenous pancreatic enzymes
for pancreatic insufficiency. It is important to discontinue or avoid
medications that may exacerbate hepatopathy, including sodium
valproate, tetracycline, and macrolide antibiotics, azathioprine,
chloramphenicol, quinolones, and linezolid. Ringer lactate should
be avoided because patients with liver dysfunction may not be able
to metabolize lactate. Propofol should be avoided during anesthesia because of potential interference with mitochondrial function.
In patients with lactic acidosis, lactate levels should be monitored
during procedures. It is important to maintain anabolism using a
balanced intake of fat and carbohydrates while avoiding unbalanced
intakes (e.g., glucose only at a high intravenous rate) or fasting for
>12 hours.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 410 u Autoimmune Hepatitis 2487

Chapter 410

Autoimmune Hepatitis
Amy G. Feldman and Frederick J. Suchy
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is an immune-­mediated liver disease
manifested by elevated serum aminotransaminase concentrations,
liver-­associated serum autoantibodies, and/or hypergammaglobulinemia. The serologic autoantibody profile defines two main types
of autoimmune hepatitis: AIH type 1, with positivity for antinuclear
antibodies (ANA) and/or anti–smooth muscle antibody (SMA)
and AIH type 2, with positivity for anti–liver kidney microsomal
type 1 antibody (anti-­LKM-­1). The targets of the inflammatory
process can include hepatocytes and, to a lesser extent, bile duct
epithelium. Autoimmune hepatitis typically refers to a primarily
hepatocyte-­specific process, whereas autoimmune cholangiopathy and sclerosing cholangitis predominately involve intrahepatic
and extrahepatic bile duct injury. Overlap of the process involving
both hepatocyte and bile duct–directed injury may be more common in children. Chronicity is determined either by duration of
liver disease (typically >3-­6 months), by evidence of chronic hepatic
decompensation (hypoalbuminemia, thrombocytopenia) or physical stigmata of chronic liver disease (clubbing, spider telangiectasia,
splenomegaly, ascites). The severity is variable; the affected child
might have only biochemical evidence of liver dysfunction, might
have stigmata of chronic liver disease, or can present in hepatic failure. De novo hepatitis can be seen in a subset of liver transplant
recipients whose initial disease was not autoimmune.

ETIOLOGY

Autoimmune hepatitis arises in a genetically predisposed host after
an unknown trigger leads to a T cell–mediated immune response
targeting liver autoantigens. A dense portal mononuclear cell infiltrate invades the surrounding parenchyma and comprises T and B
lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells. The immunopathogenic mechanisms underlying autoimmune hepatitis are unsettled.
Triggering factors can include molecular mimicry, infections, drugs,
and the environment (toxins) in a genetically susceptible host. Several human leukocyte antigen class II molecules―particularly
DR3, DR4, and DR7 isoforms―confer susceptibility to autoimmune hepatitis. Self-­antigenic peptides are processed by populations of antigen-­presenting cells and presented to CD4 and CD8
effector T cells. CD4+ T lymphocytes recognizing a self-­antigenic
liver peptide orchestrate liver injury. Cell-­mediated injury by cytokines released by CD8+ cytotoxic T cells and/or antibody-­mediated
cytotoxicity can be operative. There is also evidence that regulatory
T cells from patients with autoimmune hepatitis are impaired in
their ability to control the proliferation of CD4 and CD8 effector
cells. Cytochrome P450 2D6 is the main autoantigen in type 2 autoimmune hepatitis.
Antibody-­coated hepatocytes may be lysed by complement or
Fc-­bearing natural killer lymphocytes. Heterozygous pathogenic
variants in the autoimmune regulator gene (AIRE), which encodes
a transcription factor controlling the negative selection of autoreactive thymocytes, can be found in some children with autoimmune
hepatitis types 1 and 2. AIRE variants also cause autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy-­c andidiasis-­e ctodermal dystrophy (also
called autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome), in which autoimmune hepatitis occurs in approximately 20% of patients.

PATHOLOGY

The histologic features common to untreated cases include inflammatory infiltrates, consisting of lymphocytes and plasma cells that

expand portal areas and often penetrate the lobule (interface hepatitis);
moderate to severe piecemeal necrosis of hepatocytes extending outward from the limiting plate; variable necrosis, fibrosis, and zones of
parenchymal collapse spanning neighboring portal triads or between a
portal triad and central vein (bridging necrosis); and variable degrees
of bile duct epithelial injury. Distortion of hepatic architecture can be
severe; cirrhosis may be present in over a third of children at the time of
diagnosis. Histologic features in acute liver failure may be obscured by
massive necrosis and multilobular collapse. Other histologic features
may suggest an alternative diagnosis; characteristic periodic acid–
Schiff-­positive, diastase-­resistant granules are seen in α1-­antitrypsin
deficiency, and macrovesicular and microvesicular steatosis is found
in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and often in Wilson disease. Bile duct
injury can suggest an autoimmune cholangiopathy or an overlap syndrome. Ultrastructural analysis might suggest distinct types of storage
disorders.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical features and course of autoimmune hepatitis are
extremely variable. Signs and symptoms at the time of presentation
comprise a wide spectrum of disease including a substantial number
of asymptomatic patients and some who have an acute, even fulminant, onset. In 25–30% of patients with autoimmune hepatitis, particularly children, the illness mimics acute viral hepatitis. In most,
the onset is insidious. Patients can be asymptomatic or have fatigue,
malaise, behavioral changes, anorexia, and amenorrhea, sometimes for many months before jaundice or stigmata of chronic liver
disease are recognized. Extrahepatic manifestations can include
arthritis, vasculitis, nephritis, thyroiditis, Coombs-­
positive anemia, and rash (vitiligo, Sweet syndrome, pyoderma gangrenosum,
erythema nodosum). Some patients’ initial clinical features reflect
cirrhosis (ascites, hypersplenism, bleeding esophageal varices, or
hepatic encephalopathy). There may be mild to moderate jaundice
in severe cases. Spider telangiectasias and palmar erythema may be
present. The liver may be tender and slightly enlarged but might not
be felt in patients with cirrhosis. The spleen is commonly enlarged.
Edema and ascites may be present in advanced cases.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The findings are related to the severity of presentation. In many
asymptomatic cases, serum aminotransferase ranges between 100
and 300 IU/L, whereas levels in excess of 1,000 IU/L can be seen in
young symptomatic patients. Serum bilirubin concentrations may
be normal in mild cases but are commonly 2-­10 mg/dL in more
severe cases. Serum alkaline phosphatase and γ-­glutamyl transpeptidase activities are normal to slightly increased but may be more
significantly elevated in autoimmune cholangiopathy or in the setting of overlap with sclerosing cholangitis. Serum γ-­globulin levels can show marked polyclonal elevations. Hypoalbuminemia is
common. The prothrombin time or international normalized ratio
(INR) is prolonged, most often as a result of vitamin K deficiency
but also as a reflection of impaired hepatocellular function. A normochromic normocytic anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia are present and become more severe with the development of
portal hypertension and hypersplenism.
Most patients with autoimmune hepatitis have hypergammaglobulinemia. Serum immunoglobulin G levels usually exceed 16
g/L. Characteristic patterns of serum autoantibodies define distinct subgroups of autoimmune hepatitis (Table 410.1). The most
common pattern (type 1) is associated with the formation of non–
organ-­specific antibodies, such as antiactin (smooth muscle) and
ANA. Approximately 50% of these patients are 10-­20 years of age.
High titers of a liver-­kidney microsomal antibody are detected in
another form (type 2) that usually affects children 2-­14 years of age.
A subgroup of primarily young females might demonstrate autoantibodies against a soluble liver antigen but not against nuclear or
microsomal proteins. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies may

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2488 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 410.1  Classification of Autoimmune Hepatitis
VARIABLE

TYPE 1 AUTOIMMUNE HEPATITIS

Characteristic autoantibodies

Antinuclear antibody*

TYPE 2 AUTOIMMUNE HEPATITIS
Antibody against liver-­kidney microsome
type 1*

Smooth-­muscle antibody*
Antiactin antibody

Antibody against liver cytosol type 1*

Autoantibodies against soluble liver antigen
and liver-­pancreas antigen‡

Antibody against liver-­kidney microsome
type 3

Atypical perinuclear antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody
Geographic variation

Worldwide

Worldwide; rare in North America

Age at presentation

Any age

Predominantly early childhood

Sex of patients

Female in ∼75% of cases

Female in ∼95% of cases

Association with other autoimmune diseases

Common

Common§

Clinical severity

Broad range, variable

Generally severe

Histopathologic features at presentation

Broad range, mild disease to cirrhosis

Generally advanced

Treatment failure

Infrequent

Frequent

Relapse after drug withdrawal

Variable

Common

Need for long-­term maintenance

Variable

∼100%

*The conventional method of detection is immunofluorescence.
‡This antibody is detected by enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay.
§Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-­candidiasis-­ectodermal dystrophy is seen only in patients with type 2 disease.
Modified from Krawitt EL. Autoimmune hepatitis. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:54–66.

be seen more commonly in autoimmune cholangiopathy. Autoantibodies are rare in healthy children, so that titers as low as 1:40 may
be significant, although nonspecific elevation in autoantibodies can
be observed in a variety of liver diseases. Up to 20% of patients
with apparent autoimmune hepatitis might not have autoantibodies at presentation but have histologic features and clinical course
consistent with the disorder. Other, less common autoantibodies
include rheumatoid factor, antiparietal cell antibodies, atypical
p-­ANCA, antithyroid antibodies, and anti–liver cytosol type 1 antibody (anti-­LC-­1).

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of autoimmune hepatitis is based on clinical, biochemical, immunologic, and histologic features and the exclusion of other
known causes of liver disease. Diagnostic criteria with scoring systems
have been developed for adults and modified slightly for children,
although these scoring systems were developed as research rather than
diagnostic tools and lack validation by prospective studies and lack
accuracy in the setting of concurrent sclerosing cholangitis, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, or fulminant liver failure. Autoimmune hepatitis should be considered in all children presenting with elevated liver
function tests and/or signs of chronic liver disease, including children
who are asymptomatic, in liver failure, or who have autoantibody-­
negative hepatitis. Important positive features include primary elevation in transaminases and not alkaline phosphatase (or GGT), elevated
γ-­globulin levels, the presence of autoantibodies (most commonly
antinuclear, smooth muscle, or liver-­kidney microsome), and characteristic histologic findings (Fig. 410.1). Other causes of acute hepatitis and chronic liver disease must be excluded including infection
(Epstein-­Barr virus [EBV], hepatitis A [Hep A], B, C, D), drug or toxin
exposure, α1-­antitrypsin deficiency (see Chapter 405) and Wilson disease (see Chapter 405.2) (Table 410.2). To exclude these processes viral

Fig. 410.1 Autoimmune hepatitis. Liver biopsy showing fibrous ex-

pansion of the portal tracts with moderate portal lymphocytic infiltrates
rich in plasma cells (arrowhead). There is extensive interface hepatitis (arrows). Original magnification ×20. (Courtesy Dr Margret Magid,
Mount Sinai School of Medicine.)

titers (Hep A IgM, Hep B surface Ag, Hep C Ab), α1-­antitrypsin level/
phenotype and serum ceruloplasmin should be obtained. Magnetic
resonance (MR) cholangiography may be very useful for screening for
evidence of sclerosing cholangitis. An overlap syndrome with features
of primary sclerosing cholangitis and autoimmune hepatitis is being
increasingly recognized with wider application of MR cholangiography. Ultimately, liver biopsy is necessary to confirm compatible histologic features as well as to look for features of small duct primary
sclerosing cholangitis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 410 u Autoimmune Hepatitis 2489
Table 410.2  Disorders Producing Chronic Hepatitis
• Chronic viral hepatitis
• Hepatitis B
• Hepatitis C
• Hepatitis D
• Autoimmune hepatitis
• Anti–actin antibody-­positive
• Anti-nuclear antibody
• Anti–liver-­kidney microsomal antibody-­positive
• Anti–soluble liver antigen antibody-­positive
• Others (includes antibodies to liver-­specific lipoproteins or
asialoglycoprotein)
• Overlap syndrome with sclerosing cholangitis and autoantibodies
• Systemic lupus erythematosus
• Celiac disease
• Drug-­induced hepatitis
• Metabolic disorders associated with chronic liver disease
• Wilson disease
• Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
• α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
• Tyrosinemia
• Niemann-­Pick disease type 2
• Glycogen storage disease type IV
• Cystic fibrosis
• Galactosemia
• Bile acid biosynthetic abnormalities

TREATMENT

Prednisone, with or without azathioprine, improves the clinical,
biochemical, and histologic features in most patients with autoimmune hepatitis and prolongs survival in most patients with severe
disease. The goal is to suppress or eliminate hepatic inflammation
with minimal side effects. Prednisone at an initial dose of 1-­2 mg/
kg/24 hr is continued until aminotransferase values return to normal. Budesonide (9 mg/daily) can be used instead of prednisone
for children who do not have cirrhosis or severe acute autoimmune
hepatitis. In some centers, azathioprine (1.5-­2.0 mg/kg/24 hr, up to
100 mg/24 hr) is started at the same time as glucocorticoids, whereas
other centers prefer to wait ∼2 weeks before starting azathioprine
to confirm steroid responsiveness and allow improvement in liver
function. Measurement of thiopurine methyltransferase activity
should be performed at some point in the beginning of therapy as
patients with low activity (10% prevalence) or absent activity (prevalence 0.3%) are at risk for developing severe drug-­induced myelotoxicity from accumulation of the unmetabolized drug. Once liver
function tests normalize and biochemical remission is achieved the
prednisone or budesonide dose should then be lowered (in 5-­mg
decrements for prednisone and 3-­mg decrements for budesonide)
over several months. Liver function tests should be monitored every
1-­2 weeks while tapering steroids to ensure the child stays in biochemical remission. Once tapered off steroids, liver function tests
should be monitored every 3-­4 months to ensure the child stays in
biochemical remission. Cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate mofetil can be trialed as second-­line agents for cases refractory

to standard therapy. Use of these agents should be reserved for practitioners with extensive experience in their administration because
the agents have a more restricted therapeutic to toxic ratio.
If the child has sustained normal serum levels of aminotransferases, negative autoantibodies and normal IgG levels for at least 2 years
after steroids have been withdrawn, a follow-­up liver biopsy can be
performed and if there is no evidence of ongoing inflammation, then
gradual withdrawal of azathioprine can be attempted. However, there
is a high rate of relapse after discontinuation of therapy and many children with autoimmune hepatitis require lifelong azathioprine.
Patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis/autoimmune hepatitis
overlap syndrome respond similarly to immunosuppressive therapy.
Prednisone, azathioprine and ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) (10 mg/
kg/dose BID) are recommended for children with overlap syndrome.

PROGNOSIS

The initial response to therapy in autoimmune hepatitis is generally
prompt, with a >75% rate of remission. Transaminases and bilirubin fall to near-­normal levels, often in the first 1-­3 months. When
present, abnormalities in serum albumin and prothrombin time
respond over a longer period (3-­9 months). In patients meeting
the criteria for tapering and then withdrawal of treatment (25–40%
of children), 50% are weaned from all medication. However, long-­
term biochemical remission has been possible in only 20% of children with type 1 autoimmune hepatitis and rarely in children with
type 2 autoimmune hepatitis. Relapse usually responds to retreatment. Many children will not meet the criteria for an attempt at
discontinuation of immunosuppression and should be maintained
on the smallest dose of prednisone or azathioprine that minimizes
biochemical activity of the disease. A careful balance of the risks
of continued immunosuppression and ongoing hepatitis must be
continually evaluated. This requires frequent screening for complications of medical therapy (monitoring of linear growth velocity,
ophthalmologic examination, bone density measurement, blood
pressure monitoring). Intermittent flares of hepatitis can occur and
can necessitate recycling of prednisone therapy.
Some children have a relatively steroid-­resistant form of hepatitis.
More extensive evaluations of the etiology of their hepatitis should
be undertaken, directed particularly at reassessing for the presence
of either sclerosing cholangitis or Wilson disease. Nonadherence to
medical therapy is one of the most common causes of “resistance” to
medical therapy. Progression to cirrhosis can occur in autoimmune
hepatitis despite a good response to drug therapy and prolongation
of life. Corticosteroid therapy in fulminant autoimmune disease may
be useful, although it should be administered with caution, given
the predisposition of these patients to systemic bacterial and fungal
infections.
Liver transplantation has been successful in patients with end-­stage
or fulminant liver disease associated with autoimmune hepatitis (see
Chapter 416). Disease recurs after transplantation in approximately
30% of patients and is associated with increased concentrations of
serum autoantibodies and interface hepatitis on liver biopsy. Patients
generally respond well to an increase in immunosuppression, particularly to the addition of azathioprine.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2490 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 411

Drug-­ and Toxin-­Induced
Liver Injury
Frederick J. Suchy and Amy G. Feldman
The liver is the main site of drug metabolism and is particularly susceptible to structural and functional injury after the ingestion, parenteral administration, or inhalation of chemical agents, drugs, plant
derivatives (home remedies), herbal or nutritional supplements, or
environmental toxins. The possibility of drug use or toxin exposure at
home or in the parents’ workplace should be explored for every child
with liver dysfunction. Host factors related to hepatotoxicity include
age, genetic predisposition, nutritional status, concomitant medications, and underlying diseases. The clinical spectrum of illness can
vary from asymptomatic biochemical abnormalities of liver function
to fulminant failure (Table 411.1). Liver injury may be the only clinical
feature of an adverse drug reaction or may be accompanied by systemic
manifestations and damage to other organs. In hospitalized patients,
clinical and laboratory findings may be confused with the underlying
illness. After acetaminophen, antimicrobials, supplements, and central
nervous system agents are the most commonly implicated drug classes
causing liver injury in children.
There is growing concern about environmental hepatotoxins that are
insidious in their effects. Many environmental toxins―including the
plasticizers, biphenyl A, and the phthalates―are ligands for nuclear
receptors that transcriptionally activate the promoters of many genes
involved in xenobiotic and lipid metabolism and may contribute to
obesity and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Some herbal, weight
loss, and body building supplements have been associated with hepatic
injury or even liver failure (Table 411.2) related to their intrinsic toxicity or because of contamination with fungal toxins, pesticides, or heavy
metals.
Hepatic metabolism of drugs and toxins is mediated by a sequence
of enzymatic reactions that in large part transform hydrophobic, less-­
soluble molecules into more nontoxic, hydrophilic compounds that
can be readily excreted in urine or bile (see Chapter 94). Relative liver
size, liver blood flow, and extent of protein binding also influence
drug metabolism. Phase 1 of the process involves enzymatic activation of the substrate to reactive intermediates containing a carboxyl,
phenol, epoxide, or hydroxyl group. Mixed-­function monooxygenase,
cytochrome-­c reductase, various hydrolases, and the cytochrome P450
(CYP) system are involved in this process. Nonspecific induction of
these enzymatic pathways, which can occur during intercurrent viral
infection, with starvation, and with the administration of certain drugs
such as anticonvulsants, can alter drug metabolism and increase the
potential for hepatotoxicity. A single agent can be metabolized by
more than one biochemical reaction. The reactive intermediates that
are potentially damaging to the cell are enzymatically conjugated in
phase 2 reactions with glucuronic acid, sulfate, acetate, glycine, or glutathione. Some drugs may be directly metabolized by these conjugating
reactions without first undergoing phase 1 activation. Phase 3 is the
energy-­dependent excretion of drug metabolites and their conjugates
by an array of membrane transporters in the liver and kidney such as
the multidrug resistant protein 1.
Pathways for biotransformation are expressed early in the fetus
and infant, but many phase 1 and phase 2 enzymes are immature, particularly in the first year of life. CYP3A4 is the primary hepatic CYP
expressed postnatally and metabolizes more than 75 commonly used
therapeutic drugs and several environmental pollutants and procarcinogens. Hepatic CYP3A4 activity is poorly expressed in the fetus
but increases after birth to reach 30% of adult values by 1 month and
50% of adult values between 6 and 12 months of age. CYP3A4 can be

induced by a number of drugs, including phenytoin, phenobarbital, and
rifampin. Enhanced production of toxic metabolites can overwhelm
the capacity of phase 2 reactions. Conversely, numerous inhibitors of
CYP3A4 from several different drug classes, such as erythromycin and
cimetidine, can lead to toxic accumulations of CYP3A4 substrates. By
contrast, although CYP2D6 is also developmentally regulated (maturation by 10 years of age), its activity depends more on genetic polymorphisms than on sensitivity to inducers and inhibitors because more
than 70 allelic variants of CYP2D6 significantly influence the metabolism of many drugs. Uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase 1A6,
a phase 2 enzyme that glucuronidates acetaminophen, is also absent in
the human fetus, increases slightly in the neonate, but does not reach
adult levels until sometime after 10 years of age. Mechanisms for the
uptake and excretion of organic ions can also be deficient early in life.
Impaired drug metabolism via phase 1 and phase 2 reactions present in
the first few months of life is followed by a period of enhanced metabolism of many drugs in children through 10 years of age compared with
adults.
Genetic polymorphisms in genes encoding enzymes and transporters mediating phases 1, 2, and 3 reactions can also be associated with
impaired drug metabolism and an increased risk of hepatotoxicity.
Some cases of idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity can occur as a result of
aberrations (polymorphisms) in phase 1 drug metabolism, producing intermediates of unusual hepatotoxic potential combined with
developmental, acquired, or relative inefficiency of phase 2 conjugating reactions. Genome-­wide association studies have identified HLA
associations in certain cases of drug-­and toxin-­induced liver injury
(DILI). Children may be less susceptible than adults to hepatotoxic
reactions; liver injury after the use of the anesthetic halothane is rare
in children, and acetaminophen toxicity is less common in infants than
in adolescents, whereas most cases of fatal hepatotoxicity associated
with sodium valproate use have been reported in children. Excessive
or prolonged therapeutic administration of acetaminophen combined
with reductions in caloric or protein intake can produce hepatotoxicity in children. In this setting, acetaminophen metabolism may be
impaired by reduced synthesis of sulfated and glucuronated metabolites and reduced stores of glutathione. Immaturity of hepatic drug
metabolic pathways can prevent degradation of a toxic agent; under
other circumstances, the same immaturity might limit the formation
of toxic metabolites. Severe sodium valproate hepatotoxicity is often
associated with an underlying inherited mitochondrial disorder (Alpers syndrome).
Chemical hepatotoxicity can be predictable or idiosyncratic. Predictable hepatotoxicity implies a high incidence of hepatic injury in
exposed persons depending on dose. It is understandable that only
a few drugs in clinical use fall into this category. These agents might
damage the hepatocyte directly through alteration of membrane lipids (peroxidation) or through denaturation of proteins; such agents
include carbon tetrachloride and trichloroethylene. Indirect injury
can occur through interference with metabolic pathways essential for
cell integrity or through distortion of cellular constituents by covalent
binding of a reactive metabolite; examples include the liver injury produced by acetaminophen or by antimetabolites such as methotrexate
or 6-­mercaptopurine.
Idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity is unpredictable and accounts for the
majority of adverse reactions. Higher doses of drugs metabolized in the
liver pose a greater risk for hepatotoxicity. Idiosyncratic drug reactions
in certain patients can reflect aberrant pathways for drug metabolism,
possibly related to genetic polymorphisms, with production of toxic
intermediates (isoniazid and sodium valproate can cause liver damage
through this mechanism). Duration of drug use before liver injury varies (weeks to ≥1 year) and the response to reexposure may be delayed.
An idiosyncratic reaction can also be immunologically mediated as a
result of prior sensitization (hypersensitivity); extrahepatic manifestations of hypersensitivity can include fever, rash, arthralgia, and eosinophilia. Duration of exposure before reaction is generally 1-­4 weeks,
with prompt recurrence of injury on reexposure. Studies indicate that
arene oxides, generated through oxidative (CYP) metabolism of aromatic anticonvulsants (phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine),

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 411 u Drug-­ and Toxin-­Induced Liver Injury

2491

Table 411.1  Most Common or Well-­Described Drug-­Induced Liver Injury Agents and the Patterns of Their Liver Injury
LATENCY*

TYPICAL PATTERN OF INJURY/IDENTIFYING FEATURES

ANTIBIOTICS
Amoxicillin/clavulanate

Short to moderate

Cholestatic injury but can be hepatocellular; drug-­induced liver
injury onset is frequently detected after drug cessation

Isoniazid

Moderate to long

Acute hepatocellular injury similar to acute viral hepatitis

Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole

Short to moderate

Cholestatic injury but can be hepatocellular; often with
immunoallergic features (e.g., fever, rash, and eosinophilia)

Fluoroquinolones

Short

Variable—hepatocellular, cholestatic, or mixed in relatively similar
proportions

Macrolides

Short

Hepatocellular but can be cholestatic

Nitrofurantoin

Hepatocellular

Acute form (rare)

Short

Typically hepatocellular; often resembles idiopathic autoimmune
hepatitis

Chronic form

Moderate to long (months-­years)

Hepatocellular

Minocycline

Moderate to long

Hepatocellular and often resembles autoimmune hepatitis

ANTIEPILEPTICS
Phenytoin

Short to moderate

Hepatocellular, mixed, or cholestatic often with immune-­allergic
features (e.g., fever, rash, and eosinophilia) (anticonvulsant
hypersensitivity syndrome)

Carbamazepine

Moderate

Hepatocellular, mixed, or cholestatic often with immune-­allergic
features (anticonvulsant hypersensitivity syndrome)

Lamotrigine

Moderate

Hepatocellular often with immune-­allergic features (anticonvulsant
hypersensitivity syndrome)

Hyperammonemia

Moderate to long

Elevated blood ammonia and encephalopathy

Hepatocellular

Moderate to long

Hepatocellular

Reye-­like syndrome

Moderate

Hepatocellular, acidosis; microvesicular steatosis on biopsy

ANALGESICS
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents

Moderate to long

Hepatocellular injury

Valproate

Diclofenac

Hepatocellular injury with autoimmune features

IMMUNE MODULATORS
Interferon-­beta

Moderate to long

Hepatocellular

Interferon-­alpha

Moderate

Hepatocellular, autoimmune hepatitis–like

Anti-­TNF agents

Moderate to long

Hepatocellular. Can have autoimmune hepatitis features

Azathioprine

Moderate to long

Cholestatic or hepatocellular but can present with portal hypertension
(veno-­occlusive disease and nodular regenerative hyperplasia)

Under 12 wk

Initially mixed pattern but evolves primarily into hepatocellular
pattern, without significant autoantibodies

MISCELLANEOUS
Methotrexate (oral)

Long

Fatty liver, fibrosis

Allopurinol

Short to moderate

Hepatocellular or mixed. Often with immune-­allergic features.
Granulomas often present on biopsy

Amiodarone (oral)

Moderate to long

Hepatocellular, mixed, or cholestatic. Macrovesicular steatosis and
steatohepatitis on biopsy

Androgen-­containing steroids

Moderate to long

Cholestatic. Can present with peliosis hepatis, nodular
regenerative hyperplasia, or hepatocellular carcinoma

Inhaled anesthetics

Short

Hepatocellular. May have immune-­allergic features ± fever

Sulfasalazine

Short to moderate

Mixed, hepatocellular, or cholestatic. Often with immunoallergic
features

Proton pump inhibitors

Short

Hepatocellular; very rare

IMMUNE-­CHECKPOINT INHIBITORS
Ipilimumab (CTLA-­4 inhibitor)
Nivolumab, pembrolizumab, and
cemiplimab (PD-­1 inhibitors)
Atezolizumab, avelumab, and
durvalumab (PDL-­1 inhibitors)

*Short = 3-­30 days; moderate = 30-­90 days; long >90 days.
CTLA-­4, Cytotoxic T-­lymphocyte antigen-­4; PD-­1, programmed cell death receptor-­1; PDL-­1, programmed cell death receptor-­ligand 1; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
From Chalasani NP, Maddur H, Russo MW, et al. ACG clinical guideline: diagnosis and management of idiosyncratic drug-­induced liver injury. Am J Gastroenterol. 2021;116(5):878–
898. Table 6.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2492 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Table 411.2  Hepatotoxic Herbal Remedies, Dietary Supplements, and Weight Loss Products
REMEDY

POPULAR USES

SOURCE

HEPATOTOXIC
COMPONENT

TYPE OF LIVER INJURY

Ayurvedic herbal
medicine

Multiple

Multiple

Uncertain (may contain
heavy metal contaminants)

Hepatitis

Barakol

Anxiolytic

Cassia siamea

Uncertain

Reversible hepatitis or
cholestasis

Black cohosh

Menopausal symptoms

Cimicifuga racemosa

Uncertain

Hepatitis (causality uncertain)

“Bush tea”

Fever

Senecio, Heliotropium,
Crotalaria spp.

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

SOS

Cascara

Laxative

Cascara sagrada

Anthracene glycoside

Cholestatic hepatitis

Chaparral leaf
(greasewood,
creosote bush)

“Liver tonic,” burn salve,
weight loss

Larrea tridentata

Nordihydroguaiaretic acid

Acute and chronic hepatitis,
FHF

Chaso/onshido

Weight loss

—

N-­nitro-­fenfluramine

Acute hepatitis, FHF

Jin bu huan

Sleep aid, analgesic

Lycopodium serratum

Levo-­tetrahydropalmatine

Acute or chronic hepatitis or
cholestasis, steatosis

Ma huang

Weight loss

Ephedra spp.

Ephedrine

Severe hepatitis, FHF

Shou-­wu-­pian

Antiaging,
neuroprotection, laxative

Polygonum multiflorum
Thunb. (fleeceflower root)

Anthraquinone

Acute hepatitis or cholestasis

Syo-­saiko-­to

Multiple

Scutellaria root

Diterpenoids

Hepatocellular necrosis,
cholestasis, steatosis,
granulomas

Comfrey

Herbal tea

Symphytum spp.

Pyrrolizidine alkaloid

Acute SOS, cirrhosis

Germander

Weight loss, fever

Teucrium chamaedrys, T.
capitatum, T. polium

Diterpenoids, epoxides

Acute and chronic hepatitis,
FHF, autoimmune injury

Greater celandine

Gallstones, IBS

Chelidonium majus

Isoquinoline alkaloids

Cholestatic hepatitis, fibrosis

Green tea leaf extract

Multiple

Camellia sinensis

Catechins

Hepatitis (causality
questioned)

Herbalife

Nutritional supplement,
weight loss

—

Various; ephedra

Severe hepatitis, FHF

Hydroxycut

Weight loss

Camellia sinensis, among
other constituents

Uncertain

Acute hepatitis, FHF

Impila

Multiple

Callilepis laureola

Potassium atractylate

Hepatic necrosis

Kava

Anxiolytic

Piper methysticum

Kava lactone,
pipermethystine

Acute hepatitis, cholestasis,
FHF

Kombucha

Weight loss

Lichen alkaloid

Usnic acid

Acute hepatitis

Limbrel (Flavocoxid)

Osteoarthritis

Plant bioflavonoids

Baicalin, epicatechin

Acute mixed
hepatocellular-­cholestatic
injury

Lipokinetix

Weight loss

Lichen alkaloid

Usnic acid

Acute hepatitis, jaundice, FHF

Mistletoe

Asthma, infertility

Viscus album

Uncertain

Hepatitis (in combination
with skullcap)

Oil of cloves

Dental pain

Various foods, oils

Eugenol

Zonal necrosis

Pennyroyal
(squawmint oil)

Abortifacient

Hedeoma pulegioides,
Mentha pulegium

Pulegone, monoterpenes

Severe hepatocellular
necrosis

Prostata

Prostatism

Multiple

Uncertain

Chronic cholestasis

Sassafras

Herbal tea

Sassafras albidum

Safrole

HCC (in animals)

Senna

Laxative

Cassia angustifolia

Sennoside alkaloids;
anthrone

Acute hepatitis

Skullcap

Anxiolytic

Scutellaria

Diterpenoids

Hepatitis

Valerian

Sedative

Valeriana officinalis

Uncertain

Elevated liver enzymes

Chinese medicines
(traditional)

FHF, Fulminant hepatic failure; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; SOS, sinusoidal obstruction syndrome.
From Lewis JH. Liver disease caused by anesthetics, chemicals, toxins, and herbal preparations. In: Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, eds. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s
Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Table 89.6.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 411 u Drug-­ and Toxin-­Induced Liver Injury
can initiate the pathogenesis of some hypersensitivity reactions. Arene
oxides, formed in vivo, can bind to cellular macromolecules, thus perturbing cell function and possibly initiating immunologic mechanisms
of liver injury.
The pathogenesis of hepatoxicity is most likely multifactorial, particularly the role played by the host immune system. Activation of
liver nonparenchymal Kupffer cells and infiltration by neutrophils perpetuate toxic injury by many drugs by release of reactive oxygen and
nitrogen species as well as cytokines. Stellate cells can also be activated,
potentially leading to hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis.
The pathologic spectrum of drug-­induced liver disease is extremely
wide, is rarely specific, and can mimic other liver diseases (Table 411.3;
see also Table 411.1). Predictable hepatotoxins, such as acetaminophen, produce centrilobular necrosis of hepatocytes. Steatosis is an
important feature of tetracycline (microvesicular) and ethanol (macrovesicular) toxicities. A cholestatic hepatitis can be observed, with
injury caused by erythromycin estolate and chlorpromazine. Cholestasis without inflammation may be a toxic effect of estrogens and anabolic steroids. Use of oral contraceptives and androgens has also been
associated with benign and malignant liver tumors. Some idiosyncratic
drug reactions can produce mixed patterns of injury, with diffuse cholestasis and cell necrosis. Chronic hepatitis has been associated with
the use of methyldopa and nitrofurantoin.
Clinical manifestations can be mild and nonspecific, such as fever
and malaise. Fever, rash, and arthralgia may be prominent in cases of
hypersensitivity. In ill hospitalized patients, the signs and symptoms of
Table 411.3  Patterns of Hepatic Drug Injury
DISEASE

DRUG

Centrilobular necrosis

Acetaminophen
Carbon tetrachloride
Cocaine
Ecstasy
Iron
Halothane

Microvesicular steatosis

Valproic acid
Tetracycline
Toluene
Methotrexate

Acute hepatitis

Isoniazid
Anti–tumor necrosis factor agents
Valproic acid

General hypersensitivity

Sulfonamides
Phenytoin
Minocycline

Fibrosis

Methotrexate

Cholestasis

Chlorpromazine
Aniline
Erythromycin
Paraquat
Estrogens
Sertraline

Sinusoidal obstruction
syndrome (venoocclusive
disease)

Irradiation plus busulfan
Arsenic
Cyclophosphamide

Portal and hepatic vein
thrombosis

Estrogens
Androgens

Biliary sludge

Ceftriaxone

Hepatic adenoma or
hepatocellular carcinoma

Oral contraceptives
Anabolic steroids

2493

hepatic drug toxicity may be difficult to separate from the underlying
illness. The differential diagnosis should include acute and chronic viral
hepatitis, biliary tract disease, septicemia, ischemic and hypoxic liver
injury, malignant infiltration, and inherited metabolic liver disease.
The laboratory features of drug-­or toxin-­related liver disease are
extremely variable. Hepatocyte damage can lead to elevations of serum
aminotransferase activities and serum bilirubin levels and to impaired
synthetic function as evidenced by decreased serum coagulation factors and albumin. Hyperammonemia can occur with liver failure or
with selective inhibition of the urea cycle (sodium valproate). Toxicologic screening of blood and urine specimens can aid in detecting drug
or toxin exposure. Percutaneous liver biopsy may be necessary to distinguish drug injury from complications of an underlying disorder or
from intercurrent infection. Vanishing bile duct syndrome can be seen
in a small portion of patients with idiosyncratic DILI.
Slight elevation of serum aminotransferase activities (generally
<2-­3 times normal) can occur during therapy with drugs, particularly
anticonvulsants, capable of inducing microsomal pathways for drug
metabolism. Liver biopsy reveals proliferation of smooth endoplasmic
reticulum but no significant liver injury. Liver test abnormalities often
resolve with continued drug therapy.

TREATMENT

Treatment of drug-­or toxin-­related liver injury is mainly supportive.
Contact with the offending agent should be avoided. Corticosteroids
might have a role in immune-­mediated disease. Treatment with n-­
acetylcysteine, by stimulating glutathione synthesis, is effective in preventing or attenuating hepatotoxicity when administered within 16
hours after an acute overdose of acetaminophen and appears to improve
survival in patients with severe liver injury even up to 36 hours after
ingestion. Intravenous l-­carnitine may be of value in treating valproic
acid–induced hepatotoxicity. Orthotopic liver transplantation may be
required for treatment of drug-­or toxin-­induced hepatic failure.

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of DILI depends on its type and severity. Injury is usually completely reversible when the hepatotoxic factor is withdrawn.
The mortality of submassive hepatic necrosis with fulminant liver failure can, however, exceed 50%. Hyperbilirubinemia, coagulopathy, and
elevated serum creatinine are associated with an increased risk of death
or need for liver transplantation. With continued use of certain drugs,
such as methotrexate, effects of hepatoxicity can proceed insidiously to
cirrhosis, even with normal or near normal liver tests. Neoplasia can
follow long-­term androgen therapy. Rechallenge with a drug suspected
of having caused previous liver injury is rarely justified and can result
in fatal hepatic necrosis.

PREVENTION

The prevention of drug-­induced liver injury remains a challenge. Monitoring of liver biochemical tests may be useful in some cases, but it
can prove difficult to sustain for agents used for many years. Children
who take medications with potential for hepatotoxicity, such as some
anticonvulsants and antineoplastic drugs, require frequent monitoring
for evidence of liver injury. Such testing may be particularly important in patients with preexisting liver disease. For drugs with hepatotoxic potential, even if episodes are infrequent in children, such as
with the use of isoniazid, patients should be advised to immediately
stop the medication with onset of nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain,
and fatigue until liver damage is excluded. Obvious symptoms of liver
disease, such as jaundice and dark urine, can lag behind severe hepatocellular injury. Monitoring for toxic metabolites and genotyping can
be effective in preventing severe toxicity with the use of azathioprine.
Advances in pharmacogenomics, such as the use of gene chips to detect
variants in some of the CYP enzymes, hold promise of a personalized
approach to prevent hepatotoxicity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2494 Part XVI u The Digestive System
ETIOLOGY
Infection

Chapter 412

Acute Hepatic Failure
Frederick J. Suchy and Amy G. Feldman
Acute liver failure is a clinical syndrome associated with significant
morbidity and mortality resulting from massive necrosis of hepatocytes or from severe functional impairment of hepatocytes. The synthetic, excretory, and detoxifying functions of the liver are all severely
impaired. In adults, hepatic encephalopathy has been an essential
diagnostic feature. However, in pediatrics, this narrow definition may
be problematic because early hepatic encephalopathy can be difficult to
detect in infants and children, and some children in acute liver failure
may not develop encephalopathy (Table 412.1). The accepted definition in children includes biochemical evidence of acute liver injury
(usually <8 weeks duration); no evidence of chronic liver disease; and
hepatic-­based coagulopathy defined as a prothrombin time (PT) >15
seconds or international normalized ratio (INR) >1.5 not corrected by
vitamin K in the presence of clinical hepatic encephalopathy, or a PT
>20 seconds or INR >2 regardless of the presence of clinical hepatic
encephalopathy.
Liver failure in the perinatal period can be associated with prenatal
liver injury and even cirrhosis. Examples include gestational alloimmune liver disease (GALD), tyrosinemia, familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), and some cases of congenital viral
(herpes simplex virus [HSV]) infection. Liver disease may be noticed
at birth or after several days of apparent well-­being. Fulminant Wilson disease and fulminant autoimmune hepatitis also occurs in
older children who were previously asymptomatic but, by definition,
have preexisting liver disease (Table 412.2). Other forms of acute-­
on-­chronic liver failure can occur when a patient with an underlying
liver disease such as biliary atresia develops hepatic decompensation
after viral or drug-­induced hepatic injury. In some cases of liver failure, particularly in the idiopathic form of acute hepatic failure, the
onset of encephalopathy occurs later, from 8 to 28 weeks after the
onset of jaundice.

Acute hepatic failure can be a complication of viral hepatitis (A, B, D, and,
rarely, E), Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV), HSV, adenovirus, adeno-associated
virus, enterovirus, influenza A, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, human
herpesvirus (HHV)-­6, varicella zoster infection, parechovirus, coronavirus-­2 (SARS-­CoV-­2) and other respiratory illnesses (see Table 412.2; see
also Chapter 406). An unusually high rate of fulminant hepatic failure
occurs in young people who have combined infections with the hepatitis B
virus (HBV) and hepatitis D. Pathogenic gene variants in the precore and/
or promoter region of HBV DNA are associated with fulminant and severe
hepatitis. HBV is also responsible for some cases of fulminant liver failure
in the absence of serologic markers of HBV infection but with HBV DNA
found in the liver. Hepatitis E virus is an uncommon cause of fulminant
hepatic failure in the United States but can occur in pregnant women, in
whom mortality rates rise dramatically to up to 25%. Patients with chronic
hepatitis C are at risk if they have superinfection with hepatitis A virus.

Autoimmune Hepatitis

Acute hepatic failure is caused by autoimmune hepatitis in approximately 5–28% of cases (see Chapter 410). Patients have a positive
autoimmune marker (e.g., antinuclear antibody, anti–smooth muscle
antibody, liver-­kidney microsomal antibody, or soluble liver antigen)
and possibly an elevated serum immunoglobulin G level. If a biopsy
can be performed, liver histology often demonstrates interface hepatitis and a plasma cell infiltrate.

Metabolic Diseases

Metabolic disorders account for 28–36% of cases of pediatric acute
liver failure and include galactosemia, tyrosinemia, hereditary fructose intolerance, Niemann-­Pick type C, mitochondrial hepatopathies (in particular, mitochondrial DNA depletion disorders), urea
cycle defects, defects in β-­oxidation of fatty acids, and disorders of
bile acid synthesis in infants and young children and Wilson disease
and acute fatty liver of pregnancy in older children (see Table 412.2;
see also Chapters 405.1 and 405.5). Family history of consanguinity, recurrent pregnancy loss, stillbirths, or death of children before
the age of 1 and/or patient history of diarrhea, vomiting, failure to
thrive, or developmental delay should alert one to the possibility of
metabolic disease. Patients with Wilson disease who present in acute

Table 412.1  Hepatic Encephalopathy in Pediatric Acute Liver Failure
STAGE

CLINICAL

0
I

III

IV

NEUROLOGIC SIGNS

EEG CHANGES

None

Normal

None

Normal

Inconsolable, crying, inattention to
task, parents describe child as “not
acting like self”
Confused, mood changes, altered
sleep habits, forgetful

Normal or
hyperreflexia

Difficult or impossible to
assess

Normal

Tremor, apraxia, impaired
handwriting

Normal or diffuse
slowing to theta
rhythm, triphasic
waves

Normal or
hyperreflexia

Difficult or impossible to
assess

Adolescent/young
adult

Inconsolable, crying, inattention to
task, parents describe child as “not
acting like self”
Drowsy, inappropriate behavior,
decreased inhibitions

Hyperreflexia

Dysarthria, ataxia

Infant/child

Somnolence, stupor, combativeness

Hyperreflexia

Adolescent/young
adult

Stuporous, obeys simple commands

Hyperreflexia, (+)
Babinski

Difficult or impossible to
assess
Rigidity

Abnormal, generalized
slowing, triphasic
waves

Infant/child

Comatose, arouses with painful
stimuli (IVa) or no response (IVb)
Comatose, arouses with painful
stimuli (IVa) or no response

Absent

Decerebrate or decorticate

Abnormal, very slow,
delta activity

Absent

Decerebrate or decorticate

Infant/child
Adolescent/young
adult

II

REFLEXES

Infant/child

Adolescent/young
adult

Abnormal, generalized
slowing, triphasic
waves

EEG, Electroencephalography.
Modified from Squires RH Jr. Acute liver failure in children. Semin Liver Dis. 2008;28(2):157–166. Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 412 u Acute Hepatic Failure
Table 412.2  Etiologies of Acute Liver Failure
DRUG-­INDUCED LIVER INJURY
Acetaminophen
Antibiotics: amoxicillin-­clavulanate, ciprofloxacin, nitrofurantoin,
minocycline, dapsone, doxycycline, trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole, efavirenz, didanosine, abacavir, ketoconazole
Antiepileptics: valproic acid, phenytoin, carbamazepine
Antituberculosis drugs: isoniazid, rifampin-­isoniazid, pyrazinamide
Antihypertensives: methyldopa, hydralazine, labetalol, nicotinic acid
(slow release)
NSAIDs: diclofenac, ibuprofen, indomethacin, naproxen
Herbs and supplements: ma huang, kava kava, Herbalife, green tea
extract, ginseng, black cohosh, anabolic steroids
Anesthetics: halothane
Miscellaneous: propylthiouracil, amitriptyline, statins, amiodarone,
methotrexate
VIRAL HEPATITIS
Hepatitis A, B (±D), C, and E
Adenovirus, adeno-associated virus, CMV, EBV, herpes virus, parvovirus,
varicella zoster virus
PREGNANCY-­RELATED LIVER DISEASE
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
HELLP syndrome
Preeclampsia-­associated liver disease
Acute hepatic rupture
ISCHEMIC HEPATITIS
Systemic hypotension
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Hepatic artery thrombosis
Congestive hepatopathy
REVERSIBLE ETIOLOGIES
Autoimmune hepatitis
Leptospirosis, hepatic amoebiasis, malaria, rickettsial disease
GENETIC
Wilson disease
Galactosemia
Urea cycle defects
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Hemochromatosis
Mitochondrial disorders
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Tyrosinemia
Pathogenic variants in NBAS, DLD, CPT1A, FAH, LARS1, MPV17,
NPC1, POLG, SUCLG1, TWINK, DGUOK, RINT1, SCYL1, ITCH
MISCELLANEOUS
Malignancy
Mushroom poisoning
Heat injury
Reye syndrome
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Gestational alloimmune liver disease
Idiopathic
NSAID, Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr
virus; HELLP, hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelet count.
Modified from Montrief T, Koyfman A, Long B. Acute liver failure: a review for
emergency physicians. Am J Emerg Med. 2019;37:329–337. Table 3.

liver failure often have high bilirubin levels, low alkaline phosphatase
levels, low uric acid levels, aspartate aminotransferase levels that are
higher than alanine aminotransferase levels, and a Coombs-­negative
hemolytic anemia.

Neoplasm

Acute liver failure can occur with malignancies, including leukemia, lymphoma, and familial HLH. Acute liver failure is a common
feature of HLH caused by several gene defects, infections by mostly
viruses of the herpes group, and a variety of other conditions, including organ transplantation and malignancies. Impaired function of
natural killer cells and cytotoxic T-­lymphocyte cells with uncontrolled

2495

hemophagocytosis and cytokine overproduction is characteristic for
genetic and acquired forms of HLH. Patients with HLH present with a
combination of fever, splenomegaly, cytopenias, high triglyceride levels, very high ferritin levels, low natural killer cell activity, and high
soluble CD25 levels; they may also have hemophagocytosis on bone
marrow or liver biopsy (see Chapter 556).

Gestational Alloimmune Liver Disease

GALD is the most common cause of acute liver failure in the neonate (see Chapter 405.4). In this alloimmune process, maternal
immunoglobulin (Ig) G antibodies bind to fetal liver antigens and
activate the terminal complement cascade, resulting in hepatocyte
injury and death. Infants with GALD present at birth or within the
first few days of life with low/normal aminotransferases that are out
of proportion to their degree of liver failure. They may have significant hypoglycemia, jaundice, coagulopathy, and hypoalbuminemia.
Alpha fetoprotein levels are typically high, as are serum ferritin levels. Extrahepatic iron deposition can be observed on MRI or buccal
biopsy.

Drug-­Induced Liver Injury

Various hepatotoxic drugs and chemicals can also cause drug-­induced
liver injury and acute hepatic failure (see Table 412.2; see also Chapter
411). Predictable liver injury can occur after exposure to carbon tetrachloride or Amanita phalloides mushrooms or after acetaminophen
overdose. Acetaminophen is the most common identifiable etiology of
acute hepatic failure in children and adolescents in the United States
and England. In addition to the acute intentional ingestion of a massive dose, a therapeutic misadventure leading to severe liver injury
can also occur in ill children given doses of acetaminophen exceeding
weight-­based recommendations for many days. Such patients can have
reduced stores of glutathione after a prolonged illness and a period
of poor nutrition. Idiosyncratic damage can follow the use of drugs
such as halothane, isoniazid, ecstasy, or sodium valproate. Herbal and
weight loss supplements are additional causes of hepatic failure (see
Chapter 411). The website Liver Tox (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK547852/) is available to provide up-­to-­date information
about liver injury attributable to medications, herbals, and dietary
supplements.

Vascular

Ischemia and hypoxia resulting from hepatic vascular occlusion, severe
heart failure, cyanotic congenital heart disease, or circulatory shock
can produce liver failure. Venoocclusive disease (VOD) is a clinical
process characterized by weight gain, painful hepatomegaly, ascites,
and hyperbilirubinemia resulting from hepatic sinusoidal obstruction,
most commonly after hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Liver failure
is uncommon with VOD but can occur.

Idiopathic Acute Liver Failure

Idiopathic acute liver failure accounts for 40–50% of acute hepatic
failure cases in children. The disease occurs sporadically and usually
without the risk factors for common causes of viral hepatitis. It is likely
that the etiology of these cases is heterogeneous, including unidentified or variant viruses, excessive immune activation, and undiagnosed
genetic or metabolic disorders. There is increasing recognition of some
children presenting with indeterminate acute hepatitis or acute liver
failure who have evidence of immune activation, including markedly
elevated soluble interleukin 2 receptor (sIL-2R) levels but never fulfilling diagnostic criteria for HLH.

Other

There is a growing category of autosomal recessive disorders including pathogenic variants in the neuroblastoma amplified sequence gene
NBAS, LARS, SCYL1, and RINT1 that can result in recurrent episodes
of pediatric acute liver failure, sometimes associated with concurrent
fevers (see Table 412.2). Patients with NBAS variants may also have
short stature, skeletal abnormalities, intellectual disability, ophthalmic and facial abnormalities, cardiac abnormalities, and low serum

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2496 Part XVI u The Digestive System
immunoglobulins. Patients with SCYL1 variants may have low gammaglutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), cholestasis, and a variable neurologic
phenotype. Patients with RINT1 variants may have persistently abnormal liver function tests (LFTs) between acute liver failure episodes.
Most patients recovered with restoration of normal liver function after
control of fever and maintenance of energy balance with the infusion
of intravenous glucose.

PATHOLOGY

Liver biopsy usually reveals patchy or confluent massive necrosis of
hepatocytes. Multilobular or bridging necrosis can be associated with
collapse of the reticulin framework of the liver. There may be little or
no regeneration of hepatocytes. A zonal pattern of necrosis may be
observed with certain insults. Centrilobular damage is associated with
acetaminophen hepatotoxicity or with circulatory shock. Evidence of
severe hepatocyte dysfunction rather than cell necrosis is occasionally
the predominant histologic finding (microvesicular fatty infiltrate of
hepatocytes is observed in Reye syndrome, β-­oxidation defects, and
tetracycline toxicity).

PATHOGENESIS

It is unknown why only approximately 1–2% of patients with viral
hepatitis experience liver failure. Massive destruction of hepatocytes might represent both a direct cytotoxic effect of the virus and
an immune response to the viral antigens. Of patients with HBV-­
induced liver failure, 30–50% become negative for serum hepatitis
B surface antigen within a few days of presentation and often have
no detectable HBV antigen or HBV DNA in serum. These findings
suggest a hyperimmune response to the virus that underlies the massive liver necrosis. Formation of hepatotoxic metabolites that bind
covalently to macromolecular cell constituents is involved in the
liver injury produced by drugs such as acetaminophen and isoniazid;
acute hepatic failure can follow depletion of intracellular substrates
involved in detoxification, particularly glutathione. Whatever the initial cause of hepatocyte injury, various factors can contribute to the
pathogenesis of liver failure, including impaired hepatocyte regeneration, altered parenchymal perfusion, endotoxemia, and decreased
hepatic reticuloendothelial function.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Acute hepatic failure can be the presenting feature of liver disease, or
it can complicate previously known liver disease (acute-­on-­chronic
liver failure). Progressive jaundice, fetor hepaticus, fever, anorexia,
vomiting, and abdominal pain are common. A rapid decrease in liver
size without clinical improvement is an ominous sign. A hemorrhagic
diathesis and ascites can develop. In addition, acute liver failure is a
multisystem disorder (Fig. 412.1).
Patients should be closely observed for hepatic encephalopathy,
which is initially characterized by minor disturbances of consciousness or motor function. Irritability, poor feeding, and a change in sleep
rhythm may be the only findings in infants; asterixis may be demonstrable in older children. Patients are often somnolent, confused, or
combative on arousal and can eventually become responsive only to
painful stimuli. Patients can rapidly progress to deeper stages of coma
in which extensor responses and decerebrate and decorticate posturing appear. Respirations are usually increased early, but respiratory
failure can occur in stage IV coma (see Table 412.1). The pathogenesis
of hepatic encephalopathy is likely related to increased serum levels of
ammonia, false neurotransmitters, amines, increased γ-­aminobutyric
acid receptor activity, or increased circulating levels of endogenous
benzodiazepine-­like compounds. Decreased hepatic clearance of these
substances can produce marked central nervous system dysfunction.
The mechanisms responsible for cerebral edema and intracranial
hypertension in acute liver failure suggest both cytotoxic and vasogenic
injury (Fig. 412.2). There is increasing evidence for an inflammatory
response (synthesis and release of inflammatory factors from activated
microglia and endothelial cells), which acts in synergy with hyperammonemia to cause severe astrocyte swelling/brain edema.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Serum direct and indirect bilirubin levels and serum aminotransferase
activities may be markedly elevated. Serum aminotransferase activities
do not correlate well with the severity of the illness and can decrease
as a patient deteriorates. The blood ammonia concentration is usually
increased, but hepatic coma can occur in patients with a normal blood
ammonia level. PT and the INR are prolonged and do not improve
after parenteral administration of vitamin K. Hypoglycemia can occur,

Clinical manifestations of acute liver failure
Brain
Hepatic encephalopathy
Cerebral edema
Intracranial hypertension
Seizures
Liver
Loss of metabolic function
Hypoglycemia
Hyperammonemia
Coagulopathy
Lactic acidosis
Kidney and adrenals
Hepatorenal syndrome
Hepatoadrenal syndrome
Electrolyte abnormalities

Systemic
Systemic inflammatory response
Immunosuppression
High energy expenditure
Catabolic state

Heart
High output state
Subclinical myocardial injury
Hepatocardiac syndrome

Lungs
Acute lung injury
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Hepatopulmonary syndrome

Pancreas
Pancreatitis

Bone marrow
Frequent suppression
Anemia
Thrombocytopenia

Fig. 412.1 Clinical manifestations of acute liver. (From Montrief T, Koyfman A, Long B. Acute liver failure: a review for emergency physicians. Am
J Emerg Med. 2019;37:329–337. Fig.1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 412 u Acute Hepatic Failure

A

B

2497

D

C

Fig. 412.2 CT of the head in a patient with acute liver failure (ALF) who developed cerebral edema. A, Axial scan before the development of cer-

ebral edema. B, Coronal scan before the development of cerebral edema. C, Axial scan after the development of cerebral edema. D, Coronal scan
after development of cerebral edema. All in a dying patient with brainstem herniation because of acetaminophen-­induced ALF. C and D show the
loss of gray–white demarcation and effacement of sulci. (From Stravitz RT, Lee WM. Acute liver failure. Lancet. 2019;394:869–880. Fig. 3.)

Table 412.3  Investigations in Acute Liver Failure
SERUM CHEMISTRIES
Basic metabolic panel: sodium,
potassium, bicarbonate,
calcium, magnesium,
phosphate, glucose, blood
urea nitrogen, creatinine
Amylase, lipase
Serum lactate

VIRAL HEPATITIS SEROLOGIES
Anti-­HAV IgM
Hep B surface Ag, anti-­hep B
core Ab IgM
Hep D Ab, hep D RNA
Anti-­HCV, ±hepatitis C RNA
PCR
±Anti-­HEV IgM
Anti-­VZV IgM
Anti-­HSV IgM

HEPATIC PANEL
AST, ALT, albumin, total bilirubin,
alkaline phosphatase

AUTOIMMUNE MARKERS
Antinuclear antibody
Anti–smooth muscle antibody
Serum IgG levels

ARTERIAL BLOOD
Blood gas
Serum ammonia

URINE
Pregnancy test
Urinalysis and urine culture
Toxicology

TOXICOLOGIC
Blood alcohol level
Acetaminophen level
Urine toxicology screen
Serum salicylate level

HEMATOLOGIC
Complete blood count
Blood type and screen
Coagulation studies: PT/INR,
fibrinogen, PTT, TEG, D-­dimer

THERAPY
Acetominophen toxicity

N-­acetylcysteine

Drug-­induced liver injury

Cessation of offending agent;
consider steroids

Neonatal acute liver failure
secondary to gestational
alloimmune disease

Exchange transfusion and
immunoglobulin

Autoimmune liver disease

Steroids

Vascular etiologies (e.g., Budd-­
Chiari syndrome and sinusoidal
obstruction syndrome)

Anticoagulation and hepatic
decompression (usually with
a transhepatic portosystemic
shunt)

Wilson disease

Copper chelation

Herpes simplex virus

Acyclovir

MISCELLANEOUS
Serum ceruloplasmin
Blood cultures
Electrocardiogram
Exome sequencing
Mitochondrial DNA
Specific gene panels

Adenovirus

Cidofovir

Hepatitis A

No specific treatment

Hepatitis B

Lamivudine, entecavir, tenofovir

Hepatitis E

Ribavirin, α-­interferon

Galactosemia

Lactose-­free diet

IMAGING
CT brain scan without contrast
Abdominal US
Chest x-­ray
Echocardiogram
Transcranial Doppler

Hereditary fructose intolerance

Fructose-­free, sucrose-­free, and
sorbitol-­free diet

Tyrosinemia

2-­(2-­nitro-­4-­trifluoromethylbenzoyl)­1,3-­ cyclohexanedione in addition
to a diet restricted in tyrosine and
phenylalanine

Urea cycle defects

Protein restriction, ammonia
scavengers; renal replacement
therapy might be required

PT, Prothrombin time; INR, international normalized ratio; PTT, partial thromboplastin
time; TEG, thromboelastography.
Modified from Montrief T, Koyfman A, Long B. Acute liver failure: a review for
emergency physicians. Am J Emerg Med. 2019;37:329–337. Table 4.

particularly in infants. Hypokalemia, hyponatremia, metabolic acidosis, or respiratory alkalosis can also develop. Laboratory studies are
important to monitor the course of liver failure, to detect complications, and to better define the etiology (Table 412.3).

TREATMENT

Table 412.4  Potential Disease-­Directed Therapies in
Pediatric Acute Liver Failure

Specific therapies for identifiable causes of acute liver failure include N-­
acetylcysteine (acetaminophen), acyclovir (HSV), penicillin (Amanita
mushrooms), nucleos(t)ide analogs such as entecavir (HBV), and prednisone (autoimmune hepatitis) (Table 412.4). Immunosuppression

Modified from Deep A, Alexander EC, Bulut Y, et al. Advances in medical management
of acute liver failure in children: promoting native liver survival. Lancet Child Adolesc.
2022;6:725–737.

with corticosteroids should also be considered in children with the
indeterminate form of fulminant hepatic failure with immune activation to avoid progression to liver transplantation or death. However,
controlled trials have shown a worse outcome in patients treated with
corticosteroids in patients without an immune basis for liver injury.
Treatment of GALD involves intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2498 Part XVI u The Digestive System
(1 g/kg) followed by a combination of double-­volume exchange transfusion to remove existing reactive antibody and a second dose of IVIG
(1 g/kg) to block antibody-­induced complement activation.
Management of other types of acute hepatic failure is supportive. No
therapy is known to reverse hepatocyte injury or to promote hepatic
regeneration (Fig. 412.3). Continuous kidney replacement therapy and
extracorporeal liver support have been used as potential bridging therapies pending native liver recovery or liver transplantation.
An infant or child with acute hepatic failure should be cared for in
an institution able to perform a liver transplantation if necessary and
managed in an intensive care unit (ICU) with continuous monitoring
of vital functions. Endotracheal intubation may be required to prevent
aspiration, to reduce cerebral edema by hyperventilation, and to facilitate
pulmonary toilet. Mechanical ventilation and supplemental oxygen are
often necessary in advanced coma. Sedatives should be avoided unless
needed in the intubated patient because these agents can aggravate or
precipitate encephalopathy. Opiates may be better tolerated than benzodiazepines. Prophylactic use of proton pump inhibitors should be considered because of the high risk of gastrointestinal bleeding.
Hypovolemia should be avoided and treated with cautious infusions of isotonic fluids and blood products. Renal dysfunction can
result from dehydration, acute kidney injury, or functional renal failure (hepatorenal syndrome). Electrolyte and glucose solutions should
be administered intravenously to maintain urine output, to correct or
prevent hypoglycemia, and to maintain normal serum potassium concentrations. In a cardiovascularly stable patient, fluids should be kept
around 90% of maintenance. Hyponatremia is common and should be
avoided; it is usually dilutional and not a result of sodium depletion.

Parenteral supplementation with calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium may be required. Hypophosphatemia, probably a reflection of
liver regeneration, and early phosphorus administration are associated
with a better prognosis in acute liver failure, whereas hyperphosphatemia predicts a failure of spontaneous recovery. Coagulopathy should
be treated with parenteral administration of vitamin K. Fresh-­frozen
plasma, cryoprecipitate, platelets, activated factor VII, or prothrombin
complex concentrates can be used to treat clinically significant bleeding
or can be given if an invasive procedure such as placement of a central
line or an intracranial monitor needs to be performed. Plasmapheresis can permit temporary correction of the bleeding diathesis without
resulting in volume overload. Continuous hemofiltration is useful for
managing fluid overload, acute renal failure, and hyperammonemia.
Patients should be monitored closely for infection, including sepsis,
pneumonia, peritonitis, and urinary tract infections. At least 50% of
patients experience serious infection. Gram-­positive organisms (Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis) are the most common
pathogens, but gram-­negative and fungal infections are also observed.
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage, infection, constipation, sedatives,
electrolyte imbalance, and hypovolemia can precipitate encephalopathy and should be identified and corrected. Protein intake should be
restricted to 1 g/kg, depending on the degree of encephalopathy. If
encephalopathy or hyperammonemia develops, lactulose or rifaximin can be administered. N-­acetylcysteine is not effective in improving the outcome of patients with acute liver failure not associated with
acetaminophen.
Cerebral edema is an extremely serious complication of hepatic
encephalopathy that responds poorly to measures such as corticosteroid

Respiratory
• Endotracheal intubation in the event of
encephalopathy (grade 3 or above) or respiratory
failure
• Use appropriate sedation, pain management, and
neuromuscular blocking agents
• Adjust ventilation pressures and FiO2 to avoid
hypoxemia and hypercarbia

Supportive measures

Coagulation

• Monitor INR, renal function, blood gases, and
blood glucose regularly
• Aim for normothermia in the ﬁrst instance and
treat fevers with antipyretics
• Consider for all patients: broad-spectrum
antibiotics, antifungals, N-acetylcysteine, and
proton-pump inhibitors for gastric protection
• Nutrition to provide adequate energy:
carbohydrates (6–13 g/kg per day), fat
(1–4 g/kg per day), and protein (1 g/kg per day)

• Do not correct coagulopathy unless:
a) before invasive procedure
b) active bleeding
• Discuss with surgeons or anesthesiologists FFP
before transplant if INR is very prolonged or
cryoprecipitate if ﬁbrinogen <1.0
• Platelet count ≤ 50,000/mL (cut off threshold)*
• Recombinant factor VII (40 µg/kg) if FFP, platelets,
and cryoprecipitate fail to control bleeding
• Perform thromboelastogram in patients with
refractory bleeding

Overall aim

Promote spontaneous
liver regeneration or, if not
possible, to bridge to
transplantation

Neuromonitoring and neuroprotection

Cardiovascular

Extra-corporeal liver support

See text

• Intravenous ﬂuids: 2/3 maintenance with 0.9%
sodium chloride plus 10% dextrose (aim for blood
sugar 4–8 mmol/L and sodium 140–150 mmol/L)
• Determine need for ﬂuid boluses as per clinical
ﬂuid responsiveness and regular cardiac output
monitoring
• Aim for MAP >50th percentile for neuroprotection
and urine output >1 mL/kg per h
• Consider early use of vasopressors
(eg, noradrenaline). If noradrenaline >1 µg/kg per
min consider vasopressin
• Hydrocortisone: 1–2 mg/kg per dose every 6 h if
ongoing requirement for resuscitation with
ﬂuids and inotropes or vasopressors

See text

Kidney replacement therapy
See text

Fig. 412.3 Nontransplant management for pediatric acute liver failure. FFP, Fresh-frozen plasma; FiO2, fractional concentration of oxygen in

inspired air; INR, international normalized ratio; MAP, mean arterial pressures. *Platelet counts of ≤50,000 is controversial. (Modified from Deep A,
Alexander EC, Bulut Y, et al. Non-­transplant management for paediatric acute liver failure. Advances in medical management of acute liver failure in
children: promoting native liver survival. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2022;6:725–737. Fig. 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 412 u Acute Hepatic Failure
administration and osmotic diuresis. Monitoring intracranial pressure
can be useful in preventing severe cerebral edema, maintaining cerebral perfusion pressure, and establishing the suitability of a patient for
liver transplantation.
Temporary liver support continues to be evaluated as a bridge for the
patient with liver failure to liver transplantation or regeneration. Nonbiologic systems, essentially a form of liver dialysis with an albumin-­
containing dialysate, and biologic liver support devices that involve
perfusion of the patient’s blood through a cartridge containing liver cell
lines or porcine hepatocytes can remove some toxins, improve serum
biochemical abnormalities, and, in some cases, improve neurologic
function, but there has been little evidence of improved survival, and
few children have been treated.
Orthotopic liver transplantation can be lifesaving in patients who
reach advanced stages (III, IV) of hepatic coma. Various predictive
tests suggest a poor prognosis and need for liver transplantation (Table
412.5). Reduced-­size allografts and living donor transplantation have
been important advances in the treatment of infants with hepatic failure. Partial auxiliary orthotopic or heterotopic liver transplantation is
successful in a small number of children, and, in some cases, it has
allowed regeneration of the native liver and eventual withdrawal of
immunosuppression. Orthotopic liver transplantation should not be
done in patients with liver failure and neuromuscular dysfunction
secondary to a mitochondrial disorder because progressive neurologic
deterioration is likely to continue after transplantation.

PROGNOSIS

Children with acute hepatic failure fare better than adults. Improved
survival can be attributed to careful intensive care and if necessary,
liver transplantation. In the largest prospective study from the Pediatric Acute Liver Failure Study Group, 709 children were assessed at
21 days: 50.3% of patients survived with supportive care alone, 36.2%
survived after liver transplantation, and 13.4% died. Prognosis varies considerably with the cause of liver failure and stage of hepatic

2499

encephalopathy. Survival rates with supportive care may be as high as
90% in acetaminophen overdose and with fulminant hepatitis A. By
contrast, spontaneous recovery can be expected in only approximately
40% of patients with liver failure caused by the idiopathic (indeterminate) form of acute liver failure or an acute onset of Wilson disease.
Prognosis is also poor for spontaneous recovery in patients with
mitochondrial deficits, hemophagocytic syndromes, herpes simplex
disease, and idiosyncratic drug reactions. In patients who progress
to stage IV coma (see Table 412.1), the prognosis is extremely poor.
Brain stem herniation is the most common cause of death. Major complications such as sepsis, severe hemorrhage, or renal failure increase
the mortality. The prognosis is particularly poor in patients with liver
necrosis and multiorgan failure. Age <1 year, stage IV encephalopathy, an INR >4, PT >90 seconds, low factor V levels, and the need for
dialysis before transplantation are associated with increased mortality. Pre-­transplantation serum bilirubin concentration or the height
of hepatic enzymes is not predictive of posttransplantation survival.
A plasma ammonia concentration >200 μmol/L is associated with a
fivefold increased risk of death. Children with acute hepatic failure are
more likely to die while on the waiting list compared with children
with other liver transplant–requiring diagnoses. Because of the severity of their illness, the 6-­month post–liver transplantation survival of
approximately 75% for acute liver failure is significantly lower than
the 90% achieved in children with chronic liver disease. Patients who
recover from fulminant hepatic failure with only supportive care do
not usually develop cirrhosis or chronic liver disease. Aplastic anemia
occurs in approximately 10% of children with the idiopathic form of
fulminant hepatic failure and is often fatal without bone marrow transplantation. Long-­term survivors demonstrate average IQ and visual
spatial ability but greater than expected impairments in motor skills,
attention, executive function, and health-­related quality of life.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 412.5  Tests and Indices for Predicting Mortality and Need for Liver Transplantation in Patients with Acute Liver Failure
CAUSE OF ACUTE LIVER FAILURE

THRESHOLD FOR POOR PROGNOSIS OR NEED FOR LIVER
TRANSPLANTATION

King’s College Criteria

Acetominophen

Arterial pH <7.30 or all of the following: prothrombin time >100 s
(international normalized ratio >6.5), creatinine >3.4 mg/dL, and grade 3
or 4 encephalopathy

King’s College Criteria

Non-acetominophen

Prothrombin time >100 s (international normalized ratio >6.5) or any
three of the following: non-­A, non-­B viral hepatitis, or drug or halothane
cause; jaundice to encephalopathy >7 days; age between 10 and 40
years; prothrombin time >50 s; bilirubin >17.4 mg/dL

Factor V (Clichy criteria)

Viral

Age <30 years with clotting factor V <20% or any age with clotting factor
V <30% and grade 3 or 4 encephalopathy

Liver biopsy

Mixed causes

Hepatocyte necrosis >70%

Arterial phosphate

Acetominophen

>1.2 mmol/L

Serum lactate

Acetominophen

>3.5 mmol/L

APACHE II score

Acetominophen

Score >15

MELD score

Acetominophen

Score >33

BiLE score

Mixed causes

Score >6.9

Volumetric CT

Non-acetominophen

Liver volume <1000 cm3

ALFSG Prognostic Index*

Mixed causes

Continuous

*The ALFSG Prognostic Index, in contrast to the other indices listed, is designed to predict transplant-­free survival rather than death or need for liver transplantation.
MELD, Model for end-­stage liver disease; BiLE, bilirubin, lactate, and etiology score; ALFSG, Acute Liver Failure Study Group.
From Stravitz RT, Lee WM. Acute liver failure. Lancet. 2019;394:869–880. Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2500 Part XVI u The Digestive System

Chapter 413

Cystic Diseases of the
­Biliary Tract and Liver
Frederick J. Suchy and Amy G. Feldman
Cystic lesions of liver may be initially recognized during infancy and
childhood. Hepatic fibrosis can also occur as part of an associated
developmental defect (Table 413.1). Cystic renal disease is usually associated and often determines the clinical presentation and prognosis.
Virtually all proteins encoded by genes mutated in combined cystic
diseases of the liver and kidney are at least partially localized to primary cilia in renal tubular cells and cholangiocytes.
A solitary, congenital liver cyst (nonparasitic) can occur in childhood and has been identified in some cases on prenatal ultrasound.
Abdominal distention and pain may be present, and a poorly defined
right-­upper-­quadrant mass may be palpable. These benign lesions are

Table 413.1  Syndromes Associated with Congenital
Hepatic Fibrosis
DISORDER

ASSOCIATED FEATURES

Autosomal recessive
polycystic kidney disease

Ductal plate malformation, Caroli
syndrome

Autosomal dominant
polycystic kidney disease

Ductal plate malformation, Caroli
syndrome

Autosomal dominant
polycystic liver disease

Rarely, congestive heart failure

Jeune syndrome

Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy,
with cystic renal tubular dysplasia,
Caroli syndrome

Joubert syndrome

Central nervous system defects,
cardiac malformations

COACH syndrome

Cerebellar vermis hypoplasia,
oligophrenia, congenital ataxia,
ocular coloboma, hepatic fibrosis

Meckel-­Gruber syndrome

Cystic renal dysplasia, abnormal bile
duct development with fibrosis,
posterior encephalocele,
polydactyly

Carbohydrate-­deficient
glycoprotein syndrome
type 1b

Phosphomannose isomerase 1
deficiency chronic diarrhea,
protein-­losing enteropathy

Ivemark syndrome type 2

Autosomal-­recessive
renal-­hepatic-­pancreatic dysplasia

Nephronophthisis type 3

Tapetoretinal degeneration

Bardet-­Biedl syndrome

Retinal degeneration, obesity, limb
deformities, hypogonadism

Oral-­facial-­digital syndrome
type 1

Oral clefts, hamartomas or cysts
of the tongue, digital anomalies
pancreatic cysts

Miscellaneous syndromes

Intestinal lymphangiectasia,
enterocolitis, cystic short rib
(Beemer-­Langer) syndrome,
osteochondrodysplasia

Adapted from Suchy FJ, Sokol RJ, Balistreri WF, eds. Liver Disease in Children, 3rd ed.
New York: Cambridge University Press; 2014: p. 713.

best left undisturbed unless they compress adjacent structures or a
complication occurs, such as hemorrhage into the cyst. Operative management is generally reserved for symptomatic patients and enlarging
cysts.

CHOLEDOCHAL MALFORMATIONS

Choledochal malformations (previously known as choledochal cysts)
are congenital dilatations of the common bile duct that can cause progressive biliary obstruction and biliary cirrhosis. Cylindrical (fusiform) and spherical (saccular) dilatations of the extrahepatic ducts are
the most common types (see Table 413.1). Choledochal malformations
are classified according to the Todani method (see Fig. 404.5). Type 1
choledochal malformations, the most common variant, involve a saccular or fusiform dilation of the common bile duct. Type II malformations are congenital diverticula protruding from the common bile
duct. Type III malformations, or choledochoceles, involve a herniation
of the intraduodenal segment of the common bile duct into the duodenum. Type IVa malformations, or Caroli disease, involve multiple
intrahepatic and extrahepatic cysts. Type IVb malformations involve
only the extrahepatic duct. Solitary liver cysts (type V) are very rare.
The pathogenesis of choledochal malformations remains uncertain.
Some reports suggest that junction of the common bile duct and the
pancreatic duct before their entry into the sphincter of Oddi might allow
reflux of pancreatic enzymes into the common bile duct, causing inflammation, localized weakness, and dilation of the duct. It has also been proposed that a distal congenital stenotic segment of the biliary tree leads to
increased intraluminal pressure and proximal biliary dilation.
Approximately 75% of cases appear during childhood. The infant
typically presents with cholestatic jaundice; severe liver dysfunction including ascites and coagulopathy can rapidly evolve if biliary
obstruction is not relieved. An abdominal mass is rarely palpable. In
an older child, the classic triad of abdominal pain, jaundice, and mass
occurs in <33% of patients.
Features of acute cholangitis (fever, right-­upper-­quadrant tenderness, jaundice, and leukocytosis) may be present. The diagnosis is made
by ultrasonography; choledochal malformations have been identified
prenatally using this technique. Magnetic resonance cholangiography
is useful in the preoperative assessment of choledochal malformations
anatomy.
Because of bile stasis and inflammation, choledochal malformations
have the potential to develop into cholangiocarcinoma; therefore the
treatment of choice is primary excision of the abnormal biliary segment and a Roux-­en-­Y choledochojejunostomy. The postoperative
course can be complicated by recurrent cholangitis or stricture at the
anastomotic site. Long-­term follow-­up is necessary to ensure that no
malignancy develops.

Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney Disease

Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) manifests
predominantly in childhood (see Chapter 563.2). Bilateral enlargement of the kidneys is caused by a generalized dilation of the collecting
tubules. The disorder is invariably associated with congenital hepatic
fibrosis and various degrees of biliary ductal ectasia, discussed in detail
later. Approximately 40% of patients have nonobstructive intrahepatic
ductal dilatation (Caroli disease).
The polycystic kidney and hepatic disease 1 (PKHD1) gene, altered in
ARPKD, encodes a protein that is called fibrocystin, which is localized
to cilia on the apical domain of renal collecting cells and cholangiocytes.
The primary defect in ARPKD may be ciliary dysfunction related to the
abnormality in this protein. Fibrocystin appears to have a role in the
regulation of cellular adhesion, repulsion, and proliferation and/or the
regulation and maintenance of renal collecting tubules and bile ducts,
but its exact role in normal and cystic epithelia remains unknown.
Kidney and liver disease are independent and variable in severity;
they are not readily explainable by the type of PKHD1 pathogenic variants. Approximately 750 PKHD1 pathogenic variants have been identified, of which approximately half are missense changes. Phenotypic
variability among affected siblings suggests the importance of modifier
genes as well as possibly environmental influences.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 413 u Cystic Diseases of the ­Biliary Tract and Liver
In ARPKD, the cysts arise as ectatic expansions of the collecting
tubules and bile ducts, which remain in continuity with their structures
of origin. ARPKD normally presents in early life, often shortly after
birth, and is generally more severe than autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD). Fetal ultrasound may visualize large
echogenic kidneys, also described as bright, with low or absent amniotic fluid (oligohydramnios). However, in many instances, the features
of ARPKD are not visualized on sonography until the third trimester
or after birth.
Patients with ARPKD can die in the perinatal period from renal failure or lung dysgenesis. The kidneys in these patients are usually markedly enlarged and dysfunctional. Respiratory failure can result from
compression of the chest by grossly enlarged kidneys, from fluid retention, or from concomitant pulmonary hypoplasia. The clinical pathologic findings within a family tend to breed true, although there has
been some variability in the severity of the disease and the time for presentation within the same family. In patients surviving infancy because
of a milder renal phenotype, liver disease may be a prominent part of
the disorder. The liver disease in ARPKD is related to congenital malformation of the liver with varying degrees of periportal fibrosis, bile
ductular hyperplasia, ectasia, and dysgenesis. Initial symptoms are liver
related in approximately 26% of patients. This can manifest clinically as
variable cystic dilation of the intrahepatic biliary tree with congenital
hepatic fibrosis. Congenital hepatic fibrosis and Caroli disease likely
result from an abnormality in remodeling of the embryonic ductal
plate of the liver. Ductal plate malformation refers to the persistence
of excess embryonic bile duct structures in the portal tracts. The synthetic function of the liver remained largely intact even in patients with
advanced portal hypertension. ARPKD patients with recurrent cholangitis or complications of portal hypertension may require combined
liver-­kidney transplant.

Cystic Dilation of the Intrahepatic Bile Ducts (Caroli
Disease/Caroli Syndrome)

In Caroli disease, there is isolated ectasia or nonobstructing segmental
dilatation of the larger intrahepatic ducts. Caroli syndrome is the more
common variant, in which malformations of small bile ducts are associated with congenital hepatic fibrosis. Congenital saccular dilation can
affect several segments of the intrahepatic bile ducts; the dilated ducts
are lined by cuboidal epithelium and are in continuity with the main
duct system, which is usually normal. Choledochal malformations
have also been associated with Caroli disease. Bile duct dilation leads
to stagnation of bile and formation of biliary sludge and intraductal
lithiasis. There is a marked predisposition to ascending cholangitis,
which may be exacerbated by calculus formation within the abnormal
bile ducts.
Affected patients usually experience symptoms of acute cholangitis as children or young adults. Fever, abdominal pain, mild jaundice,
and pruritus occur, and a slightly enlarged, tender liver is palpable.
Elevated alkaline phosphatase activity, direct-­reacting bilirubin levels, and leukocytosis may be observed during episodes of acute infection. In patients with Caroli disease, clinical features may be the result
of a combination of recurring episodes of cholangitis, reflecting the
intrahepatic ductal abnormalities and portal hypertensive bleeding
resulting from hepatic fibrosis. Ultrasonography shows the dilated
intrahepatic ducts, but definitive diagnosis and extent of disease must
be determined by percutaneous transhepatic, endoscopic, or magnetic
resonance cholangiography.
Cholangitis and sepsis should be treated with appropriate antibiotics. Calculi can require surgery. Partial hepatectomy may be curative
in rare cases in which cystic disease is confined to a single lobe. The
prognosis is otherwise guarded, largely because of difficulties in controlling cholangitis and biliary lithiasis and because of a significant risk
for developing cholangiocarcinoma.

Congenital Hepatic Fibrosis

Congenital hepatic fibrosis is usually associated with ARPKD and is
characterized pathologically by diffuse periportal and perilobular
fibrosis in broad bands that contain distorted bile duct–like structures

2501

and that often compress or incorporate central or sublobular veins (see
Table 413.1). Irregularly shaped islands of liver parenchyma contain
normal-­appearing hepatocytes. Caroli disease and choledochal malformations may be associated. Most patients have renal disease, mostly
ARPKD and rarely nephronophthisis. Congenital hepatic fibrosis also
occurs as part of the COACH syndrome (cerebellar vermis hypoplasia,
oligophrenia, congenital ataxia, coloboma, and hepatic fibrosis). Congenital hepatic fibrosis has been described in children with a congenital disorder of glycosylation caused by mutations in the gene encoding
phosphomannose isomerase (see Chapter 107.7).
Several different forms of congenital hepatic fibrosis have been
defined clinically: portal hypertensive (most common) cholangitic,
mixed, and latent. The disorder usually has its onset in childhood, with
hepatosplenomegaly or with bleeding secondary to portal hypertension. In a recent study, splenomegaly, as a marker for portal hypertension, developed early in life and was present in 60% of children younger
than 5 years of age.
Cholangitis can occur in these patients because they have abnormal
biliary tracts even without Caroli disease. Hepatocellular function is
usually well preserved. Serum aminotransferase activities and bilirubin levels are usually normal in the absence of cholangitis and choledocholithiasis; serum alkaline phosphatase activity may be slightly
elevated. The serum albumin level and prothrombin time are normal.
Liver biopsy is rarely required for diagnosis, particularly in patients
with obvious renal disease.
Treatment of this disorder should focus on control of bleeding from
esophageal varices and aggressive antibiotic treatment of cholangitis.
Infrequent mild bleeding episodes may be managed by endoscopic
sclerotherapy or band ligation of the varices. After more severe hemorrhage, portacaval anastomosis can relieve portal hypertension. The
prognosis may be greatly improved by a shunting procedure, but survival in some patients may be limited by renal failure.

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT POLYCYSTIC
KIDNEY DISEASE

ADPKD (see Chapter 563.3), the most commonly inherited cystic kidney disease, affects 1 in 1,000 live births. It is characterized by progressive renal cyst development and cyst enlargement and an array of
extrarenal manifestations. There is a high degree of intrafamilial and
interfamilial variability in the clinical expression of the disease. The
prevalence of hepatic cysts in children with ADPKD is <5%, with no
reports of severe cases. However, hepatic cysts increase in number and
size with age with prevalence in patients ages 15-­24 years on MRI close
to 60%.
ADPKD is caused by pathogenic variants in one of two genes, PKD1
or PKD2, which account for 85–90% and 10–15% of cases, respectively.
The proteins encoded by these genes, polycystin-­1 and polycystin-­2,
are expressed in renal tubule cells and in cholangiocytes. Polycystin­1 functions as a mechanosensor in cilia, detecting the movement of
fluid through tubules and transmitting the signal through polycystin-­2,
which acts as a calcium channel.
Dilated noncommunicating cysts are most commonly observed.
Other hepatic lesions are rarely associated with ADPKD, including
the ductal plate malformation, congenital hepatic fibrosis, and biliary microhamartomas (the von Meyenburg complexes). Approximately 50% of patients with renal failure have demonstrable hepatic
cysts that are derived from the biliary tract but not in continuity with
it. The hepatic cysts increase with age. In one study, the prevalence of
hepatic cysts was 58% in patients 15-­24 years old. Hepatic cystogenesis appears to be influenced by estrogens. Although the frequency
of cysts is similar in males and females, the development of large
hepatic cysts is mainly a complication in females. Hepatic cysts are
often asymptomatic but can cause pain and are occasionally complicated by hemorrhage, infection, jaundice from bile duct compression,
portal hypertension with variceal bleeding, or hepatic venous outflow
obstruction from mechanical compression of hepatic veins, resulting
in tender hepatomegaly and exudative ascites. Cholangiocarcinoma
can occur. Subarachnoid hemorrhage can result from the associated
cerebral arterial aneurysms.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2502 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Selected patients with severe symptomatic polycystic liver disease
and favorable anatomy benefit from liver resection or fenestration.
Combined liver-­
kidney transplantation may be required. There is
considerable evidence for a role of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
in epithelial proliferation and fluid secretion in experimental renal
and hepatic cystic disease. Several clinical trials in adults have shown
that somatostatin analogs can blunt hepatic cyst expansion by blocking secretin-­induced cyclic adenosine monophosphate generation and
fluid secretion by cholangiocytes. Surgical or pharmacologic therapies
for hepatic cysts are not likely to be required in childhood.

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT POLYCYSTIC
LIVER DISEASE

Autosomal dominant polycystic liver disease is a distinct clinical and
genetic identity in which multiple cysts develop and are unassociated
with cystic kidney disease. Liver cysts arise from but are not in continuity with the biliary tract. Females are more commonly affected than
males, and the cysts often enlarge during pregnancy. Cysts are rarely
identified in children. Cyst complications are related to effects of local
compression, infection, hemorrhage, or rupture. The genes associated
with autosomal dominant polycystic liver disease are PRKCSH and
SEC63, which encode hepatocystin and Sec63, respectively. Hepatocystin is a protein kinase C substrate adK-­H, which is involved in the
proper folding and maturation of glycoproteins. It has been localized to
the endoplasmic reticulum. SEC63 encodes the protein SEC63P, which
is a component of the protein translocation machinery in the endoplasmic reticulum.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 414

Diseases of the
Gallbladder
Frederick J. Suchy and Amy G. Feldman
The incidence of gallbladder disease, particularly cholelithiasis and
biliary dyskinesia, has been increasing in children and has been associated with a rise in the number of cholecystectomies.

ANOMALIES

The gallbladder is congenitally absent in approximately 0.1% of the
population. Hypoplasia or absence of the gallbladder can be associated with extrahepatic biliary atresia or cystic fibrosis. Duplication of
the gallbladder occurs rarely. Gallbladder ectopia may occur with a
transverse, intrahepatic, left-­sided, or retroplaced location. Multiseptate gallbladder, characterized by the presence of multiple septa dividing the gallbladder lumen, is another rare congenital anomaly of the
gallbladder.

ACUTE HYDROPS

Table 414.1 lists the conditions associated with hydrops of the
gallbladder.
Acute noncalculous, noninflammatory distention of the gallbladder can occur in infants and children. It is defined by the absence of
calculi, bacterial infection, or congenital anomalies of the biliary system. The disorder may complicate acute infections and Kawasaki disease, but the cause is often not identified. Hydrops of the gallbladder
may also develop in patients receiving long-­term parenteral nutrition,

Table 414.1  Conditions Associated with Hydrops of the
Gallbladder
Cholelithiasis
Cholecystitis
Kawasaki disease
Streptococcal pharyngitis
Staphylococcal infection
Leptospirosis
Ascariasis
Threadworm
Sickle cell crisis
Typhoid fever
Thalassemia
Total parenteral nutrition
Prolonged fasting
Viral hepatitis
Sepsis
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Mesenteric adenitis
Necrotizing enterocolitis

presumably because of gallbladder stasis during the period of enteral
fasting. Hydrops is distinguished from acalculous cholecystitis by the
absence of a significant inflammatory process and is a generally benign
prognosis.
Affected patients usually have right upper quadrant pain with a palpable mass. Fever, vomiting, and jaundice may be present and are usually associated with a systemic illness such as streptococcal infection.
Ultrasonography shows a markedly distended echo-­free gallbladder,
without dilation of the biliary tree. Acute hydrops is usually treated
conservatively with a focus on supportive care and managing the intercurrent illness; cholecystostomy and drainage are rarely needed. Spontaneous resolution and return of normal gallbladder function usually
occur over a period of several weeks. If a laparotomy is required, a large
edematous gallbladder is found to contain white, yellow, or green bile.
Obstruction of the cystic duct by mesenteric adenopathy is occasionally observed. Cholecystectomy is required if the gallbladder is gangrenous. Pathologic examination of the gallbladder wall shows edema and
mild inflammation. Cultures of bile are usually sterile.

CHOLECYSTITIS AND CHOLELITHIASIS

Acute acalculous cholecystitis is uncommon in children and is usually caused by infection. Pathogens include streptococci (groups A and
B), gram-­negative organisms―particularly Salmonella and Leptospira
interrogans―and a number of viral infections (hepatitis A, Epstein-­
Barr [EB] virus, and cytomegalovirus). Parasitic infestation with Ascaris or Giardia lamblia may be found. Acalculous cholecystitis may be
associated with abdominal trauma or burn injury or with a severe systemic illness such as leukemia, end-­stage liver disease, and systemic
vasculitis.
Clinical features include right upper quadrant or epigastric pain,
nausea, vomiting, fever, and jaundice. Right upper quadrant guarding
and tenderness are present. Ultrasonography discloses an enlarged,
thick-­walled gallbladder without calculi. Serum alkaline phosphatase
activity and direct-­reacting bilirubin levels are elevated. Leukocytosis
is usual.
Patients may recover with treatment of systemic and biliary infection. Because the gallbladder can become gangrenous, daily ultrasonography is useful in monitoring gallbladder distention and wall
thickness. Cholecystectomy is required in patients who fail to improve
with conservative management. Cholecystostomy drainage is an alternative approach in a critically ill patient.
Cholelithiasis is relatively rare in otherwise healthy children, occurring more commonly in patients with various predisposing disorders
(Table 414.2). Gallstones are rarely detected by ultrasonography in
the fetus but generally remain asymptomatic and resolve spontaneously during the first year of life. In an ultrasonographic survey of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2502 Part XVI u The Digestive System
Selected patients with severe symptomatic polycystic liver disease
and favorable anatomy benefit from liver resection or fenestration.
Combined liver-­
kidney transplantation may be required. There is
considerable evidence for a role of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
in epithelial proliferation and fluid secretion in experimental renal
and hepatic cystic disease. Several clinical trials in adults have shown
that somatostatin analogs can blunt hepatic cyst expansion by blocking secretin-­induced cyclic adenosine monophosphate generation and
fluid secretion by cholangiocytes. Surgical or pharmacologic therapies
for hepatic cysts are not likely to be required in childhood.

AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT POLYCYSTIC
LIVER DISEASE

Autosomal dominant polycystic liver disease is a distinct clinical and
genetic identity in which multiple cysts develop and are unassociated
with cystic kidney disease. Liver cysts arise from but are not in continuity with the biliary tract. Females are more commonly affected than
males, and the cysts often enlarge during pregnancy. Cysts are rarely
identified in children. Cyst complications are related to effects of local
compression, infection, hemorrhage, or rupture. The genes associated
with autosomal dominant polycystic liver disease are PRKCSH and
SEC63, which encode hepatocystin and Sec63, respectively. Hepatocystin is a protein kinase C substrate adK-­H, which is involved in the
proper folding and maturation of glycoproteins. It has been localized to
the endoplasmic reticulum. SEC63 encodes the protein SEC63P, which
is a component of the protein translocation machinery in the endoplasmic reticulum.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 414

Diseases of the
Gallbladder
Frederick J. Suchy and Amy G. Feldman
The incidence of gallbladder disease, particularly cholelithiasis and
biliary dyskinesia, has been increasing in children and has been associated with a rise in the number of cholecystectomies.

ANOMALIES

The gallbladder is congenitally absent in approximately 0.1% of the
population. Hypoplasia or absence of the gallbladder can be associated with extrahepatic biliary atresia or cystic fibrosis. Duplication of
the gallbladder occurs rarely. Gallbladder ectopia may occur with a
transverse, intrahepatic, left-­sided, or retroplaced location. Multiseptate gallbladder, characterized by the presence of multiple septa dividing the gallbladder lumen, is another rare congenital anomaly of the
gallbladder.

ACUTE HYDROPS

Table 414.1 lists the conditions associated with hydrops of the
gallbladder.
Acute noncalculous, noninflammatory distention of the gallbladder can occur in infants and children. It is defined by the absence of
calculi, bacterial infection, or congenital anomalies of the biliary system. The disorder may complicate acute infections and Kawasaki disease, but the cause is often not identified. Hydrops of the gallbladder
may also develop in patients receiving long-­term parenteral nutrition,

Table 414.1  Conditions Associated with Hydrops of the
Gallbladder
Cholelithiasis
Cholecystitis
Kawasaki disease
Streptococcal pharyngitis
Staphylococcal infection
Leptospirosis
Ascariasis
Threadworm
Sickle cell crisis
Typhoid fever
Thalassemia
Total parenteral nutrition
Prolonged fasting
Viral hepatitis
Sepsis
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Mesenteric adenitis
Necrotizing enterocolitis

presumably because of gallbladder stasis during the period of enteral
fasting. Hydrops is distinguished from acalculous cholecystitis by the
absence of a significant inflammatory process and is a generally benign
prognosis.
Affected patients usually have right upper quadrant pain with a palpable mass. Fever, vomiting, and jaundice may be present and are usually associated with a systemic illness such as streptococcal infection.
Ultrasonography shows a markedly distended echo-­free gallbladder,
without dilation of the biliary tree. Acute hydrops is usually treated
conservatively with a focus on supportive care and managing the intercurrent illness; cholecystostomy and drainage are rarely needed. Spontaneous resolution and return of normal gallbladder function usually
occur over a period of several weeks. If a laparotomy is required, a large
edematous gallbladder is found to contain white, yellow, or green bile.
Obstruction of the cystic duct by mesenteric adenopathy is occasionally observed. Cholecystectomy is required if the gallbladder is gangrenous. Pathologic examination of the gallbladder wall shows edema and
mild inflammation. Cultures of bile are usually sterile.

CHOLECYSTITIS AND CHOLELITHIASIS

Acute acalculous cholecystitis is uncommon in children and is usually caused by infection. Pathogens include streptococci (groups A and
B), gram-­negative organisms―particularly Salmonella and Leptospira
interrogans―and a number of viral infections (hepatitis A, Epstein-­
Barr [EB] virus, and cytomegalovirus). Parasitic infestation with Ascaris or Giardia lamblia may be found. Acalculous cholecystitis may be
associated with abdominal trauma or burn injury or with a severe systemic illness such as leukemia, end-­stage liver disease, and systemic
vasculitis.
Clinical features include right upper quadrant or epigastric pain,
nausea, vomiting, fever, and jaundice. Right upper quadrant guarding
and tenderness are present. Ultrasonography discloses an enlarged,
thick-­walled gallbladder without calculi. Serum alkaline phosphatase
activity and direct-­reacting bilirubin levels are elevated. Leukocytosis
is usual.
Patients may recover with treatment of systemic and biliary infection. Because the gallbladder can become gangrenous, daily ultrasonography is useful in monitoring gallbladder distention and wall
thickness. Cholecystectomy is required in patients who fail to improve
with conservative management. Cholecystostomy drainage is an alternative approach in a critically ill patient.
Cholelithiasis is relatively rare in otherwise healthy children, occurring more commonly in patients with various predisposing disorders
(Table 414.2). Gallstones are rarely detected by ultrasonography in
the fetus but generally remain asymptomatic and resolve spontaneously during the first year of life. In an ultrasonographic survey of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 414 u Diseases of the Gallbladder
Table 414.2  Conditions Associated with Cholelithiasis
Chronic hemolytic disease (sickle cell anemia, spherocytosis,
thalassemia, others)
Ileal resection or disease
Cystic fibrosis
Cirrhosis
Cholestasis
Crohn disease
Obesity
Insulin resistance
Prolonged parenteral nutrition
Prematurity with complicated medical or surgical course
Prolonged fasting or rapid weight reduction
Treatment of childhood cancer
Abdominal surgery
Pregnancy
Sepsis
Genetic (ABCB4, ABCG5/G8) progressive familial intrahepatic
cholestasis
Gilbert disease
Cephalosporins

1570 children (ages 6-­19 years) the overall prevalence of gallstone disease was 0.13% (0.27% in female subjects). Older reports consistently
found that >70% of gallstones were the pigment type, 15–20% were
cholesterol stones, and the remainder were composed of a mixture of
cholesterol, organic matrix, and calcium bilirubinate. Black pigment
gallstones, composed mostly of calcium bilirubinate and glycoprotein
matrix, are a frequent complication of chronic hemolytic anemias.
However, because of obesity, cholesterol gallstones now predominate
in children, while the number of patients with hemolytic anemia-­
associated gallstones have remained stable.
Brown pigment stones form mostly in infants as a result of biliary
tract infection. Unconjugated bilirubin is the predominant component,
formed by the high β-­glucuronidase activity of infected bile. Cholesterol gallstones are composed purely of cholesterol or contain >50%
cholesterol along with a mucin glycoprotein matrix and calcium bilirubinate. Calcium carbonate stones have also been described in children.
Patients with hemolytic disease (including sickle cell anemia, the
thalassemias, and red blood cell enzymopathies) and Wilson disease
are at increased risk for black pigment cholelithiasis. In sickle cell
disease, pigment gallstones can develop before age 4 years and have
been reported in 17–33% of patients 2-­18 years of age. Genetic variation in the promoter of uridine diphosphate-­glucuronosyltransferase
1A1 (the [TA]7/[TA]7 and [TA]7/[TA]8 genotypes) underlies Gilbert
syndrome, a relatively common, chronic form of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, and is a risk factor for pigment gallstone formation in
sickle cell disease.
Cirrhosis and chronic cholestasis also increase the risk for pigment
gallstones. Sick premature infants may also have gallstones; their treatment is often complicated by such factors as bowel resection, necrotizing enterocolitis, prolonged parenteral nutrition without enteral
feeding, cholestasis, frequent blood transfusions, and use of diuretics.
Cholelithiasis in premature infants is often asymptomatic and may
resolve spontaneously. Brown pigment stones are found in infants with
obstructive jaundice and infected intra-­and extrahepatic bile ducts.
These stones are usually radiolucent, owing to a lower content of calcium phosphate and carbonate and a higher amount of cholesterol than
in black pigment stones. MDR3 deficiency caused by ABCB4 pathologic gene variant is a cholestatic syndrome related to impaired biliary
phospholipid excretion. It is associated with symptomatic and recurring cholelithiasis. Patients may show intrahepatic lithiasis, sludge, or
microlithiasis along the biliary tree.
Obesity has assumed an increasingly important role as a risk factor for cholesterol cholelithiasis in children, particularly in adolescent females. Cholesterol gallstones are also found in children with

2503

disturbances of the enterohepatic circulation of bile acids, including
patients with ileal disease and bile acid malabsorption, such as those
with ileal resection, ileal Crohn disease, and cystic fibrosis. Pigment
stones can also occur in these patients.
Cholesterol gallstone formation results from an excess of cholesterol in relation to the cholesterol-­carrying capacity of micelles in bile.
Supersaturation of bile with cholesterol, leading to crystal and stone
formation, could result from decreased bile acid or from an increased
cholesterol concentration in bile. Other initiating factors that may be
important in stone formation include gallbladder stasis or the presence
in bile of abnormal mucoproteins or bile pigments that may serve as a
nidus for cholesterol crystallization.
Prolonged use of high-­dose ceftriaxone, a third-­generation cephalosporin, has been associated with the formation of calcium-­ceftriaxone
salt precipitates (biliary pseudolithiasis) in the gallbladder. Biliary
sludge or cholelithiasis can be detected in >40% of children who are
treated with ceftriaxone for at least 10 days. In rare cases, children
become jaundiced and develop abdominal pain; precipitates usually
resolve spontaneously within several months after discontinuation of
the drug.
Acute or chronic cholecystitis is often associated with gallstones. The
acute form may be precipitated by impaction of a stone in the cystic
duct. Proliferation of bacteria within the obstructed gallbladder lumen
can contribute to the process and lead to biliary sepsis. Chronic calculous cholecystitis is more common. It can develop insidiously or follow
several attacks of acute cholecystitis. The gallbladder epithelium commonly becomes ulcerated and scarred.
More than 50% of patients with gallstones have symptoms, and
18% present with a complication as the first indication of cholelithiasis, such as pancreatitis, choledocholithiasis or acute calculous
cholecystitis. The most important clinical feature of cholelithiasis is
recurrent abdominal pain, which is often colicky and localized to the
right upper quadrant. An older child may have intolerance for fatty
foods. Acute cholecystitis is characterized by fever, pain in the right
upper quadrant, and often a palpable mass. Jaundice occurs more
commonly in children than adults. Pain may radiate to an area just
below the right scapula. A plain x-­ray of the abdomen may reveal
opaque calculi, but radiolucent (cholesterol) stones are not visualized. Accordingly, ultrasonography is the method of choice for gallstone detection. Hepatobiliary scintigraphy is a valuable adjunct in
that failure to visualize the gallbladder provides evidence of cholecystitis. Laboratory evaluation may reveal elevated aminotransferase levels, leukocytosis, and mild hyperbilirubinemia. Marked
elevations of the direct bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, or gammaglutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) levels should prompt evaluation for
choledocholithiasis.
Patients with cholecystitis and persistent fever or concern for
obstruction should be hospitalized and started on antibiotics. Cholecystectomy is curative. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is routinely
performed in symptomatic infants and children with cholelithiasis.
Common bile duct stones are unusual in children, occurring in 2–6%
of cases with cholelithiasis, often in association with obstructive jaundice and pancreatitis. Rarely a common bile duct stone may appear
after a successful cholecystectomy. Operative cholangiography should
be done at the time of surgery, however, to detect unsuspected common
duct calculi. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography with extraction
of common duct stones is an option before laparoscopic cholecystectomy in older children and adolescents.
Asymptomatic patients with cholelithiasis pose a more difficult
management problem. Studies in adults indicate a lag time of more
than a decade between initial formation of a gallstone and development of symptoms. Spontaneous resolution of cholelithiasis has been
reported in infants and children. However, if surgery is deferred for
any patient, parents should be counseled about signs and symptoms
consistent with cholecystitis or obstruction of the common bile duct
by a gallstone. In patients with chronic hemolysis or ileal disease,
cholecystectomy can be carried out at the same time as another surgical procedure. Because laparoscopic surgery can safely be performed
in children with sickle cell disease, elective cholecystectomy is being

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2504 Part XVI u The Digestive System
done more frequently at the time of gallstone diagnosis before symptoms or complications develop. In cases associated with liver disease,
severe obesity, or cystic fibrosis, the surgical risk of cholecystectomy
may be substantial so that the risks and benefits of the operation need
to be carefully considered.

BILIARY DYSKINESIA

Biliary dyskinesia is a motility disorder of the biliary tract that may
cause biliary colic in children, often in association with nausea and
fatty food intolerance, but symptoms may overlap with functional
abdominal pain. There are no gallstones on imaging. Sphincter of Oddi
dysfunction may be a variant that can present with chronic abdominal pain and recurrent pancreatitis. The diagnosis is based on a cholecystokinin–di-­isopropyl iminodiacetic acid scan or an ultrasound
done with a fatty meal demonstrating a gallbladder ejection fraction
of <35%. Reproduction of pain on cholecystokinin administration may
also be seen, as well as the absence of gallbladder filling on an otherwise normal ultrasound examination. Although laparoscopic cholecystectomy is performed for many patients with this disorder, short-­term
and long-­term symptomatic improvement is highly variable.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 415.1  Causes of Portal Hypertension
EXTRAHEPATIC PORTAL HYPERTENSION
Portal vein agenesis, atresia, stenosis
Portal vein thrombosis or cavernous transformation
Splenic vein thrombosis
Increased portal flow
Arteriovenous fistula
INTRAHEPATIC PORTAL HYPERTENSION
Hepatocellular disease
Acute and chronic viral hepatitis
Cirrhosis
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
Wilson disease
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Glycogen storage disease type IV
Hepatotoxicity
Methotrexate
Parenteral nutrition
Biliary tract disease
Biliary atresia
Cystic fibrosis
Choledochal cyst
Sclerosing cholangitis
Intrahepatic bile duct paucity
Idiopathic portal hypertension
Postsinusoidal obstruction
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Venoocclusive disease

Chapter 415

Portal Hypertension and
Varices

+

Amy G. Feldman and Frederick J. Suchy

*
Portal hypertension, defined as an elevation of portal pressure >10-­12
mm Hg or a hepatic venous pressure gradient >4 mm Hg, is a major
cause of morbidity and mortality in children with liver disease. Portal hypertension occurs when there is increased portal resistance or
increased blood flow through the portal system. When portal hypertension occurs, children can develop varices, splenomegaly, ascites,
and gastrointestinal bleeding.

ETIOLOGY

Portal hypertension can result from obstruction to portal blood flow
anywhere along the course of the portal venous system (prehepatic,
intrahepatic, or posthepatic). Table 415.1 outlines the various disorders
associated with portal hypertension.
Portal vein thrombosis is the most common cause of extrahepatic portal hypertension. The obstruction can occur at any level of
the portal vein. In neonates, portal vein thrombosis can occur from
umbilical infection (omphalitis) with or without a history of catheterization of the umbilical vein, dehydration, and/or sepsis. Rare
developmental anomalies producing extrahepatic portal hypertension include agenesis, atresia, stenosis, or a web of the portal vein. In
older children, portal vein thrombosis can occur with intraabdominal infection (appendicitis, peritonitis, pancreatitis), inflammatory
bowel disease, celiac disease, primary sclerosing cholangitis, or biliary infection. Portal vein thrombosis is also associated with hypercoagulable states, such as deficiencies of factor V Leiden, protein C,
or protein S. The portal vein can be replaced by a fibrous remnant or
contain an organized thrombus. At least half of reported cases have
no defined cause. Uncommonly, presinusoidal hypertension can be
caused by increased flow through the portal system as a result of a
congenital or acquired arteriovenous fistula.

Fig. 415.1 Coronal CT image of the abdomen in a patient with cirrho-

sis. The liver is shrunken (green cross), shows nodularity (white arrowhead), and is surrounded by ascites (green arrowheads). The spleen is
enlarged (star). Gastro-­esophageal varices are seen (white arrow). There
is a splenorenal shunt between a tributary of the splenic vein (green arrow) and the left renal vein (red arrow). The left renal vein is seen entering the inferior vena cava (green curved arrow). (From Ginés P, Krag A,
Abraldes JG, et al. Liver cirrhosis. Lancet. 2021;398:1359–1374. Fig. 1.)

The intrahepatic causes of portal hypertension are numerous. The
most common cause of portal hypertension in children is cirrhosis
(Fig. 415.1). The numerous causes of cirrhosis include recognized
disorders such as biliary atresia, autoimmune hepatitis, chronic viral

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 415 u Portal Hypertension and Varices
hepatitis, and metabolic liver disease such as α1-­antitrypsin deficiency,
Wilson disease, glycogen storage disease type IV, hereditary fructose
intolerance, and cystic fibrosis.
Portal infiltration with malignant cells or granulomas can also contribute. An idiopathic form of portal hypertension characterized by
splenomegaly, hypersplenism, and portal hypertension without occlusion of portal or splenic veins and with no obvious disease in the liver
has been described. In some patients, noncirrhotic portal fibrosis has
been observed.
Postsinusoidal causes of portal hypertension are also observed in childhood. Budd-­Chiari syndrome occurs with obstruction to hepatic veins
anywhere between the efferent hepatic veins and the entry of the inferior
vena cava into the right atrium. In most cases, no specific cause can be
found, but thrombosis can occur from inherited and acquired hypercoagulable states (antithrombin III deficiency, protein C or S deficiency, factor
V Leiden or prothrombin gene variants, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinemia, antiphospholipid syndrome, pregnancy, oral contraceptives) and
can complicate hepatic or metastatic neoplasms, collagen vascular disease,
infection, and trauma. Additional causes of the Budd-­Chiari syndrome
include Behçet syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, sarcoidosis, pancreatitis, aspergillosis, dacarbazine therapy, autoinflammatory-­
recurrent fever syndromes, and inferior vena cava webs.
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (venoocclusive disease) is the
most common cause of hepatic vein obstruction in children. In this
disorder, occlusion of the centrilobular venules or sublobular hepatic
veins occurs. The disorder most frequently occurs in bone marrow
transplant recipients after total body irradiation with or without cytotoxic drug therapy, but it can also be seen in patients on azathioprine,
mercaptopurine, thioguanine, and those taking herbal remedies that
contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The primary hemodynamic abnormality in portal hypertension is
increased resistance to portal blood flow. This is the case whether the
resistance to portal flow has an intrahepatic cause such as cirrhosis or
is because of portal vein obstruction. Portosystemic shunting should
decompress the portal system and thus significantly lower portal
pressures. However, despite the development of significant collaterals deviating portal blood into systemic veins, portal hypertension
is maintained by an overall increase in portal venous flow and thus
maintenance of portal hypertension. A hyperdynamic circulation is
achieved by tachycardia, an increase in cardiac output, decreased systemic vascular resistance, and increased splanchnic dilation. Overall,
the increase in portal flow likely contributes to an increase in variceal
transmural pressure. The increase in portal blood flow is related to the
contribution of hepatic and collateral flow; the actual portal blood flow
reaching the liver is reduced. It is also likely that hepatocellular dysfunction and portosystemic shunting lead to the generation of various humoral factors that cause vasodilation and an increase in plasma
volume.
Many complications of portal hypertension can be accounted for
by the development of a remarkable collateral circulation. Collateral
vessels can form prominently in areas in which absorptive epithelium
joins stratified epithelium, particularly in the esophagus or anorectal
region. The superficial submucosal collaterals, especially those in the
esophagus and stomach, and, to a lesser extent, those in the duodenum,
colon, or rectum, are prone to rupture and bleeding under increased
pressure. In portal hypertension, the vascularity of the stomach is also
abnormal and demonstrates prominent submucosal arteriovenous
communications between the muscularis mucosa and dilated precapillaries and veins. The resulting lesion, a vascular ectasia, has been called
congestive gastropathy and contributes to a significant risk of bleeding
from the stomach.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Bleeding is the most common presentation of portal hypertension in
children. In large series of children with portal hypertension, two thirds

2505

presented with hematemesis or melena, most commonly from rupture
of an esophageal varix (see Fig. 415.1). Less commonly, patients bleed
from portal gastropathy, gastric antral ectasia, or stomal, intestinal, or
anorectal varices. The risk of a first bleed in children with cirrhosis
is 22% but rises to 38% in children with known varices over a 5-­year
period. In children with biliary atresia, 15–25% have bleeding on long-­
term follow-­up. The age of first bleed is dependent on the underlying
etiology of portal hypertension. Hemorrhage, particularly in children
with portal vein obstruction, can be precipitated by a minor febrile,
intercurrent illness. The mechanism is often unclear; aspirin or other
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs may be a contributing factor by
damaging the integrity of a congested gastric mucosa or interfering
with platelet function. Coughing during a respiratory illness can also
increase intravariceal pressure.
Splenomegaly is the second most common finding in children with
portal hypertension and may be initially recognized on routine physical examination (see Fig. 415.1). Because more than half of patients
with portal vein obstruction do not experience bleeding until after 6
years of age, underlying liver disease should be considered in any child
with splenomegaly, especially if there is concurrent cytopenia. Most
children with splenomegaly are asymptomatic.
Ascites is the presenting sign of portal hypertension in 7–21% of
children. Ascites can develop at any time with cirrhosis or if there is
new onset portal vein obstruction. Children with portal hypertension
can also suffer from growth impairment, minimal hepatic encephalopathy, and impaired quality of life. Some develop portal hypertensive
biliopathy, where portal vein obstruction occurs as a result of external
compression of the bile ducts by cavernous transformation of the portal vein.
Children with portal hypertension may also develop pulmonary
complications, including hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS) and
portopulmonary hypertension (PP-­HTN). HPS is defined as an arterial oxygenation defect induced by intrapulmonary microvascular
dilation, resulting from release of a number of endogenous vasoactive
molecules, including endothelin-­1 and nitric oxide into the venous
circulation. HPS develops in ≥10% of patients with portal hypertension. Patients with HPS may present with dyspnea, cyanosis, clubbing,
and spider nevi. PP-­HTN is defined by a pulmonary arterial pressure
greater than 25 mm Hg at rest or a left-­ventricular end-­diastolic pressure of less than 15 mm Hg. Patients with PP-­HTN most commonly
present with exertional dyspnea. Histologically, these patients have
pulmonary arteriopathy with laminar intimal fibrosis.

DIAGNOSIS

In patients with established chronic liver disease or in those in whom
portal vein obstruction is suspected, an experienced ultrasonographer should be able to demonstrate the patency of the portal vein,
and Doppler flow ultrasonography can demonstrate the direction
of flow within the portal system. The pattern of flow correlates with
the severity of cirrhosis and encephalopathy. Reversal of portal vein
blood flow (hepatofugal flow) is more likely to be associated with
variceal bleeding. Ultrasonography is also effective in detecting the
presence of esophageal varices. Another important feature of extrahepatic portal vein obstruction is cavernous transformation of the
portal vein, in which an extensive complex of small collateral vessels
forms in the paracholedochal and epicholedochal venous system to
bypass the obstruction. Other imaging techniques also contribute to
further definition of the portal vein anatomy but are required less
often; contrast-­enhanced CT and magnetic resonance angiography
provide information similar to ultrasonography. Selective arteriography of the celiac axis, superior mesenteric artery, and splenic
vein may be useful in precise mapping of the extrahepatic vascular
anatomy. This is not required to establish a diagnosis but can prove
valuable in planning surgical decompression of portal hypertension.
The platelet count, spleen length measured by ultrasonography, and
serum albumin are the best noninvasive predictors of portal hypertension in children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2506 Part XVI u The Digestive System
In a patient with hypoxia (HPS), intrapulmonary microvascular
dilation is demonstrated with contrast-­enhanced bubble echocardiography that shows delayed appearance in the left heart of microbubbles
from a saline bolus injected into a peripheral vein.
Endoscopy is the most reliable method for detecting esophageal
varices and for identifying the source of gastrointestinal bleeding.
Although bleeding from esophageal or gastric varices is most common
in children with portal hypertension, up to one third of patients, particularly those with cirrhosis, have bleeding from some other source,
such as portal hypertensive gastropathy or gastric or duodenal ulcerations. There is a strong correlation between variceal size as assessed
endoscopically and the probability of hemorrhage. Red spots apparent
over varices at the time of endoscopy are a strong predictor of imminent hemorrhage.

TREATMENT

The therapy of portal hypertension can be divided into emergency
treatment of potentially life-­threatening hemorrhage and prophylaxis
directed at prevention of initial or subsequent bleeding.
Treatment of patients with acute variceal hemorrhage must focus on
stabilization of the patient. Fluid resuscitation should be administered,
initially in the form of crystalloid infusion, followed by the replacement of red blood cells. Care should be taken to avoid over transfusing
children with portal hypertension-­induced bleeding because this can
result in overfilling the intravascular space and increasing portal pressure. A reasonable goal hemoglobin level after variceal bleed is between
7 and 9 g/dL. Correction of coagulopathy by administration of vitamin
K and/or infusion of platelets or fresh-­frozen plasma may be required.
A nasogastric tube should be placed to document the presence of
blood within the stomach and to monitor for ongoing bleeding. An
H2-­receptor blocker or proton pump inhibitor should be given intravenously to reduce the risk of bleeding from gastric erosions. Intravenous
antibiotics should be considered because there is high risk of infectious
complications during variceal bleeding.
Pharmacologic therapy to decrease portal pressure should be initiated in patients with continued bleeding. Vasopressin or one of its
analogs is commonly used and is thought to act by increasing splanchnic vascular tone and thus decreasing portal blood flow. Vasopressin
is administered initially with a bolus of 0.33 units/kg over 20 min, followed by a continued infusion of the same dose on an hourly basis or a
continuous infusion of 0.2 units/1.73 m2/min. The drug has a half-­life
of approximately 30 minutes. Its use may be limited by the side effects
of vasoconstriction, which can impair cardiac function and perfusion
to the heart, bowel, and kidneys and can also, as a result, exacerbate
fluid retention. More commonly, the somatostatin analog, octreotide,
is used because it decreases splanchnic blood flow with few side effects.
Octreotide is initially administered with a bolus of 1 μg/kg followed by
a continuous intravenous infusion of 1.0-­5.0 μg/kg/hr. A total of 15%
of children with a portal hypertensive bleed will have persistent hemorrhage despite initiation of some form of splanchnic vasoconstriction.
After an episode of variceal hemorrhage or in patients in whom
bleeding cannot be controlled with pharmacologic therapy, endoscopy with variceal band ligation or variceal sclerotherapy should be
performed. Endoscopic band ligation is preferred because it has been
shown in adults to be more effective and has fewer side effects. For
smaller children in whom the banding device cannot be used, sclerosants can be injected either intra-­or paravariceal until bleeding has
stopped. Sclerotherapy treatments may be associated with bleeding,
bacteremia, esophageal ulceration, and stricture formation. After band
ligation or sclerosis, repeat endoscopy should be performed until varices are obliterated.
In patients who continue to bleed despite pharmacologic and endoscopic methods to control hemorrhage, a Sengstaken-­
Blakemore
tube may be emergently placed to stop hemorrhage by mechanically

compressing esophageal and gastric varices. The device is rarely used
now, but it may be the only option to control life-­threatening hemorrhage until a more definite procedure can be performed. It carries a
significant rate of complications and a high rate of bleeding when the
device is removed, and it poses a particularly high risk for pulmonary
aspiration. The tube is not well tolerated in children without significant
sedation and intubation.
Various surgical procedures have been devised to divert portal blood
flow and to decrease portal pressure. A portacaval shunt diverts nearly
all of the portal blood flow into the subhepatic inferior right vena cava.
Although portal pressure is significantly reduced, because of the significant diversion of blood from the liver, patients with parenchymal
liver disease have a marked risk for hepatic encephalopathy. Even mild
hepatic encephalopathy can impair cognitive function, including school
performance. More selective shunting procedures, such as mesocaval
or distal splenorenal shunt (see Fig. 415.1), can effectively decompress
the portal system while allowing a greater amount of portal blood flow
to the liver. The small size of the vessels makes these operations technically challenging in infants and small children, and there is a significant risk of failure as a result of shunt thrombosis. A shunt may be a
good option for a child with relatively well-­preserved liver function, as
sometimes occurs in patients with biliary atresia, congenital hepatic
fibrosis, or cystic fibrosis. For children with an extrahepatic portal vein
thrombosis, a Meso-­Rex shunt (superior mesenteric vein to left portal
vein bypass) may successfully restore physiologic portal blood flow and
inflow of hepatotrophic factors. In one large single-­center experience,
84% of children with idiopathic extrahepatic portal vein thrombosis
were successfully treated with a Meso-­Rex shunt. Growth and cognitive
function improve after this procedure.
A transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS), in which
a stent is placed by an interventional radiologist between the right
hepatic vein and the right or left branch of the portal vein, can aid in
the management of portal hypertension in children, especially in those
needing temporary relief before liver transplantation. The transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt procedure can precipitate hepatic
encephalopathy and is prone to thrombosis.
Orthotopic liver transplantation represents a much better therapy
for portal hypertension resulting from intrahepatic disease and cirrhosis. A prior portosystemic shunting operation does not preclude a successful liver transplantation but makes the operation technically more
difficult.
Long-­term treatment with nonspecific β blockers, such as propranolol, has been used extensively in adults with portal hypertension. These
agents might act by lowering cardiac output and inducing splanchnic
vasoconstriction. Evidence in adult patients shows that β blockers can
reduce the incidence of variceal hemorrhage and improve long-­term
survival. A therapeutic effect is thought to result when the pulse rate is
reduced by ≥25%. There is limited published experience with the use of
this therapy in children.

PROGNOSIS

Portal hypertension secondary to intrahepatic disease has a poor prognosis. Portal hypertension is usually progressive in these patients and
is often associated with deteriorating liver function. Efforts should be
directed toward prompt treatment of acute bleeding and prevention of
recurrent hemorrhage with available methods. Patients with progressive liver disease and significant esophageal varices ultimately require
orthotopic liver transplantation. Liver transplantation is the only effective therapy for HPS and should also be considered for patients with
portal hypertension secondary to hepatic vein obstruction or resulting
from severe venoocclusive disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 416 u Liver Transplantation 2507

Chapter 416

Liver Transplantation
Jorge D. Reyes and Evelyn K. Hsu
Survival rates for pediatric liver transplantation are >90% in the United
States, in large part thanks to refinements made in the critical care
management of children with liver failure and advances in perioperative care and immunosuppression management. Protocols for immune
suppression withdrawal in the setting of allograft tolerance have introduced the possibility of transplantation for children without the need
for long-­term immunosuppression. In the United States, a national
allocation system matches donor organs with waitlist candidates (the
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network and the United Network for Organ Sharing [UNOS]); this organization has been given the
responsibility of allocating scarce organs to the neediest patients and
has undergone continuous revisions with this goal in mind—the most
significant in 2002, with the adoption of the Pediatric End-­Stage Liver
Disease (PELD) and Medical End-­Stage Liver Disease (MELD; for adolescents) illness severity scoring system.

INDICATIONS

The diseases for which liver transplantation is indicated can be categorized into the following groups:
• Obstructive biliary tract disease: biliary atresia, sclerosing cholangitis,
and traumatic or postsurgical injury
• Metabolic disorders with liver parenchymal disease: α1-­antitrypsin
deficiency, tyrosinemia type I, glycogen storage disease type IV,
Wilson disease, gestational alloimmune liver disease (GALD,
previously known as neonatal hemochromatosis), and cystic fibrosis
• Metabolic disorders without liver parenchymal disease: Crigler-­
Najjar type I, familial hypercholesterolemia, primary oxalosis (with
kidney), organic acidemia, and urea cycle defects
• Acute hepatitis: fulminant hepatic failure, viral, toxin, or drug-­
induced
• Chronic hepatitis with cirrhosis: hepatitis B or C, autoimmune
• Intrahepatic cholestasis: idiopathic neonatal hepatitis, Alagille
syndrome, progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis, and bile acid
synthetic disorders
• Primary
liver
tumors:
benign
tumors
(hamartomas,
hemangioendothelioma), unresectable hepatoblastoma, and
hepatocellular carcinoma
• Miscellaneous: cryptogenic cirrhosis, congenital hepatic fibrosis,
Caroli disease, polycystic kidney and liver disease, and cirrhosis
induced by total parenteral nutrition
• Emerging indications: graft-­
versus-­
host disease (a complication
of bone marrow transplantation), hemophilia, and portosystemic
shunts
Biliary atresia is the most common indication for liver transplantation in children, accounting for about half of all pediatric liver transplants performed in the United States, followed by metabolic liver
disease and inborn errors of metabolism, autoimmune and familial
cholestatic disorders, and acute hepatic necrosis. Biliary atresia may
present in two clinical patterns: an acquired form for which there
may be nonrandom clustering of potential etiologies (80% of cases)
and a syndromic/embryonic form that includes other anomalies, such
as polysplenia preduodenal portal vein, intestinal malrotation, situs
anomalies, and absence of the retrohepatic vena cava. Hepatoportoenterostomy benefits survival if performed within the first 60 days of life;
however, some patients with successful drainage later develop cirrhosis with portal hypertension (variceal bleeding and ascites). Children
with biliary atresia (or any other obstructive biliary disorder) who do
not achieve successful drainage will experience continued decline and
end-­stage liver disease, usually requiring liver transplantation within
the first year of life.

Inborn errors of metabolism result from a single enzyme deficiency
that results in alteration of synthesis, breakdown, transport, or function of carbohydrate, fat, or protein. These disorders can be grouped
into those diseases that cause liver parenchymal disease and eventual
cirrhosis with end-­stage liver disease, as well as liver cancer (i.e., α1-­
antitrypsin deficiency, Wilson disease, cystic fibrosis, progressive
familial intrahepatic cholestasis), and those inborn errors that manifest principally by their hepatic enzyme deficiency with no hepatocellular injury; complications occur in “satellite” systems such as the brain
(hyperammonemic conditions), the kidney (hyperoxaluria type 1), or
heart (familial hypercholesterolemia). Some metabolic disorders place
patients at risk for decompensation throughout their entire lives, and
others manifest principally after adolescence. Liver transplantation is a
form of enzyme replacement; the value and risk: benefit of doing so in
the absence of cirrhosis has prompted the pursuit of gene therapy and
hepatocyte transplantation as possible alternatives, but the therapeutic
benefit of these modalities of treatment is as yet equivocal.
Although a proportion of children with acute hepatic failure will
survive without transplant, it accounts for approximately 10% of pediatric liver transplantation and requires the most intense concentration
of multimodal management/support yet devised. This diagnosis lacks
clear etiology in the majority of cases, and posttransplantation survival
varies but is worse than the general population, likely because of multifactorial issues related to comorbidities and listing/transplantation
graft option availability.
Primary hepatic malignancies in children are rare (<2% of all pediatric malignancies) and account for about 7% of pediatric transplants.
Hepatoblastoma accounts for the majority of cases (75% of primary
liver tumors in childhood) and usually presents in an advanced stage;
adjuvant chemotherapy and total hepatectomy with transplantation
provide cure and long-­term survival for the majority of these children.
Survival of >85% has been reported by the International Society of
Pediatric Oncology and several American centers.
The impact of chronic liver disease and its impact on growth, development, and quality of life of children can be devastating. Liver transplantation is a valid therapy and cure. The allocation of deceased donor
livers in the United States follows guidelines based on the severity of
liver disease as reflected in the PELD/MELD scoring system implemented in 2002, which is calculated from the measurable values of
bilirubin, albumin, or creatinine (depending on age) and international
normalization ratio. The PELD scoring system was initially modeled
from a cohort of 884 children on the pediatric liver transplant wait
list and is intended to predict death, decompensation, or transplantation within 3 months. Since 2002, the number of liver transplants
performed in children in the United States has remained relatively
stable, whereas the number of liver transplants performed in adults
has steadily increased by approximately 10% per year. A change (2020)
to the allocation algorithm that prioritized local adults over critically
ill children nationally has in the short term led to increased rates of
transplantation in adolescent patients. This and other issues highlight
the importance of advocacy on behalf of children in this growing field.
Contraindications to liver transplantation include uncontrolled
infection of extrahepatic origin, extrahepatic malignancies, and
severely disabling and uncorrectable disease in other organ systems,
principally the brain, heart, and lungs. Although combined liver and
heart or lung transplantation has been performed in adults and children, such cases require special consideration and centers dedicated to
the complexities of posttransplantation management.

TECHNICAL INNOVATIONS

There are no limitations on age or weight for liver transplantation. To
enhance the availability of liver grafts to children and optimize the timing of transplantation, techniques allowing the use of reduced-­size or
segmental grafts (a right or left lobe of liver, or the left lateral segment
of the left lobe) were developed; this allows a liver from a larger donor
to be implanted into a child, overcoming the barrier of size mismatch.
In the same era, techniques were developed for the use of segments
from living donors (usually the left lateral segment for small pediatric
recipients), and then split-­liver grafts from deceased donors where the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2508 Part XVI u The Digestive System
left lateral segment is transplanted into a child and the remaining segments of right lobe and medial segment of left lobe are transplanted
into an adult, allowing increased utilization of deceased donor grafts
without affecting adult waitlist mortality. Reduction of a liver graft is
performed ex vivo (i.e., outside of the body); split-­liver procurement
surgery can be performed either ex vivo or in situ (in the hemodynamically stable brain-­dead donor). Donors suitable for aforementioned
graft variants should ideally be young (younger than 45 years of age),
healthy, and nonobese; however, variations are guided by the severity of illness and urgency for transplantation of the recipient. Not all
centers have the degree of surgical expertise required to perform these
more complex surgeries; thus options may be limited for children at
centers that accept only size-­matched organs. This has implications for
their waitlist survival.
The implantation of a liver (either whole organ or segment) involves
removal of the native liver and encompasses four anastomoses: the
suprahepatic vena cava, the portal vein, the hepatic artery, and the
bile duct. Modifications of the procedure generally involve retaining
(or not) of the retrohepatic vena cava, the performance (or not) of a
temporary portocaval shunt to decompress the splanchnic venous system during the anhepatic phase, and the use of vascular homografts
of donor iliac vein or artery to replace the native inflow (guided by
the presence of recipient anomalies or thrombosis of native vessels).
The donor bile duct may be connected to a loop of recipient intestine
(Roux-­en-­Y limb) or the native bile duct. UNOS reported outcomes
analyzing graft types, and outcomes have shown improved graft survival in children younger than 3 years of age for live donor grafts when
compared with deceased donor whole, split, and reduced grafts. After
the first year, however, patient and allograft survivals were similar,
independent of graft type.

IMMUNOSUPPRESSION

The long-­
term goal of effective clinical immunosuppression
after solid-­
organ transplantation is to inhibit antigen-­
induced
T-­lymphocyte activation and cytokine production and to interrupt
alloimmune–major histocompatibility complex recognition. To
prevent weakening the host response to infection, this goal should
be achieved while preserving host immunocompetence. A major
emphasis is on the prevention of acute and chronic rejection and preserving the ability to reverse refractory acute rejection. These efforts
have been successful; the challenge for the future of pediatric liver
transplantation is achieving long-­term survival and improved quality of life. This inherently involves strategies to minimize the long-­
term toxicity of immunosuppressive drug therapy, which can include
renal failure, cardiovascular complications, and infections. Strategies
of drug minimization, steroid-­free therapy, and complete withdrawal
of drugs have been accomplished in select patients and under careful
medical supervision.
Immediately peri-­or posttransplantation induction immunosuppressive therapy can involve antilymphocyte antibody induction with
depleting antibodies (monoclonal or polyclonal), such as antithymocyte globulin antibody or the use of a chimeric mouse–human
antibody that blocks the interleukin-­2 receptor of the T cell, thus
preventing activation and replication of antigen-­selected T cells.
Corticosteroids act through the suppression of antibody production
and cytokine synthesis (interleukin-­2, and interferon-­γ), decreasing
proliferation of T cells (helper, suppressor, and cytotoxic), B cells, and
neutrophils. Maintenance immunosuppression is achieved by using
calcineurin phosphatase inhibitor (cyclosporine or tacrolimus); these
drugs interfere with the production and release of interleukin-­2, a
critical factor in the cytotoxic T-­cell response. Calcineurin phosphatase inhibitors are most effectively directed toward inhibiting T-­cell–
mediated acute cellular rejection. Tacrolimus is the mainstay of most
immunosuppressive regimens, and its ability to progress or initiate
maintenance immunosuppression in the absence of corticosteroids
is of particular benefit in children. Adjuvant immunosuppression,
such as azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil, which inhibits the
synthesis of purine nucleosides and subsequently the proliferation of
T and B lymphocytes as well as antibody formation, may be added to

enhance the antirejection profile, allow for decrease in the calcineurin dosage, or manage chronic rejection. Rapamycin, a macrolide that
binds its molecular target of mammalian target of rapamycin receptor, decreases interleukin-­2 production and, in turn, T-­and B-­cell
activation and proliferation.

COMPLICATIONS

Posttransplantation complications can be related to the pretransplantation condition of the recipient and the donor match and type,
immunologic responses to the graft and the need for enhanced immunosuppressive drug therapy, and toxicity effects of these drugs or infections from over-­immunosuppression. Post-­transplant complications
can occur at varying specific frequencies over a fairly well-­defined time
course (early, late, remote).
The most anticipated early complications involve those inherent
to the transplantation operation: primary nonfunction of the graft,
hepatic artery thrombosis, portal/hepatic venous strictures or occlusions, and biliary strictures. Primary nonfunction of the graft is rare
in pediatric recipients given the selection criteria of potential donors.
Hepatic artery thrombosis is the most frequent and early vascular complication; it occurs in 5–10% of recipients and can have devastating
consequences on the graft (acute necrosis and gangrene, biliary leaks/
stricture/bilomas) and may require urgent retransplantation. Portal
vein or hepatic vein strictures/occlusions are rare and generally occur
later posttransplantation. Biliary strictures are the most frequent surgical complication (10–30%) after liver transplantation and should be
included in the differential diagnosis of any posttransplantation liver
allograft dysfunction. Management of these complications varies and
may include interventional radiologic procedures, reoperation, or
retransplantation. Advancements in interventional radiology technique have allowed for a less invasive and equally efficacious approach
to resolving these complications.
Rejection usually occurs after the first 2 weeks after transplantation,
with the highest incidence (30–60%) within the first 90 days. Diagnosis of rejection is suspected based on abnormal liver function studies;
rarely are there systemic signs such as fever, abdominal pain, new-­onset
ascites, or hydrothorax. Diagnosing rejection requires biopsy confirmation; treatment algorithms include high doses of corticosteroids and
antilymphocyte antibodies. Chronic rejection is less frequent (5–10%)
and is characterized by progressive damage and loss of bile ductules
with consequent cholestasis; treatment involves long-­term enhancement of maintenance immunosuppression with corticosteroids and
other agents.
The need to treat rejection can place the patient at a higher risk
of drug toxicity or infection. The most common transplantation-­
related infections are cytomegalovirus and Epstein-­Barr virus infections, for which there are well-­developed algorithms of prophylaxis
and screening. Epstein-­Barr virus–induced posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD) represents a unique complication
of over-­immunosuppression and infection occurring in approximately 10% of patients. It is managed primarily by withdrawal of
immunosuppression and antiviral therapy; some patients require
chemotherapy.

OUTCOMES

UNOS data reveal a 1-­year patient and graft survival for biliary atresia of 95% and 87%, respectively. Examination of 461 5-­year survivors of pediatric liver transplantation in a North American registry
found a first graft survival of 88%, with 12% requiring a second
graft and 2% requiring a third transplant. The same investigators
published a study of 167 10-­year survivors and found that only 30%
of the group had an “ideal outcome” of normal liver-­associated
enzymes, no retransplant, and no evidence of PTLD, chronic rejection, hypertension, or renal disease. Longer-­term survival is inherently dependent on adequacy of long-­term immunosuppression
management, adherence to care protocols, and prevention of infection/toxicities/chronic rejection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 417 u Peritoneal Malformations

Section 7

2509

Table 418.1  Causes of Fetal Ascites

Peritoneum
Chapter 417

Peritoneal Malformations
Jamie F. Merves and Chris A. Liacouras
Numerous anomalies can occur during peritoneal development. Many
are rarely of clinical importance, but peritoneal bands and cysts can
result in manifestations such as abdominal pain and obstruction. Additionally, peritoneal encapsulation can occur because of an accessory
peritoneal sac. Absence or duplication of the omentum occurs rarely.
Congenital peritoneal bands represent anatomically unabsorbed
portions of omentum and mesentery and most commonly occur in the
regions of the duodenum, duodenojejunal flexure, ileocecal junction,
and ascending colon. Although usually benign, they may be responsible for symptoms ranging from nonspecific chronic abdominal pain to
intestinal obstruction, malrotation, volvulus, and internal herniation
with potential for resulting associated necrosis. Evaluation includes
abdominal radiography, fluoroscopy, and, less commonly, CT and
angiography. Even when discovered incidentally, surgical management
generally remains the standard of care to prevent complications.
Omental cysts arise from obstructed or ectopic lymphatic channels
within the omentum. They may be congenital or can result from trauma.
They are usually asymptomatic, but abdominal pain or partial small bowel
obstruction can result from compression or torsion of the small bowel
from traction on the omentum. Mesenteric cysts are also rare and may
coexist with omental cysts. They most commonly arise from the small
bowel mesentery but can also occur in the large bowel mesentery or retroperitoneum. They too arise from lymphatic anomalies, and the cysts
can be single or multiple and are often large. Presentation varies but most
frequently involves abdominal pain, distention, and appreciation of an
abdominal mass and/or suspected ascites on examination. Gastrointestinal
symptoms may also include nausea, emesis, constipation, or loose stools.
Mesenteric cysts are mostly benign lesions but may act as lead points for
torsion and intussusception and can develop hemorrhage, infection, and,
rarely, malignant transformation. Cysts are usually well defined and identified on imaging via ultrasound or CT scan. Treatment is typically simple
excision, which can be performed laparoscopically in most cases, with
excellent results and generally good prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 418

Ascites
Jessica W. Wen and Chris A. Liacouras
Ascites is the pathologic accumulation of fluid within the peritoneal cavity. Multiple causes of ascites have been described in different age-­groups
(Tables 418.1-­418.3). In children, hepatic and renal disease are the most
common causes, but ascites can also be caused by cardiac disease, trauma,
infection, or neoplasia.

Gastrointestinal disorders
Meconium peritonitis
Intestinal malrotation
Small intestinal or colonic atresia
Intussusception
Volvulus
Hepatobiliary disorders
Gestational alloimmune liver disease
Cystic fibrosis
Biliary atresia
Portal venous malformations
Infection
Parvovirus
Syphilis
Cytomegalovirus
Toxoplasmosis
Acute maternal hepatitis
Genitourinary disorders
Hydronephrosis
Polycystic kidney disease
Urinary obstruction
Ovarian cyst
Persistent cloaca
Chylous ascites
Lymphangiectasia
Lymphatic malformations
Cardiac disorders
Arrhythmia
Heart failure
Chromosomal abnormalities
Trisomy
Turner syndrome
Neoplasm
Neuroblastoma
Leukemia
Hematologic
Hemolytic anemias
Metabolic disease
Niemann-­Pick type C
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Lysosomal storage diseases
Other
Maternal/fetal injury
Congenital lupus erythematosus
Idiopathic
Modified from Giefer MJ, Murray KF, Colletti RB. Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and
management of pediatric ascites. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2011;52(5):503–513. Table 1.

The clinical hallmark of ascites is abdominal distention. Early satiety
and dyspnea can occur with a moderate amount of ascites. Considerable intraperitoneal fluid can accumulate before ascites is detectable by
the classic physical signs: bulging flanks, dullness to percussion, shifting
dullness, a fluid wave, and the puddle sign (percussion of a supine person’s abdomen over the umbilicus becomes dull as the patient is moved
to a prone position and ascitic fluid puddles in dependent regions).
Umbilical herniation can be associated with tense ascites. Ultrasound
examination is useful for detecting small amounts of ascites.
Abdominal paracentesis can provide symptomatic relief and may be
diagnostic of the cause of the ascites. Determining the serum-­ascites
albumin gradient can help determine the cause of ascites. A gradient
greater than 1.1 g/dL (high-­gradient ascites) is consistent with ascites
caused by portal hypertension, whereas a gradient <1.1 g/dL (low-­
gradient ascites) indicates ascites of non-­portal-­hypertensive etiology.
The course, prognosis, and treatment of ascites depend entirely on the
cause. For most patients, treatment consists of dietary sodium restriction
and diuretic therapy with spironolactone, with the addition of furosemide in more severe cases. Supplemental albumin can also aid in ascitic
fluid mobilization. Refractory cases may require large volume paracentesis or transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting. Patients with any
type of ascites are at increased risk for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 417 u Peritoneal Malformations

Section 7

2509

Table 418.1  Causes of Fetal Ascites

Peritoneum
Chapter 417

Peritoneal Malformations
Jamie F. Merves and Chris A. Liacouras
Numerous anomalies can occur during peritoneal development. Many
are rarely of clinical importance, but peritoneal bands and cysts can
result in manifestations such as abdominal pain and obstruction. Additionally, peritoneal encapsulation can occur because of an accessory
peritoneal sac. Absence or duplication of the omentum occurs rarely.
Congenital peritoneal bands represent anatomically unabsorbed
portions of omentum and mesentery and most commonly occur in the
regions of the duodenum, duodenojejunal flexure, ileocecal junction,
and ascending colon. Although usually benign, they may be responsible for symptoms ranging from nonspecific chronic abdominal pain to
intestinal obstruction, malrotation, volvulus, and internal herniation
with potential for resulting associated necrosis. Evaluation includes
abdominal radiography, fluoroscopy, and, less commonly, CT and
angiography. Even when discovered incidentally, surgical management
generally remains the standard of care to prevent complications.
Omental cysts arise from obstructed or ectopic lymphatic channels
within the omentum. They may be congenital or can result from trauma.
They are usually asymptomatic, but abdominal pain or partial small bowel
obstruction can result from compression or torsion of the small bowel
from traction on the omentum. Mesenteric cysts are also rare and may
coexist with omental cysts. They most commonly arise from the small
bowel mesentery but can also occur in the large bowel mesentery or retroperitoneum. They too arise from lymphatic anomalies, and the cysts
can be single or multiple and are often large. Presentation varies but most
frequently involves abdominal pain, distention, and appreciation of an
abdominal mass and/or suspected ascites on examination. Gastrointestinal
symptoms may also include nausea, emesis, constipation, or loose stools.
Mesenteric cysts are mostly benign lesions but may act as lead points for
torsion and intussusception and can develop hemorrhage, infection, and,
rarely, malignant transformation. Cysts are usually well defined and identified on imaging via ultrasound or CT scan. Treatment is typically simple
excision, which can be performed laparoscopically in most cases, with
excellent results and generally good prognosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 418

Ascites
Jessica W. Wen and Chris A. Liacouras
Ascites is the pathologic accumulation of fluid within the peritoneal cavity. Multiple causes of ascites have been described in different age-­groups
(Tables 418.1-­418.3). In children, hepatic and renal disease are the most
common causes, but ascites can also be caused by cardiac disease, trauma,
infection, or neoplasia.

Gastrointestinal disorders
Meconium peritonitis
Intestinal malrotation
Small intestinal or colonic atresia
Intussusception
Volvulus
Hepatobiliary disorders
Gestational alloimmune liver disease
Cystic fibrosis
Biliary atresia
Portal venous malformations
Infection
Parvovirus
Syphilis
Cytomegalovirus
Toxoplasmosis
Acute maternal hepatitis
Genitourinary disorders
Hydronephrosis
Polycystic kidney disease
Urinary obstruction
Ovarian cyst
Persistent cloaca
Chylous ascites
Lymphangiectasia
Lymphatic malformations
Cardiac disorders
Arrhythmia
Heart failure
Chromosomal abnormalities
Trisomy
Turner syndrome
Neoplasm
Neuroblastoma
Leukemia
Hematologic
Hemolytic anemias
Metabolic disease
Niemann-­Pick type C
Congenital disorders of glycosylation
Lysosomal storage diseases
Other
Maternal/fetal injury
Congenital lupus erythematosus
Idiopathic
Modified from Giefer MJ, Murray KF, Colletti RB. Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and
management of pediatric ascites. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2011;52(5):503–513. Table 1.

The clinical hallmark of ascites is abdominal distention. Early satiety
and dyspnea can occur with a moderate amount of ascites. Considerable intraperitoneal fluid can accumulate before ascites is detectable by
the classic physical signs: bulging flanks, dullness to percussion, shifting
dullness, a fluid wave, and the puddle sign (percussion of a supine person’s abdomen over the umbilicus becomes dull as the patient is moved
to a prone position and ascitic fluid puddles in dependent regions).
Umbilical herniation can be associated with tense ascites. Ultrasound
examination is useful for detecting small amounts of ascites.
Abdominal paracentesis can provide symptomatic relief and may be
diagnostic of the cause of the ascites. Determining the serum-­ascites
albumin gradient can help determine the cause of ascites. A gradient
greater than 1.1 g/dL (high-­gradient ascites) is consistent with ascites
caused by portal hypertension, whereas a gradient <1.1 g/dL (low-­
gradient ascites) indicates ascites of non-­portal-­hypertensive etiology.
The course, prognosis, and treatment of ascites depend entirely on the
cause. For most patients, treatment consists of dietary sodium restriction
and diuretic therapy with spironolactone, with the addition of furosemide in more severe cases. Supplemental albumin can also aid in ascitic
fluid mobilization. Refractory cases may require large volume paracentesis or transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunting. Patients with any
type of ascites are at increased risk for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 418.2  Causes of Neonatal Ascites

Table 418.3  Causes of Ascites in Infants and Children

Hepatobiliary disorders
Cirrhosis
α1-­Antitrypsin deficiency
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
Viral hepatitis
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Gestational alloimmune liver disease
Biliary atresia
Bile duct perforation
Portal venous malformation
Ruptured mesenchymal hamartoma
Gastrointestinal disorders
Intestinal malrotation
Intestinal perforation
Acute appendicitis
Intestinal atresia
Pancreatitis
Chylous ascites
Intestinal lymphangiectasia
Lymphatic duct obstruction
Lymphatic duct trauma
Parenteral nutrition extravasation
Metabolic disease (see Table 418.1)
Genitourinary disorders
Obstructive uropathy
Posterior urethral valves
Ureterocele
Lower ureteral stenosis
Ureteral atresia
Imperforate hymen
Bladder rupture
Bladder injury from umbilical artery catheterization
Nephrotic syndrome
Ruptured corpus luteum cyst
Cardiac
Arrhythmia
Heart failure
Other
Cutis marmorata telangiectatica congenita
Intravenous vitamin E
Pseudo-­ascites
Small bowel duplication
Abdominal trauma
Idiopathic

Hepatobiliary disorders
Cirrhosis
Congenital hepatic fibrosis
Acute hepatitis
Budd-­Chiari syndrome
Bile duct perforation
Liver transplantation
Gastrointestinal disorders
Acute appendicitis
Intestinal atresia
Pancreatitis
Pyloric duplication
Serositis
Crohn disease
Eosinophilic enteropathy
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein
purpura)
Chylous ascites
Intestinal lymphangiectasia
Lymphatic duct obstruction
Lymphatic duct trauma
Parenteral nutrition
extravasation
Infectious
Tuberculosis
Abscess
Schistosomiasis

From Giefer MJ, Murray KF, Colletti RB. Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management
of pediatric ascites. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2011;52(5):503–513. Table 2.

418.1 Chylous Ascites
Jessica W. Wen and Chris A. Liacouras
Chylous ascites refers to peritoneal fluid that contains lymphatic drainage
with a characteristic milky appearance that is rich in triglycerides. Chylous
ascites can result from congenital anomaly, injury, or obstruction of the
intraabdominal portion of the thoracic duct. Although uncommon, it can
occur at any age. In the pediatric population, the most common cause is
lymphatic malformation (lymphangiectasia). Other causes include surgical injury to the lymphatics, trauma, cirrhosis, peritoneal bands, generalized lymphangiomatosis, chronic inflammatory processes of the bowel,
and mycobacterial infection. Malignancy is a common cause in the adult
population but uncommon in pediatrics. Congenital anomalies of the
lymphatic system can be associated with Turner, Noonan, yellow nail, and
Klippel-­Trenaunay-­Weber syndromes. Other etiologies include nephrotic
syndrome, familial visceral myopathy, sarcoidosis, intestinal malrotation
and volvulus, pancreatitis, constrictive pericarditis, and Behçet disease.
Postsurgical chylous ascites has been associated with a variety of abdominal surgical procedures, including Nissen fundoplication, appendectomy,
liver and kidney transplant, and others. It can occur early, within a week
post operation, or weeks to months later due to adhesions and extrinsic
compression of lymphatic vessels.
The most common presentation is painless abdominal distention, and
it may be accompanied by poor weight gain and loose stools. Peripheral
edema is common. Massive chylous ascites can result in scrotal edema,
inguinal and umbilical herniation, and respiratory difficulties.
Diagnosis of chylous ascites depends on the demonstration of milky
ascitic fluid obtained via paracentesis after a fat-­containing feeding. Ascites

Neoplasm
Lymphoma
Wilms tumor
Clear cell renal sarcoma
Glioma
Germ cell tumor
Ovarian tumor
Mesothelioma
Neuroblastoma
Metabolic disease
Genitourinary disorders
Nephrotic syndrome
Peritoneal dialysis
Cardiac
Heart failure
Pseudo-­ascites
Celiac disease
Cystic mesothelioma
Omental cyst
Ovarian cyst
Other
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Ventriculoperitoneal shunt
Vitamin A toxicity
Chronic granulomatous disease
Nonaccidental trauma
Protein losing enteropathy
Idiopathic

Modified from Giefer MJ, Murray KF, Colletti RB. Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and
management of pediatric ascites. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2011;52(5):503–513. Table 3.

fluid analysis reveals high protein content, elevated triglycerides, and lymphocytosis. If the patient has had nothing by mouth, the fluid may appear
serous. Hypoalbuminemia, hypogammaglobulinemia, and lymphopenia
are common in these patients. MR lymphangiography will identify lymphatic malformations.
Treatment includes a high-­
protein, low-­
fat diet supplemented with
medium-­chain triglycerides that are absorbed directly into the portal circulation and decrease lymph production. Parenteral alimentation may be
necessary if nutrition remains impaired on oral feedings; this may also significantly decrease lymph flow and facilitate sealing at the point of lymph
leakage. Octreotide, a somatostatin analog, has been used subcutaneously
in chylous ascites. The mechanism is not clearly understood; however, it
decreases intestinal blood flow, leading to decreased portal pressure, and
it also inhibits lymphatic secretion through somatostatin receptors in the
intestinal wall. Paracentesis should be repeated only if abdominal distention
causes respiratory distress. Lymphangiography with adjunctive embolization may be very successful in treating chylous ascites with identified site
of leakage or a malformation. Laparotomy may be indicated if conservative management has been unsuccessful for potential surgical ligation of
lymphatics.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 419

Peritonitis
Jessica W. Wen and Chris A. Liacouras
Inflammation of the peritoneal lining of the abdominal cavity can result
from infectious, autoimmune, neoplastic, and chemical processes.
Infectious peritonitis is usually defined as primary (spontaneous) or
secondary. In primary peritonitis, the source of infection originates
outside the abdomen and seeds the peritoneal cavity via hematogenous, lymphatic, or transmural spread. Secondary peritonitis arises
from the abdominal cavity itself through extension from or rupture of
an intraabdominal viscus or an abscess within an organ. Tertiary peritonitis refers to recurrent diffuse or localized disease and is associated
with poorer outcomes than secondary peritonitis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 419 u Peritonitis 2511
Clinically, patients have abdominal pain, abdominal tenderness,
and rigidity on exam. Peritonitis can result from rupture of a hollow
viscus, such as the appendix or a Meckel diverticulum; disruption of
the peritoneum from trauma or peritoneal dialysis catheter; chemical
peritonitis from other bodily fluid, including bile and urine; and infection. Meconium peritonitis is described in Chapter 135. Peritonitis is
considered a surgical emergency and requires exploration and lavage of
the abdomen, except in spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.

419.1 Acute Primary Peritonitis
Jessica W. Wen and Chris A. Liacouras

ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Primary peritonitis usually refers to bacterial infection of the peritoneal
cavity without a demonstrable intraabdominal source. Most cases occur
in children with ascites resulting from cirrhosis or nephrotic syndrome.
Infection can result from translocation of gut bacteria as well as immune
dysfunction. Rarely, primary peritonitis occurs in previously healthy children. Pneumococci (most common), group A streptococci, enterococci,
staphylococci, and gram-­negative enteric bacteria, especially Escherichia
coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae, are most commonly found. Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Neisseria meningitidis, and Mycobacterium bovis are rare
causes. A small percentage are polymicrobial or culture negative.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Onset may be insidious or rapid and is characterized by fever, abdominal pain, and a toxic appearance. Vomiting and diarrhea may be present.
Hypotension and tachycardia are common, along with shallow, rapid respirations because of discomfort associated with breathing. Abdominal palpation might demonstrate rebound tenderness and rigidity. Bowel sounds are
hypoactive or absent. However, signs and symptoms may be subtle at times,
and increased vigilance is needed in cirrhotic patients who have ascites and
present with unexplained leukocytosis, azotemia, or metabolic acidosis.

DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT

Peripheral leukocytosis with a marked predominance of polymorphonuclear cells is common, although the white blood cell (WBC) count can be
affected by preexisting hypersplenism in patients with cirrhosis. Patients
with nephrotic syndrome generally have proteinuria, and low serum albumin in these patients is associated with an increased risk of peritonitis.
X-­ray examination of the abdomen reveals dilation of the large and small
intestines, with increased separation of loops secondary to bowel wall
thickening. Distinguishing primary peritonitis from appendicitis may be
difficult in patients without a history of nephrotic syndrome or cirrhosis;
accordingly, the diagnosis of primary peritonitis is made by CT scan, laparoscopy, or laparotomy. In a child with known renal or hepatic disease and
ascites, the presence of peritoneal signs should prompt diagnostic paracentesis. Infected fluid usually reveals a WBC count of ≥250 cells/mm3, with
>50% polymorphonuclear cells.
Primary peritonitis is usually monomicrobial. The presence of mixed bacterial flora on ascitic fluid examination or free air on abdominal roentgenogram in children with presumed peritonitis mandates further evaluation
to localize a perforation as a likely intraabdominal source of the infection.
Inoculation of ascitic fluid obtained at paracentesis directly into blood
culture bottles increases the yield of positive cultures. Parenteral antibiotic therapy with broad-­spectrum coverage, such as cefotaxime, should be
started promptly, with subsequent changes dependent on sensitivity testing
(vancomycin for resistant pneumococci). Patients with risk factor for multidrug resistant organisms such as nosocomial infection, recent exposure
to antibiotics, or with sepsis or septic shock should receive broad-­spectrum
coverage with piperacillin/tazobactam with consideration for addition of
vancomycin if prior infection or positive surveillance swab for methicillin-­
resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Therapy should be continued for 5-­10 days.
Culture-­negative neutrocytic ascites is a variant of primary peritonitis
with an ascitic fluid WBC count of >500 cells/mm3, a negative culture, no
intraabdominal source of infection, and no prior treatment with antibiotics. It should be treated in a similar way to primary peritonitis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

419.2 Acute Secondary Peritonitis
Jessica W. Wen and Chris A. Liacouras
Acute secondary peritonitis most often results from entry of enteric bacteria into the peritoneal cavity through a necrotic defect in the wall of
the intestines or other viscus as a result of obstruction or infarction or
after rupture of an intraabdominal visceral abscess. It most commonly
follows perforation of the appendix. Other causes include incarcerated
hernias, rupture of a Meckel diverticulum, midgut volvulus, intussusception, hemolytic uremic syndrome, peptic ulceration, inflammatory bowel
disease, necrotizing cholecystitis, necrotizing enterocolitis, typhlitis, and
traumatic perforation.
Peritonitis in the neonatal period most often occurs as a complication
of necrotizing enterocolitis but may be associated with meconium ileus or
spontaneous (or indomethacin-­induced) rupture of the stomach or intestines. In postpubertal females, bacteria from the genital tract (Neisseria
gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis) can gain access to the peritoneal cavity via the fallopian tubes, causing secondary peritonitis. The presence of a
foreign body, such as a ventriculoperitoneal catheter or peritoneal dialysis
catheter, can predispose to peritonitis, with skin microorganisms, such as
Staphylococcus epidermidis, S. aureus, and Candida albicans, contaminating the shunt. Secondary peritonitis results from direct toxic effects of bacteria as well as local and systemic release of inflammatory mediators in
response to organisms and their products (lipopolysaccharide endotoxin).
The development of sepsis depends on various host and disease factors, as
well as the promptness of antimicrobial and surgical intervention.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Similar to primary peritonitis, characteristic symptoms include fever, diffuse abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. Physical findings of peritoneal
inflammation include rebound tenderness, abdominal wall rigidity, a paucity of body motion (lying still), and decreased or absent bowel sounds
from paralytic ileus. Massive exudation of fluid into the peritoneal cavity,
along with the systemic release of vasodilative substances, can lead to the
rapid development of shock. A toxic appearance, irritability, and restlessness are common. Basilar atelectasis, as well as intrapulmonary shunting,
can develop, with progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Laboratory studies reveal a peripheral WBC count >12,000 cells/mm3,
with a marked predominance of polymorphonuclear forms. X-­rays of
the abdomen can reveal free air in the peritoneal cavity, evidence of ileus
or obstruction, peritoneal fluid, and obliteration of the psoas shadow.
Other peritoneal fluid findings suggestive of secondary peritonitis
include elevated total protein (>1 g/dL), and low glucose (<50 mg/dL).

TREATMENT

Aggressive fluid resuscitation and support of cardiovascular function
should begin immediately. Stabilization of the patient before surgical
intervention is mandatory. Antibiotic therapy must provide coverage for
organisms that predominate at the site of presumed origin of the infection. Initial empiric antibiotics for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis has
included cefotaxime or ceftriaxone. In contrast to primary peritonitis, secondary peritonitis is typically polymicrobial. For perforation of the lower
gastrointestinal tract, a regimen of ampicillin, gentamicin, and clindamycin or metronidazole will adequately address infection by E. coli, Klebsiella,
and Bacteroides spp. and enterococci. Alternative therapy could include
piperacillin/tazobactam or a carbapenem. Surgery to repair a perforated
viscus should proceed after the patient is stabilized and antibiotic therapy
is initiated. Intraoperative peritoneal fluid cultures will indicate whether
a change in the antibiotic regimen is warranted. Empirical treatment for
peritoneal dialysis catheter–related peritonitis may include intraperitoneal
vancomycin or a first-­generation cephalosporin (such as cefazolin) for
gram-­positive organism coverage, and third-­or fourth-­generation cephalosporin (such as cefepime or ceftazidime), aminoglycoside, carbapenem
or aztreonam (for patients allergic to cephalosporins) for gram-­negative
organism coverage. Serious infection from peritoneal dialysis catheters can
generally be prevented with good catheter hygiene and prompt removal
and replacement with signs of progressive infection.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2512 Part XVI u The Digestive System

419.3 Acute Secondary Localized Peritonitis
(Peritoneal Abscess)
Jessica W. Wen and Chris A. Liacouras

ETIOLOGY

Intraabdominal abscesses occur less commonly in children and infants
than in adults, but they can develop in visceral intraabdominal organs
(hepatic, splenic, renal, pancreatic, tubo-­ovarian abscesses) or in the interintestinal, periappendiceal, subdiaphragmatic, subhepatic, pelvic, or retroperitoneal spaces. Most commonly, periappendiceal and pelvic abscesses
arise from a perforation of the appendix. Transmural inflammation with
fistula formation can result in intraabdominal abscess formation in children with inflammatory bowel disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Prolonged fever, anorexia, vomiting, and lassitude suggest the development
of an intraabdominal abscess. The peripheral WBC count is elevated, as
is the erythrocyte sedimentation rate. With an appendiceal abscess, there
is localized tenderness and a palpable mass in the right lower quadrant.
A pelvic abscess is suggested by abdominal distention, rectal tenesmus
with or without the passage of small-­volume mucous stools, and bladder irritability. Rectal examination might reveal a tender mass anteriorly.
Subphrenic gas collection, basal atelectasis, elevated hemidiaphragm, and
pleural effusion may be present with a subdiaphragmatic abscess. Psoas
abscess can develop from extension of infection from a retroperitoneal
appendicitis, Crohn disease, or perirenal or intrarenal abscess. Abdominal
findings may be minimal, and presentation can include a limp, hip pain,
and fever. Ultrasound examination, CT scanning, and MRI may be used to
localize intraabdominal abscesses; MRI gives the best resolution of disease
involvement.

TREATMENT

An abscess should be drained, and appropriate antibiotic therapy provided. Drainage can be performed under radiologic control (ultrasonogram or CT guidance) and an indwelling drainage catheter left in place,
or surgically depending on location of abscess. Initial broad-­spectrum
antibiotic coverage such as a combination of ampicillin, gentamicin, and
clindamycin or ciprofloxacin and metronidazole should be started and can
be modified, depending on the results of sensitivity testing. The treatment
of appendiceal rupture complicated by abscess formation may be problematic because intestinal phlegmon formation can make surgical resection
more difficult. Intensive antibiotic therapy for 4-­6 weeks followed by an
interval appendectomy is often the treatment course followed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

intraabdominal pressure, and, in older patients, previous midline incision
may play a role in the development of epigastric hernia. Epigastric hernias may be single or multiple and are 2-­3 times more common in males
than females. Through the small midline defect there is often herniation
of preperitoneal fat into the superficial abdominal wall, although as the
defect becomes progressively larger, the rare possibility exists of herniation
of intraabdominal contents. Epigastric (incisional) hernias can occur in a
previous incision site or be associated with ventricular-­peritoneal shunts.

CLINICAL PRESENTATION

Epigastric hernias typically appear in young children as a visible or palpable mass in the midline, between the umbilicus and the xiphoid process of the sternum, noted by the parents or primary care practitioner.
The mass is almost always small (<1 cm), asymptomatic, and typically
reported as always present, but most apparent at times of irritability or
straining. Occasionally the mass is intermittent, and the child relates
pain localized to the site. Physical examination demonstrates a firm
mass, directly in the midline, anywhere between the umbilicus and the
xiphoid process. The mass may be intermittent if the fat reduces with
relaxation of the abdominal muscles. Epigastric hernias typically contain only preperitoneal fat, and most are not reducible because of the
small size of the fascial defect. Rarely, a fascial defect is noted without
a palpable mass. Herniation of intestines or abdominal viscera in an
epigastric hernia would be exceptionally rare if the defect enlarges over
time. The mass may be tender to examination, but strangulation of the
hernia contents is uncommon. Physical examination is almost always
diagnostic, and imaging studies are generally unnecessary. If the diagnosis is unclear, imaging may be useful. Ultrasound typically shows a
small mass that is isoechoic to the adjacent subcutaneous fat and possibly connection through a small fascial defect with the preperitoneal fat.
MRI imaging might be helpful in diagnosis but is not routinely used.
The natural history of epigastric hernia is for gradual enlargement
over time as intermittently more preperitoneal fat is extruded through
the defect at times of straining or increased intraabdominal pressure. Left untreated, the defect can enlarge and allow herniation of
intraabdominal viscera within a peritoneal sac, mostly seen in adults.
Epigastric hernias do not resolve spontaneously, and therefore operative repair is the recommended treatment. The site should be carefully
marked preoperatively because the mass and defect can be difficult to
localize in a relaxed abdominal wall after induction of anesthesia. A
limited transverse incision is made over the mass, and dissection is
performed to delineate the edges of the fascial defect. If herniated fat
is present, it is dissected free of the subcutaneous tissues and can be
reduced or ligated and excised. The defect is closed using absorbable
suture. The skin is closed with an absorbable subcuticular suture. Postoperative complications are rare, and the recurrence rate is low.

420.1 Incisional Hernia
Chapter 420

Epigastric Hernia
John J. Aiken
Epigastric hernias in children are ventral hernias in the midline of the
abdominal wall between the xiphoid process of the sternum and the umbilicus. Epigastric hernias are more likely to be congenital than acquired. The
defect typically contains only preperitoneal fat without a peritoneal sac or
abdominal viscera. Because most epigastric hernias are small and asymptomatic, the true incidence is unknown, but the reported incidence in childhood varies from <1% to as high as 5%. The etiology of epigastric hernia is
unknown. The two main hypotheses are the vascular lacunae hypothesis
and the tendinous fiber decussation hypothesis; the former proposes that
the protrusion is through small spaces created where the vascular lacunae penetrate the linea alba, and the latter proposes that epigastric hernia
occurs exclusively at sites where affected patients do not have triple lines
of decussation. In addition, undiagnosed collagen disorders, increased

John J. Aiken
Hernia formation in the site of a previous laparotomy is uncommon in
childhood. Incisional hernias can also occur at the incision sites for the
laparoscopic ports used in minimally invasive surgery. Factors associated
with an increased risk of incisional hernia include increased intraabdominal pressure, wound infection, and midline incision. The laparoscopic port
sites pose a technical challenge to visualize the fascia in a small incision.
Transverse abdominal incisions are favored because of their increased
strength and blood supply, which reduces the likelihood of wound infection and incisional hernia. Although most incisional hernias require repair,
operation should be deferred until the child is in optimal medical condition. Some incisional hernias resolve, especially those occurring in infants.
Some recommend elastic bandaging to discourage enlargement of the hernia and to promote spontaneous healing. Initial management should be
conservative, with repair deferred until around 1 year of age. Incarceration
is very uncommon in incisional hernias but is an indication for prompt
repair. Newborns with abdominal wall defects represent the largest group
of children with incisional hernias.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

