Diseases of the Blood

PART

XIX

Section 1

The Hematopoietic
System
Chapter 495

Development of the
Hematopoietic System
Stella T. Chou
HEMATOPOIESIS IN THE HUMAN EMBRYO AND
FETUS

Hematopoiesis is the process by which the cellular elements of blood are
formed. In the developing human embryo and fetus, hematopoiesis has
three developmental waves and is conceptually divided into three anatomic stages: mesoblastic, hepatic, and myeloid. Mesoblastic hematopoiesis occurs in extraembryonic structures, principally in the yolk sac,
and begins between the 10th and 14th days of gestation. By 6-­8 weeks
of gestation, the liver replaces the yolk sac as the primary site of blood
cell production, and during this time, the placenta also contributes as a
hematopoietic site. By 10-­12 weeks, extraembryonic hematopoiesis has
ceased. Hepatic hematopoiesis occurs through the remainder of gestation and then diminishes during the second ­trimester while bone marrow (myeloid) hematopoiesis increases. The liver is the predominant
erythropoietic organ through 20-­24 weeks of gestation.
Each hematopoietic organ houses distinct populations of cells. The
yolk sac predominantly produces erythrocytes, megakaryocytes, and
macrophages. The fetal liver is primarily an erythropoietic organ, while
the bone marrow produces erythrocytes, megakaryocytes, and leukocytes. The types of leukocytes present in the fetal liver and marrow differ with gestation. Macrophages precede neutrophils in the marrow,
and the ratio of macrophages to neutrophils decreases as gestation
progresses. Regardless of gestational age or anatomic location, production of all hematopoietic tissues begins with multipotent cells capable
of both self-­renewal and clonal maturation into all blood cell lineages.
Progenitor cells differentiate under the influence of transcription factors and hematopoietic growth factors.
The classical model of hematopoietic differentiation involves differentiation into increasingly lineage-­specific progenitors, although
there may also be alternate pathways that are used separately or in
combination with classical pathways (Fig. 495.1). In the classical pathway, long-­term repopulating hematopoietic stem cells (LTR-­HSCs) are
characterized by their ability to self-­renew and differentiate into cells
that are multipotent. Multipotent progenitors (MPPs) have reduced
self-­renewal capacity and differentiate into common lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) or common myeloid progenitors (CMPs). The CMP
differentiates into all the blood lineages except for lymphoid. The
commitment of hematopoietic cells to increasingly lineage-­restricted
cells requires cytokine stimulation and regulation by transcription
factors.

Erythrocytes in the fetus are larger than in adults, and at 22-­23 weeks’
gestation, the mean corpuscular volume can be as high as 135 femtoliters (fL) (Fig. 495.2A). Similarly, the mean corpuscular hemoglobin
is very high at 22-­23 weeks and falls relatively linearly with advancing
gestation (see Fig. 495.2B). In contrast, the mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration is constant throughout gestation at 34 ±1 g/dL.
While the size and quantity of hemoglobin in erythrocytes diminish
during gestation, the hematocrit and blood hemoglobin concentration
gradually increase (Fig. 495.3).
Platelet concentration in the blood increases gradually between
22 and 40 weeks’ gestation (Fig. 495.4), but the platelet size, assessed
by mean platelet volume, remains constant at 8 ±1 fL. No differences
are observed between males and females in fetal and neonatal reference ranges for erythrocyte indices, hematocrit, hemoglobin, platelet
counts, or mean platelet volume measurements.

FETAL GRANULOCYTOPOIESIS

Neutrophils are first observed in the human fetus about 5 weeks after conception as small clusters of cells around the aorta. The fetal bone marrow
space begins to develop around the eighth week, and from 8-­10 weeks, the
marrow space enlarges, but no neutrophils appear there until 10.5 weeks.
From 14 weeks through term, the most common granulocytic cell type
in the fetal bone marrow space is the neutrophil. Neutrophils and macrophages originate from a common progenitor cell, but macrophages appear
before neutrophils in the fetus, first in the yolk sac, liver, lung, and brain, all
before the bone marrow cavity is formed.
Granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (G-­CSF) and macrophage
colony-­stimulating factor (M-­CSF) are expressed in developing fetal
bone as early as 6 weeks after conception, and both are expressed in
the fetal liver as early as 8 weeks. Granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­
stimulating factor (GM-­
CSF) and stem cell factor (SCF) also are
distributed widely in human fetal tissues. However, no changes in
expression of any of these factors, or of their specific receptors, appear
to be the signal for fetal production of neutrophils or macrophages.
Fetal blood contains few neutrophils until the third trimester. At 20
weeks’ gestation, the blood neutrophil count is 0-­500/mm3. Although
mature neutrophils are scarce, progenitor cells with the capacity to
generate neutrophil clones are abundant in fetal blood. When cultured
in vitro in the presence of recombinant G-­CSF, they mature into large
colonies of neutrophils. The physiologic role of G-­CSF includes upregulating neutrophil production, and the low number of circulating neutrophils in the mid-­trimester human fetus may be caused, in part, by
low production of G-­CSF. Monocytes isolated from the blood of adults
produce G-­CSF when stimulated with a variety of inflammatory mediators, such as bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or interleukin (IL)-­1.
In contrast, monocytes isolated from the blood or organs of fetuses up
to 24 weeks’ gestation generate only small quantities of G-­CSF protein
and messenger RNA (mRNA) after LPS or IL-­1 stimulation. Despite
this, G-­CSF receptors on the surface of neutrophils of newborn infants
are equal in number and affinity to those on adult neutrophils.
In the fetus, actions of the granulocytic factors (G-­CSF, M-­CSF, GM-­
CSF, and SCF) are not limited to hematopoiesis. Receptors for each of

2921
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2922 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Stem Cell
Growth
Factors

Wnt
Jagged
Angiopoietin-like 2/3
BMP
Osteopontin

LTRHSC

RUNX-1
SCL/TAL-1
LMO-2
MLL
Gfi-1
TEL
BMI-1
GATA2

Stem Cell
Transcription
Factors

MPP
Early-acting
Hematopoietic
Growth Factors

MLP

?

SCF
IL-3
GM-CSF
Flt3 Ligand
IL-11
IL-6
IL-1
Tpo

CLP

CMP

PU.1
Ikaros
E2A
EBF
PAX-5
BCL11A

MEP

GATA1
FOG-1
Gfi-1b BFU-E
EKLF

Epo
LineageSpecific
Hematopoietic
Growth Factors

CFU-E

Notch-1
TCF-1
GATA3

GMP
GATA1
GATA2
FOG-1
CFUMEG

CFUG

GATA1
Gfi-1b

Tpo

PU.1
C/EBP

C/EBP
CFUM

C/EBP
Gfi-1

G-CSF

CFUb
GATA1

M-CSF

CFUEo

PreB Cell

PreNK

PreT Cell

B Cell

NK Cell

T Cell

C/EBP
GATA1

IL-5

Epo

erythrocyte

platelet

polymorphonuclear
leukocyte

monocyte/
macrophage

basophil

IL-1

eosinophil

endothelial cell

IL-3
GM-CSF
IL-5

TNF
and fibroblast

SCF GM-CSF
IL-6
G-CSF
IL-11 M-CSF

Fig. 495.1 Major cytokine sources and actions to promote hematopoiesis. Cells of the bone marrow microenvironment, such as macrophages,

endothelial cells, and reticular fibroblasts, produce macrophage colony-­stimulating factor (M-­CSF), granulocyte-­macrophage colony-­stimulating
factor (GM-­CSF), and granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (G-­CSF) after stimulation. These cytokines and others listed in the text have overlapping
interactions during hematopoietic differentiation, as indicated; for all lineages, optimal development requires a combination of early-­and late-­acting
factors. BFU, Burst-­forming unit; BMP, bone morphogenic protein; CFU, colony-­forming unit; CLP, common lymphoid progenitor; CMP, common
myeloid progenitor; Epo, erythropoietin; GMP, granulocyte-monocyte progenitor; IL, interleukin; LTR-HSC, long-term repopulating-hematopoietic
stem cell; MEP, megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor; MLP, multipotent lymphoid progenitor; MPP, multipotent progenitor; SCF, stem cell factor;
TNF, tumor necrosis factor; Tpo, thrombopoietin. (From Sieff CA, Daley GO, Zon LI. The anatomy and physiology of hematopoiesis. In Orkin SH,
Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015.)

these are located in areas of the fetal central nervous system and gastrointestinal tract, where their patterns of expression change with development.

FETAL THROMBOPOIESIS

Several biologic differences exist between fetal, neonatal, and adult megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis. There is a developmentally unique
pattern of fetal/neonatal megakaryopoiesis characterized by rapid proliferation, followed by full cytoplasmic maturation without polyploidization.

Fetal and neonatal megakaryocytes are significantly smaller, exhibit lower
ploidy, and produce fewer platelets. However, fetal and neonatal megakaryocytes have a higher proliferative potential than adult progenitors.
These differences allow fetuses and neonates to populate their rapidly
expanding bone marrow space and blood volume while maintaining normal platelet counts.
Megakaryocyte progenitors are categorized as burst-­forming
unit–megakaryocytes (BFU-­
MK), which are primitive megakaryocyte

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 495 u Development of the Hematopoietic System
140

2923

60

135
130

50
Hematocrit (%)

MCV (fL)

125
120
115
110
105

40

30

100
95
90

A

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
Weeks Gestation

A

48

20
10

20

30

40

30

40

Time (wk)
6

46
5
Red cell count (1012/I)

44

MCH (pg)

42
40
38
36
34

4

3

2

32
30

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42

B

B

Weeks Gestation

Fig. 495.2 A, Erythrocyte mean corpuscular volume (MCV), and B,

mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) from 22 weeks’ gestation through
term. The lines represent the 5th percentile, the mean, and the 95th
percentile reference range. (From Christensen RD, Jopling J, Henry
E, et al. The erythrocyte indices of neonates, defined using data from
over 12,000 patients in a multihospital healthcare system. J Perinatol
2008;28:24–28.)

1
10

20
Time (wk)

Fig. 495.3 Reference ranges of fetal hematocrit (A) and fetal red
blood cell count (B) by cordocentesis throughout gestations.

400,000

Platelet Count

300,000

200,000

Fig. 495.4 Platelet count from 22

100,000

0
Gestational Age 22
Sample Size 11

23
66

24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
106 108 146 198 215 254 317 510 698 1090 1798 2456 3286 3910 5478 7600 4685 1143 71
5th %ile

Mean

95th %ile

weeks’ gestation through term. The
lines represent the 5th percentile, the
mean, and the 95th percentile reference range. (From Wiedmeier SE,
Henry E, Sola-­Visner MC, et al. Platelet
reference ranges for neonates, defined
using data from over 47,000 patients
in a multihospital healthcare system. J
Perinatol 2009;29:130–136.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2924 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
5c

3c
Chromosome 11

2

G A



1

 

1 1
Chromosome 16
2 1 2 2 1
0

10

20

Embryonic:

30

40

50

60

Gower 1

2 2

Gower 2

2 2

Portland

2 2

70

Kb

Fetal: Hemoglobin F 2 2
Adult:

Hemoglobin A 2 2
Hemoglobin A2 2 2

Fig. 495.5 Organization of the globin genes. The bottom line reflects

the scale in kilobases. The upper segment represents the β-­like globin
genes on chromosome 11, and the lower segment the α-­like genes
on chromosome 16. Regions of the gene that code for primary globin
proteins are shown as blue segments, and regions that code for pseudogenes (“ψ,” nonexpressed remnants) are shown as pink segments.
The composition of embryonic, fetal, and adult hemoglobins is listed.
α, Alpha; β, beta; γ, gamma; δ, delta; ε, epsilon; ζ, zeta.

progenitors, and colony-­forming unit–megakaryocytes (CFU-­MK), which
are more differentiated. BFU-­MK produce large multifocal colonies containing ≥50 megakaryocytes, whereas CFU-­MK generate smaller (3-­50
cells/colony) unifocal colonies. Megakaryocytes are identified by their
morphologic characteristics as they undergo endoreduplication, which
results in large cells with polyploid nuclei. Megakaryocytes, unlike megakaryocyte progenitors, do not have the capacity to generate colonies.
Rather, they undergo maturation, progressing from small mononuclear
cells to large polyploid cells. The modal megakaryocyte ploidy (the number
of sets of complete chromosomes) in normal adult marrow is 16N. In the
fetus and neonate, ploidy is lower, primarily 2N and 4N, and mature megakaryocyte size is smaller. Large megakaryocytes generate more platelets
than do small megakaryocytes; in vitro studies suggest that megakaryocytes of neonates produce fewer platelets than do their adult counterparts.
The exact mechanisms by which megakaryocytes release platelets into
the circulation remain incompletely understood. In situ examination of
this process suggests that mature megakaryocytes migrate to a perivascular site and extend a process through the endothelium, giving rise to
proplatelets, which then release platelets. An alternate mechanism is that
platelets are released from megakaryocytes in the lungs as a result of shear
forces.
Thrombopoietin (TPO) is the dominant regulator of megakaryocyte
development and platelet production. TPO is predominantly produced in
the liver from early fetal to adult life but is also expressed by cells in the kidney, and, to a lesser extent, by smooth muscle and marrow cells. TPO concentrations are higher in healthy neonates of any gestational age than in
healthy adults. TPO is a primary stimulator of megakaryocyte and platelet
production, but SCF, IL-­3, IL-­11, IL-­6, and erythropoietin also stimulate
megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis in vitro and in vivo. Importantly,
TPO promotes expansion of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and progenitor cells, and the TPO receptor is expressed on HSCs and erythroid
progenitors in addition to megakaryocyte progenitors, megakaryocytes,
and mature platelets.

FETAL ERYTHROPOIESIS

Similar to hematopoietic production of other cell lineages, fetal erythropoiesis is regulated by growth factors produced by the fetus, not
by the mother. Erythropoietin (EPO) does not cross the human placenta. Stimulating maternal EPO production does not enhance fetal
erythropoiesis, nor does suppressing maternal erythropoiesis by
hypertransfusion.

EPO plays a central regulatory role on the proliferation and maturation of erythroid progenitors. Erythroid-­committed progenitors consist
of burst-­forming unit–erythroid (BFU-­E) and colony-­forming unit–erythroid (CFU-­E) cells. In colony-­forming assays, human BFU-­E cells are
more proliferative, forming colonies of multiple clusters of erythroblasts,
as compared with CFU-­E cells, which form one or two clusters, with
each containing 8-­100 hemoglobinized erythroblasts. EPO is essential for
erythrocyte production from CFU-­E cells by inducing survival and proliferation of erythroblasts. EPO binds to specific receptors on the surface
of committed erythroid precursors, and its expression is regulated by an
oxygen-­sensing mechanism through the hypoxia-­inducible factor (HIF)
family of proteins. HIF-­1α and HIF-­2α are regulated by oxygen tension,
whereas HIF-­1β is constitutively expressed. Together, HIF proteins maintain oxygen homeostasis and regulate erythropoiesis by inducing EPO
under hypoxic conditions.
EPO is produced by monocytes and macrophages in the fetal liver
during the first and second trimesters. After birth, the anatomic site of
EPO production shifts to the kidney. The specific stimulus for this shift
is unknown but may involve the increase in arterial oxygen tension that
occurs at birth. Epigenetic modification of gene expression may also
play a role because it appears that renal and hepatic EPO genes are methylated to different degrees. Although EPO mRNA and protein can be
found in the human fetal kidney, it is not known whether this production is biologically relevant. It appears that renal production of EPO is
not essential for normal fetal erythropoiesis, as evidenced by the normal
serum EPO concentration and normal hematocrit of anephric fetuses.

Hemoglobins in the Fetus and Neonate

Hemoglobin is a tetramer of four globin chains with an iron-­containing
porphyrin ring called heme covalently bound to each chain. A dynamic
interaction between heme and globin gives hemoglobin its unique properties in the reversible transport of oxygen. The hemoglobin molecule
consists of two alpha (α)-­like and two beta (β)-­like polypeptide chains,
with each chain having a heme group attached (Fig. 495.5). There are two
β-­globin genes and four α-­globin genes. Within erythrocytes of an early
embryo, fetus, child, and adult, six different hemoglobins may normally
be detected (Fig. 495.6): the embryonic hemoglobins (Gower-­1, Gower-­2,
and Portland), fetal hemoglobin (HbF), and the adult hemoglobins (HbA
and HbA2). The electrophoretic mobilities of hemoglobins vary with their
chemical structures.
Expression and quantitative relationships among the hemoglobins are
determined by complex developmental processes. Globin chain expression is developmental stage specific and occurs through two hemoglobin switches, mediated primarily through changes of the β-­globin genes
expressed. There are five functional β-­like globin chain genes: embryonic
(HBE1), two fetal (HBG1, HBG2), and two adult (HBD, HBB); and three
α-­like globin chain genes: embryonic (HBZ) and two adult (HBA1, HBA2).
Primitive erythroid cells primarily express embryonic globins. The first β-­
globin switch occurs at approximately 6 weeks’ gestation to fetal globin
(HBG), which coincides with the onset of definitive hematopoiesis. The
major hemoglobin in the fetus (HbF) consists of two α and two gamma
(γ) globin chains (α2γ2). The second globin switch is responsible for the
expression of the major hemoglobin of adults (HbA), consisting of two α
and two β polypeptide chains (α2β2) and is first expressed at mid-­gestation.
A key regulator of the fetal-­to-­adult hemoglobin switch is the transcription factor BCL11A, which binds to the β-­globin gene and acts to silence
γ-­globin expression and thus HbF.

Embryonic Hemoglobins

The blood of early human embryos contains two slowly migrating hemoglobins, Gower-­1 and Gower-­2, and Hb Portland, which has HbF-­like
mobility. The zeta (ζ) chains of Hb Portland and Gower-­1 are structurally
quite similar to α chains. Both Gower hemoglobins contain the epsilon
(ε) β-­like globin polypeptide chain. Hb Gower-­1 has the structure ζ2ε2,
whereas Gower-­2 has α2ε2. Hb Portland has the structure ζ2γ2. In embryos
up to 6 weeks’ gestation, the Gower hemoglobins predominate but are no
longer detectable by 3 months of gestation.

Fetal Hemoglobin

By 6-­8 weeks’ gestation, HbF (α2γ2) is the predominant hemoglobin;
at 24 weeks’ gestation, it constitutes 90% of the total hemoglobin. HbF

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 495 u Development of the Hematopoietic System
100

100

HbF production

40
F

A 0
Globin subunits: % of total

80

A

60

22
A—22

22

B

HbF production, after
premature delivery

80

A2—22

22

50

Fetal hemoglobin %

Hemoglobins: % of total

F—22

20

2925

60

40



40

G

20



30
20


10
0

A




0

10

3

0


20

30

BIRTH
Crown–Rump
5 10 15 20  cm
FETUS

10

20

30

40WK

AGE:
NEWBORN

Fig. 495.6 Changes in hemoglobin tetramers (A) and in globin subunits (B) during human development from embryo to early infancy. (From
Polin RA, Fox WW. Fetal and Neonatal Physiology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1998: p. 1769.)

declines modestly in the third trimester, such that the HbF comprises
70–80% of the total hemoglobin. HbF production decreases rapidly
postnatally (Fig. 495.7), and by 6-­12 months of age declines to adult
concentrations of <2%. Understanding the molecular basis of the fetal-­
to-­adult hemoglobin switch is of interest because of the therapeutic
benefits to patients with β-­thalassemia and sickle cell disease, whose
clinical severity is improved with modest elevation of HbF. The exact
mechanisms by which BCL11A acts to repress HbF are not fully elucidated, but erythroid-­specific enhancers of BCL11A have been identified and are potential targets for therapeutic HbF induction.

Adult Hemoglobins

HbA constitutes 5–10% of total hemoglobin at 24 weeks’ gestation and
steadily increases, so that at term, HbA averages 30% of total hemoglobin. By 6-­12 months of age, individuals reach adult concentrations of
HbA. The minor adult hemoglobin component, HbA2, contains delta (δ)
chains and has the structure α2δ2. At birth, <1.0% of HbA2 is detected,
but by 12 months of age the normal level is 2.0–3.4%. Throughout life,
the normal ratio of HbA to HbA2 is approximately 30:1.

Alterations of Hemoglobins

HbF levels may be elevated with hemoglobinopathies, hereditary persistence of HbF, or bone marrow failure syndromes or may be associated
with stress erythropoiesis. Because the HbF level is elevated during the first
years of life, knowledge of its normal pattern of decline is important (see
Figs. 495.6 and 495.7). Two disorders resulting from pathogenic variants
in the β-­globin gene (HBB), β-­thalassemia and sickle cell disease, become
symptomatic postnatally as fetal γ-­globin expression decreases and adult
β-­globin increases. In both these disorders, elevated HbF levels persist in
childhood and later. In patients with the most severe type, β0 thalassemia,
except for a small amount of HbA2, HbF is the only hemoglobin produced.
At the other end of the spectrum, in individuals with β-­thalassemia trait,
the postnatal decrease of HbF is delayed and mildly elevated levels of HbF
(>2%) may persist throughout life. Individuals with sickle cell disease, who
also have a pathogenic variant in the HBB gene, typically demonstrate
elevated levels of HbF, ranging from approximately 5% to up to 30%. In
contrast, elevated HbF is not characteristic of α-­thalassemia syndromes,
but tetramers of γ chains (γ4 or Hb Barts) may be found in the neonatal
period. Because α-­globin chains are expressed in fetal and adult hemoglobin, four α gene pathogenic variants leading to functional deletions are

32 36
40
Postconceptional, 1
wks

2

3

4

5

6

Term postnatal, mos

Fig. 495.7 Pre-­and postnatal changes in the percentage of total

hemoglobin represented by fetal hemoglobin (HbF) (yellow). The triangles represent postnatal production by reticulocytes in premature
infants, and the circles represent cord blood and postnatal reticulocyte
production in term infants. (From Brown MS. Fetal and neonatal erythropoiesis. In: Stockman JA, Pochedly C eds. Developmental and Neonatal Hematology. New York: Raven Press, 1988.)

not compatible with life. Fetuses die in utero or shortly after birth from the
severe anemia and hydrops fetalis. Inheritance of only one normal gene of
the four (α −/−) results in hemoglobin H disease, which is usually associated with a moderate anemia. Inheritance of two or three normal α genes
results in α-­thalassemia trait or carrier status, respectively.
Hereditary persistence of HbF (HPFH) is a benign genetic condition
caused by heterozygous deletions or nucleotide substitutions in regions of
the β-­globin locus that regulate transcription of HBG1 and HBG2, causing
persistent pancellular HbF expression levels of approximately 30% of total
hemoglobins. Individuals with HPFH do not exhibit anemia.
Preterm infants treated with human recombinant EPO increase HbF
production during active erythropoiesis. Moderate elevations of HbF
may also occur in many diseases accompanied by hematologic stress,
such as hemolytic anemias, leukemia, and bone marrow failure syndromes, such as Diamond Blackfan anemia.
The normal adult level of HbA2 (2.0–3.4%) is seldom altered. Levels of
HbA2 > 3.4% are found in most persons with the β-­thalassemia trait and in
those with megaloblastic anemias secondary to vitamin B12 and folic acid
deficiency. Decreased HbA2 levels are found in those with iron-­deficiency
anemia (see Chapter 504) and α-­thalassemia (see Chapter 511.10).

RED CELL LIFE SPAN IN THE FETUS AND NEONATE

In general, the highest hematocrit during a person’s lifetime occurs
at birth, and the lowest hematocrit occurs at the physiologic nadir
that occurs 8-­10 weeks postnatally. A shortened life span of fetal and
neonatal red blood cells (RBCs) has been suggested as an important
component. The average erythrocyte life span in normal adults is
approximately 120 days. The life span of fetal/neonatal erythrocytes
was once estimated to be considerably less, with an average of 60-­90
days suggested by chromium (51Cr)-­labeled erythrocyte studies. However, newer studies indicate that the life span of fetal/neonatal RBCs is
similar to that of adults. Neocytolysis is the active removal of young
erythrocytes that were generated in relatively hypoxic conditions, after
normoxic or hyperoxic conditions. This process has also been suggested as an explanation for the physiologic nadir of neonates.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2926 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
more complete transfer of oxygen to the tissues. This same shift in the
oxygen dissociation curve can also occur at high altitude. Higher levels
of erythropoietin (EPO) and consequent increased RBC production by
the bone marrow further help the body to adapt.

Chapter 496

Anemias

HISTORY AND PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Courtney D. Thornburg

A detailed history and thorough physical exam are essential when evaluating an anemic child. Important historical facts include demographics, diet, medications, chronic diseases, infections, travel, and exposures.
A family history of anemia and associated difficulties (e.g., splenomegaly, jaundice, early-­age onset of gallstones) is also important. Often, few
physical symptoms or signs result solely from a low hemoglobin, particularly when the anemia develops slowly. Clinical findings generally
do not become apparent until the hemoglobin level falls to <7-­8 g/dL.
Clinical features can include pallor, sleepiness, irritability, and decreased
exercise tolerance. Pallor can involve the tongue, nail beds, conjunctiva,
palms, or palmar creases. A flow murmur is often present. Ultimately,
weakness, tachypnea, shortness of breath on exertion, tachycardia, cardiac dilation, and high-­output heart failure results from increasingly
severe anemia, regardless of its cause. Unusual physical findings linked
to specific underlying disease etiologies are discussed in detail in sections describing the associated disorders and in Table 496.3.

Anemia is defined as a reduction of the hemoglobin concentration
or red blood cell (RBC) volume below the range of values occurring
in healthy persons. Normal ranges for hemoglobin and hematocrit
(packed red cell volume) vary substantially with age and between males
and females (Table 496.1) and by race and ethnicity (Table 496.2).
Anemia is a significant global health problem affecting children and
reproductive-­age females (Figs. 496.1 and 496.2).
Physiologic responses to anemia include increased cardiac output,
augmented oxygen extraction (increased arteriovenous oxygen difference), and shunting of blood flow toward vital organs and tissues.
In addition, the concentration of 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate increases
within the RBC. The resultant “rightward shift” of the oxygen dissociation curve reduces the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen and results in

Table 496.1  	 Normal Mean and Lower Limits of Normal for Hemoglobin, Hematocrit, and Mean Corpuscular Volume
HEMOGLOBIN (g/dL)

HEMATOCRIT (%)

MEAN CORPUSCULAR VOLUME (fL)

AGE (yr)

MEAN

LOWER LIMIT

MEAN

LOWER LIMIT

MEAN

LOWER LIMIT

0.5-­1.9

12.5

11.0

37

33

77

70

2-­4

12.5

11.0

38

34

79

73

5-­7

13.0

11.5

39

35

81

75

8-­11

13.5

12.0

40

36

83

76

12-­14 female

13.5

12.0

41

36

85

78

12-­14 male

14.0

12.5

43

37

84

77

15-­17 female

14.0

12.0

41

36

87

79

15-­17 male

15.0

13.0

46

38

86

78

18-­49 female

14.0

12.0

42

37

90

80

18-­49 male

16.0

14.0

47

40

90

80

From Brugnara C, Oski FJ, Nathan DG, eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology of Infancy and Childhood, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2009: p. 456.

Table 496.2  	 NHANES-­III Hemoglobin Values for Non-­Hispanic Whites and Blacks Ages 2-­18 Yr*
WHITE NON-­HISPANIC
AGE (yr)

MEAN

2-­5
6-­10

BLACK

−2 SD

MEAN

−2 SD

12.21

10.8

11.95

10.37

12.87

11.31

12.40

10.74

11-­15 male

13.76

11.76

13.06

10.88

11-­15 female

13.32

11.5

12.61

10.85

16-­18 male

15.00

13.24

14.18

12.42

16-­18 female

13.39

11.61

12.37

10.37

*Sample size is 5,142 (White, 2,264; Black, 2,878).
NHANES-­III, Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; SD, standard deviation.
Adapted from Robbins EB, Blum S. Hematologic reference values for African American children and adolescents. Am J Hematol 2007;82:611–614.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 496 u Anemias

2927

Anaemia prevalence
Mild (5.0–19.9%)
Moderate (20.0–39.9%)
Severe (40.0%)
Regression-based estimate

Fig. 496.1 Global prevalence of anemia in children of preschool age (0-­5 yr). (Adapted from Worldwide prevalence of anaemia 1993–2005. In
WHO Global Database on Anaemia. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2008.)

Genetic hemoglobin
disorders
Thalassemias
Hemoglobin variants
Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency
Ovalocytosis

Nutrition
Iron deficiency
Folic acid deficiency
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Vitamin A deficiency
Protein energy malnutrition

Infectious disease
Soil-transmitted helminths
Malaria
Schistosomiasis
Tuberculosis
AIDS
Leishmaniasis
Tropical sprue
Malabsorption and disorders
of the small intestine

Fig. 496.2 Causes of anemia in countries with low-­or middle-­
income populations. (From Balarajan Y, Ramakrishnan U, Özaltin E,
et al. Anaemia in low-­income and middle-­income countries. Lancet
2011;378:2123–2134; Fig 3.)

LABORATORY STUDIES

Initial laboratory testing should include hemoglobin, hematocrit, RBC
indices, white blood cell (WBC) count and differential, platelet count,
reticulocyte count, and examination of the peripheral blood smear. The
need for additional laboratory studies is dictated by the history, physical exam, and initial testing.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Anemia can result from many underlying pathologic processes. To
narrow the diagnostic possibilities, anemias may be classified based on
their morphology and physiology (Fig. 496.3).

Anemias may be morphologically categorized by red cell size
(mean corpuscular volume [MCV]) and microscopic appearance.
Anemias can be classified as microcytic, normocytic, or macrocytic
based on whether the MCV is low, normal, or high, respectively
(Table 496.4). RBC size also changes with age, and normal developmental changes in MCV should be accommodated before a designation is made (see Table 496.1). Examination of a peripheral
blood smear often reveals changes in RBC appearance that will help
to further narrow the diagnostic categories (Fig. 496.4 and Table
496.5). Details regarding morphologic changes associated with specific disorders are described in subsequent sections.
Anemias may also be further divided based on underlying pathophysiology. The two major categories are decreased production
and increased destruction (or loss). These two groups are not
always mutually exclusive. Decreased RBC production may be a
consequence of either ineffective erythropoiesis or complete failure
of erythropoiesis. Increased destruction or loss may be secondary to
hemolysis, sequestration, or bleeding. The peripheral blood reticulocyte percentage or absolute number helps to distinguish between
the two physiologic categories. The normal reticulocyte percentage of total RBCs during most of childhood is approximately 1%,
with an absolute reticulocyte count of 25,000-­75,000/mm3. In the
presence of anemia, EPO production and the absolute number of
reticulocytes should rise. Low or normal numbers of reticulocytes
generally represent an inadequate response to anemia that is associated with relative bone marrow failure or ineffective erythropoiesis.
Increased numbers of reticulocytes represent a normal bone marrow response to ongoing RBC destruction (hemolysis), sequestration, or loss (bleeding).
Figure 496.3 presents a useful approach to assessing the common
causes of anemia in the pediatric age group. Children with microcytic
anemia and low or normal reticulocyte counts most often have defects
in erythroid maturation or ineffective erythropoiesis. Iron deficiency
is the most common cause (see Chapter 504). Thalassemia trait constitutes the primary differential diagnosis when iron deficiency is
suspected (see Chapter 511). Distinctions between these entities are
presented in Table 504.2. Chronic disease or inflammation (more
often normocytic), lead poisoning, and sideroblastic anemias should
also be considered and are discussed in other chapters. Microcytosis
and elevated reticulocyte counts are associated with thalassemias and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2928 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 496.3  	 Physical Findings in the Evaluation of Anemia
SYSTEM

OBSERVATION

SIGNIFICANCE

Skin

Hyperpigmentation

Fanconi anemia, dyskeratosis congenita

Café-­au-­lait spots

Fanconi anemia

Vitiligo

Vitamin B12 deficiency

Partial oculocutaneous albinism

Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome

Jaundice

Hemolysis, hepatitis

Petechiae, purpura

Bone marrow infiltration, autoimmune hemolysis with autoimmune
thrombocytopenia (Evans syndrome), hemolytic-­uremic syndrome

Erythematous rash

Parvovirus, Epstein-­Barr virus

Butterfly rash

Systemic lupus erythematosus

Frontal bossing

Thalassemia major, severe iron deficiency, chronic subdural hematoma

Microcephaly

Fanconi anemia
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia

Microphthalmia

Fanconi anemia

Retinopathy

Sickle cell disease, types SS and SC

Optic atrophy, blindness

Osteopetrosis

Blocked lacrimal gland

Dyskeratosis congenita

Kayser-­Fleischer ring

Wilson disease

Head

Eyes

Blue sclera

Iron deficiency

Ears

Deafness

Osteopetrosis

Mouth

Glossitis

Vitamin B12 deficiency, iron deficiency

Angular stomatitis

Iron deficiency

Cleft lip, palate

Diamond-­Blackfan anemia

Pigmentation

Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome (intestinal blood loss)

Telangiectasia

Osler-­Weber-­Rendu syndrome (blood loss)

Leukoplakia

Dyskeratosis congenital

Shield chest or widespread nipples

Diamond-­Blackfan anemia

Murmur

Endocarditis; prosthetic valve hemolysis

Hepatomegaly

Hemolysis, infiltrative tumor, chronic disease, hemangioma, cholecystitis

Splenomegaly

Acquired hemolytic anemia, inherited hemolytic anemia (hereditary
spherocytosis, pyruvate kinase deficiency, sickle cell disease [age of presentation
varies based on phenotype]), thalassemia, malaria, leukemia/lymphoma,
Epstein-­Barr virus, portal hypertension, hemophagocytic syndromes

Nephromegaly

Fanconi anemia

Absent kidney

Fanconi anemia

Absent thumbs

Fanconi anemia

Thenar eminence hypoplasia:
triphalangeal thumb

Diamond-­Blackfan anemia

Spoon nails

Iron deficiency

Beau line (nails)

Heavy metal intoxication, severe illness

Mees line (nails)

Heavy metals, severe illness, sickle cell disease

Dystrophic nails

Dyskeratosis congenita

Edema

Milk-­induced protein-­losing enteropathy with iron deficiency, renal failure

Hemorrhoids

Portal hypertension

Heme-­positive stool

Intestinal hemorrhage

Irritable, apathy

Iron deficiency

Peripheral neuropathy

Deficiency of vitamins B1 and B12, lead poisoning

Dementia

Deficiency of vitamins B12 and E

Ataxia, posterior column signs

Deficiency of vitamins B12 and E

Stroke

Sickle cell disease, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria

Chest
Abdomen

Extremities

Rectal
Nerves

Adapted from Scott JP. Hematology. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1994: p. 520.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 496 u Anemias
Microcytic

Normocytic

Macrocytic

Reticulocyte count

Reticulocyte count

Reticulocyte count

Low/Inadequate

High

• Iron deficiency
• Thalassemia syndromes
• Thalassemia trait
• Hemoglobin C and E
• Chronic disease/
disorders
inflammation
• Pyropoikilocytosis
• Lead poisoning
• Sideroblastic anemias
• Copper deficiency
• Iron refractory iron
deficiency anemia

Low/Inadequate
• Chronic disease/
inflammation
• RBC aplasia
(TEC, infection, drugs)
• Malignancy
• Endocrinopathies
• Renal failure
• Acute bleeding
• Hypersplenism
• Dyserythropoietic
Anemia II
• Hemophagocytic
syndrome

High

Low/Inadequate

2929

High

• Dyserythropoietic
• Antibody mediated
• Folate deficiency
anemia I, III
hemolysis
• Vitamin B12 deficiency
• Active hemolysis
• Hypersplenism
• Acquired aplastic anemia
with very elevated
• Microangiopathy
• Congenital aplastic anemia
reticulocyte count
(Diamond-Blackfan,
(HUS, TTP, DIC,
Fanconi anemia,
Kasabach-Merritt)
Pearson syndrome)
• Membranopathies
(spherocytosis, elliptocytosis, • Drug induced
ovalocytosis)
• Trisomy 21
• Enzymopathies
• Hypothyroidism
(G6PD, PK deficiencies)
• Orotic aciduria
• Liver disease
• Hemoglobinopathies
• Thiamine responsive
(HBSS, SC)
anemia
• Myelodysplasias
• Drugs

Fig. 496.3 Use of the mean corpuscular volume (MCV) and reticulocyte count in the diagnosis of anemia. (Adapted from Brunetti M, Cohen J. The
Harriet Lane Handbook, 17th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2005. p. 338.)

Table 496.4  Causes of High or Low Mean Corpuscular
Volume
LOW MEAN CORPUSCULAR VOLUME
Iron deficiency
Thalassemias
Lead toxicity
Anemia of chronic disease
Copper deficiency
Sideroblastic anemia
Hemoglobin E
Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis
HIGH MEAN CORPUSCULAR VOLUME
Normal newborn
Elevated reticulocyte count
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia (congenital hypoplastic anemia)
Fanconi anemia
Aplastic anemia
Down syndrome
Hypothyroidism (occasionally)
Orotic aciduria
Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome
Drugs (zidovudine, chemotherapy)
Chronic liver disease
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic anemia
Myelodysplasias
Dyserythropoietic anemias
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis: Common Diseases and Their Mimics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023:
Table 49.5, p. 910.

hemoglobin C and E (see Chapter 511). Notably, thalassemias and
hemoglobinopathies are most often seen in patients of Mediterranean,
Middle Eastern, African, or Asian descent.
Normocytic anemia and low reticulocyte count characterize
many anemias. The anemia of chronic disease/inflammation
is usually normocytic (see Chapter 504). The anemia associated
with renal failure, primarily a result of reduced EPO production,

will invariably be associated with clinical and laboratory evidence
of significant kidney disease. Decreased or absent RBC production secondary to transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (see
Chapter 499), infection, medications, or endocrinopathy usually
results in a normocytic anemia, as does bone marrow infiltration by
malignancy. Normocytic anemia in combination with leukopenia
(or significant leukocytosis with blasts) and/or thrombocytopenia
should raise suspicion for malignancy. See Chapters 517 and 518
to review pancytopenias. Acute bleeding, hypersplenism, and congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II are also normocytic (see
Chapter 501).
In children with normocytic anemia and an appropriate (high)
reticulocyte response, the anemia is usually caused by bleeding,
hypersplenism, or ongoing hemolysis. In hemolytic conditions,
reticulocytosis, indirect hyperbilirubinemia, and increased serum
lactate dehydrogenase are indicators of accelerated erythrocyte
destruction. Many causes of hemolysis result from conditions that
are extrinsic (usually acquired) or intrinsic (usually congenital) to
the erythrocyte. Abnormal RBC morphology (e.g., spherocytes,
dacryocytes or sickle forms, and schistocytes) identified on the
peripheral smear is often helpful in ascertaining the cause.
The anemia seen in children with macrocytic blood cells is
sometimes megaloblastic, resulting from impaired DNA synthesis
and nuclear development (see Chapter 503). The peripheral blood
smear in megaloblastic anemias contains large macroovalocytes,
and the neutrophils often show nuclear hypersegmentation. The
major causes of megaloblastic anemia include folate deficiency,
vitamin B12 deficiency, and rare inborn errors of metabolism.
Other macrocytic anemias with low or normal reticulocyte counts
include acquired and congenital (Diamond-­Blackfan anemia and
Fanconi anemia) aplastic anemias and hypothyroidism. Patients
with trisomy 21 have macrocytic cells, although an accompanying
anemia is generally not present. High MCV and reticulocytosis is
seen in congenital dyserythropoietic anemias I and III and in situations where hemolysis results in such a large outpouring of young
red cells that the MCV is abnormally high.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2930 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

A

B

D

C

E

Fig. 496.4 Morphologic abnormalities of the red blood cell. A, Normal. B, Macrocytes (folic acid or vitamin B12 deficiency). C, Hypochromic microcytes (iron deficiency). D, Target cells (HbCC disease). E, Schistocyte (hemolytic-­uremic syndrome). (Courtesy Dr. Elias Schwartz, Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia.)

Table 496.5  Peripheral Blood Morphologic Findings in Various Anemias
MICROCYTES
Iron deficiency
Thalassemias
Lead toxicity
Anemia of chronic disease

BASOPHIL STIPPLING
Thalassemia
Lead intoxication
Myelodysplasia

MACROCYTES
Newborns
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia
Fanconi anemia
Aplastic anemia
Liver disease
Down syndrome
Hypothyroidism

RED BLOOD CELL FRAGMENTS, HELMET CELLS, BURR CELLS
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
Waring blender syndrome (artificial heart valve)
Uremia
Liver disease

SPHEROCYTES
Hereditary spherocytosis
Immune hemolytic anemia (newborn or acquired)
Hypersplenism
SICKLED CELLS
Sickle cell anemias (SS disease, SC disease, Sβ+ thalassemia, Sβ0
thalassemia)
ELLIPTOCYTES
Hereditary elliptocytosis
Iron deficiency
Megaloblastic anemia
TARGET CELLS
Hemoglobinopathies (especially hemoglobin C and SC and thalassemia)
Liver disease
Xerocytosis

HYPERSEGMENTED NEUTROPHILS
Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency
BLASTS
Leukemia (ALL or AML)
Severe infection (rarely)
LEUKOPENIA/THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Fanconi anemia
Aplastic anemia
Leukemia
Hemophagocytic histiocytosis
HOWELL-­JOLLY BODIES
Asplenia, hyposplenia
Severe iron deficiency
DACROCYTES (TEARDROP CELLS)
Myelodysplasia
Leukemia
Neuroblastoma

ALL, Acute lymphocytic leukemia; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; SC, sickle cell C disease; SS, sickle cell S disease.
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis: Common Diseases and Their Mimics. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023: Table
49.7, p. 910.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 497 u Congenital Hypoplastic Anemia (Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia)

Section 2

Anemias of Inadequate
Production
Chapter 497

Congenital Hypoplastic
Anemia (Diamond-­
Blackfan Anemia)
Courtney D. Thornburg
Diamond-­Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare, congenital bone marrow
failure syndrome that usually becomes symptomatic in early infancy.
More than 90% of cases are recognized in the first year of life. The disorder is characterized by anemia, usually normochromic and macrocytic; reticulocytopenia; and insufficient or absent red blood cell (RBC)
precursors in an otherwise normally cellular bone marrow. Up to 50%
of affected individuals have additional, extrahematopoietic anomalies.

ETIOLOGY

The most common DBA-­associated pathogenic variants are in RPS19
(Fig. 497.1). This gene encodes a component protein of the small 40S
ribosomal subunit and pathogenic variants are present in approximately 25–30% of patients with additional ribosomal protein (RP)

100%
Multiple

% cases with putative causal mutations

TSR2
MT
75%

GATA1
CECR1

2931

genes, each encoding a different small (40S) or large (60S) ribosomal
subunit protein, implicated as well. All of these pathogenic variants
are inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion, with 40–45% of cases
inherited from a parent and 55–60% with a de novo pathogenic variant.
Less frequently, X-­linked inherited cases of DBA involve pathologic
genetic variants in GATA1 or TSR2. Patients with GATA1-­related DBA
usually have no extra hematopoietic manifestations (Fig. 497.2). TSR2-­
related DBA is associated with mandibulofacial dysostosis. Approximately 20% of cases do not have an identified genetic variant. Because
most causative variants are in ribosomal genes, the disorder is often
referred to as a ribosomopathy.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

DBA affects about 5-­10 individuals per million live births. Notably, there
is substantial phenotypic diversity in DBA, even in families whose members share the same pathologic genetic variant, suggesting that additional
genetic modifiers affect phenotypic expression of the disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Profound anemia usually becomes evident by 2-­6 months of age, occasionally somewhat later. Approximately 25% of patients are anemic at
birth, although hydrops fetalis occurs rarely; 92% are diagnosed within
the first year of life. Approximately 40–50% of patients have congenital
anomalies, and more than one anomaly is found in 25% of DBA patients
(Table 497.1). Craniofacial abnormalities are the most common (50% of
patients) and include a depressed nasal bridge and high-­arched palate.
Skeletal anomalies, mostly upper limb and hand, affect 30–40%. This
includes thumb abnormalities, including flattening of the thenar eminence and triphalangeal thumb, that may be bilateral or ­unilateral. The
radial pulse may be absent. Genitourinary (39%), cardiac (30%), ophthalmologic, and musculoskeletal anomalies have also been described.
Short stature is common, but it is often unclear whether this characteristic results from the disease itself, related therapies, or both.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The RBCs are usually macrocytic for age, but no hypersegmented
neutrophils or other characteristics of megaloblastic anemia are
appreciated on the peripheral blood smear. RBC characteristics are
like those of a “fetal” RBC population, with increased expression
of “i” antigen and elevated fetal hemoglobin (HbF). Erythrocyte
adenosine deaminase (eADA) activity is increased in most patients
with DBA, a finding that helps distinguish congenital RBC aplasia
from acquired transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC)
(see Chapter 499). Because elevated eADA activity is not a fetal
RBC feature, measurement of this enzyme may be particularly helpful when diagnosing DBA in very young infants. Thrombocytosis,

RPL15
RPL35A
50%

RPL11

Ribosomal gene
variants:

RPL5

increased eADA
extrahematopoietic
anomalies: skeletal,
renal, heart,
orofacial, bone,
endocrine

RPS17
RPS24
25%

RPS26

Steroid
responsiveness,
congenital red cell
hypoplasia,
increased MCV,
increased fHb,
transfusion-dependent
iron overload

GATA1 gene
variants:
neutropenia,
dyserythropoiesis,
thrombocytopenia

RPS19

0%

Fig. 497.1 Mutational spectrum of likely pathogenic variants in DBA.

Percentage of putative causal mutations in each gene. A total of 78% of
case subjects have a putative causal mutation. (Modified from Ulirsch JC,
Verboon JM, Kazerounian S, et al. The genetic landscape of Diamond-­
Blackfan anemia. Am J Hum Genetics 2018;103:930–947, Fig.1.)

Malignant transformation?
Activation of p53?
BM aplasia?

Fig. 497.2 Common and distinct phenotypes in congenital red cell
aplasia caused by variants in RP genes and in GATA1. BM, Bone marrow; eADA, erythrocyte adenosine deaminase activity; fHb, fetal hemoglobin; MCV, mean corpuscular volume. (Adapted from Weiss MJ, Mason PJ, Bessler M. What's in a name? J Clin Invest 2012;122:2346–2349.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2932 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
or rarely thrombocytopenia, and occasionally neutropenia, may
also be present. Reticulocytopenia is characteristic despite severe
anemia. Bone marrow erythrocyte precursors are greatly reduced
in most patients; other marrow elements are usually normal. Serum
iron levels are elevated. Unlike Fanconi anemia, there is no increase

in chromosomal breaks when lymphocytes are exposed to alkylating agents. Table 497.2 outlines suggested diagnostic criteria for
“classical” DBA. Patients may be diagnosed with “nonclassical”
DBA or “probable” DBA depending on their individual genetic test
results, family history, and major and minor criteria.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Table 497.1  Range of Congenital Anomalies Observed
in Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia
TYPE/LOCATION

ANOMALIES

Craniofacial

Hypertelorism
Broad, flat nasal bridge
Cleft palate
High-­arched palate
Microcephaly
Micrognathia
Microtia
Low-­set ears
Low hairline
Ptosis

Ophthalmologic

Congenital glaucoma
Strabismus
Epicanthal folds
Congenital cataract

Neck

Short neck
Webbed neck
Sprengel deformity
Klippel-­Feil deformity

Thumbs

Triphalangeal
Duplex or bifid
Hypoplastic
Flat thenar eminence
Absent radial artery

Urogenital

Absent kidney
Horseshoe kidney
Hypospadias

DBA must be differentiated from other anemias associated with reticulocytopenia. The syndrome of TEC is often the primary alternative
diagnosis. Table 499.1 shows a useful comparison of findings in these
two disorders (see Chapter 499). TEC often is differentiated from DBA
by its relatively late onset, although it occasionally develops in infants
younger than 6 months of age. Macrocytosis, congenital anomalies,
fetal RBC characteristics, and elevated eADA are generally associated
with DBA and not TEC.
Other inherited macrocytic bone marrow failure syndromes, particularly Fanconi anemia and Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome
(see Chapter 517), should also be considered, as should myelodysplastic syndrome. Aase syndrome includes congenital RBC aplasia
with triphalangeal thumb, congenital heart disease, and cleft palate. Hemolytic disease of the newborn can also mimic features of
DBA because it can have a protracted course and can be coupled
with greatly reduced erythropoiesis. The anemia in this disorder
usually resolves spontaneously at 5-­8 weeks of age. Several types
of chronic hemolytic diseases may be complicated by an aplastic
crisis, characterized by reticulocytopenia and decreased numbers
of RBC precursors. This event usually occurs after the first several
months of life and is often caused by parvovirus B19 infection (see
Chapter 499). Infection with parvovirus B19 in utero is also associated with pure RBC aplasia in infancy and even with hydrops fetalis
at birth (see Chapter 298). When diagnosing DBA in young infants,
it is important to rule out parvovirus B19 infection using a polymerase chain reaction assay because serologic testing may be inaccurate. Other infections, including HIV, as well as drugs, immune
processes, and Pearson syndrome (see Chapter 498), should also be
ruled out.

TREATMENT

Cardiac

Ventricular septal defect
Atrial septal defect
Coarctation of the aorta
Complex cardiac anomalies

Other

Low birth weight
Short stature
Syndactyly
Learning difficulties

Multiple anomalies, most often including craniofacial, are present in up to 25% of affected individuals. At least one anomaly is present in 40–50%.
From Vlachos A, Ball S, Dahl N, et al. Diagnosing and treating Diamond-­Blackfan anaemia: Results of an international clinical consensus conference. Br J Haematol 2008;142:
859–876, Table IV.

Corticosteroids are a mainstay of therapy, and approximately 80%
of patients initially respond. Because corticosteroids impair linear
growth as well as physical and neurocognitive development, many
hematologists maintain infants on chronic transfusion therapy and
delay the start of steroids until after age 1 year. Prednisone or prednisolone in doses totaling 2 mg/kg/day is used as an initial trial. An
increase in RBC precursors is usually seen in the bone marrow 1-­3
weeks after therapy is begun and is followed by peripheral reticulocytosis. The hemoglobin can reach normal levels in 4-­6 weeks,
although the rate of response is quite variable. Once it is established
that the hemoglobin concentration is increasing, the dose of corticosteroid may be reduced gradually by tapering and then by eliminating all except a single, lowest effective daily dose. This dose may

Table 497.2  	 Diagnostic Criteria for Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia
SUPPORTING CRITERIA
DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA

MAJOR CRITERIA

MINOR CRITERIA

Age younger than 1 yr

Pathogenic variant described in “classical
DBA”

Elevated red cell adenosine deaminase

Macrocytic anemia with no other significant
cytopenias

Positive family history

Congenital anomalies described in “classical”
DBA

Reticulocytopenia

Elevated HbF

Normal marrow cellularity with paucity of bone
marrow erythroid precursors

No evidence for another inherited bone marrow failure syndrome

“Classical DBA” diagnosis is made if all the diagnostic criteria are met.
DBA, Diamond Blackfan anemia, HbF, fetal hemoglobin.
From Vlachos A, Ball S, Dahl N, et al. Diagnosing and treating Diamond-­Blackfan anaemia: results of an international clinical consensus conference. Br J Haematol 2008;142:859–876.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 498 u Pearson Syndrome 2933
then be doubled, used on alternate days, and tapered still further
while maintaining the hemoglobin level at ≥9 g/dL. The target maintenance dose should not exceed 0.5 mg/kg/day or 1 mg/kg every
other day. In some patients, very small amounts of prednisone, as
low as 2.5 mg twice a week, may be sufficient to sustain adequate
erythropoiesis. Scheduled surveillance examinations and testing for
corticosteroid side effects should be pursued in all patients, regardless of dose. Appropriate Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis should
be considered after the first month of high-­dose steroids and continued until the patient is on low-­dose alternate-­day therapy. In the
setting of illness, stress steroids should be considered for children
on chronic corticosteroids. Many children with DBA stop taking
corticosteroids, usually because of unacceptable side effects (i.e.,
cushingoid features, pathologic fractures, cataracts) or the evolution of corticosteroid refractoriness.
Chronic red cell transfusions are required in approximately
35% of patients, including patients who are never steroid responsive (30%), are steroid refractory (15%), or cannot be weaned to
acceptable low dose (50%). Transfusions are given at intervals of
3-­5 weeks to maintain a hemoglobin level >8 g/dL. Some younger
children may require hemoglobin >9 g/dL to sustain normal growth
and activities. Appropriate screening and ultimately the initiation of chelation therapy are required for transfusion-­related iron
overload.
L-­leucine (700 mg/m2 orally three times per day) has been evaluated in a phase I/II trial patients with DBA 2 years of age and
older. In 43 evaluable patients, 16% had erythroid response, 36%
had increase in weight, and 44% had an increase in linear growth
velocity.
Spontaneous remission of anemia with independence from steroid or red cell transfusion therapy has been reported. The likelihood of remission is 25% by age 25 years, with most of these
patients experiencing remission during the first decade. Mild macrocytic anemia and increased erythrocyte ADA levels persist in
these circumstances.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) can be curative. Indications for HSCT include steroid resistance or unacceptable toxicity and transfusion dependence as well as significant
complications of chronic red cell transfusions including iron overload and alloimmunizations. HLA-­matched sibling HSCT is recommended for transfusion-­dependent children with DBA. One
recommendation is for HSCT between ages 3 and 9 years, and some
advocate HSCT at a younger age to avoid iron overload and allosensitization from chronic red cell transfusions. It is important that
sibling donors be carefully screened, including genotype if known,
to ensure that the donor does not carry the pathologic genetic variant. Overall, outcomes are improving for matched-­sibling and alternative donor HSCT.

Chapter 498

Pearson Syndrome
Courtney D. Thornburg
Pearson syndrome (PS) is a rare multisystem mitochondrial disorder
that presents with a hypoplastic anemia that may be initially confused
with Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome (anemia) or transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (see Chapter 499). The marrow failure usually
appears in the neonatal period and is characterized by a sideroblastic
macrocytic anemia and, occasionally, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. There are vacuolated erythroblasts and myeloblasts in the
bone marrow (Fig. 498.1). PS is considered a unique variant of congenital sideroblastic anemia because the marrow also contains ringed
sideroblasts. The hemoglobin F level is elevated. There is multiorgan
involvement manifested by failure to thrive and symptoms of exocrine
pancreas dysfunction, liver and renal tubular defects, malabsorption,
and myopathy. Endocrine dysfunction (type 1 diabetes, adrenal insufficiency, hypoparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism) has also been
reported. Children that survive early childhood typically develop
Kearns-­Sayre syndrome, an early-­onset, mitochondrial disorder with
lactic acidosis, progressive external ophthalmoplegia (impaired eye
movement and ptosis), pigmentary retinitis, deafness, cerebellar ataxia,
and heart block. Pearson syndrome is caused by a large heteroplasmic
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletion (see Chapter 108) that predominates in the hematopoietic lineage. Subsequently, there is heterogeneity in different tissues and between patients, accounting for the
variable clinical picture. The proportion of deleted mtDNA in the bone
marrow correlates with the severity of the hematologic disease, and a
reduction in the percentage of deleted mtDNA over time may be associated with spontaneous improvement of red blood cell hypoproliferation. PS may be misdiagnosed as Diamond-­Blackfan anemia (DBA)
based on the overlapping features, including severe anemia starting at a
young age. Evaluation for mtDNA deletion differentiates PS from DBA
(see Chapter 497).
Therapy for the hematologic manifestations of the disease includes
red cell transfusions to correct anemia and granulocyte colony-­
stimulating factor in the setting of severe neutropenia. The hematologic manifestations may spontaneously resolve within the first few
years of life and stem cell transplantation may be considered for persistent cytopenias.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

PROGNOSIS

DBA has been identified as a cancer predisposition syndrome
because of the higher risk of myelodysplastic syndrome, acute
myeloid leukemia, colon carcinoma, osteogenic sarcoma, and
female genital cancers. Patients are at risk for iron overload-­related
endocrine abnormalities (diabetes, hypogonadism), especially if
transfused. Patients who have undergone HSCT are at risk of associated late effects (see Chapters 179, 180, and 181). The overall
actuarial survival of all patients with DBA is approximately 75%
at age 40 years, with approximately 87% for those maintained on
corticosteroids and approximately 57% for transfusion-­dependent
patients. Of reported deaths, 67% were treatment related and 22%
were DBA related (malignancy and severe aplastic anemia).
Treatment outcome and survival data are collected through the
Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia Registry (https://www.dbar.org).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 498.1 Bone marrow morphology in Pearson syndrome. Left,

Vacuoles in myeloid precursor. Center, Vacuoles in erythroid precursor.
Right, Ringed sideroblast. (From Shimamura A, Alter BP. Pathophysiology and management of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes.
Blood Rev 2010;24:101–122; Fig 14.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 498 u Pearson Syndrome 2933
then be doubled, used on alternate days, and tapered still further
while maintaining the hemoglobin level at ≥9 g/dL. The target maintenance dose should not exceed 0.5 mg/kg/day or 1 mg/kg every
other day. In some patients, very small amounts of prednisone, as
low as 2.5 mg twice a week, may be sufficient to sustain adequate
erythropoiesis. Scheduled surveillance examinations and testing for
corticosteroid side effects should be pursued in all patients, regardless of dose. Appropriate Pneumocystis jiroveci prophylaxis should
be considered after the first month of high-­dose steroids and continued until the patient is on low-­dose alternate-­day therapy. In the
setting of illness, stress steroids should be considered for children
on chronic corticosteroids. Many children with DBA stop taking
corticosteroids, usually because of unacceptable side effects (i.e.,
cushingoid features, pathologic fractures, cataracts) or the evolution of corticosteroid refractoriness.
Chronic red cell transfusions are required in approximately
35% of patients, including patients who are never steroid responsive (30%), are steroid refractory (15%), or cannot be weaned to
acceptable low dose (50%). Transfusions are given at intervals of
3-­5 weeks to maintain a hemoglobin level >8 g/dL. Some younger
children may require hemoglobin >9 g/dL to sustain normal growth
and activities. Appropriate screening and ultimately the initiation of chelation therapy are required for transfusion-­related iron
overload.
L-­leucine (700 mg/m2 orally three times per day) has been evaluated in a phase I/II trial patients with DBA 2 years of age and
older. In 43 evaluable patients, 16% had erythroid response, 36%
had increase in weight, and 44% had an increase in linear growth
velocity.
Spontaneous remission of anemia with independence from steroid or red cell transfusion therapy has been reported. The likelihood of remission is 25% by age 25 years, with most of these
patients experiencing remission during the first decade. Mild macrocytic anemia and increased erythrocyte ADA levels persist in
these circumstances.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) can be curative. Indications for HSCT include steroid resistance or unacceptable toxicity and transfusion dependence as well as significant
complications of chronic red cell transfusions including iron overload and alloimmunizations. HLA-­matched sibling HSCT is recommended for transfusion-­dependent children with DBA. One
recommendation is for HSCT between ages 3 and 9 years, and some
advocate HSCT at a younger age to avoid iron overload and allosensitization from chronic red cell transfusions. It is important that
sibling donors be carefully screened, including genotype if known,
to ensure that the donor does not carry the pathologic genetic variant. Overall, outcomes are improving for matched-­sibling and alternative donor HSCT.

Chapter 498

Pearson Syndrome
Courtney D. Thornburg
Pearson syndrome (PS) is a rare multisystem mitochondrial disorder
that presents with a hypoplastic anemia that may be initially confused
with Diamond-­Blackfan syndrome (anemia) or transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (see Chapter 499). The marrow failure usually
appears in the neonatal period and is characterized by a sideroblastic
macrocytic anemia and, occasionally, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia. There are vacuolated erythroblasts and myeloblasts in the
bone marrow (Fig. 498.1). PS is considered a unique variant of congenital sideroblastic anemia because the marrow also contains ringed
sideroblasts. The hemoglobin F level is elevated. There is multiorgan
involvement manifested by failure to thrive and symptoms of exocrine
pancreas dysfunction, liver and renal tubular defects, malabsorption,
and myopathy. Endocrine dysfunction (type 1 diabetes, adrenal insufficiency, hypoparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism) has also been
reported. Children that survive early childhood typically develop
Kearns-­Sayre syndrome, an early-­onset, mitochondrial disorder with
lactic acidosis, progressive external ophthalmoplegia (impaired eye
movement and ptosis), pigmentary retinitis, deafness, cerebellar ataxia,
and heart block. Pearson syndrome is caused by a large heteroplasmic
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) deletion (see Chapter 108) that predominates in the hematopoietic lineage. Subsequently, there is heterogeneity in different tissues and between patients, accounting for the
variable clinical picture. The proportion of deleted mtDNA in the bone
marrow correlates with the severity of the hematologic disease, and a
reduction in the percentage of deleted mtDNA over time may be associated with spontaneous improvement of red blood cell hypoproliferation. PS may be misdiagnosed as Diamond-­Blackfan anemia (DBA)
based on the overlapping features, including severe anemia starting at a
young age. Evaluation for mtDNA deletion differentiates PS from DBA
(see Chapter 497).
Therapy for the hematologic manifestations of the disease includes
red cell transfusions to correct anemia and granulocyte colony-­
stimulating factor in the setting of severe neutropenia. The hematologic manifestations may spontaneously resolve within the first few
years of life and stem cell transplantation may be considered for persistent cytopenias.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

PROGNOSIS

DBA has been identified as a cancer predisposition syndrome
because of the higher risk of myelodysplastic syndrome, acute
myeloid leukemia, colon carcinoma, osteogenic sarcoma, and
female genital cancers. Patients are at risk for iron overload-­related
endocrine abnormalities (diabetes, hypogonadism), especially if
transfused. Patients who have undergone HSCT are at risk of associated late effects (see Chapters 179, 180, and 181). The overall
actuarial survival of all patients with DBA is approximately 75%
at age 40 years, with approximately 87% for those maintained on
corticosteroids and approximately 57% for transfusion-­dependent
patients. Of reported deaths, 67% were treatment related and 22%
were DBA related (malignancy and severe aplastic anemia).
Treatment outcome and survival data are collected through the
Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia Registry (https://www.dbar.org).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 498.1 Bone marrow morphology in Pearson syndrome. Left,

Vacuoles in myeloid precursor. Center, Vacuoles in erythroid precursor.
Right, Ringed sideroblast. (From Shimamura A, Alter BP. Pathophysiology and management of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes.
Blood Rev 2010;24:101–122; Fig 14.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2934 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 499

Acquired Pure Red Blood
Cell Anemia
Courtney D. Thornburg

be seen under light microscopy in bone marrow specimens. The
virus does not cause significant anemia in immunocompetent individuals with a normal RBC life span.
Because parvovirus infection usually lasts less than 2 weeks, anemia may not develop or be appreciated in otherwise normal children whose peripheral RBC life span is 100-­120 days. The RBC life
span is much shorter in patients with chronic hemolysis secondary
to conditions such as hereditary spherocytosis, immune hemolytic
anemia, or sickle cell disease. In these children, a brief cessation of
erythropoiesis can cause severe anemia, known as aplastic crisis.
When a definitive diagnosis is required, the workup should include

TRANSIENT ERYTHROBLASTOPENIA OF
CHILDHOOD

Transient erythroblastopenia of childhood (TEC) is the most common acquired red cell aplasia occurring in children. It is more
prevalent than congenital hypoplastic anemia (Diamond-­Blackfan
anemia [DBA]). This syndrome of severe transient hypoplastic anemia occurs mainly in previously healthy children between 6 months
and 3 years of age. Most children are older than 12 months at onset.
Only 10% of affected patients are more than 3 years of age. The
annual incidence is estimated to be 4.3 cases per 100,000 children,
although it is likely higher, because TEC often resolves spontaneously with many cases undiagnosed. The suppression of erythropoiesis has been linked to IgG, IgM, and cell-­mediated mechanisms.
Familial cases have been reported, suggesting a hereditary component. TEC often follows a viral illness, although no specific virus
has been consistently implicated.
The temporary suppression of erythropoiesis results in reticulocytopenia and moderate to severe normocytic anemia. Some degree
of neutropenia occurs in up to 20% of cases. Platelet numbers are
normal or elevated. Like the situation observed in iron-­deficiency
anemia and other red blood cell (RBC) hypoplasias, thrombocytosis is presumably caused by increased erythropoietin (EPO), which
has homology to thrombopoietin (TPO). Mean corpuscular volume
(MCV) is characteristically normal for age, and fetal hemoglobin
(HbF) levels are normal before the recovery phase. RBC adenosine deaminase levels are normal in TEC, thus contrasting with the
elevation noted in most cases of congenital hypoplastic anemia
(Table 499.1). Differentiation from DBA is sometimes difficult, but
differences in age at onset and in age-­related MCV, HbF, and adenosine deaminase are usually helpful. The peak occurrence of TEC
coincides with that of iron-­deficiency anemia in infants receiving
milk as their main caloric source; differences in MCV should help
to distinguish between TEC and DBA.
Virtually all children recover within 1-­2 months. RBC transfusions may be necessary for severe anemia in the absence of signs of
early recovery. The anemia develops slowly, and significant symptoms usually develop only with severe anemia. Corticosteroid therapy is of no value in this disorder. Any child with presumed TEC
who requires more than one transfusion should be reevaluated for
another possible diagnosis. In rare instances, a prolonged case of
apparent TEC may be caused by parvovirus-­induced RBC aplasia, occurring in children with hemolytic anemia or congenital or
acquired immunodeficiencies.

RED CELL APLASIA ASSOCIATED WITH
­PARVOVIRUS B19 INFECTION

Parvovirus B19 is a common infectious agent that causes erythema
infectiosum (fifth disease) (see Chapter 298). It is also the most
clearly documented viral cause of RBC aplasia in patients with
chronic hemolytic anemia or an immunocompromised state. This
single-­stranded virus is cytotoxic to marrow erythroid progenitor
cells, interacting specifically by binding to the red cell P antigen. In
addition to decreased or absent erythroid precursors, characteristic
nuclear inclusions in erythroblasts and giant pronormoblasts may

Table 499.1  Comparison of Diamond-­Blackfan Anemia and
Transient Erythroblastopenia of Childhood
DBA

TEC

Male:female

FEATURE

1:1

1:3

AGE AT DIAGNOSIS, MALE (MO)
Mean

10

26

Median

2

23

Range

0-­408

1-­120

14

26

Median

3

23

AGE AT DIAGNOSIS, FEMALE (MO)
Mean

Range

0-­768

1-­192

Males >1 yr

9%

82%

Females >1 yr

12%

80%

Etiology

Genetic

Acquired,
possibly
familial

Antecedent history

None

Viral illness

Physical examination abnormal
(congenital anomalies present)

25%

0%

LABORATORY
Hemoglobin (g/dL)

1.2-­14.8

2.2-­12.5

WBCs <5,000/μL

15%

20%

Platelets >400,000/μL

20%

45%

Adenosine deaminase

Increased

Normal

MCV increased at diagnosis

80%

5%

MCV increased during recovery

100%

90%

MCV increased in remission

100%

0%

HbF increased at diagnosis

100%

20%

HbF increased during recovery

100%

100%

HbF increased in remission

85%

0%

i Antigen increased

100%

20%

i Antigen increased during recovery

100%

60%

i Antigen increased in remission

90%

0%

DBA, Diamond-­Blackfan anemia; HbF, fetal hemoglobin; MCV, mean cell volume; TEC,
transient erythroblastopenia of childhood; WBC, white blood cell.
From Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology
of Infancy and Childhood. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003, p. 329. Adapted from
Alter BP. The bone marrow failure syndromes. In: Nathan DG, Oski FA, eds. Hematology of Infancy and Childhood. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1987. p 159; and Link
MP, Alter BP. Fetal erythropoiesis during recovery from transient erythroblastopenia of
childhood (TEC). Pediatr Res 1981;15:1036–1039.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 500 u Anemia of Chronic Disease and Renal Disease
serum parvovirus IgM and IgG titers. In young infants, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay should be used since serologic
testing may be inaccurate. Recovery from moderate to severe anemia is usually spontaneous, heralded by the appearance of nucleated RBCs and subsequent reticulocytosis in the peripheral blood.
Nonetheless the parvovirus PCR may remain positive for months
after recovery. An RBC transfusion may be necessary if the anemia
is associated with significant symptoms. Parvovirus-­induced aplastic crisis usually occurs only once in children with chronic hemolysis. In families with more than one child with a hemolytic disorder,
parents should be warned that a similar aplastic episode can occur
in the other children if they have not been previously infected. During the episode of aplastic crisis, the child is potentially contagious
and should be isolated from at-­risk patients.
Persistent parvovirus infection may occur in children with congenital immunodeficiency diseases, lymphoproliferative disorders,
those being treated with immunosuppressive agents, and those with
HIV/AIDS, because these children may be unable to mount an adequate antibody response. The resultant pure RBC aplasia may be
severe, and affected children may be thought to have TEC. This type
of RBC aplasia differs from TEC in that there is no spontaneous
recovery, and more than one transfusion is often needed. The diagnosis of parvovirus infection is made by PCR of peripheral blood or
bone marrow DNA because the usual serologic responses, reflected
by parvovirus serum IgM or IgG titers, are impaired in immunodeficient children. In chronically infected patients, the disease may
be treated with high doses of intravenous immunoglobulin, which
contains neutralizing antibody to parvovirus and is effective in the
short term.
Parvovirus infection and destruction of erythroid precursors can
also occur in utero. Such events are associated with increased rates
of fetal loss in the first and second trimesters. Infants may be born
with hydrops fetalis and anemia (see Chapter 138). The presence
of persistent congenital parvovirus infection is detected by PCR of
peripheral blood and/or bone marrow DNA because immunologic
tolerance to the virus can prevent the usual development of specific
antibodies.

OTHER RED CELL APLASIAS IN CHILDREN

Acquired red cell aplasia in adults is usually mediated by a chronic
antibody and often associated with disorders such as chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, lymphoma, thymoma, lymphoproliferative disorders, and systemic lupus erythematosus. This chronic
antibody-­mediated type of RBC aplasia, often responsive to immunosuppressive therapy, is quite rare in childhood. Cases of acquired
pure RBC aplasia attributable to T-­cell suppression have also been
described.
Infections other than parvovirus, such as cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-­Barr virus, and human herpes virus-­6, may cause pure RBC
aplasia. Certain drugs, such as chloramphenicol, also can inhibit
erythropoiesis in a dose-­
dependent manner. Reticulocytopenia,
erythroid hypoplasia, and vacuolated pronormoblasts in the bone
marrow are reversible effects of this drug. These effects are distinct
from the idiosyncratic and rare development of severe aplastic anemia in chloramphenicol recipients. Acquired antibody-­mediated
(to erythropoietin) pure RBC aplasia is a rare complication in
chronic kidney disease patients treated with erythropoietin. In
addition to discontinuing erythropoiesis-­
stimulating agents,
therapy and addressing anemia with red cell transfusions, further
treatment may require immunosuppression and eventually renal
transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2935

Chapter 500

Anemia of Chronic
Disease and Renal
Disease
500.1 Anemia of Chronic Disease
Courtney D. Thornburg
The anemia of chronic disease (ACD), also referred to as anemia of
inflammation, is found in conditions where there is ongoing immune
activation. It occurs in a wide range of disorders, including infections,
malignancies, chronic disease, autoimmunity, and graft-­versus-­host
disease. A similar anemia is associated with chronic kidney disease.
ACD is typically a mild to moderate normocytic, normochromic,
hypoproliferative anemia associated with a decreased serum iron and
low transferrin saturation.

ETIOLOGY

Decreased red cell life span, impaired erythropoiesis, and an increased
uptake of iron in the reticuloendothelial system are important mechanisms contributing to ACD.
ACD-­associated alterations in iron recycling are characterized
by an accumulation of iron in reticuloendothelial macrophages
despite low levels of serum iron. The diversion of iron from the
circulation into the reticuloendothelial system results in functional iron deficiency, which causes the impaired heme synthesis and iron-­restricted erythropoiesis that contribute to anemia.
These alterations in iron metabolism have been attributed to
inflammation-­associated excess synthesis of hepcidin, a key regulatory protein that controls intestinal iron absorption and tissue distribution. Hepcidin, although mainly synthesized by hepatocytes, is
expressed in other cells, including monocytes and macrophages. It
functions by binding to and initiating the degradation of the iron
exporter, ferroportin (Fig. 500.1).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although the important symptoms and signs associated with ACD are
those of the underlying disease, the mild to moderate anemia can affect
the patient’s quality of life.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Hemoglobin concentrations are generally 6-­9 g/dL. The anemia is
usually normochromic and normocytic, although some patients have
modest hypochromia and microcytosis, particularly if there is concomitant iron deficiency. Absolute reticulocyte counts are normal or
low, and leukocytosis is common. The serum iron level is low, without the increase in serum transferrin (the iron transport protein) that
occurs in iron deficiency. This pattern of low serum iron and low-­to-­
normal serum transferrin is a valuable diagnostic feature. However,
note that the serum ferritin level may be elevated secondary to inflammation. Soluble transferrin receptor (sTfR) is a useful diagnostic test
to distinguish ACD from iron-­deficiency anemia (IDA) because sTfR
levels are high in IDA and normal in ACD. A bone marrow biopsy typically shows normal cellularity with decreased or adequate red blood
cell precursors; marrow hemosiderin may be increased and granulocytic hyperplasia may be present.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 500 u Anemia of Chronic Disease and Renal Disease
serum parvovirus IgM and IgG titers. In young infants, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay should be used since serologic
testing may be inaccurate. Recovery from moderate to severe anemia is usually spontaneous, heralded by the appearance of nucleated RBCs and subsequent reticulocytosis in the peripheral blood.
Nonetheless the parvovirus PCR may remain positive for months
after recovery. An RBC transfusion may be necessary if the anemia
is associated with significant symptoms. Parvovirus-­induced aplastic crisis usually occurs only once in children with chronic hemolysis. In families with more than one child with a hemolytic disorder,
parents should be warned that a similar aplastic episode can occur
in the other children if they have not been previously infected. During the episode of aplastic crisis, the child is potentially contagious
and should be isolated from at-­risk patients.
Persistent parvovirus infection may occur in children with congenital immunodeficiency diseases, lymphoproliferative disorders,
those being treated with immunosuppressive agents, and those with
HIV/AIDS, because these children may be unable to mount an adequate antibody response. The resultant pure RBC aplasia may be
severe, and affected children may be thought to have TEC. This type
of RBC aplasia differs from TEC in that there is no spontaneous
recovery, and more than one transfusion is often needed. The diagnosis of parvovirus infection is made by PCR of peripheral blood or
bone marrow DNA because the usual serologic responses, reflected
by parvovirus serum IgM or IgG titers, are impaired in immunodeficient children. In chronically infected patients, the disease may
be treated with high doses of intravenous immunoglobulin, which
contains neutralizing antibody to parvovirus and is effective in the
short term.
Parvovirus infection and destruction of erythroid precursors can
also occur in utero. Such events are associated with increased rates
of fetal loss in the first and second trimesters. Infants may be born
with hydrops fetalis and anemia (see Chapter 138). The presence
of persistent congenital parvovirus infection is detected by PCR of
peripheral blood and/or bone marrow DNA because immunologic
tolerance to the virus can prevent the usual development of specific
antibodies.

OTHER RED CELL APLASIAS IN CHILDREN

Acquired red cell aplasia in adults is usually mediated by a chronic
antibody and often associated with disorders such as chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, lymphoma, thymoma, lymphoproliferative disorders, and systemic lupus erythematosus. This chronic
antibody-­mediated type of RBC aplasia, often responsive to immunosuppressive therapy, is quite rare in childhood. Cases of acquired
pure RBC aplasia attributable to T-­cell suppression have also been
described.
Infections other than parvovirus, such as cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-­Barr virus, and human herpes virus-­6, may cause pure RBC
aplasia. Certain drugs, such as chloramphenicol, also can inhibit
erythropoiesis in a dose-­
dependent manner. Reticulocytopenia,
erythroid hypoplasia, and vacuolated pronormoblasts in the bone
marrow are reversible effects of this drug. These effects are distinct
from the idiosyncratic and rare development of severe aplastic anemia in chloramphenicol recipients. Acquired antibody-­mediated
(to erythropoietin) pure RBC aplasia is a rare complication in
chronic kidney disease patients treated with erythropoietin. In
addition to discontinuing erythropoiesis-­
stimulating agents,
therapy and addressing anemia with red cell transfusions, further
treatment may require immunosuppression and eventually renal
transplantation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2935

Chapter 500

Anemia of Chronic
Disease and Renal
Disease
500.1 Anemia of Chronic Disease
Courtney D. Thornburg
The anemia of chronic disease (ACD), also referred to as anemia of
inflammation, is found in conditions where there is ongoing immune
activation. It occurs in a wide range of disorders, including infections,
malignancies, chronic disease, autoimmunity, and graft-­versus-­host
disease. A similar anemia is associated with chronic kidney disease.
ACD is typically a mild to moderate normocytic, normochromic,
hypoproliferative anemia associated with a decreased serum iron and
low transferrin saturation.

ETIOLOGY

Decreased red cell life span, impaired erythropoiesis, and an increased
uptake of iron in the reticuloendothelial system are important mechanisms contributing to ACD.
ACD-­associated alterations in iron recycling are characterized
by an accumulation of iron in reticuloendothelial macrophages
despite low levels of serum iron. The diversion of iron from the
circulation into the reticuloendothelial system results in functional iron deficiency, which causes the impaired heme synthesis and iron-­restricted erythropoiesis that contribute to anemia.
These alterations in iron metabolism have been attributed to
inflammation-­associated excess synthesis of hepcidin, a key regulatory protein that controls intestinal iron absorption and tissue distribution. Hepcidin, although mainly synthesized by hepatocytes, is
expressed in other cells, including monocytes and macrophages. It
functions by binding to and initiating the degradation of the iron
exporter, ferroportin (Fig. 500.1).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although the important symptoms and signs associated with ACD are
those of the underlying disease, the mild to moderate anemia can affect
the patient’s quality of life.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Hemoglobin concentrations are generally 6-­9 g/dL. The anemia is
usually normochromic and normocytic, although some patients have
modest hypochromia and microcytosis, particularly if there is concomitant iron deficiency. Absolute reticulocyte counts are normal or
low, and leukocytosis is common. The serum iron level is low, without the increase in serum transferrin (the iron transport protein) that
occurs in iron deficiency. This pattern of low serum iron and low-­to-­
normal serum transferrin is a valuable diagnostic feature. However,
note that the serum ferritin level may be elevated secondary to inflammation. Soluble transferrin receptor (sTfR) is a useful diagnostic test
to distinguish ACD from iron-­deficiency anemia (IDA) because sTfR
levels are high in IDA and normal in ACD. A bone marrow biopsy typically shows normal cellularity with decreased or adequate red blood
cell precursors; marrow hemosiderin may be increased and granulocytic hyperplasia may be present.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2936 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Macrophage

Enterocyte
Ferroportin
Fe

Red cell

Fe

Heme

Lysosome

Lysosome

Ferroportin
Transferrin-bound Fe

HEPCIDIN

Ferroportin
Hepatocyte

Iron uptake
Diferric transferrin
NTBI
Hb-haptoglobin
Hb-hemopexin

HAMP mRNA
Fe
HAMP
Lysosome

Modulators of hepcidin transcription
- Fe deficiency
Ineffective erythropoiesis
Hypoxia/anemia
+ Fe stores
Inflammation

TREATMENT

Where possible, the best approach to ACD is the treatment of the underlying disorder. If the associated systemic disease can be controlled, the
anemia typically improves or resolves. Transfusions raise the hemoglobin concentration temporarily but are rarely indicated. Erythropoiesis-­
stimulating agents (ESAs), such as recombinant human erythropoietin
(EPO) or related extended half-­life formulations, increase the hemoglobin level and improve activity and the sense of well-­being. When
using ESAs, treatment with iron is usually necessary to produce optimal
effect. Response to these agents is highly variable, and poorly responsive patients may require high doses to reach target hemoglobin levels.
In adults, high doses are associated with a higher incidence of adverse
events, such as stroke, cardiovascular events, cancer progression,
and death, leading the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to
require a “black box” warning on labels.
ACD does not respond to iron alone unless there is concomitant
deficiency. Unfortunately, it is a common clinical challenge to identify
iron deficiency in patients with an inflammatory disease (see Chapters
496 and 504). In this circumstance, a trial of iron therapy might be
helpful, although there may be no response because persistent inflammation impairs iron absorption and utilization; intravenous iron may
further increase hepcidin production.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

500.2 Anemia of Renal Disease
Courtney D. Thornburg
Anemia is common in children with chronic kidney disease (CKD).
The anemia is usually normocytic, and the absolute reticulocyte count
is normal or low. Although most patients with end-­stage renal disease

Fig. 500.1 Central role of hepcidin in iron metabolism.
Hepcidin, produced by hepatocytes, downregulates iron
export to circulating transferrin from iron “donor” cells
(hepatocytes, macrophages, and duodenal enterocytes)
by promoting the internalization and lysosomal degradation of ferroportin. Hepatocytes take up iron in several
forms, whereas enterocytes obtain their iron predominantly from the gut lumen, and macrophages are specialized to deal with the high throughput of iron from
senescent red cells. (From Pippard M. Iron deficiency
anemia, anemia of chronic disorders and iron overload.
In Porwit A, McCullough J, Erber WN, eds. Blood and
Bone Marrow Pathology, 2nd ed. London: Elsevier, 2011;
Fig 11-­5.)

(ESRD) are anemic, earlier stages of CKD are also associated with a
lower prevalence of anemia. In adults, a lower glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) has been correlated with lower hemoglobin concentration, and
hemoglobin has been reported to decline below a GFR threshold of 40-­
60 mL/min/1.73 m2. In children with CKD, hemoglobin levels decline
as the GFR decreases below 43 mL/min/1.73 m2.
Decreased hemoglobin values are linked to increased incidence of
left ventricular hypertrophy, impaired physical activity, and a reduced
quality of life in pediatric patients with CKD. In those with ESRD on
dialysis, anemia is also associated with increased risk of hospitalization
and mortality.

ETIOLOGY

Although the anemia of CKD shares many features with anemia of
chronic disease, its predominant cause is decreased erythropoietin
(EPO) production by diseased kidneys. Other important causes include
absolute and/or functional iron deficiency because of chronic blood
loss (from blood sampling, surgeries, and dialysis) and disturbances
in iron metabolism. Higher hepcidin levels have also been implicated
in the anemia of CKD. Hepcidin is filtered by the glomerulus and
excreted by the kidney; serum concentrations are increased in patients
with decreased GFR. Inflammation may also be a contributing factor in
pediatric dialysis patients who have elevated levels of proinflammatory
cytokines. Hyperparathyroidism and deficiencies of vitamin B12, folate,
and carnitine may also have a role in anemia of CKD.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Anemia in children with CKD is defined by age: hemoglobin <11.0
g/dL (0.5-­5 years), <11.5 g/dL (5-­12 years), <12 g/dL (12-­15 years),
<13.0 g/dL (males >15 years), and <12.0 g/dL (females >15 years).
The anemia of CKD is hypoproliferative and usually normocytic and
normochromic, unless there is concomitant iron deficiency or vitamin
deficiency. The EPO level and absolute reticulocyte count are usually

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 501 u Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemias

2937

low. White cell and platelet counts are generally normal. Ferritin will
be low if there is accompanying iron deficiency and high if there is
associated inflammation.

also cause CDA I. Proteins encoded by CDAN1 and CDIN1 likely
contribute to DNA repair and/or chromatin reassembly after DNA
replication.

TREATMENT

Clinical Manifestations

Oral iron therapy is recommended for all pediatric CKD patients with
anemia. Intravenous (IV) iron therapy may be considered for those
receiving maintenance hemodialysis and those who to do not respond
to oral iron. Current IV iron preparations (iron-­
gluconate, iron-­
sucrose, iron-­carboxymaltose, iron-­isomaltoside, ferumoxytol) have
iron as a core within a carbohydrate stabilizer shell, thus preventing the
uncontrolled release of free iron and thus reducing serious side effects.
Erythropoiesis-­stimulating agents (ESAs) are the mainstay of therapy and, particularly for children with ESRD, have greatly reduced the
need for frequent transfusions, decreasing the incidence of associated
iron overload and alloimmunization.
Hemoglobin levels at which ESAs are initiated may be guided by
individual patient characteristics, with a goal of 11-­12 g/dL for children on maintenance ESA therapy. Dosing varies with age and dialysis
modality. Darbepoetin, a synthetic form of EPO, appears to be equally
effective as recombinant human EPO and has the benefit of less frequent dosing because of a longer half-­life. Iron therapy should be prescribed when using ESAs because treatment demands additional iron
for erythropoiesis. Infants and children require higher doses of ESAs.
In the rare case in which anti-­EPO antibody-­mediated pure red cell
aplasia develops, ESA therapy should be stopped, and immunomodulatory therapy may be indicated to suppress the antibody response.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

CDA I may be diagnosed at any age, although most cases are recognized during childhood or adolescence in the setting of moderate to
severe macrocytic anemia with relative reticulocytopenia. CDA I is
rarely diagnosed in utero with severe anemia resulting in hydrops fetalis. Neonates with CDA 1 may have neonatal jaundice or pulmonary
hypertension related to anemia. Type I CDA has been associated with
dysmorphic features in 4–25% of patients, primarily involving the
digits (syndactyly, absence of nails or curved toenails, supernumerary
toes, skin pigmentation, café-­au-­lait spots, macrocephaly, dolichocephaly, spinal fusion, scoliosis, and short stature). Patients have progressive
iron overload even in the absence of transfusions.

Laboratory Findings

Hemoglobin concentrations generally range between 7-­11 g/dL. The
anemia is usually macrocytic (mean corpuscular volume: 100-­120
fL), but normocytic indices may be seen during childhood. Anisopoikilocytosis is appreciated on the peripheral blood smear. In some
cases, normoblasts and basophilic stippling of RBCs may be seen. The
reticulocyte count is inadequate for the degree of anemia (reticulocytopenia). Elevated serum ferritin secondary to iron overload may
be present. The bone marrow aspirate shows erythroid hyperplasia. Binucleate erythroblasts make up 2.5–10% of late erythroblasts.
Incompletely divided cells with thin chromatin bridges between nuclei
of pairs of erythrocytes are highly specific for type I CDA. Electron
microscopy is the gold standard for clinical diagnosis, revealing erythroblasts with a characteristic “Swiss cheese” heterochromatin pattern.

Treatment

Chapter 501

Congenital
Dyserythropoietic
Anemias
Courtney D. Thornburg
The congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) are a heterogeneous
class of inherited disorders resulting from abnormalities of late erythropoiesis. These rare conditions are characterized by variable degrees
of anemia, ineffective erythropoiesis, hyperbilirubinemia, gallstones,
splenomegaly, and secondary hemochromatosis (iron overload). They
may be misdiagnosed as other congenital anemias, such as hereditary
spherocytosis or thalassemia. Dyserythropoiesis is the major cause of
anemia but a shortened half-­life of circulating red blood cells (RBCs)
may also contribute. The CDAs have been classified into four major
types (I, II, III, and IV) and variants based on distinctive bone marrow morphology, clinical features, and genetic mutations. Genetic testing is now the key method for achieving a timely accurate diagnosis
(Fig. 501.1).

CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA TYPE I
Pathogenesis

Type I CDA (CDA I) is an autosomal recessive disorder. It is caused by
pathogenic variants in CDAN1, the first gene to be implicated, which
encodes Codanin-­1, a cell-­cycle regulated protein. Pathogenic variants in CDIN1 (CDAN1-­interacting nuclease 1, previously C15orf41)

Treatment of this disorder includes transfusions, especially in the neonatal period and early childhood and in association with co-­inherited
disorders, such as thalassemia or RBC enzymopathy. However, adolescents and adults may require episodic transfusions only during
aplastic crises, infection, or pregnancy. For patients with CDAN1
mutations, treatment with PEGylated interferon-­α2 can reduce transfusion requirements. Because of potential side effects of spastic diplegia and peripheral neuropathy, treatment initiation may be reserved
for patients beyond early childhood requiring frequent transfusions.
Patients do not respond to erythropoietin; splenectomy is generally not
recommended. Cholecystectomy is often required for management of
pigmented gallstones. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation may also be
considered for severe cases.
The most important long-­term complication is progressive iron
overload, caused by increased intestinal absorption of iron and ineffective erythropoiesis and transfusion therapy. Regular phlebotomies
is a treatment option as long as there is not significant anemia. If this
approach is untenable, chelation therapy should be employed when
repeated ferritin levels exceed 1,000 μg/L or liver iron is elevated as
determined by hepatic magnetic resonance imaging T2*.

CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA
TYPE II
Pathogenesis

CDA type II (CDA II), the most common type of CDA, is an autosomal
recessive disorder caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in SEC23B.
This gene encodes a component of the cytoplasmic coat protein II
(COPII) complex that is involved in endoplasmic reticulum vesicle
trafficking.

Clinical Manifestations

CDA II presents with varying degrees of normocytic anemia and no
or mild reticulocytosis. Approximately 20% of patients are transfusion
dependent. CDA II may be initially misdiagnosed as hereditary spherocytosis due to overlapping symptoms of anemia, jaundice, splenomegaly, or hepatomegaly. Extramedullary hematopoiesis may result in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 501 u Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemias

2937

low. White cell and platelet counts are generally normal. Ferritin will
be low if there is accompanying iron deficiency and high if there is
associated inflammation.

also cause CDA I. Proteins encoded by CDAN1 and CDIN1 likely
contribute to DNA repair and/or chromatin reassembly after DNA
replication.

TREATMENT

Clinical Manifestations

Oral iron therapy is recommended for all pediatric CKD patients with
anemia. Intravenous (IV) iron therapy may be considered for those
receiving maintenance hemodialysis and those who to do not respond
to oral iron. Current IV iron preparations (iron-­
gluconate, iron-­
sucrose, iron-­carboxymaltose, iron-­isomaltoside, ferumoxytol) have
iron as a core within a carbohydrate stabilizer shell, thus preventing the
uncontrolled release of free iron and thus reducing serious side effects.
Erythropoiesis-­stimulating agents (ESAs) are the mainstay of therapy and, particularly for children with ESRD, have greatly reduced the
need for frequent transfusions, decreasing the incidence of associated
iron overload and alloimmunization.
Hemoglobin levels at which ESAs are initiated may be guided by
individual patient characteristics, with a goal of 11-­12 g/dL for children on maintenance ESA therapy. Dosing varies with age and dialysis
modality. Darbepoetin, a synthetic form of EPO, appears to be equally
effective as recombinant human EPO and has the benefit of less frequent dosing because of a longer half-­life. Iron therapy should be prescribed when using ESAs because treatment demands additional iron
for erythropoiesis. Infants and children require higher doses of ESAs.
In the rare case in which anti-­EPO antibody-­mediated pure red cell
aplasia develops, ESA therapy should be stopped, and immunomodulatory therapy may be indicated to suppress the antibody response.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

CDA I may be diagnosed at any age, although most cases are recognized during childhood or adolescence in the setting of moderate to
severe macrocytic anemia with relative reticulocytopenia. CDA I is
rarely diagnosed in utero with severe anemia resulting in hydrops fetalis. Neonates with CDA 1 may have neonatal jaundice or pulmonary
hypertension related to anemia. Type I CDA has been associated with
dysmorphic features in 4–25% of patients, primarily involving the
digits (syndactyly, absence of nails or curved toenails, supernumerary
toes, skin pigmentation, café-­au-­lait spots, macrocephaly, dolichocephaly, spinal fusion, scoliosis, and short stature). Patients have progressive
iron overload even in the absence of transfusions.

Laboratory Findings

Hemoglobin concentrations generally range between 7-­11 g/dL. The
anemia is usually macrocytic (mean corpuscular volume: 100-­120
fL), but normocytic indices may be seen during childhood. Anisopoikilocytosis is appreciated on the peripheral blood smear. In some
cases, normoblasts and basophilic stippling of RBCs may be seen. The
reticulocyte count is inadequate for the degree of anemia (reticulocytopenia). Elevated serum ferritin secondary to iron overload may
be present. The bone marrow aspirate shows erythroid hyperplasia. Binucleate erythroblasts make up 2.5–10% of late erythroblasts.
Incompletely divided cells with thin chromatin bridges between nuclei
of pairs of erythrocytes are highly specific for type I CDA. Electron
microscopy is the gold standard for clinical diagnosis, revealing erythroblasts with a characteristic “Swiss cheese” heterochromatin pattern.

Treatment

Chapter 501

Congenital
Dyserythropoietic
Anemias
Courtney D. Thornburg
The congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) are a heterogeneous
class of inherited disorders resulting from abnormalities of late erythropoiesis. These rare conditions are characterized by variable degrees
of anemia, ineffective erythropoiesis, hyperbilirubinemia, gallstones,
splenomegaly, and secondary hemochromatosis (iron overload). They
may be misdiagnosed as other congenital anemias, such as hereditary
spherocytosis or thalassemia. Dyserythropoiesis is the major cause of
anemia but a shortened half-­life of circulating red blood cells (RBCs)
may also contribute. The CDAs have been classified into four major
types (I, II, III, and IV) and variants based on distinctive bone marrow morphology, clinical features, and genetic mutations. Genetic testing is now the key method for achieving a timely accurate diagnosis
(Fig. 501.1).

CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA TYPE I
Pathogenesis

Type I CDA (CDA I) is an autosomal recessive disorder. It is caused by
pathogenic variants in CDAN1, the first gene to be implicated, which
encodes Codanin-­1, a cell-­cycle regulated protein. Pathogenic variants in CDIN1 (CDAN1-­interacting nuclease 1, previously C15orf41)

Treatment of this disorder includes transfusions, especially in the neonatal period and early childhood and in association with co-­inherited
disorders, such as thalassemia or RBC enzymopathy. However, adolescents and adults may require episodic transfusions only during
aplastic crises, infection, or pregnancy. For patients with CDAN1
mutations, treatment with PEGylated interferon-­α2 can reduce transfusion requirements. Because of potential side effects of spastic diplegia and peripheral neuropathy, treatment initiation may be reserved
for patients beyond early childhood requiring frequent transfusions.
Patients do not respond to erythropoietin; splenectomy is generally not
recommended. Cholecystectomy is often required for management of
pigmented gallstones. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation may also be
considered for severe cases.
The most important long-­term complication is progressive iron
overload, caused by increased intestinal absorption of iron and ineffective erythropoiesis and transfusion therapy. Regular phlebotomies
is a treatment option as long as there is not significant anemia. If this
approach is untenable, chelation therapy should be employed when
repeated ferritin levels exceed 1,000 μg/L or liver iron is elevated as
determined by hepatic magnetic resonance imaging T2*.

CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA
TYPE II
Pathogenesis

CDA type II (CDA II), the most common type of CDA, is an autosomal
recessive disorder caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in SEC23B.
This gene encodes a component of the cytoplasmic coat protein II
(COPII) complex that is involved in endoplasmic reticulum vesicle
trafficking.

Clinical Manifestations

CDA II presents with varying degrees of normocytic anemia and no
or mild reticulocytosis. Approximately 20% of patients are transfusion
dependent. CDA II may be initially misdiagnosed as hereditary spherocytosis due to overlapping symptoms of anemia, jaundice, splenomegaly, or hepatomegaly. Extramedullary hematopoiesis may result in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2938 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Erythroid hyperplasia

CDA type I

CDA type II

CDA type III

CDA type IV

CAD-deficiency

A
14.0
CDAII
SEC23B
58.7 %

Rank pathogenicity

Undiagnosed
17.3 %

Other HA
14.8 %

B

Acquired
dyserythropoiesis
2.2 %
Syndromic CDA
0.4 %

CDAla
CDAN1
3.3 %

CDAIV
KLF1
0.4 %

CAD
1.4 %

12.0

GATA1-related
cytopenias
1.8 %

10.0
GATA1
3.4 %

8.0

CDAN1
12.1 %

KLF1
1.4 %

6.0
4.0

SEC23B
77.9 %

C15orf41
4.0 %

2.0
0.0

CDAlb
C15orf41
1.1 %

0

C

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

Coding sequence length (nt)

Fig. 501.1 Morphologic and molecular features of patients with congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDA). A, Light microscopy analysis of the

bone marrow from patients with different CDA subtypes. CDA patients generally show erythroid hyperplasia. Red arrows indicate typical findings
for each CDA subtype: CDAI, internuclear chromatin bridging; CDAII, binucleate erythroid precursors; CDAIII, giant multinucleated erythroblasts;
CDAIV, multinucleate erythroblasts; and CAD deficiency, binucleate CDAII-­like precursors. B, Pie chart showing the frequencies of the different CDA
subtypes diagnosed after genetic testing in patients clinically suspected of having CDA. The frequency of each condition was calculated as the ratio
between the number of patients in each CDA subtype and the overall count of patients tested (n = 218 patients [those included in our international
registry of CDAs from 1995 to 2019]). Six patients originally suspected of CDA showed conclusive diagnosis of acquired dyserythropoiesis: two
patients with liver failure, two with iron-­deficiency anemia, one with erythrophagocytosis, and one with transient erythroblastopenia. Syndromic
CDA refers to one patient with a mutation in the CAD gene. GATA1-­related cytopenias include: X-­linked thrombocytopenia with or without dyserythropoietic anemia; congenital erythropoietic porphyria; and idiopathic cytopenias of undetermined significance. Other hereditary anemias (HA)
include: hereditary spherocytosis; hereditary dehydrated stomatocytosis; red cell enzymatic defects; and sideroblastic anemia. The undiagnosed
cases were evaluated by analysis of the CDA gene panel, by extended targeted next-­generation sequencing for hereditary anemias, or by whole-­
exome sequencing. C, Bubble chart defining the lengths of the coding sequences of each CDA-­causative gene and their relative pathogenicity
scores. These scores were calculated by combining the constraint metrics of each gene available at the ExAC database (http://exac.broadinstitute.o
rg/). High pathogenicity scores identify increased constraints (intolerance to variation). The more intolerant to variation a gene is, the less likely it is
to be mutated. The size of each bubble represents the frequency of the mutations in each gene, as calculated by the ratio of the number of mutated
alleles for each gene and the overall count of disease alleles (n = 149, from 78 patients included in our international registry of CDAs from 2008 to
2019). (From Iolascon A, Andolfo I, Russo R. Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias. Blood. 2020;136:1274–1281; Fig. 1.)

posterior mediastinal or paravertebral masses. Iron overload occurs in
both transfusion dependent and independent patients.

Laboratory Findings

The anemia is normocytic and is generally mild with inappropriately low
reticulocytes. Hemoglobin levels are lower in children than adults and
range from 8-­11 g/dL. The peripheral blood smear shows anisopoikilocytosis, occasional basophilic stippling, as well as a few, sometimes binucleate, mature erythroblasts. The bone marrow aspirate is normoblastic but
hypercellular, with erythroid hyperplasia. Binucleated and multinucleated
erythroblasts with equal nuclei size (10–35%) and karyorrhexis (fragmentation of the nuclei) in >2% are ­characteristic. Electron micrographs
demonstrate vesicles laden with endoplasmic reticulum proteins running beneath the plasma membrane (double membranes). Ninety-­five
percent of patients with CDA II have hypoglycosylated band 3, which
has faster migration on the gel, and the diagnosis may be made by analyzing red blood cell membrane proteins with sodium dodecyl sulfate-­
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS PAGE).

Treatment

Most patients can lead a normal life and have a normal life expectancy if complications and consequences are managed appropriately.
Approximately 10% of patients will require red cell transfusions in
infancy and childhood but rarely during adulthood. Splenectomy may
provide hematologic improvement and is currently recommended
for patients with severe anemia and/or symptomatic splenomegaly.

Splenectomy does not prevent further iron overloading, even in those
patients whose hemoglobin is normalized, presumably because of persistent ineffective erythropoiesis in the bone marrow. Secondary iron
overload is the most prominent long-­term complication and should be
approached as previously outlined.
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation may also be considered for
severe cases.

CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC ANEMIA
TYPE III

CDA type III (CDA III) is an extremely rare, poorly defined entity
characterized by mild to moderate macrocytic anemia. It is inherited in
an autosomal dominant or de novo fashion, although there have been
cases that might represent other inheritance patterns. CDA III is caused
by pathogenic variants in KIF23, which encodes a ubiquitous protein,
mitotic kinesin-­like protein 1, which regulates daughter cell separation
during mitosis. Iron overload is not clinically significant (likely due to
hemolysis being predominantly intravascular), and spleen size is generally normal. Patients can present with angioid streaks with macular
degeneration. An association with monoclonal gammopathy and multiple myeloma is also reported. The blood smear shows macrocytes,
anisopoikilocytosis, and occasional basophilic stippling. The bone
marrow is notable for giant erythroid precursors that are often multinucleated, containing up to 12 nuclei per cell. Such multinucleated
erythroblasts can also be seen in myelodysplasia and erythroleukemia.
Transfusions are usually not required.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 502 u Physiologic Anemia of Infancy
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR–RELATED CDA

Transcription factor–related CDA includes CDA type IV (CDA IV) and
X-­linked thrombocytopenia with or without dyserythropoietic anemia
(XLTDA). CDA IV has an autosomal dominant inheritance due to pathogenic variants in KLF1, which encodes an erythroid transcription factor
that regulates fetal hemoglobin switching and is necessary for terminal
erythroid differentiation. Patients have severe hemolytic anemia with no
or mild reticulocytosis and very high fetal hemoglobin. Bone marrow
morphology consists of hypercellularity and binucleate or multinucleate
erythroblasts. Electron micrographs show immature red cell progenitors
that have atypical inclusions within the cytoplasm, nuclear membrane
invaginations, and heterochromatin.
XLTDA is an X-­linked condition due to pathogenic variants in
GATA1, a DNA-­binding protein with two zinc fingers and a transactivation domain that plays a key role in development and maintenance
of red cell and platelet lineages. The laboratory features of this condition include mild to severe anemia and macrothrombocytopenia with
poorly granulated platelets. Bone marrow morphology shows dyserythropoiesis and megakaryocytes that are abnormal and reduced in
number. Patients present with bleeding and anemia, and management
includes transfusion and supportive care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 502

Physiologic Anemia of
Infancy
Courtney D. Thornburg
At birth, normal full-­term infants have higher hemoglobin (Hb) levels
and larger red blood cells (RBCs) than do older children and adults.
However, within the first week of life, a progressive decline in Hb level
begins and then persists for 6-­8 weeks. The resulting anemia is known
as the physiologic anemia of infancy.
With the onset of respiration at birth, considerably more oxygen
becomes available for binding to Hb, and as a result the Hb-­oxygen
saturation increases from 50–95% or more. There is also a gradual, normal developmental switch from fetal to adult Hb synthesis after birth
that results in the replacement of high-­oxygen-­affinity fetal Hb with
lower-­affinity adult Hb, capable of delivering more oxygen to tissues.
The increase in blood oxygen content and delivery results in the downregulation of erythropoietin (EPO) production, leading to suppression of erythropoiesis. Because there is no erythropoiesis, aged RBCs
that are removed from the circulation are not replaced, and the Hb
level decreases. The Hb concentration continues to decline until tissue oxygen needs become greater than oxygen delivery. Normally, this
point is reached between 8-­12 weeks of age, when the Hb concentration
is about 11 g/dL. In healthy term infants, the nadir rarely falls below
10 g/dL. At this juncture, EPO production increases and erythropoiesis
resumes. The supply of stored reticuloendothelial iron, derived from previously degraded RBCs, remains sufficient for this renewed Hb synthesis,
even in the absence of dietary iron intake, until approximately 20 weeks
of age. In all, this “anemia” should be viewed as a physiologic adaptation
to extrauterine life, reflecting the excess oxygen delivery relative to tissue
oxygen requirements. There is no hematologic problem, and no therapy
is required unless physiologic anemia of infancy is exacerbated by other
ongoing processes including nutritional deficiency and blood loss. The
degree of anemia at birth is correlated with maternal hemoglobin.
A late hyporegenerative anemia, with reticulocytopenia, can occur in
infants with hemolytic disease of the newborn. The persistence of maternally derived anti-­RBC antibodies in the infant’s circulation can lead to an

2939

ongoing low-­grade hemolytic anemia that can exaggerate the physiologic
anemia. Lower-­than-­expected Hb at the “physiologic” nadir has also been
seen in infants after intrauterine or neonatal RBC transfusions. When
infants are transfused with adult blood containing HbA, the associated shift
of the oxygen dissociation curve facilitates oxygen delivery to the tissues.
Accordingly, the definition of anemia and the need for transfusion should
be based not only on the infant’s Hb level, but also on oxygen requirements
and the ability of circulating RBCs to release oxygen to the tissues.
Premature infants also develop a physiologic anemia, known as
anemia of prematurity. The Hb decline is both more extreme and
more rapid. Hb levels of 7-­9 g/dL usually are reached by 3-­6 weeks
of age, and levels may be even lower in very small premature infants (see
Chapter 139). The same physiologic factors at play in term infants are
exaggerated in preterm infants. In premature infants, the physiologic
Hb decline may be intensified by blood loss from repeated phlebotomies
obtained to monitor ill neonates. Demands on erythropoiesis are further
heightened by the premature infant’s presumed shortened RBC life span
(40-­60 days) and the accelerated expansion of RBC mass that accompanies
the premature baby’s rapid rate of growth. Nonetheless, plasma EPO levels
are lower than would be expected for the degree of anemia, resulting in a
suboptimal erythropoietic response. The reason for diminished EPO levels
is not fully understood. During fetal life, EPO synthesis is handled primarily by the liver, and the liver’s oxygen sensor is less sensitive to hypoxia
compared with that of the kidney. The developmental switch from liver
to kidney EPO production is not accelerated by early birth, and thus the
preterm infant must rely on the liver as the primary site for synthesis, leading to diminished responsiveness to anemia. An additional mechanism
thought to contribute to diminished EPO levels may be accelerated EPO
metabolism. Because the pronounced decline in Hb that occurs in many
very low birthweight infants may be associated with abnormal clinical
signs, this “anemia of prematurity” is not considered benign and usually
requires transfusions when symptomatic.
­

TREATMENT

In the full-­term infant, physiologic anemia requires no therapy beyond
ensuring that the infant’s diet contains essential nutrients for normal
hematopoiesis. For infants who are exclusively breastfed, iron supplementation is indicated beginning at 4 months of age and continued until
oral iron intake via food is sufficient. In premature infants, an optimal
Hb has not been established and is usually dictated by the infant’s overall
clinical condition. Transfusions may be needed to maintain the Hb at what
is considered safe for that child. Premature infants who are feeding well
and growing normally rarely need transfusion unless iatrogenic blood loss
has been significant. Although factors such as poor weight gain, respiratory difficulties, and abnormal heart rate have prompted transfusion, the
beneficial effect has not been documented. Laboratory tests such as blood
lactate, EPO, and mixed venous oxygen saturation have poor predictive
value. A restrictive strategy does not increase infant morbidity or mortality. Long-­term neurodevelopmental outcomes have been found to be
poorer in liberally transfused neonates. Exposure to packed RBCs may be
related to the development of necrotizing enterocolitis, and early transfusions may be associated with the risk of intraventricular hemorrhage. Iron
supplementation is indicated starting at 2 to 6 weeks of age until 6 to 12
months of age; dosing depends on birth weight and infants with smaller
birth weights require higher doses.
Strategies to decrease anemia include delayed cord clamping, avoiding
unnecessary phlebotomy, and providing adequate iron supplementation.
Delayed cord clamping at birth results in fewer transfusions and a reduction in both intraventricular hemorrhage and necrotizing enterocolitis in
preterm infants. Given the impact of phlebotomy losses during monitoring in the neonatal intensive care unit, attention to reducing unnecessary
blood draws also has been advocated. Iron therapy is indicated for all neonates with anemia of prematurity starting at 1 month of age and continuing until about 1 year of age. Iron is prescribed as mg of elemental iron per
kg/day and depends on birthweight.
When transfusions are necessary, an RBC volume of 10-­15 mL/kg is
recommended. It is good practice to split units derived from a single donor
to minimize donor exposure if sequential transfusions are indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 502 u Physiologic Anemia of Infancy
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR–RELATED CDA

Transcription factor–related CDA includes CDA type IV (CDA IV) and
X-­linked thrombocytopenia with or without dyserythropoietic anemia
(XLTDA). CDA IV has an autosomal dominant inheritance due to pathogenic variants in KLF1, which encodes an erythroid transcription factor
that regulates fetal hemoglobin switching and is necessary for terminal
erythroid differentiation. Patients have severe hemolytic anemia with no
or mild reticulocytosis and very high fetal hemoglobin. Bone marrow
morphology consists of hypercellularity and binucleate or multinucleate
erythroblasts. Electron micrographs show immature red cell progenitors
that have atypical inclusions within the cytoplasm, nuclear membrane
invaginations, and heterochromatin.
XLTDA is an X-­linked condition due to pathogenic variants in
GATA1, a DNA-­binding protein with two zinc fingers and a transactivation domain that plays a key role in development and maintenance
of red cell and platelet lineages. The laboratory features of this condition include mild to severe anemia and macrothrombocytopenia with
poorly granulated platelets. Bone marrow morphology shows dyserythropoiesis and megakaryocytes that are abnormal and reduced in
number. Patients present with bleeding and anemia, and management
includes transfusion and supportive care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 502

Physiologic Anemia of
Infancy
Courtney D. Thornburg
At birth, normal full-­term infants have higher hemoglobin (Hb) levels
and larger red blood cells (RBCs) than do older children and adults.
However, within the first week of life, a progressive decline in Hb level
begins and then persists for 6-­8 weeks. The resulting anemia is known
as the physiologic anemia of infancy.
With the onset of respiration at birth, considerably more oxygen
becomes available for binding to Hb, and as a result the Hb-­oxygen
saturation increases from 50–95% or more. There is also a gradual, normal developmental switch from fetal to adult Hb synthesis after birth
that results in the replacement of high-­oxygen-­affinity fetal Hb with
lower-­affinity adult Hb, capable of delivering more oxygen to tissues.
The increase in blood oxygen content and delivery results in the downregulation of erythropoietin (EPO) production, leading to suppression of erythropoiesis. Because there is no erythropoiesis, aged RBCs
that are removed from the circulation are not replaced, and the Hb
level decreases. The Hb concentration continues to decline until tissue oxygen needs become greater than oxygen delivery. Normally, this
point is reached between 8-­12 weeks of age, when the Hb concentration
is about 11 g/dL. In healthy term infants, the nadir rarely falls below
10 g/dL. At this juncture, EPO production increases and erythropoiesis
resumes. The supply of stored reticuloendothelial iron, derived from previously degraded RBCs, remains sufficient for this renewed Hb synthesis,
even in the absence of dietary iron intake, until approximately 20 weeks
of age. In all, this “anemia” should be viewed as a physiologic adaptation
to extrauterine life, reflecting the excess oxygen delivery relative to tissue
oxygen requirements. There is no hematologic problem, and no therapy
is required unless physiologic anemia of infancy is exacerbated by other
ongoing processes including nutritional deficiency and blood loss. The
degree of anemia at birth is correlated with maternal hemoglobin.
A late hyporegenerative anemia, with reticulocytopenia, can occur in
infants with hemolytic disease of the newborn. The persistence of maternally derived anti-­RBC antibodies in the infant’s circulation can lead to an

2939

ongoing low-­grade hemolytic anemia that can exaggerate the physiologic
anemia. Lower-­than-­expected Hb at the “physiologic” nadir has also been
seen in infants after intrauterine or neonatal RBC transfusions. When
infants are transfused with adult blood containing HbA, the associated shift
of the oxygen dissociation curve facilitates oxygen delivery to the tissues.
Accordingly, the definition of anemia and the need for transfusion should
be based not only on the infant’s Hb level, but also on oxygen requirements
and the ability of circulating RBCs to release oxygen to the tissues.
Premature infants also develop a physiologic anemia, known as
anemia of prematurity. The Hb decline is both more extreme and
more rapid. Hb levels of 7-­9 g/dL usually are reached by 3-­6 weeks
of age, and levels may be even lower in very small premature infants (see
Chapter 139). The same physiologic factors at play in term infants are
exaggerated in preterm infants. In premature infants, the physiologic
Hb decline may be intensified by blood loss from repeated phlebotomies
obtained to monitor ill neonates. Demands on erythropoiesis are further
heightened by the premature infant’s presumed shortened RBC life span
(40-­60 days) and the accelerated expansion of RBC mass that accompanies
the premature baby’s rapid rate of growth. Nonetheless, plasma EPO levels
are lower than would be expected for the degree of anemia, resulting in a
suboptimal erythropoietic response. The reason for diminished EPO levels
is not fully understood. During fetal life, EPO synthesis is handled primarily by the liver, and the liver’s oxygen sensor is less sensitive to hypoxia
compared with that of the kidney. The developmental switch from liver
to kidney EPO production is not accelerated by early birth, and thus the
preterm infant must rely on the liver as the primary site for synthesis, leading to diminished responsiveness to anemia. An additional mechanism
thought to contribute to diminished EPO levels may be accelerated EPO
metabolism. Because the pronounced decline in Hb that occurs in many
very low birthweight infants may be associated with abnormal clinical
signs, this “anemia of prematurity” is not considered benign and usually
requires transfusions when symptomatic.
­

TREATMENT

In the full-­term infant, physiologic anemia requires no therapy beyond
ensuring that the infant’s diet contains essential nutrients for normal
hematopoiesis. For infants who are exclusively breastfed, iron supplementation is indicated beginning at 4 months of age and continued until
oral iron intake via food is sufficient. In premature infants, an optimal
Hb has not been established and is usually dictated by the infant’s overall
clinical condition. Transfusions may be needed to maintain the Hb at what
is considered safe for that child. Premature infants who are feeding well
and growing normally rarely need transfusion unless iatrogenic blood loss
has been significant. Although factors such as poor weight gain, respiratory difficulties, and abnormal heart rate have prompted transfusion, the
beneficial effect has not been documented. Laboratory tests such as blood
lactate, EPO, and mixed venous oxygen saturation have poor predictive
value. A restrictive strategy does not increase infant morbidity or mortality. Long-­term neurodevelopmental outcomes have been found to be
poorer in liberally transfused neonates. Exposure to packed RBCs may be
related to the development of necrotizing enterocolitis, and early transfusions may be associated with the risk of intraventricular hemorrhage. Iron
supplementation is indicated starting at 2 to 6 weeks of age until 6 to 12
months of age; dosing depends on birth weight and infants with smaller
birth weights require higher doses.
Strategies to decrease anemia include delayed cord clamping, avoiding
unnecessary phlebotomy, and providing adequate iron supplementation.
Delayed cord clamping at birth results in fewer transfusions and a reduction in both intraventricular hemorrhage and necrotizing enterocolitis in
preterm infants. Given the impact of phlebotomy losses during monitoring in the neonatal intensive care unit, attention to reducing unnecessary
blood draws also has been advocated. Iron therapy is indicated for all neonates with anemia of prematurity starting at 1 month of age and continuing until about 1 year of age. Iron is prescribed as mg of elemental iron per
kg/day and depends on birthweight.
When transfusions are necessary, an RBC volume of 10-­15 mL/kg is
recommended. It is good practice to split units derived from a single donor
to minimize donor exposure if sequential transfusions are indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2940 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 503

Megaloblastic Anemias
Courtney D. Thornburg
Megaloblastic anemia describes a group of disorders that are caused
by impaired DNA synthesis. Red blood cells (RBCs) are larger than
normal at every developmental stage, and there is maturational asynchrony between the nucleus and cytoplasm of erythrocytes. The
delayed nuclear development becomes increasingly evident as cell divisions proceed. Myeloid and platelet precursors are also affected, and
giant metamyelocytes and neutrophil bands are often present in the
bone marrow. There is often an associated thrombocytopenia and leukopenia. The peripheral blood smear is notable for large, often oval RBCs
with increased mean corpuscular volume (Fig. 503.1). Neutrophils are
characteristically hypersegmented, with many having more than five
lobes (see Fig. 503.1). Most cases of childhood megaloblastic anemia
result from a deficiency of folic acid or vitamin B12 (cobalamin), vitamins essential for DNA synthesis (Table 503.1). Rarely, these anemias
may be caused by inborn errors of metabolism. Megaloblastic anemias
resulting from malnutrition are relatively uncommon in the United
States but are important worldwide (see Chapters 62, 64, and 496).

503.1 Folic Acid Deficiency
Courtney D. Thornburg
Folates are essential for DNA replication and cellular proliferation.
Humans cannot synthesize folate and must depend on dietary sources,
including green vegetables, fruits, and animal organs (e.g., liver, kidney). Folates are heat labile and water soluble; consequently, boiling
or heating folate sources leads to decreased amounts of the vitamin.
Naturally occurring folates are in a polyglutamated form that is less
efficiently absorbed than the monoglutamate species (i.e., folic acid).
Dietary folate polyglutamates are hydrolyzed to simple folates that
are absorbed primarily in the proximal small intestine by a specific
carrier-­mediated system. Folates travel in the bloodstream and are
taken up in cells, primarily in the form of unconjugated methyltetrahydrofolate, which is subsequently reconjugated (polyglutamated) in
the cell. There is an active enterohepatic circulation. Although rare,

megaloblastic anemia because of folate deficiency has its peak incidence at 4-­7 months of age, somewhat earlier than iron-­deficiency anemia, although both conditions may be present concomitantly in infants
with poor nutrition.

ETIOLOGY

Folic acid deficiency can result from inadequate folate intake, decreased
folate absorption, or acquired and congenital disorders of folate metabolism or transport (Table 503.2).

Inadequate Folate Intake

In the United States, anemia caused by insufficient folate intake usually occurs in the context of increased vitamin requirements associated
with pregnancy, periods of accelerated growth, and chronic hemolysis (see Chapter 67.6). Folate requirements greatly increase during
pregnancy, in part to meet fetal needs, and deficiencies are common
in mothers, particularly those who are poor or malnourished. Folate
supplementation is recommended from the start of pregnancy to prevent neural tube defects and to meet the needs of the developing fetus.
Folate-­deficient mothers generally do not give birth to infants with
clinical folate deficiency because there is selective transfer of folate
Table 503.1  Causes of Red Blood Cell Macrocytosis
CAUSATIVE CONDITIONS
MEGALOBLASTIC ANEMIA
Cobalamin (vitamin B12)
deficiency
Folate deficiency
Antifolate drugs (e.g.,
methotrexate)
Cytotoxic drugs (e.g.,
hydroxyurea, 5-­FU)
Immunosuppressive drugs (e.g.,
azathioprine)
Thiamine-­responsive anemia
Hereditary orotic aciduria

DRUGS AND TOXINS
Alcohol abuse
Some antiviral drugs (e.g.,
nucleoside RT inhibitors)
Some anticonvulsant drugs

(green arrowheads), macrocytes (blue arrowheads), and a teardrop-­
shaped red blood cell (red arrowhead). (From Bawaskar HS, Bawaskar
P, Bawaskar PH, Parekh PB. Tropical megaloblastic anemia. Lancet
2019;393:2261–2262.)

Megaloblastic changes,
including hypersegmented
neutrophils
Macrocytosis can become severe
Mild reticulocytopenia
Pancytopenia (when the megaloblastic process is severe)

DISORDERS OF ERYTHROID PRODUCTION
Aplastic anemia, PRCA, Blackfan-­ Nonmegaloblastic
Diamond anemia
Some disorders feature
Some sideroblastic anemias
dyserythropoiesis and
CDA, non-­CDA dyserythropoiesis,
sometimes hyposegmented
Fanconi anemia
neutrophils
Myelodysplasia, myeloproliferative Macrocytosis can often be severe
diseases
(e.g., aplastic processes)
Reticulocytopenia (often severe)
RETICULOCYTOSIS
Chronic hemolytic anemia

Fig. 503.1 Peripheral blood film shows hypersegmented neutrophils

ACCOMPANYING
HEMATOLOGIC FEATURES

Nonmegaloblastic; no hypersegmented neutrophils
Mechanism of macrocytosis is
often unknown
No hypersegmented neutrophils

NONHEMATOLOGIC DISEASES
Chronic liver diseases
Hypothyroidism
Copper deficiency

Nonmegaloblastic; no hypersegmented neutrophils
Macrocytes are rarely oval

ARTIFACTS
RBC clumping by cold
agglutinins; some warm RBC
antibodies
Severe hyperglycemia
Hyponatremia

Nonmegaloblastic; no hypersegmented neutrophils
Disparity between high MCV and
normal morphologic examination

CDA, Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; PRCA, pure
red cell aplasia; RBC, red blood cell; RT, reverse transcriptase; 5-­FU, 5-­fluorouracil.
From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and
Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015; Table 10-­3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 503 u Megaloblastic Anemias
Table 503.2  Causes of Folate Deficiency* in Adults and
Children
INADEQUATE NUTRITION
Poor diet†
Poor food preparation methods
Exclusive feeding with goat’s milk
DEFECTS IN ABSORPTION
Gastric achlorhydria§
Diseases of the upper small intestine
Tropical sprue
Celiac disease
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Oral pancreatic replacement therapy§
Hereditary folate malabsorption
INCREASED REQUIREMENTS OR LOSSES
Pregnancy
Lactation§
Prematurity§,‖
Chronic hemolytic anemia§
Dialysis
Hyperthyroidism§
Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome
DISORDERS OF TRANSPORT
Cerebral folate deficiency (genetic or acquired)¶
DISORDERS OF CELLULAR METABOLISM
Drugs inhibiting folate metabolism
Antifolates (e.g., methotrexate)
Pyrimethamine§; trimethoprim§
Sulfasalazine§
Valproic acid§,#
Inherited defects
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency
Disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism
Dihydrofolate reductase deficiency
Methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase, cyclohydrolase, and
formyltetrahydrofolate synthetase 1 (MTHFD1) deficiency
Others
MULTIFACTORIAL OR UNCERTAIN MECHANISMS
Alcohol use disorder‡
Anticonvulsants§
Oral contraceptives§
*Folate deficiency is often multifactorial.
†Relative dietary insufficiency (i.e., intake that is adequate under usual circumstances) is

a particularly important cofactor that can convert borderline folate deficiency to clinically overt deficiency when other conditions coexist, such as increased requirements
for folate or mild malabsorption.
§Megaloblastic anemia rarely results unless other limitations of folate status coexist.
‖Neonatal stores are low in premature infants.
¶Cerebral folate deficiency can occur on a genetic basis or an autoimmune basis;
megaloblastic anemia does not occur because folate deficiency appears not to exist
outside the central nervous system.
#Disrupts mitochondrial folate metabolism in utero.
‡Poor intake is often associated with alcoholism in adults.
From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and
Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015; Box 10-­2.

to the fetus via placental folate receptors. Rapid growth after birth
increases demands for folic acid, and infants who are premature or ill
and those with certain hemolytic disorders will have particularly high
folate requirements. Human breast milk, infant formulas, and pasteurized cow’s milk provide adequate amounts of folic acid. Goat’s milk is

2941

folate deficient, and supplementation must be given when it is the child’s
main food source. Unless supplemented, powdered milk may also be a
poor source of folic acid.
Malnutrition is the most common cause of folate deficiency in older
children. In addition, children with chronic hemolytic anemias, infections, or malabsorption are at increased risk due to increased demand.
Because body stores of folate are limited, deficiency can develop quickly
in malnourished individuals. On a folate-­free diet, megaloblastic anemia will occur after 2-­3 months.

Decreased Folate Absorption

Malabsorption caused by chronic diarrheal states or diffuse inflammatory disease can lead to folate deficiency. In both situations, some of
the decreased folate absorption may be caused by impaired folate conjugase activity. Chronic diarrhea also interferes with the enterohepatic
circulation of folate, thereby enhancing folate losses because of rapid
intestinal passage. Megaloblastic anemia caused by folic acid deficiency
can occur in celiac disease or chronic infectious enteritis and in association with enteroenteric fistulas. Previous intestinal surgery is another
potential cause of decreased folate absorption.
Certain anticonvulsant drugs (e.g., phenytoin, phenobarbital) can
impair folic acid absorption, and many patients treated with these
drugs have low serum levels. Frank megaloblastic anemia is rare and
readily responds to folic acid therapy, even when administration of the
offending drug is continued. Alcohol overuse also is associated with
folate malabsorption.

Congenital Abnormalities in Folate Transport and
Metabolism

Inborn errors of folate transport or metabolism are rare but can be
life threatening. Those associated with megaloblastic anemia include
hereditary folate malabsorption and certain extremely uncommon
enzyme deficiencies.
Hereditary folate malabsorption (HFM) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants in the
SLC46A1 gene encoding the protein-­coupled folate transporter. HFM
is associated with an inability to absorb folic acid, 5-­tetrahydrofolate,
5-­
methyltetrahydrofolate, or 5-­
formyltetrahydrofolate (folinic acid).
It can become apparent at 2-­6 months of age with megaloblastic anemia and other deficits, including infections and diarrhea. Neurologic
abnormalities attributable to folate deficiency in the central nervous
system (CNS) include seizures, developmental delay, and intellectual
disability. Folate transport is impaired both in the intestine and at the
brain’s choroid plexus. Serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) folate levels
are very low, with a loss of the normal 3:1 ratio of CSF to serum folate.
Treatment for HFM involves parenteral (intramuscular) folate or
high-­dose oral 5-­formyltetrahydrofolate (5-­formylTHF), folinic acid,
leucovorin, or the active isomer of 5-­formylTHF (Isovorin or Fusilev)
targeting normal or near normal trough levels in the CSF to ameliorate
both the megaloblastic anemia and neurologic complications of folate
deficiency.
Functional methionine synthase deficiency may result from pathologic genetic variants affecting the function of methionine synthase
reductase or methionine synthase. These disorders are autosomal recessive and characterized not only by megaloblastic anemia but also by
cerebral atrophy, nystagmus, blindness, and altered muscle tone. Both
respond to hydroxocobalamin (OHCbl) plus betaine with variable clinical success. Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) deficiency is extremely
rare and is associated with homozygous pathologic genetic variants
in the DHFR gene. Clinical symptoms include megaloblastic anemia
and neurologic manifestations. Although methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase (MTHFR) deficiency is the most common inborn error of
folate metabolism, and severe cases can produce several neurologic and
vascular complications, there is no associated megaloblastic anemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2942 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Drug-­Induced Abnormalities in Folate Metabolism

Several drugs have anti–folic acid activity as their primary pharmacologic effect and regularly produce megaloblastic anemia. Methotrexate
binds to dihydrofolate reductase and prevents formation of tetrahydrofolate, the active form of folate. Pyrimethamine, used in the therapy of
toxoplasmosis, and trimethoprim, used for treatment of various infections, can induce folic acid deficiency and occasionally megaloblastic
anemia. Therapy with folinic acid (5-­formyltetrahydrofolate) is usually
beneficial.

products and by-­products of these enzymatic reactions are critical to
DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis.
Cobalamin (Cbl) is synthesized exclusively by microorganisms,
and humans must rely on dietary sources (animal products, including
meat, eggs, fish, and milk) for their needs (see Chapter 67.7). Unlike
folate, older children and adults have sufficient vitamin B12 stores to
last 3-­5 years. In young infants born to mothers with low vitamin B12
stores, clinical signs of Cbl deficiency can become apparent in the first
6-­18 months of life.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

METABOLISM

In addition to the clinical features associated with anemia, folate-­
deficient infants and children may manifest irritability, chronic diarrhea, and poor weight gain. Hemorrhages from thrombocytopenia
may occur in advanced cases. HFM and other rare etiologies of folate
deficiency may be further associated with hypogammaglobulinemia,
severe infections, failure to thrive, neurologic abnormalities, and cognitive delays.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The anemia is macrocytic (mean corpuscular volume >100 fL). Variations in RBC shape and size are common (see Chapter 496, Fig. 496.4B).
The reticulocyte count is low, and nucleated RBCs with megaloblastic
morphology are often seen in the peripheral blood. Neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia may be present, particularly in patients with long-­
standing and severe deficiencies. The neutrophils are large, some with
hypersegmented nuclei (see Fig. 503.1). The bone marrow is hypercellular because of erythroid hyperplasia, and megaloblastic changes are
prominent. Large, abnormal neutrophilic forms (giant metamyelocytes) with cytoplasmic vacuolation are also seen.
Levels of RBC folate are a better indicator of chronic deficiency than
serum folic acid levels. The normal RBC folate level is 150-­600 ng/mL
of packed cells. Levels of iron and vitamin B12 in serum usually are
normal or elevated. Serum activity of lactate dehydrogenase, a marker
of ineffective erythropoiesis, is markedly elevated.

TREATMENT

When the diagnosis of folate deficiency is established, folic acid may
be administered orally or parenterally at 0.5-­1.0 mg/day. If the specific
diagnosis is in doubt, smaller doses of folate (0.1 mg/day) may be used
for 1 week as a diagnostic test because a hematologic response can be
expected within 72 hours. Doses of folate >0.1 mg can correct the anemia of vitamin B12 deficiency but might aggravate any associated neurologic abnormalities. In most medical settings in developed countries,
this therapeutic trial to distinguish the different causes of megaloblastic
anemia is rarely necessary because vitamin B12 and folate blood levels
are usually readily available. Folic acid therapy (0.5-­1.0 mg/day) should
be continued for 3-­4 weeks until a definite hematologic response has
occurred. Maintenance therapy with a multivitamin (containing 0.2
mg of folate) is adequate. Parenteral or high doses of specific folate formulations are required in the setting of HFM. Transfusions are indicated only when the anemia is severe, or the child is very ill.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

503.2 Vitamin B12 (Cobalamin) Deficiency
Courtney D. Thornburg
Vitamin B12, a generic term encompassing all biologically active cobalamins, is a water-­soluble vitamin with a central, functional cobalt atom
and a planar corrin ring. Methylcobalamin and adenosyl cobalamin are
the metabolically active derivatives, serving as cofactors in two essential
metabolic reactions: methylation of homocysteine to methionine (via
methionine synthase) and conversion of methyl-­malonyl-­coenzyme
A (CoA) to succinyl CoA (via l-­methyl-­malonyl-­CoA mutase). The

Under normal circumstances, cobalamin is released from food protein in
the stomach through peptic digestion. Cbl then binds to haptocorrin (HC),
a salivary glycoprotein. This complex moves into the duodenum, where
HC is digested by pancreatic proteases and Cbl is liberated. Cbl then binds
to intrinsic factor (IF), another glycoprotein that is produced by gastric
parietal cells. The Cbl-­IF complex subsequently enters mucosal cells of the
distal ileum by receptor-­mediated endocytosis. Through a complex series
of protein interactions, Cbl is taken up into the blood stream and taken
up into cells. Cobalamins are processed in the cytoplasm to a common
intermediate that can be allocated to the methylcobalamin and adenosylcobalamin synthesis pathways to meet cellular needs.

ETIOLOGY

Vitamin B12 deficiency can result from inadequate dietary intake of
Cbl, lack of IF, impaired intestinal absorption of IF-­Cbl, inactivation,
or absence of vitamin B12 transport protein (see Table 503.1).

Inadequate Vitamin B12 Intake

Vitamin B12 deficiency in infants is most often nutritional, resulting
from low Cbl levels in the breast milk of B12-­deficient mothers. Associated megaloblastic anemia often appears during the first year of life.
Maternal deficiency may be caused by pernicious anemia or gastrointestinal disorders such as Helicobacter pylori infection, celiac disease,
Crohn disease, or pancreatic insufficiency. Previous gastric bypass surgery, treatment with proton pump inhibitors, and inadequate intake
from a strict unsupplemented vegetarian diet have also been implicated. Fortunately, because of active placental Cbl transport in utero,
most children of B12-­deficient mothers maintain Cbl levels sufficient
to support adequate prenatal development. Such infants are born with
low B12 stores, the depletion of which is associated with a gradual
onset of clinical manifestations. Vitamin B12 replacement often results
in rapid improvement, but the longer the deficient period, the greater
the likelihood of permanent disabilities. Neonatal screening programs
may detect maternal-­neonatal nutritional B12 deficiency because of an
increase in propionyl carnitine, but there is higher sensitivity using
a measurement of methylmalonic acid. In high-­income countries,
dietary deficiency during childhood or adolescence is infrequent but
can result from strict vegetarian or vegan diet. Daily requirements
range from 0.4-­2.4 μg.

Impaired Vitamin B12 Absorption

Gastric surgery or medications that impair gastric acid secretion may
result in IF deficiency, leading to decreased vitamin B12 absorption.
Pancreatic insufficiency can also lead to Cbl deficiency because of
impaired cleavage and IF complex formation. Patients with neonatal
necrotizing enterocolitis, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease,
or surgical removal of the terminal ileum may also have impaired
absorption of vitamin B12. An overgrowth of intestinal bacteria within
diverticula or duplications of the small intestine can cause vitamin B12
deficiency by consumption of (or competition for) the vitamin or by
splitting of its complex with IF. In these cases, hematologic response can
follow appropriate antibiotic therapy. In endemic areas, when the fish
tapeworm Diphyllobothrium latum infests the upper small intestine,
similar mechanisms may be operative. When megaloblastic anemia
occurs in such situations, the serum vitamin B12 level is low, and the
gastric fluid contains IF.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 503 u Megaloblastic Anemias

2943

Hereditary intrinsic factor deficiency (HIFD) is a rare autosomal
recessive disorder caused by a variety of pathologic genetic variants in
the IF gene that produce a lack of gastric IF or a functionally abnormal
IF. HIFD differs from typical adult pernicious anemia in that gastric
acid is secreted normally and the stomach is histologically normal. It
is not associated with antibodies or endocrine abnormalities. Unlike
Imerslund-­Grasbeck syndrome, described next, HIFD is only occasionally associated with proteinuria. Symptoms become prominent at
an early age (6-­24 months), consistent with exhaustion of vitamin B12
stores acquired in utero. As the anemia becomes severe, weakness, irritability, anorexia, and listlessness occur. The tongue is smooth, red, and
painful. Neurologic manifestations include ataxia, paresthesias, hyporeflexia, Babinski responses, and clonus. Oral vitamin B12 is usually
ineffective, and lifelong intramuscular (IM) or intranasal Cbl should
be used to bypass the absorption defect. The natural form, OHCbl, is
believed to be more effective than the synthetic form, cyanocobalamin
(CNCbl).
Imerslund-­Grasbeck syndrome is a rare, recessively inherited pediatric disorder resulting in selective vitamin B12 malabsorption in the
ileum and consequent vitamin B12 deficiency. It usually becomes clinically apparent within the first 6 years of life. In addition to megaloblastic
anemia, the patient may also have neurologic defects (e.g., hypotonia,
developmental delay, brain atrophy, movement disorders, dementia)
and/or proteinuria. Patients carry pathologic variants in genes CUBN
or AMN, which encode proteins that form the cubam receptor for the
ileal IF-­Cbl complex. Because CUBN is also a key receptor for protein
reabsorption in the kidney, impaired expression at this site results in
associated proteinuria. The disease can be fatal if it remains untreated.
Early diagnosis and treatment with IM or intranasal Cbl will reverse
the hematologic and neurologic abnormalities. Proteinuria does not
respond to therapy.
Classic pernicious anemia (autoimmune gastritis) usually occurs in
older adults but can rarely affect children. This disorder (juvenile pernicious anemia) usually presents during adolescence. In such cases,
the disease is associated with various detectable antibodies, including
those against IF and the hydrogen-­potassium adenosine triphosphatase proton pump in gastric parietal cells. These children can have
additional immunologic abnormalities, cutaneous candidiasis, hypoparathyroidism, and other endocrine deficiencies; atrophy of the gastric mucosa and achlorhydria may occur. IM or intranasal vitamin B12
should be administered regularly.

disorders present at a range of ages starting in utero and have a variable
clinical presentation including complications of methylmalonic acidemia, homocystinuria, and megaloblastic anemia. Patients require care
with a metabolic specialist to guide treatment with OHCbl, avoidance
of agents that can cause metabolic decompensation, and surveillance
for complications.
Vitamin B12 deficiency may develop by inactivation of vitamin B12.
This most often occurs in adolescents who chronically use “Whippets,”
which contain nitrous oxide, as a recreational agent to get high. Conversely, patients with underlying vitamin B12 deficiency may have an
exacerbation after nitrous oxide anesthesia.

Absence of Vitamin B12 Transport Protein
Transcobalamin

A comprehensive medical history is essential to the clinical recognition
of possible Cbl deficiency. Information regarding clinical symptoms,
dietary history, diseases, surgeries, or medications and drugs is likely to
provide important clues. The physical examination may reveal relevant
findings such as irritability, pallor, pigmentation or specific neurologic
symptoms. Screening laboratory findings offer important information, but more focused testing will be required to confirm a diagnosis
of vitamin B12 deficiency and its cause. Cbl deficiency is usually identified by measuring total or TC-­bound vitamin B12 in the blood. Although
an extremely low level is generally diagnostic, this may not be the case
because false negatives and false positives are reportedly common using
currently available assays. As a result, it is wise not to discount vitamin
B12 deficiency, particularly in the face of clinical symptoms, macrocytic
anemia, an abnormal blood smear, and a normal folate level. In untreated
patients, methylmalonic acid and total homocysteine levels are often helpful because they are greatly elevated in the majority of those with clinical
signs of B12 deficiency. Excessive urinary methylmalonic acid excretion
is also a sensitive test of B12 deficiency. Although modest increases occur
with renal failure, elevated methylmalonic acid is otherwise quite specific
for B12 deficiency. Notably, however, serum homocysteine is also elevated
in folate deficiency, homocystinuria, and renal failure.
If vitamin B12 deficiency has been confirmed and there is no evidence of inadequate dietary intake or, in the case of an infant, inadequate maternal B12, malabsorption should be investigated. Anti-­IF
antibodies and anti–parietal cell antibodies are useful for the diagnosis
of pernicious anemia. Measurement of IF and testing from more specialized laboratories may be required for less common disorders.

Transcobalamin (TC) deficiency is a rare cause of megaloblastic anemia. A congenital deficiency is inherited as an autosomal recessive
condition resulting in a failure to absorb and transport vitamin B12.
Most patients lack TC, but some have functionally defective forms.
This disorder usually manifests in the first weeks of life. Characteristically, there is failure to thrive, diarrhea, vomiting, glossitis, neurologic abnormalities, and megaloblastic anemia. The diagnosis can be
difficult given that total serum vitamin B12 levels are often normal
because approximately 80% of serum Cbl is bound to HC. The diagnosis is suggested by the presence of severe megaloblastic anemia in the
face of normal folate levels and no evidence of another inborn error
of metabolism. Plasma homocysteine and methylmalonic acid levels
are elevated. A definitive diagnosis is made by measuring plasma TC.
The serum vitamin B12 levels must be kept high to force enough Cbl
into cells and allow normal function using high-­dose oral supplementation or IM or intranasal treatment. Symptoms and laboratory studies
should be monitored, and doses adjusted as needed.

Disorders of Intracellular Cobalamin Metabolism

Disorders of intracellular cobalamin metabolism are associated with
pathologic genetic variants in genes associated with lettered complementation groups. These include MMACHC (cblC), MMADHC (cblD-­
combined and cblD homocystinuria), MTRR (cblE), LMBRD1 (cblF),
MTR (cblG), ABCD4 (cblJ), THAP11 (cblX-­like), ZNF143 (cblX-­like),
or HCFC1 (cblX, which can show a cblC complementation class). The

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Children with Cbl deficiency often present with nonspecific manifestations such as weakness, lethargy, feeding difficulties, failure to thrive,
and irritability. Other common findings include pallor, glossitis, vomiting, diarrhea, and icterus. Hyperpigmentation is another feature that
may mimic Addison disease. Neurologic symptoms can include paresthesia, sensory deficits, hypotonia, seizures, developmental delay,
developmental regression, neuropsychiatric changes, and brain/spine
MRI changes. Neurologic problems from vitamin B12 deficiency may
occur in the absence of any hematologic abnormalities. Thrombotic
microangiopathy is a rare manifestation.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The hematologic manifestations of folate and Cbl deficiency are identical. The anemia resulting from Cbl deficiency is macrocytic, with prominent macro-­ovalocytosis of the RBCs (see Chapter 496, Fig. 496.2, and
Fig. 503.1). The neutrophils may be large and hypersegmented (see
Fig. 503.1). In advanced cases, neutropenia and thrombocytopenia
can occur, simulating aplastic anemia or leukemia. Macrocytosis may
not always be present. Serum vitamin B12 levels are low, and the serum
concentrations of methylmalonic acid and homocysteine are elevated.
Concentrations of serum iron and serum folic acid are normal or elevated. Serum lactate dehydrogenase activity is markedly increased, a
reflection of ineffective erythropoiesis. Moderate elevations of serum
bilirubin levels (2-­3 mg/dL) also may be found. Excessive excretion of
methylmalonic acid in the urine (normal: 0-­3.5 mg/24 hr) is a reliable
and sensitive index of vitamin B12 deficiency and is especially helpful
when the serum vitamin B12 level is in the low-­normal range.

DIAGNOSIS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2944 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
TREATMENT

Treatment regimens in children have not been well studied. The cause
of vitamin B12 deficiency should ultimately dictate treatment dosage
and route of administration as well as the duration of therapy. Cyanocobalamin is available as a nasal spray as an alternative to parenteral
injection. Dose adjustments should be made in response to clinical
status and laboratory values. The physiologic requirement for vitamin
B12 is about 1-­3 μg/day. Hematologic responses have been observed
with small doses, indicating that a mini-­dose may be administered as
a therapeutic test when the diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency is in
doubt or in circumstances where the anemia is severe and higher initial
doses might result in severe metabolic disturbances.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A full-­term newborn infant contains about 0.5 grams of iron, compared with 5 grams of iron in adults. This change in quantity of iron
from birth to adulthood means that an average of 0.8 mg of iron must
be absorbed each day during the first 15 years of life. A small additional
amount is necessary to balance normal losses of iron by shedding of cells.
It is therefore necessary to absorb approximately 1 mg daily to maintain
positive iron balance in childhood. Because <10% of dietary iron is usually absorbed, a dietary intake of 8-­10 mg of iron daily is necessary to
maintain iron levels. During infancy, when growth is most rapid, the 1
mg/L of iron in cow’s and breast milk makes it difficult to maintain body
iron. Although breastfed infants have an advantage because they absorb
iron 2-­3 times more efficiently than infants fed cow’s milk, breastfed
infants nonetheless are at risk of developing iron deficiency without
regular intake of iron-­fortified foods by 6 months of age.

ETIOLOGY

503.3 Other Rare Megaloblastic Anemias
Courtney D. Thornburg
Orotic aciduria is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that usually appears
in the first year of life and is characterized by growth failure, developmental delay, megaloblastic anemia, and increased urinary excretion of orotic
acid (see Chapter 110). Rarely, orotic aciduria occurs without megaloblastic anemia. This defect is the most common metabolic error in the de
novo synthesis of pyrimidines and therefore affects nucleic acid synthesis. The usual form of hereditary orotic aciduria is caused by a deficiency
(in all body tissues) of orotic phosphoribosyl transferase and orotidine-­
5-­phosphate decarboxylase, two sequential enzymatic steps in pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis. The diagnosis is suggested by the presence of
severe megaloblastic anemia with normal serum B12 and folate levels and
no evidence of TC deficiency. A presumptive diagnosis is made by finding increased urinary orotic acid. However, confirmation of the diagnosis
requires assay of the transferase and decarboxylase enzymes in the patient’s
erythrocytes. Failure to thrive and intellectual disability often accompany
this condition. The anemia is refractory to vitamin B12 or folic acid, but the
anemia responds promptly to administration of uridine.
Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic anemia (Rogers syndrome) is
a very rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by megaloblastic
anemia, sensorineural deafness, and diabetes mellitus. Congenital heart
defects, arrhythmias, visual problems, short stature, trilineage myelodysplasia, and strokes are also described. Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic
anemia usually presents in infancy but may occasionally develop in childhood and adolescence and occurs in several ethnically distinct populations. The bone marrow is characterized not only by megaloblastic changes
but also by ringed sideroblasts. The defect is caused by biallelic pathologic
genetic variants in SCL19A2, which encodes a high-­affinity plasma membrane thiamine transporter. Continuous thiamine supplementation usually reverses the anemia and diabetes, but not existing hearing defects.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 504

Iron-­Deficiency Anemia
Jennifer A. Rothman
Iron deficiency is the most widespread and common nutritional disorder in the world. It is estimated that 30–50% of the global population
has iron-­deficiency anemia, and most of these individuals live in developing countries. In the United States, 8–14% of children ages 12-­36
months are iron deficient, and 30% of this group progresses to iron-­
deficiency anemia.

Most iron in neonates resides in circulating hemoglobin. As the relatively high hemoglobin concentration of the newborn infant falls during the first 2-­3 months of life, considerable iron is recycled. These
iron stores are usually sufficient for blood formation in the first 6-­9
months of life in term infants. Stores are depleted sooner in premature
infants, low birthweight infants, or infants with perinatal blood loss,
because their iron stores are smaller. Delayed (1-­3 minute) clamping
of the umbilical cord can improve iron status and reduce the risk of
iron deficiency, whereas early clamping (<30 seconds) puts the infant
at risk for iron deficiency. Dietary sources of iron are especially important in these infants. In term infants, anemia caused solely by inadequate dietary iron usually occurs at 9-­24 months of age and is less
common thereafter. The usual dietary pattern observed in infants and
toddlers with nutritional iron-­deficiency anemia in developed countries is excessive consumption of cow’s milk (low iron content, blood
loss from milk protein colitis) in a child who is often overweight or
bottle feeding beyond 12 months of age. Worldwide, undernutrition is
usually responsible for iron deficiency (Table 504.1).
Blood loss must be considered as a possible cause in every case of
iron-­deficiency anemia. Sources of blood loss, particularly in older
children and adolescents, include menstrual losses, recurrent nosebleeds, or intravascular hemolysis with hemoglobinuria, as seen in diseases such as malaria or endurance athletics such as triathletes. Chronic
iron-­deficiency anemia from occult bleeding may be caused by a lesion
of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, such as peptic ulcer, Meckel diverticulum, polyp, hemangioma, or inflammatory bowel disease. Infants
can have chronic intestinal blood loss induced by exposure to cow’s
milk protein. Involved infants characteristically develop anemia that
is more severe and occurs earlier than would be expected simply from
an inadequate intake of iron. The ongoing loss of blood in the stools
can be prevented either by breastfeeding or by delaying the introduction of whole cow’s milk in the first years of life and then limiting the
quantity to <24 oz/24 hours. Infants and toddlers who have excessive
raw milk intake with no iron supplementation and limited iron containing foods are at high risk of iron deficiency. Unrecognized blood loss also
can be associated with chronic diarrhea and, rarely, with pulmonary
hemosiderosis. In developing countries, infections with hookworm,
Trichuris trichiura, and Plasmodium often contribute to iron deficiency.
Since iron is absorbed in the proximal duodenum with the assistance
of gastric acid, gastric bypass procedures or Helicobacter pylori infection may interfere with iron absorption. Similarly, inflammation of the
bowel from celiac disease and giardiasis may also interfere with iron
absorption.
Approximately 2% of adolescent females have iron-­deficiency anemia, largely as a result of their adolescent growth spurt and menstrual
blood loss. The highest risk of iron-­deficiency anemia (>30%) is among
teenagers who are or have been pregnant.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most children with iron-­deficiency anemia are asymptomatic and are
identified by routine laboratory screening at 9-­12 months of age. Normal hemoglobin values vary according to age, gender, ethnicity, and
method of testing, such as capillary versus venous blood. Pallor is the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2944 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
TREATMENT

Treatment regimens in children have not been well studied. The cause
of vitamin B12 deficiency should ultimately dictate treatment dosage
and route of administration as well as the duration of therapy. Cyanocobalamin is available as a nasal spray as an alternative to parenteral
injection. Dose adjustments should be made in response to clinical
status and laboratory values. The physiologic requirement for vitamin
B12 is about 1-­3 μg/day. Hematologic responses have been observed
with small doses, indicating that a mini-­dose may be administered as
a therapeutic test when the diagnosis of vitamin B12 deficiency is in
doubt or in circumstances where the anemia is severe and higher initial
doses might result in severe metabolic disturbances.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A full-­term newborn infant contains about 0.5 grams of iron, compared with 5 grams of iron in adults. This change in quantity of iron
from birth to adulthood means that an average of 0.8 mg of iron must
be absorbed each day during the first 15 years of life. A small additional
amount is necessary to balance normal losses of iron by shedding of cells.
It is therefore necessary to absorb approximately 1 mg daily to maintain
positive iron balance in childhood. Because <10% of dietary iron is usually absorbed, a dietary intake of 8-­10 mg of iron daily is necessary to
maintain iron levels. During infancy, when growth is most rapid, the 1
mg/L of iron in cow’s and breast milk makes it difficult to maintain body
iron. Although breastfed infants have an advantage because they absorb
iron 2-­3 times more efficiently than infants fed cow’s milk, breastfed
infants nonetheless are at risk of developing iron deficiency without
regular intake of iron-­fortified foods by 6 months of age.

ETIOLOGY

503.3 Other Rare Megaloblastic Anemias
Courtney D. Thornburg
Orotic aciduria is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that usually appears
in the first year of life and is characterized by growth failure, developmental delay, megaloblastic anemia, and increased urinary excretion of orotic
acid (see Chapter 110). Rarely, orotic aciduria occurs without megaloblastic anemia. This defect is the most common metabolic error in the de
novo synthesis of pyrimidines and therefore affects nucleic acid synthesis. The usual form of hereditary orotic aciduria is caused by a deficiency
(in all body tissues) of orotic phosphoribosyl transferase and orotidine-­
5-­phosphate decarboxylase, two sequential enzymatic steps in pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis. The diagnosis is suggested by the presence of
severe megaloblastic anemia with normal serum B12 and folate levels and
no evidence of TC deficiency. A presumptive diagnosis is made by finding increased urinary orotic acid. However, confirmation of the diagnosis
requires assay of the transferase and decarboxylase enzymes in the patient’s
erythrocytes. Failure to thrive and intellectual disability often accompany
this condition. The anemia is refractory to vitamin B12 or folic acid, but the
anemia responds promptly to administration of uridine.
Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic anemia (Rogers syndrome) is
a very rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by megaloblastic
anemia, sensorineural deafness, and diabetes mellitus. Congenital heart
defects, arrhythmias, visual problems, short stature, trilineage myelodysplasia, and strokes are also described. Thiamine-­responsive megaloblastic
anemia usually presents in infancy but may occasionally develop in childhood and adolescence and occurs in several ethnically distinct populations. The bone marrow is characterized not only by megaloblastic changes
but also by ringed sideroblasts. The defect is caused by biallelic pathologic
genetic variants in SCL19A2, which encodes a high-­affinity plasma membrane thiamine transporter. Continuous thiamine supplementation usually reverses the anemia and diabetes, but not existing hearing defects.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 504

Iron-­Deficiency Anemia
Jennifer A. Rothman
Iron deficiency is the most widespread and common nutritional disorder in the world. It is estimated that 30–50% of the global population
has iron-­deficiency anemia, and most of these individuals live in developing countries. In the United States, 8–14% of children ages 12-­36
months are iron deficient, and 30% of this group progresses to iron-­
deficiency anemia.

Most iron in neonates resides in circulating hemoglobin. As the relatively high hemoglobin concentration of the newborn infant falls during the first 2-­3 months of life, considerable iron is recycled. These
iron stores are usually sufficient for blood formation in the first 6-­9
months of life in term infants. Stores are depleted sooner in premature
infants, low birthweight infants, or infants with perinatal blood loss,
because their iron stores are smaller. Delayed (1-­3 minute) clamping
of the umbilical cord can improve iron status and reduce the risk of
iron deficiency, whereas early clamping (<30 seconds) puts the infant
at risk for iron deficiency. Dietary sources of iron are especially important in these infants. In term infants, anemia caused solely by inadequate dietary iron usually occurs at 9-­24 months of age and is less
common thereafter. The usual dietary pattern observed in infants and
toddlers with nutritional iron-­deficiency anemia in developed countries is excessive consumption of cow’s milk (low iron content, blood
loss from milk protein colitis) in a child who is often overweight or
bottle feeding beyond 12 months of age. Worldwide, undernutrition is
usually responsible for iron deficiency (Table 504.1).
Blood loss must be considered as a possible cause in every case of
iron-­deficiency anemia. Sources of blood loss, particularly in older
children and adolescents, include menstrual losses, recurrent nosebleeds, or intravascular hemolysis with hemoglobinuria, as seen in diseases such as malaria or endurance athletics such as triathletes. Chronic
iron-­deficiency anemia from occult bleeding may be caused by a lesion
of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, such as peptic ulcer, Meckel diverticulum, polyp, hemangioma, or inflammatory bowel disease. Infants
can have chronic intestinal blood loss induced by exposure to cow’s
milk protein. Involved infants characteristically develop anemia that
is more severe and occurs earlier than would be expected simply from
an inadequate intake of iron. The ongoing loss of blood in the stools
can be prevented either by breastfeeding or by delaying the introduction of whole cow’s milk in the first years of life and then limiting the
quantity to <24 oz/24 hours. Infants and toddlers who have excessive
raw milk intake with no iron supplementation and limited iron containing foods are at high risk of iron deficiency. Unrecognized blood loss also
can be associated with chronic diarrhea and, rarely, with pulmonary
hemosiderosis. In developing countries, infections with hookworm,
Trichuris trichiura, and Plasmodium often contribute to iron deficiency.
Since iron is absorbed in the proximal duodenum with the assistance
of gastric acid, gastric bypass procedures or Helicobacter pylori infection may interfere with iron absorption. Similarly, inflammation of the
bowel from celiac disease and giardiasis may also interfere with iron
absorption.
Approximately 2% of adolescent females have iron-­deficiency anemia, largely as a result of their adolescent growth spurt and menstrual
blood loss. The highest risk of iron-­deficiency anemia (>30%) is among
teenagers who are or have been pregnant.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most children with iron-­deficiency anemia are asymptomatic and are
identified by routine laboratory screening at 9-­12 months of age. Normal hemoglobin values vary according to age, gender, ethnicity, and
method of testing, such as capillary versus venous blood. Pallor is the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2950 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
serum transferrin levels that are accompanied by the deposition of
non–transferrin-­bound iron in parenchymal tissues. Because hepcidin
production is induced by inflammatory stimuli, hepcidin elevation is
also a feature of the anemia of chronic disease (ACD). However, in
contrast to patients with IRIDA, in whom the hepcidin dysregulation
is congenital, patients with ACD generally retain normal to high iron
stores because of the acquired nature of their hepcidin elevation (see
Chapter 500.1). Rare medical causes that may mimic IRIDA include
vascular malformations of the GI tract, Castleman disease (where IL-­6
overproduction causes hepcidin elevation), autoimmune gastritis, and
pathogenic germline variants in KCNQ1 (which regulates gastric acid
secretion).

TREATMENT

Because of the underlying pathophysiology of IRIDA, parenteral iron
supplementation is required to correct the anemia. Although parenteral
iron therapy raises body iron stores, the hematologic response is usually
slow and not completely corrective. This likely results from insufficient
export of the processed iron from macrophages into the circulation,
an expected consequence of hepcidin elevation. Serum ferritin levels
increase with parenteral iron therapy in a dose-­dependent manner
and may raise concerns for iron overload, which would be expected to
exhibit a reticuloendothelial rather than a parenchymal pattern of iron
loading. Given the limited number of IRIDA cases reported to date, the
optimal formulation and dosing of parenteral iron have not yet been
established. Although oral iron supplementation does not appear to
have a significant role in treatment of IRIDA, the addition of ascorbic acid to a ferrous sulfate oral supplement has been associated with
hematologic responses in isolated cases. Treatment with recombinant
erythropoietin has not been found to produce significant clinical benefit in patients with IRIDA.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 505

Other Microcytic Anemias
Jennifer A. Rothman
A number of rare microcytic anemias need to be considered
when children with microcytic anemia fail to respond to oral iron
(Table 504.5). These anemias include thalassemia or thalassemia trait
(see ­Chapter 511), infantile poikilocytosis and hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (Chapter 508), and anemia of chronic disease (Chapter 500.1).
Additionally, rare nutritional disorders and disorders of iron metabolism can cause microcytosis.

INFANTILE POIKILOCYTOSIS AND HEREDITARY
PYROPOIKILOCYTOSIS

Infants with common hereditary elliptocytosis (see Chapter 508)
may initially present with hemolytic anemia characterized by marked
poikilocytosis with budding and fragmentation of the red blood cells
(RBCs). These small RBC fragments reduce the overall mean corpuscular volume (MCV), resulting in microcytosis. By 2 years of age, the
findings become typical of hereditary elliptocytosis. Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis is a much less common variant of hereditary elliptocytosis, in which the hemolytic anemia and RBC changes are more severe.

COPPER DEFICIENCY

Copper deficiency is a rare cause of microcytic anemia and neurologic dysfunction. Copper is absorbed in the stomach and proximal

duodenum. Deficiency is associated with malabsorption; severe malnutrition, often with feeding of milk alone; gastric surgery or feedings that bypass the stomach and duodenum; or parenteral nutrition
with inadvertent omission of supplemental copper. Zinc and copper
are competitively absorbed from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, so zinc
excess may inadvertently lead to copper deficiency. Diagnosis is made
by measuring a serum copper level, serum ceruloplasmin, and possibly
a zinc level. Treatment includes either oral or parenteral supplementation, depending on the underlying cause.

DEFECTS OF IRON METABOLISM

Rare microcytic anemias may be associated with defects in iron trafficking and regulation. Most are inherited and usually identified in
childhood, including defects of iron absorption, transport, utilization, and recycling. A defect of iron absorption is iron-­refractory iron-­
deficiency anemia (see Chapter 504.1). Defects of iron recycling include
aceruloplasminemia and atransferrinemia. Aceruloplasminemia is an
autosomal recessive disorder in the CP gene that encodes ceruloplasmin. Iron cannot be appropriately transported from macrophages to
plasma to be available for RBC production but accumulates instead in
the brain and visceral organs, which can lead to an adult-­onset neurodegenerative disorder. The diagnosis is made by a combination of
absence of serum ceruloplasmin, low serum copper and iron, elevated
ferritin, and increased liver iron concentration. Hypotransferrinemia
or atransferrinemia is also an autosomal recessive disorder caused by
pathogenic variants in the transferrin (TF) gene. Diagnosis is made by
low or absent serum transferrin and liver iron overload. Genetic testing
can confirm the diagnosis for both disorders. Treatment includes iron
chelation therapy, limiting iron supplementation and dietary iron, and
possibly fresh-­frozen plasma to replace ceruloplasmin and/or transferrin. Purified transferrin (apotransferrin) infusions are available.
Defects of mitochondrial iron utilization are a diverse group of
acquired and inherited defects known as sideroblastic anemias
(Table 505.1). Several genes associated with these disorders have been
described. Impaired heme synthesis leads to retention of iron within
the mitochondria of marrow RBCs. The perinuclear distribution of
mitochondria results in a pattern of iron staining surrounding the
nucleus. These are ringed sideroblasts (Fig. 505.1), which are distinct
from the more diffuse cytoplasmic distribution of iron in normal RBC
precursors. The anemia is characterized by hypochromic, microcytic
RBCs mixed with normal RBCs, so the complete blood count indicates a very high RBC distribution width. The serum iron concentration usually is elevated, and the transferrin saturation of iron is
increased.
Congenital sideroblastic anemia (CSA) can be syndromic or
nonsyndromic. The most common type of nonsyndromic CSA is an
X-­linked disorder and is most often a result of pathogenic variants
in ALAS2 that encodes erythrocytic isozyme 5-­aminolevulinic acid
synthetase, the rate-­limiting enzyme reaction in heme synthesis. An
important cofactor for 5-­ALA synthetase is pyridoxal phosphate, with
several pathogenic variants occurring near its binding site. Severe
anemia is recognized in infancy or early childhood, whereas milder
cases might not become apparent until early adulthood or later. Clinical findings include pallor, icterus, and moderate splenomegaly and/
or hepatomegaly. The severity of the anemia varies such that some
patients require no therapy and others need regular RBC transfusions.
A subset of patients with hereditary sideroblastic anemia manifest
a hematologic response to pyridoxine doses of 50-­200 mg/day. Iron
overload, as manifested by elevated serum ferritin, elevated serum
iron, and increased transferrin saturation, is a major complication of
this disorder. Clinical evidence of iron overload (e.g., diabetes mellitus,
liver dysfunction) may be found in some patients who have little or no
anemia, which may require iron chelation therapy. Stem cell transplantation has been used to treat affected children who are dependent on
RBC transfusions.
A unique variant of congenital sideroblastic anemia is Pearson syndrome (see Chapter 498), but the anemia is usually macrocytic and
not microcytic. Another rare variant of sideroblastic anemia is caused
by pathogenic variants in TRNT1 and manifests with developmental

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 505 u Other Microcytic Anemias

2951

Table 505.1  Clinical and Genetic Features of Congenital Sideroblastic Anemias
CATEGORY

DISORDER

INHERITANCE

SYNDROMIC

FREQUENCY

AGE AT
PRESENTATION

ANEMIA
SEVERITY

MCV

ASSOCIATED
ABNORMALITIES

Heme
synthesis
defects

XLSA

X-­linked

No

ALAS2

100s

Infancy to
adulthood

Mild to
severe

↓ males
N/↑
female

Iron overload in the
absence of
transfusions

SLC25A38
deficiency

AR

No

SLC25A38

40

Infancy

Severe

↓

Transfusional iron
overload

EPP

AR/PSD

No

FECH

100s

Childhood

Mild

↓

Acute
photosensitivity

AR

No

GLRX5

2

Adulthood

Mild to
severe

↓

Iron overload

HSPA9
deficiency

AR/PSD

No

HSPA9

12

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↓

Retinitis pigmentosa

HSCB
deficiency

AR

No

HSCB

1

Childhood

Moderate

N

None

XLSA/A

X-­linked

Yes

ABCB7

5

Childhood

Mild to
moderate

↓

Cerebellar ataxia
and hypoplasia,
delayed motor
development

SP/M

Yes

mtDNA

100s

Early childhood

Severe

↑

Lactic acidosis,
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency, failure
to thrive, hepatic/
renal failure

MLASA1

AR

Yes

PUS1

10

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↑

Myopathy, lactic
acidosis, facial
dysmorphism

MLASA2

AR

Yes

YARS2

40

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↑

Myopathy, lactic
acidosis,
cardiomyopathy

LARS2
deficiency

AR

Yes

LARS2

1

Infancy

Severe

↑

Lactic acidosis,
cardiomyopathy,
hepatopathy,
seizures

SIFD

AR

Yes

TRNT1

30

Infancy

Severe

Yes

MT-­ATP6

4

Infancy to early
childhood

Moderate
to severe

N/↑

Lactic acidosis,
myopathy,
neurologic
abnormalities

Yes

NUDFB11

5

Early childhood

Moderate

N

Lactic acidosis,
myopathy

Yes

SLC19A2

50

Early childhood

Mild to
severe

↑

Sensorineural
deafness, non-­type
1 diabetes mellitus,
optic atrophy,
strokelike episodes

Fe-­S
GLRX5
biogenesis
deficiency
defects

Mitochondrial PMPS
protein
synthesis
defects

Mitochondrial MT-­ATP6-­SA SP/M
respiratory
protein
mutations
NDUFB11-­SA

X-­linked

Multifactorial AR
TRMA

GENE

Immunodeficiency
(B.T), aseptic
febrile episodes,
developmental
delay, seizures,
cardiomyopathy,
retinitis
pigmentosa, other

↑, increased; ↓, decreased; AR, autosomal recessive; EPP, erythropoietic protoporphyria; MCV, mean red blood cell volume; MLASA, mitochondrial myopathy lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anemia;. mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; N, normal; PMPS, Pearson marrow pancreas syndrome; PSD, Pseudodominant; SIFD, sideroblastic anemia, immunodeficiency (B cell),
periodic fevers, and developmental delay; SP/M, sporadic/mitochondrial; TRMA, thiamine responsive megaloblastic anemia; XLSA, X-­linked sideroblastic anemia.
Adapted from Ducamp S and Fleming D. The molecular genetics of sideroblastic anemia. Blood 2019:133(1):59–69.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2952 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
MATURATION TIME - DAYS

45

3.5

Percent

Hematocrit

Marrow
normoblasts and
reticulocytes

Fig. 505.1 Ring sideroblast in myelodysplastic syndrome (refractory

anemia with ring sideroblasts)—iron stain. (From Ryan DH, Cohen HJ.
Bone marrow examination. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Shattil SJ, et al.,
eds. Hematology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone, 2005.)

delay, periodic fevers, and B-­cell immunodeficiency in addition to sideroblastic anemia.
Acquired sideroblastic anemias can be triggered by copper deficiency
or drugs and toxins that disturb mitochondrial iron metabolism,
including lead, chloramphenicol, penicillamine, ethanol, and isoniazid. The acquired neoplastic sideroblastic syndromes (myelodysplasias) seen in adults are very rare in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Blood
reticulocytes
1.0

35

3.0

25

2.5

15

1.5

1.5
2.0
2.5

Fig. 506.1 Number of days for maturation of reticulocytes to mature

erythrocytes in the marrow and blood. The duration of maturation as
blood reticulocytes is taken as μ, which is used in the correction equation in this chapter. (Modified from Hillman RS, Finch CA. Red cell manual. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1983.)
RED CELL DESTRUCTION
Red

Extravascular
(liver and spleen)

Intravascular

cell

Macrophage

Hb tetramer (n)
Globin

Hb

Amino
acid
pool

Globin
Fe

Heme

Methemoglobin

CO

Unconjugated (n)
bilirubin
Transferrin

Hb dimer

Hemopexin (p) Metheme
(p) Haptoglobin

Hepatocytes
Heme
Fe

Bilirubin

Methemalbumin (n)

Conjugation

Section 3

Hb-Haptoglobin
complex

Hemolytic Anemias

Fecal
urobilinogen (n)

Chapter 506

Urine
Urobilinogen (n)

Definitions and
Classification of
Hemolytic Anemias

Fig. 506.2 Red cell destruction and catabolism of hemoglobin (Hb) based
on the description by Hillman and Finch. Fe, Iron; CO, carbon monoxide.
(From Hillman RS, Finch CA. Red cell manual. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1983.)

Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
Hemolysis is defined as the premature destruction of red blood cells
(RBCs). Anemia results when the rate of destruction exceeds the
capacity of the marrow to produce additional RBCs. Normal RBC survival time is 110-­120 days (half-­life: 55-­60 days), and thus, approximately 0.85% of the most senescent RBCs are removed and replaced
each day. During hemolysis, RBC survival is shortened, the RBC count
falls, erythropoietin is increased, and marrow erythropoietic activity
is stimulated. This leads to compensatory erythroid hyperplasia with
increased RBC production, reflected by an increase in the reticulocyte
count. The marrow can increase its output twofold to threefold acutely,
with a maximum of sixfold to eightfold in chronic hemolysis. The
reticulocyte percentage can be corrected to measure the magnitude of
marrow production in response to hemolysis as follows:
Reticulocyte index = reticulocyte % ×

Observed hematocrit
Normal hematocrit

Urine hemosiderin
Urine Hb

×

1
μ

where μ is a maturation factor of 1-­3 related to the severity of the
anemia (Fig. 506.1). The normal reticulocyte index is 1.0; therefore the
index measures the fold increase in erythropoiesis (e.g., twofold, threefold). Because the reticulocyte index is essentially a measure of RBC
production per day, the maturation factor μ provides this correction
(see Fig. 506.1).
When hemolysis is chronic, compensatory erythroid hyperplasia may lead to significant expansion of the medullary spaces at the
expense of cortical bone. This is particularly prominent in children
with severe chronic hemolytic anemia such as thalassemia. These
changes may be evident on physical examination or on radiographs of
the skull and long bones. In severe cases, there is increased propensity
for long bone fracture. Hemolysis also leads to increased degradation
of hemoglobin. This process can result in indirect hyperbilirubinemia,
increased biliary excretion of heme pigment derivatives, and formation
of bilirubinate gallstones.
During hemolysis (Fig. 506.2), heme-­binding proteins in the plasma
are altered. Hemoglobin binds to haptoglobin and hemopexin, both of
which are cleared more rapidly as heme-­bound complexes. Oxidized
heme binds to albumin to form methemalbumin, which is increased
in the plasma during hemolysis. When the capacity of these heme-­
binding molecules is exceeded, free hemoglobin appears in the plasma.
Free hemoglobin in the plasma is considered prima facie evidence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2950 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
serum transferrin levels that are accompanied by the deposition of
non–transferrin-­bound iron in parenchymal tissues. Because hepcidin
production is induced by inflammatory stimuli, hepcidin elevation is
also a feature of the anemia of chronic disease (ACD). However, in
contrast to patients with IRIDA, in whom the hepcidin dysregulation
is congenital, patients with ACD generally retain normal to high iron
stores because of the acquired nature of their hepcidin elevation (see
Chapter 500.1). Rare medical causes that may mimic IRIDA include
vascular malformations of the GI tract, Castleman disease (where IL-­6
overproduction causes hepcidin elevation), autoimmune gastritis, and
pathogenic germline variants in KCNQ1 (which regulates gastric acid
secretion).

TREATMENT

Because of the underlying pathophysiology of IRIDA, parenteral iron
supplementation is required to correct the anemia. Although parenteral
iron therapy raises body iron stores, the hematologic response is usually
slow and not completely corrective. This likely results from insufficient
export of the processed iron from macrophages into the circulation,
an expected consequence of hepcidin elevation. Serum ferritin levels
increase with parenteral iron therapy in a dose-­dependent manner
and may raise concerns for iron overload, which would be expected to
exhibit a reticuloendothelial rather than a parenchymal pattern of iron
loading. Given the limited number of IRIDA cases reported to date, the
optimal formulation and dosing of parenteral iron have not yet been
established. Although oral iron supplementation does not appear to
have a significant role in treatment of IRIDA, the addition of ascorbic acid to a ferrous sulfate oral supplement has been associated with
hematologic responses in isolated cases. Treatment with recombinant
erythropoietin has not been found to produce significant clinical benefit in patients with IRIDA.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 505

Other Microcytic Anemias
Jennifer A. Rothman
A number of rare microcytic anemias need to be considered
when children with microcytic anemia fail to respond to oral iron
(Table 504.5). These anemias include thalassemia or thalassemia trait
(see ­Chapter 511), infantile poikilocytosis and hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (Chapter 508), and anemia of chronic disease (Chapter 500.1).
Additionally, rare nutritional disorders and disorders of iron metabolism can cause microcytosis.

INFANTILE POIKILOCYTOSIS AND HEREDITARY
PYROPOIKILOCYTOSIS

Infants with common hereditary elliptocytosis (see Chapter 508)
may initially present with hemolytic anemia characterized by marked
poikilocytosis with budding and fragmentation of the red blood cells
(RBCs). These small RBC fragments reduce the overall mean corpuscular volume (MCV), resulting in microcytosis. By 2 years of age, the
findings become typical of hereditary elliptocytosis. Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis is a much less common variant of hereditary elliptocytosis, in which the hemolytic anemia and RBC changes are more severe.

COPPER DEFICIENCY

Copper deficiency is a rare cause of microcytic anemia and neurologic dysfunction. Copper is absorbed in the stomach and proximal

duodenum. Deficiency is associated with malabsorption; severe malnutrition, often with feeding of milk alone; gastric surgery or feedings that bypass the stomach and duodenum; or parenteral nutrition
with inadvertent omission of supplemental copper. Zinc and copper
are competitively absorbed from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, so zinc
excess may inadvertently lead to copper deficiency. Diagnosis is made
by measuring a serum copper level, serum ceruloplasmin, and possibly
a zinc level. Treatment includes either oral or parenteral supplementation, depending on the underlying cause.

DEFECTS OF IRON METABOLISM

Rare microcytic anemias may be associated with defects in iron trafficking and regulation. Most are inherited and usually identified in
childhood, including defects of iron absorption, transport, utilization, and recycling. A defect of iron absorption is iron-­refractory iron-­
deficiency anemia (see Chapter 504.1). Defects of iron recycling include
aceruloplasminemia and atransferrinemia. Aceruloplasminemia is an
autosomal recessive disorder in the CP gene that encodes ceruloplasmin. Iron cannot be appropriately transported from macrophages to
plasma to be available for RBC production but accumulates instead in
the brain and visceral organs, which can lead to an adult-­onset neurodegenerative disorder. The diagnosis is made by a combination of
absence of serum ceruloplasmin, low serum copper and iron, elevated
ferritin, and increased liver iron concentration. Hypotransferrinemia
or atransferrinemia is also an autosomal recessive disorder caused by
pathogenic variants in the transferrin (TF) gene. Diagnosis is made by
low or absent serum transferrin and liver iron overload. Genetic testing
can confirm the diagnosis for both disorders. Treatment includes iron
chelation therapy, limiting iron supplementation and dietary iron, and
possibly fresh-­frozen plasma to replace ceruloplasmin and/or transferrin. Purified transferrin (apotransferrin) infusions are available.
Defects of mitochondrial iron utilization are a diverse group of
acquired and inherited defects known as sideroblastic anemias
(Table 505.1). Several genes associated with these disorders have been
described. Impaired heme synthesis leads to retention of iron within
the mitochondria of marrow RBCs. The perinuclear distribution of
mitochondria results in a pattern of iron staining surrounding the
nucleus. These are ringed sideroblasts (Fig. 505.1), which are distinct
from the more diffuse cytoplasmic distribution of iron in normal RBC
precursors. The anemia is characterized by hypochromic, microcytic
RBCs mixed with normal RBCs, so the complete blood count indicates a very high RBC distribution width. The serum iron concentration usually is elevated, and the transferrin saturation of iron is
increased.
Congenital sideroblastic anemia (CSA) can be syndromic or
nonsyndromic. The most common type of nonsyndromic CSA is an
X-­linked disorder and is most often a result of pathogenic variants
in ALAS2 that encodes erythrocytic isozyme 5-­aminolevulinic acid
synthetase, the rate-­limiting enzyme reaction in heme synthesis. An
important cofactor for 5-­ALA synthetase is pyridoxal phosphate, with
several pathogenic variants occurring near its binding site. Severe
anemia is recognized in infancy or early childhood, whereas milder
cases might not become apparent until early adulthood or later. Clinical findings include pallor, icterus, and moderate splenomegaly and/
or hepatomegaly. The severity of the anemia varies such that some
patients require no therapy and others need regular RBC transfusions.
A subset of patients with hereditary sideroblastic anemia manifest
a hematologic response to pyridoxine doses of 50-­200 mg/day. Iron
overload, as manifested by elevated serum ferritin, elevated serum
iron, and increased transferrin saturation, is a major complication of
this disorder. Clinical evidence of iron overload (e.g., diabetes mellitus,
liver dysfunction) may be found in some patients who have little or no
anemia, which may require iron chelation therapy. Stem cell transplantation has been used to treat affected children who are dependent on
RBC transfusions.
A unique variant of congenital sideroblastic anemia is Pearson syndrome (see Chapter 498), but the anemia is usually macrocytic and
not microcytic. Another rare variant of sideroblastic anemia is caused
by pathogenic variants in TRNT1 and manifests with developmental

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 505 u Other Microcytic Anemias

2951

Table 505.1  Clinical and Genetic Features of Congenital Sideroblastic Anemias
CATEGORY

DISORDER

INHERITANCE

SYNDROMIC

FREQUENCY

AGE AT
PRESENTATION

ANEMIA
SEVERITY

MCV

ASSOCIATED
ABNORMALITIES

Heme
synthesis
defects

XLSA

X-­linked

No

ALAS2

100s

Infancy to
adulthood

Mild to
severe

↓ males
N/↑
female

Iron overload in the
absence of
transfusions

SLC25A38
deficiency

AR

No

SLC25A38

40

Infancy

Severe

↓

Transfusional iron
overload

EPP

AR/PSD

No

FECH

100s

Childhood

Mild

↓

Acute
photosensitivity

AR

No

GLRX5

2

Adulthood

Mild to
severe

↓

Iron overload

HSPA9
deficiency

AR/PSD

No

HSPA9

12

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↓

Retinitis pigmentosa

HSCB
deficiency

AR

No

HSCB

1

Childhood

Moderate

N

None

XLSA/A

X-­linked

Yes

ABCB7

5

Childhood

Mild to
moderate

↓

Cerebellar ataxia
and hypoplasia,
delayed motor
development

SP/M

Yes

mtDNA

100s

Early childhood

Severe

↑

Lactic acidosis,
exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency, failure
to thrive, hepatic/
renal failure

MLASA1

AR

Yes

PUS1

10

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↑

Myopathy, lactic
acidosis, facial
dysmorphism

MLASA2

AR

Yes

YARS2

40

Childhood

Mild to
severe

N/↑

Myopathy, lactic
acidosis,
cardiomyopathy

LARS2
deficiency

AR

Yes

LARS2

1

Infancy

Severe

↑

Lactic acidosis,
cardiomyopathy,
hepatopathy,
seizures

SIFD

AR

Yes

TRNT1

30

Infancy

Severe

Yes

MT-­ATP6

4

Infancy to early
childhood

Moderate
to severe

N/↑

Lactic acidosis,
myopathy,
neurologic
abnormalities

Yes

NUDFB11

5

Early childhood

Moderate

N

Lactic acidosis,
myopathy

Yes

SLC19A2

50

Early childhood

Mild to
severe

↑

Sensorineural
deafness, non-­type
1 diabetes mellitus,
optic atrophy,
strokelike episodes

Fe-­S
GLRX5
biogenesis
deficiency
defects

Mitochondrial PMPS
protein
synthesis
defects

Mitochondrial MT-­ATP6-­SA SP/M
respiratory
protein
mutations
NDUFB11-­SA

X-­linked

Multifactorial AR
TRMA

GENE

Immunodeficiency
(B.T), aseptic
febrile episodes,
developmental
delay, seizures,
cardiomyopathy,
retinitis
pigmentosa, other

↑, increased; ↓, decreased; AR, autosomal recessive; EPP, erythropoietic protoporphyria; MCV, mean red blood cell volume; MLASA, mitochondrial myopathy lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anemia;. mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; N, normal; PMPS, Pearson marrow pancreas syndrome; PSD, Pseudodominant; SIFD, sideroblastic anemia, immunodeficiency (B cell),
periodic fevers, and developmental delay; SP/M, sporadic/mitochondrial; TRMA, thiamine responsive megaloblastic anemia; XLSA, X-­linked sideroblastic anemia.
Adapted from Ducamp S and Fleming D. The molecular genetics of sideroblastic anemia. Blood 2019:133(1):59–69.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2952 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
MATURATION TIME - DAYS

45

3.5

Percent

Hematocrit

Marrow
normoblasts and
reticulocytes

Fig. 505.1 Ring sideroblast in myelodysplastic syndrome (refractory

anemia with ring sideroblasts)—iron stain. (From Ryan DH, Cohen HJ.
Bone marrow examination. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Shattil SJ, et al.,
eds. Hematology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone, 2005.)

delay, periodic fevers, and B-­cell immunodeficiency in addition to sideroblastic anemia.
Acquired sideroblastic anemias can be triggered by copper deficiency
or drugs and toxins that disturb mitochondrial iron metabolism,
including lead, chloramphenicol, penicillamine, ethanol, and isoniazid. The acquired neoplastic sideroblastic syndromes (myelodysplasias) seen in adults are very rare in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Blood
reticulocytes
1.0

35

3.0

25

2.5

15

1.5

1.5
2.0
2.5

Fig. 506.1 Number of days for maturation of reticulocytes to mature

erythrocytes in the marrow and blood. The duration of maturation as
blood reticulocytes is taken as μ, which is used in the correction equation in this chapter. (Modified from Hillman RS, Finch CA. Red cell manual. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1983.)
RED CELL DESTRUCTION
Red

Extravascular
(liver and spleen)

Intravascular

cell

Macrophage

Hb tetramer (n)
Globin

Hb

Amino
acid
pool

Globin
Fe

Heme

Methemoglobin

CO

Unconjugated (n)
bilirubin
Transferrin

Hb dimer

Hemopexin (p) Metheme
(p) Haptoglobin

Hepatocytes
Heme
Fe

Bilirubin

Methemalbumin (n)

Conjugation

Section 3

Hb-Haptoglobin
complex

Hemolytic Anemias

Fecal
urobilinogen (n)

Chapter 506

Urine
Urobilinogen (n)

Definitions and
Classification of
Hemolytic Anemias

Fig. 506.2 Red cell destruction and catabolism of hemoglobin (Hb) based
on the description by Hillman and Finch. Fe, Iron; CO, carbon monoxide.
(From Hillman RS, Finch CA. Red cell manual. Philadelphia: FA Davis, 1983.)

Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
Hemolysis is defined as the premature destruction of red blood cells
(RBCs). Anemia results when the rate of destruction exceeds the
capacity of the marrow to produce additional RBCs. Normal RBC survival time is 110-­120 days (half-­life: 55-­60 days), and thus, approximately 0.85% of the most senescent RBCs are removed and replaced
each day. During hemolysis, RBC survival is shortened, the RBC count
falls, erythropoietin is increased, and marrow erythropoietic activity
is stimulated. This leads to compensatory erythroid hyperplasia with
increased RBC production, reflected by an increase in the reticulocyte
count. The marrow can increase its output twofold to threefold acutely,
with a maximum of sixfold to eightfold in chronic hemolysis. The
reticulocyte percentage can be corrected to measure the magnitude of
marrow production in response to hemolysis as follows:
Reticulocyte index = reticulocyte % ×

Observed hematocrit
Normal hematocrit

Urine hemosiderin
Urine Hb

×

1
μ

where μ is a maturation factor of 1-­3 related to the severity of the
anemia (Fig. 506.1). The normal reticulocyte index is 1.0; therefore the
index measures the fold increase in erythropoiesis (e.g., twofold, threefold). Because the reticulocyte index is essentially a measure of RBC
production per day, the maturation factor μ provides this correction
(see Fig. 506.1).
When hemolysis is chronic, compensatory erythroid hyperplasia may lead to significant expansion of the medullary spaces at the
expense of cortical bone. This is particularly prominent in children
with severe chronic hemolytic anemia such as thalassemia. These
changes may be evident on physical examination or on radiographs of
the skull and long bones. In severe cases, there is increased propensity
for long bone fracture. Hemolysis also leads to increased degradation
of hemoglobin. This process can result in indirect hyperbilirubinemia,
increased biliary excretion of heme pigment derivatives, and formation
of bilirubinate gallstones.
During hemolysis (Fig. 506.2), heme-­binding proteins in the plasma
are altered. Hemoglobin binds to haptoglobin and hemopexin, both of
which are cleared more rapidly as heme-­bound complexes. Oxidized
heme binds to albumin to form methemalbumin, which is increased
in the plasma during hemolysis. When the capacity of these heme-­
binding molecules is exceeded, free hemoglobin appears in the plasma.
Free hemoglobin in the plasma is considered prima facie evidence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 507 u Hereditary Spherocytosis

2955

Table 506.3  Clinical and Laboratory Features Suggestive of Hemolytic Anemia
Pallor
Icterus
Splenomegaly
Gallstones
History of neonatal icterus
Positive family history of anemia, splenectomy, cholecystectomy
↑ Reticulocyte count

↑ RDW (caused by ↑ reticulocyte count)
Abnormal RBC morphology
↑ Indirect bilirubin (normal direct bilirubin)
↓ Serum haptoglobin level
↑ Urinary urobilinogen level
Hemoglobinuria (+ dipstick test result for blood; no RBCs in urine)
↑ LDH level

LDH, Lactate dehydrogenase; RBC, red blood cell; RDW, red cell distribution width.
From Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2018: 674; Table 37.12.

Table 506.4  Hemolytic Anemias: Diagnostic Clues Based
on Red Blood Cell Shape
Sickle cells: sickle cell disease
Target cells: hemoglobinopathies (HbC, HbS, thalassemia), liver
disease
Schistocytes/burr cells/helmet cells/RBC fragments: microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia (DIC, HUS, TTP)
Spherocytes: hereditary spherocytosis, autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Cigar-­shaped cells: hereditary elliptocytosis
“Bite” cells: G6PD deficiency
Poikilocytosis, microcytosis, fragmented erythrocytes, elliptocytes:
hereditary pyropoikilocytosis
DIC, Disseminated intravascular coagulation; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; HbC, hemoglobin C; HbS, sickle hemoglobin; HUS, hemolytic-­uremic
syndrome; RBC, red blood cell; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura.
From Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2018: 674; Table 37.13.

Chapter 507

Hereditary Spherocytosis
Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
Hereditary spherocytosis (HS) is a common cause of inherited
hemolytic anemia, with a prevalence of approximately 1 in 2,000-­
5,000 persons. Described in patients of all ethnic groups, it is the
most common inherited abnormality of the erythrocyte associated
with inherited hemolytic anemia in persons of Northern European
origin. HS is marked by wide variability in the associated clinical,
laboratory, and genetic manifestations. Symptomatology ranges
from asymptomatic patients with well-­
compensated anemia to
severely affected patients with hemolytic anemia requiring regular
blood transfusions.

ETIOLOGY

The pathophysiology underlying HS is twofold: an intrinsic defect
of the erythrocyte membrane and an intact spleen that selectively
retains, damages, and removes abnormal HS erythrocytes. Qualitative or quantitative defects of key membrane proteins lead to
a multistep process of accelerated HS erythrocyte destruction.

Abnormalities of ankyrin or spectrin are the most common molecular defects (Table 507.1). Defects in these membrane proteins
result in uncoupling of the “vertical” interactions of the lipid bilayer
with the underlying membrane skeleton with subsequent release of
membrane microvesicles. The loss of membrane surface area without a proportional loss of cell volume causes decreased erythrocyte
deformability. This impairs cell passage from the splenic cords to
the splenic sinuses, leading to the trapping and premature destruction of HS erythrocytes by the spleen (Figs. 507.1 and 507.2).
Splenectomy markedly improves erythrocyte life span and may be
indicated in some patients with HS.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Hereditary spherocytosis is usually transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. However, as many as 25% of patients have no previous family history, representing either recessive inheritance or de novo gene
variants.
In the neonatal period, HS is a significant cause of hemolysis and
can manifest as anemia and/or hyperbilirubinemia severe enough
to require phototherapy, transfusion, or exchange transfusions.
Hemolysis may be more prominent in the newborn because hemoglobin F binds 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate poorly, and the increased
level of free 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate destabilizes interactions among
spectrin, actin, and protein 4.1 in the red blood cell (RBC) membrane (see Fig. 507.1). The need for transfusions in infancy is not
indicative of more severe disease later in life because infants are
typically slow to mount an adequate reticulocyte response for the
first few months after birth.
Disease severity varies and can be used to clinically classify HS
(Table 507.2). Mild cases (20–30% of all HS) are asymptomatic into
adulthood and have well-­compensated mild anemia where reticulocyte
production and erythrocyte destruction are essentially balanced. Cases
of moderate or “typical” HS (60–70%) have partially compensated
hemolytic anemia with reticulocytosis, frequently with symptoms of
fatigue, pallor, and intermittent jaundice. Splenomegaly is common
after infancy, and it is present in almost all HS patients by young adulthood. Severe cases of HS (3–5%) have life-­threatening anemia and are
transfusion dependent.
Bilirubin gallstone formation is a function of age; they can form as
early as 4-­5 years of age and are present in most adult HS patients.
HS patients are susceptible to aplastic crises primarily as a result
of parvovirus B19 infection, hypoplastic crises associated with other
infections, and megaloblastic crises due to folate deficiency (Fig. 507.3).
During these crises, high RBC turnover in the setting of erythroid marrow failure can result in profound anemia (hematocrit <10%), high-­
output heart failure, cardiovascular collapse, and death. Leukocyte and
platelet counts may also fall.
Rare complications associated with HS include splenic sequestration crisis, gout, cardiomyopathy, priapism, leg ulcers, and
neurologic or muscular abnormalities, including spinocerebellar
degeneration.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2956 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 507.1  	 Common Gene Pathogenic Variants in Hereditary Spherocytosis
COMMON PATHOGENIC VARIANTS

PROTEIN

GENE

Ankyrin-­1

ANK1

Frameshift
Nonsense
Splicing
Missense
Insertion/deletion
Promoter region

PREVALENCE
50–67%
5–10% in Japan

INHERITANCE
Mostly dominant,
rare recessive

Mild to moderate

DISEASE SEVERITY

Band 3

AE1 (SLC4A1)

Missense
Nonsense

15–20%

Dominant

Mild to moderate

β-­Spectrin

SPTB

Nonsense
Missense
Insertion/deletion

15–20%

Dominant

Mild to moderate

α-­Spectrin

SPTA1

Splicing
Nonsense
Missense

<5%

Recessive

Severe

Protein 4.2

EPB42

Missense
Nonsense
Splicing
Deletion

<5%
45–50% in Japan

Recessive

Mild to moderate

Modified from Bolton-­Maggs PHB, Langer JC, Iolascon A, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of hereditary spherocytosis–2011 update. Br J Haematol. 2011;156:37–
49.

Glycophorin A

Glycophorin B

Glycophorin A

Band 3
Band 3

Band 3

Glycophorin C/D

Band 3

Rh RhAG LW

p55

CD47

Fig. 507.1 A simplified cross-­section

of the red blood cell (erythrocyte)
membrane. The lipid bilayer forms
the equator of the cross-­section with
its polar heads (small circles) turned
outward. 4.1R, protein; 4.2, protein
4.2; LW, Landsteiner-­Wiener glycoprotein; Rh, Rhesus polypeptide; RhAG,
Rh-­associated glycoprotein. (From
Perrotta S, Gallagher PG, Mohandas
N. Hereditary spherocytosis. Lancet
2008;372:1411–1426.)

DIAGNOSIS

Ankyrin-1

Dematin

4.2

4.1R
Actin
 spectrin

Typically, there is evidence of hemolytic anemia with reticulocytosis and indirect hyperbilirubinemia. The mean corpuscular volume
(MCV) of HS erythrocytes is low normal or even slightly decreased
and the mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) is
usually increased (>35 g/dL). An MCHC > 35.4 g/dL combined
with an RBC distribution width (RDW) <14% has been suggested
as a screening test for HS. Erythroid cells on peripheral blood
smear vary in size and include spherocytes and polychromatophilic

Adducin
4.1R

 spectrin

Tropomyosin
Tropomodulin

reticulocytes. Spherocytes are smaller in diameter, hyperchromic
due to elevated hemoglobin concentration from cellular dehydration, and lacking in central pallor (Fig. 507.4). Numbers of spherocytes are variable, with increased numbers likely reflecting the
severity of disease. Other markers of hemolysis include decreased
haptoglobin and elevated lactic dehydrogenase.
The diagnosis of HS can be established from a positive family
history and the presence of typical clinical and laboratory features
of the disease: splenomegaly, spherocytes on the blood smear,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 507 u Hereditary Spherocytosis

Spectrin, ankyrin, or
protein 4.2 deficiency

Low pH
High macrophage
contact

Release of microvesicles

Erythrostasis

Reduced
surface-to-volume ratio

2957

Reduced cellular Splenic
trapping
deformability

Low glucose
concentration
High oxidants
concentration

Hemolysis

Splenic
conditioning

Further loss
of membrane

Release of microvesicles

Fig. 507.2 Pathophysiologic effects

of hereditary spherocytosis. (From
Perrotta S, Gallagher PG, Mohandas
N. Hereditary spherocytosis. Lancet
2008;372:1411–1426.)

Lipid bilayer
Spectrin
Ankyrin
Band 3

reticulocytosis, and an elevated MCHC. If these are present, no
additional testing is necessary to confirm the diagnosis clinically.
If the diagnosis is less certain, additional testing can be performed.
Binding of fluorescently labeled eosin-­
5-­
maleimide (EMA) to
band 3 and other membrane proteins is decreased in HS erythrocytes. This flow cytometry–based screening test is easy to perform
and has good diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. In the classic
incubated osmotic fragility test, HS erythrocytes are incubated in
progressive dilutions of sodium chloride causing the cells to swell
and lyse, with spherocytes lysing at a lower dilution due to their
lower surface area to volume ratio. This test detects the presence
of spherocytes in the blood, but it is not specific to HS and may be
abnormal in other anemias with prominent spherocytosis. Osmotic
fragility testing has poor sensitivity and may miss cases of mild HS
where the numbers of spherocytes are few. Other assays such as the
cryohemolysis test, the acidified glycerol lysis test, and the osmotic
gradient ektacytometry have been used for diagnosis of HS, but they
are not available in many laboratories. Genetic diagnosis is widely
available on a commercial basis. The precise role of molecular
testing in HS diagnosis and management is evolving. Some experts
suggest molecular testing before splenectomy to verify the diagnosis of HS.
Diagnosis in the neonatal period requires a high index of suspicion as the disease presents differently than in older children,
particularly in de novo and recessively inherited cases where family history is not available for guidance. Jaundice is frequently
observed, and kernicterus can occur. Hemolytic anemia may be
severe enough to require blood transfusion. In fact, HS is the leading cause of Coombs-­negative hemolytic anemia, requiring transfusion in the first months of life. Splenomegaly is uncommon in
neonates.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Tail of osmotic
fragility curve

Band-3 deficiency

The differential diagnosis for spherocytosis on peripheral blood
smear includes isoimmune and autoimmune hemolysis. Isoimmune
hemolytic disease of the newborn, particularly when there is a
result of ABO incompatibility, closely mimics the appearance of HS.
The detection of antibody on an infant's RBCs using a direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test should establish the diagnosis of immune
hemolysis. Autoimmune hemolytic anemias also are characterized
by spherocytosis, but there will typically be evidence of previously

normal values for hemoglobin, hematocrit, and reticulocyte count.
Rare causes of spherocytosis include thermal injury, hemolytic
transfusion reaction, clostridial sepsis, severe hypophosphatemia,
Wilson disease, and snake, bee, or wasp envenomation, which all
may manifest as transient spherocytic hemolytic anemia.

TREATMENT
General Supportive Care

Infants born to a parent with known HS should be monitored carefully because hyperbilirubinemia may peak several days after birth.
Parents should be advised of the risk of neonatal anemia and jaundice and the potential need for transfusion, phototherapy, and/or
exchange transfusion to treat anemia or hyperbilirubinemia. A subset of infants will be transfusion-­dependent until development of
adequate erythropoiesis to compensate for the ongoing hemolysis,
usually between 6-­12 months of age. Transfusion dependence after
this time is rare and is most likely due to recessive HS.
Once the baseline level of disease severity is reached, an annual
visit to the hematologist usually is sufficient follow-­up. Growth
should be monitored, and exercise tolerance and spleen size documented. Vaccinations should be up to date. Screening for gallbladder disease should begin at ∼4 years of age, repeated every 3-­5
years, or as indicated clinically. Documentation of parvovirus B19
susceptibility or immunity should be obtained in newly diagnosed
patients. Similarly, HIV and hepatitis serology should be documented in patients who have received transfusions. Folic acid supplementation is recommended in cases of moderate and severe HS
due to the demands of brisk erythropoiesis. Parents should receive
anticipatory guidance regarding the risk of aplastic crisis secondary
to parvovirus infection and hypoplastic crises with other infections.
Parents and patients should be informed of an increased risk for
gallstone development.

Guidelines for Splenectomy

Because spherocytes are destroyed almost exclusively in the spleen,
splenectomy is curative in most patients because hemolysis, anemia,
hyperbilirubinemia, and the incidence of gallstones are significantly
lessened, if not completely eradicated, after splenectomy. Thus splenectomy became routine in the care of HS patients. However, splenectomy is associated with short-­term risks, related to the operative
procedure itself, and long-­term risks, particularly increased lifelong

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2958 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 507.2  	 Clinical and Laboratory Classification of Hereditary Spherocytosis

NORMAL

MILD
SPHEROCYTOSIS

MODERATE
SPHEROCYTOSIS

MODERATELY
SEVERE
SPHEROCYTOSIS

Inheritance

—

Autosomal dominant

Autosomal dominant,
de novo variant

Autosomal dominant,
de novo variant

Autosomal recessive

Proportion of hereditary spherocytosis
cases

—

~20–30%

~60–70%

~10%

<5%

Hemoglobin (Hb, g/
dL)†

11.5-­16‡

10.5-­15

8-­12

6-­8

<6

Reticulocytes (%)†

0.5-­1.5

1.5-­6

≥6

≥10

≥10

Bilirubin (mg/dL)†,||

0-­1

0.5-­2

≥2

≥2

≥3

Peripheral smear*

Normal

Mild spherocytosis

Spherocytosis

Spherocytosis

Spherocytosis ±
poikilocytosis

Osmotic fragility
(fresh)

Normal

Normal or slightly
increased

Increased

Increased

Greatly increased

Osmotic fragility
(incubated)

Normal

Usually increased

Increased

Increased

Greatly increased

MCHC (g/dL)§

32-­36

34-­37

34-­38

35-­39

RDW (%)§

11-­14

12-­19

16-­23

20-­30

Hb/MCHC*

0.38-­0.41

0.35-­0.40

0.29-­0.33

0.18-­0.28

Hb/RDW§

0.95-­1.05

0.7-­1.0

0.48-­0.74

0.16-­0.35

Serum transferrin
receptor (nmol/L)§

18-­25

30-­65

80-­125

100-­150

Erythropoietin (mlU/
mL)§

7-­16

9-­30

25-­90

30-­300

Membrane protein
patterns (SDS-­
PAGE)¶

—

“Normal”#
Slight ↓ spectrin
Slight ↓ spectrin and
ankyrin
Slight ↓ band 3 and
4.2
Absent protein 4.2
and ↓ CD47

↓ Spectrin
↓ Spectrin and ankyrin
↓ Band 3 and protein
4.2
Absent protein 4.2
and ↓ CD47

↓ Spectrin
↓ Spectrin and ankyrin
↓ Band 3 and protein
4.2

↓↓ Spectrin
↓↓ Spectrin and
ankyrin
↓↓ Band 3 and protein
4.2**

Transfusions

—

No

Sometimes required
in infancy or with
aplastic crisis

Occasionally with
crises

Regular*

Splenectomy

—

Rarely, partial splenectomy††

Sometimes; consider
partial splenectomy

Usually (6-­9 yr)

Yes (>3 yr)

SEVERE
SPHEROCYTOSIS*

*Patients with severe disease are transfusion dependent by definition. Values are in untransfused patients or at nadir before transfusion.
†Data modified from Eber SW, Armbrust R, Schröter W. Variable clinical severity of hereditary spherocytosis: relation to erythrocytic spectrin concentration, osmotic fragility and
autohemolysis. J Pediatr. 1990;177:409–416.
‡Varies with age.
§Ranges shown encompass the majority of individuals in each category. From Rocha S, Costa E, Rocha-­Pereira P, et al. Complementary markers for the clinical severity classification of
hereditary spherocytosis in unsplenectomized patients. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2011;46:166–170.
||Multiply by 17.1 to convert to μmol/L.
¶Indicates common patterns observed on SDS gels. Decreased spectrin alone is seen in α-­spectrin or β-­spectrin defects. Decreased spectrin and ankyrin arc observed with ankyrin
defects. Decreased band 3 and protein 4.2 occur with band 3 defects. Absent protein 4.2 and decreased CD47 occur with protein 4.2 defects.
#Patients with mild spherocytosis who appear normal probably have small deficits (10–15%) that cannot be distinguished from normal findings on SDS gels.
**Rare patients with severe spherocytosis who are homozygous or compound heterozygous for band 3 defects.
††Consider in adolescents and adults who require a cholecystectomy or have disfiguring chronic jaundice.
CD, cluster of differentiation; MCHC, Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; RDW, red cell distribution width (measure of variation in shape); SDS-­PAGE, sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; ↓, decreased.
From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015:518; Table 16.3.

risk for sepsis, often caused by encapsulated bacteria. This risk is
not eliminated but reduced with the requisite preoperative and
postoperative vaccination against pneumococcus, meningococcus,
and Haemophilus influenzae type b. In addition, there are increasing

concerns regarding the emergence of penicillin-­resistant pneumococci, as well as increased risk for cardiovascular diseases including
thrombosis, pulmonary hypertension, and atherosclerosis, which
have tempered the practice of routine splenectomy in HS.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2959

Hemoglobin

Reticulocytes

WBC  103

Platelets  103

Chapter 507 u Hereditary Spherocytosis

30
10
Hemoglobin
400 20

A

B

C

D

E

F

20
Platelets
5

200 10 10

Retics
WBC

0 0

0 0
0

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

Days After Onset of Crisis

induced aplastic crisis. Progression of the
Fig. 507.3 Parvovirus-­

changes in blood count is shown for a patient with hereditary spherocytosis and infection with parvovirus. Note that the fall in baseline reticulocytosis is associated with a rapid fall in hemoglobin. White blood cells
(WBC) and platelets are also affected; Retics, reticulocytes. (Adapted
from Nathan DG, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Hematology of
Infancy and Childhood, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003.)

When considering splenectomy, the patient and the parents,
together with their healthcare providers, should review and consider
the risks and benefits. Individual-­specific factors may confer additional
risk after a splenectomy; time and distance from medical care in case
of febrile illness and residence in or travel to areas where parasitic diseases such as malaria or babesiosis occur should be considered.
Most experts recommend splenectomy for patients with severe HS
and believe it should be strongly considered for patients with moderate HS and frequent hypoplastic or aplastic crises, poor growth, or
cardiomegaly. It is generally not recommended for patients with mild
HS. When splenectomy is indicated, it should be performed after the
age of 6 years, if possible, to avoid the heightened risk of postsplenectomy sepsis in younger children. The laparoscopic approach has less
surgical morbidity and has become the technique of choice. Partial or
subtotal splenectomy (removal of 85–95% of spleen volume) has been
shown to decrease the hemolytic rate while preserving some splenic
phagocytic function, although the decrease in hemolysis is less than
that achievable with total splenectomy. Partial splenectomy is most
attractive in children with severe HS requiring frequent transfusion
early in childhood.
In children undergoing splenectomy, a concomitant cholecystectomy should be performed if there are gallstones. It is controversial
whether to perform a concomitant splenectomy in less-­severely ill
patients who are undergoing cholecystectomy for gallstone disease. Postsplenectomy thrombocytosis is commonly observed but
requires no treatment and usually resolves spontaneously. The

Fig. 507.4 Morphology of abnormal red cells. A, Hereditary spherocytosis. B, Hereditary elliptocytosis. C, Hereditary pyropoikilocytosis.
D, Hereditary stomatocytosis. E, Acanthocytosis. F, Fragmentation hemolysis.

patient should remain current on their vaccinations, as should
household and frequent contacts. Prophylactic antibiotics are
typically prescribed at least until the patient is 5 years of age or at
least 2 years postsplenectomy. Folate supplementation should be
continued if the hemoglobin level and reticulocyte count do not
normalize.
Splenectomy failure may occur in cases of accessory spleen, accidental autotransplantation of splenic tissue into peritoneum at time of
surgery, inaccurate diagnosis, or another co-­inherited hemolytic anemia. Clues include return of hemolysis and disappearance of Howell-­
Jolly bodies on peripheral blood smear. The diagnosis can be made by
radionucleotide studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2960 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 508

Hereditary Elliptocytosis,
Hereditary
Pyropoikilocytosis, and
Related Disorders
Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
Hereditary elliptocytosis (HE), hereditary pyropoikilocytosis (HPP),
and related disorders are characterized by the finding of elliptocytes on
peripheral blood smear (Table 508.1). Whereas hereditary spherocytosis is thought of as a disorder of the vertical interactions coupling the

erythrocyte membrane skeleton to the lipid bilayer, the HE syndromes
interfere with the horizontal interactions that link spectrin molecules
to each other and to membrane skeleton junctional complexes (see
Chapter 507, Fig. 507.1), leaving the cell vulnerable to shear stress.
HE is the prototypical member of the group, in which abnormal
shear stress over time results in elliptical deformation of the cell. It is
much more common than hereditary spherocytosis, but it is much less
likely to cause significant clinical symptomatology. The severity of HE
varies markedly, with most patients experiencing little or no symptomatology beyond the finding of elliptocytes on peripheral blood smear.
About 10% of patients have hemolytic HE with ongoing hemolysis
and anemia. HE is often worse during infancy, with hemolytic anemia
and hyperbilirubinemia that evolves to a well-­compensated state with
anemia that is absent, sporadic, or chronic. Hereditary elliptocytosis
occurs worldwide and in all ethnic groups, but it is more common in
patients with ancestry linked to areas of endemic malaria.
HPP is a subtype of HE characterized by severe hemolytic anemia
with findings on peripheral blood smear reminiscent of a thermal burn
(pyro, fire). HE and HPP are seen co-­segregating in the same families
because they involve overlapping pathogenic variants in spectrin. HPP
occurs predominantly in patients of African descent.

Table 508.1  Clinical Subtypes of Hereditary Elliptocytosis and Related Disorders
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
TYPICAL HETEROZYGOUS HE
Asymptomatic
Dominant inheritance: one parent with HE
No splenomegaly
Variants:
Some neonates have moderately severe hemolytic anemia and
HPP-­like smear; converts to typical HE by “1 yr.”
Some patients with typical HE have mild to moderate chronic
hemolysis and some poikilocytosis, caused by co-­inheritance of
the low-­expression variant α-­spectrinLELY , coexistence of chronic
disease producing splenomegaly, or unknown factors.
HOMOZYGOUS HE OR HPP
Moderate to severe hemolytic anemia
Splenomegaly
Intermittent jaundice
Aplastic crises
Recessive inheritance: typically one parent with HE and one
with α-­spectrin mutation, or both parents with HE
Good improvement after splenectomy

LABORATORY MANIFESTATION
Blood smear: elliptocytes, rod forms, few or no poikilocytes
No anemia, little or no hemolysis (reticulocytes, 1–3%)
Normal osmotic fragility
Usually a defect in α-­spectrin or β-­spectrin leading to decreased
spectrin self-­association, or a defect in protein 4.1 leading to partial
deficiency or dysfunction

Blood smear: bizarre poikilocytes, fragments, ± spherocytes, ± elliptocytes
Reticulocytosis
Decreased MCV because of red cell fragmentation
Increased osmotic fragility, positive EMA test
α-­Spectrin defects:
Decreased red cell and spectrin heat stability
Marked defect in spectrin self-­association
In the more severe variants, partial spectrin deficiency (indicated by
more spherocytes on the blood smear)

SPHEROCYTIC HE
Mild to moderate hemolytic anemia
Splenomegaly
Intermittent jaundice
Aplastic crises
Dominant inheritance pattern
Excellent response to splenectomy

SOUTHEAST ASIAN OVALOCYTOSIS
Anemia and jaundice in neonatal period; then asymptomatic
Dominant inheritance
Lowland Aboriginal tribes, especially in Melanesia, Malaysia, and the
Philippines
Very rigid red cells that resist invasion by malarial parasites in vitro and
protect against cerebral malaria in vivo

Blood smear: rounded elliptocytes, ± spherocytes; may see variable
morphology within a kindred
Reticulocytosis
Increased osmotic fragility
Variable molecular defects:
C-­terminal truncation of β-­spectrin
Protein 4.2 deficiency (some patients); variable morphology: spherocytes, ovalocytes, stomatocytes, or spiculated cells, sometimes
resembling spherocytic HE
Glycophorin C deficiency (rare)
Blood smear: rounded elliptocytes, some with a transverse bar that
divides the central clear space (theta cells)
No hemolysis or anemia after neonatal period
Normal osmotic fragility, positive EMA test
Mutant band 3 that lacks anion exchange function and tends to aggregate, leading to a rigid membrane

EMA, Eosin-­5′-­maleimide; HE, hereditary elliptocytosis; HPP, hereditary pyropoikilocytosis; MCV, mean cell volume.
Adapted from Wilensky ID, Narla M, Lux SF. Disorders of the red cell membrane. In: Handin RI, Lux SF, Stossel TP, eds. Blood: Principles and Practice of Hematology. Philadelphia:
Lippincott, 2003.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 509 u Hereditary Stomatocytosis Syndromes
Southeast Asian ovalocytosis (SAO) is a disorder characterized by
the presence of ovalocytes (less elongated and plumper than elliptocytes), some with one or two transverse ridges on peripheral smear.
SAO is found in individuals from New Guinea, Malaysia, Indonesia,
and the Philippines. Unlike HE and HPP, SAO is due to a variant in a
transmembrane protein, band 3, affecting vertical skeletal interactions
and leading to increased red cell rigidity. These changes may lead to
protection from malaria, particularly cerebral malaria.

ETIOLOGY

Various molecular defects have been described in HE. HE is inherited
as an autosomal dominant disorder with occasional de novo cases.
Most commonly, there are missense pathogenic variants of α-­ or β-­
spectrin that interfere with the formation of spectrin heterodimers
into tetramers, the primary structural unit of the membrane skeleton
(see Fig. 507.1). Erythrocytes carrying many of these spectrin pathogenic variants are resistant to malaria in vitro, hypothesized to explain
the increased prevalence of HE in malaria-­endemic areas. Less commonly, elliptocytosis results from pathogenic variants in protein 4.1 or
glycophorin C, proteins of the junctional complex that link spectrin
tetramers to the actin cytoskeleton. These defects in horizontal membrane skeleton protein interactions leave the cell susceptible to shearing forces, leading to the characteristic elliptical deformation of the cell
and potentially membrane fragmentation.
In HPP, two abnormal spectrin alleles are inherited. Frequently, an HPP
patient inherits an abnormal spectrin allele carrying a self-­association
site missense variant from one parent, who has mild or asymptomatic
HE, and a production-­defective allele that leads to quantitative deficiency
of spectrin from the other parent, who is otherwise clinically well.
SAO is an autosomal dominant disorder associated with an in-­
frame, nine amino acid deletion in band 3.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most HE patients do not have clinically significant hemolysis (see Fig.
507.4B). HE may be an incidental finding on a blood film examination for an unrelated indication. The diagnosis of HE is established by
the findings on the peripheral blood smear, the autosomal dominant
inheritance pattern, and the absence of other causes of elliptocytosis.
The differential diagnosis for other causes of elliptocytosis includes
deficiencies of iron, folic acid, and vitamin B12, thalassemia, myelodysplastic syndromes, and pyruvate kinase deficiency.
Interestingly, elliptocytes are not always present on the peripheral blood smear in the first few months of life. Even in hemolytic
HE, which may lead to neonatal jaundice and anemia, the peripheral
blood smear typically shows bizarre poikilocytes and pyknocytes with
rare to no elliptocytes. Hemolysis and anemia are aggravated in the
newborn period because of the increased presence of hemoglobin F,
which binds poorly to 2,3-­
diphosphoglycerate. The increased free
2,3-­diphosphoglycerate tends to destabilize the spectrin–actin–protein
4.1 complex, leading to membrane instability (see Fig. 507.1). The usual
features of a chronic hemolytic process due to hemolytic HE manifest as
anemia, jaundice, and splenomegaly. Cholelithiasis may occur in later
childhood and aplastic crises have been reported. HPP is characterized
by extreme microcytosis (mean corpuscular volume [MCV], 50-­65 fL/
cell), extraordinary variation in cell size and shape, and microspherocytosis with occasional elliptocytosis (see Fig. 507.4C). Hemolysis is
chronic and significant.
SAO is associated with neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, but it is associated with little to no hemolysis later in life.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Examination of the peripheral blood smear is essential to establish the
diagnosis of HE (see Fig. 507.4B). HE elliptocytes are normochromic
and normocytic with varying degrees of elongation. Because some HE
patients may present with relatively low numbers of elliptocytes, there
is no cutoff percentage that is useful diagnostically. In hemolytic HE,
other abnormal RBC shapes may be present, depending on the severity of hemolysis, including spherocytes, pyknocytes, and other poikilocytes. In HPP, microspherocytes, red cell fragments, and occasional

2961

elliptocytes are seen. SAO is suggested when ovalocytes, which in contrast to elliptocytes are less elongated, are observed.
Reticulocyte levels and other markers of hemolysis, such as total
bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, and haptoglobin, are helpful in establishing the severity of hemolysis, if present. In hemolytic HE and HPP,
additional testing may include the eosin-­5-­maleimide (EMA) binding
test, which detects binding to band 3 by flow cytometry, or incubated
osmotic fragility testing. In cases of chronic hemolysis, splenomegaly
and cholelithiasis can be assessed with abdominal ultrasound.

TREATMENT

If the presentation is that of typical HE (i.e., an isolated peripheral blood
smear abnormality without clinically evident hemolysis), no treatment
is necessary. For chronic HE and HPP, red blood cell transfusions are
occasionally required. Splenectomy decreases the hemolysis and should
be considered using criteria similar to that of hereditary spherocytosis.
If hemolysis continues after splenectomy, patients should receive folic
acid to prevent secondary folic acid deficiency. SAO does not require
treatment beyond the newborn period.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 509

Hereditary Stomatocytosis
Syndromes
Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
The hereditary stomatocytosis syndromes are a group of heterogeneous, dominantly inherited disorders in which alterations in red cell
cation permeability lead to alterations in intracellular water content
(Table 509.1). A net increase in sodium and potassium ions allows
water to enter the erythrocyte, creating stomatocytes or hydrocytes,
whereas a net loss of sodium and potassium ions leads to water loss,
creating dehydrated red cells, or xerocytes (Fig. 509.1).

HEREDITARY XEROCYTOSIS
Pathophysiology

Hereditary xerocytosis, the most common type of the hereditary
stomatocytosis syndromes, is a dominant disorder of erythrocyte
dehydration. The underlying defect is most commonly a missense
variant in PIEZO1, a mechanosensory transduction protein, associated with delayed channel inactivation. In a few patients, pathogenic
variants in the Gardos channel, important in erythrocyte dehydration in sickle cell disease, have been observed. Typically, there is
a net loss of intracellular potassium that is not accompanied by a
compensatory increase in sodium. Subsequently, the gradual loss
of intracellular water leads to erythrocyte dehydration. Hereditary
xerocytosis may be associated with a syndrome of hydrops fetalis
with perinatal anemia and ascites. These findings are transient and
remain unexplained.

Clinical Features

Affected patients exhibit a mild compensated macrocytic hemolytic
anemia with variable degrees of splenomegaly and intermittent jaundice. The mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) and
mean cell volume (MCV) are elevated, and erythrocyte osmotic fragility is decreased, as are potassium concentration and total monovalent
cation content. There are small numbers of stomatocytes, target cells,
and contracted red blood cells (RBCs) with hemoglobin puddled to
the side on peripheral blood smear. Treatment is supportive, similar

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 509 u Hereditary Stomatocytosis Syndromes
Southeast Asian ovalocytosis (SAO) is a disorder characterized by
the presence of ovalocytes (less elongated and plumper than elliptocytes), some with one or two transverse ridges on peripheral smear.
SAO is found in individuals from New Guinea, Malaysia, Indonesia,
and the Philippines. Unlike HE and HPP, SAO is due to a variant in a
transmembrane protein, band 3, affecting vertical skeletal interactions
and leading to increased red cell rigidity. These changes may lead to
protection from malaria, particularly cerebral malaria.

ETIOLOGY

Various molecular defects have been described in HE. HE is inherited
as an autosomal dominant disorder with occasional de novo cases.
Most commonly, there are missense pathogenic variants of α-­ or β-­
spectrin that interfere with the formation of spectrin heterodimers
into tetramers, the primary structural unit of the membrane skeleton
(see Fig. 507.1). Erythrocytes carrying many of these spectrin pathogenic variants are resistant to malaria in vitro, hypothesized to explain
the increased prevalence of HE in malaria-­endemic areas. Less commonly, elliptocytosis results from pathogenic variants in protein 4.1 or
glycophorin C, proteins of the junctional complex that link spectrin
tetramers to the actin cytoskeleton. These defects in horizontal membrane skeleton protein interactions leave the cell susceptible to shearing forces, leading to the characteristic elliptical deformation of the cell
and potentially membrane fragmentation.
In HPP, two abnormal spectrin alleles are inherited. Frequently, an HPP
patient inherits an abnormal spectrin allele carrying a self-­association
site missense variant from one parent, who has mild or asymptomatic
HE, and a production-­defective allele that leads to quantitative deficiency
of spectrin from the other parent, who is otherwise clinically well.
SAO is an autosomal dominant disorder associated with an in-­
frame, nine amino acid deletion in band 3.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Most HE patients do not have clinically significant hemolysis (see Fig.
507.4B). HE may be an incidental finding on a blood film examination for an unrelated indication. The diagnosis of HE is established by
the findings on the peripheral blood smear, the autosomal dominant
inheritance pattern, and the absence of other causes of elliptocytosis.
The differential diagnosis for other causes of elliptocytosis includes
deficiencies of iron, folic acid, and vitamin B12, thalassemia, myelodysplastic syndromes, and pyruvate kinase deficiency.
Interestingly, elliptocytes are not always present on the peripheral blood smear in the first few months of life. Even in hemolytic
HE, which may lead to neonatal jaundice and anemia, the peripheral
blood smear typically shows bizarre poikilocytes and pyknocytes with
rare to no elliptocytes. Hemolysis and anemia are aggravated in the
newborn period because of the increased presence of hemoglobin F,
which binds poorly to 2,3-­
diphosphoglycerate. The increased free
2,3-­diphosphoglycerate tends to destabilize the spectrin–actin–protein
4.1 complex, leading to membrane instability (see Fig. 507.1). The usual
features of a chronic hemolytic process due to hemolytic HE manifest as
anemia, jaundice, and splenomegaly. Cholelithiasis may occur in later
childhood and aplastic crises have been reported. HPP is characterized
by extreme microcytosis (mean corpuscular volume [MCV], 50-­65 fL/
cell), extraordinary variation in cell size and shape, and microspherocytosis with occasional elliptocytosis (see Fig. 507.4C). Hemolysis is
chronic and significant.
SAO is associated with neonatal hyperbilirubinemia, but it is associated with little to no hemolysis later in life.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Examination of the peripheral blood smear is essential to establish the
diagnosis of HE (see Fig. 507.4B). HE elliptocytes are normochromic
and normocytic with varying degrees of elongation. Because some HE
patients may present with relatively low numbers of elliptocytes, there
is no cutoff percentage that is useful diagnostically. In hemolytic HE,
other abnormal RBC shapes may be present, depending on the severity of hemolysis, including spherocytes, pyknocytes, and other poikilocytes. In HPP, microspherocytes, red cell fragments, and occasional

2961

elliptocytes are seen. SAO is suggested when ovalocytes, which in contrast to elliptocytes are less elongated, are observed.
Reticulocyte levels and other markers of hemolysis, such as total
bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, and haptoglobin, are helpful in establishing the severity of hemolysis, if present. In hemolytic HE and HPP,
additional testing may include the eosin-­5-­maleimide (EMA) binding
test, which detects binding to band 3 by flow cytometry, or incubated
osmotic fragility testing. In cases of chronic hemolysis, splenomegaly
and cholelithiasis can be assessed with abdominal ultrasound.

TREATMENT

If the presentation is that of typical HE (i.e., an isolated peripheral blood
smear abnormality without clinically evident hemolysis), no treatment
is necessary. For chronic HE and HPP, red blood cell transfusions are
occasionally required. Splenectomy decreases the hemolysis and should
be considered using criteria similar to that of hereditary spherocytosis.
If hemolysis continues after splenectomy, patients should receive folic
acid to prevent secondary folic acid deficiency. SAO does not require
treatment beyond the newborn period.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 509

Hereditary Stomatocytosis
Syndromes
Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
The hereditary stomatocytosis syndromes are a group of heterogeneous, dominantly inherited disorders in which alterations in red cell
cation permeability lead to alterations in intracellular water content
(Table 509.1). A net increase in sodium and potassium ions allows
water to enter the erythrocyte, creating stomatocytes or hydrocytes,
whereas a net loss of sodium and potassium ions leads to water loss,
creating dehydrated red cells, or xerocytes (Fig. 509.1).

HEREDITARY XEROCYTOSIS
Pathophysiology

Hereditary xerocytosis, the most common type of the hereditary
stomatocytosis syndromes, is a dominant disorder of erythrocyte
dehydration. The underlying defect is most commonly a missense
variant in PIEZO1, a mechanosensory transduction protein, associated with delayed channel inactivation. In a few patients, pathogenic
variants in the Gardos channel, important in erythrocyte dehydration in sickle cell disease, have been observed. Typically, there is
a net loss of intracellular potassium that is not accompanied by a
compensatory increase in sodium. Subsequently, the gradual loss
of intracellular water leads to erythrocyte dehydration. Hereditary
xerocytosis may be associated with a syndrome of hydrops fetalis
with perinatal anemia and ascites. These findings are transient and
remain unexplained.

Clinical Features

Affected patients exhibit a mild compensated macrocytic hemolytic
anemia with variable degrees of splenomegaly and intermittent jaundice. The mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) and
mean cell volume (MCV) are elevated, and erythrocyte osmotic fragility is decreased, as are potassium concentration and total monovalent
cation content. There are small numbers of stomatocytes, target cells,
and contracted red blood cells (RBCs) with hemoglobin puddled to
the side on peripheral blood smear. Treatment is supportive, similar

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2962 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 509.1  	 Features of Hereditary Stomatocytosis-­Xerocytosis Syndromes
OTHER HEREDITARY STOMATOCYTOSIS
SYNDROMES
FEATURE
(NORMAL
VALUE)

HEREDITARY XEROCYTOSIS
(DEHYDRATED STOMATOCYTOSIS)

OVERHYDRATED
HEREDITARY
STOMATOCYTOSIS

MILD
HEREDITARY
HEREDITARY
STOMATOCYTOSIS CRYOHYDROCYTOSIS

SOUTHEAST
ASIAN
OVALOCYTOSIS

Hemolysis

Severe

Mild to moderate

Mild to moderate

Mild (neonatal
only)

Moderate

Mild or none

Anemia

Moderate to severe

Mild to moderate

Mild to moderate to
completely
compensated

Mild (neonatal
only)

Mild to
moderate to
completely
compensated

None

Blood smear

Stomatocytes; ±
spherocytes

Stomatocytes; ±
spherocytes

Stomatocytes,
sometimes with
curved or offset
stoma; ±
spherocytes; ± target
cells

Rounded
elliptocytes,
some with a
double central
clearing and
a theta (θ)
shape; ±
stomatocytes

Target cells;
Target cells; few
sometimes
stomatocytes
small
numbers of
echinocytes or
stomatocytes

MCV

Increased

Normal to
increased

Normal to
increased

High normal to
increased

Normal to
increased

MCHC

Decreased

Normal to
decreased

Normal to
increased

Normal to
increased

Normal to
increased

Unincubated
osmotic fragility

Very increased

Variable

Variable

Unknown

Decreased
to very
decreased

Slightly
decreased

RBC Na+
(5-­12 mEq/L)*

60-­150

30-­60

15-­100

Normal

5-­30

10-­30

RBC K+
(90-­105 mEq/L)*

20-­55

40-­85

30-­100

Normal

60-­90

75-­100

RBC Na+ + K+
(95-­110 mEq/L)*

110-­170

115-­145

70-­130

Normal

70-­100

85-­110

RBC passive
membrane
leak*†

20-­40

~3-­10

1-­6

2-­4

2-­4

1-­2

Cold hemolysis

No

TYPICAL

PSEUDO-­
HYPERKALEMIA

Unknown

Yes

Yes

No

No

Pseudohyperkalemia Sometimes

Unknown

Yes

Unknown

Sometimes

Yes

Perinatal ascites

No

Unknown

No

No

Sometimes

No

Stomatin
markedly
decreased

Yes

No

No (type 1)
Yes (type 2)

No

No

No

Effect of
splenectomy
on hemolysis

Some benefit

Some benefit

Minimal or no effect

No significant
hemolysis

No effect

No significant
hemolysis

Thromboembolism
risk after
splenectomy

Yes

Unknown

?Yes

Unknown

Yes

Unknown

Genetics

Autosomal
dominant

Autosomal
dominant

Autosomal
dominant

Autosomal
dominant

Autosomal
dominant

Autosomal
dominant

Defective gene(s)

KHAG

Band 3 (SLC4A1)

Type 1: Band 3
(SLC4A1)
Type 2: Glut 1
(SLC2A1)

Band 3 (SLC4A1)
in-­frame deletion

PIEZO1

PIEZO1, ABCR6

*Based on a relatively small number of measurements reported in the literature.
†Times normal. Defined as the ouabain-­and bumetanide-­resistant 86Rb+ influx at 37°C, and expressed as the ratio of patient residual leak to normal residual leak (normal: 0.06-­0.10 mmol/L
RBC/hr).
MCHC, Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean cell volume; RBC, red blood cell.
From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015: 561; Table 16.12.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 509 u Hereditary Stomatocytosis Syndromes

2963

INTERMEDIATE SYNDROMES AND OTHER
VARIANTS

A

B
Fig. 509.1 Peripheral blood smears. A, Hereditary xerocytosis.
B, Hereditary hydrocytosis.

to other disorders with congenital hemolytic anemia. Because of the
apparent predisposition to major thromboses postsplenectomy, splenectomy is not recommended in hereditary xerocytosis and related disorders. Another unusual manifestation of hereditary xerocytosis is the
propensity for iron overload, independent of transfusion history. Thus
iron indices should be monitored at regular intervals.

HEREDITARY HYDROCYTOSIS
Pathophysiology

Hereditary hydrocytosis is a very rare, dominant disorder associated
with large, swollen stomatocytic erythrocytes. The principal defect is
an increase in Na+ and K+ permeability, leading to markedly increased
intracellular sodium and water content. The molecular defect is
unknown in most cases. In a subset of cases, missense variants in the
Rh-­associated glycoprotein (RhAG) have been identified.

Clinical Features

Hereditary hydrocytosis is the most clinically severe disorder of altered
erythrocyte volume regulation. It is characterized by moderate to
severe hemolysis and macrocytosis (110-­150 fL), with a low MCHC
(24–30%), elevated erythrocyte sodium concentration, reduced potassium concentration, increased total Na+ and K+ content, and increased
erythrocyte osmotic fragility. There are large numbers (10–30%) of stomatocytes on peripheral blood smear. Patients typically develop jaundice, splenomegaly, and cholelithiasis.
Treatment is supportive. RBC transfusions are occasionally
required. Patients should be followed for evidence of hematologic
decompensation during acute illness. Interval ultrasonography to
detect cholelithiasis should be obtained. When there is significant
hemolysis, folate should be prescribed daily. Similar to hereditary
xerocytosis, significant postsplenectomy major thromboses have
been observed; thus splenectomy is not recommended in hereditary
hydrocytosis.

Hereditary xerocytosis and hereditary hydrocytosis are at the
extremes of disorders with alterations in erythrocyte permeability.
Patients with intermediate defects have been described with varying degrees of hemolysis and anemia. One of these intermediate
syndromes is cryohydrocytosis in which affected patients typically
suffer from mild anemia associated with stomatocytes, spherocytes,
and sphero-­stomatocytes on peripheral blood smear. Cryohydrocytosis erythrocytes are deficient in band 3 and demonstrate a significant cation leak upon cooling to low temperature (kyros = cold).
This disorder is due to missense variants in band 3 that likely convert band 3 from an anion exchanger to a nonselective cation leak
channel.
Rh deficiency syndrome, also known as Rhnull syndrome, is mild
to moderate hemolytic anemia associated with markedly decreased
(Rhmod) or absent (Rhnull) Rh antigens on the erythrocyte membrane.
Rhnull erythrocytes, which lack all Rh antigens, LW, and Fy5 antigens
and have decreased reduced expression of Ss, U, and Duclos antigens,
are dehydrated with decreased cell cation and water content. Findings
on blood smear include reticulocytes, stomatocytes, and spherocytes.
In response to immunization during pregnancy or after blood transfusion, Rhnull patients produce antibodies varying in specificity from
reacting to anti-­e or anti-­C to reacting with all erythrocytes tested, an
antibody called “anti-­total Rh.”
Familial deficiency of high-­density lipoproteins (Tangier disease)
is a rare recessive disorder that results from pathogenic variants in the
cholesterol and phospholipid transport protein ABCA1, which lead to
perturbations of cellular cholesterol transport and result in the accumulation of cholesterol esters in many tissues. Hematologic manifestations include a mild to moderate stomatocytic hemolytic anemia and
thrombocytopenia. Affected patients can also have large orange tonsils,
hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, cloudy corneas, peripheral
neuropathy, and premature atherosclerosis.
Sitosterolemia, also known as phytosterolemia, is a recessive disorder in which the absorption of sterols, both cholesterol and its
plant-­derived relatives (e.g., sitosterol), is unlimited and unselective. Clinical manifestations include early-­onset xanthomatosis, short
stature, and premature coronary artery disease. Hematologic abnormalities include macrothrombocytopenia and stomatocytic hemolytic anemia. The plasma cholesterol may or may not be abnormal, but
mass spectrometry always shows a massive increase in plant sterol levels in the plasma and in the membranes of platelets and erythrocytes.
Pathogenic variants in ABCG5 or ABCG8, transporters that actively
pump plant sterols out of intestinal cells back into the intestine and
out of liver cells into bile ducts, lead to gastrointestinal hyperabsorption and decreased biliary elimination of plant sterols, as well as
altered cholesterol metabolism. Treatment involves dietary restriction
of cholesterol and plant sterols and prescription of ezetimibe, a sterol
absorption inhibitor, and cholestyramine and other related bile acid–
sequestering agents.

OTHER DISORDERS ASSOCIATED WITH
STOMATOCYTOSIS

Acquired stomatocytosis may be seen with liver disease, alcoholism, malignancy, and cardiovascular disease and after vinca alkaloid
administration. Stomatocytes can be seen as a blood smear–processing
artifact.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2964 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 510

Paroxysmal Nocturnal
Hemoglobinuria and
Acanthocytosis
Stephanie Prozora and Patrick G. Gallagher
PAROXYSMAL NOCTURNAL HEMOGLOBINURIA
Etiology

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is an acquired disorder
of the cell membranes of multipotent bone marrow stem cells. The
underlying somatic pathogenic variant propagates into a clonal population of stem cells so that all blood cells derived from these variant
clonal progenitors, especially red blood cells (RBCs), are susceptible
to complement-­
mediated destruction (Fig. 510.1). The pathogenic
variant causes cell membranes to be deficient (either partially or completely) in proteins that impede complement-­mediated lysis via the
constitutively active alternative pathway. These complement regulating proteins include decay-­accelerating factor (CD55), the membrane
inhibitor of reactive lysis (CD59), and the C8 binding protein. The
underlying defect involves the glycolipid anchor that maintains these
protective proteins on the cell surface. Various pathogenic variants in
the PIGA gene that encodes the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor
protein have been identified in patients with PNH.

Clinical Manifestations

PNH is a rare disorder in children. Approximately 60% of pediatric patients have marrow failure, and the remainder have either

Alternative pathway of complement
Eculizumab
C3a
C3 convertase C3

C5a MAC

C5 convertase

C5

C3bBbP

C3bBbC3bP

C5b-9n

CD55

CD55

CD59

Complement activation

Normal red cell

LDH

PNH red cell

Fig. 510.1 Complement-­
mediated lysis in paroxysmal nocturnal

hemoglobinuria (PNH). Red circles are hemoglobin. Blue circles are
decay accelerating factor (CD55). Green circles are membrane inhibitor of reactive lysis (CD59). Bb, activated factor B; C3b, activated
C3; C5b, activated C5; MAC, membrane attack complex (consisting
of C5b, C6, C7, C8, and several molecules of C9 [9n]). (From Parker C. Eculizumab for paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria. Lancet
2009;373:759–767.)

intermittent or chronic anemia, often with prominent intravascular
hemolysis (Tables 510.1 and 510.2). Nocturnal and morning hemoglobinuria is the classic finding in adults, but only a minority of PNH
patients experience this. Most patients experience chronic hemolysis, often with thrombocytopenia and leukopenia. Hemoglobinuria is
rarely seen in children compared with adults with PNH. Thrombosis
and thromboembolic phenomena are serious complications that may
be related to altered glycoproteins on the platelet surface and resultant platelet activation and production of procoagulant microparticles. Abdominal venous thrombosis presents as recurrent episodes
of abdominal pain, Budd-­Chiari syndrome (hepatic veins), or splenomegaly (splenic vein). Released free hemoglobin results in depletion
of nitric oxide, fostering vasoconstriction, thrombosis, and pain. Back
and head pain may also be prominent. Hypoplastic or aplastic pancytopenia can precede or follow the diagnosis of PNH; rarely, PNH may
progress to acute myelogenous leukemia. At the time of presentation,
more than 90% of patients with PNH have some blood abnormality
(including ∼35% with anemia alone, ∼15% with anemia and thrombocytopenia, ∼7% with anemia and neutropenia, and ∼30% with pancytopenia), >10% have abdominal pain, and >5% have thrombosis. The
mortality in PNH is related primarily to the development of aplastic
anemia or thrombotic complications. The predicted survival rate for
children before the development of eculizumab was 80% at 5 years,
60% at 10 years, and 28% at 20 years.

Laboratory Findings

Hemoglobin levels can range from normal to markedly decreased.
Common findings reflect chronic intravascular hemolysis and
include hemosiderinuria, an elevated reticulocyte percentage, a low
serum haptoglobin, and increased lactic dehydrogenase. Initially,
the anemia is normocytic, but if iron deficiency develops, it becomes
microcytic. On the blood smear, poikilocytosis and anisocytosis may
be present. Markedly reduced levels of RBC acetylcholinesterase
activity and decay-­accelerating factor are also found. Flow cytometry
is the diagnostic test of choice for PNH. With the use of anti-­CD59 for
RBCs and anti-­CD55 and anti-­CD59 for granulocytes, flow cytometry is more sensitive than the classic RBC lysis (Ham or sucrose) tests
in detecting these reduced glycolipid-­bound membrane proteins.
Fluorescently labeled aerolysin testing can heighten the sensitivity
of detection by binding selectively to glycosylphosphatidylinositol
anchors.

Treatment

Eculizumab therapy has resulted in sustained survival in the majority of patients. Eculizumab is a monoclonal antibody against complement component C5 that interrupts formation of the membrane attack
complex, blocking downstream complement destruction of RBCs
and activation of platelets. It decreases the rate of hemolysis, stabilizes hemoglobin levels, reduces the number of transfusions, reduces
the risk of thrombosis, and improves quality of life. Eculizumab is an
approved and effective treatment for PNH in adults. A recent phase I/
II trial demonstrated safety and efficacy in patients 11-­17 years of age.
Because of the cost and duration of treatment (i.e., lifelong) required,
particularly in children, it may be most useful in preventing thrombosis, anemia, and other symptoms while stem cell transplant is considered. Survival in adults with PNH treated with eculizumab may not be
different from sex-­and age-­matched control patients from the general
population. However, the medication does not improve the hematopoietic clonal expansion or prevent marrow failure. Before beginning eculizumab, it is recommended to immunize patients with the
meningococcal vaccine if the patient hasn’t already received this vaccine because a very serious risk of complement inhibition is increased
susceptibility to Neisseria infections. If eculizumab therapy is desired
to begin immediately for clinical reasons, the vaccine can be given at
the same time, and prophylactic antibiotics can be given for a 2-­week
bridge. Headache is a common adverse effect after the first few doses
but disappears subsequently. A poor response to eculizumab may
be due to polymorphisms in the C5 gene that produce resistance to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 510 u Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria and Acanthocytosis

2965

Table 510.1  Suggested Criteria as Indications for PNH Testing
CATCH CRITERION

INDICATIONS FOR TESTING

SUPPORTING INFORMATION

Cytopenias

Patients for whom a bone marrow examination is
considered for otherwise unexplained cytopenia(s)

Additional features such as elevated LDH, DAT-­
negative hemolysis, history of unexplained TE,
and hemoglobinuria

AA/MDS

All patients with a diagnosis or suspicion of AA
Testing should be done at diagnosis and monitored at
least q6 months
Low or intermediate-­1 risk MDS, and especially if
hypoplastic

Additional features such as elevated LDH, DAT-­
negative hemolysis, history of unexplained TE,
and hemoglobinuria

Thrombosis

Unprovoked and/or unusual site TE (e.g.,, splenic,
hepatic, CNS), especially if recurrent and/or despite
anticoagulation

Additional features such as elevated LDH,
DAT-­negative hemolysis, otherwise-­unexplained
cytopenias, especially including anemia

Coombs-­negative hemolysis

Hemolysis or hemolytic anemia (i.e., elevated LDH and
indirect bilirubin, reduced haptoglobin, DAT/Coombs
test negative) without other clear cause

Test in all patients unless a clear alternate
explanation exists
Supportive information may be helpful but is not
necessary

Hemoglobinuria

Otherwise-­unexplained hemoglobinuria or cases where
“hematuria” has been identified without evidence of
erythrocytes on microscopy

Test in all patients unless a clear alternate
explanation exists
Supportive information may be helpful but is not
necessary

AA, Aplastic anemia; CNS, central nervous system; DAT, direct antiglobulin test (aka Coombs test); LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MDS, myelodysplastic syndromes; TE, thromboembolic event.
From Patriquin CJ, Kiss T, Caplan S, et al. How we treat paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria: A consensus statement of the Canadian PNH Network and review of the national
registry. Eur J Haematol. 2019;102:36–52: Table 2, p. 39.

Table 510.2  Classification of Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
RATE OF INTRAVASCULAR
HEMOLYSIS*

CATEGORY

BONE MARROW

BENEFIT FROM
ECULIZUMAB

FLOW CYTOMETRY

Classic clinical PNH

Florid (markedly abnormal
LDH, often with episodic
macroscopic
hemoglobinuria)

Cellular marrow caused by Large population (>50%)
erythroid hyperplasia and of GPI-­AP– PMNs§
normal or near-­normal
morphology†

Yes

Clinical PNH in the
setting of another
bone marrow failure
syndrome‡

Mild (often with minimal
abnormalities of
biochemical markers of
hemolysis)

Evidence of a
concomitant bone
marrow failure
syndrome‡

Although variable, the
percentage of
GPl-­AP– PMNs is usually
relatively small (<50%)

Typically no, but some
patients have relatively
large clones and clinically
significant hemolysis and
may benefit from treatment

Subclinical PNH

No clinical or biochemical
evidence of intravascular
hemolysis

Evidence of a
concomitant bone
marrow failure
syndrome‡

Small (<1%) population of
GPI-­AP– PMNs detected
by high-­resolution flow
cytometry

No

*Based on macroscopic hemoglobinuria, serum LDH concentration and reticulocyte count.
†Karyotypic abnormalities are uncommon.
‡Aplastic anemia or low-­risk myelodysplastic syndrome.
§Analysis of PMNs is more informative than analysis of red blood cells because of selective destruction GPI-­AP– RBCs.

GPI-­AP–, Glycosylphosphatidylinositol–anchored protein–deficient; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PMNs, polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
From Parker CJ, Ware RE. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. In: Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015: Table 14-­1.

eculizumab blockades. Patients on eculizumab therapy require regular
monitoring, including complete blood counts with reticulocytes, lactate dehydrogenase, total bilirubin, and repeat flow cytometry every
6-­12 months.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is a key therapeutic consideration if a suitable donor exists, particularly in children.
Severe aplastic anemia is a strong indication for transplant in PNH
(Fig. 510.2). HSCT is the only potentially curative therapy available for
PNH. Nonmyeloablative transplantation (with reduced intensity conditioning regimens) are often used to reduce transplant-­related mortality and morbidity; because eradication of only the PNH clones is
sought, total myeloablation is not necessary.

Glucocorticoids such as prednisone can be used for acute hemolytic
episodes; the dosage should be tapered as soon as the hemolysis abates.
Prolonged anticoagulation (heparin or low molecular weight heparin)
therapy may be of benefit when thromboses occur. Because of chronic
urinary loss of iron as hemosiderin, iron therapy may be necessary.
Androgens (e.g., fluoxymesterone), antithymocyte globulin, cyclosporine, and growth factors (e.g., erythropoietin and granulocyte colony-­
stimulating factor) have been used to treat marrow failure.

ACANTHOCYTOSIS

Acanthocytosis is characterized by RBCs with irregular circumferential pointed projections (also known as spur cells) (see Fig. 507.4E).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2966 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Management of PNH Based on Disease Classification
Classify PNH based on flow cytometric characteristics,
reticulocyte count, serum LDH concentration, bone marrow analysis

Subclinical PNH

PNH/BMF syndrome

Classic PNH

No specific PNH
therapy—focus on
underlying BMF
syndrome*

Focus on BMF†
Patients with large PNH
clones may benefit from
eculizumab

Treat with eculizumab
Inadequate
response
Increase dose/frequency
of eculizumab, BMT,
(steroids, splenectomy),‡
supportive care§

*Some, but not all, studies suggest a favorable response to immunosuppressive therapy (IST).
†
BMT eradicates the PNH clone, and typically, treatment with IST does not affect PNH clone size.
‡
Consider for patients with clinically significant extravascular hemolysis.
§
Transfusion.

with multiple neurologic findings such as limb chorea, tics, and hypotonia. The rare X-­linked McLeod syndrome (marked by absence of the
Kell antigen) presents with mild hemolytic anemia, late-­onset myopathy, peripheral neuropathy, chorea, and splenomegaly. There are usually >3% acanthocytes on peripheral smear and caudate atrophy noted
on MRI. McLeod syndrome is the only neuroacanthocytosis syndrome
likely to present in childhood. Acanthocytes also are seen in pantothenate kinase-­associated neurodegeneration (with dystonia, rigidity, chorea, dysarthria, spasticity, retinopathy) and Huntington disease–like 2.
In contrast to acanthocytes, echinocytes or “burr cells” have a more
regular distribution of projections or serrations along the surface of the
RBCs and will tend to a more spheroidal cell contour as they age. They
are seen often as artifacts (e.g., due to elevated pH, contact with glass,
or blood storage) and infrequently in end-­stage renal disease, liver disease, uremia, pyruvate-­kinase deficiency, long-­distance runners, and
patients with hypomagnesemia and hypophosphatemia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 510.2 Management algorithm for paroxysmal nocturnal hemo-

globinuria (PNH). A management scheme based on classification of
PNH into two categories: subclinical, PNH in the setting of another
bone marrow failure syndrome (PNH/BMF), and classic PNH (see Table 510.2 for characteristics of each category.) LDH, Lactic dehydrogenase; BMF, bone marrow failure (aplastic anemia and low risk MDS);
BMT, bone marrow transplant. (From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D,
et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and
Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015. Fig 14-­9.)

Table 510.3  Hereditary Acanthocytosis Syndromes
SYNDROME

INHERITANCE

GENES

Chorea-­
acanthocytosis

Autosomal recessive

VPS13A

McLeod syndrome

X-­linked recessive

XK

Huntington disease–
like 2

Autosomal dominant

JPH3

Pantothenate kinase-­
associated neurodegeneration

Autosomal recessive

PANK2

Abetalipoproteinemia

Autosomal recessive

MTTP

Hereditary
hypobetalipo­
proteinemia

Autosomal recessive

APOB,
MTP,
PCSK9

Aceruloplasminemia

Autosomal recessive

CP

This morphologic finding results from alterations in the membrane
ratio of cholesterol to phospholipid, with the morphology attributed
to an excess of lipid in the outer layer relative to the inner layer of the
membrane bilayer. In liver disease, acanthocytes develop because of
increased abundance of free cholesterol, as patients develop splenic
congestion, hemolytic anemia, and jaundice. Abetalipoproteinemia
is an inherited autosomal recessive disease in which acanthocytosis is
associated with fat malabsorption, progressive ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa. The fat malabsorption may become apparent in the first year
of life, whereas the ataxia develops at school-­age. The anemia is usually mild. Hypobetalipoproteinemia is a recessive familial disease that
has a similar clinical spectrum, but with milder findings. Aceruloplasminemia leads to anemia, diabetes, ocular problems, tremors, chorea,
ataxia, and facial abnormalities due to increased iron in the brain and
other organs.
There are four genetically diverse neuroacanthocytosis syndromes
(Table 510.3). Chorea-­acanthocytosis is an adult-­onset disease without
anemia, variable numbers of acanthocytes on peripheral blood smear,

Chapter 511

Hemoglobinopathies
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
HEMOGLOBIN DISORDERS

Hemoglobin is a tetramer consisting of two pairs of globin chains. Abnormalities in these proteins are referred to as
hemoglobinopathies.
More than 800 variant hemoglobins have been described. The most
common and useful clinical classification of hemoglobinopathies is
based on nomenclature associated with alteration of the involved globin chain. Two hemoglobin (Hb) gene clusters are involved in Hb production and are located at the end of the short arms of chromosomes
16 and 11. Their control is complex, including an upstream locus control region on each respective chromosome and an X-­linked control
site. On chromosome 16, there are three genes within the alpha (α)
gene cluster: zeta (ζ), alpha 1 (α1), and alpha 2 (α2). On chromosome
11, there are five genes within the beta (β) gene cluster: epsilon (ε),
gamma 1 (γ1), gamma 2 (γ2), delta (δ), and beta (β).
The order of gene expression within each cluster roughly follows
the order of expression during the embryonic period, fetal period,
and eventually childhood. After 8 weeks of fetal life, the embryonic
hemoglobins, Gower-­1 (ζ2ε2), Gower-­2 (α2ε2), and Portland (ζ2γ2), are
formed. At 9 weeks of fetal life, the major hemoglobin is hemoglobin F
(HbF; α2γ2). Hemoglobin A (HbA; α2β2) first appears at approximately
1 month of fetal life but does not become the dominant hemoglobin
until after birth, when HbF levels start to decline. HbA2 (α2δ2) is a
minor hemoglobin that appears shortly before birth and remains at
a low level after birth. The final hemoglobin distribution pattern that
occurs in childhood is not achieved until at least 6 months of age and
sometimes later. The normal hemoglobin pattern is ≥95% HbA, ≤3.5%
HbA2, and <2.5% HbF.

511.1 Sickle Cell Disease
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
Children with sickle cell disease should be followed by experts in the
management of this disease, most often by pediatric hematologists.
Children who receive disease-­specific care that focuses on prevention of infectious complications and end-­organ damage should have a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
higher likelihood of survival to adult age. Medical care provided by a
pediatric hematologist is also associated with a decreased frequency of
emergency department (ED) visits and length of hospitalization compared to patients who were not seen by a hematologist within the last
year.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Hemoglobin S (HbS) is the result of a single base-­pair change, thymine
for adenine, at the 6th codon of the β-­globin gene. This change encodes
valine instead of glutamine in the sixth residue in the β-­globin molecule. Sickle cell anemia (HbSS), homozygous HbSS, occurs when both
β-­globin alleles have the sickle cell pathogenic variant (βs). Sickle cell
disease refers not only to patients with sickle cell anemia but also to
compound heterozygotes where one β-­globin allele includes the sickle
cell pathogenic variant and the second β-­globin allele includes a gene
pathogenic variant other than the sickle cell pathogenic variant, such as
HbC, β-­thalassemia, HbD, and HbOArab. In sickle cell anemia, HbS is
typically as high as 90% of the total hemoglobin, whereas in sickle cell
disease, HbS is >50% of all hemoglobin.
In red blood cells (RBCs), the hemoglobin molecule has a highly
specified conformation allowing for the transport of oxygen in the
body. In the absence of globin-­chain pathogenic variants, hemoglobin molecules do not interact with one another. However, the presence of HbS results in a conformational change in the Hb tetramer,
and in the deoxygenated state, HbS molecules interact with each other,
forming rigid polymers that give the RBC its characteristic “sickled”
shape. Intraerythrocytic changes lead to a shortened RBC life span
and hemolysis. Hemolysis leads to multiple changes, including altered
nitric oxide metabolism and oxidant stress, which contribute to endothelial dysfunction. Intravascular sickling primarily occurs in the postcapillary venules and is a function of both mechanical obstruction by
sickled erythrocytes, platelets, and leukocytes and increased adhesion
between these elements and the vascular endothelium. Sickle cell disease is also an inflammatory disease based on nonspecific markers of
inflammation, including, but not limited to, elevated baseline white
blood cell (WBC) count and cytokines.

DIAGNOSIS AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Every state in the United States has instituted a mandatory newborn
screening program for sickle cell disease. Such programs identify newborns with the disease and provide prompt diagnosis and referral to

2967

providers with expertise in sickle cell disease for anticipatory guidance
and the initiation of penicillin prophylaxis before 4 months of age.
The most commonly used procedures for newborn diagnosis
include thin-­layer/isoelectric focusing (IEF) and high-­performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC). Some laboratories perform genetic
testing on specimens demonstrating abnormal hemoglobins. A confirmatory step is recommended, with all patients who have initial abnormal screens being retested during the first clinical visit, which helps to
account for potential administrative errors in specimen handling. In
addition, a complete blood cell count (CBC) and Hb phenotype determination is recommended for both parents to provide an opportunity
for genetic counseling and to better characterize disease genotype in the
affected offspring if necessary. Infants who may have HbS-­hereditary
persistence fetal hemoglobin (HbSHPFH) but do not have full parental studies should have molecular testing for β-­globin genotype before
12 months of age (or sooner if hydroxyurea is initiated). Table 511.1
correlates the initial hemoglobin phenotype at birth with the type of
hemoglobinopathy.
In newborn screening programs, the hemoglobin with the greatest quantity is reported first, followed by other hemoglobins in order
of decreasing quantity. Some states perform IEF initially on newborn
blood samples, then use DNA probes to confirm abnormal hemoglobins found on IEF. In newborns with a hemoglobin analysis result of
HbFS, the pattern supports HbSS, HbSHPFH, or HbSβ0-­thalassemia.
In certain situations, a newborn with a hemoglobin analysis of HbFS
may have HbSβ+-­thalassemia and the hemoglobin A may not be demonstrating on the electrophoresis in quantities high enough for detection. In a newborn with a hemoglobin analysis of FSA, the pattern is
supportive of the diagnosis of HbSβ+-­thalassemia. The diagnosis of
HbSβ+-­thalassemia is confirmed if at least 50% of the hemoglobin is
HbS, HbA is present, and the amount of HbA2 is elevated (typically
>3.5%), although HbA2 is not elevated in the newborn period. In newborns with a hemoglobin analysis of FSC, the pattern supports a diagnosis of HbSC. In newborns with a hemoglobin analysis of FAS, the
pattern supports a diagnosis of HbAS (sickle cell trait); however, in this
circumstance, care must be taken to confirm that the newborn has not
received an RBC transfusion before testing.
A newborn with a hemoglobin analysis of AFS either has been transfused with RBCs before collection of the newborn screen to account
for the greater amount of HbA than HbF, or there has been an error.
The patient may have either sickle cell disease or sickle cell trait and

Table 511.1  Various Newborn Sickle Cell Disease Screening Results with Baseline Hemoglobin
NEWBORN SCREENING RESULTS:
SICKLE CELL DISEASE*

POSSIBLE HEMOGLOBIN PHENOTYPE†

BASELINE HEMOGLOBIN RANGE AFTER
AGE 5 YR

FS

SCD-­SS
SCD-­S β0 thal
SCD-­S β+ thal
SCD-­S δβ− thal
S HPFH

6-­11 g/dL
6-­10 g/dL
9-­12 g/dL
10-­12 g/dL
12-­14 g/dL

FSC

SCD-­SC

10-­15 g/dL

FSA‡

SCD-­S β+ thal

9-­12 g/dL

FS other

SCD-­S β0 thal

6-­10 g/dL

SCD-­SD, SOArab, SCHarlem, SLepore

Variable

SCD-­SS
SCD-­S β+ thal
SCD-­S β0 thal

6-­10 g/dL
6-­9 g/dL
7-­13 g/dL variable

AFS‡§

*Hemoglobins are reported in order of quantity.

†Requires confirmatory hemoglobin analysis after at least 6 mo of age and, if possible, β-­globin gene testing or hemoglobin analysis from both parents for accurate diagnosis of

hemoglobin phenotype.

‡Sickle cell trait is another possible diagnosis.
§Impossible to determine the diagnosis because the infant most likely received a blood transfusion before testing.

A, Normal hemoglobin A; C, hemoglobin C; F, fetal hemoglobin; HPFH, hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin; OArab, hemoglobin OArab; S, sickle hemoglobin; SC, sickle-­
hemoglobin C; SCD, sickle cell disease; SS, homozygous sickle cell disease; thal, thalassemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2968 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
should be started on penicillin prophylaxis until the final diagnosis can
be determined.
Given the implications of a diagnosis of sickle cell disease versus
sickle cell trait in a newborn, the importance of repeating the Hb
identification analysis in the patient and obtaining a Hb identification
analysis and CBC to evaluate the peripheral blood smear and RBC
parameters in the parents cannot be overemphasized. Unintended mistakes do occur in state newborn screening programs. Newborns who
have the initial phenotype of HbFS but whose final true phenotype is
HbSβ+-­thalassemia have been described as one of the more common
errors identified in newborn screening hemoglobinopathy programs.
Determining an accurate phenotype is important for appropriate
genetic counseling for the parents. In addition, distinguishing HbSS
from HbSHPFH in the newborn period usually requires parental or
genetic testing. Infants who maintain HbF percentages above 25% after
12 months of age without evidence of hemolysis should have testing for
β-­globin gene deletions consistent with HPFH. These children have a
much milder clinical course and do not require penicillin prophylaxis
or hydroxyurea therapy.
If the parents are tested for sickle cell trait or hemoglobinopathy
trait, full disclosure to the parent tested should be provided privately,
and in some circumstances, the issue of paternity may be disclosed. For
this reason and because of healthcare privacy, common practice is to
always seek permission for the genetic testing and to report the hemoglobinopathy trait results back to each parent separately.
In the United States, sickle cell disease is the most common genetic
disorder identified through the state-­mandated newborn screening
program, occurring in 1:2,647 births. The sickle hemoglobin gene is
more prevalent in communities of color because descendants of people
where malaria has been endemic are more likely to have been protected
from the severe manifestations of malaria. Regarding ethnicity in the
United States, sickle cell disease occurs in Black persons at a rate of
1:396 births and in Hispanics at a rate of 1:36,000 births. In the United
States, an estimated 100,000 people have sickle cell disease, with an ethnic distribution of 90% Black and 10% Hispanic. The U.S. sickle cell
disease population represents a fraction of the worldwide burden of
the disease, with global estimates of 312,000 neonates born annually
with HbSS disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND TREATMENT OF
SICKLE CELL ANEMIA

For a comprehensive discussion of the clinical management of children
and adolescents with sickle cell disease, refer to the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) 2014 Expert Panel Report on the
Evidence-­Based Management of Sickle Cell Disease (https://www.nhlb
i.nih.gov/sites/www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/sickle-­cell-­disease-­report.pdf).

Fever and Bacteremia

Fever in a child with sickle cell anemia is a medical emergency, requiring prompt medical evaluation and delivery of antibiotics because of
the increased risk of serious bacterial infection and subsequent high
mortality rate. As early as 6 months of age, infants with sickle cell
anemia develop abnormal immune function because of splenic dysfunction. By 5 years of age, most children with sickle cell anemia have
complete functional asplenia. Regardless of age, all patients with sickle
cell anemia are at increased risk of infection and death from bacterial
infection, particularly encapsulated organisms such as Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae type b, and Neisseria meningitidis, as well as Salmonella spp.
Several clinical strategies have been developed to manage children
with sickle cell disease who present with fever. These strategies range
from hospital admission for intravenous (IV) antimicrobial therapy to
administering a third-­generation cephalosporin in an ED or outpatient
setting to patients without established risk factors for occult bacteremia (Table 511.2). Given the observation that the average time for a
positive blood culture is <20 hours in children with sickle cell anemia,
admission for 24 hours is probably the most prudent strategy for children and families who live out of town or who are identified as high
risk for poor follow-­up.

Table 511.2  Clinical Factors Associated with Increased Risk
of Acute Complications in Febrile Children
with Sickle Cell Disease
Seriously ill appearance
Hypotension: systolic blood pressure <70 mm Hg at 1 yr of age or
<70 mm Hg + 2 × age (yr) for older children
Poor perfusion: capillary refill time >4 sec
Temperature >40.0°C (104°F)
Hypoxia
Corrected white blood cell count >30,000/mm3 or <5,000/mm3
Platelet count <100,000/mm3
History of pneumococcal sepsis*
Severe pain
Dehydration: poor skin turgor, dry mucous membranes, history of
poor fluid intake, or decreased output of urine
Presence of acute chest syndrome (new infiltrate on chest radiograph)
Hemoglobin level <5.0 g/dL
No prophylactic antibiotics
Not immunized
*Or other serious infection requiring hospital admission.
Adapted from Williams JA, Flynn PM, Harris S et al. A randomized study of outpatient
treatment with ceftriaxone for selected febrile children with sickle cell disease. N Engl J
Med 1993;329:472–476.

Outpatient management of fever without a source should be considered in children with the lowest risk of bacteremia and after appropriate
cultures are obtained and IV ceftriaxone or another cephalosporin is
given. Observation after antibiotic administration is important because
children treated with ceftriaxone can develop severe, rapid, and life-­
threatening immune hemolysis. In the event that Salmonella spp. or
Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia occurs, strong consideration should
be given to an evaluation for osteomyelitis with an MRI, given the
increased risk of osteomyelitis in children with sickle cell anemia compared to the general population. Screening laboratory and radiologic
studies are strongly recommended to identify those at risk for transient
red cell aplasia, acute splenic sequestration, and acute chest syndrome
(ACS), because many children with these diagnoses present to acute
care settings with isolated fever. Screening children and caregivers for
psychosocial factors that could impede their return to the hospital in
the case of a positive blood culture is essential.

Aplastic Crisis

Human parvovirus B19 infection poses a unique threat for patients
with sickle cell disease because this infection results in temporary red
cell aplasia, limiting the production of reticulocytes and causing profound anemia (see Fig. 507.3 in Chapter 507). Any child with sickle
cell disease, fever, and reticulocytopenia should be presumed to have
parvovirus B19 infection until proven otherwise. However, reticulocytopenia is not a requirement for the diagnosis of a recent parvovirus B19 infection because reticulocytosis and increased nucleated
RBCs may be seen in the recovery phase. Diagnostic testing for the
presence of human parvovirus B19 with polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) testing is superior to using immunoglobulin M (IgM) and
IgG titers. The acute exacerbation of anemia is treated conservatively
using red cell transfusion when the patient becomes hemodynamically symptomatic or has a concurrent illness, such as ACS or acute
splenic sequestration. Children with suspected aplastic crisis should
be closely monitored because acute infection with parvovirus B19 is
associated with pain, splenic sequestration, ACS, glomerulonephritis,
arthropathy, and stroke. Patients with parvovirus-­associated aplastic
crisis are contagious, and infection precautions should be taken to
avoid nosocomial spread of the infection and to avoid exposure of
pregnant caregivers who may be at risk for adverse fetal outcomes
with acute infection.

Splenic Sequestration

Acute splenic sequestration is a life-­threatening complication occurring primarily in infants and young children with sickle cell anemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
The incidence of splenic sequestration has declined from an estimated
30% to 12.6% with early identification by newborn screening and
improved parental education. Sequestration can occur as early as 5
weeks of age but most often occurs in children between ages 6 months
and 2 years. Patients with the SC and Sβ+-­thalassemia types of sickle
cell disease can have acute splenic sequestration events throughout
adolescence and adulthood.
Splenic sequestration is associated with rapid spleen enlargement
causing left-­sided abdominal pain and Hb decline from the patient’s
baseline. Sequestration may lead to signs of hypovolemia as a result of
the trapping of blood in the spleen and profound anemia, with total Hb
falling below 3 g/dL. A decrease in WBC and platelet count may also
be present. Sequestration may be spontaneous or triggered by fever,
bacteremia, or viral infections.
Treatment includes early intervention and maintenance of hemodynamic stability using isotonic fluid or transfusions. Careful blood transfusions with RBCs are recommended to treat both the sequestration
and the resultant anemia. Blood transfusion aborts the RBC trapping
in the spleen and allows release of the patient’s blood cells that have
become sequestered, often raising Hb above baseline values. A reasonable approach is to provide only 5 mL/kg of RBCs and/or a posttransfusion Hb target of 8 g/dL, keeping in mind that the goal of transfusion is
to prevent hypovolemia. Blood transfusion that results in Hb levels >10
g/dL may put the patient at risk for hyperviscosity syndrome because
RBCs may be released from the spleen after transfusion.
Repeated episodes of splenic sequestration are common, occurring
in 65% of patients. Most recurrent episodes develop within 6 months
of the previous episode. Prophylactic splenectomy performed after
an acute episode has resolved is the only effective strategy for preventing future life-­threatening episodes. Although blood transfusion
therapy has been used with the goal of preventing subsequent episodes, evidence strongly suggests that this strategy does not reduce
the risk of recurrent splenic sequestration compared to no transfusion therapy. However, a short course of regular RBC transfusions
can be used until splenectomy is arranged. Children should be appropriately immunized with meningococcal and pneumococcal vaccines
before surgery. Penicillin prophylaxis should be prescribed after
splenectomy.

Hepatic and Gallbladder Involvement
See Chapters 408 and 414.

Sickle Cell Pain

Dactylitis, referred to as hand-­foot syndrome, is often the first
manifestation of pain in infants and young children with sickle
cell anemia, occurring in 50% of children by their second year of
life (Fig. 511.1). Dactylitis often manifests with symmetric or less
often unilateral swelling of the hands and/or feet. Unilateral dactylitis can be confused with osteomyelitis, and careful evaluation to
distinguish the two is important because treatment differs significantly. Dactylitis requires palliation with pain medications, whereas
osteomyelitis requires at least 4-­6 weeks of IV antibiotics. Feedback
from the parents is needed to determine if pain therapy is successful
in relieving pain.
The cardinal clinical feature of sickle cell disease is acute vasoocclusive pain. Acute sickle cell pain is characterized as unremitting
discomfort that can occur in any part of the body but most often
occurs in the chest, abdomen, or extremities. These painful episodes
are often abrupt and cause disruption of daily life activities and significant stress for children and their caregivers. A patient with sickle
cell anemia has approximately one painful episode per year that
requires medical attention, but the frequency is extremely variable.
The pattern of symptoms with subsequent episodes may resemble
that of previous episodes.
The exact etiology of pain is unknown, but the pathogenesis may
be initiated when blood flow is disrupted in the microvasculature by
sickled RBCs and other cellular elements, resulting in tissue ischemia.
Acute sickle cell pain may be precipitated by physical stress, infection,
dehydration, hypoxia, local or systemic acidosis, exposure to cold, and

A

2969

B

Fig. 511.1 Radiographs of an infant with sickle cell anemia and acute
dactylitis. A, The bones appear normal at the onset of the episode. B,
Destructive changes and periosteal reaction are evident 2 weeks later.

swimming for prolonged periods. However, most pain episodes occur
without an identifiable trigger. Successful treatment of these episodes
requires education of both caregivers and patients regarding the recognition of symptoms and the optimal management strategy. Given the
absence of any reliable objective laboratory or clinical parameter associated with pain, trust between the patient and the treating physician
is paramount to successful clinical management. Specific therapy for
pain varies greatly but generally includes the use of acetaminophen or
a nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) early in the course of
pain, followed by escalation to a combination analgesic regimen using
a single-­agent short-­acting oral opioid, long-­acting oral opioid, and
continued nonopioid agent.
The majority of painful episodes in patients with sickle cell disease are managed at home with comfort measures, such as heating
pad, relaxation techniques, massage, and oral pain medication. Some
patients require treatment in an acute care setting with IV morphine
or derivatives of morphine. The primary goal of treatment in these settings is timely administration of analgesics to provide relief of pain.
The incremental increase and decrease in the use of the medication
to relieve pain roughly parallels the eight phases associated with a
chronology of pain and comfort in children (Table 511.3). When pain
requires continued parenteral analgesic administration, hospitalization or prolonged stays in day hospitals are required. The average
hospital length of stay for children admitted in pain is 4.4 days. The
American Society of Hematology and NHLBI clinical guidelines for
treating acute and chronic pain in children and adults with sickle cell
disease are comprehensive and represent a starting point for treating
pain.
The only measure for degree of pain is the patient. Healthcare providers working with children in pain should use a consistent, validated
pain scale (e.g., Wong-­Baker FACES Scale) for assessing pain. Although
pain scales have proved useful for some children, other forms of pain
assessment may be required to determine when opioid therapy should
be initiated and decreased. Individualized pain plans provide important information for assessment and treatment that address patient
preferences.
Several myths have been propagated regarding the treatment of pain
in sickle cell disease. The concept that all painful episodes in children
should be managed without opioids is without foundation and results
in unwarranted suffering on the part of the patient. Blood transfusion
therapy during an existing painful episode does not decrease the intensity or duration of the painful episode. Aggressive IV hydration does

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2970 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 511.3  Phases of a Painful Episode in Patients with Sickle Cell Disease
PHASE

DESCRIPTION AND COMFORT MEASURES

DATA FROM CHILDREN
I

Baseline
No pain and no comfort measures

II

Prepain phase
No evidence of pain
Child begins to display some prodromal signs and symptoms of VOE (yellow eyes, fatigue)
No comfort measures used
Caregivers encouraged child to increase fluids to prevent the pain event from occurring

III

Pain starting point
Child complained of mild “ache-­ish” pain in one specific area, which gradually or rapidly increased or “waxed”
Mild analgesics (ibuprofen and acetaminophen) given
Child maintained normal activities and continued to attend school
Caregivers hoped to prevent an increase in pain intensity

IV

Pain acceleration
Pain continued to escalate; intensity increased from mild to moderate; pain appeared in more areas of the body;
child was kept home from school; decreased level of activity; differences in behaviors, appearance, and mood
Stronger oral analgesics may be combined with rest, rubbing, heat, distraction, and psychologic comfort

V

Peak pain experience
Pain continued to escalate
Some children were incapacitated and unable to obtain pain relief
Pain described as “stabbing,” “drilling,” “pounding,” “banging,” “excruciating,” “unbearable,” or “throbbing”
Caregivers sometimes decide to seek help from ED for stronger analgesics and protection from complications such
as fever or respiratory distress
Caregivers may be exhausted from caring for the child for several days with little or no rest
All methods of comfort were used around the clock to reduce the pain and avoid going to the hospital
Pain increased despite all efforts
Decision is made to take the child to ED

VI

Pain decrease starting point
Pain begins to resolve after the use of IV fluids and analgesics
Analgesics sedate the child and allow the child to sleep for longer periods
Pain described as “slowly decreasing”
Pain is still sharp and throbbing

VII

Steady pain decline
Pain decreased slowly or rapidly
Child takes more interest in surroundings, roommates, and visitors
Child is less irritable
Level of activity increased—child may be taken to tub room for warm bath, may watch television, may play games
with other children or hospital volunteers
Mobility has improved
Pain levels reported as “just a little”
More animation in behaviors evident

VIII

Pain resolution
Pain is at a tolerable level
Child may be discharged from the hospital on mild oral analgesics; child is at or close to baseline conditions, with
behavior, appearance, and mood more normal
Caregiver and child attempt to regain, recapture, and catch up with life as it was before the pain event

DATA FROM ADULTS
I

Evolving/infarctive phase
3 days
↓ RBC deformability
↓ Hemoglobin
↑ % of dense RBCs
↑ RDW, ↑ HDW
S/S: fear, anorexia, anxiety, ↑ pain

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies

2971

Table 511.3  Phases of a Painful Episode in Patients with Sickle Cell Disease—cont’d
PHASE

DESCRIPTION AND COMFORT MEASURES

II

Postinfarctive/inflammatory phase
4-­5 days
↓ Hemoglobin
↑ White blood cells (leukocytosis)
↑ Acute-­phase reactants C-­reactive protein
↑ Reticulocytes, ↑ LDH, ↑ CPK
↑ % dense RBCs
↑ RDW, ↑ HDW
S/S: fever, severe steady pain, swelling, tenderness, joint stiffness, joint effusions

III

Resolving/healing/recovery/postcrisis phase
↑ RBC deformability
Hemoglobin returns to precrisis level
Retics return to precrisis levels
↓ % of dense RBCs
↓ RDW, ↓ HDW
↓ ISC
Precursors to relapse that happens in phase III: ↑ platelets, ↑ acute-­phase reactants (fibrinogen, α1-­acid glycoprotein,
osmomucoid), ↑ viscosity, ↑ ESR
↑ Retics expressing the ↑ α4β1-­integrin complex ICAM-­1

CPK, Creatinine phosphokinase; ED, emergency department; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; HDW, hemoglobin distribution width; ICAM, intracellular adhesion molecule; ISC,
irreversibly sickled cells; IV, intravenous; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; RBC, red blood cell; RDW, red cell distribution width; S/S, signs and symptoms; VOE, vasoocclusive episode.
Adapted from Jacob E. The pain experience of patients with sickle cell anemia. Pain Manage Nurs 2001;2:74–83; with data from Ballas SK, Smith ED. Red blood cell changes during
the evolution of the sickle cell painful crisis. Blood 1992;79:2154–2163; and Beyer JE, Simmons L, Woods GM, Woods PM. A chronology of pain and comfort in children with sickle cell
disease. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1999;153:913–920.

not relieve or prevent pain and is appropriate when the patient is dehydrated or unable to drink as a result of the severe pain. Opioid dependency in children with sickle cell disease is rare and should never be used
as a reason to withhold pain medication. However, patients with multiple painful episodes requiring hospitalization within 1 year or with
pain episodes that require hospitalization for >7 days should be evaluated for comorbidities and environmental stressors that are contributing to the frequency or duration of pain. Children with chronic pain
should be evaluated for other disease-­related complications, including,
but not limited to, presence of avascular necrosis, leg ulcers, and vertebral body compression fractures. A careful history is warranted to
distinguish chronic pain that often is not relieved by opioids versus
recurrent acute prolonged vasoocclusive pain episodes.
Skeletal pain (bone or bone marrow infarction) with or without fever
must be differentiated from osteomyelitis. Both Salmonella spp. and
S. aureus cause osteomyelitis in children with sickle cell disease, often
involving the diaphysis of long bones (in contrast to children without
sickle cell anemia, in whom osteomyelitis is in the metaphyseal region
of the bone). Differentiating osteomyelitis from a vasoocclusive crisis is
often difficult. Clinical signs and symptoms can be consistent with both
osteomyelitis and vasoocclusive crises because low-­grade fever pain,
swelling of the affected area, high WBC counts, and elevated C-­reactive
protein levels can be present in both. Blood, fluid, and tissue cultures,
when positive, are helpful. MRI may be useful for locating an area to
obtain fluid for culture. Ultimately, aspiration with or with or without
biopsy and culture will be needed to differentiate the two processes (see
Chapter 725).

Avascular Necrosis

Avascular necrosis (AVN) occurs at a higher rate among children with
sickle cell disease than in the general population and is a source of
both acute and chronic pain. Most often, the femoral head is affected.
AVN of the hip may cause limp and leg-­length discrepancy. Other sites
affected include the humeral head and mandible. Risk factors for AVN
include HbSS disease with α-­thalassemia trait, frequent vasoocclusive
episodes, and elevated hematocrit (for patients with sickle cell anemia). Optimal treatment of AVN has not been determined, and individual management requires consultation with a sickle cell specialist,
orthopedic surgeon, physical therapist, and primary care physician.

Initial management should include referral to a pediatric orthopedist and a physical therapist to address strategies to increase strength
and decrease weight-­bearing daily activities that may exacerbate the
pain associated with AVN as well as to determine whether surgical
approaches may be beneficial. Opioids are often used but usually can
be tapered after the acute pain has subsided. Regular blood transfusion
therapy has not been demonstrated as an effective therapy to abate the
acute and chronic pain associated with AVN.

Priapism

Priapism, defined as an unwanted painful erection of the penis, affects
males of all sickle genotypes but most frequently affects males with
sickle cell anemia. The mean age of first episode is 15 years, although
priapism has been reported in children as young as 3 years. The actuarial probability of a patient experiencing priapism is approximately
90% by 20 years of age.
Priapism occurs in two patterns: prolonged, lasting >4 hours, or stuttering, with brief episodes that resolve spontaneously but may occur
in clusters and herald a prolonged event. Both types occur from early
childhood to adulthood. Most episodes occur between 3 am and 9 am.
Priapism in sickle cell disease represents a low-­flow state caused by
venous stasis from RBC sickling in the corpora cavernosa. Recurrent
prolonged episodes of priapism are associated with erectile dysfunction (impotence).
The optimal treatment for acute priapism is unknown. Supportive
therapy, such as a hot shower, short aerobic exercise, or pain medication,
is often used by patients at home. A prolonged episode lasting >4 hours
should be treated by aspiration of blood from the corpora cavernosa, followed by irrigation with dilute epinephrine to produce immediate and
sustained detumescence. Urology consultation is required to initiate this
procedure, with appropriate input from a hematologist. Simple blood
transfusion with exchange transfusion has been proposed for the acute
treatment of priapism, but limited evidence supports this strategy as the
initial management. If no benefit is obtained from surgical management,
transfusion therapy should be considered. However, detumescence may
not occur for up to 24 hours (much longer than with urologic aspiration) after transfusion, and transfusion for priapism has been associated with acute neurologic events. Consultation with a hematologist and
urologist will help identify therapies to prevent recurrences.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2972 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Neurologic Complications

Neurologic complications associated with sickle cell disease are varied
and complex, ranging from acute ischemic stroke with focal neurologic deficit to clinically silent abnormalities found on imaging. Before
the development of transcranial Doppler ultrasonography to screen
for stroke risk among children with sickle cell anemia, approximately
11% experienced an overt stroke before age 20. A functional definition of overt stroke is the presence of a focal neurologic deficit lasting
for >24 hours and/or abnormal neuroimaging of the brain indicating a cerebral infarct on T2-­weighted MRI corresponding to the focal
neurologic deficit (Figs. 511.2 and 511.3). A silent cerebral infarct lacks
focal neurologic findings and is diagnosed by abnormal imaging on

A

B

Fig. 511.2 MRI and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the

brain. A, T2-­weighted MRI shows remote infarction of the territories
of the left anterior cerebral artery and middle cerebral artery. B, MRA
shows occlusion of the left internal carotid artery siphon distal to the
takeoff of the ophthalmic artery.

T2-­weighted MRI. The prevalence of silent infarct among children with
HbSS is around 35%. Children with other types of sickle cell disease,
such as HbSC or HbSβ+-­thalassemia, develop overt or silent cerebral
infarcts as well, but at a lower frequency than children with HbSS and
HbSβ0-­thalassemia. Other neurologic complications include transient
ischemic attacks, headaches that may or may not correlate to degree of
anemia, seizures, cerebral venous thrombosis, cerebral vasculopathy,
and posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). Chiari
I malformations can occur in older children with sickle cell disease.
Fat embolism syndrome (associated with bone marrow infarction)
is a rapidly progressive, potentially fatal complication involving pain,
respiratory distress, changes in mental status, and multiorgan system
failure. When this syndrome is identified early, exchange transfusion
therapy has improved patient survival in small case series. Skull infarction can lead to a subgaleal hematoma or epidural bleed, which may
present as altered mental status.
For patients presenting with acute focal neurologic deficit, a prompt
pediatric neurologic evaluation and consultation with a pediatric
hematologist is recommended. In addition, oxygen administration
to keep oxygen saturation (So2) >96% and blood transfusion within
2 hours of presentation, with a goal of increasing Hb to a maximum
of 10 g/dL, is warranted. A timely simple blood transfusion is important because this is the most efficient strategy to dramatically increase
oxygen content of the blood, particularly when exchange transfusion
is not readily available. However, greatly exceeding this posttransfusion Hb limits oxygen delivery to the brain as a result of hyperviscosity by increasing the Hb significantly over the patient’s baseline values.
Subsequently, prompt treatment with an exchange transfusion is recommended, either manually or with automated erythrocytapheresis,
to reduce the HbS percentage to <30%. Exchange transfusion at the
time of acute stroke is associated with a decreased risk of second stroke
compared to simple transfusion alone. CT of the head to exclude
cerebral hemorrhage should be performed as soon as possible, and, if
available, MRI of the brain with diffusion-­weighted imaging to distinguish between ischemic infarcts and PRES. MR venography is useful
to evaluate the possibility of cerebral venous thrombosis, a rare but
potential cause of focal neurologic deficit in children with sickle cell
disease. MR angiography may identify evidence of cerebral vasculopathy; these images are not critical in the initial time management of a
child with sickle cell disease presenting with a focal neurologic deficit
but are important for long-­term management.
The clinical presentation of PRES or central venous thrombosis can
mimic a stroke but would require a different treatment course. For both
PRES and cerebral venous thrombosis, the optimal management has
not been defined in patients with sickle cell disease, resulting in the
need for consultation with both a pediatric neurologist and a pediatric
hematologist. The primary approach for prevention of recurrent overt
stroke is blood transfusion therapy aimed at keeping the maximum
HbS concentration <30%. Despite regular blood transfusion therapy,
approximately 20% of patients will have a second stroke and 30% of
this group will have a third.

Transcranial Doppler Ultrasonography

Fig. 511.3 Fast fluid-­attenuated inversion recovery sequence MRI of
the brain showing a right hemisphere border-­zone cerebral infarction
in a child with sickle cell anemia. (From Switzer JA, Hess DC, Nichols
F, et al. Pathophysiology and treatment of stroke in sickle-­cell disease:
present and future. Lancet Neurol 2006;5:501–512.)

Primary prevention of overt stroke can be accomplished using screening transcranial Doppler ultrasonography (TCD) assessment of the
blood velocity in the terminal portion of the internal carotid and the
proximal portion of the middle cerebral artery. Children with sickle
cell anemia with an elevated time-­averaged mean maximum (TAMM)
blood flow velocity ≥200 cm/sec (abnormal study) are at increased
risk for a cerebrovascular event. A repeat study should be performed
within a week to confirm the result. However, a single value ≥220 cm/
sec is concerning and does not require repeating before recommending an intervention. A TAMM measurement of <200 but ≥170 cm/sec
represents a conditional threshold. A repeat measurement is suggested
within a few months because of the high rate of conversion to a TCD
velocity >200 cm/sec in this group of patients.
Two distinct methods of measuring TCD velocity are a nonimaging technique and an imaging technique. The nonimaging technique
was the method used in the stroke prevention trial sponsored by the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
National Institutes of Health, whereas most pediatric radiologists in
practice use the imaging technique. When compared to each other, the
imaging technique produces values that are 10–15% below those of the
nonimaging technique. The imaging technique uses the time-­averaged
mean of the maximum velocity (TAMX), and this measure is believed
to be equivalent to the nonimaging calculation of TAMM. A downward adjustment for the transfusion threshold is appropriate for centers using the imaging method to assess TCD velocity. The magnitude
of the transfusion threshold in the imaging technique has not been
settled, but a transfusion threshold of a TAMX of 185 cm/sec and a
conditional threshold of TAMX of 165 cm/sec seem reasonable. Alternatively, some experts recommend using the same thresholds regardless of technique.
Children with abnormal TCD studies should begin chronic blood
transfusion therapy to maintain HbS levels <30% to decrease the risk
of first stroke. This strategy results in an over 90% reduction in the
rate of overt strokes. Once transfusion therapy is initiated, a subset of
patients at low risk for the development of increased TCD values, such
as those without MRA-­confirmed cerebral vasculopathy, may be able
to transition from chronic transfusions to long-­term hydroxyurea therapy. Acute stroke risk is decreased when hydroxyurea use and chronic
transfusions overlap until a robust therapeutic response to hydroxyurea is achieved.

Pulmonary Complications

Lung disease in children with sickle cell disease is the second most common reason for hospital admission and is associated with significant
mortality. ACS refers to a life-­threatening pulmonary complication of
sickle cell disease defined as a new radiodensity on chest radiography.
Other clinical definitions include clinical features such as fever, respiratory distress, hypoxia, cough, and chest pain (Fig. 511.4). Even in
the absence of respiratory symptoms, very young children with fever
should receive a chest radiograph to identify evolving ACS because
clinical examination alone is insufficient to identify patients with a new
radiographic density. Early detection of ACS may alter clinical management. The radiographic findings in ACS are variable but may include
single-­lobe involvement, predominantly left lower lobe; multiple lobes,
most often both lower lobes; and pleural effusions, either unilateral or
bilateral. ACS may progress rapidly from a simple infiltrate to extensive
infiltrates and a pleural effusion. Therefore continuous pulse oximetry
and frequent clinical exams are required, and repeat chest x-­ray films
may be indicated for progressive hypoxia, dyspnea, tachypnea, and
other signs of respiratory distress.
Most patients with ACS do not have a single identifiable cause. Infection is the most well-­known etiology, yet only 30% of ACS episodes will

A

B

2973

have positive sputum or bronchoalveolar culture, and the most common bacterial pathogens are S. pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae,
and Chlamydia spp. The most frequent event preceding ACS is a painful episode requiring systemic opioid treatment. Fat emboli have also
been implicated as a cause of ACS, arising from infarcted bone marrow,
and can be life-­threatening if large amounts are released to the lungs.
Fat emboli can be difficult to diagnose but should be considered in any
patient with sickle cell disease presenting with rapid onset of respiratory distress and altered mental status changes. Petechial rash may also
occur but may be difficult to detect if not carefully sought.
Given that the causes of ACS are varied, recommended management is also multimodal (Table 511.4). The type of opioid, with overuse of morphine being more likely to cause ACS than nalbuphine

Table 511.4  Overall Strategies for the Management of
Acute Chest Syndrome
PREVENTION
Incentive spirometry and periodic ambulation in patients admitted
for sickle cell pain, surgery, or febrile episodes
Watchful waiting in any hospitalized child or adult with sickle cell
disease (pulse oximetry monitoring and frequent respiratory assessments)
Cautious use of intravenous fluids
Intense education and optimum care of patients who have sickle cell
anemia and asthma
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING AND LABORATORY MONITORING
Blood cultures, if febrile
Nasopharyngeal samples for viral culture (respiratory syncytial virus,
influenza), depending on clinical setting
Complete blood counts every day and appropriate chemistries
Continuous pulse oximetry
Chest radiographs, for persistent or progressive illness
TREATMENT
Blood transfusion (simple or exchange), depending on clinical features; consider maintaining an active type and cross match
Supplemental O2 for drop in pulse oximetry by 4% over baseline, or
values <90%
Empirical antibiotics (third-­generation cephalosporin and macrolide)
Continued respiratory therapy (incentive spirometry and chest physiotherapy as necessary)
Bronchodilators and corticosteroids for patients with asthma
Optimum pain control and fluid management

Fig. 511.4 Probable pulmonary infarction in a 15-­
year-­
old patient with
HbSS. A, Frontal radiograph shows
consolidation and a small pleural effusion posteriorly in the right lower lobe.
B, Radiograph obtained <24 hr later
shows massive right middle and lower
lobe consolidation and effusion. No
organisms could be cultured. The diagnosis of “probably pulmonary infarction” was established clinically. (Courtesy Dr. Thomas L. Stovis, Children’s
Hospital of Michigan, Detroit. From
Kuhn JP, Stovis TL, Haller JO: Caffey’s
Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 10th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby, 2004. p. 1087.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2974 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
hydrochloride, is associated with an increase in the risk of ACS, in
part because of sedation and hypoventilation. However, under no circumstance should opioid administration be limited to prevent ACS;
rather, other measures must be taken to prevent ACS from developing.
In patients with pain, regular use of an incentive spirometer at 10-­12
breaths every 2 hours can significantly reduce the frequency of subsequent ACS episodes. Because of the clinical overlap between pneumonia and ACS, all episodes should be treated promptly with antimicrobial
therapy, including at least a macrolide and a third-­generation cephalosporin. A previous diagnosis of asthma or wheezing with ACS should
prompt treatment following standard of care for an asthma exacerbation with bronchodilators. The diagnosis of ACS does not negate the
recommended management of a patient with asthma exacerbation.
Oxygen should be administered for patients who demonstrate hypoxia.
Blood transfusion therapy using either simple or exchange (manual or
automated) transfusion is the only method to abort a rapidly progressing ACS episode. The decision when to give blood and whether the
transfusion should be a simple or exchange transfusion is less clearly
defined. Usually, blood transfusions are given when at least one of the
following clinical features are present: decreasing So2, increasing work
of breathing, rapidly changing respiratory effort either with or without a worsening chest radiograph, a dropping Hb of 2 g/dL below the
patient’s baseline, or previous history of severe ACS requiring admission to the intensive care unit.
Pulmonary hypertension has been identified as a major long time
risk factor for death in adults with sickle cell anemia. The natural history of pulmonary hypertension in children with sickle cell anemia is
unknown. Asymptomatic patients do not require screening for pulmonary hypertension. The initial diagnostic test is an echocardiogram
and, depending on the severity of those findings, the echocardiogram
should be followed by right-­sided heart catheterization. Clinical findings suggestive of pulmonary hypertension include hypoxia or dyspnea
at rest or with exertion, comorbid vascular complications (leg ulcers,
priapism), elevated N-­terminal, pro-­B-­type natriuretic peptide, or an
abnormal 6-­minute walk distance.

Renal Disease and Enuresis

Renal disease among patients with sickle cell disease is a major comorbid condition that can lead to premature death. Seven sickle cell disease
nephropathies have been identified: gross hematuria, papillary necrosis, nephrotic syndrome, renal infarction, hyposthenuria, pyelonephritis, and renal medullary carcinoma. The presentation of these entities
is varied but may include hematuria, proteinuria, renal insufficiency,
concentrating defects, or hypertension.
The common presence of nocturnal enuresis occurring in children with sickle cell disease is not well defined but is troublesome
for affected children and their parents. The overall prevalence of
enuresis was 33% in the Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease,
with the highest prevalence (42%) among children 6-­8 years old.
Furthermore, enuresis may still occur in approximately 9% of older
adolescents. Patients with sickle cell disease and nocturnal enuresis should have a systematic evaluation for recurrent urinary tract
infections, kidney function, and possibly obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome. Unfortunately, most children with nocturnal enuresis do
not have an etiology, and targeted therapeutic interventions have
been of limited success.

Cognitive and Psychologic Complications

Ongoing evaluation of the family unit and identification of the
resources available to cope with a chronic illness are critical for optimal management. Children and adolescents with sickle cell disease
have decreased quality of life, as measured on standardized assessments, compared to their siblings and children with other chronic
diseases. Furthermore, children with sickle cell disease are at great
risk for academic failure and have a 20% high school graduation rate,
possibly because, among other reasons, approximately one third of
children with sickle cell anemia have had a cerebral infarct, either
silent or an overt stroke. Early school-­age children with sickle cell
anemia should have MRI without sedation to screen for silent cerebral
ischemia. Children with cerebral infarcts require ongoing cognitive

and school performance assessment so that education resources can
be focused to optimize educational attainment. Participation in relevant support groups and group activities, such as camps for children
with sickle cell disease, may be of direct benefit by improving self-­
esteem and establishing peer relationships.

Other Complications

In addition to the previous organ dysfunctions, patients with sickle cell
disease can have other significant complications. These complications
include, but are not limited to, sickle cell retinopathy, delayed onset of
puberty, leg ulcers, and complications associated with pregnancy. Optimal treatment for each of these entities has not been determined, and
individual management requires consultation with the hematologist
and primary care physician. Reproductive health issues are prevalent
in children and adolescents with sickle cell disease; therefore hematologists, adolescent medicine teams, and obstetrics/gynecology teams
should co-­manage patients to provide optimal care.

THERAPEUTIC CONSIDERATIONS
Hydroxyurea

Hydroxyurea is a well-­established drug proven effective in reducing
the frequency of acute pain episodes. In adults with sickle cell anemia,
hydroxyurea decreases the rate of hospitalization for painful episodes
by 50% and the rate of ACS and blood transfusion by almost 50%. In
addition, adults taking hydroxyurea have shorter hospitalizations and
require less analgesic medication during hospitalization.
In children with sickle cell anemia, hydroxyurea is safe and well
tolerated. The primary toxicities are limited to myelosuppression that
reverses on cessation of the drug. Infants treated with hydroxyurea
experience fewer episodes of pain, dactylitis, and ACS; are hospitalized less frequently; and less often require a blood transfusion. Infants
treated with hydroxyurea do not experience increased rates of bacteremia or serious infection.
Current recommendations are that all children with sickle cell anemia
should be offered hydroxyurea beginning at 9 months of age. Hydroxyurea may be indicated for other sickle cell–related complications,
especially in patients who are unable to tolerate other treatments. For
patients who either will not or cannot continue blood transfusion therapy to prevent recurrent stroke, hydroxyurea therapy may be a reasonable alternative. The trial assessing the efficacy of hydroxyurea as an
alternative to transfusions to prevent a second stroke was terminated
early after the data safety and monitoring process found an increased
stroke rate in the hydroxyurea arm compared to the transfusion arm.
Hydroxyurea alone is inferior to transfusion therapy for secondary
stroke prevention in patients who do not have contraindications to
ongoing transfusions.
The long-­term toxicity associated with initiating hydroxyurea in very
young children has not yet been established. However, all evidence to
date suggests that the benefits far outweigh the risks. For these reasons,
very young children starting hydroxyurea require well-­informed parents
and medical care by pediatric hematologists, or at least co-­management
by a physician with expertise in immunosuppressive medications. The
typical starting dose of hydroxyurea is 15-­20 mg/kg once daily, with an
incremental dosage increase every 8 weeks of 5 mg/kg, and if no toxicities occur, up to a maximum of 35 mg/kg per day. The infant hydroxyurea study found young children could safely be started at 20 mg/kg/
day without increased toxicity. Achievement of the therapeutic effect of
hydroxyurea can require several months, and for this reason, initiating
hydroxyurea to address short-­term symptom relief is not optimal. We
prefer to introduce the concept to parents within the first year of life, preferably by 9 months; provide literature that describes both the pros and
cons of starting hydroxyurea in children with severe symptoms of sickle
cell disease; and educate parents on starting hydroxyurea in asymptomatic children as a preventive therapy for repetitive pain and ACS events.
Other effects of hydroxyurea that may vary include an increase in the
total Hb level and a decrease in the TCD velocity.
Other medications are available for long-­term use in children and
adults with sickle cell disease. Oral L-­glutamine reduces hospitalizations and sickle cell crisis in children age 5 years and older. In addition, crizanlizumab, a humanized P-­selectin inhibitor administered

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
monthly IV, is indicated for reducing acute pain in adults and children
age 16 years and older. Voxelotor, a sickle hemoglobin polymerization
inhibitor, is FDA-­approved for adults and children 4 years and older. In
clinical trials, Voxelotor demonstrated reduced hemolysis in patients
with sickle cell disease.

Gene Therapy

The FDA (2023) has approved two different gene therapy approaches
to ex vivo gene modification of autologous hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells following myeloablative conditioning. Both therapies
are approved for patients ≥12 years of age with recurrent vasoocclusive
crises.
Casgevy (exagamglogene autotemcel: exa-cel), involves gene editing
with CRISPR/Cas9 (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats / CRISPR associated nuclease 9). Exa-cel specifically targets
and inactivates the red cell precursor BCL11A gene (a suppressor of
fetal hemoglobin expression), which results in increased production
of fetal hemoglobin (which does not sickle), resulting in decreased
polymerization of sickle hemoglobin.
Lyfgenia (lovotibeglogene autotemcel: lovo-cel) is a gene addition
approach using a lentiviral vector carrying a modified beta globin gene
(beta-A-T87Q globin), thus increasing the levels of hemoglobin A.
Both have been successful in reducing or eliminating vasoocclusive
crises after therapy. Lyfgenia has a black box warning for the risk of
off target editing /insertional mutagenesis and the possibility of acute
myeloid leukemia.

Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation

The only currently approved cure for sickle cell anemia is transplantation with human leukocyte antigen (HLA)–matched hematopoietic
stem cells from a sibling donor (allogenic) without sickle cell disease. Because of the limited availability of appropriate sibling donors,
research is exploring a wide variety of curative regimens. Clinical trials
are underway to explore unrelated and partially matched related donor
stem cell transplants.
The most common indications for allogenic transplant are recurrent ACS, stroke, and abnormal TCD. Sibling-­matched stem cell transplantation has a lower risk for graft-­versus-­host disease than unrelated
donors. Surveys suggest that younger children may have lower morbidity and mortality. The decision to consider unrelated transplantation
should involve appropriate consultation and counseling from physicians with expertise in sickle cell transplantation.
Stem cell transplantation for children with sickle cell disease who
have a genetically matched sibling and few complications is less commonly performed. The use of hydroxyurea has dramatically decreased
the disease burden for the patient and family, with far fewer hospitalizations for pain or ACS episodes and less use of blood transfusions.
The field of stem cell transplantation is also progressing such that larger
studies involving nonsibling donor and haploidentical donor transplantation. Transplant-­related complications caused by conditioning
regimens may be decreased by using low-­intensity, nonmyeloablative
HLA-­matched sibling, allogenic stem cell transplantation.

Red Blood Cell Transfusions

RBC transfusions are used frequently both in the treatment of acute
complications and to prevent acute or recurrent complications. Typically, short-­term transfusions are used to prevent progression of acute
complications such as ACS, aplastic crisis, splenic sequestration, and
acute stroke, as well as to prevent surgery-­related ACS. RBC transfusions are not recommended for uncomplicated acute pain events. Select
RBC volumes judiciously to avoid high posttransfusion Hb levels and
hyperviscosity. Long-­term or chronic transfusion therapy is used to
prevent first stroke in patients with abnormal TCD or MRI findings
(silent stroke), recurrent stroke, or recurrent ACS. Patients with sickle
cell disease are at increased risk of developing alloantibodies to less
common RBC surface antigens after receiving even a single transfusion. In addition to standard cross matching for major blood group
antigens (A, B, O, RhD), more extended matching should be performed
to identify donor units that are C-­, E-­, and Kell-­antigen matched. Full
RBC antigen phenotyping or genotyping for all patients with sickle cell

2975

disease should be performed before RBC transfusion whenever possible to have the RBC units least likely to result in alloimmunization
available for these patients.
Three methods of blood transfusion therapy are used in the management of acute and chronic complications associated with sickle cell
disease: automated erythrocytapheresis, manual exchange transfusion (phlebotomy of a set amount of patient’s blood followed by rapid
administration of donated packed RBCs), and simple transfusion. The
decision on which method to use depends on the patient’s pretransfusion Hb level, the clinical indication, RBC alloimmunization, and transfusional iron overload. Exchange transfusion, manual or automated,
is preferable for patients with new neurologic symptoms. Automated
erythrocytapheresis is the preferred method for patients requiring
chronic blood transfusion therapy because there is a minimum net iron
balance after the procedure, followed by manual exchange transfusion.
However, this method requires technical expertise, special machines,
and good patient venous access. Manual exchange is more accessible.
However, both methods may expose the patient to more RBC units
and possible alloimmunization. Simple transfusion therapy may lower
donor exposure and be more readily available but may result in higher
net iron burden when compared to erythrocytapheresis or exchange
transfusion.
Preparation for surgery for children with sickle cell disease requires
a coordinated effort from the hematologist, surgeon, anesthesiologist,
and primary care provider. Historically, ACS was associated with general
anesthesia in patients with sickle cell disease. Blood transfusion before
surgery for children with sickle cell disease is recommended to raise Hb
level preoperatively to no more than 10 g/dL, to avoid ACS development.
Because of better general perioperative care and the use of long-­term
therapies such as hydroxyurea and chronic transfusions, the decision
to transfuse before general anesthesia should be made in conjunction
with the medical team who provides sickle cell disease–related care for
the patient. When preparing a child with sickle cell disease for surgery
with a simple blood transfusion, caution must be used not to elevate Hb
level beyond 10 g/dL because of the risk of hyperviscosity syndrome.
For children with milder forms of sickle cell disease, such as HbSC or
HbSβ-­thalassemia, a decision must be made on a case-­by-­case basis as to
whether an exchange transfusion is warranted because a simple transfusion may raise the hemoglobin to an unacceptable level.

Iron Overload

The primary toxic effect of blood transfusion therapy relates to excessive iron stores or iron overload, which can result in organ damage and
premature death. Excessive iron stores develop after 100 mL/kg of RBC
transfusion, or about 10 transfusions. The assessment of iron overload
in children receiving regular blood transfusions is difficult. The most
common and least invasive method of estimating total body iron involves
serum ferritin levels. Ferritin measurements have significant limitations
in their ability to estimate iron stores for several reasons, including, but
not limited to, elevation during acute inflammation and poor correlation with excessive iron in specific organs, such as the heart and endocrine glands. MRI of the liver has proved to the most effective approach
for assessment of iron stores. MRI T2* and MRI R2 and R2* sequences
are used to estimate iron levels in the heart and liver. These imaging
strategies are more accurate than serum ferritin in estimating heart
and liver iron content. The standard for iron assessment previously was
liver biopsy, which is an invasive procedure exposing children to the
risk of general anesthesia, bleeding, and pain. Liver biopsy alone does
not accurately estimate total body iron because iron deposition in the
liver is not homogeneous and does not always correlate with iron levels
in the heart and other organs. The major advantage of a liver biopsy is
that histologic assessment of the parenchyma can be ascertained along
with appropriate staging of suspected pathology, particularly cirrhosis.
The primary treatment of transfusion-­related iron overload requires
iron chelation using medical therapy. In the United States, three chelating
agents are approved for use in transfusional iron overload. Deferoxamine
is administered subcutaneously 5 of 7 nights/week over 8 to 12 hours a
night. Deferasirox is taken by mouth daily, and deferiprone is available in
tablet forms taken orally twice or three times a day and an oral solution
taken three times a day. The FDA approved deferasirox for use in patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2976 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
age ≥2 years. A pill formulation of deferasirox is available that does not
require mixing before oral administration. A sprinkle formulation that
is mixed with a soft food such as applesauce also is available for young
children who are unable to swallow pills. Deferiprone is an older oral chelator that has been widely used outside the United States for many years
and was also approved as a first-­line agent (see Table 511.8). Because of a
1–2% risk of agranulocytosis, weekly CBC monitoring is recommended,
particularly in the first 6 months of treatment and with any febrile illness. Transfusion-­related excessive iron stores in children with sickle cell
disease should be managed by a physician with expertise in chelation
therapy because of the need for close monitoring and due to the risk of
significant toxicity from available chelation therapies.

OTHER SICKLE CELL SYNDROMES

The most common sickle cell syndromes besides HbSS are HbSC, HbSβ0-­
thalassemia, and HbSβ+-­
thalassemia. The other syndromes—HbSD,
HbSOArab, HbSHPFH, HbSE, and other variants—are much less common. Patients with HbSβ0-­thalassemia have a clinical phenotype similar
to those with HbSS. In the RBCs of patients with HbSC, crystals of HbC
interact with membrane ion transport, dehydrating RBCs and inducing sickling. Children who have HbSC disease can experience the same
symptoms and complications as those with severe HbSS disease, but less
frequently. Children with HbSC have increased incidence of retinopathy, chronic hypersplenism, and acute splenic sequestration over the life
span. The natural history of the other sickle cell syndromes is variable
and difficult to predict because of the lack of systematic evaluation.
There is no validated model that can predict the clinical course of
an individual with sickle cell disease. A patient with HbSC can have a
more severe clinical course than a patient with HbSS. Management of
end-­organ dysfunction in children with sickle cell syndromes requires
the same general principles as managing patients with sickle cell anemia; however, each situation should be managed on a case-­by-­case
basis and requires consultation with a pediatric hematologist.

ANTICIPATORY GUIDANCE

Children with sickle cell disease should receive general health maintenance as recommended for all children, with special attention to
disease-­specific guidance and infection prevention education. In addition to counseling regarding adherence to penicillin and a vaccination
schedule, patients, parents, and caregivers should be instructed to seek
immediate medical attention for all febrile illness. In addition, early
detection of acute splenic sequestration has been shown to decrease
mortality. Therefore parents and caregivers should be educated early
and repeatedly about the importance of daily penicillin administration
and correct palpation of the spleen.

Prophylactic Penicillin

Children with sickle cell anemia should receive prophylactic oral penicillin VK until at least 5 years of age (125 mg twice daily up to age 3
years, then 250 mg twice daily thereafter). No established guidelines
exist for penicillin prophylaxis beyond 5 years of age; some clinicians
continue penicillin prophylaxis, and others recommend discontinuation. Penicillin prophylaxis should be continued beyond 5 years in children with a history of pneumococcal infection because of the increased
risk of a recurrent infection. An alternative for children who are allergic to penicillin is erythromycin ethylsuccinate.

Immunizations

In addition to penicillin prophylaxis, routine childhood immunizations, as well as the annual administration of influenza vaccine, are
highly recommended. Children with sickle cell disease develop functional asplenia and also require immunizations to protect against
encapsulated organisms, including additional pneumococcal and
meningococcal vaccinations. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) provides vaccination guidelines at https://www.cdc.
gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-­recs/index.html.

Spleen Palpation

Splenomegaly is a common complication of sickle cell disease, and splenic
sequestration can be life threatening. Parents and primary caregivers

should be taught how to palpate the spleen to determine if the spleen is
enlarging starting at the first visit, with reinforcement at subsequent visits.
Parents should also demonstrate spleen palpation to the provider.

Transcranial Doppler Ultrasound

Primary stroke prevention using TCD has resulted in a decrease in
the prevalence of overt stroke among children with sickle cell anemia.
Children with HbSS or HbSβ0-­thalassemia should be screened annually
with TCD starting at age 2 years. TCD is best performed when the child
is quietly awake and in their usual state of health. TCD measurements
may be falsely elevated or decreased in the settings of acute anemia,
sedation, pain, fever, or immediately after blood transfusions. Screening
should occur annually from ages 2-­16 years. Abnormal values should
be repeated within a week to identify patients at greatest risk of overt
stroke. Conditional values should be repeated within at least 3 months,
and normal values should be repeated annually. Routine neuroimaging
with MRI in asymptomatic patients requires consultation with a pediatric hematologist or neurologist with expertise in sickle cell disease.

Hydroxyurea

Recommendations include offering hydroxyurea therapy to all children
with sickle cell anemia starting at 9 months of age regardless of clinical
symptoms. Monitoring children receiving hydroxyurea is labor intensive.
Hydroxyurea is a chemotherapeutic agent, and patients receiving this
agent require the same level of nursing and physician oversight as any child
with cancer receiving chemotherapy. The parents must be educated about
the consequences of therapy, and when ill, children should be promptly
evaluated. Starting doses should be approximately 20 mg/kg/day. CBC
with differential and reticulocyte count should be checked within 4 weeks
after initiation of therapy or any dose change to monitor for hematologic
toxicity, then every 8-­12 weeks. Dose escalation should be based on clinical and laboratory parameters. If appropriate, dose increases should be in 5
mg/kg/day increments to a maximum of 35 mg/kg/day.
While receiving hydroxyurea, steady-­state absolute neutrophil count
should be approximately 2,000/μL or higher and platelet count should
be 80,000/μL or higher. However, children may tolerate lower absolute neutrophil counts while receiving hydroxyurea. Holding hydroxyurea and adjusting to lower doses may be required for neutropenia
and thrombocytopenia. Hydroxyurea is a pregnancy class D medication, and adolescents should be counseled regarding methods to prevent pregnancy while taking this medication. Close monitoring of the
patient requires a commitment by the parents and the patient as well as
diligence by a physician to identify toxicity early. Information is scarce
regarding the impact of hydroxyurea on fertility, although hydroxyurea
has been shown to further reduce sperm count in males with sickle
cell disease in several case reports; this effect may be reversible once
hydroxyurea is discontinued.

Red Cell Transfusion Therapy

At the initiation of blood transfusion therapy, children with sickle cell
disease should have testing to identify the presence of alloantibodies
and RBC phenotyping or genotyping, which is performed to identify
the best matched blood. RBC units selected should be extended antigen-­
matched for C, E, and K, when feasible. Goals of transfusion for acute
events should be established before initiating therapy, including target
posttransfusion Hb level and HbS percentage, or both. For children
receiving chronic transfusion therapy, pretransfusion HbS goals should
be defined; the most common goal is <30%. Posttransfusion Hb values
should be targeted to avoid hyperviscosity. Children, parents, and caregivers should be educated about the symptoms of delayed hemolytic
transfusion reactions. Any child with sickle cell disease with a recent history of RBC transfusion who presents with pain, dark urine, increased
scleral icterus, or symptoms of worsening anemia should be screened
for a delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction after consultation with the
blood bank. Children meeting criteria for chronic transfusion therapy
should receive annual evaluation for transfusion-­transmitted infections,
including hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and HIV. After receiving 100 mL/kg
RBC transfusions, regular assessments of iron overload should begin,
usually including measurements of serum ferritin and MRI assessments
for hepatic iron every 1-­2 years. Cardiac iron assessments should be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
performed in children over 10 years old, especially if there is a history
of poor adherence with iron chelation and/or liver iron concentration of
15 mg/g dry weight or higher. For children requiring chelation therapy,
audiology and ophthalmology exams should be performed annually and
monitoring of liver function and pituitary function performed regularly
because of iron deposition.

Pulmonary and Asthma Screening

Pulmonary complications of sickle cell disease are common and life
threatening. Asthma is common in children with sickle cell disease,
and thus evaluation for asthma symptoms and asthma risk factors
should be performed routinely, particularly given the high morbidity
and mortality. All children should receive annual screening for signs
and symptoms of lower airway disease, such as nighttime cough and
exercise-­induced cough. In children with symptoms consistent with
lower airway disease, consultation with an asthma specialist should be
considered. Pulse oximetry readings should be performed during well
visits to identify children with abnormally low daytime oxygen saturation. For children with snoring, daytime somnolence, and symptoms
associated with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS), sleep studies should be performed as necessary.

Retinopathy

Effective therapy is available for retinopathy associated with sickle cell
disease. Although all patients are at risk for development of retinopathy, those with sickle cell disease, type SC, are at very high risk. Patients
should receive annual screening by an ophthalmologist to identify vascular changes that would benefit from laser therapy. Although changes
may occur earlier, children with sickle cell disease should begin annual
screenings no later than age 10 years.

Renal Disease

Sickle cell–associated renal disease starts in infancy and may not become
clinically evident until adulthood. Chronic kidney disease is common in
adults with sickle cell disease, with high morbidity and mortality. Screening protocols for early signs of sickle nephropathy in children have not
been adopted due to lack of data. However, when creatinine elevation,
microalbuminuria, or macroalbuminuria is detected, a nephrologist
should be consulted to determine next steps for further evaluation and
possible treatment. The age to begin screening for proteinuria has not
been defined, but some experts recommend screening annually after
at least 10 years, if not sooner. If proteinuria is detected, urine studies should be repeated with an early-­morning urine collection; if the
protein remains elevated, the patient should be referred to a pediatric
nephrologist. Males with sickle cell disease should also receive counseling regarding the diagnosis and treatment of priapism. Because of the
high frequency of enuresis beyond early childhood, approximately 9%
between 18 and 20 years of age, parents and caregivers should be educated about the prolonged nature of enuresis in this disease. OSAS is
associated with an increased prevalence of enuresis in sickle cell disease.
Unfortunately, no evidence-­based therapies have been developed to treat
enuresis in children and young adults with sickle cell disease. In children
with enuresis who have symptoms and clinical features of OSAS, referral
to specialists for evaluation is recommended.

Echocardiography

Echocardiography is a screening tool to identify individuals with sickle
cell disease who have pulmonary artery hypertension (see the section
on “Pulmonary Hypertension”). Studies in adults with sickle cell disease have found that echocardiography is insensitive at identifying individuals truly at risk for pulmonary hypertension, although an elevated
tricuspid velocity measurement may still be a risk factor for premature
death in adults with sickle cell disease. Routine echocardiograms for
pulmonary hypertension screening are not recommended in asymptomatic children; however, they are recommended in patients with leg
ulcers, priapism, and connective tissue disease, as well as referral to a
pulmonary hypertension specialist for patients with new steady-­state
cardiorespiratory symptoms, heart failure, or pulmonary embolus.

2977

Additional Screening

Patients with sickle cell disease are at increased risk for behavioral
health issues, including anxiety and depression. Screening should be
performed at routine and acute visits. AVN of the hips and shoulders
is increased in patients with sickle cell disease and may be identified
early on routine physical exam. Plain radiographs may not detect early
disease; thus, when AVN is suspected and plain films are normal,
MRI should be obtained. When AVN is confirmed, patients should be
referred promptly to orthopedics and physical therapy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

511.2 Sickle Cell Trait (Hemoglobin AS)
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
The prevalence of sickle cell trait varies throughout the world; in the
United States, the incidence is 7–10% of the Black population. Because
all state newborn screening programs include sickle cell disease, for
most children, sickle cell trait is first identified on their newborn
screen. Communication of sickle cell trait status from infancy to young
adulthood for the affected individual, family, and healthcare providers
is often inconsistent, and many young adults are unaware of their sickle
cell trait status.
By definition, among individuals with sickle cell trait, the HbS level
is <50%. The life span of people with sickle cell trait is normal, and
serious complications are extremely rare. The CBC is within the normal range (Fig. 511.5B). Hemoglobin analysis is diagnostic, revealing
a predominance of HbA, typically >50%, and HbS <50%. Rare complications of sickle cell trait may exist. Sickle cell trait is reported to
be associated with exertional rhabdomyolysis in military recruits,
and possibly with sudden death during rigorous exercise. However,
whether these reports establish sickle cell trait as a risk factor that is
nonmodifiable by other genetic factors remains unclear. Other complications reported with sickle cell trait include splenic infarction at
high altitude, hematuria, hyposthenuria, deep vein thrombosis, and
susceptibility to progressive eye injury after hyphema (Table 511.5).
Renal medullary carcinoma has been reported almost exclusively in
individuals with sickle cell trait and occurs predominantly in young
people.
Children with sickle cell trait do not require limitations on physical activities as long as provisions are made for frequent rest and oral
hydration, particularly when participating in physical conditioning
or competitive sports. Sudden death in persons with sickle cell trait
while exercising under extreme conditions is most likely associated
with a second genetic factor and/or environmental factors and not
the presence of sickle cell trait itself. However, if exertional rhabdomyolysis is identified, evaluation by neurology and cardiology
should be considered. No causal pathway has been implicated for the
presence of sickle cell trait and sudden death. All patients with sickle
cell trait who participate in rigorous athletic activities should receive
maximum hydration and appropriate rest during exertion, as would
be the precautionary steps for all athletes, particularly when participating in hot, humid conditions. The presence of sickle cell trait
should never be a reason to exclude a person from athletic participation but rather should serve as an indication that prudent surveillance is necessary to ensure appropriate hydration and prevention
of exhaustion from heat or other strenuous exercise. If athletes are
to be screened for sickle cell trait, the appropriate procedure is testing using a hemoglobin electrophoresis followed by genetic counseling, along with the knowledge that genetic information may provide
opportunities to challenge paternity. Such situations are typically
handled by a pediatrician or hematologist accustomed to providing
both a balanced approach to genetic counseling and addressing the
challenges about paternity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2978 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 511.5 Red blood cell morphology associated with hemoglobin disorders. A, Sickle cell anemia (HbSS): target cells and fixed (irreversibly
sickled) cells. B, Sickle cell trait (HbAS): normal red blood cell (RBC) morphology. C, Hemoglobin CC: target cells and occasional spherocytes. D,
Congenital Heinz body anemia (unstable hemoglobin): RBCs stained with supravital stain (brilliant cresyl blue) reveal intracellular inclusions. E, Homozygous β0-­thalassemia: severe hypochromia with deformed RBCs and normoblasts. F, Hemoglobin H disease (α-­thalassemia): anisopoikilocytosis
with target cells. (Courtesy Dr. John Bolles, The ASH Collection, University of Washington, Seattle.)

Table 511.5  Complications Reported with Sickle Cell Trait
Renal medullary cancer
Hematuria
Renal papillary necrosis
Hyposthenuria
Splenic infarction at high altitudes
Exertional rhabdomyolysis
Protection against severe complications of falciparum malaria
Microalbuminuria (adults)
From Tsaras G, Owusu-­Ansah A, Boateng O, et al. Complications associated with sickle
cell trait: a brief narrative review. Am J Med 2009;122:507–512.

511.3 Other Hemoglobinopathies
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski

HEMOGLOBIN C

The pathogenic variant for HbC is at the same site as in HbS, with substitution of lysine instead of valine for glutamine. In the United States,
hemoglobin C trait (HbAC) occurs in 1:40 and homozygous hemoglobin C disease (HbCC) occurs in 1:5,000 of the Black population. HbAC
is asymptomatic. HbCC can result in mild anemia, splenomegaly, and
cholelithiasis; rare cases of spontaneous splenic rupture have been
reported. Splenic dysfunction does not occur. This condition is usually
diagnosed through newborn screening programs. HbC crystallizes,
disrupting the red cell membrane, and HbC crystals may be visible on
peripheral smear (see Fig. 511.5C).

HEMOGLOBIN E

Hemoglobin E is an abnormal hemoglobin resulting from a qualitative pathogenic variant in the β-­globin gene and is the second most
common globin pathogenic variant worldwide. Patients may have
asymptomatic hemoglobin E trait (HbAE) or benign homozygous
hemoglobin E disease (HbEE). Compound heterozygous hemoglobin
E/β-­thalassemia produces clinical phenotypes ranging from moderate to severe anemia, depending on the β-­thalassemia pathogenic

variant. In California, HbE/β-­thalassemia is found almost exclusively
in persons of Southeast Asian descent, with a prevalence of 1:2,600
births.

HEMOGLOBIN D

At least 16 variants of hemoglobin exist. HbD-­Punjab (Los Angeles)
is a rare hemoglobin that is seen in 1–3% of Western Indians and in
some Europeans with Asian-­Indian ancestry and produces symptoms
of sickle cell disease when present in combination with HbS. Heterozygous HbD or hemoglobin D trait (HbAD) is clinically silent. Homozygous hemoglobin D disease (HbDD) produces a mild to moderate
anemia with splenomegaly.

511.4 Unstable Hemoglobin Disorders
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
At least 200 rare unstable hemoglobins have been identified; the most
common is Hb Köln. Most patients seem to have de novo pathogenic variants rather than inherited hemoglobin disorders. The best-­
studied unstable hemoglobins are the ones leading to hemoglobin
denaturation from pathogenic variants affecting heme binding. The
denatured hemoglobin can be visualized during severe hemolysis
or after splenectomy as Heinz bodies. Unlike the Heinz bodies seen
after toxic exposure, in unstable hemoglobins, Heinz bodies are present in reticulocytes and older RBCs (see Fig. 511.5D). Heterozygotes
are asymptomatic.
Children with homozygous gene pathogenic variants can present in
early childhood with anemia and splenomegaly or with unexplained
hemolytic anemia. Hemolysis is increased with febrile illness and with
the ingestion of oxidant medications (similar to glucose-­6-­phosphate
dehydrogenase [G6PD] deficiency [see Chapter 512.3]) with some
unstable hemoglobins. If the spleen is functional, the blood smear can
appear almost normal or have only hypochromasia and basophilic stippling. A diagnosis may be made by demonstrating Heinz bodies, Hb
instability, or an abnormal Hb analysis (although some unstable hemoglobins have normal mobility and are not detected on Hb analysis).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies

2979

Treatment is supportive. Transfusion may be required during
hemolytic episodes in severe cases. Oxidative drugs should be avoided,
and folate supplementation may be helpful if dietary deficiency is a
concern. Splenectomy may be considered in patients requiring recurrent transfusion or demonstrating poor growth, but the complications
of splenectomy, including bacterial sepsis, risk of thrombosis, and risk
of developing pulmonary hypertension, should be considered before
surgery.

Low-­affinity hemoglobins have less cyanosis than the M hemoglobins. The amino acid substitutions destabilize the oxyhemoglobin and
lead to decreased oxygen saturation. The best characterized are Hb
Kansas, Hb Beth Israel, and Hb Denver. Hb analysis (IEF and HPLC
techniques) may be normal in affected individuals. When clinically
suspected, oxygen affinity studies reveal a right-­shifted dissociation
curve, and heat testing demonstrates unstable hemoglobin. Children
present with mild cyanosis only.

511.5 Abnormal Hemoglobins with
Increased Oxygen Affinity

511.7 Hereditary Methemoglobinemia

Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
More than 110 high-­affinity hemoglobins have been characterized.
These pathogenic variants affect the state of Hb configuration during oxygenation and deoxygenation. Hemoglobin changes structure when in the oxygenated versus the deoxygenated state. The
deoxygenated state is termed the T (tense) state and is stabilized by
2,3-­diphosphoglycerate. When fully oxygenated, hemoglobin assumes
the R (relaxed) state. The exact molecular interactions between these
two states are unknown. High-­affinity hemoglobins contain pathogenic variants that either stabilize the R form or destabilize the T
form. The interactions between the R and T forms are complex, and
the mechanisms of the pathogenic variants are not known. In most
cases, the high-­affinity hemoglobins can be identified by Hb analysis;
approximately 20% must be characterized under controlled conditions
where measurements are obtained with the P50 lowered to 9-­21 mm Hg
(normal: 23-­29 mm Hg). The decreased P50 in these hemoglobins leads
to an erythrocytosis with Hb levels of 17-­20 g/dL. Levels of erythropoietin and 2,3-­DPG are normal. Patients are usually asymptomatic and
do not need phlebotomy. If phlebotomy is performed, oxygen delivery
could be problematic because of the reduced number of Hb molecules
to carry oxygen.

511.6 Abnormal Hemoglobins Causing
Cyanosis
Kim Smith-­Whitley
Abnormal hemoglobins causing cyanosis, also called structural methemoglobinemias, are rare. They are referred to as M hemoglobins
and represent a group of hemoglobin variants that result from point
pathogenic variants in one of the globin chains, α, β, or γ, located in
the heme pocket; 13 known variants exist. These unstable hemoglobins lead to hemolytic anemia, most pronounced when the β-­globin
gene is affected. Clinically, these children are cyanotic from birth,
without other signs or symptoms of disease, if the pathogenic variant is in the α-­globin gene (HbM Boston, HbM Iwate, Hb Auckland).
Infants with β-­globin pathogenic variants become cyanotic later in
infancy after the fetal hemoglobin switch (HbM Saskatoon, HbM
Chile, HbM Milwaukee 1 and 2). The γ-­chain pathogenic variants
(HbF-­M Fort Ripley, HbF-­M Osaka, HbF Cincinnati, HbF Circleville,
HbF Toms River, HbF Viseu) are all transient, presenting with cyanosis at birth, which resolves during the neonatal period after HbF
production discontinues.
The abnormal M hemoglobins exhibit autosomal dominant inheritance
and are diagnosed by Hb analysis. HbM variants may not be isolated reliably using Hb analysis (HPLC or IEF); consequently, diagnostic confirmation may require DNA sequencing or mass spectrometry. There is no
specific treatment and affected patients do not respond to treatments used
for enzyme-­deficient methemoglobinemia. Beyond cyanosis, individuals
are otherwise asymptomatic and do not require additional monitoring.
Children with the β-­globin form should avoid oxidant drugs. Individuals
with all forms have a normal life expectancy and pregnancy course.

Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
Hereditary methemoglobinemia is a clinical syndrome caused by
an increase in the serum concentration of methemoglobin either
because of congenital changes in hemoglobin synthesis or of metabolism leading to imbalances in reduction and oxidation of hemoglobin. The iron molecule in hemoglobin is normally in the ferrous state
(Fe2+), which is essential for oxygen transport. Under physiologic
conditions, there is a slow, constant loss of electrons to released
oxygen, and the ferric (Fe3+) form combines with water, producing
methemoglobin (MetHb). The newly formed MetHb has a reduced
ability to bind oxygen.
Two pathways for MetHb reduction exist. The physiologic and predominant pathway is a reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH)–dependent reaction catalyzed by cytochrome b5
reductase. This mechanism is >100-­fold more efficient than the production of MetHb. The alternate pathway uses NAD phosphate generated by G6PD in the hexose monophosphate shunt and requires an
extrinsic electron acceptor to be activated (i.e., methylene blue, ascorbic acid, riboflavin). In normal individuals, oxidation of hemoglobin
to MetHb occurs at a slow rate, 0.5–3%, which is countered by MetHb
reduction to maintain a steady state of 1% MetHb.
MetHb may be increased in the RBC because of exposure to toxic
substances or to absence of reductive pathways, such as NADH-­
cytochrome b5 reductase deficiency. Toxic methemoglobinemia is
much more common than hereditary methemoglobinemia (Table
511.6). Infants are exceptionally vulnerable to hemoglobin oxidation
because their erythrocytes have half the amount of cytochrome b5
reductase seen in adults, hemoglobin F is more susceptible to oxidation than hemoglobin A, and the more alkaline infant gastrointestinal
(GI) tract promotes the growth of nitrite-­producing gram-­negative
bacteria. When MetHb levels are >1.5 g/24 hours, cyanosis is visible
(15% MetHb); a level of 70% MetHb is lethal. The MetHb level is usually reported as a percentage of normal hemoglobin, and the toxic level
is lower at a lower Hb level. Methemoglobinemia has been described
in infants who ingested foods and water high in nitrates, who were
exposed to aniline teething gels or other chemicals, and in some infants
with severe gastroenteritis and acidosis. Methemoglobin can color the
blood brown (Fig. 511.6). A patient with significant methemoglobinemia is cyanotic and does not respond to 100% oxygen. Arterial
oxygen tension will be normal or elevated (if on high FiO2) despite
cyanosis, but blood oxygen saturation determined by multiwavelength
co-­oximetry will be low. Oxygen saturation calculated from arterial
blood gas or pulse oximetry is misleading and inaccurate. Although
pulse oximetry is usually lower than normal, it does not reflect the true
degree of desaturation.

511.8 Hereditary Methemoglobinemia with
Deficiency of NADH Cytochrome b5
Reductase
Kim Smith-­Whitley
The first reported inherited disorder causing methemoglobinemia
resulted from an enzymatic deficiency of NADH cytochrome b5

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2980 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 511.6  Known Etiologies of Acquired
­Methemoglobinemia
MEDICATIONS
Benzocaine
Chloroquine
Dapsone
Doxycycline
EMLA (eutectic mixture of local anesthetics) topical anesthetic
(lidocaine 2.5% and prilocaine 2.5%)
Flutamide
Lidocaine
Metoclopramide
Nitrates
Nitric oxide
Nitroglycerin
Nitroprusside
Nitrous oxide
Phenazopyridine
Prilocaine
Primaquine
Riluzole
Silver nitrate
Sodium nitrate
Sulfonamides
MEDICAL CONDITIONS
Pediatric gastrointestinal infection, sepsis
Recreational drug overdose with amyl nitrate (“poppers”)
Sickle cell disease–related painful episode
MISCELLANEOUS
Aniline dyes
Fume inhalation (automobile exhaust, burning of wood and plastics)
Herbicides
Industrial chemicals: nitrobenzene, nitroethane (found in nail polish,
resins, rubber adhesives)
Pesticides
Gasoline octane booster
Nitrate rich vegetables (beets, borage, chard)
Well water
From Ash-­Bernal R, Wise R, Wright SM. Acquired methemoglobinemia. Medicine
(Baltimore) 2004;83:265–273.

reductase, which was classified into two distinct phenotypes. In type
I, the most common form, the deficiency of NADH cytochrome b5
activity is found only in erythrocytes, with other cell types unaffected.
In type II, the enzyme deficiency is present in all tissues and results in
more significant symptoms beginning in infancy with encephalopathy,
intellectual impairment, spasticity, microcephaly, and growth retardation, with death most often by 2 years of age. Both types exhibit an
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.
Cyanosis varies in intensity with season and diet. The time of cyanosis onset also varies, appearing in some patients at birth and others as
late as adolescence. Although as much as 50% of the total circulating
hemoglobin may be in the form of nonfunctional MetHb, little or no
cardiorespiratory distress occurs in these patients, except on exertion.
Daily oral treatment with ascorbic acid (200-­500 mg/day in divided
doses) gradually reduces the MetHb to approximately 10% of the total
pigment and alleviates the cyanosis as long as therapy is continued.
Chronic high doses of ascorbic acid have been associated with hyperoxaluria and renal stone formation. Ascorbic acid should not be used
to treat acute toxic methemoglobinemia. When immediately available,
poison control should be contacted to verify the most up-­to-­date therapeutic strategies. As with ascorbic acid, riboflavin uses the alternate
pathway of MetHb reduction and is most effective when given in high
doses. Methylene blue, administered via IV (1-­2 mg/kg initially), is
used to treat toxic methemoglobinemia. An oral dose can be administered (100-­300 mg/day) as maintenance therapy.

Fig. 511.6 Normal arterial blood vs methemoglobinemia. Arterial

whole blood with 1% methemoglobin (left) vs arterial whole blood with
72% methemoglobin (right). Note the characteristic chocolate-­brown
color of the sample with an elevated methemoglobin level. Both samples were briefly exposed to 100% oxygen and shaken. This quick analysis is a good bedside test for methemoglobinemia. The sample on
the left turned bright red, whereas the sample on the right remained
chocolate-­brown. Methods: Whole blood samples were drawn at the
same time from the same person. The measured hemoglobin concentration was 11.7 g/dL. Calculated concentration of methemoglobin:
11.7 g/dL × 0.01 = 0.117 g/dL (left) and 11.7 g/dL × 0.72 = 8.42 g/dL
(right). An elevated methemoglobin level was made in vitro by adding
0.1 mL of a 0.144 molar solution of sodium nitrate (right), and 0.1 mL of
normal saline was added as a control (left). Co-­oximetry measurements
were taken on both samples shortly after the blood was drawn and 20
min after the addition of sodium nitrate solution. Both blood samples
were exposed to 100% oxygen before the second measurement. (Protocol based on personal communication with Dr. Ali Mansouri, December 2002.)

Methylene blue should not be used in patients with G6PD deficiency.
This treatment is ineffective and can cause severe oxidative hemolysis.
If methylene blue is given to a patient with G6PD deficiency, symptoms
will not improve, and marked hemolysis can develop within 24 hours
of administration. Because G6PD deficiency status is rarely known at
the time of treatment, a careful history should be elicited. When the
history is negative for symptoms of G6PD deficiency, treatment with
methylene blue should be initiated judiciously, and the patient should
be closely monitored for improvement.

511.9 Syndromes of Hereditary Persistence
of Fetal Hemoglobin
Kim Smith-­Whitley and Janet L. Kwiatkowski
Hereditary persistence of HbF (HPFH) syndromes are a form of thalassemia; pathogenic variants are associated with a decrease in the production of either or both β-­ and δ-­globins. There is an imbalance in
the α:non-­α synthetic ratio characteristic of thalassemia. More than 20
variants of HPFH have been described. They are deletional, δβ0 (Black,
Ghanaian, Italian), nondeletional (Tunisian, Japanese, Australian),
linked to the β-­globin–gene cluster (British, Italian-­Chinese, Black), or
unlinked to the β-­globin–gene cluster (Atlanta, Czech, Seattle). The δβ0
forms have deletions of the entire δ-­ and β-­globin gene sequences, and
the most common form in the United States is the Black (HPFH 1)
variant. As a result of the δ and β gene deletions, there is production
only of γ-­globin and formation of HbF. In the homozygous form, no
manifestations of thalassemia are present. There is only HbF with very
mild anemia and slight microcytosis. When inherited with other variant
hemoglobins, HbF is elevated into the 20–30% range; when inherited
with HbS, sickle cell disease is ameliorated, with fewer complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies

511.10 Thalassemia Syndromes
Janet L. Kwiatkowski
Thalassemia refers to a group of genetic disorders of globin-­chain production in which there is an imbalance between the α-­globin and β-­globin
chain production. β-­thalassemia syndromes result from a decrease in β-­
globin chains, which results in a relative excess of α-­globin chains. There
are >300 β-­thalassemia pathogenic variants that have been characterized.
These pathogenic variants can affect any step in the transcription of β-­
globin genes. β0-­thalassemia refers to the absence of production of the
β-­globin. When patients are homozygous for the β0-­thalassemia gene,
they cannot make any normal β-­globin chains (HbA). β+-­thalassemia
indicates a pathogenic variant that makes decreased amounts of normal
β-­globin (HbA). Some β-­thalassemia pathogenic variants have structural
changes such as HbE. Others, such as δβ-­thalassemia or HPFH, are variants of β-­thalassemia that have decreased production of β-­globin gene with
increased compensatory production of HbF. β0-­thalassemia syndromes
are generally more severe than β+-­thalassemia syndromes, but there is
significant variability between the genotype and phenotype. β-­thalassemia
major, commonly called transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia, refers to
severe β-­thalassemia that requires early transfusion therapy. β-­thalassemia
intermedia (also known as non–transfusion-dependent thalassemia) is
a clinical diagnosis of a patient with a less severe clinical phenotype that
usually does not require regular transfusion therapy in childhood. Many
of these patients have at least one β+-­thalassemia pathogenic variant. β-­
thalassemia syndromes usually require a β-­thalassemia pathogenic variant
in both β-­globin genes. Carriers with a single β-­globin pathogenic variant
are generally asymptomatic, except for microcytosis and mild anemia.
In α-­thalassemia, there is an absence or reduction in α-­globin
production usually due to deletions of α-­globin genes. Normal individuals have four α-­globin genes; the more genes affected, the more
severe the disease. α0-­thalassemia indicates no α-­chains produced
from that chromosome (− −/). α+-­thalassemia produces a decreased
amount of α-­globin chain from that chromosome (-­alpha/).
The primary pathology in the thalassemia syndromes stems from
the quantity of globin produced, whereas the primary pathology in
sickle cell disease is related to the quality of β-­globin produced.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

There are >300 different pathogenic variants resulting in absent or
decreased globin production. Although most are rare, the 20 most common abnormal alleles constitute 80% of the known thalassemias worldwide; 1.5% of the world’s population carries alleles for β-­thalassemia, and
in Southeast Asia 5–10% of the population carry alleles for α-­thalassemia.
In the United States, an estimated 2,000 persons have β-­thalassemia major.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Two related features contribute to the sequelae of β-­thalassemia syndromes: inadequate β-­globin gene production leading to decreased
levels of normal hemoglobin (HbA) and unbalanced α-­ and β-­globin
chain production leading to ineffective erythropoiesis. In β-­thalassemia
α-­globin chains are in excess to non–α-­globin chains, and α-­globin
tetramers (α4) are formed and appear as RBC inclusions. The free
α-­globin chains and inclusions are very unstable, precipitate in RBC
precursors, damage the RBC membrane, and shorten RBC survival,
leading to anemia and increased erythroid production (Table 511.7).
This results in a marked increase in erythropoiesis, with early erythroid
precursor death in the bone marrow. Clinically, this is characterized by
a lack of maturation of erythrocytes and an inappropriately low reticulocyte count. This ineffective erythropoiesis and the compensatory
massive marrow expansion with erythroid hyperactivity characterize
β-­thalassemia. Because of the low or absent production of β-­globin,
the α-­chains combine with γ-­chains, resulting in HbF (α2γ2) being the
dominant hemoglobin. In addition to the natural survival effect, the
γ-­globin chains may be produced in increased amounts, regulated by
genetic polymorphisms. The δ-­chain synthesis is not usually affected
in β-­thalassemia or β-­thalassemia trait, and therefore patients have a
relative or absolute increase in HbA2 production (α2δ2).

2981

In the α-­thalassemia syndromes, there is a reduction in α-­globin
production. Normally, there are four α-­globin genes (two from each
parent) that control α-­globin production. α-­thalassemia syndromes
vary from complete absence (hydrops fetalis) to only slightly reduced
(α-­thalassemia silent carrier) α-­globin production. In the α-­thalassemia
syndromes, an excess of β-­ and γ-­globin chains are produced. These
excess chains form hemoglobin Bart’s (γ4) in fetal life and HbH (β4)
after birth. These abnormal tetramers are nonfunctional hemoglobins
with very high oxygen affinity. They do not transport oxygen and result
in extravascular hemolysis. A fetus with the most severe form of α-­
thalassemia (hydrops fetalis) develops in utero anemia and, without
therapeutic intervention, the pregnancy usually results in fetal loss
because HbF production requires sufficient amounts of α-­globin. In
contrast, infants with β-­thalassemia major become symptomatic only
after birth when HbA predominates and insufficient β-­globin production manifests in clinical symptoms.

HOMOZYGOUS β-­THALASSEMIA (TRANSFUSIONDEPENDENT BETA THALASSEMIA, BETA
THALASSEMIA MAJOR, COOLEY ANEMIA)
Clinical Manifestations

If not treated, children with homozygous β0-­thalassemia usually
become symptomatic from progressive anemia, with weakness, poor
growth, and cardiac decompensation during the second 6 months of
life. Depending on the pathogenic variant and degree of HbF production, regular transfusions are necessary beginning in the second month
to second year of life, but rarely later. The decision to transfuse is multifactorial but is not determined solely by the degree of anemia. Persistent hemoglobin level below 7 g/dL in the absence of acute illness is
an indication to start transfusions. In addition, the presence of signs of
ineffective erythropoiesis, such as growth failure, bone deformities secondary to marrow expansion, and hepatosplenomegaly, are important
variables in determining transfusion initiation.
The classic presentation of children with severe disease includes
thalassemic facies (maxilla hyperplasia, flat nasal bridge, frontal bossing),
pathologic bone fractures, marked hepatosplenomegaly, and cachexia
and is primarily seen in countries without access to chronic transfusion
therapy. Occasionally, patients with moderate anemia develop these features because of severe compensatory, ineffective erythropoiesis.
In nontransfused patients with severe ineffective erythropoiesis,
marked splenomegaly can develop with hypersplenism and abdominal symptoms. The features of ineffective erythropoiesis include
expanded medullary spaces (with massive expansion of the marrow
of the face and skull), extramedullary hematopoiesis, and higher
metabolic needs (Fig. 511.7). The chronic anemia and increased
erythroid drive produce an increase in iron absorption from the GI
tract and secondary hemosiderosis-­induced organ injury.
Chronic transfusion therapy dramatically improves the quality of
life and reduces the complications of severe thalassemia. Transfusion-­
induced hemosiderosis becomes the major clinical complication of
transfusion-­dependent thalassemia. Each mL of pure packed RBCs
contains approximately 1 mg of iron. Physiologically, there is no
mechanism to eliminate excess body iron. Iron is initially deposited
in the liver and is followed by deposition in the endocrine organs and
the heart. This leads to a high rate of hypothyroidism, hypogonadotropic gonadism, growth hormone deficiency, hypoparathyroidism,
and diabetes mellitus. Iron deposition in the heart causes heart failure and arrhythmias, and heart disease is the leading cause of death
in inadequately chelated patients. Eventually, most patients not receiving adequate iron chelation therapy die from cardiac failure or cardiac
arrhythmias secondary to hemosiderosis. Hemosiderosis-­
induced
morbidity can be prevented by adequate iron chelation therapy.

Laboratory Findings

In the United States, some children with β-­thalassemia major will be
identified on newborn screening because of the detection of only HbF on
hemoglobin electrophoresis. However, infants with β+ pathogenic variants might be missed on newborn screen if small amounts of hemoglobin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2982 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 511.7  The Thalassemias
THALASSEMIA

GLOBIN GENOTYPE

⍺-­THALASSEMIA
1 Gene deletion

RED BLOOD CELL
FEATURES

CLINICAL FEATURES

HEMOGLOBIN
ANALYSIS

−,α/α,α

Normal

Normal

Newborn: Bart’s: 1–2%

2 Gene deletion
(α-­thalassemia trait)

−,α/−,α −, −/α,α

Microcytosis, mild
hypochromasia

Normal, mild anemia

Newborn: Bart’s: 5–10%

3 Gene deletion
­hemoglobin H

−,−/−,α

Microcytosis, hypochromic

Mild anemia, transfusions
not required

Newborn: Bart’s: 20–30%

2 Gene deletion +
Constant Spring

−,−/α,αConstant Spring

Microcytosis, hypochromic

Moderate to severe
anemia, transfusion,
splenectomy.

2–3% Constant Spring,
10–15% HbH

4 Gene deletion

−,−/−,−

Anisocytosis, poikilocytosis

Hydrops fetalis

Newborn: 89–90% Bart’s
with Gower-­1, Gower-­2,
and Portland

Nondeletional

α,α/α,αvariant

Microcytosis, mild anemia

Normal

1–2% variant hemoglobin

β-­THALASSEMIA
β0 or β+ heterozygote: trait

β0/A, β+/A

Variable microcytosis, mild
anemia

Normal

Elevated A2, variable
elevation of F

β0 or β+-­homozygote or
compound heterozygote
Thalassemia severe

β0/β0, β+/β0,
β+β+, E/β0,
E/β+

Microcytosis, nucleated
RBC

Transfusion dependent

F 98% and A2 2%,
E 30–40% (E/β0);
variably low HbA with β+

β0 or β+ homozygote or
compound heterozygote
Thalassemia intermedia

β0/β0, β+/β0,
β+β+, E/β0, E/β+

Hypochromic, microcytosis

Mild to moderate anemia,
intermittent transfusions

A2 2–5%, F 10–30%, HbA
variably low levels

Dominant (rare)

B0/A

Microcytosis, abnormal
RBCs

Moderately severe anemia,
splenomegaly

Elevated F and A2

δ-­Thalassemia

A/A

Normal

Normal

A2 absent

(δβ)0-­Thalassemia

(δβ)0/A

Hypochromic

Mild anemia

F 5–20%

(δβ)+-­Thalassemia Lepore

βLepore/A

Microcytosis

Mild anemia

Lepore 8–20%

Homozygous Hb Lepore

βLepore/βLepore

Microcytic, hypochromic

Thalassemia intermedia

F 80%, Lepore 20%

γδβ-­Thalassemia

(γAδβ)0/A

Microcytosis, microcytic,
hypochromic

Moderate anemia, splenomegaly, homozygote:
thalassemia intermedia

Decreased F and A2
compared with δβ-­
thalassemia

γ-­Thalassemia

(γAγG)0/A

Microcytosis

Insignificant unless
­homozygote

Decreased F

A are present. An HbFE pattern can be consistent with hemoglobin E β0-­
thalassemia, or the more benign hemoglobin EE disease, and needs to be
followed up. The lack of standardized neonatal diagnosis of thalassemia
disorders requires close follow-­up of newborns with unclear thalassemia
pathogenic variants and babies from high-­risk ethnic groups.
Infants with serious β-­thalassemia disorders have a progressive
anemia after the newborn period. Microcytosis, hypochromia, and
targeting characterize the RBCs. Nucleated RBCs, marked anisopoikilocytosis, and a relative reticulocytopenia are typically seen (see
Fig. 511.5E). The Hb level falls progressively often to <6 g/dL unless
transfusions are given. The reticulocyte count is commonly <8% and
is inappropriately low compared to the degree of anemia caused by
ineffective erythropoiesis. The unconjugated serum bilirubin level is
usually elevated, but other chemistries may be initially normal. Even
if the child does not receive transfusions, iron eventually accumulates
with elevated serum ferritin and transferrin saturation. Evidence of
bone marrow hyperplasia can be seen on radiographs (see Fig. 511.7).
Early definitive diagnosis is recommended. Newborn screening
techniques such as hemoglobin electrophoresis are not definitive.
DNA diagnosis of the β-­thalassemia pathogenic variants, along with
testing for common genetic modifiers of the clinical phenotype, is
recommended. Co-­inheritance of one or more α-­thalassemia deletions is common, and it decreases the severity of the β-­thalassemia

disease as it improves the α:β chain imbalance. Some patients’ pathogenic variants cannot be diagnosed by standard electrophoresis or
common DNA probes. Referral of the samples to a tertiary laboratory is indicated, along with parental and family testing. After the
definitive diagnosis, families should undergo detailed counseling.

Management and Treatment of Thalassemia
See Figure 511.8.

Transfusion Therapy

β-­thalassemia major is a clinical diagnosis that requires the integration of laboratory findings and clinical features. Of patients with
homozygous β0-­thalassemia (the most severe pathogenic variants),
15–20% may have a clinical course that is phenotypically consistent with thalassemia intermedia. In contrast, 25% of patients with
homozygous β+-­
thalassemia, typically a more benign genotype,
may have transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia. Transient clinical
events, such as a sudden fall in hemoglobin secondary to an episode
of parvovirus requiring transfusion, do not necessarily indicate a
transfusion-­dependent patient. The long-­term observation of the
clinical characteristics, such as growth, bony changes, and hemoglobin, are necessary to determine chronic transfusion therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies

2983

Quantitative liver iron by approved R2 or R2* MRI is the best
indicator of total body iron stores and should be obtained in
patients after chronic transfusion therapy has been initiated. The
liver iron results will help guide the chelation regimen. Cardiac iron
estimation by T2* MRI, is usually obtained starting at 10 years old,
but should be obtained earlier in the setting of severe iron overload
or if the transfusion and chelation history is not known. There may
be a discrepancy between the liver iron and the heart iron because
of different rates of tissue loading and unloading and the differential effects of iron chelators on organ-­specific iron removal.

Chelation Therapy

A

C

B

Fig. 511.7 Ineffective erythropoiesis in a 3-­yr-­old patient who has β-­
thalassemia major and has not received a transfusion. A, Massive widening of the diploic spaces of the skull as seen on MRI. B, Radiographic
appearance of the trabeculae as seen on plain radiograph. C, Obliteration of the maxillary sinuses with hematopoietic tissue as seen on CT
scan.

Guidelines for Transfusion Therapy. Patients who require
transfusion therapy should have an extended RBC phenotype and/
or genotype. Patients should receive RBCs depleted of leukocytes
and matched for D, C, c, E, e, and Kell antigens at a minimum.
Cytomegalovirus-­safe units are indicated in stem cell transplantation
candidates. Transfusions should generally be given at intervals of 3-­4
weeks, with the goal being to maintain a pretransfusion Hb level of 9.5-­
10.5 g/dL. Ongoing monitoring for transfusion-­associated transmitted infections (hepatitis A, B, and C, HIV), alloimmunization, annual
blood transfusion requirements, and transfusion reactions is essential.

Iron Overload Monitoring

Excessive iron stores from transfusion cause many of the complications of β-­thalassemia major. Accurate assessment of excessive
iron stores is essential to optimal therapy. Serial serum ferritin
levels provide a useful screening technique in assessing iron balance trends, but results may not accurately predict quantitative iron
stores. Undertreatment or overtreatment of presumed excessive
iron stores can occur in managing a patient based on serum ferritin
alone. Quantitative measurements of liver iron and cardiac iron by
MRI are standard noninvasive methods to assess tissue iron overload; estimation of pancreatic and gonadal iron is being studied.
This technology, along with access to multiple chelators, enables
targeted chelation therapy for patients with organ-­specific hemosiderosis before the onset of overt organ failure. Integration of these
imaging technologies with chelation therapy may prevent heart failure, diabetes, and other organ dysfunction.

Iron-­chelation therapy should start as soon as the patient becomes
significantly iron-­overloaded. In general, this occurs after 1 year of
transfusion therapy and correlates with the serum ferritin >1,000 ng/
mL and/or a liver iron concentration of >5,000 μg/g dry weight. Iron
chelation is not currently labeled for use in children <2 years.
There are three available iron chelators (deferoxamine, deferasirox,
and deferiprone); each varies in its route of administration, pharmacokinetics, adverse events, and efficacy (Table 511.8). Combination chelation therapy may be required for high iron burden. The overall goal
is to prevent hemosiderosis-­induced tissue injury and avoid chelation
toxicity. This requires close monitoring of the patients. In general, chelation toxicity increases as iron stores decrease.
Deferoxamine (Desferal) is the most studied iron chelator; it has
an excellent safety and efficacy profile. It requires subcutaneous or IV
administration because of its poor oral bioavailability and short half-­
life of <30 minutes, necessitating administration as a continuous infusion over at least 8 hours daily, 5-­7 days/week. Deferoxamine is initially
started at 25 mg/kg and can be increased to 60 mg/kg in heavily iron-­
overloaded patients. The major problem with deferoxamine is poor
adherence because of the difficult, time-­consuming route of administration. Adverse side effects include local skin reactions, ototoxicity,
retinal changes, and bone dysplasia with truncal shortening. Maintaining the therapeutic index (deferoxamine dose in mg/kg divided by the
serum ferritin) below 0.025 limits these adverse effects.
The oral iron chelator deferasirox is commercially available in
the United States. Of patients treated with deferoxamine, 70% have
switched to deferasirox because it is orally available. Deferasirox
has a half-­life of >16 hours and requires once-­daily administration.
The drug was initially available as a dispersible tablet that is dissolved in water or juice. Subsequently, a film coated tablet that is
swallowed whole and a granule form that is sprinkled on soft food
and ingested became available. Dosing is different for the different
deferasirox formulations. For the dispersible tablet form, the initial
dose typically is 20 mg/kg/day and can be escalated to as high as
40 mg/kg/day based on the iron burden. The dosing for the film-­
coated tablet and granule forms is 30% lower than the dispersible
tablet, with a starting dose of 14 mg/kg/day, which can be escalated
to a maximum of 28 mg/kg/day. The most common side effects are
GI symptoms, which may be lessened with the film-­coated tablet
and granule formulations because they do not contain lactose and
sodium laureate, which are found in the dispersible tablet and are
thought to be responsible for some of the GI symptoms. The most
serious side effect of deferasirox is potential kidney damage. Up
to 30% of patients have transient increases in creatinine that may
require temporary modifications of dosing. This toxicity may occur
more commonly in the setting of dehydration. Proteinuria also can
develop and, less commonly, a renal Fanconi syndrome may occur.
Long-­term studies in thousands of patients have not demonstrated
progressive renal dysfunction, but isolated cases of renal failure
in patients have occurred. In addition, hepatic transaminitis may
occur, with an increase to >5 times the upper limit of normal in
approximately 8% of patients. All patients require monthly chemistry panels and ongoing monitoring for proteinuria.
Deferiprone, an oral iron chelator, is approved in the United States
for use in individuals with transfusional iron overload 3 years and
older. Deferiprone has a half-­life of approximately 3 hours and requires
dosing 3 times daily; a new longer-­acting tablet form is available that is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2984 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Gene therapy

• Gene addition (beti cel: conditionally approved by the
European Medicines Agency)
• Gene editing

Hematopoietic stem-cell
transplantation

• Older patients
• Haploidentical donor

Curative therapies

Investigational

Hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation

•Young patients
•Available human leukocyte antigen-matched donor

Hemoglobin-inducing agents

• Luspatercept
• Investigational

Blood transfusion

• Regular (usually every 2–4 weeks)
• Targeting pre-transfusion hemoglobin concentrations:
95–105 g/L

Transfusion-dependent
thalassemia

• Deferoxamine, deferiprone, and deferasirox
(monotherapy or combination treatment daily)
• Timely initiation, individualize regimen, and toxicity
monitoring
• Target close to normal range of iron load

Conservative treatment

Treat iron overload
with iron chelation

Distinction of
transfusion-dependent
thalassemia versus
non-transfusiondependent
thalassemia is
based on phenotype,
genotype, or available
resources

Non-transfusion-dependent
thalassemia

• Deferoxamine and deferasirox approved; deferiprone,
off-label data available
• To start when liver iron concentration >5 mg/g dry
weight tissue or ferritin >800 µ/L

Thromboembolic events

Treat disease-related
and treatment-related
complications

Non-transfusion-dependent
thalassemia

Thalassemia

Transfusion-dependent
thalassemia

Treat anemia

Organ dysfunction

• Renal complications
• Cardiac (arrhythmias; insufficiency)
• Pulmonary hypertension

Endocrinopathies

• Growth failure, gonadal dysfunction
• Osteoporosis, glucose homeostasis disorders
• Hypoparathyroidism, hypothyroidism, hypoadrenalism

Other

• Infections
• Cancer
• Alloimmunization

Prevention or timely
detection of
complications

• Monitoring (growth, iron overload with ferritin/MRI, organ dysfunction, cancer surveillance)
• Healthy lifestyle, supplements

Splenectomy

Reserved mainly for signs of hypersplenism or symptomatic organomegaly

Hemoglobin-inducing
agents

• Investigational

Blood transfusion

• None or sporadic (0–6 sessions per year)
• Depends on severity of the anemia
• Often required during certain conditions (pregnancy,
infections, surgical procedures)

Treat anemia

Fig. 511.8 Algorithm for the therapeutic management of thalassemia. (From Kattamis A, Kwiatkowski JL, Aydinok Y. Thalassemia. Lancet.
2022;399:2310–2322; Fig. 3.)

dosed twice daily. The starting dose is 75 mg/kg/day and can be escalated to 99 mg/kg/day based on the degree of iron overload. Deferiprone, a small molecule, effectively enters cardiac tissue and may be
more effective than other chelators in reducing cardiac hemosiderosis.
The most serious side effect of deferiprone is transient agranulocytosis,
which occurs in 1-2% of patients and usually in the first year of treatment. It has been associated with rare deaths where patients were not
adequately monitored. The use of deferiprone requires frequent CBC
monitoring, typically weekly for at least the first 6 months of therapy.
Most importantly, the drug should be held and the neutrophil count
checked immediately with all febrile illnesses.

As thalassemia patients live longer, the iron chelation goals have
changed. Aggressive treatment with combination chelation therapy
is often used in heavily iron-­overloaded patients to prevent or reverse
organ dysfunction. Deferoxamine, in combination with deferiprone, is
routinely used in patients with increased cardiac iron. Combination
therapy of deferoxamine and deferasirox or with deferasirox and deferiprone may also be efficacious in patients with severe iron overload.

Luspatercept

Luspatercept is a recombinant fusion protein that binds TGFβ family ligands and thus blocks a signaling pathway involved in ineffective

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies

2985

Table 511.8  Properties of Iron Chelators
DEFEROXAMINE

DEFERASIROX

DEFERIPRONE

Prototype trade name

Desferal

Exjade; Jadenu

Ferriprox

Route of administration

Subcutaneous; intravenous

Oral dispersible tablet; film-­coated tablet;
granules

Oral solution; oral tablet (3 times
per day); oral tablet (twice per
day)

Usual dose

Standard, 25–40 mg/kg per day
over 8–12 h; low cardiac T2* or
heart failure, 50–60 mg/kg per
day over 12–24 h

Oral dispersible tablet, 20–40 mg/kg per
day once daily; film-­coated tablet and
granules, 14–28 mg/kg per day once daily

75–100 mg/kg per day divided
into 3 doses (oral solution or oral
tablet, 3 times per day); 75–100
mg/kg per day divided into 2
doses (oral tablet, twice per day)

Excretion

Urinary (60%), defecation (40%)

Defecation (∼90%)

Urinary (∼75–90%)

Ability to remove liver iron

High

High

Moderate*

Ability to remove cardiac
iron

Moderate†

Moderate‡

High

Adverse events

Local reactions, auditory,
ophthalmologic, allergic reactions, bone defects, Yersinia
or Klebsiella infections; high
doses: pulmonary, neurologic,
renal failure

Gastrointestinal, rash, renal impairment
(increase in creatinine, proteinuria,
proximal renal tubular dysfunction, renal
insufficiency), elevated hepatic enzymes,
gastrointestinal bleeding or ulcers,
hepatic failure, auditory, ophthalmologic

Gastrointestinal, elevated
hepatic enzymes, arthropathy,
neutropenia or agranulocytosis

EU licensure

Licensed

Patients age 6 years and older with
transfusion-­dependent thalassemia;
patients age 10 years and older with
non-­transfusion-­dependent thalassemia
(as a first-­line treatment); patients age
2 years and older with transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia (as a second-­line
treatment)

Patients with thalassemia major
when current chelation therapy
is contraindicated or inadequate

USA licensure

Licensed

Patients age 2 years and older with
transfusion-­dependent thalassemia;
patients age 10 years and older with
­non­transfusion-­dependent thalassemia

Patients age 8 years and older
with transfusional iron overload
and thalassemia syndromes

*Reports of insufficient liver iron removal in some patients at doses of 75 mg/kg per day, but higher dosages, especially for patients with high transfusional iron burden, might be
more effective.
†With continuous infusion.
‡Limited data show faster cardiac iron removal with modest hepatic iron loading, but this removal might be less effective in patients with more severe hepatic siderosis.
From Kattamis A, Kwiatkowski JL, Aydinok Y. Thalassemia. Lancet 2022;399:2310–2322; Table 1.

erythropoiesis and results in improved erythroid maturation. The drug is
given by subcutaneous injection every 3 weeks at a starting dose of 1 mg/
kg/dose, which can be escalated to 1.25 mg/kg/dose if no response after 6
weeks of treatment. In patients with transfusion-­dependent β-­thalassemia,
use of luspatercept was associated with a reduction in RBC requirements
in about 70% of treated patients. Luspatercept is approved by the FDA for
use in adults with transfusion-­dependent β-­thalassemia. Adverse effects
include bone pain, arthralgia, dizziness, hypertension, and hyperuricemia.
The drug also is being studied in nontransfusion dependent thalassemia,
where a 1 to 1.5 g/dL rise in hemoglobin has been seen.

Hydroxyurea

Hydroxyurea, a DNA antimetabolite, increases HbF production. It has
been most successfully used in sickle cell disease and in some patients
with β-­thalassemia intermedia. Studies in β-­thalassemia major are limited. In many parts of the world, hydroxyurea therapy is used in β-­
thalassemia intermedia patients. Even though increases in HbF levels
are observed, they do not predictively correlate with increase in total
Hb in these patients. In general, there appears to be a mean increase in
Hb of 1 g/dL (range: 0.1-­2.5 g/dL). Hydroxyurea therapy in thalassemia
intermedia is associated with a reduced risk of leg ulcers, pulmonary
hypertension, and extramedullary hematopoiesis. The initial starting
dose for thalassemia intermedia is 10 mg/kg and may be escalated
to 20 mg/kg/day. Patients with β-­thalassemia are at increased risk of
developing cytopenias with hydroxyurea use, which may prevent dose
escalation. Close monitoring of the CBC with differential is required.

Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation and
Gene Therapy

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has cured >3,000 patients who
had β-­thalassemia major. In low-­risk HLA-­matched sibling patients,
there is at least a 90% survival and an 80% event-­free survival. In general,
myeloablative conditioning regimens have been used to prevent graft
rejection and thalassemia recurrence. Most success has been in children <14 years old without excessive iron stores and hepatomegaly who
undergo sibling HLA-­matched allogeneic transplantation. All children
who have an HLA-­matched sibling should be offered the option of bone
marrow transplantation. Outcomes of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation with a matched unrelated donor using molecular techniques
for HLA typing have significantly improved, approaching outcomes with
matched sibling donors, but with an increased risk of graft versus host
disease. Alternative transplantation regimens for patients without appropriate donors are experimental and have variable success.
Gene therapy using gene addition or gene editing approaches are
FDA approved for transfusion-dependent patients with β-thalassemia.
Results with gene addition using lentiviral vectors containing a
functional β-­
globin gene have been promising. Betibeglogene
autotemcel is a rare gene-based, FDA- approved therapy for adults
and pediatric patients (≥4 years) with transfusion dependent
β-thalassemia. This one-time therapy transduces harvested autologous CD34+ cells with a replicant incompetent vector containing
a modified β-globin gene. Approximately 90% of treated patients
achieve transfusion independence.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2986 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
A second approved approach to gene therapy involves gene editing to
increase hemoglobin F levels. The first patient treated with transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia treated with a CRISPR-­Cas9 gene editing
approach was able to discontinue RBC transfusions while maintaining a
normal hemoglobin level, mostly consisting of HbF. This gene approach
is indicated for transfusion-dependent ­β-thalassemia patients ≥12 years
of age.

Table 511.9  Risk Factors of Thalassemia Comorbidities
CARDIOVASCULAR
Left ventricle dysfunction
Pulmonary hypertension

Chronic hypoxia; splenectomy
hypercoagulability; advanced
age; non­transfusion-­dependent
thalassemia

Arrhythmia

Anemia; cardiac iron overload;
thyroid disturbances

Thromboembolic events

Splenectomy; hypercoagulability;
iron-­induced endothelial damage

Splenectomy

Splenectomy may be required in thalassemia patients who develop
hypersplenism. These patients have a falling steady-­state Hb level and/
or a rising transfusion requirement. However, splenectomy is less frequently used as a therapeutic option; serious adverse effects of splenectomy are increasingly recognized beyond infection risk. In thalassemia
intermedia, splenectomized patients have a marked increased risk of
venous thrombosis, pulmonary hypertension, leg ulcers, and silent
cerebral infarction compared to nonsplenectomized patients. All
patients should be fully immunized against encapsulated bacteria and
receive appropriate instructions regarding fever management. Prophylactic penicillin should be administered after splenectomy to prevent
sepsis, and families need to be educated on the risk of fever and sepsis.

HEPATOBILIARY
Viral hepatitis

Red cell transfusions

Fibrosis or cirrhosis

Liver iron overload

Gallstones

Chronic hemolysis

ENDOCRINOPATHIES
Growth retardation; delayed
puberty; hypogonadism

Preventive Monitoring of Thalassemia Patients
See Table 511.9.

Cardiac Disease

Cardiac disease is the major cause of death in thalassemia. Serial echocardiograms should be monitored to evaluate cardiac function and
pulmonary artery pressure. Pulmonary hypertension frequently occurs
in non­transfusion dependent thalassemia patients and may be an indication for transfusion therapy. After approximately 8 years of chronic
transfusion therapy, cardiac hemosiderosis may occur; consequently,
cardiac T2* MRI imaging studies are recommended, typically beginning
at 10 years of age. Patients with cardiac hemosiderosis and decreasing
cardiac ejection fraction require intensive combination chelation therapy. Periodic electrocardiogram studies also are obtained after age 10
years because of the risk of arrhythmia from cardiac iron overload.

Endocrine Disease

Endocrine function progressively declines with age secondary to hemosiderosis and nutritional deficiencies. Iron deposition in the pituitary
and endocrine organs can result in multiple endocrinopathies, including
hypothyroidism, growth hormone deficiency, delayed puberty, hypoparathyroidism, diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis, and adrenal insufficiency.
Monitoring for endocrine dysfunction starts early, about 5 years of age, or
after at least 3 years of chronic transfusions. All children require monitoring
of their height, weight, pubertal assessment, and sitting height semiannually. Bone density scans should be obtained starting in the second decade of
life given the high rate of osteopenia. Nutritional assessments are required.
Most patients need vitamin D, vitamin C, and zinc replacement. Fertility is
a growing concern among patients and should be assessed routinely.

Psychosocial Support

Thalassemia imposes major disruption in the family unit and significant obstacles to normal development. Culturally sensitive anticipatory
counseling is necessary, and the early use of child life services decreases
psychologic trauma of therapy. Early social service consultation to
address financial and social issues is mandatory.

OTHER β-­THALASSEMIA SYNDROMES
Non–Transfusion-­Dependent Thalassemia: β-­
Thalassemia Intermedia

Non–transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia (thalassemia intermedia) includes a spectrum of patients who initially are not chronically transfused in infancy but may be sporadically transfused
throughout their lifetime. The major determining characteristic
of these patients is less α-­β–globin chain imbalance than observed
in thalassemia major. Sometimes, genetic modifiers alter the primary pathogenic variant severity and improve the globin-­chain

Anemia; cardiac iron overload

Pituitary iron deposition (thyroid
hormone, hypothalamus-­pituitary-­
gonadal axis, growth hormone-­
insulin like growth factor disturbances); nutrition; anemia

Glucose intolerance; diabetes

Liver iron overload; pancreatic iron
deposition; family predisposition

Thyroid dysfunction

Anemia; thyroid iron deposition;
hypopituitarism

Adrenal insufficiency

Anemia; adrenal iron deposition;
hypopituitarism

Bone disease

Ineffective erythropoiesis, iron
predisposition and chelator toxicity; hypogonadism; hypoparathyroidism

NEOPLASIA
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Thyroid cancer; renal cancer;
gastrointestinal cancer;
breast cancer; hematologic
malignancies
OTHER
Renal dysfunction; tubular
dysfunction; nephrolithiasis

Chronic hepatitis B or hepatitis C
virus infections; liver iron overload
Iron toxicity; chronic anemia;
advanced age

Anemia; renal iron deposition; and
chelator (especially deferasirox)
toxicity

Extramedullary hematopoiesis

Ineffective erythropoiesis

Leg ulcers

Anemia; hypercoagulability

Auditory disturbances

Chelator toxicity

Ophthalmologic disturbances

Chelator toxicity

Infectious complications

Splenic dysfunction; transfusion-­
related infections; iron overload;
use of iron chelation therapy
(especially deferoxamine)

Spleen (splenomegaly,
hypersplenism)

Ineffective erythropoiesis;
extramedullary hematopoiesis

From Kattamis A, Kwiatkowski JL, Aydinok Y. Thalassemia. Lancet 2022;399:2310–2322.
Table 2.

imbalance. Co-­
inheritance of α-­
thalassemia trait or polymorphisms of globin promoters such as BCL11A may lessen disease
severity and result in a nontransfusion dependent thalassemia. HbE
β-­thalassemia is a common cause of both transfusion-­dependent
and non–transfusion-­
dependent thalassemia. These secondary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 511 u Hemoglobinopathies
genetic modifiers play a role in altering the severity of this disorder. Occasionally, patients with a single β-­thalassemia pathogenic
variant or autosomal dominant β-­thalassemia trait have clinical
features of thalassemia intermedia, or non–transfusion-­dependent
thalassemia. Genetic studies of these patients often uncover co-­
inheritance of genetic modifiers that worsens the condition, such as
α-­gene triplication or an unstable β-­globin variant.
Individuals with thalassemia intermedia have significant ineffective erythropoiesis that leads to microcytic anemia with hemoglobin of approximately 7 g/dL (range: 6-­10 g/dL). These patients
have some of the complications characterized in untransfused
thalassemia major patients, but the severity varies depending on
the degree of ineffective erythropoiesis. They can develop medullary hyperplasia, hepatosplenomegaly, hematopoietic pseudotumors, pulmonary hypertension, leg ulcers, thrombotic events, and
growth failure. Many patients develop hemosiderosis secondary to
increased GI absorption of iron requiring chelation. Extramedullary hematopoiesis can occur in the vertebral canal, compressing
the spinal cord and causing neurologic symptoms; the latter is a
medical emergency requiring immediate local radiation therapy to
halt erythropoiesis. Transfusions are indicated in thalassemia intermedia patients with significant clinical morbidity.
Thalassemia trait is often misdiagnosed as iron deficiency in children because the two diagnoses produce similar hematologic abnormalities on CBC. However, iron deficiency is much more prevalent. A
short course of iron and reevaluation is all that is required to identify children who will need further evaluation. Children who have β-­
thalassemia trait have a persistently normal RBC distribution width
and low mean corpuscular volume (MCV), whereas patients with
iron deficiency develop an elevated red cell distribution width (RDW)
with treatment. On Hb analysis, patients with β-­thalassemia trait have
elevated levels of HbA2 and variably increased HbF. There are “silent”
forms of β-­thalassemia trait, and if the family history is suggestive, further studies may be indicated.

α-­THALASSEMIA SYNDROMES

The same evolutionary pressures that produced β-­thalassemia and
sickle cell disease produced α-­thalassemia. Infants are identified in
the newborn period by the increased production of hemoglobin Bart’s
(γ4) during fetal life and its presence at birth. The α-­thalassemia syndromes occur most frequently in Southeast Asia. Deletions are most
common in α-­thalassemia. In addition to deletional pathogenic variants, there are nondeletional α-­globin gene pathogenic variants, the
most common being Constant Spring (αCSα); these variants cause a
more severe anemia and clinical course than the deletional variants.
Normally, there are four α-­globin genes. The different phenotypes in α-­
thalassemia largely result from whether one (α+-­thalassemia) or both
(α0-­thalassemia) α-­globin genes are deleted in each of the two loci.
The deletion of one α-­globin gene (silent carrier) is not identifiable
hematologically. Specifically, no alterations are noted in the MCV and
mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH). Persons with this deletion are
usually diagnosed after the birth of a child with a two-­gene deletion or
HbH (β4), but some newborn screening programs report even low concentrations of Hb Bart’s. During the newborn period, <3% Hb Bart’s is
observed. The deletion of one α-­globin gene is common in Black persons.
The deletion of two α-­globin genes results in α-­thalassemia trait. The
α-­globin alleles can be lost in a trans (−α/−α) or cis (α,α/-­SEA) configuration. The trans or cis pathogenic variants can combine with other
pathogenic variants or deletions and lead to HbH or α-­thalassemia
major. In persons from Africa or of African descent, the most common
α-­globin deletions are in the trans configuration, whereas in persons
from or descended from Asia or the Mediterranean region, cis deletions are most common.
α-­Thalassemia trait (two missing α-­globin genes) manifests as a
microcytic anemia that can be mistaken for iron-­deficiency anemia

2987

(see Fig. 511.5F). The Hb analysis is normal, except during the newborn period, when Hb Bart’s is typically <8% but >3%. Children with
a deletion of two α-­globin genes are commonly mistaken to have
iron deficiency, given the presence of both low MCV and MCH. The
simplest approach to distinguish between iron deficiency and α-­
thalassemia trait is with a good dietary history. Children with iron-­
deficiency anemia often have a diet that is low in iron and drink
a significant amount of cow’s milk. Alternatively, a brief course of
iron supplementation along with monitoring of erythrocyte parameters might confirm the diagnosis of iron deficiency. If both parents
of a child diagnosed with α-­thalassemia trait are carriers in the cis
conformation, they are at risk for a future hydrops fetalis pregnancy.
Thus family screening and genetic counseling are indicated.
The deletion of three α-­globin genes leads to the diagnosis of HbH
disease. A more severe form of HbH disease may be caused by a nondeletional α-­globin pathogenic variant in combination with two gene
deletions. HbH Constant Spring (−α/α,αCS) is the most common type
of nondeletional HbH disease.
In California, where a large population of persons of Asian descent
resides, approximately 1:10,000 of all newborns have HbH disease. The
simplest manner of diagnosing HbH disease is during the newborn
period, when excess in γ-­tetramers are present and Hb Bart’s is commonly >25%. Obtaining supporting evidence from the parents is helpful. Later in childhood, there is an excess of β-­globin chain tetramers
that results in HbH. A definitive diagnosis of HbH disease requires
DNA analysis. Brilliant cresyl blue can stain HbH, but it is rarely used
for diagnosis. Patients with HbH disease have a marked microcytosis, anemia, mild splenomegaly, and, occasionally, scleral icterus or
cholelithiasis. Chronic transfusion is not usually required for therapy
because the Hb range is 7-­11 g/dL, with MCV 51-­73 fL, but intermittent transfusions for worsening anemia, particularly in the setting of
acute infection, may be needed. Individuals with nondeletional HbH
disease are more likely to require transfusions than individuals with
deletional HbH disease.
The deletion of all four α-­globin gene alleles causes profound anemia
during fetal life, resulting in hydrops fetalis; the ζ-­globin gene must be
present for fetal survival. There are no normal hemoglobins present at
birth (primarily Hb Bart’s, with Hb Gower-­1, Gower-­2, and Portland).
Intrauterine transfusions may rescue the fetus, but congenital abnormalities and neurodevelopmental delay often result. Infants with severe
α-­thalassemia will have lifelong transfusion dependence, and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is the only cure.
Treatment of HbH disease requires ongoing monitoring of growth
and organ dysfunction. Dietary supplement with folate and multivitamins without iron is indicated. Older patients may develop decreased
bone density with calcium and vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D
supplementation is indicated if the level is low, and adequate dietary
calcium intake should be encouraged to promote bone health. Iron
supplementation should be avoided as patients are at risk of developing iron overload. Intermittent transfusion requirements during
intercurrent infection may occur, particularly in nondeletional HbH.
Splenectomy is occasionally indicated, and because of the high risk of
postsplenectomy thrombosis, aspirin or other anticoagulant therapy
after splenectomy should be considered. Hemosiderosis, secondary
to GI iron absorption or transfusion exposure, may develop in older
patients and require chelation therapy. Because HbH is an unstable
hemoglobin sensitive to oxidative injury, oxidative medications should
be avoided. At-­risk couples for hydrops fetalis should be identified and
offered molecular diagnosis on fetal tissue obtained early in pregnancy.
Later in pregnancy, intrauterine transfusion can improve fetal survival,
but chronic transfusion therapy or bone marrow transplantation for
survivors will be required.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2988 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
in the liver and/or spleen. This is more pronounced in reticulocytes,
which require higher levels of ATP.

Chapter 512

Enzymatic Defects

ETIOLOGY

512.1 Pyruvate Kinase Deficiency
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
Congenital nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia occurs in persons
homozygous or compound heterozygous for autosomal recessive genes
that cause either a marked reduction in red blood cell (RBC) pyruvate
kinase (PK) or production of an abnormal enzyme with decreased
catalytic activity resulting in impaired conversion of phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate. Generation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
within RBCs at this step is impaired, and low levels of ATP, pyruvate,
and the oxidized form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+)
are found (Fig. 512.1). The concentration of 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate is
increased; this isomer is beneficial in facilitating oxygen release from
hemoglobin but detrimental in inhibiting hexokinase and enzymes of
the hexose monophosphate shunt. This decrease of hemoglobin oxygen affinity leads to a rightward shift of the hemoglobin-­oxygen dissociation curve and therefore improved oxygen delivery manifesting
as tolerance of anemia more than expected for the degree of severity.
In addition, an unexplained decrease occurs in the sum of the adenine (ATP, adenosine diphosphate, and adenosine monophosphate)
and pyridine (NAD+ and reduced form of NAD) nucleotides, further
impairing glycolysis. Because of decreased ATP, RBCs cannot maintain their potassium and water content; the cells become rigid, and
their life span is considerably reduced with precipitous destruction

There are two mammalian PK genes, but only the PKLR gene is
expressed in RBCs. More than 300 pathogenic variants are reported
in this structural gene, which codes for a 574–amino acid protein that
forms a functional tetramer. There is some correlation of the type, location, and amino acid substitution with disease severity. The majority of
patients have at least one missense pathogenic variant. Most affected
patients are compound heterozygotes for two different PK gene defects.
The many possible combinations likely account for the variability in
clinical severity. The pathogenic variants 1456 C to T and 1529 G to
A are the most common pathogenic variants in the White population.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND LABORATORY
FINDINGS

The clinical manifestations of PK deficiency vary from severe neonatal hemolytic anemia to mild, well-­compensated hemolysis first noted
in adulthood (Table 512.1). Perinatal complications include premature birth, prenatal anemia or fetal hydrops requiring transfusions,
and preterm labor. Severe hyperbilirubinemia, anemia, and, in rare
cases, hepatic failure may occur in the neonatal period, and kernicterus has been reported. The hemolysis in older children and adults
varies in severity, with hemoglobin values ranging from 2-­14 g/dL in
various reports and associated pallor, jaundice, scleral icterus, splenomegaly, bone deformities due to extramedullary hematopoiesis, and
hyperpigmentation. Reticulocyte counts are often extremely elevated,
reflecting the severe ongoing hemolysis. Associated serum chemistries
consistent with nonimmune hemolytic anemia are present, including
an elevated indirect bilirubin, decreased haptoglobin, increased lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH), negative direct antiglobulin test (DAT), and

Cysteine
Glutamic acid

Glucose
ATP
Hexokinase
ADP
Glucose 6-P

Anaerobic
glycolysis

-glutamylcysteine
synthetase

NADP

Glucosephosphate isomerase

Glucose-6-P dehydrogenase
Glutathione
6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase reductase

NADPH

Fructose-6-P
ATP
Phosphofructokinase
ADP

Glycine
Glutathione
synthetase

Reduced glutathione
(Anti-oxidant)

H2O2
Glutathione
peroxidase

Oxidized glutathione

H2O

Hexose Monophosphate Shunt

Fructose-1,6-diP
Aldolase

Dihydroxyacetone-P

Triosephosphate
isomerase

Diphosphoglycerate mutase

2,3-Diphosphoglycerate

Glyceraldehyde-3-P
NAD
Glyceraldehyde-3-P dehydrogenase
NADP

1,3-Diphosphoglycerate
ADP
Phosphoglycerate kinase
[Energy] ATP

Diphosphoglycerate phosphatase

1,3-Phosphoglycerate
Phosphoglycerate mutase

2-Phosphoglycerate
Enolase

2-Phosphoenolpyruvate
ADP
[Energy] ATP

Pyruvate kinase

Pyruvate
NADH

Lactate dehydrogenase

NAD
Lactate

Fig. 512.1 Red blood cell metabolism: glycolysis and hexose monophosphate pathway. The enzyme deficiencies clearly associated with hemolysis are shown in bold. ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; ADP, adenosine diphosphate; NADP, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NADPH,
reduced form of NADP.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 512 u Enzymatic Defects

2989

Table 512.1  	 Hexokinase Variants Associated with Hemolytic Anemia
CLINICAL FEATURES
INHERITANCE

ANEMIA

PROPERTIES OF RBC HEXOKINASE
OTHER

ACTIVITY

KINETIC
ABNORMALITIES

13-­24*

0

—

—

15-­20*

+

Normal

Abnormal

16*

0

—

Abnormal

20*

0

Normal

Normal

Congenital malformations

STABILITY

MOBILITY

—

+

Recessive

++

Recessive

++

Recessive

+++

Recessive

+

Recessive

++

Low platelet and fibroblast
HK activity

20*

0

Low

Normal

Recessive

++

Low platelet HK activity

25*

+

Normal

Abnormal

Recessive

+

25*

0

Low

Normal

Dominant

+

Spherocytes, ovalocytes

30*

0

Low

Normal

Developmental and
cognitive delays

45†

+

Normal

Normal

50*

0

Normal

Normal

33*

+

—

—

Hydrops fetalis

17

Recessive

+

Recessive

+

—

+

Recessive

+

40-­53*

+

Low

Normal

—

+

50*

+

—

—

45-­91†

+

Normal

Abnormal

75*

+

Normal

Abnormal

Congenital malformations

53
Dominant

+

Dominant

++

Recessive

±

WBC HK activity low

77†

*Maximal enzyme activity (Vmax) compared to reticulocytosis controls.
†Maximal enzyme activity (V
max) compared to normal red cells.

HK, Hexokinase; RBC, red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.
From Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski's Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015: 583; Table 17.2.

negative indirect antiglobulin test. A severe form of the disease has a
relatively high incidence among the Amish of the Midwestern United
States (homozygous splicing pathogenic variant R479H). PK deficiency
may possibly provide protection against falciparum malaria. There are
long-­term effects of chronic hemolysis, including folate deficiency, skin
ulcers, gallstones, increased risk of bone fractures, and risk of transient
bone marrow aplasia associated with certain viral infections.
Polychromatophilia and mild macrocytosis reflect the elevated
reticulocyte count. Spherocytes are uncommon, but a few spiculated
pyknocytes may be found. Diagnosis relies on demonstration of a
marked reduction of RBC PK activity or an increase in the Michaelis-­
Menten dissociation constant (Km) for its substrate, phosphoenolpyruvate (high Km variant). Other RBC enzyme activity is normal or
elevated, reflecting the reticulocytosis. No abnormalities of hemoglobin are noted. The white blood cells (WBCs) and platelets have normal
PK activity and must be rigorously excluded from the RBC hemolysates used to measure PK activity. Fructose 1,6-­disphosphate (FDP)
must also be removed because it is an allosteric activator of PK. Heterozygous carriers usually have moderately reduced levels of PK activity.
Molecular testing provides additional evidence for the disease. However, due to genotype-­phenotype variability with unclear pathogenicity
regarding variants, it is recommended to perform initial biochemical
testing.

TREATMENT

Intrauterine RBC transfusions are performed in the setting of severe
anemia associated with fetal hydrops. Phototherapy and exchange transfusions may be indicated for hyperbilirubinemia in newborns. Transfusions of packed RBCs are necessary for severe anemia or for aplastic
crises. If the anemia is consistently severe and frequent transfusions

are required, iron chelation may be necessary. Splenectomy should be
considered after the child is 5-­6 years of age to decrease the need for
transfusions and minimize iron overload. Although not curative, splenectomy may be followed by higher Hb levels and by strikingly high
(30–60%) reticulocyte counts. Death resulting from overwhelming
pneumococcal sepsis has followed splenectomy; thus immunization
with vaccines for encapsulated organisms should be given before splenectomy and prophylactic penicillin administered after the procedure.
Splenectomy has also been associated with thrombosis and pulmonary
hypertension. There is currently no standard curative therapy, although
the role of gene therapy and hematopoietic cell transplant are actively
being investigated. An oral allosteric PK activator (mitapivat) is being
studied in clinical trials involving adults and is under review by the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The natural history of the disease is limited and is currently being studied through an international
registry.

512.2 Other Glycolytic Enzyme Deficiencies
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
Chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemias of varying severity have
been associated with deficiencies of other enzymes in the glycolytic pathway, including hexokinase, glucose phosphate isomerase,
and aldolase, which are inherited as autosomal recessive disorders.
Phosphofructokinase deficiency, which occurs primarily in Ashkenazi Jews in the United States, results in hemolysis associated
with a myopathy classified as glycogen storage disease type VII
(see Chapter 107.1). Clinically, hemolytic anemia is complicated by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2990 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
muscle weakness, exercise intolerance, cramps, and myoglobinuria.
Erythrocyte production is increased to compensate for hemolysis.
Enzyme assays for phosphofructokinase yield low values for RBCs
and muscle.
Triose phosphate isomerase deficiency is an autosomal recessive
disorder affecting many systems. Affected patients have hemolytic anemia, cardiac abnormalities, and lower motor neuron and pyramidal
tract impairment, with or without evidence of cerebral impairment.
They usually die in early childhood. The gene for triose phosphate
isomerase has been cloned and sequenced and is located on chromosome 12.
Phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) is the first ATP-­generating step
in glycolysis. At least 23 kindreds with PGK deficiency have been
described. PGK is the only glycolytic enzyme inherited on the X
chromosome. PGK is important in erythrocytes, the central nervous system (CNS), and skeletal muscle. The phenotype is quite
variable and may affect one isolated tissue or a combination of all
three. Affected males may present with dysfunction of the CNS
with seizures, intellectual disability, and nonspherocytic hemolytic
anemia; hemolytic anemia without CNS involvement; or myopathy,
myoglobinuria, and progressive weakness. Some patients present
with parkinsonism. Female heterozygotes have been shown to have
partial symptoms depending on their degree of enzymatic activity, including signs of hemolysis. The gene for PGK is particularly
large, spanning 23 kb, and various genetic abnormalities, including nucleotide substitutions, gene deletions, missense, and splicing
pathogenic variants, result in PGK deficiency.

DEFICIENCIES OF ENZYMES OF HEXOSE
MONOPHOSPHATE PATHWAY

The most important function of the hexose monophosphate pathway is to maintain glutathione in its reduced state (GSH) as protection against the oxidation of RBCs (see Fig. 512.1). Approximately
10% of the glucose taken up by RBCs passes through this pathway
to provide the reduced form of NAD phosphate (NADPH) necessary for the conversion of oxidized glutathione to GSH. Maintenance of GSH is essential for the physiologic inactivation of oxidant
compounds, such as hydrogen peroxide, that are generated within
RBCs. If glutathione, or any compound or enzyme necessary for
maintaining it in the reduced state, is decreased, the SH groups of
the RBC membrane are oxidized, and the Hb becomes denatured
and may precipitate into RBC inclusions called Heinz bodies. Once
Heinz bodies have formed, an acute hemolytic process results from
damage to the RBC membrane by the precipitated Hb, the oxidant
agent, and the action of the spleen. The damaged RBCs then are
rapidly removed from the circulation.

512.3 Glucose-­6-­Phosphate Dehydrogenase
Deficiency and Related Deficiencies
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
Glucose-­
6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency, the most
frequent disease involving enzymes of the hexose monophosphate
pathway, is responsible for two clinical syndromes: episodic acute
hemolytic anemia and chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. The
most common manifestations are neonatal jaundice and episodic acute
hemolytic anemia, which is induced by infections, certain drugs, and,
rarely, fava beans. This X-­linked deficiency affects >400 million people
worldwide, representing an overall 4.9% global prevalence. The global
distribution of this disorder parallels that of malaria, representing an
example of “balanced polymorphism,” in which there is an evolutionary advantage of resistance to falciparum malaria in heterozygous
females that outweighs the small negative effect of affected hemizygous
males.

Fig. 512.2 Most common pathogenic variants along coding sequence

of G6PD gene. Exons are shown as open numbered boxes. Open circles
are pathogenic variants causing classes II and III variants. Filled circles
represent sporadic pathogenic variants giving rise to severe variants
(class I). Open ellipses are pathogenic variants causing class IV variants.
X is a nonsense pathogenic variant; f, a splice site pathogenic variant;
filled squares, small deletions. 202A and 968C are the two sites of base
substitution in G6PD-­A. (From Cappellini MD, Fiorelli G. Glucose-­6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Lancet. 2008;371:64–74.)

The deficiency is caused by inheritance of any of a large number
of abnormal alleles of the gene responsible for the synthesis of the
G6PD protein. Over 200 pathogenic variants have been described
in the gene responsible for the synthesis of the G6PD protein. Many
of these pathogenic variants are missense point pathogenic variants
leading to amino acid substitutions and destabilization of the G6PD
enzyme. ­Figure 512.2 shows some of the pathogenic variants that
cause episodic versus chronic hemolysis. Milder disease is associated with pathogenic variants near the amino terminus of the G6PD
molecule, and chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia is associated with pathogenic variants clustered near the carboxyl terminus
near the G6P and NADP-­binding sites. The normal enzyme found
in most populations is designated G6PD B+. A normal variant, designated G6PD A+, is common in Americans of African descent.

EPISODIC OR INDUCED ACUTE HEMOLYTIC
ANEMIA
Etiology

G6PD catalyzes the conversion of glucose 6-­
phosphate to
6-­phosphogluconic acid. This reaction produces NADPH, which maintains GSH (glutathione in its reduced, functional state; see Fig. 512.1).
GSH provides protection against oxidant threats from certain drugs
and infections that would otherwise cause precipitation of hemoglobin
(Heinz bodies) or damage the RBC membrane.
Synthesis of RBC G6PD is determined by a gene on the X chromosome. Thus heterozygous females have intermediate enzymatic
activity and have two populations of RBCs: one is normal, and the
other is deficient in G6PD activity. Because they have fewer susceptible cells, most heterozygous females do not have clinically evident
hemolysis after exposure to oxidant drugs. Rarely, the majority of
RBCs is G6PD deficient in heterozygous females because the inactivation of the normal X chromosome is random and sometimes
exaggerated.
Disease involving this enzyme therefore occurs more frequently
in males than in females. Approximately 13% of male Americans of African descent have a variant enzyme (G6PD A−) that
results in a deficiency of RBC G6PD activity (5–15% of normal).
Italians, Greeks, and other Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, African, and Asian ethnic groups also have a high incidence, ranging
from 5–40%, of a variant designated G6PD B− (G6PD Mediterranean). In these variants, the G6PD activity of homozygous females
or hemizygous males is <5% of normal. Therefore the defect in
Americans of African descent is less severe than that in Americans
of European descent. A third variant enzyme with greatly reduced
activity (G6PD Canton) occurs in approximately 5% of the Chinese
population.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 512 u Enzymatic Defects
Clinical Manifestations

Most individuals with G6PD deficiency are asymptomatic, with
no clinical manifestations of illness unless triggered by infection,
drugs, or ingestion of fava beans. Typically, hemolysis ensues in
about 24-­96 hours after a patient has ingested a substance with
oxidant properties. In severe cases, hemoglobinuria and jaundice result, and the Hb concentration may fall precipitously. Drugs
that elicit hemolysis in these individuals include fluoroquinolones,
methylene blue, sulfonylureas, rasburicase, and antimalarials, such
as primaquine and dapsone (Table 512.2). There is mixed evidence
regarding the safety data of aspirin and sulfa-­containing medications, which are generally thought to be safe. Chemical exposures
to henna compounds and naphthalene (e.g., mothballs and deodorant) have also been implicated. The degree of hemolysis varies with
the inciting agent, amount ingested, and severity of the enzyme
deficiency. In some individuals, ingestion of fava beans also produces an acute, severe hemolytic syndrome, known as favism. Fava
beans contain divicine, isouramil, and convicine, which ultimately
lead to production of hydrogen peroxide and other reactive oxygen
products. Favism is thought to be more frequently associated with
the G6PD Mediterranean and G6PD Canton variants.
In the G6PD A− variant, the stability of the folded protein dimer
is impaired, and this defect is accentuated as the RBCs age. Thus
hemolysis decreases as older RBCs are destroyed, even if administration of the drug is continued. This recovery results from the
age-­labile enzyme, which is abundant and more stable in younger
RBCs (Fig. 512.3). The associated reticulocytosis produces a compensated hemolytic process in which the blood hemoglobin may be
only slightly decreased, despite continued exposure to the offending
agent.
G6PD deficiency can produce hemolysis in the neonatal period.
In G6PD A–, spontaneous hemolysis and hyperbilirubinemia have
been observed in preterm infants. In newborns with the G6PD B−
and G6PD Canton varieties, hyperbilirubinemia and even kernicterus may occur. Neonates with co-­inheritance of G6PD deficiency

2991

and a pathogenic variant of the promoter of uridine-­diphosphate-­
glucuronyl transferase (UGT1A1), seen in Gilbert syndrome, have
more severe neonatal jaundice. When a pregnant woman ingests
oxidant drugs, they may be transmitted to her G6PD-­deficient
fetus, and hemolytic anemia and jaundice may be apparent at birth.
Similarly, medications may be transmitted to a neonate through
breast milk.

Laboratory Findings

The onset of acute hemolysis usually results in a precipitous fall in
hemoglobin and hematocrit. If the episode is severe, the Hb-­binding
proteins, such as haptoglobin, are saturated, and free hemoglobin
may appear in the plasma and subsequently in the urine. Hemolysis is
intravascular and extravascular. Unstained or supravital preparations
of RBCs reveal precipitated hemoglobin, or Heinz bodies. The RBC
inclusions are not visible on the Wright-­stained blood film. Cells that
contain these inclusions are seen only within the first 3-­4 days of illness because they are rapidly cleared from the blood. Also, the blood
film may contain RBCs with what appears to be a bite taken from their
periphery (“bite cells”) and polychromasia (evidence of bluish, larger
RBCs), representing reticulocytosis (Fig. 512.4).

Diagnosis

The diagnosis depends on direct or indirect demonstration of reduced
G6PD activity in RBCs. By direct measurement, enzyme activity in
affected persons is ≤10% of normal, and the reduction of enzyme activity is more extreme in Americans of European descent and in Asians
than in Americans of African descent. Satisfactory screening tests are
based on decolorization of methylene blue, reduction of methemoglobin, or fluorescence of NADPH. Confirmatory testing is available
using quantitative NADPH formation measured spectrophotometrically. Immediately after a hemolytic episode, reticulocytes and young
RBCs predominate. These young cells have significantly higher enzyme
activity than do older cells in the A− variety (African). Testing may
therefore have to be deferred for a few weeks before a diagnostically low

Table 512.2  	 Agents Precipitating Hemolysis in Glucose-­6-­Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency
DEFINITE RISK OF AHA
ANTIMALARIAL DRUGS
Dapsone
Pamaquine
Primaquine
Tafenoquine
OTHER DRUGS
Ciprofloxacin
Glibenclamide
Methylene blue
Moxifloxacin
Nalidixic acid
Nitrofurantoin
Norfloxacin
Ofloxacin
Phenazopyridine
Rasburicase and pegloticase
Sulfamethoxazole/cotrimoxazole
Henna (cosmetic use)

“POSSIBLE” RISK OF AHA

POSSIBLE ASSOCIATION (LESS LIKELY)

Chloroquine
Quinidine
Quinine

Aspirin*
Menadiol sodium phosphate
Sulfadiazine
Sulfasalazine
Sulfonylureas
Tolonium chloride

Chloramphenicol
Dimercaptosuccinic acid
Glibenclamide
Mepacrine
Vitamin K analogs

*Hemolysis is dose related. Typical 75 to 100 mg per day, widely used for prophylaxis of cardiovascular events, is safe for G6PD-­deficient persons.
AHA, acute hemolytic anemia.
From Luzzatto L, Ally M, Notaro R. Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Blood. 2020;136:1225–1240; Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2992 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
100

50
Normal
G6PD

G6PD (g/g Hb)

10

5

G6PD
Seattle

Fig. 512.4 Morphologic erythrocyte changes (anisopoikilocytosis,

1

bite cells) during acute hemolysis in a G6PD-­deficient patient. Arrows
show bite cells. Anisopoikilocytosis is abnormality in the shape or size
of erythrocytes. (From Cappellini MD, Fiorelli G. Glucose-­6-­phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency. Lancet. 2008;371:64–74.)

0.5
G6PD
Mediterranean

0.1
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Age of erythrocytes (days)

Fig. 512.3 Main mechanism of G6PD deficiency in RBCs is in vivo
instability of mutant enzyme. For many G6PD variants, such as the two
studied here, this is essentially acceleration of a process that takes place
normally with the aging of RBCs in the circulation. Hb, Hemoglobin.
(Adapted from Morelli A, Benatti U, Gaetani GF, et al. Biochemical
mechanisms of glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 1978;75:1979–1983.)

level of enzyme can be shown. The diagnosis can be suspected when
G6PD activity is within the low-­normal range in the presence of a high
reticulocyte count. G6PD variants also can be detected by electrophoretic and molecular analysis. G6PD deficiency should be considered
in any neonatal patients with hyperbilirubinemia and borderline low
G6PD activity.

Prevention and Treatment

Prevention of hemolysis constitutes the most important therapeutic
measure. When possible, males belonging to ethnic groups with a significant incidence of G6PD deficiency (e.g., Greeks, southern Italians,
Sephardic Jews, Filipinos, southern Chinese, Black Americans, Thais)
should be tested for the defect before known oxidant drugs are given.

The usual doses of aspirin and trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole do not
cause clinically relevant hemolysis in the A− variety. Aspirin administered in doses used for acute rheumatic fever (50-­100 mg/kg/24 hr)
may produce a severe hemolytic episode. Infants with severe neonatal jaundice who belong to these ethnic groups also require testing for
G6PD deficiency because of their heightened risk for this defect. If
severe hemolysis has occurred, supportive therapy may require blood
transfusions, although recovery is the rule when the oxidant agent is
discontinued.

CHRONIC HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS ASSOCIATED
WITH DEFICIENCY OF G6PD OR RELATED FACTORS

Chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia has been associated
with profound deficiency of G6PD caused by enzyme variants, particularly those defective in quantity, activity, or stability. The gene
defects leading to chronic hemolysis are located primarily in the
region of the NADP-­binding site near the carboxyl terminus of the
protein (see Fig. 512.2). These include the Loma Linda, Tomah,
Iowa, Beverly Hills, Nashville, Riverside, Santiago de Cuba, and
Andalus variants. Persons with G6PD B− enzyme deficiency occasionally have chronic hemolysis, and the hemolytic process may
worsen after ingestion of oxidant drugs. Splenectomy is of little
value in these types of chronic hemolysis.
Other enzyme defects may impair the regeneration of GSH as an
oxidant “sump” (see Fig. 512.1). Mild, chronic nonspherocytic anemia
has been reported in association with decreased RBC GSH, resulting
from γ-­glutamylcysteine or GSH synthetase deficiencies. Deficiency
of 6-­phosphogluconate dehydrogenase has been associated primarily
with drug-­induced hemolysis, and hemolysis with hyperbilirubinemia
has been related to a deficiency of GSH peroxidase in newborn infants.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 513 u Hemolytic Anemias Resulting from Extracellular Factors—Immune Hemolytic Anemias

Chapter 513

Hemolytic Anemias
Resulting from
Extracellular Factors—
Immune Hemolytic
Anemias
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow

IMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS

A number of extrinsic agents and disorders may lead to premature
destruction of red blood cells (RBCs) at a rate where hemolysis exceeds
hematopoietic replacement. Among the most clearly defined are antibodies associated with immune hemolytic anemias. The hallmark of this group
of diseases is the positive result of the direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test
(DAT), which detects a coating of immunoglobulin or components of
complement on the RBC surface. The most important immune hemolytic
disorder in pediatric practice is hemolytic disease of the newborn (erythroblastosis fetalis), caused by transplacental transfer of maternal antibody
active against the RBCs of the fetus, that is, isoimmune hemolytic anemia
(see Chapter 140).
Various other immune hemolytic anemias are autoimmune
(Table 513.1). Often, no underlying cause can be found; this is the primary or idiopathic type. If the autoimmune hemolysis is associated with
an underlying disease, including various infections (Epstein-­Barr virus
[EBV], rarely HIV, cytomegalovirus, and mycoplasma), autoimmune or
Table 513.1  Diseases Characterized by Immune-­Mediated
Red Blood Cell Destruction
AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA CAUSED BY WARM-­
REACTIVE AUTOANTIBODIES
Primary (idiopathic)
Secondary
Lymphoproliferative disorders
Connective tissue disorders (especially systemic lupus
­erythematosus)
Nonlymphoid neoplasms (e.g., ovarian tumors)
Chronic inflammatory diseases (e.g., ulcerative colitis)
Immunodeficiency disorders
AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA CAUSED BY COLD-­
REACTIVE AUTOANTIBODIES (CRYOPATHIC HEMOLYTIC
SYNDROMES)
Primary (idiopathic) cold agglutinin disease
Secondary cold agglutinin disease
Lymphoproliferative disorders
Infections (Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Epstein-­Barr virus)
Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria
Primary (idiopathic)
Viral syndromes (most common)
Congenital or tertiary syphilis
DRUG-­INDUCED IMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
(SEE TABLE 513.2)
Hapten/drug adsorption (e.g., penicillin)
Ternary (immune) complex (e.g., quinine, quinidine)
True autoantibody induction (e.g., methyldopa)
Adapted from Packman CH. Autoimmune hemolytic anemias. In Rakel R (ed). Conn’s
Current Therapy. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1995: 305.

2993

inflammatory diseases (autoimmune lymphoproliferative disease [ALPS],
systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE], rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes
mellitus, ulcerative colitis), primary immunodeficiency diseases (common variable immunodeficiency [CVID], Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome),
neoplasms (lymphoproliferative, solid tumors), or posttransplant (solid
organ or allogeneic stem cell), it is considered secondary (Table 513.2). As
many as 20% of episodes of autoimmune hemolysis are drug-­induced (e.g.,
Table 513.2  Secondary Etiologies Causing Autoimmune
Cytopenias in ­Children
DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH AUTOIMMUNE CYTOPENIAS IN
CHILDREN
Lymphoproliferative Disorders
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS)*
Rosai-­Dorfman disease
Castleman disease
Ras-­associated leukoproliferative disorder
Immune Deficiencies
Common variable immune deficiency (CVID)*
Selective IgA deficiency
Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion (DiGeorge or velocardiofacial syndrome)
Severe combined immunodeficiency syndromes
IPEX syndrome
Rheumatologic Conditions
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)*
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome*
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Sjögren syndrome
Sarcoid
Malignancies
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Hodgkin lymphoma
Chronic Infections
EBV
HIV**
Helicobacter pylori
CMV
HCV
Other
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
RECOMMENDED EVALUATION FOR CHILDREN WITH CHRONIC
SINGLE LINEAGE AUTOIMMUNE CYTOPENIAS OR MULTI-­
LINEAGE AUTOIMMUNE CYTOPENIAS*
Flow cytometry for double negative T cells (ALPS)
ANA (SLE)
Anti-­phospholipid antibodies
Quantitative immunoglobulins (CVID)
Specific antibody titers (CVID)
T cells subsets (CD3/CD4, CD3/CD8)
Ferritin
HIV**
FOXP3 testing (IPEX)
Exome or specific gene panels
*Consider screening for these conditions in children with chronic single lineage autoimmune cytopenias or multi-­lineage autoimmune cytopenias.
**Consider also screening for HIV in adolescents with chronic single lineage or multi-­
lineage autoimmune cytopenias. Other diseases should be considered if the history
or physical are suggestive of the underlying condition. It is extremely rare for the
other conditions to present with autoimmune cytopenias and no other signs or symptoms suggestive of the underlying disease. Thus, the utility of routine screening is low.
EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; ANA, antinuclear
antibody; IPEX, immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy X-linked.
Modified from Teachey DT, Lambert MP. Diagnosis and management of autoimmune
cytopenias in childhood. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2013;60:1489–1511; Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2994 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
methyldopa, l-­
dopa, checkpoint inhibitors). Other drugs (penicillins,
cephalosporins) cause hemolysis by means of “drug-­dependent antibodies”—antibodies directed toward the drug and in some cases toward an
RBC membrane antigen as well.

Etiology

Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) is caused by the production of
anti-­RBC autoantibodies generated by tissue and self-­reactive B lymphocytes circulating in the periphery supported by T helper lymphocytes.
The complement system induces sequential activation of the membrane
attack complex (MAC) leading to erythrocyte lysis typically in the liver
and circulation. RBCs are opsonized by the autoantibodies or complement
then phagocytosed primarily in the spleen and lymph tissue. Antibody-­
dependent cell-­mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) induced by cytotoxic CD8+
T lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells are an additional important
mechanism contributing to AIHA also predominantly in lymphoid organs
and the spleen.
The underlying cause of autoimmunity is loss of central self-­tolerance in
the early stages of lymphocyte differentiation, as well as loss of peripheral
self-­tolerance driven by Tregs and CD8+ suppressor T lymphocytes. Loss
of tolerance allows for autoreactive cells to avoid negative selection, and/or
suppression of autoantibodies fails to occur appropriately in the periphery.
It is theorized patients who develop AIHA have an underlying predisposition to losing such self-­tolerance, which is stimulated by environmental
factors.
The autoantibody may be produced as an inappropriate immune
response to an RBC antigen or to another antigenic epitope similar to an
RBC antigen, known as molecular mimicry. Alternatively, an infectious
agent may alter the RBC membrane so that it becomes “foreign” or antigenic to the host.
The autoantibodies that form in AIHA have antibody class, antigenic
reactivity, and thermal characteristics associated with binding and/or
destroying erythrocytes. The temperature predilection is associated
with corresponding nomenclature, including warm (wAIHA), cold
(cold agglutinin disease [CAD]), paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria
(PCH), and rare mixed forms.

AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS ASSOCIATED
WITH “WARM” ANTIBODIES
Etiology

Warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia (wAIHA) is the most common
form in children found in as many as 90% of cases. Autoantibodies
are “warm-­reactive” meaning they preferentially bind to erythrocytes
at 37°C. Extravascular hemolysis occurs in the spleen. Typically, the
antibodies are immunoglobulin (Ig) G, and react to epitopes (antigens)
that are “public” or common to all human RBCs, such as Rh proteins.
When IgG is present in exceptional quantity, it can fix complement,
which results in intravascular hemolysis.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with wAIHA present with symptoms consistent with anemia
and nonspecific signs of hemolysis. Onset may be acute, with pallor,
jaundice, icterus, hemoglobinuria, abdominal pain, fever, shortness of
breath, and dizziness, or more gradual with primarily fatigue and pallor. Cardiovascular compromise is rare. The spleen is usually enlarged
and is the primary site of destruction of IgG-­coated RBCs.

Laboratory Findings

In many cases, anemia is profound with hemoglobin (Hb) levels <6
g/dL. Considerable spherocytosis and polychromasia (reflecting the
reticulocyte response) are present. More than 50% of the circulating
RBCs may be reticulocytes, and nucleated RBCs usually are present.
In some cases, a low reticulocyte count may be found, particularly
early in the episode due to similar epitopes on RBC precursors in the
marrow, marrow suppression if there is concurrent infection, and/
or a “shocked” marrow after a severe hemolytic event. Leukocytosis is common. The platelet count is usually normal, but concomitant immune thrombocytopenic purpura sometimes occurs (Evans
syndrome). Patients with Evans syndrome often have or eventually
develop a chronic disease, including SLE, an immunodeficiency

syndrome (common variable immunodeficiency), or autoimmune
lymphoproliferative syndrome.
Results of the DAT (Coombs test) are strongly positive, and free antibody can sometimes be demonstrated in the serum (indirect Coombs
test). These antibodies are active at 35–40°C (95–104°F) (“warm” antibodies) and most often belong to the IgG class. They do not require complement for activity. Antibodies from the serum and those eluted from
the RBCs react with the RBCs of many persons in addition to those of the
patient. They often have been regarded as nonspecific panagglutinins,
but careful studies have revealed specificity for RBC antigens of the Rh
system in 70% of patients (50% of adult patients). Complement, particularly fragments of C3b, may be detected on the RBCs in conjunction with
IgG. The Coombs test result is rarely negative because of the sensitivity
of the Coombs reaction. A minimum of 260-­400 molecules of IgG per
cell is necessary on the RBC membrane to produce a positive reaction.
Special tests are required to detect the antibody in cases of “Coombs-­
negative” autoimmune hemolytic anemia. In warm antibody hemolytic
anemia, the direct Coombs test may detect IgG alone, both IgG and complement fragments, or solely complement fragments if the level of RBC-­
bound IgG is below the detection limit of the anti-­IgG Coombs reagent.

Treatment

Transfusions may provide only transient benefit but may be lifesaving in cases of severe anemia until the effects of other treatments are
observed. All tested units for transfusion are serologically incompatible. It is important to identify the patient’s ABO blood group to avoid
a hemolytic transfusion reaction mediated by anti-­A or anti-­B. The
blood bank should also test for the presence of an underlying alloantibody, which could cause rapid hemolysis of transfused RBCs. Patients
who have been neither previously transfused nor pregnant are unlikely
to harbor an alloantibody. Early consultation between the clinician and
the blood bank physician is essential. Failure to transfuse a profoundly
anemic infant or child may lead to serious morbidity and even death.
Patients with mild disease and compensated hemolysis may not require
treatment. If the hemolysis is severe and results in significant anemia or
symptoms, treatment with glucocorticoids is initiated. Glucocorticoids
decrease the rate of hemolysis by blocking macrophage function through
downregulating Fcγ receptor expression, decreasing the production of the
autoantibody, and perhaps enhancing the elution of antibody from the
RBCs. Initial dosing is dependent on the degree of anemia and symptoms.
In patients who present with Hb <6 to 7 g/dL or severe symptoms, initial
treatment with intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone 0.5-­1 mg/kg every 6
to 8 hours in the first 24-­72 hours is typically indicated. With rapid deterioration or severity of anemia, high-­dose methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg with
maximum 1 g daily for 3 days may be required. When hemolytic anemia
remains severe despite glucocorticoid therapy, or if very large doses are
necessary to maintain a reasonable Hb level, intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) may be tried. Long-­term use of IVIG has not been shown to be
effective in the majority of children. In children who present with mild to
moderate anemia with Hg ≥7 to 8 g/dL and an appropriate reticulocyte
count, oral prednisone 2 mg/kg/day may be started. Response is typically
seen within 2-­4 weeks after initiation of steroids and considered adequate
with Hb concentration >9 to 10 g/dL. Hb, reticulocyte count, lactate dehydrogenase, and DAT should be monitored for response. Treatment should
be continued until the rate of hemolysis decreases, with the dose then
gradually reduced, typically over at least 4 months. The Coombs test result
may remain positive even after the Hb level returns to normal. It is usually
safe to discontinue prednisone once the direct Coombs test result becomes
negative.
The majority of patients (approximately 80%) have an initial response
to glucocorticoids within the first month of treatment; however, it is
common to require prolonged or multimodal therapies over time. If
a patient is unable to taper prednisone effectively within 1-­2 months
after diagnosis, addition of a second-­line therapy should be considered.
Relapse occurs in 15–40% of patients with wAIHA, typically within
the first 6-­12 months after initial response to treatment. If this occurs,
resumption of the lowest dose of prednisone that was effective in treating
the patient is recommended. Because of the adverse effects of long-­term
steroid use, alternative agents could be considered if relapse continues to
occur.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 513 u Hemolytic Anemias Resulting from Extracellular Factors—Immune Hemolytic Anemias
There are limited data in second-­line therapies for wAIHA in children.
Rituximab, a monoclonal antibody that targets B lymphocytes, the source
of antibody production, is useful in chronic cases refractory to conventional
therapy. Plasmapheresis has been used in refractory cases but generally is
not helpful because most hemolysis is in the extravascular space. Splenectomy may be beneficial but is complicated by a heightened risk of infection
with encapsulated organisms, particularly in patients <6 years old. Prophylaxis is indicated with appropriate vaccines (pneumococcal, meningococcal, and Haemophilus influenzae type b) before splenectomy and with oral
penicillin after splenectomy. Thrombosis and pulmonary hypertension
are also increasingly recognized problems after splenectomy. In refractory
disease, several immunomodulating agents have been used in small case
series or reports including azathioprine, 6-­mercaptopurine, cyclosporine,
mycophenolate mofetil, tacrolimus, sirolimus, and monoclonal antibodies
(e.g., obinutuzumab, daratumumab, alemtuzumab, bortezomib).

Prognosis

Acute idiopathic autoimmune hemolytic disease in childhood varies
in severity but is self-­limited; death from untreatable anemia is rare.
Approximately 30% of patients have chronic hemolysis, often associated with an underlying disease, such as SLE, immunodeficiency, or
lymphoma. The presence of antiphospholipid antibodies in adult
patients with immune hemolysis predisposes to thrombosis. Mortality
in chronic cases depends on the primary disorder.

AUTOIMMUNE HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS ASSOCIATED
WITH “COLD” ANTIBODIES OR COLD AGGLUTININ
DISEASE

“Cold” antibodies agglutinate RBCs at temperatures <37°C (98.6°F).
They are primarily of the IgM class and require complement for hemolytic activity. The highest temperature at which RBC agglutination
occurs is called the thermal amplitude. A higher thermal amplitude
antibody—that is, one that can bind to RBCs at temperatures achievable in the body—results in hemolysis with exposure to a cold environment. High antibody titers are associated with high thermal amplitude.
Cold antibodies usually have specificity for the oligosaccharide
antigens of the I/i system. They may occur in primary or idiopathic
cold agglutinin disease, secondary to infections such as those from
Mycoplasma pneumoniae and EBV, or secondary to lymphoproliferative disorders. After M. pneumoniae infection, the anti-­I levels may
increase considerably, and occasionally, enormous increases may occur
to titers ≥1/30,000. The antibody has specificity for the I antigen and
thus reacts poorly with human cord RBCs, which possess the i antigen but exhibit low levels of I. Patients with infectious mononucleosis
occasionally have CAD, and the antibodies in these patients often have
anti-­i specificity. This antibody causes less hemolysis in adults than in
children because adults have fewer i molecules on their RBCs. Spontaneous RBC agglutination is observed in the cold and in vitro, and
RBC aggregates are seen on the blood film (rouleaux formation). Mean
corpuscular volume (MCV) may be spuriously elevated because of
RBC agglutination and reticulocytosis. The severity of the hemolysis

2995

is related to the thermal amplitude of the antibody, which itself partly
depends on the IgM antibody titer.
When very high titers of cold antibodies are present and active near
body temperature, severe intravascular hemolysis with hemoglobinemia
and hemoglobinuria may occur and may be heightened on a patient’s
exposure to cold (external temperature or ingested foods). Each IgM molecule has the potential to activate a C1 molecule, so that large amounts of
complement are found on the RBCs in CAD. These sensitized RBCs may
undergo intravascular complement-­mediated lysis or may be destroyed
in the liver and spleen. Only complement, not IgM, is detected on RBCs
because the IgM is removed during the washing steps of the DAT.
CAD is less common in children than in adults and more frequently
results in an acute, self-­limited episode of hemolysis. RBC transfusion
is indicated based on symptoms and severity of anemia. If transfusion
is required, blood should be warmed before administration. Glucocorticoids are much less effective in CAD than in hemolytic disease with
warm antibodies. Patients should avoid exposure to cold and should be
treated for any underlying disease. In the uncommon patient with severe
hemolytic disease, immunosuppression and plasmapheresis can be used.
Successful treatment of CAD has been reported with rituximab, which
effectively depletes B lymphocytes. Splenectomy is not useful in CAD.

Paroxysmal Cold Hemoglobinuria

Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria is mediated by the Donath-­
Landsteiner (D-­L) hemolysin, which is an IgG cold-­reactive autoantibody with anti-­P specificity. In vitro, the D-­L antibody binds to RBCs
in the cold, and the RBCs are lysed by complement as the temperature
is increased to 37°C. A similar sequence is thought to occur in vivo as
RBCs move from the cooler extremities to warmer parts of the circulation. Most reported cases are self-­limited; many patients experience
only one paroxysm of hemolysis. Congenital or acquired syphilis was
once the most common underlying cause of paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria, but currently, most cases are associated with nonspecific
viral infections. Treatment includes transfusion for severe anemia and
avoidance of cold ambient temperatures.

Drug-­Induced Hemolytic Anemia

Drugs (penicillin or sometimes cephalosporins) that cause hemolysis
through the “hapten” mechanism (immune but not autoimmune) bind
tightly to the RBC membrane. Antibodies to the drug, either newly or
previously formed, bind to the drug molecules on RBCs, mediating their
destruction in the spleen. In other cases, certain drugs, such as quinine and
quinidine, do not bind to RBCs, but rather form part of a “ternary complex,” consisting of the drug, an RBC membrane antigen, and an antibody
that recognizes both (see Table 513.3). Methyldopa and sometimes cephalosporins may, by unknown mechanisms, incite true autoantibodies to
RBC membrane antigens, so that the presence of the drug is not required
to cause hemolysis. Cephalosporins are the most common cause of drug-­
induced immune hemolytic anemia.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 513.3  Selected Drugs That Cause Immune-­Mediated Hemolysis
MECHANISM

DRUG ADSORPTION (HAPTEN)

TERNARY (IMMUNE) COMPLEX

AUTOANTIBODY INDUCTION

Direct antiglobulin test

Positive (anti-­IgG)

Positive (anti-­C3)

Positive (anti-­IgG)

Site of hemolysis

Extravascular

Intravascular

Extravascular

Medications

Penicillins
Cephalosporins
6-­Mercaptopurine
Tetracycline
Oxaliplatin
Hydrocortisone

Cephalosporins
Quinidine
Amphotericin B
Hydrocortisone
Rifampin (Rifadin)
Metformin
Quinine
Probenecid
Chlorpromazine
Oxaliplatin

α-­Methyldopa
Cephalosporins
Oxaliplatin
l-­Dopa
Procainamide
Ibuprofen
Diclofenac (Voltaren)
Interferon alfa

Adapted from Packman CH. Hemolytic anemia resulting from immune injury. In Kaushansky K, Lichtman MA, Beutler E, et al, (eds): Williams Hematology. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-­
Hill, 2010.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2996 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 514

Hemolytic Anemias
Secondary to Other
Extracellular Factors
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
FRAGMENTATION HEMOLYSIS

See Table 506.2 in Chapter 506.
Red blood cell (RBC) destruction may occur in hemolytic anemias
because of mechanical injury as the cells traverse a damaged vascular bed. Damage may be microvascular when RBCs are sheared
by fibrin in the capillaries during intravascular coagulation or when
renovascular disease accompanies the hemolytic-­uremic syndrome
(HUS) (see Chapter 560.5) or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) (see Chapter 533.5). Larger vessels may be involved in
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome (giant hemangioma and thrombocytopenia; see Chapter 554) or when a replacement heart valve is poorly
epithelialized. The blood film shows many schistocytes, or fragmented
cells, as well as polychromatophilia, reflecting the reticulocytosis
(see Fig. 507.4F in Chapter 507 on Castleman disease). Secondary
iron deficiency may complicate the intravascular hemolysis because
of urinary hemoglobin and hemosiderin iron loss (see Fig. 506.2 in
Chapter 506). Treatment should be directed toward the underlying condition, and the prognosis depends on the effectiveness of this
treatment. The benefit of transfusion may be transient because the
transfused cells are destroyed as quickly as those produced by the
patient.
It is critical to determine the precise etiology of the fragmentation
hemolysis because the treatment depends on the underlying problem
(Table 514.1). Acquired TTP results from an antibody to an enzyme
(ADAMTS13) that regulates the size of von Willebrand multimers. The

lack of this enzyme results in a marked increase in multimer size and
a resultant thrombotic microangiopathy. Congenital TTP can result in
the inability to produce adequate amounts of the enzyme ADAMTS13
and results in the same pathophysiology. The treatment for acquired
TTP involves plasma exchange (PEX) to remove the antibody and
replace the ADAMTS13, in addition to immunosuppressive therapy
with glucocorticoids. Treatment should be initiated as soon as possible
when there is a high index of suspicion, even before confirmation of
the diagnosis because of high morbidity and mortality. Once diagnosis has been confirmed, rituximab is suggested. Use of caplacizumab,
an anti-­von Willebrand factor monoclonal antibody, is used in adult
patients with severe disease, although it has not been approved by the
US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in children. The treatment
for congenital TTP involves scheduled plasma infusions to replace
the ADAMTS13. Recombinant ADAMTS13 is under investigation
for use in acquired and congenital TTP. In contrast, HUS results from
Shiga toxin produced by Escherichia coli 0157 and may not be helped
by plasmapheresis, and treatment is largely based on supportive measures. Atypical HUS involves activation of the alternative complement
pathway and can be treated with eculizumab (anti-­C5), an inhibitor of
the complement pathway. Plasmapheresis may reduce the RBC fragmentation and improve the platelet count but has little effect on the
tissue (kidney) vasculopathy, and thus is not usually recommended.
Pneumococcal-­induced HUS results from neuraminidase produced
by the bacteria, which damages the membranes of the RBCs and the
kidney, exposing the T-­antigen. Plasma contains natural antibody to
the T-­antigen, producing hemolysis, renal damage, and a thrombotic
microangiopathy. Thus, patients with T-­antigen activation from suspected pneumococcal-­induced HUS should not be given plasma infusions because this will significantly exacerbate the RBC hemolysis and
can lead to life-­threatening anemia.

THERMAL INJURY

Extensive burns may directly damage the RBCs and cause hemolysis
that results in the formation of spherocytes. Blood loss and marrow
suppression may contribute to anemia and require blood transfusion.
Erythropoietin (EPO) has been used as treatment for diminished RBC
production. There may be a role of early use of propranolol, which has
been shown to restore erythrocyte progenitors.

Table 514.1  Thrombotic Microangiopathies
DISEASE*

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

LAB FINDINGS

MANAGEMENT

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP)

Acquired: Ab to ADAMTS13
Congenital: Inadequate
­ADAMTS13 production

Ab to ADAMTS13
ADAMTS13 <10%

Acquired: Plasma exchange (PEX)
Glucocorticoids
+/-­ Rituximab
Congenital: Scheduled plasma
infusions, recombinant
ADAMTS13

Hemolytic-­uremic syndrome (HUS)

Escherichia coli 0157, Shiga toxin

E. coli 0157, Shiga toxin

Supportive
? Value of plasmapheresis

Atypical HUS

Complement-­mediated
­alternative pathway

ADAMTS13 >10%
Decreased factors H and I
(inhibitors of complement)†

Eculizumab (Ab to C5)
Plasmapheresis not indicated

Pneumococcal-­induced HUS

Neuraminidase-­induced RBC,
platelet, and kidney damage
Exposure of T-­antigen on RBC and
kidney

Pneumococcal infection
ADAMTS13 >10%

Plasmapheresis with albumin for
neuraminidase and endogenous
T Ab removal
Avoid plasma infusions, which will
exacerbate RBC hemolysis

Disseminated intravascular
­coagulation (DIC)

Sepsis, shock, endotoxin

Decreased fibrinogen, increased
fibrin split products, decreased
clotting factors and platelets

Treat underlying condition;
replace factors and platelets if
bleeding

*All show fragmentation hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and potential renal and other organ damage. An elevated lactate dehydrogenase and reduced haptoglobin usually
are present secondary to hemolysis.
†May be related to inherited defect in factor H or I.
Ab, Antibody; RBC, red blood cell.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 515 u Polycythemia
RENAL DISEASE

The anemia of uremia is multifactorial in origin. EPO production may
be decreased, and the marrow suppressed by toxic metabolites. Furthermore, the RBC life span often is shortened because of retention of metabolites and organic acidemia. The use of EPO in chronic renal disease can
decrease the need for blood transfusion. Abnormalities in the hepcidin-­
ferroportin pathway provide an additional pathway contributing to
anemia associated with chronic kidney disease. Investigative use of medications targeting this pathway are being evaluated in patients. Hemodialysis is also implicated in causing fragmentation of erythrocytes.

LIVER DISEASE

A change in the ratio of cholesterol to phospholipids in the plasma may
result in changes in the composition of the RBC membrane and shortening of the RBC life span. Some patients with liver disease have many
target RBCs on the blood film, whereas others have a preponderance
of spiculated cells. These morphologic changes reflect the alterations in
the plasma lipid composition.

TOXINS AND VENOMS

Bacterial sepsis caused by Haemophilus influenzae, staphylococci, or
streptococci may be complicated by accompanying hemolysis. Particularly severe hemolytic anemia has been observed in clostridial infections and results from a hemolytic clostridial toxin. Large numbers
of spherocytes may be seen on the blood film. Spherocytic hemolysis also may be noted after bites by various snakes, including cobras,
vipers, and rattlesnakes, which have phospholipases in their venom.
Large numbers of bites by insects, such as bees, wasps, and yellow jackets, also may cause spherocytic hemolysis by a similar mechanism (see
Chapter 768).

WILSON DISEASE

See Chapter 405.2.
An acute and self-­limited episode of hemolytic anemia may precede
by years the onset of hepatic or neurologic symptoms in Wilson disease. This event appears to result from the toxic effects of free copper
on the RBC membrane. The blood film often (but not always) shows
large numbers of spherocytes, and the Coombs test result is negative.
Because early diagnosis of Wilson disease permits prophylactic treatment with penicillamine and prevention of hepatic and neurologic
disease, correct assessment of this rare type of hemolysis is important.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 4

Polycythemia
(Erythrocytosis)
Chapter 515

Polycythemia
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
Polycythemia exists when the hemoglobin concentration and/
or hematocrit and total red blood cell (RBC) volume exceed the

2997

upper limits of normal in peripheral blood. In postpubertal individuals, an RBC mass >25% above the mean normal value (based
on body surface area) or a hemoglobin level >16.5 g/dL (in males)
or >16.0 g/dL (in females) and/or hematocrit >49% (in males) or
>48% (in females) indicate absolute erythrocytosis. A decrease in
plasma volume, such as occurs in acute dehydration and burns, may
result in a high hemoglobin value. These situations are more accurately designated as hemoconcentration or relative polycythemia
because the RBC mass is not increased, and normalization of the
plasma volume restores hemoglobin to ­normal levels. Once the
diagnosis of true polycythemia is made, sequential studies should
be done to determine the underlying etiology (Fig. 515.1).

CLONAL POLYCYTHEMIA (POLYCYTHEMIA VERA)
Pathogenesis

Polycythemia vera is an acquired clonal myeloproliferative neoplastic disorder, which is rare in children and adolescents. The
median age of diagnosis is >60 years. Although primarily manifesting as erythrocytosis, thrombocytosis and leukocytosis can also be
seen. When isolated severe thrombocytosis exists in the absence of
erythrocytosis, the myeloproliferative disorder is called essential
thrombocythemia. A gain-­of-­function pathogenic variant involving exon 12 or 14 (V617F) of JAK2, a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase,
is found in >90% of adult patients with polycythemia vera, but in
<30% of children with this condition. The erythropoietin receptor
is normal, and serum erythropoietin levels are low. Patients without JAK pathogenic variants may have variants in the calreticulin
or thrombopoietin receptor genes. Risk factors for development of
polycythemia vera include a family history of polycythemia vera
and presence of an autoimmune disorder.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with polycythemia vera usually have splenomegaly. Erythrocytosis may cause hypertension, headache, early satiety, or
neurologic symptoms and increases the risk of thrombosis. Granulocytosis may cause diarrhea or pruritus from histamine release.
Thrombocytosis (with or without platelet dysfunction) may cause
thrombosis or hemorrhage. Bleeding or acquired von Willebrand
disease with extreme thrombocytosis, and complications of pregnancy may occur. Long-­term effects include progression to myelofibrosis, myelodysplasia, and/or acute leukemia. These events are
rare in children. Table 515.1 lists the diagnostic criteria for polycythemia vera.

Treatment

Phlebotomy and low-­dose aspirin are the initial treatments of choice
to alleviate symptoms of hyperviscosity and decrease the risk of
thrombosis. Iron supplementation should be given to prevent viscosity problems from iron-­deficient microcytosis or thrombocytosis. If these treatments are unsuccessful, the patient has progressive
splenomegaly, thrombocytosis, or leukocytosis, or has high-­risk
features (i.e., age >60 or history of thrombosis), antiproliferative
treatments (hydroxyurea, pegylated interferon, or busulfan) may
be helpful. The use of ruxolitinib (a JAK2 inhibitor) is approved
in hydroxyurea-­resistant or hydroxyurea-­intolerant adult patients,
but the long-­term effectiveness remains under investigation. There
are limited data in the treatment of children, given the rarity of the
condition. Often only phlebotomy is required. Transformation of
the disease into myelofibrosis or acute leukemia is rare in children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2998 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Red cell mass
Normal

Elevated

Low plasma
volume

Normal

High

COHgb

Smoke exposure

Abnormal

Arterial O2

Low

Heart
Lung
Other cause
CT scan head, abdomen
Kidney


CNS
Other cause
Hemoglobin
Normal
studies

High O2 affinity hemoglobin
2,3-DPG deficiency

Normal

Low

Rule out polycythemia
vera:
CBC, differential
Bone marrow with chromosomes
Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase
B12/B12 binding capacity
JAK2 mutation

Erythropoietin

Normal

Elevated

von Hippel–Lindau mutations
Erythropoietin receptor
mutations
Other causes

Fig. 515.1 Algorithm showing sequential studies in the evaluation of polycythemia. CBC, Complete blood count; CNS, central nervous system;
COHgb, carboxyhemoglobin; 2,3-­DPG, 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate.

Table 515.1  World Health Organization (WHO) Diagnostic
Criteria for Polycythemia Vera
MAJOR CRITERIA
1.	Hb >16.5 g/dL (males) or Hb >16.0 g/dL (females)
or
Hct >49% (males) or >48% (females)
or
Elevated red cell mass >25% above mean normal predicted value
2.	Bone marrow (BM) biopsy showing hypercellularity for age with
trilineage growth (panmyelosis) including prominent erythroid,
granulocytic, and megakaryocytic proliferation with pleomorphic
mature megakaryocytes (difference in sizes)
3.	Presence of JAK2 or JAK2 exon 12 mutation
MINOR CRITERIA
1.	Subnormal serum erythropoietin level
DIAGNOSIS
All three major criteria
or
First two major criteria and the minor criterion*
*Criterion number 2 (BM biopsy) may not be required in cases with sustained absolute
erythrocytosis: hemoglobin levels >18.5 g/dL in males (hematocrit, 55.5%) or 16.5 g/dL
in females (hematocrit >49.5%) if major criterion 3 and the minor criterion are present.
However, initial myelofibrosis (present in up to 20% of patients) can only be detected
by performing a BM biopsy; this finding may predict a more rapid progression to overt
myelofibrosis (post-­PV MF).
Hb, Hemoglobin; Hct, hematocrit.
Modified from Arber DA, Orazi A, Hasserjian R, et al. The 2016 revision to the World
Health Organization classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia. Blood.
2016;127: 2391–405.

Chapter 516

Nonclonal Polycythemia
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
PATHOGENESIS

Nonclonal polycythemia is diagnosed when polycythemia is caused by
a physiologic process that is not derived from a single cell (Table 516.1).
Nonclonal polycythemia can be congenital or acquired (secondary).

Table 516.1  	 Differential Diagnosis of Polycythemia
CLONAL (PRIMARY)
Polycythemia vera
NONCLONAL
Congenital
High–oxygen affinity hemoglobinopathy (e.g., hemoglobin
­Chesapeake, Malmo, San Diego)
Erythropoietin receptor mutations (primary familial and congenital
polycythemia [PFCP])
Methemoglobin reductase deficiency
Hemoglobin M disease
2,3-­Diphosphoglycerate deficiency
Acquired
Hormonal
Adrenal disease: virilizing hyperplasia, Cushing syndrome
Athletic performance enhancing substances (e.g., anabolic ­steroids,
androgens, recombinant erythropoiesis stimulating agents)
Malignant tumors: adrenal, cerebellar, hepatic, other
Renal disease: cysts, hydronephrosis, renal artery stenosis
Hypoxia
Altitude
Cardiac disease
Lung disease
Sleep apnea
Central hypoventilation
Chronic carbon monoxide exposure including smoking
Neonatal: delayed cord clamping (placental-­fetal transfusion)
Normal intrauterine environment
Placental insufficiency (preeclampsia, maternal chronic
­hypertension, placental abruption)
Twin-­twin or maternal-­fetal hemorrhage
Perinatal asphyxia
Infants of diabetic mothers
Intrauterine growth restriction
Trisomy 13, 18, or 21
Adrenal hyperplasia
Maternal-­congenital hyperthyroidism
Spurious
Plasma volume decrease

Congenital Polycythemia

Lifelong or familial polycythemia should trigger a search for a
congenital problem. These inherited conditions may be transmitted as dominant or recessive disorders instigating erythrocytosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

2998 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Red cell mass
Normal

Elevated

Low plasma
volume

Normal

High

COHgb

Smoke exposure

Abnormal

Arterial O2

Low

Heart
Lung
Other cause
CT scan head, abdomen
Kidney


CNS
Other cause
Hemoglobin
Normal
studies

High O2 affinity hemoglobin
2,3-DPG deficiency

Normal

Low

Rule out polycythemia
vera:
CBC, differential
Bone marrow with chromosomes
Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase
B12/B12 binding capacity
JAK2 mutation

Erythropoietin

Normal

Elevated

von Hippel–Lindau mutations
Erythropoietin receptor
mutations
Other causes

Fig. 515.1 Algorithm showing sequential studies in the evaluation of polycythemia. CBC, Complete blood count; CNS, central nervous system;
COHgb, carboxyhemoglobin; 2,3-­DPG, 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate.

Table 515.1  World Health Organization (WHO) Diagnostic
Criteria for Polycythemia Vera
MAJOR CRITERIA
1.	Hb >16.5 g/dL (males) or Hb >16.0 g/dL (females)
or
Hct >49% (males) or >48% (females)
or
Elevated red cell mass >25% above mean normal predicted value
2.	Bone marrow (BM) biopsy showing hypercellularity for age with
trilineage growth (panmyelosis) including prominent erythroid,
granulocytic, and megakaryocytic proliferation with pleomorphic
mature megakaryocytes (difference in sizes)
3.	Presence of JAK2 or JAK2 exon 12 mutation
MINOR CRITERIA
1.	Subnormal serum erythropoietin level
DIAGNOSIS
All three major criteria
or
First two major criteria and the minor criterion*
*Criterion number 2 (BM biopsy) may not be required in cases with sustained absolute
erythrocytosis: hemoglobin levels >18.5 g/dL in males (hematocrit, 55.5%) or 16.5 g/dL
in females (hematocrit >49.5%) if major criterion 3 and the minor criterion are present.
However, initial myelofibrosis (present in up to 20% of patients) can only be detected
by performing a BM biopsy; this finding may predict a more rapid progression to overt
myelofibrosis (post-­PV MF).
Hb, Hemoglobin; Hct, hematocrit.
Modified from Arber DA, Orazi A, Hasserjian R, et al. The 2016 revision to the World
Health Organization classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemia. Blood.
2016;127: 2391–405.

Chapter 516

Nonclonal Polycythemia
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
PATHOGENESIS

Nonclonal polycythemia is diagnosed when polycythemia is caused by
a physiologic process that is not derived from a single cell (Table 516.1).
Nonclonal polycythemia can be congenital or acquired (secondary).

Table 516.1  	 Differential Diagnosis of Polycythemia
CLONAL (PRIMARY)
Polycythemia vera
NONCLONAL
Congenital
High–oxygen affinity hemoglobinopathy (e.g., hemoglobin
­Chesapeake, Malmo, San Diego)
Erythropoietin receptor mutations (primary familial and congenital
polycythemia [PFCP])
Methemoglobin reductase deficiency
Hemoglobin M disease
2,3-­Diphosphoglycerate deficiency
Acquired
Hormonal
Adrenal disease: virilizing hyperplasia, Cushing syndrome
Athletic performance enhancing substances (e.g., anabolic ­steroids,
androgens, recombinant erythropoiesis stimulating agents)
Malignant tumors: adrenal, cerebellar, hepatic, other
Renal disease: cysts, hydronephrosis, renal artery stenosis
Hypoxia
Altitude
Cardiac disease
Lung disease
Sleep apnea
Central hypoventilation
Chronic carbon monoxide exposure including smoking
Neonatal: delayed cord clamping (placental-­fetal transfusion)
Normal intrauterine environment
Placental insufficiency (preeclampsia, maternal chronic
­hypertension, placental abruption)
Twin-­twin or maternal-­fetal hemorrhage
Perinatal asphyxia
Infants of diabetic mothers
Intrauterine growth restriction
Trisomy 13, 18, or 21
Adrenal hyperplasia
Maternal-­congenital hyperthyroidism
Spurious
Plasma volume decrease

Congenital Polycythemia

Lifelong or familial polycythemia should trigger a search for a
congenital problem. These inherited conditions may be transmitted as dominant or recessive disorders instigating erythrocytosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia
by augmenting hypoxia sensing or abnormalities in oxygen sensing. Autosomal dominant causes include hemoglobins that have
increased oxygen affinity (P50 [partial pressure of oxygen in
the blood at which the hemoglobin is 50% saturated] <20 mm
Hg), erythropoietin receptor pathogenic variants resulting in an
enhanced effect of erythropoietin, or variants in the von Hippel–
Lindau (VHL), EGLN1, or EPAS1 genes that result in altered intracellular oxygen sensing. Another rare cause is autosomal recessive
2,3-­diphosphoglyceric acid deficiency, which leads to a left shift of
the oxygen dissociation curve, increased oxygen affinity, and consequent polycythemia.
Subtle decreases in oxygen delivery to tissues may cause polycythemia. Congenital methemoglobinemia resulting from an autosomal recessive deficiency of cytochrome b5 reductase may cause
cyanosis and polycythemia (see Chapter 511.7). Most affected individuals are asymptomatic. Neurologic abnormalities may be present
in patients whose enzyme deficits are not limited to hematopoietic
cells. Hemoglobin M disease (autosomal dominant) causes methemoglobinemia and can lead to polycythemia. Cyanosis may occur in
the presence of as little as 1.5 g/dL of methemoglobin but is uncommon in other hemoglobin variants unless hyperviscosity results in
localized hypoxemia.
In rare cases, there is an undefined inherited lesion causing primary
familial and congenital polycythemia (PFCP), which is described as
an elevation of erythrocyte mass and hemoglobin, hypersensitivity
to EPO, and low serum EPO in the setting of a normal hemoglobin-­
oxygen dissociation curve.

Acquired (Secondary) Polycythemia

Polycythemia may be present in clinical situations associated with
chronic arterial oxygen desaturation. Cardiovascular defects involving right-­to-­left shunts and pulmonary diseases interfering with
proper oxygenation are the most common causes of hypoxic polycythemia. Clinical findings usually include cyanosis, hyperemia of
the sclerae and mucous membranes, and clubbing of the fingers. As
the hematocrit rises to >65%, clinical manifestations of hyperviscosity, such as headache and hypertension, may require phlebotomy. Living at high altitudes also causes hypoxic polycythemia; the
hemoglobin level increases approximately 4% for each rise of 1,000
m (∼3,300 ft) in altitude. Smoking has been associated with polycythemia secondary to tissue hypoxia, elevation of carbon monoxide,
and volume contraction. Partial obstruction of a renal artery rarely
results in polycythemia. Polycythemia has also been associated with
benign and malignant tumors that secrete paraneoplastic erythropoietin. Exogenous or endogenous excess of anabolic steroids also
may cause polycythemia. A common spurious cause is a decrease in
plasma volume, as occurs in moderate to severe dehydration.

DIAGNOSIS

See Chapter 515; Figure 515.1 outlines sequential studies to evaluate
polycythemia.

TREATMENT

For mild disease, observation is sufficient. When the hematocrit is
>65–70% (hemoglobin >23 g/dL), blood viscosity greatly increases.
Periodic phlebotomy may prevent or decrease symptoms such as
headache, dizziness, or exertional dyspnea. Apheresed blood should
be replaced with plasma or saline to prevent hypovolemia in patients
accustomed to a chronically elevated total blood volume. Increased
demand for red blood cell production may cause iron deficiency.
Iron-­deficient microcytic red cells are more rigid, further increasing the risk of intracranial and other thromboses in patients with
polycythemia. Periodic assessment of iron status should be performed, and iron deficiency should be treated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

2999

Section 5

The Pancytopenias
Chapter 517

Inherited Bone Marrow
Failure Syndromes with
Pancytopenia
Yigal Dror and Michaela Cada

Pancytopenia refers to a reduction below normal values of all three
peripheral blood lineages: leukocytes, platelets, and erythrocytes.
Identifying the etiology of pancytopenia usually requires microscopic
examination of the peripheral blood smear, as well as bone marrow
biopsy and aspirate specimens to assess overall cellularity and morphology. The three general categories of pancytopenia are related to
bone marrow pathologies and can frequently be differentiated based
on bone marrow findings.
Pancytopenia with hypocellular bone marrow on biopsy is seen
with inherited bone marrow failure syndromes (IBMFSs) with pancytopenia, acquired aplastic anemia of varied etiologies, and the hypoplastic
variant of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Pancytopenia with cellular bone marrow is seen with primary bone marrow disease (e.g.,
acute leukemia, myelodysplasia) and secondary to autoimmune disorders (e.g., autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, systemic lupus
erythematosus), vitamin B12 or folate deficiency, storage diseases (e.g.,
Gaucher, Niemann-­Pick), overwhelming infection, sarcoidosis, and
hypersplenism. Pancytopenia with bone marrow infiltration can be
seen in metastatic solid tumors, myelofibrosis, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, and osteopetrosis. It is important to note that exceptions exist with regard to this classification; IBMFSs can manifest as
normocellular or hypercellular bone marrow at early stages of presentation or in cases where MDS develops.
Inherited pancytopenias with hypocellular bone marrow are
IBMFSs that feature decreased bone marrow production of the three
major hematopoietic lineages occurring on an inherited basis and
resulting in anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia. Patients may
have single-­lineage or bi-­lineage cytopenia at presentation and gradually develop pancytopenia over time. All disorders for which a genetic
basis has been deciphered have thus far been shown to be monogenic.
Transmission of pathogenic variant genes is mendelian and in an
autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-­linked manner (Table
517.1). Modifying genes and acquired factors may also be operative.
Inherited pancytopenias account for approximately 30% of cases of
pediatric bone marrow failure. Clinical features may help differentiate the IBMFS disorders (Table 517.2), but whole exome sequencing
(WES) or specific bone marrow failure syndrome gene panels help to
confirm the diagnosis.

FANCONI ANEMIA
Etiology and Epidemiology

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare multisystem hereditary disorder resulting in the development of bone marrow failure in those affected and a
predisposition to malignancy, including myelodysplasia (MDS), acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), and epithelial cancers. Individuals with FA

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3000 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 517.1  Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Multilineage Cytopenia and Familial MDS/AML: Inheritance,
Variant Genes, and Affected Pathways
DISORDER

INHERITANCE

Fanconi anemia

AR

GENE

AFFECTED PATHWAYS
DNA repair, homologous recombination, ribosome biogenesis (FANCI)

XLR

FANCA, FANCC, FANCD1/BRCA2, FANCD2,
FANCE, FANCF, FANCG/XRCC9, FANCI,
FANCJ/BRIP1, FANCL/PHF9, FANCM,
FANCN/PALB2, FANCO/RAD51C, FANCP/
SLX4, FANCQ/ERCC4, FANCR/RAD51,
FANCS/BRCA1, FANCT/UBE2T, FANCU/
XRCC2, FANCV/REV7, FANCW/RFWD3
FANCB

Mixed Fanconi anemia/­xeroderma
pigmentosa/Cockayne
­syndrome

AR

ERCC1/XPF

DNA repair

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome

AR

SBDS, DNAJC21, EFL1

Ribosome biogenesis

AD

SRP54

Co-­translational protein modification

XLR

DKC1

AD
AR

TINF2, TERC, TERT, RTEL1, ACD(TPP1), PARN
TERT, RTEL1, ACD(TPP1), WRAP53(TCAB1),
CTC1, POT1, RPA1, PARN, NOP10, NHP2

Telomere maintenance, ribosome
biogenesis
Telomere maintenance, RNA processing
Telomere maintenance, RNA
­processing, ribosome biogenesis

Congenital amegakaryocytic
thrombocytopenia

AR

MPL

Hematopoietic cytokine receptor

SRP72-­associated hereditary
aplastic anemia/MDS

AD

SRP72

Co-­translational protein modification

ERCC6L2-­associated hereditary
aplastic anemia/MDS

AR

ERCC6L2

Transcription

THPO-­associated hereditary
aplastic anemia/MDS

AR/AD

THPO

Hematopoietic cytokine

Reticular dysgenesis

AR

AK2

Nucleotide metabolism

Cartilage-­hair hypoplasia

AR

RMRP, POP1, NEPRO

rRNA and mitochondrial RNA processing

Pearson’s syndrome

Maternal

mDNA

Mitochondrial DNA genes

Familial thrombocytopenia with
predisposition to AML

AD

RUNX1/CBFA2

Hematopoietic cytokines

AD

ETV6

Transcription repression

AD

GATA2

Transcription

Bone marrow failure and diabetes

DUT

Nucleotide metabolism

Familial MDS/AML (others)

CEBPA

Transcription

Familial MDS/AML (others)

DDX41

RNA helicase

Dyskeratosis congenita

GATA2-­associated disorders
(MonoMac syndrome, ­Emberger
syndrome, familial MDS
­syndrome)

DNA repair, homologous
­recombination

Seckel syndrome

AR

CEP152, CENPJ, CEP63, NIN, PLK4,
­CDK5RAP2;
ATR, RBBP8, ATRIP, DNA2

Centriole/Centrosome duplication and
function;
DNA damage sensing and repair, and
checkpoint signaling activation

Schimke immunoosseous
­dysplasia

AR

SMARCAL1

Chromatin remodeling

Dubowitz syndrome

AR

NSUN2;
LIG4

Cytosine methylation in various RNA
types;
DNA non-­homologous end joining
repair

AD

-­14q32, -­17q24, -­19q13

Rothmund-­Thomson syndrome

AR

RECQL4

Chromosome segregation

Nijmegen breakage syndrome

AR

NBN

DNA repair

AD, Autosomal dominant; AML, acute myeloid leukemia AR, autosomal recessive; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; UK, unknown; XLR, X-­linked recessive.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia

3001

Table 517.2  Clinical Manifestations and Laboratory Findings in Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndrome
SYNDROME

NONHEMATOLOGICAL CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Fanconi anemia

Short stature, low birth weight, microcephaly, microphthalmia, hearing loss, triangular face, micrognathia, cardiac
anomalies, tracheoesophageal fistula, esophageal atresia,
kidney anomalies, hypoplastic thenar eminence, clinodactyly, café-­au-­lait spots

Pancytopenia, macrocytosis, elevated Hb F,
increased chromosome breakage in clastogenic assay

Dyskeratosis congenita

Mucocutaneous triad (skin pigmentation, nail dysplasia,
oral leukoplakia), short stature, low birth weight, failure to
thrive, pulmonary fibrosis, stenosis of the esophagus, liver
fibrosis

Pancytopenia, macrocytosis, elevated Hb F,
very short telomeres

Diamond-­Blackfan anemia

Low birth weight, short stature, developmental delay,
anomalies in craniofacial skeleton, eyes, heart, visceral
organs, and limbs

Anemia, elevated red blood cell adenosine
deaminase, macrocytosis, elevated Hb F

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, failure to thrive, malabsorption, short stature, neurodevelopment and skeletal
abnormalities

Neutropenia, low serum isoamylase, low
serum trypsinogen

Severe congenital neutropenia

Recurrent infection

Neutropenia

Congenital amegakaryocytic
thrombocytopenia

Nonsyndromic (occasionally, growth retardation, cardiac
anomalies, psychomotor developmental delay)

Thrombocytopenia, reduced megakaryocytes

GATA2 deficiency

Lymphedema, immunodeficiency, atypical mycobacterial
infections

Neutropenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia

SAMD9/SAMD9L disorders

MIRAGE (SAMD9): MDS, infection, restriction of growth,
adrenal hypoplasia, genital phenotypes, and enteropathy

Transient or permanent cytopenia

Ataxia–pancytopenia syndrome (SAMD9L): cerebellar atrophy and white matter hyperintensities, gait disturbance,
nystagmus
MECOM-­associated syndromes

Radioulnar synostosis, clinodactyly, hearing loss, cardiac/
renal malformation

Thrombocytopenia

Pearson syndrome

Pancreatic insufficiency, failure to thrive, microcephaly,
ptosis, Kearns-Sayre syndrome

Neutropenia, anemia, pancytopenia, lactic
acidosis, hyperglycemia

Hb F, Hemoglobin F; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome.
Modified from Park M. Overview of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. Blood Res. 2022;57(S1):49–54. Table 1.

often have congenital malformations and high sensitivity to alkylating
agents and radiation. The estimated frequency of FA is 1 in 200,000
in most populations but is higher in Ashkenazi Jews (1:30,000) and
Afrikaners (1:22,000). Carrier frequency is approximately 1:200-­300 in
most populations. Pathogenic variants in 22 genes, designated FANC
genes, have been reported to cause FA or FA-­like disease. All pathogenic variants except for one are inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. One uncommon form of FA is X-­linked recessive. FA occurs
in all ethnic groups. At presentation, patients may have typical physical
anomalies and abnormal hematologic findings (majority of patients),
normal physical features but abnormal hematologic findings (about
one third of patients), or physical anomalies and normal hematologic
findings (unknown percentage of patients). There can be sibling discordance in clinical and hematologic manifestations, even in affected
monozygotic twins.

Pathology

All FA genes code for proteins that play roles in various cellular pathways and most prominently in DNA cross linking and repair. Patients
with FA have faulty DNA repair and increased chromosomal fragility caused by DNA interstrand cross-­linking agents such as diepoxybutane (DEB) and mitomycin C (MMC). Cell fusion of FA cells with
normal cells or with cells from some unrelated patients with FA produces a corrective effect on chromosomal fragility, a process called
complementation. The classic FA phenotype that clearly defines the
FA-­associated genes (FANCA, FANCB, FANCC, FANCD1/BRCA2,
FANCD2, FANCE, FANCF, FANCG, FANCI, FANCJ/BACH1/BRIP1,
FANCL, FANCM, FANCN/PALB2, FANCP/SLX4, FANCQ/ERCC4,

UBE2T, REV7, RFWD3) includes the triad of bone marrow failure,
congenital anomalies, and elevated chromosome fragility. These
genes can be mutated in patients who have one or all of the components of the triad. Genes that were found to be associated with one or
two but not all three of the components are FA-­like genes (FANCO/
RAD51C, RAD51, FANCS/BRCA1, FANCR/EXCC2). FANCA accounts
for approximately 64% of FA cases, FANCC for 14%, and FANG for 9%.
FANCB, FANCD1/BRCA2, FANCD2, FANCE, and FANCF are collectively mutated in almost 13% of FA patients. The remaining genes are
pathogenic variants in rare cases.
The proteins encoded by wild-­type FANC genes are involved in the
DNA damage recognition and repair biochemical pathway. Therefore
aberrant proteins lead to genomic instability and chromosome fragility.
FANC proteins are involved in other cellular activities, such as reactive
oxygen species detoxification, energetic metabolism, and cytokine signaling. Thus FANC pathogenic variants likely affect several cellular and
biochemical roles of the respective proteins, which eventually leads to
the FA phenotype. The observed disease complexity and heterogeneity
is likely caused by the involvement of multiple cellular and biochemical
pathways both in unrelated individuals and in family members with
the same genetic pathogenic variant.

Clinical Manifestations

The most common congenital anomalies in FA are skeletal and include
absence of radii and/or thumbs that are hypoplastic, supernumerary, bifid, or absent. Anomalies of the feet, congenital hip dislocation,
and leg abnormalities can also be seen (Fig. 517.1 and Table 517.3).
Skin hyperpigmentation of the trunk, neck, and intertriginous areas;

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3002 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

C

A

B

D

Fig. 517.1 A 3-­year-­old boy with Fanconi anemia who exhibits several classic phenotypic features. A, Front view. B, Face. C, Hands. D, Back right
shoulder. The features to be noted include short stature, dislocated hips, microcephaly, a broad nasal base, epicanthal folds, micrognathia, thumbs
attached by a thread, and café-­au-­lait spots with hypopigmented areas beneath. (From Nathan DC, Orkin SH, Ginsburg D, et al, eds: Nathan and
Oski’s Hematology of Infancy and Childhood, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2003. p. 285.)

Table 517.3  Specific Types of Anomalies in Fanconi Anemia
SKIN (40%)
Generalized hyperpigmentation on the trunk, neck, and intertriginous
areas; café-­au-­lait spots; hypopigmented areas
BODY (40%)
Short stature, delicate features, small size, underweight
UPPER LIMBS (35%)
Thumbs (35%): absent or hypoplastic; supernumerary, bifid, or
­duplicated; rudimentary; short, low set, attached by a thread;
triphalangeal, tubular, stiff, hyperextensible
Radii (7%): absent or hypoplastic (only with abnormal thumbs); absent
or weak pulse
Hands (5%): clinodactyly; hypoplastic thenar eminence; six fingers;
absent first metacarpal; enlarged, abnormal fingers; short fingers;
transverse crease
Ulnae (1%): dysplastic or absent
LOWER LIMBS (5%)
Feet: toe syndactyly, abnormal toes, flat feet, short toes, clubfeet, six
toes, supernumerary toe
Legs: congenital hip dislocation, Perthes disease, coxa vara, abnormal
femur, thigh osteoma, abnormal legs
GONADS
Males (25%): hypogenitalia, undescended testes, hypospadias,
­abnormal genitalia, absent testis, atrophic testes, azoospermia,
­phimosis, abnormal urethra, micropenis, delayed development
Females (2%): hypogenitalia; bicornuate uterus; abnormal genitalia;
aplasia of uterus and vagina; atresia of uterus, vagina, and ovary
OTHER SKELETAL ANOMALIES
Head (20%) and face (2%): microcephaly, hydrocephalus, micrognathia,
peculiar face, birdlike face, flat head, frontal bossing, scaphocephaly,
sloped forehead, choanal atresia, dental abnormalities
Neck (1%): Sprengel deformity; short, low hairline; webbed
Spine (2%): spina bifida (thoracic, lumbar, cervical, occult sacral),
­scoliosis, abnormal ribs, sacral agenesis, sacrococcygeal sinus,
Klippel-­Feil syndrome, vertebral anomalies, extra vertebrae

EYES (20%)
Small eyes, strabismus, epicanthal folds, short or almond-­shaped
­palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, ptosis, slanting, cataracts,
­astigmatism, blindness, epiphora, nystagmus, proptosis, small iris
EARS (10%)
Deafness (usually conductive); abnormal shape; atresia; dysplasia; low
set, large, or small; infections; abnormal middle ear; absent eardrum;
dimples; rotated; canal stenosis
KIDNEY (20%)
Ectopic or pelvic; abnormal, horseshoe, hypoplastic, or dysplastic;
­absent; hydronephrosis or hydroureter; infections; duplicated;
­rotated; reflux; hyperplasia; no function; abnormal artery
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM (5%)
High-­arched palate, atresia (esophagus, duodenum, jejunum),
­imperforate anus, tracheoesophageal fistula, Meckel ­diverticulum,
umbilical hernia, hypoplastic uvula, abnormal biliary ducts,
­megacolon, abdominal diastasis, Budd-­Chiari syndrome
UROGENITAL
Males (25%): micropenis, penile-­scrotal fusion, undescended or ­atrophic
or absent testes, hypospadias, chordae, phimosis, ­azoospermia
Females (2%): bicornuate uterus, aplasia or hypoplasia of vagina and
uterus, atresia of vagina, hypoplastic uterus, hypoplastic or absent
ovary, hypoplastic fused labia
CARDIOPULMONARY SYSTEM (6%)
Patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal defect, abnormal heart,
peripheral pulmonic stenosis, aortic stenosis, coarctation, absent lung
lobes, vascular malformation, aortic atheromas, atrial septal defect,
tetralogy of Fallot, pseudotruncus, hypoplastic aorta, abnormal
­pulmonary drainage, double aortic arch, cardiac myopathy
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (3%)
Hyperreflexia, Bell palsy, central nervous system arterial ­malformation,
moyamoya syndrome, Arnold-­Chiari malformation, stenosis of
­internal carotid artery, small pituitary gland, absent corpus callosum
Slow development (10%)

Abnormalities are listed in the approximate order of frequency within each category.
Adapted from Shimamura A, Alter BP. Pathophysiology and management of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. Blood Rev. 2010;24:101–122.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia
café-­au-­lait spots; and vitiligo, alone or in combination, occur with
similar frequency. Short stature is common and in some patients is
aggravated by subnormal growth hormone (GH) secretion or hypothyroidism. Male patients with FA may have an underdeveloped penis;
undescended, atrophic, or absent testes; and hypospadias or phimosis,
and all are infertile. Females can have malformations of the vagina,
uterus, and ovary, and all have reduced fertility. Many patients have
characteristic facial dysmorphisms, including microcephaly, small
eyes, epicanthal folds, and abnormal shape, size, or positioning of
the ears (see Fig. 517.1). Kidneys may be ectopic, pelvic, horseshoe-­
shaped, hypoplastic, dysplastic, or absent. Cardiovascular (CV) and
gastrointestinal (GI) malformations also occur. Approximately 10%
of patients with FA are cognitively delayed. Neonates with FA usually
have intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and low birthweight and
may show malformations consistent with VACTERL/VACTERL-­
H
association (vertebral anomalies, anal atresia, cardiac malformations,
tracheoesophageal fistula with esophageal atresia, renal and limb structural abnormalities with hydrocephalus).
Bone marrow failure usually appears within the first decade of life.
Thrombocytopenia, red blood cell (RBC) macrocytosis, and increased
fetal hemoglobin (Hb F), as a result of bone marrow stress, often appear
first. At these stages, bone marrow aspirate and biopsy often show a hypocellular specimen. Subsequently, patients develop neutropenia and then
anemia. Severe aplasia develops in most cases, usually over a few years.

Cancer Risk and Other Complications

In addition to the low blood counts and physical anomalies, patients
with FA have a high risk of developing cancer. The most frequent solid
tumors are squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) of the head and neck (600-­
fold higher risk than the general population) and carcinoma of the
upper esophagus (2,000-­fold higher risk), the vulva (3,000-­fold higher
risk), and/or anus, cervix, and lower esophagus. Onset of solid-­tumor
malignancy is much sooner than that seen in the general population,
with median age of onset of SCC in the FA population occurring at
33 years vs 60–70 years in the general population. Human papillomavirus (HPV) is suspected in the pathogenesis of SCC. Benign and
malignant liver tumors can occur (adenomas, hepatomas) and are
usually associated with androgen therapy for aplastic anemia. Androgens are also implicated in the etiology of peliosis hepatis (blood-­
filled hepatic sinusoids), which is reversible when androgen therapy
is discontinued. Clonal bone marrow cytogenetic abnormalities are
common in FA and on follow-­up can either be stable, intermittently
detected, or progressive. The cumulative incidence of clonal and
malignant myeloid transformation by age 18 years, which includes
clonal cytogenetic marrow abnormalities, MDS, and AML, is approximately 75%. One study indicated that by age 40 years, the cumulative
incidence of leukemia is 33%.

Diagnosis

FA should be considered in all children and young adults with unexplained cytopenias. Abnormal hematologic findings and characteristic physical anomalies suggest the diagnosis, which can be confirmed
with a lymphocyte chromosomal breakage study done with and
without the addition of cross-­linking agents such as DEB and MMC.
Increased chromosome fragility is indicated by spontaneously occurring chromatid breaks, rearrangements, gaps, endoreduplications, and
chromatid exchanges in blood lymphocytes cultured with phytohemagglutinin, as well as in cultured skin fibroblasts, underscoring the
constitutional nature of FA. With the addition of DEB or MMC, fragility is strikingly enhanced in lymphocyte cultures of patients with
FA compared with those of controls. Abnormal chromosome breakage
analysis and genetic testing for prenatal diagnosis can be performed on
amniotic fluid cells or on tissue from a chorionic villus biopsy. No other
inherited pancytopenia is associated with a prominent in vitro hypersensitivity to DEB or MMC by the chromosomal breakage study. However, 10–15% of patients with suspected FA have somatic mosaicism
and may not show the characteristically high degree of chromosomal
fragility in their lymphocytes, reflecting the presence of mixed populations of somatic cells, some with two abnormal alleles and some with

3003

only one. The latter population of lymphocytes derives from a portion of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) that underwent spontaneous
somatic gene correction on one allele. Testing of skin fibroblasts should
be performed if the suspicion of FA is high despite negative testing on
peripheral blood lymphocytes.
Next-­generation sequencing (NGS) gene panels and WES are the
tests of choice for FA. NGS is an efficient and accurate method for
diagnosing FA but can occasionally be limited by difficulties in interpreting previously unreported variants or in unraveling pathogenic
variants due to reversion variants or technical matters. When no definite causative point pathogenic variants are found, high-­resolution
copy number variation analysis techniques are employed, followed by a
genome-­wide search for pathogenic variants in novel associated genes.
Pathogenic variants in one of the 22 FA genes are found in over 95%
of FA cases.
Extensive screening for potential medical problems is necessary after
the diagnosis of FA is established. Imaging using radiation should be
minimized as much as possible because of the carcinogenic risk inherent to this genetic instability disease; MRI should replace CT whenever
possible. In addition to detailed review of the past medical history and
thorough physical examination, the screen should include ultrasonographic examination of the abdomen and echocardiography to rule
out internal congenital anomalies. Other imaging may be done as necessary and based on the initial screen. Subspecialty consultations for
anomalies and disabilities that have been identified can be arranged
during this interval. If growth velocity is below expectations, endocrine
evaluation is needed to assess for GH and thyroid deficiency. Blood
work should include evaluation of renal, liver, thyroid, metabolic, and
immune systems.

Treatment

A hematologist, preferably one who specializes in IBMFSs, with a multidisciplinary team should manage patients with FA. At diagnosis, a
detailed assessment of the patient’s blood counts, bone marrow function, growth, development, and other organ function should be carried
out.
If hematologic abnormalities are mild to moderate and stable and
there is no transfusion requirement, patients can be observed closely
with peripheral blood counts every 3 months and bone marrow aspiration surveillance every year for clonal cytogenetic abnormalities, MDS,
and AML. Bone marrow biopsy might also be intermittently done
during bone marrow testing to evaluate changes in percentage of cellularity and fibrosis. More frequent monitoring can be applied when
deemed necessary, as when a decline in blood counts occurs. Glucose
levels should be performed annually or biannually, depending on the
degree of hyperglycemia found on initial testing. Screening for hypothyroidism should be performed yearly. Patients should be assessed for
solid tumors at least annually, with a careful physical examination that
includes comprehensive inspection of the skin, oral cavity, and other
organs for unusual masses. After a certain age (e.g., 10 years) or after
HSC transplant (HSCT), fluoroscopic examination of the orolaryngeal
cavity and occult fecal blood testing are also recommended. Beginning
at menarche, female patients should be screened annually for gynecologic cancer. Administration of HPV quadrivalent vaccine to decrease
the risk of SCC is advised.
Chromosome fragility (and/or targeted genetic testing) should be
offered to siblings and parents of affected patients for identification of
other affected individuals. It is noteworthy that heterozygosity for several FA genes (e.g., FANCN, FANCD1, FANCS) is associated with cancer
development. Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) typing of patients, biological parents, and full siblings for future HSCT should also occur early.
HSCT is the only curative therapy for the hematologic abnormalities
observed in FA patients. Outcomes have improved because of modified
reduced-­intensity regimens that include fludarabine, low dose cyclophosphamide, and antithymocyte globulin with or without low-­dose
busulfan. Most regimens do not use radiation. These regimens have
decreased the toxicities experienced by FA patients, who have high
sensitivity to DNA-­damaging agents such as alkylating drugs and irradiation. Those who undergo transplant using an HLA-­identical sibling

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3004 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
donor without irradiation in the preparative regimen have an overall
3-­5-­year survival rate of >90%.
Traditionally, HSCT of FA patients with matched unrelated donors
(MUD) or mismatched related donors have been a challenge because
of the high degree of HSCT-­related toxicity and death. However, major
progress has been made in this regard. Several reports of radiation-­
free HSCT with in vivo or ex-­vivo T-­cell depleted, peripheral blood
CD34+ selected MUD graft and conditioning with fludarabine, rabbit antithymocyte globulin (ATG), low-­
dose cyclophosphamide,
and low-­
dose busulfan demonstrated 80% or higher probabilities
of overall and disease-­free survival 1–­5 years post HSCT. Improvement in high-­resolution HLA typing contributes to better selection
of unrelated-­donor selection and a better outcome. Transplantation
using haploidentical donors is on the rise and is showing promising
outcomes, similar to those seen with unrelated donors.
Those transplanted before they receive multiple transfusions or
develop clonal and malignant myeloid transformation (MDS or AML)
do better. Survival rates are higher for patients who undergo transplant
at <10 years of age. Molecular technology has led to preimplantation
genetic diagnosis on parent-­derived blastomeres, allowing for the unaffected ones to be implanted and resulting in the creation of an HLA-­
matched sibling donor without FA.
Androgens produce a response in approximately 70% of patients, heralded by reticulocytosis and a rise in hemoglobin within 1-­2 months.
White blood cell (WBC) counts may increase next, followed by platelet counts. After the initial response is seen, counts may continue to
improve over many months until a maximum response is achieved. If
a low dose is initially employed, the androgen dose can be increased
every 3-­4 weeks as long as no major side effects are seen and until
the desired response is achieved. If a high dose is initially employed,
androgen dosage can be slowly reduced to the minimum dose that
maintains the required blood counts. Oral danazol and oxymetholone
are currently the two most commonly used androgenic drugs. Patients
typically stop responding to androgens after several months or years,
as their bone marrow failure progresses or as they develop MDS or
AML. Thus androgen therapy is not curative but is used rather as a
bridge while waiting for a suitable donor for HSCT or while weighing
the risks and benefits of transplant. Side effects of androgens include
masculinization, increased linear growth, increased mood swings or
aggressiveness, elevated hepatic enzymes, cholestasis, peliosis hepatis,
and liver tumors. Screenings for these should be performed regularly.
The potential for recombinant growth factor (cytokine) therapy for
FA has not been defined. Granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor (G-­
CSF) can usually induce an increase in the absolute neutrophil count;
however, there may be a heightened risk of expansion of bone marrow
cells with clonal cytogenetic abnormalities such as monosomy 7. In one
study, combination therapy consisting of G-­CSF given subcutaneously
daily or every 2 days along with erythropoietin given subcutaneously
or intravenously 3 times per week resulted in improved neutrophil
counts in most patients and a sustained rise in hemoglobin and platelet levels in approximately one third of patients. Most patients lost the
response because of progression of bone marrow disease.

Prognosis

Improvements in supportive care, careful surveillance of known complications, prompt intervention, and improved transplant techniques
have resulted in patients with FA surviving into their 30s. Unfortunately, there is an increased risk of solid tumors after HSCT. For example, head and neck cancer risk is increased 4.4-­fold and is accelerated
by approximately 15 years compared with nontransplanted patients.
The cumulative incidence of malignancy 20 years after transplant is
35–40%. Some of the increased risk might be attributed to the use of
DNA-­damaging agents or the occurrence of graft-­versus-­host disease
(GVHD).

SHWACHMAN-­DIAMOND SYNDROME
Etiology and Epidemiology

Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome (SDS) is an inherited disorder caused
by pathogenic variants in one of four genes. It occurs in all racial and

Table 517.4  Major Clinical Features of Shwachman-­
Diamond Syndrome
CLINICAL FEATURE

TOTAL/AVERAGE

Number of patients

225

Neutropenia

90%

Severe (≤500/μL)

46%

Anemia

46%

Thrombocytopenia

42%

Pancytopenia

21%

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency

98%

Liver (elevated transaminases)

61%

Skeletal abnormalities

70%

Metaphyseal dysostosis

53%

Rib cage abnormalities

35%

Short stature (<3rd percentile)

66%

Data from Ginzberg H, Shin J, Ellis L, et al. Shwachman syndrome: phenotypic
manifestations of sibling sets and isolated cases in a large patient cohort are similar.
J Pediatr. 1999;135:81–88; Cipolli M, D’Orazio C, Delmarco A, et al. Shwachman’s
syndrome: pathomorphosis and long-­term outcome. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr.
1999;29:265–272; and Kuijpers TW, Alders M, Tool AT, et al. Hematologic abnormalities
in Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome: lack of genotype-­phenotype relationship. Blood.
2005;106:356–361.

ethnic groups. SDS is a multisystem disorder. However, the nonhematologic manifestations of SDS are substantially different and usually
include exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and skeletal abnormalities
such as metaphyseal dysplasia (Table 517.4). SDS is a ribosomopathy,
and the underlying defect is in ribosome assembly.

Pathology

Four genes have been linked to SDS. SBDS is the first gene that was
described to have biallelic variants in SDS in 2003. SBDS maps to
chromosome 7q11 and accounts for 80–90% of SDS cases. SBDS plays
a role in the late stage of the pre-­60S ribosome subunit maturation,
binding to the EFL1 GTPase and facilitating the release of eIF6 to
enable 80S monosome formation. DNAJC21 is the second reported
SDS gene. The function of the human DNAJC21 is required for the
release and recycling of the Arx1/Alb1 heterodimer from the pre-­60S
biogenesis factors. The third SDS gene discovered is EFL1. DNAJC21
and EFL1-­associated SDS are autosomal recessive. Monoallelic pathogenic variants in SRP54, a protein involved in co-­translational protein
modification, mainly cause severe congenital neutropenia phenotype.
Nevertheless, a small proportion of the patients have partial or classical
SDS phenotype. The underlying genetic defects of SDS indicate that the
last step in ribosome biogenesis is associated with pancytopenia (most
often neutropenia) and a hypoplastic bone marrow. Defects in ribosomal proteins that are involved in earlier stages of ribosome subunit
maturation and are structural components of the ribosome are associated with predominantly anemia and pure red cell aplasia.
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is caused by failure of exocrine
pancreatic acinar development in SDS, and fatty replacement of pancreatic tissue is prominent. Bone marrow failure is characterized by
dysfunctional HSCs, accelerated apoptosis of bone marrow progenitors, and a defective bone marrow microenvironment that does not
support and maintain normal hematopoiesis.

Clinical Manifestations

Most patients with SDS have symptoms of fat malabsorption from
birth that are caused by pancreatic insufficiency, but steatorrhea is not
always obvious. Approximately 50% of patients appear to exhibit an
improvement in pancreatic enzyme secretion as they age. The clinical
picture can be dominated by complications from neutropenia, anemia,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia
or thrombocytopenia. Bacterial and fungal infections secondary to
neutropenia, neutrophil dysfunction, and immunodeficiency can
occur. A major concern is the development of MDS and acute leukemia, most often AML.
Short stature is a consistent feature of SDS. Most patients show normal growth velocity yet remain consistently below the 3rd percentile
for height and weight. The occasional SDS adult achieves the 25th percentile for height. Although skeletal abnormalities are variable, classic
findings are metaphyseal dysplasia, osteopenia, delayed appearance
of secondary ossification centers, short or flared ribs, and thoracic
dystrophy.
Some patients have hepatomegaly and elevations of liver enzymes.
Most patients have dental abnormalities and poor oral health. Many
have neurocognitive problems and poor social skills.

Laboratory Findings

Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in SDS is associated with reduced
age-­
adjusted serum trypsinogen and pancreatic isoamylase levels.
Because serum pancreatic isoamylase is physiologically low in the first
3 years of life, and because reduced serum trypsinogen is typically seen
in young infants and often improves with age, testing both enzymes is
helpful. Fecal elastase is often reduced in SDS patients. Fat-­soluble vitamin (A, D, E, and K) absorption is impaired, and thus measurement
of vitamin A, D, and E levels, as well as prothrombin time (or international normalized ratio [INR]), is helpful to assess the consequences of
fat malabsorption. Ultrasound or CT scan can visualize fatty replacement of pancreatic tissue. Fat malabsorption can be proven by assay on
a 72-­hour stool collection.
Neutropenia is observed in about 70% of patients with SDS at presentation and is seen in close to 100% of patients on follow-­up. It is
chronic but can be persistent or intermittent and mild, moderate, or
severe. It has been identified in some neonates during an episode of
sepsis. Neutrophils may have a defect in mobility, migration, and chemotaxis because of alterations in neutrophil cytoskeletal or microtubular function. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and pancytopenia are seen
in 40–66%, 40–60%, and 21–44% of cases, respectively. Pancytopenia
can be severe as a result of full-­blown aplastic anemia. Bone marrow
aspirate and biopsy specimens show varying degrees of bone marrow hypoplasia and fat infiltration. However, at a young age or when
patients develop MDS or leukemia, the bone marrow can be normocellular or even hypercellular.
Patients may also have B-­cell defects with one or more of the following: low immunoglobulin G (IgG) or IgG subclasses, low percentage of
circulating B lymphocytes, decreased in vitro B-­cell proliferation, and
lack of specific antibody production. Patients may have a low percentage of circulating T cells, subsets, or natural killer cells and decreased
in vitro T-­cell proliferation.

Diagnosis

The clinical diagnosis of SDS relies on having evidence of two of the
following: bone marrow dysfunction, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency,
and metaphyseal dysplasia. However, atypical presentations have been
identified, such as MDS without previous documentation of low blood
counts. Up to 20% of patients lack clear evidence of exocrine pancreatic
defects at diagnosis. Furthermore, 20–60% lack metaphyseal dysplasia at diagnosis because this bony anomaly often develops with age.
Therefore it is recommended that all patients with either hypoplastic/
aplastic bone marrow or exocrine pancreatic insufficiency or metaphyseal dysplasia of unknown etiology be considered for SDS genetic testing. Genetic analysis for SBDS, DNAJC21, and EFL1 are definitive in all
or almost all cases of SDS. A patient with neutropenia and an SRP54
pathogenic variant who does not have exocrine pancreatic insufficiency or metaphyseal dysplasia should be considered as having severe
congenital neutropenia.
Pearson syndrome, consisting of refractory sideroblastic anemia, cytoplasmic vacuolization of bone marrow precursors, metabolic acidosis, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and a diagnostic
mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variant, is similar to SDS, but the
clinical course, morphologic features of the bone marrow, and gene

3005

pathogenic variant are different. Severe anemia requiring transfusion,
rather than neutropenia, is present in Pearson syndrome from birth to
1 year of age. SDS shares some manifestations with Fanconi anemia,
such as bone marrow dysfunction and growth failure, but patients
with SDS are readily distinguished because of pancreatic insufficiency
with fat malabsorption, fatty changes within the pancreatic body visualized by imaging, characteristic skeletal abnormalities not seen in
FA, and a normal chromosomal breakage study with DEB and MMC.
Distinguishing SDS from dyskeratosis congenita (DC) may not be
possible based solely on clinical findings and pancreatic enzyme levels; telomere length measurement may facilitate a correct diagnosis. In
difficult cases of IBMFSs that cannot be easily classified, comprehensive
genetic testing using an NGS panel of all known IBMFS genes or unbiased testing using WES/genome sequencing is likely to assist in establishing a diagnosis.

Predisposition to Cancer

Patients with SDS are predisposed to MDS and leukemic transformation. Approximately 25% of patients develop clonal marrow cytogenetic abnormalities, MDS, or leukemia by age 18 years. About one third
of patients have been reported to develop leukemia by age 30 years.
Isochromosome 7q [i(7q)] is particularly common and is rarely seen
in other conditions. i(7q) might be related to the presence of pathogenic variant SBDS on 7q11 and likely confers a compensatory effect
by increasing SBDS transcribing alleles (although they remain variant).
Other clonal chromosome abnormalities include monosomy 7, i(7q)
combined with monosomy 7, deletions or translocations involving part
of 7q, and deletions of 20q [Del(20q)]. The i(7q) and del(20q) are associated with relatively low risk and very slow progression to MDS or
leukemic transformation.

Treatment

Fat malabsorption responds to oral pancreatic enzyme replacement
and supplemental fat-­soluble vitamins, administered according to
guidelines similar to those for cystic fibrosis. A long-­term plan should
be initiated to periodically monitor changes in peripheral blood
counts that require corrective action and to look for early evidence of
malignant myeloid transformation. The latter also requires periodic
bone marrow aspirations for smears and cytogenetic testing, as well
as bone marrow biopsy. A common recommendation is to perform
bone marrow testing every 1-­3 years and complete blood counts every
3 months.
Daily subcutaneous G-­CSF for profound neutropenia is effective in
inducing a sustained increase in neutrophils. Some patients require
transfusion support for management of severe anemia or thrombocytopenia. Experience with erythropoietin is limited. Androgens have
been used in few published cases (with and without steroids); some
patients showed response, and some did not.
The only curative option for severe bone marrow failure and
advanced MDS or leukemia in SDS is allogeneic HSCT. Traditional
myeloablative HSCT results in treatment-­related mortality in 35–50%
of patients. Reduced-­intensity conditioning regimens that incorporate fludarabine appear to be safer and have been shown to be effective in SDS. Graft failure poses a challenge, possibly due to a stromal
cell defect that is not corrected by HSCT. Results of treatment for
advanced MDS and AML are generally limited, and outcome is typically poor.

Prognosis

The accurate life expectancy of SDS patients is unknown; analysis
of published cases revealed a median survival of 35 years. Because
the number of undiagnosed patients with mild or asymptomatic disease is unknown, the overall prognosis may be better than previously
thought.
Although all patients have some degree of hematologic cytopenia at
diagnosis, the changes in most patients are mild to moderate and do
not require therapeutic intervention. Severe neutropenia responds well
to G-­CSF, but there is a concern that G-­CSF may promote the growth
of evolving MDS or leukemia clones because of the agent’s powerful

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3006 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
growth stimulus on bone marrow cells. HSCT for severe bone marrow
failure has produced a 50–70% survival rate, but safer protocols need
to be introduced. Malignant bone marrow transformation remains
ominous.
Approximately 50% of patients experience spontaneous conversion
from exocrine pancreatic insufficiency to pancreatic sufficiency as a
result of improvement in pancreatic enzyme secretion.

DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA
Etiology and Epidemiology

DC is an inherited multisystem telomere disorder. A diagnostic triad
of mucocutaneous features was proposed when the disorder was first
described and included dysplastic nails, lacy reticular pigmentation
of the upper chest and/or neck, and oral leukoplakia (Fig. 517.2).
However, this triad is not present in all individuals. If it occurs, skin
and nail findings usually become apparent in the first 10 years of life,
whereas oral leukoplakia may be noticed later. Manifestations tend to
progress as patients age. Hematological manifestations are actually the
most common features in this disease. Varying degrees of bone marrow failure are seen in approximately 90% of patients. Severe aplastic
anemia occurs in approximately 50% of cases, with the age of onset
varying according to the genetic group. In some genetic groups, the
disease usually starts in the first decade of life (e.g., DKC1, TINF2,
PARN), whereas in others, it typically starts after the first decade (e.g.,
TERT, TERC). In addition to progressive bone marrow failure, patients
with DC are also at high risk for pulmonary and hepatic fibrosis, other
congenital anomalies, and a predisposition to solid tumors and MDS
or AML. DC is rare, with an incidence in childhood of approximately 4
cases per 1 million population per year.

Pathology

DC is genetically heterogeneous, and patients have pathogenic variants in genes that encode components of the telomerase complex
(TERT, TERC), telomere-­capping complex (CTC1, STN1), T-­loop
unwinding and telomere replication (RTEL1, RPA1), telomerase
trafficking (WRAP53/TCAB1), TERC-­associated factors that stimulate telomerase activity (DKC1, NOP10, NHP2, NAF1), TERC-­
maturation factors (PARN), and telomere-­shelterin complex (TINF2,
POT1, ACD).
All components are critical for telomere maintenance. The X-­linked
recessive form of DC maps to Xq28, and many pathogenic variants
have been identified in the DKC1 gene, which codes for the nuclear
protein dyskerin. The autosomal dominant form of disease is caused
by pathogenic variants in TINF2, TERC, TERT, RTEL1, ACD, NAF1,
and RPA1. Autosomal recessive DC is linked to pathogenic variants in NOP10, NHP2, TCAB1/WRAP53, CTC1, and STN1, as well
as TERT, TERC, RTEL1, PARN, and ACD. Because of impaired telomere maintenance in all three inherited forms of DC, extremely short
telomeres (<1st percentile for age) are demonstrated in the peripheral
blood cells of all patients. Finding extremely short telomeres in lymphocytes performed by automated multicolor flow fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) has 97% sensitivity and 91% specificity for DC.
Approximately 70% of individuals who meet clinical diagnostic criteria
of DC have a pathogenic variant in one of the known DC-­related genes.
Pathogenic variants in DKC1 are most common (20–25% of individuals), followed by TINF2 (12–20% of individuals), TERC (5–10% of
individuals), RTEL1, TERT, and CTC1. The remainder of the genetic
pathogenic variants have been described in only a few families. Bone
marrow failure is likely caused by progressive attrition and depletion
of HSCs because of premature senescence, apoptosis, or chromosome
instability, which manifests as pancytopenia.

Clinical Manifestations

A

B

C

E

D

F

Fig. 517.2 Features of the diagnostic triad in dyskeratosis congenita.

A and B, Dystrophic nails on hands and feet. C and D, Lacy reticular
pigmentation on neck and upper thorax. E and F, Oral leukoplakia on
tongue and buccal mucosa. (A-­C and E from Shimamura A, Alter BP.
Pathophysiology and management of inherited bone marrow failure
syndromes. Blood Rev. 2010;24:101–122, Fig. 8; D and F from Savage
SA, Alter BP. Dyskeratosis congenital. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am.
2009;23:215–231)

The clinical criteria for classic DC include the presence of at least two
of the four major features—abnormal skin pigmentation, nail dystrophy, leukoplakia, and bone marrow failure—and two or more of
the other somatic features known to occur in DC. However, making
a diagnosis continues to be challenging because individuals develop
clinical features of DC at variable rates and ages, even within the same
family. Further, some of the patients have only one complication (e.g.,
isolated bone marrow failure or isolated pulmonary fibrosis). In about
one quarter of individuals with DC, pathogenic variants in the known
DC-­related genes cannot be identified. The spectrum ranges from individuals who develop bone marrow failure first, then years later develop
other classic findings such as nail abnormalities, to others who have
severe nail problems and abnormalities of skin pigmentation at presentation but normal bone marrow function. In classic disease, skin
pigmentation and nail changes typically appear first, usually in the first
decade of life. Bone marrow failure usually develops within the first
two decades, with 80% of patients developing bone marrow failure by
age 30 years and almost 90% of patients having bone marrow failure at
some point in their life.
Lacy reticulated skin pigmentation affecting the face, neck, chest,
and arms is a common finding (89%). The degree of pigmentation
increases with age and can involve the entire skin surface. There may
also be a telangiectatic erythematous component. Nail dystrophy of
both hands and feet is the next most common finding (88%). It usually
starts with longitudinal ridging, splitting, or pterygium formation and
may progress to complete nail loss. Leukoplakia usually involves the
oral mucosa (78%), especially the tongue, but may also be seen in the
conjunctiva and the anal, urethral, or genital mucosa. Excessive tearing (epiphora) secondary to nasolacrimal duct obstruction is common and observed in about 30% of individuals. Approximately 25%
of individuals have learning difficulties and/or developmental delay.
Hyperhidrosis of the palms and soles, hair loss and graying, dental caries or loss, esophageal stricture, pulmonary disease with reduced diffusion capacity and/or a restrictive defect due to pulmonary fibrosis
and abnormalities in pulmonary vasculature, and short stature are each
seen in approximately 15–20% of individuals.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia
Ocular abnormalities include conjunctivitis, blepharitis, loss of eyelashes, strabismus, cataracts, and optic atrophy. Skeletal abnormalities include osteoporosis, avascular necrosis of the hips or shoulders,
abnormal bone trabeculation, scoliosis, and mandibular hypoplasia.
Genitourinary abnormalities include hypoplastic testes, hypospadias,
phimosis, urethral stenosis, and horseshoe kidney. GI findings, such as
vascular lesions causing bleeding, hepatomegaly, peptic ulceration, and
fibrosis, are seen in 10% of cases.

Laboratory Findings

The initial hematologic change in DC is usually thrombocytopenia,
anemia, or both, followed by pancytopenia and aplastic anemia. The
red cells are often macrocytic, and the Hb F is elevated. Initial bone
marrow specimens may be normocellular or hypercellular, but with
time, a symmetric depletion of all hematopoietic lineages ensues.
Some patients have immunologic abnormalities, including reduced or
elevated immunoglobulin values, decreased B-­and/or T-­lymphocyte
counts, and reduction or absence of lymphocyte proliferative responses
to phytohemagglutinin. This is particularly common and severe in the
DKC1-­
associated disease. Primary skin fibroblasts in culture have
abnormal morphologic features and doubling rate and show numerous unbalanced chromosome rearrangements, such as dicentrics, tricentrics, and translocations, in the absence of DEB or MMC. These
findings provide evidence of a defect that predisposes patient cells to
chromosomal rearrangements and possibly to DNA damage.
The hallmark of DC is very short telomeres, below the first percentile
for age. However, some patients do not have short telomeres. Further,
adult patients tend to have telomere length at the low range of normal
rather than below the first percentile.

Diagnosis

The diagnosis of DC can often be made based on medical and family
history and physical examination. The following abnormalities are seen
in patients with DC but not in those with FA: nail dystrophy, early-­
onset leukoplakia, tooth abnormalities, hyperhidrosis of the palms and
soles, and hair loss. There are several relatively more severe forms of
DC. Hoyeraal-­Hreidarsson syndrome is a multisystem disorder that
presents in early childhood, which requires the features of DC along
with cerebellar hypoplasia to establish the diagnosis. Patients have
the classic diagnostic DC triad, in addition to developmental delay,
IUGR, and bone marrow failure. Hoyeraal-­Hreidarsson syndrome is
genetically heterogeneous and caused by X-­linked recessive pathogenic variants in DKC1. Some patients may also have severe immunodeficiency. Revesz syndrome has many of the features of DC and
presents in early childhood. Bilateral exudative retinopathy is required
to establish a diagnosis. Patients may also have intracranial calcifications, IUGR, developmental delay, and bone marrow failure. Pathogenic variants of TINF2 are involved in Revesz syndrome, making it
mostly an autosomal dominant condition, but a few patients have been
described without an identified pathogenic variant. Individuals with
these severe forms of DC have even shorter telomere lengths than those
with classic DC. Coats plus syndrome is caused by compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the CTC1 gene or the STN1 gene and
has overlapping features with DC, including sparse and graying hair,
dystrophic nails, and anemia. Telomeres can be very short, but patients
display variable telomere length. Coats plus syndrome is characterized
by retinal telangiectasia and exudates, intracranial calcification, leukodystrophy, brain cysts, osteopenia, GI bleeding, and portal hypertension caused by the development of vasculature ectasias in the stomach,
small intestine, and liver.
Laboratory testing and imaging are an important part in establishing
a diagnosis but also evaluate the spectrum of patient organ involvement. These tests include, but are not limited to, the laboratory tests
described in the section “Laboratory Findings,” as well as ultrasound of
the abdomen, pulmonary function tests, liver enzymes, and nutritional
elements (such as ferritin, folic acid, and vitamin B12). MRI of the head
is useful when the patient has developmental delay and ataxia. Baseline
bone marrow testing is critical. Annual evaluation of the bone marrow
and complete blood counts every 3 months are common practice.

3007

Because of genomic instability, imaging involving radiation should
be limited to those that may affect management.

Cancer Risk and Other Complications

Patients with DC are predisposed to MDS and AML, as well as to solid
tumors. Cancer usually develops in the third and fourth decades of life.
The cumulative incidence of solid cancers and leukemia by the age of
65–70 years were estimated as 20% and 5–10%, respectively. The cumulative incidence of MDS was predicted to be 20% by the age of 50 years.
The actuarial risk of clonal and malignant myeloid disease is 25% by
age 18 years.
Forty percent of the cancers in such patients are SCCs of the head
and neck (tongue, mouth, pharynx). SCCs of the skin and GI tract
(esophagus, stomach, colon), as well as anorectal adenocarcinoma, are
common. Patients may develop multiple separate primaries in different
sites involving the tongue and nasopharynx.
Other life-­threatening complications include pulmonary fibrosis,
liver fibrosis, and severe GI bleeding.

Treatment

Androgens can induce improvement of bone marrow function in
approximately 70% of patients, and in some, this treatment can result
in normal trilineage blood counts for a number of years. Patients with
DC become refractory to androgens as aplastic anemia progresses due
to HSC depletion. They also tend to be more sensitive to the side effects
of androgens than FA patients, making it important to start with lower
doses and to monitor for side effects frequently. When the response is
maximal, the androgen dose can be slowly reduced to the minimum
dose required to maintain desired and safe blood cell counts but cannot be stopped.
Cytokine therapy with granulocyte-­macrophage colony stimulating
factor (GM-­CSF) or with G-­CSF alone or combined with erythropoietin appears to offer potential benefit, at least in the short term. Use
of cytokines needs to be balanced with a potential growth-­promoting
effect of these medications on as-­yet undetected MDS or AML cells.
Allogeneic HSCT is the only curative option for severe bone marrow
failure, MDS, and AML. Long-­term survival, even with sibling HLA-­
matched HSC donors, has traditionally been poor at about 50%. Morbidity and mortality result from transplant-­related complications such
as graft failure, GVHD, sepsis, or venoocclusive disease or from emergence of DC-­related complications, such as pulmonary fibrosis and GI
bleeding related to vascular anomalies. The high morbidity and mortality rate after HSCT is likely caused by ongoing tissue sensitivity and
aging because of the telomere maintenance defect.

Prognosis

Considerable heterogeneity exists in DC, and some data about
genotype-­phenotype correlations are available. Patients with certain
genetic groups (e.g., monoallelic TERC, TERT) may develop severe
aplastic anemia or fibrosis of the liver and lungs, but these complications may appear later on in life and may not be accompanied by
multisystem involvement. Patients with other genetic groups (e.g.,
monoallelic pathogenic variants in DKC1 or TINF2 and biallelic pathogenic variants in PARN, ACD, RTEL1, TERC or TERT) appear to have
more physical anomalies and a higher incidence and earlier onset of
aplastic anemia and cancer. The mean age of death for patients with
DC who are diagnosed in childhood is approximately 30 years. However, patients who are diagnosed during adulthood may have a mild
disease or be completely asymptomatic. The main causes of death are
bone marrow failure, complications of HSCT, cancer, fatal pulmonary
problems, and GI bleeding.

CONGENITAL AMEGAKARYOCYTIC
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Etiology and Epidemiology

Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT) is less common than FA, SDS, and DC. It is transmitted in an autosomal recessive
manner. CAMT typically manifests in infancy as isolated thrombocytopenia caused by reduction or absence of bone marrow megakaryocytes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3008 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
with initial preservation of granulopoietic and erythroid lineages.
Pancytopenia due to aplastic anemia often ensues in the first few years
of life. Development of MDS and AML was reported in patients with
CAMT, as well as persistent aplastic anemia.
The defect in CAMT is directly related to pathogenic variants in
MPL, the gene for the receptor of thrombopoietin (THPO). THPO is a
growth factor that promotes HSC survival and stimulates megakaryocyte proliferation and maturation. Heterozygotes of the pathogenic
variant gene have normal hematology, whereas affected individuals
have pathogenic variants in both alleles. Genotype-­phenotype correlations predict disease course and prognosis. Nonsense pathogenic variants cause a complete loss of function of the THPO receptor, resulting
in persistently low platelet counts in early infancy due to absence of
megakaryocytes and a fast progression to pancytopenia and aplastic
anemia (CAMT type I). Impaired stem cell survival with MPL nonsense pathogenic variants explains the evolution of CAMT into aplastic anemia because THPO also has an antiapoptotic and cell survival
effect on HSCs. Missense pathogenic variants of MPL are associated
with a milder disease course, a later presentation, a partial and transient increase in platelets during the first year of life after presentation, and a delayed onset, if any, of pancytopenia, indicating residual
receptor function (CAMT type II). Biologically active plasma THPO
is consistently elevated in all patients with CAMT. A small proportion
of patients with the clinical picture of CAMT have no pathogenic variants in MPL, but more recently have been found to have homozygous
pathogenic variants in THPO.

Clinical Manifestations

Intracranial hemorrhage is a major risk; about 25% of the patients
develop this complication either in utero (13%), at birth (4%), or within
the first 4 weeks of life (7%). Patients with CAMT commonly have a
petechial rash, bruising, or bleeding. Onset of symptoms may depend
on the severity of pathogenic variants and ranges from birth to the first
year of life. Most patients with CAMT have normal physical and imaging
features. About 10–20% of published phenotypic CAMT cases involved
physical anomalies. The most common anomalies are neurologic. Findings related to cerebellar and cerebral atrophy are frequent, and developmental delay is a prominent feature. Congenital heart disease is rare but
includes atrial and ventricular septal defects, patent ductus arteriosus,
tetralogy of Fallot, and coarctation of the aorta. Some of these occur in
combinations. Other anomalies include abnormal hips or feet, kidney
malformations, eye anomalies, and cleft or high-­arched palate. Some
patients have microcephaly and abnormal facies.

Laboratory Findings

Thrombocytopenia is the major laboratory finding in CAMT. At birth,
most patients present with thrombocytopenia but not all. Typically, at
first, thrombocytopenia appears with normal hemoglobin levels and
WBC counts. Peripheral blood platelets are reduced or totally absent.
As in other IBMFSs, RBCs may be macrocytic. Hemoglobin F may
be elevated, and there may be increased expression of i antigen. Initial bone marrow aspirates and biopsy specimens show normal cellularity with marked reduction or absence of megakaryocytes. Most
patients develop pancytopenia between 6 months to 2 years of age. In
patients in whom aplastic anemia develops, bone marrow cellularity is
decreased, with fatty replacement; erythropoietic and granulopoietic
lineages are also symmetrically reduced.

Diagnosis

If thrombocytopenia persists beyond the neonatal period or is associated with adequate platelet transfusion response and no obvious precipitating cause such as infections or immunologic reactions, a bone
marrow aspirate and biopsy are indicated. Deficient megakaryocytes
in such cases suggest the diagnosis, and genetic analysis will confirm
it. If CAMT occurs at birth or shortly after, it must be distinguished
from other causes of inherited and acquired neonatal thrombocytopenia. Thrombocytopenia with absent radii (TAR syndrome) is distinguished from CAMT because radii are absent in TAR. The distinction
from DC may be evident by a lack of mucocutaneous, neurologic, and

immunologic findings that are characteristic of the early-­onset forms
of DC. Telomere lengths below the first percentile matched for age to
healthy controls is characteristic of DC and not CAMT. CAMT blood
lymphocytes do not show increased chromosomal breakage when
exposed to DEB, distinguishing the disease from FA.

Cancer Predisposition

CAMT can evolve into MDS and AML, but the true risk cannot be
defined because most patients undergo early transplantation. Typical
course in patients with transformation includes thrombocytopenia,
aplastic anemia, followed by MDS (e.g., with monosomy 7 or trisomy
8) and leukemia.

Therapy and Prognosis

The mortality rate from thrombocytopenic bleeding, complications of
aplastic anemia, or leukemic transformation in patients with MPL nonsense pathogenic variants is close to 100% if bone marrow function is
not improved. Patients with missense pathogenic variants have a milder
course but may still have serious complications. HSCT is the only curative option. The majority of patients with CAMT who undergo HSCT are
cured, especially if the procedure is performed with HLA-­matched sibling donors. Before transplantation, platelet transfusion should be used
carefully. Platelet count should not always be the sole indication for treatment, but symptoms such as clinical bleeding are an appropriate trigger.
Single-­donor, leuko-­reduced platelets are preferred to minimize sensitization. In a patient who is a candidate for HSCT, all blood products
should be irradiated and cytomegalovirus safe. The role of thrombomimetic agents such as eltrombopag or romiplostim might be suitable for
some patients (CAMT type II) and need to be studied further. However,
the promotion of fibrosis by these agents and the risk of MDS and leukemia in CAMT render HSCT the preferred treatment for patients with
severe cytopenia. Romiplostim has shown good and sustained response
in those with pathogenic variants in THPO, and there have been no
reports of acute leukemia or MDS in this subgroup of CMPL patients,
but the numbers of patients with pathogenic variants in THPO are small.

GATA2-­RELATED DISORDERS

The GATA2 gene codes for a hematopoietic transcription factor that is
crucial for the proliferation and maintenance of early hematopoietic cells.
Heterozygous germline pathogenic variants, inherited in an autosomal
dominant fashion and that are spontaneous in the majority of cases, result
in various phenotypes that range from mild cytopenia to severe immunodeficiency and myeloid neoplasia. Approximately two thirds of pathogenic variants in GATA2 are null, and one third are missense substitutions.
Germline pathogenic variants in GATA2 have been recognized as a major
MDS and AML predisposition syndrome. Approximately 150 unique
GATA2 germline pathogenic variants have been identified in about 550
patients.
Clinical manifestations include monocytopenia and Mycobacterium
avium complex (MonoMAC syndrome) infections, MDS with lymphedema (Emberger syndrome), familial MDS/AML, primary MDS,
and chronic neutropenia and dendritic cell, monocyte, and B and
NK lymphoid deficiency (DCML deficiency). Hematologic presentation is variable. Some patients present with cytopenia, a hypocellular
marrow and monocytopenia, whereas others have severe immunodeficiency, and others still present with MDS/AML and no preexisting
relevant medical history or cytopenia. Immune deficiency results in
HPV-­related infections such as warts or generalized verrucosis, disseminated nontuberculous mycobacterial, and systemic bacterial and
fungal infections. Recurrent respiratory tract infections can result in
lung disease, such as pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Few patients
have autoimmune dysregulation manifesting as autoimmune cytopenia, arthritis, lupus, and others. Constitutional abnormalities, such as
lymphedema, hydrocele, and congenital deafness, as well as abnormalities in pulmonary, CV, urogenital, and neurological systems have been
observed in approximately 50% of patients (Fig. 517.3).
In children and adolescents with primary MDS, pathogenic variants in
GATA2 are a predominant germline predisposition accounting for 7% of
all MDS cases, 15% of patients with advanced MDS, and 37% of patients

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 517 u Inherited Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes with Pancytopenia
Head & neck:
Embolic stroke
Sensorineural hearing loss

Hypothyroidism

HSV ulcers

Thorax:
Pulmonary alveolar
proteinosis
Ventilatory and diffusion
defects

Bone marrow:

Culture-negative
endocarditis
Solid organ tumors

Abdomen:
Disseminated NTM
infection

Cytopenias
MDS/AML

Severe C. difficile infection

Upper extremities:

Pelvis:
Miscarriage

Chronic
arthralgias

Genital dysplasia
Genital warts

Clubbing
Extragenital warts

Lower extremities:
Bony infarcts

Panniculitis/
Erythema nodosum

Deep venous thrombosis
Lymphedema

3009

Multiple organs can be affected in those with germline SAMD9/9L
pathogenic variants, including the hematologic, immunologic, endocrine, and neurologic systems (see Table 517.2). The term MIRAGE
syndrome was given to a constellation of abnormalities that include
MDS, infection, restriction of growth (starting in utero), adrenal
hypoplasia/insufficiency (with early onset), genital phenotypes (such
as 46XY females and testicular dysgenesis), and enteropathy (often
with reflux). Thrombocytopenia and anemia are often present at birth.
In some patients, the anemia and thrombocytopenia resolve during infancy. Patients with SAMD9L pathogenic variants might show
disease-­specific neurological findings with very variable age of onset.
Severe cerebellar ataxia is observed in some, whereas others have cerebellar atrophy, dysmetria, nystagmus, white matter abnormalities, and
loss of Purkinje cells. The majority of patients in both syndromes have
hematologic manifestations which range from single lineage cytopenia
to pancytopenia with hypocellular marrow, MDS with monosomy 7,
or deletion 7q. Some patients have nonsyndromic SAMD9/9L related
MDS.
SAMD9/9L pathogenic variants are seen in 8–17% of pediatric MDS.
The median age of presentation with SAMD9/9L related MDS is approximately 10 years. Ninety percent of children present in the early stage
of MDS (refractory cytopenia of childhood), and another 10% present
with advanced MDS. Transient monosomy 7 syndrome, the disappearance of monosomy 7 clones from the bone marrow, has been described
in a few young children. It was hypothesized that pathogenic variants
in the growth inhibitory genes, SAMD9/9L, confer gain of function that
further suppress cell growth. Hence, monosomy 7, which depletes one
allele of SAMD9/9L, reduces the growth inhibitory effect of the pathogenic variants. Somatic revertant mosaicism with expansion of benign,
corrected hematopoiesis, has also been reported with normalization of
blood counts and marrow cellularity for up to 20 years from diagnosis.
Monitoring and treatment depend on the degree of blood count
abnormalities, the presence of MDS, and the presence of syndromic
disease. Children who received HSCT for SAMD9/9L–related MDS
showed an overall survival of 85% in one study.

OTHER INHERITED APLASTIC ANEMIAS

Fig. 517.3 Clinical features of GATA2 deficiency by organ system.

Common clinical problems are indicated in bold. AML, acute myelogenous leukemia; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; NTM, non-tuberculous mycobacterium. (From National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases [NIAID] Health Information Fact Sheet. https://www.niaid.nih.
gov/sites/default/files/GATA2-­Factsheet.pdf.)

with MDS and monosomy 7. Among children with MDS, the prevalence
of GATA2 pathogenic variants increases with age; 66% of adolescents
with MDS and monosomy 7 carry germline GATA2 pathogenic variants.
Median age of diagnosis with GATA2-­related MDS is approximately 10
years.
Patients should be followed by a hematologist with expertise in bone
marrow failure/MDS and by an immunologist. Blood counts should
be done every 3 months, and bone marrow aspirate and biopsy with
cytogenetics should be carried out annually. HSCT is the only curative
option for MDS and carries an overall survival ranging from 60–85%
depending on donor type and MDS disease severity.

SAMD9/9L-­RELATED DISORDER

Sterile alpha motif domain-­containing protein 9 (SAMD9) and the paralogue gene SAMD9-­like (SAMD9L) are located side-­by-­side on chromosome 7q21. They are interferon and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α
responsive proteins that play a role in antiviral response, tumor suppression, inflammation, development, and endosomal fusion. Gain of function
pathogenic variants, mostly missense, in these genes have variable penetrance. Thirty-­eight pathogenic variants have been identified in approximately 110 patients.

A substantial number of genes that are associated with bone marrow failure with pancytopenia have been identified with the emergence of whole
genome screening methods (see Table 517.1). The specific gene-­associated
disorders may vary by phenotype but frequently include physical malformations, familial distribution, early age of disease onset, pancytopenia,
and a risk of MDS and AML. Significant overlap exists between inherited
pancytopenia syndromes and familial MDS and AML syndromes.

SRP72-­Related Disorder

This autosomal dominant disorder is characterized by familial aplastic
anemia and MDS. Some patients also have deafness. SRP72 encodes for a
signal recognition particle 72 protein. SRP72 is part of a ribonucleoprotein
complex that mediates targeting of secretory proteins to the endoplasmic
reticulum.

ERCC6L2-­Related Disorder

This autosomal recessive disorder features multilineage cytopenia,
MDS, and physical malformations. Neurological and cranial abnormalities are common in ERCC6L2-­related disorder and include developmental delay, microcephaly, ataxia, dysmetria, generalized brain
volume loss, retinal dystrophy, and low-­set ears. ERCC6L2 regulates
transcription by RNA Pol II through an interaction with DNA-­PK;
thereby, it promotes resolution of R loops and minimizes transcription-­
associated genome instability. The inherited BMF syndrome caused by
biallelic pathogenic variants in ERCC6L2 is thus a primary transcription deficiency and may not cause a DNA repair defect.

Dubowitz Syndrome

Dubowitz syndrome is characterized by a peculiar facies, infantile
eczema, small stature, and mild microcephaly. The face is small, with a
shallow supraorbital ridge, a nasal bridge at the same level as the forehead, short palpebral fissures, variable ptosis, and micrognathia. There

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3010 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
is a predisposition to cancer in these patients. Approximately 10% of
patients have hematopoietic disorders, including moderate pancytopenia, hypoplastic anemia, bone marrow hypoplasia, and full-­blown
aplastic anemia. Patients also have an increased risk of lymphoma
and neuroblastoma. In about one third of patients, a genetic cause
can be identified and includes biallelic pathogenic variants in NSUN2
(an RNA methyltransferase), biallelic pathogenic variants in LIG4 (a
nuclear DNA ligase), or one copy deletion in several chromosome sites
including 14q32, 17q24, -­14q32, -­17q24, and -­19q13.

Seckel Syndrome

Seckel syndrome, sometimes called “bird-­headed dwarfism,” is a developmental disorder characterized by marked growth failure and mental
deficiency, microcephaly, a hypoplastic face with a prominent nose,
and low-­set and/or malformed ears. Approximately 25% of patients
have aplastic anemia or malignancies. The syndrome is genetically
heterogeneous and is associated with biallelic pathogenic variants in
ATR, RBBP8, CENPJ, CEP152, CEP63, NIN, or ATRIP. A deletion at
the14q21-­q22 locus has also been described.

Reticular Dysgenesis

Reticular dysgenesis is a severe form of immunodeficiency. It is mainly
characterized by severe lymphopenia and neutropenia. Patients typically
present with severe infections at birth or shortly thereafter. On physical
examination, lymph nodes and tonsils are absent, and a thymic shadow
on radiographs cannot be seen. Laboratory tests show absence of cellular
and humoral immunity. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and aplastic anemia
may be evident. Bone marrow specimens show markedly reduced myeloid
and lymphoid elements. Clonogenic assays of hematopoietic progenitors consistently show reduced to absent colony growth, suggesting that
the disorder has its origins at the HSC level. The disease is inherited in an
autosomal recessive fashion and is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants
in mitochondrial AK2. The only curative therapy is HSCT.

Schimke Immunoosseous Dysplasia

Schimke immunoosseous dysplasia is an autosomal recessive disorder
caused by pathogenic variants in the chromatin remodeling gene SMARCAL1. Patients have spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with exaggerated
lumbar lordosis and a protruding abdomen. There are pigmentary skin
changes and abnormally discolored and configured teeth. T-­cell immunodeficiency, progressive renal insufficiency, nephrotic syndrome, and
early atherosclerosis are common causes of morbidity and mortality.
Approximately 50% of patients have hypothyroidism; 50% have cerebral
ischemia; 10% have bone marrow failure with neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia; and about 5% are predisposed to non-­Hodgkin
lymphoma. Eighty percent of patients have lymphopenia and altered
cellular immunity. Bone marrow transplantation has been successfully
applied to patients with bone marrow failure or immunodeficiency.

Cartilage Hair Hypoplasia

Cartilage-­
hair hypoplasia features metaphyseal dysostosis, short-­
limbed dwarfism, and fine sparse hair. Skeletal abnormalities may
also include scoliosis, lordosis, chest deformity and varus lower limbs.
GI abnormalities such as aganglionic megacolon have been reported.
Most reported cases are of Finnish or Amish descent. In over 80% of
patients, biallelic causal pathogenic variants in the noncoding RNA
gene RMRP (RNA Component of Mitochondrial RNA Processing
Endoribonuclease) can be found. Recently, biallelic pathogenic variants in POP1 and in NEPRO have also been found to be associated
with the disease. POP1 is a component of the RNAse-­MRP endoribonuclease complex. NEPRO is a nucleolar and neural progenitor protein
that interacts with multiple subunits of the RNase MRP complex. The
complex plays a role in rRNA and in mitochondrial RNA processing by
cleavage at a priming site during replication.
The hematological abnormalities include macrocytic anemia. In
most cases the anemia is mild and self-­limited, but a proportion of
patients have severe and persistent anemia that requires regular RBC
transfusions. Lymphopenia occurs in 65% of patients. Severe immunodeficiency can occur, often with severe anemia. Neutropenia has

been reported in 25% of patients. HSCT has been used successfully to
reconstitute the hemato/immunological system. Lymphomas and basal
cell carcinoma occur at an increased frequency among these patients.

Pearson Syndrome

Pearson syndrome is a mitochondrial metabolic disorder with various
bone marrow impairments. Insufficiency of the exocrine pancreas, caused
by acinar cell atrophy and fibrosis, develops in 30% of cases. The syndrome is caused by a maternally inherited deletion of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) that encodes enzymes that are critical to oxidative phosphorylation. Severe macrocytic anemia requiring transfusions is commonly present within the first year of life, sometimes at birth. Bone marrow aspirate
typically shows ringed sideroblasts and prominent vacuolization of erythroid and myeloid precursors. However, cases with pure red cell aplasia
mimicking Diamond Blackfan anemia have been reported. Pancytopenia
may occur alone or in association with hepatic failure, renal tubulopathy,
and lactic acidosis. In such cases, platelet transfusions may also be required.
Erythropoietin has been used for the anemia of renal failure. G-­CSF is
indicated to prevent infections in patients with severe neutropenia. HSCT
is traditionally not recommended for the hematopoietic complications
of Pearson syndrome due to their tendency to improve spontaneously in
most cases; nonetheless, HSCT has been used in rare cases with Pearson
syndrome, and engraftment was achieved. Interestingly, HSCT was associated not only with improved hematopoiesis but also with resolution of lactacidemia and acidosis. Patients may need pancreatic enzyme replacement
if they develop malabsorption due to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.

Immune-­Related Pancytopenias

Primary immunodeficiency, autoimmune, lymphoproliferative, and
hemophagocytic disorders can be associated with pancytopenia. Autoantibodies, hypersplenism, and bone marrow involvement are potential mechanisms. Recognizable disorders include common variable
immunodeficiency syndrome (Chapter 165), hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (Chapter 556.2), autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome (Chapter 174.7), and other lymphoproliferative disorders.

UNCLASSIFIED INHERITED BONE MARROW
FAILURE SYNDROMES

Unclassified IBMFSs are heterogeneous disorders that in many cases were
shown to present as new syndromes. In other cases, they may be atypical presentations of already characterized diseases. Unbiased approaches,
such as study of comprehensive genetic panels of all known IBMFS genes
regardless of the specific hematologic (e.g., isolated neutropenia or pancytopenia) or nonhematologic manifestations, or WES/genome sequencing,
have proved this to be true. These disorders do not fit into classic genetic
bone marrow failure diseases because all features of any one disease may
not be evident at presentation. All are characterized by various cytopenias
caused by underproductive bone marrow with or without physical manifestations. Compared with patients with classical disorders who present at
a median age of 1 month, patients with unclassified disorders present later,
at a median age of 9 months. Patients with unclassified IBMFSs can manifest single or multilineage cytopenia, aplastic anemia, MDS, or malignancy
with variable expression of malformations. Table 517.5 lists criteria for the
diagnosis, which include evidence of chronic bone marrow failure, in addition to factors that indicate a high likelihood of inherited disease (e.g., family history, congenital anomalies, young age at presentation).
When patients present later and without physical malformations,
an acquired etiology cannot be ruled out. Detailed genetic testing for
known IBMFS genes followed by approaches to discover novel genes
and novel syndromes by WES/genome sequencing may identify an
inherited etiology and define the disease.
Determining the actual genetic cause helps group patients according to diseases and guides counseling and proper medical care. Implementing a treatment plan is urgent in many cases. In such patients, the
management should be according to the type of complications that the
patient has at presentation and the lessons that can be learned from
published experience on unclassified cases in the literature.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 518 u Acquired Pancytopenias
Table 517.5  The Canadian Inherited Marrow Failure
Registry Criteria for Unclassified Inherited
Bone Marrow Failure Syndromes
FULFILLS CRITERIA 1 AND 2:
1.	Does not fulfill criteria for any categorized inherited bone marrow
failure syndrome*
2.	Fulfills both of the following:
FULFILLS AT LEAST TWO OF THE FOLLOWING:
a.	Chronic cytopenia(s) detected on at least two occasions over at
least 3 months†
b.	Reduced marrow progenitors or reduced clonogenic potential
of hematopoietic progenitor cells or evidence of ineffective
­hematopoiesis‡
c.	High fetal hemoglobin for age‡
d.	Red blood cell macrocytosis (not caused by hemolysis or a
­nutritional deficiency)
FULFILLS AT LEAST ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:
a.	Family history of bone marrow failure
b.	Presentation at age <1 year
c.	Anomalies involving multiple systems to suggest an inherited
syndrome
*The criteria for most common syndromes are described in Tsangaris E, Klaasen R, Fernandez CV, et al. Genetic analysis of inherited bone marrow failure syndromes from
one prospective, comprehensive, and population-­based cohort and identification of
novel mutations. J Med Genet. 2011;48:618–628.
†Cytopenia is defined according to the affected cell: neutropenia, neutrophil count of
<1.5 × 109/L; thrombocytopenia, platelet count of <150 × 109/L; anemia, hemoglobin
concentration of >2 standard deviations below mean, adjusted for age.
‡Hemoglobinopathies with ineffective erythropoiesis and high fetal hemoglobin should
be excluded by clinical or laboratory testing.
Modified from Teo JT, Klaassen R, Fernandez CV, et al. Clinical and genetic analysis of
unclassifiable inherited bone marrow failure syndromes. Pediatrics. 2008;22:e139–e148.

Table 518.1

3011

Etiology of Acquired Aplastic Anemia

Radiation, Drug, and Chemicals
Predictable: chemotherapy, benzene
Idiosyncratic: chloramphenicol, antiepileptics, gold, 3,4-­methylenedioxymethamphetamine, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), antibiotics
See also Table 518.2
Viruses
Cytomegalovirus
Epstein-­Barr
Hepatitis B
Hepatitis C
Hepatitis non-­A, non-­B, non-­C (seronegative hepatitis)
HIV
COVID-19
Immune Diseases
Eosinophilic fasciitis
Hypoimmunoglobulinemia
Thymoma
Common variable immunodeficiency syndrome (NFKB1)
Pregnancy
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
Marrow Replacement
Leukemia
Myelodysplasia
Myelofibrosis
Autoimmune
Nutritional
Vitamin B12
Folate
Copper
Other
Cryptic dyskeratosis congenita (no physical stigmata)
Telomerase reverse transcriptase haploinsufficiency
Atypical presentation of genetic marrow failure syndromes
Leishmaniasis

Chapter 518

Acquired Pancytopenias
John H. Fargo and Jeffrey D. Hord
ETIOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Therapeutic and recreational drugs, environmental toxins, infectious
agents, radiation, and immune disorders can result in pancytopenia
by direct destruction of hematopoietic progenitors, disruption of the
marrow microenvironment, or immune-­mediated suppression of marrow elements (Tables 518.1 and 518.2). A careful history of exposure
to known risk factors should be obtained for every child presenting
with pancytopenia. Even in the absence of the classic associated physical findings, the possibility of a genetic predisposition to bone marrow failure must also be considered (see Chapter 517). Many cases of
acquired marrow failure in childhood are idiopathic, in that no causative agent is identified. Many are probably immune mediated through
cytotoxic T lymphocytes and cytokine destruction of marrow stem and
progenitor cells. Patients with an initial diagnosis of acquired aplastic anemia may have developed somatic pathogenic variants in genes
associated with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Clonal hematopoiesis resulting from these acquired
somatic genetic variants may over time lead to the development of
MDS or AML. The overall incidence of acquired aplastic anemia is
relatively low, with an approximate incidence in both children and

adults in the United States and Europe of 2–6 cases per 1 million population per year. The incidence is higher in Asia, with as many as 14 cases
per 1 million per year in Japan.
Severe bone marrow suppression can develop after exposure to
many different therapeutic drugs and environmental chemicals,
including certain chemotherapeutic agents, insecticides, antibiotics, anticonvulsants, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
and recreational drugs. Some of the most notable agents are benzene,
chloramphenicol, gold, and 3,4-­
methylenedioxymethamphetamine
(MDMA, or “ecstasy”).
A number of viruses can either directly or indirectly result in
bone marrow failure. Parvovirus B19 is classically associated with
isolated red blood cell (RBC) aplasia, but in patients with sickle cell
disease or immunodeficiency, it can result in transient pancytopenia (see Chapter 298). Prolonged pancytopenia can occur after
infection with many of the hepatitis viruses, herpesviruses, Epstein-­
Barr virus (see Chapter 301), cytomegalovirus (see Chapter 302),
and HIV (see Chapter 322).
Immune-­mediated acquired pancytopenia is also found to be
prominent among acute, sporadic cases of aplastic anemia. Immunologic conditions, such as seronegative hepatitis, eosinophilic fasciitis, and thymoma, have been implicated in aplastic anemia.
Patients with evidence of bone marrow failure should also be
evaluated for inherited forms of marrow failure, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH; see Chapter 510), and collagen
vascular diseases. Pancytopenia without peripheral blasts may be
caused by bone marrow replacement by malignant cells including
leukemia and solid tumor cells, such as neuroblastoma.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3012 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 518.2  Drugs and Toxins Associated with Aplastic
Anemia
DOSE DEPENDENT
Antineoplastic Agents
Antimetabolites: fluorouracil, mercaptopurine, 6-­thioguanine,
methotrexate, cytosine arabinoside, gemcitabine, fludarabine,
cladribine, pentostatin, hydroxyurea
Alkylating and cross-­linking agents: busulfan, cyclophosphamide,
chlorambucil, nitrogen mustard, melphalan, cisplatin, carboplatin,
ifosfamide, nitrosoureas (BCNU and CCNU), mitomycin C
Cytotoxic antibiotics: daunorubicin, doxorubicin, mitoxantrone
Plant alkaloids: vinblastine, paclitaxel
Topoisomerase inhibitors: etoposide
Antimicrobial Agents
Chloramphenicol, dapsone, fluorocytosine
Antiinflammatory and Antirheumatic Agent
Colchicine
Insecticides
Chlordane, chlorophenothane (DDT), lindane, parathion
Other Chemicals
Benzene
Benzene-­containing chemicals: kerosene, chlorophenols, carbon
tetrachloride
DOSE INDEPENDENT*
Idiosyncratic, likely immune mediated
Antimicrobial Agents
Chloramphenicol, dapsone, sulfonamides, tetracycline, methicillin,
amphotericin, quinacrine, chloroquine, pyrimethamine
Anticonvulsants
Hydantoins, carbamazepine, phenacemide, primidone, ethosuximide
Antiinflammatory Agents
Phenylbutazone, indomethacin, ibuprofen, oxyphenbutazone,
­sulindac, naproxen
Antiarrhythmic Drugs
Quinidine, tocainide, procainamide
Metals
Gold, arsenic, mercury, bismuth
Antihistamines
Cimetidine, ranitidine, chlorpheniramine, pyrilamine, tripelennamine
Diuretics
Acetazolamide, furosemide, chlorothiazide, methazolamide
Hypoglycemic Agents
Chlorpropamide, tolbutamide
Antithyroid Drugs
Propylthiouracil, potassium perchlorate, methylthiouracil,
­methimazole, carbimazole
Antihypertensive Agents
Methyldopa, enalapril, captopril
Sedatives
Chlordiazepoxide, chlorpromazine, meprobamate, prochlorperazine
*Most agents listed in this group should be considered to be possibly associated with
aplastic anemia.
From Bagby GC. Aplastic anemia and related bone marrow failure states. In: Goldman
L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine, 26th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2020: Table
156.2.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The hallmark of aplastic anemia is peripheral pancytopenia,
coupled with hypoplastic or aplastic bone marrow. The severity of the clinical course is related to the degree of myelosuppression. Severe aplastic anemia is defined as a condition in
which ≥2 cell components have become seriously compromised
(absolute neutrophil count <500/mm3, platelet count <20,000/
mm3, reticulocyte count <1% after correction for hematocrit) in
a patient whose bone marrow biopsy material has <30% cellularity. Approximately 65% of patients who first present with moderate aplastic anemia (absolute neutrophil count 500–­1,500/mm3,

platelet count 20,000–100,000/mm3, reticulocyte count <1%) eventually progress to meet the criteria for severe disease if they are simply observed. Bone marrow failure may be a consequence of a direct
cytotoxic effect on hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from a drug
or chemical or may result from either cell-­mediated or antibody-­
dependent cytotoxicity. There is strong evidence that many cases of
idiopathic aplastic anemia are caused by an immune-­mediated process, with increased circulating cytotoxic T lymphocytes producing
cytokines (interferon-­γ) that suppress hematopoiesis. Abnormal
telomere length and telomerase activity in granulocytic precursors of patients with aplastic anemia suggest that early apoptosis
of hematopoietic progenitors may play a role in the pathogenesis
of this disease.
Cytogenetic abnormalities associated with aplastic anemia include
uniparental disomy of 6p, monosomy 7/deletion of 7q, and trisomy 8,
6, or 15. Genes associated with aplastic anemia include telomere complex genes (TERT, TERC) and BCOR/BCORL, PIGA, DNMT3A, and
ASXL1.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS, LABORATORY
FINDINGS, AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Pancytopenia results in increased risks of cardiac failure, fatigue,
infection, and bleeding. Acquired pancytopenia is typically characterized by anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia in the setting of elevated serum cytokine values. Other treatable disorders,
such as cancer, collagen vascular disorders, PNH, and infections,
that may respond to specific therapies (IV immunoglobulin for parvovirus), should be considered in the differential diagnosis. Careful
examination of the peripheral blood smear for RBC, leukocyte, and
platelet morphologic features is important. A reticulocyte count
should be performed to assess erythropoietic activity. In children,
the possibility of congenital pancytopenia must always be considered, and chromosomal breakage analysis should be performed to
evaluate for Fanconi anemia (see Chapter 517) and telomere length
to evaluate for telomeropathies. The presence of fetal hemoglobin
suggests congenital pancytopenia but is not diagnostic. To assess for
possible PNH, flow cytometric analysis of erythrocytes and granulocytes for CD55 and CD59 is the most sensitive test. Bone marrow examination should include both aspiration and biopsy, and
the marrow should be carefully evaluated for morphologic features,
cellularity, and cytogenetic abnormalities.

TREATMENT

The treatment of children with acquired pancytopenia requires
comprehensive supportive care coupled with an attempt to treat the
underlying etiology for marrow failure. For patients with a human
leukocyte antigen (HLA)–matched family member donor, allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) offers a 90%
chance of long-­term survival. Preparative regimens vary but typically consist of cyclophosphamide, fludarabine, and horse antithymocyte globulin (ATG). Preliminary data also suggest that children
with severe aplastic anemia can be successfully transplanted using
alemtuzumab (humanized monoclonal antibody against CD52 on
lymphocytes)–based conditioning. The risks associated with bone
marrow transplantation include the immediate complications of
transplantation, graft failure, and graft-­versus-­host disease. Late
adverse effects associated with transplantation may include secondary cancers, cataracts, short stature, hypothyroidism, and gonadal
dysfunction (see Chapters 179 and 180). Only approximately 20% of
patients have an HLA-­matched family member donor, so matched-­
related HSCT is not an option for the majority of patients.
For patients without a sibling donor, the major form of therapy
is immunosuppression with horse ATG and cyclosporine, with a
response rate of 60–70%. The median time to response is 6 months.
As many as 30–60% of patient responders experience relapse after
discontinuation of immunosuppression, and some patients must
continue cyclosporine for several years to maintain a hematologic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 518 u Acquired Pancytopenias
response. Among those who relapse after immunosuppression,
approximately 50% show response to a second course of ATG and
cyclosporine. To accelerate neutrophil recovery, a hematopoietic
colony-­
stimulating factor (e.g., granulocyte CSF, granulocyte-­
macrophage CSF) is sometimes added to ATG and cyclosporine
for treatment of patients with very severe neutropenia (absolute
neutrophil count <200/mm3), but there is no clear evidence that
this treatment influences response rate or survival. Higher baseline
reticulocyte count correlates with a higher probability of response
to immunosuppression and survival. There is an inverse correlation between telomere length and the probability of relapse after
immunosuppression.
For patients who show no response to immunosuppression or who
experience relapse after immunosuppression, matched-­unrelated
HSCT and T-­cell–depleted haploidentical family member–donor
HSCT are treatment options, with a response rate approaching 90%.
Cord blood transplants have been performed in this refractory group
of pediatric patients, with survival approximating 90%. Ongoing studies using eltrombopag (an oral thrombopoietin mimetic agent) have
shown promise in patients ≥15 years of age (mostly adults) with refractory disease. The use of eltrombopag resulted in a hematologic response
with improvements in platelet and neutrophil counts and hemoglobin
levels in over half the patients. In patients who responded, bone marrow biopsies demonstrated trilineage normalization of hematopoiesis,
with some showing a durable response. High-­dose cyclophosphamide
has been used successfully in the treatment of patients who are not
good candidates for HSCT and have not had an adequate response to
immunosuppression. This therapy leads to prolonged severe pancytopenia, increasing the risk of life-­threatening infection, especially fungal
infections. Other therapies that have been used in the past with inconsistent results include androgens, corticosteroids, and plasmapheresis.
Alemtuzumab as monotherapy in relapsed disease showed improved
response rates and 3-­year survival compared to additional courses of
ATG and cyclosporine.

COMPLICATIONS

The major complications of severe pancytopenia are predominantly
related to the risk of life-­threatening bleeding from prolonged thrombocytopenia or to infection secondary to protracted neutropenia.
Patients with protracted neutropenia as a result of bone marrow failure
are at risk not only for serious bacterial infections but also for invasive
mycoses. Patients who have been transfused with RBCs regularly over
a long period are at increased risk of developing alloantibodies to RBC
antigens and may require iron chelation therapy for transfusional iron
overload. The general principles of supportive care that have evolved
from the use of chemotherapy-­
related myelosuppression to treat
patients with cancer should be fully extended to the care of patients
with acquired pancytopenia.

PROGNOSIS

Spontaneous recovery from pancytopenia rarely occurs. If left
untreated, severe pancytopenia has an overall mortality rate of
approximately 50% within 6 months of diagnosis and of >75% overall, with infection and hemorrhage being the major causes of morbidity and mortality. The majority of children with acquired severe
aplastic anemia show response to allogeneic marrow transplantation or immunosuppression, leaving them with normal or near-­
normal blood cell counts.

3013

malignancy (classically, neuroblastoma or leukemia) or result from
myelofibrosis, MDS, or osteopetrosis. Although uncommon, evidence of hypoplastic anemia can precede the onset of acute leukemia, generally by a few months. This relationship is important to
appreciate in evaluating and monitoring children who present with
what appears to be acquired aplastic anemia. Morphologic examination of the peripheral blood and bone marrow and marrow cytogenetic studies are critically important in making the diagnoses of
leukemia, myelofibrosis, and MDS.
Myelodysplasia is very rare in children, but when it occurs, its
clinical course is more aggressive than the same category of MDS
in adults. Pediatric MDS can be subdivided into refractory cytopenia of childhood (peripheral blasts <2% and marrow blasts <5%)
and MDS with excess blasts (peripheral blasts 2–19% and/or marrow blasts 5–19%). Disease in children with >20% blasts is usually
defined as AML.
Myelodysplastic syndromes are a heterogeneous group of bone
marrow failure disorders that have in common ineffective hematopoiesis that leads to pancytopenia over time. In one group, there are
somatic variants (in >25 genes) leading to MDS. In another group,
usually in younger patients (<55 years), there is autoimmune suppression of hematopoiesis by clonal expansion of T lymphocytes,
particularly in those patients who look similar to patients with
idiopathic aplastic anemia. In all patients, other causes of MDS
(medications and vitamin B12, folate, or copper deficiencies) must
be ruled out.
A number of inherited conditions are associated with an increased
risk for development of MDS, including Down syndrome, severe
congenital neutropenia, Noonan syndrome, Fanconi anemia, trisomy 8 mosaicism, neurofibromatosis, Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome, and some familial MDS syndromes caused by pathogenic
variants in ANKRD26, CEBPA, DDX41, ETV6, GATA2, RUNX1, and
SRP72 genes. Significant clonal abnormalities are found within the
marrow of approximately 50% of patients with MDS, with monosomy 7 being most common but prognostically neutral. Those with
a structurally complex karyotype have a very poor outcome (see
Chapter 517).
The transition time from pediatric MDS to acute leukemia is relatively short, 14–­26 months, so aggressive treatment such as HSCT
must be considered shortly after diagnosis. With allogeneic HSCT,
the survival rate is approximately 60%. One exception to such an
aggressive therapeutic approach is MDS and AML in children with
Down syndrome because these diseases in this specific population
are very responsive to conventional chemotherapy, with long-­term
survival rates >80%.
The decision on how to treat a child with MDS who lacks a suitable HSC donor should be made with the specific clonal abnormality
found within the child’s marrow taken into consideration. Lenalidomide produces the best responses among patients who have the
chromosomal abnormality 5q−. Immunosuppressive therapy with
ATG and cyclosporine is most effective in patients with trisomy 8,
especially in the presence of a PNH clone. Imatinib mesylate targets mutations in the tyrosine kinase receptor family of genes found
in patients with t(5;12) and del(4q12). The DNA hypomethylating
agents azacitidine and decitabine have also been used in treating
MDS without a known molecular target and have some effect.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

PANCYTOPENIA CAUSED BY MARROW
REPLACEMENT

Processes that either infiltrate or replace the bone marrow can
manifest as acquired pancytopenia. Infiltration can be caused by

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3014 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Section 6

Blood Component
Transfusions
Chapter 519

Red Blood Cell
Transfusions and
Erythropoietin Therapy
Patricia E. Zerra and Cassandra D. Josephson

Red blood cells (RBCs) are transfused to increase the oxygen-­
carrying capacity of the blood, with the goal to increase or maintain
satisfactory tissue oxygenation. This goal may not be achieved simply by increasing the hemoglobin (Hb) concentration or hematocrit
(Hct) by an RBC transfusion because tissue oxygenation depends on
several additional factors, including oxygen off-­loading from RBCs,
microvascular blood flow, and diffusion of oxygen into tissue cells.
Although some attempts have been made to accurately relate posttransfusion Hb or Hct values to changes in posttransfusion tissue
oxygenation (e.g., improvements in the ratio of cerebral vs mesenteric oxygenation patterns assessed by serial near-­infrared spectroscopy measurements), decisions to transfuse RBCs per physiologic
indications, rather than degree of anemia, remain investigational.
This information can be applied to approaches for transfusion in
both preterm infants/neonates and children/adolescents. However,
neonates, especially extremely low birthweight infants (≤1,000 g),
are not “small” children (i.e., RBC physiology and pathophysiology
of anemia of prematurity are unique); thus RBC transfusions for neonates and children are considered separately.

RBC TRANSFUSION IN CHILDREN AND
ADOLESCENTS

Guidelines for RBC transfusions in children and adolescents are based
on maintaining a specified Hb or Hct level considered to be optimal
(per the best evidence available) for the clinical condition present at the
time of transfusion. The guidelines are similar to those for adults (Table
519.1). Transfusions may be given more stringently to children because
normal Hb levels are lower in healthy children than in adults and, as
is often the case, most children do not have the underlying multiorgan, cardiorespiratory, and vascular diseases that develop with aging
in adults to suggest a need for RBC transfusions. As a result, children
may compensate better for RBC loss than elderly adults, thus requiring
less RBC transfusion support. In general, there is increasing enthusiasm for applying patient blood management strategies, encompassing
conservative transfusion practices (i.e., accepting lower pretransfusion
Hct values to “trigger” an RBC transfusion) to all patient ages with
evidence-­based support.
In the perioperative period, it is unnecessary for most children to
maintain Hb of ≥8 g/dL, a level frequently desired for adults. Instead,
Hb of ≥7 g/dL is an acceptable level, although the optimal value for
individual patients is based on clinical and laboratory circumstances,
as influenced by the following factors. The desired preoperative Hb
level should consider the estimated blood loss for the surgical procedure planned and the rate of bleeding. There should be a compelling reason to prescribe any postoperative RBC transfusion, such as

Table 519.1  Guidelines for Pediatric Red Blood Cell
Transfusions*†
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
1.	Maintain stable status with acute loss of >25% of circulating blood
volume.
2.	Maintain hemoglobin >7.0 g/dL† in the perioperative period.
3.	Maintain hemoglobin >12.0 g/dL with severe cardiopulmonary
disease.
4.	Maintain hemoglobin >12.0 g/dL during extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation.
5.	Maintain hemoglobin >7.0 g/dL with symptomatic chronic anemia.
6.	Maintain hemoglobin >7.0 g/dL with marrow failure.
INFANTS ≤4 MO OLD
1.	Maintain hemoglobin >12.0 g/dL with severe pulmonary disease.
2.	Maintain hemoglobin >12.0 g/dL during extracorporeal
­membrane oxygenation.
3.	Maintain hemoglobin >10.0 g/dL with moderate pulmonary
disease.
4.	Maintain hemoglobin >12.0 g/dL with severe cardiac disease.
5.	Maintain hemoglobin >10.0 g/dL preoperatively and during major
surgery.
6.	Maintain hemoglobin >7.0 g/dL postoperatively.
7.	Maintain hemoglobin >7.0 g/dL with symptomatic anemia.
*Words in italics must be defined for local transfusion guidelines.
†Pretransfusion blood hemoglobin (Hb) level (convert to hematocrit values if preferred
by multiplying Hb values by 3) “triggering” an RBC transfusion. Hb values to maintain
vary among published reports, and the guideline values to maintain should be determined locally to fit the practices judged to be optimal by local physicians.

continued bleeding with hemodynamic instability because most children (without continued bleeding) can restore their RBC mass with
iron therapy (in a relatively short time).
The most important measures in the treatment of acute hemorrhage
are to control the hemorrhage and, if blood loss is modest, to restore
the circulating blood volume and tissue perfusion with crystalloid or,
less often, colloid solutions. If the estimated blood loss is >25% of the
circulating blood volume (>15 mL/kg of an estimated 60 mL/kg total
estimated blood volume) and the patient’s condition is unstable despite
initial intravenous (IV) fluids, RBC transfusions should be given without undue hesitation, along with plasma transfusions at a 1:1 ratio of
RBC/plasma volumes. Some experts recommend transfusing platelets early if bleeding is sustained or “massive” (i.e., approximating one
blood volume or 60 mL/kg, which may occur very quickly in infants
and small pediatric patients). Details of combined RBC and plasma
transfusions, the volume ratio transfused, and considerations for adding platelet transfusions to treat bleeding patients are controversial.
Accordingly, each hospital should develop and follow a “massive transfusion” protocol to ensure consistent practices.
In critically ill children with severe cardiac or pulmonary disease
requiring assisted ventilation, it is common practice to maintain the
Hb level close to the normal range, although the efficacy of this practice
has not been well documented. A similar approach is used for children
with acute cardiac, pulmonary, or cardiopulmonary disorders managed with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO).
The pretransfusion Hb level or Hct that should “trigger” an RBC
transfusion remains controversial (i.e., restrictive or a low pretransfusion level vs liberal or a high pretransfusion level) despite a substantial
amount of published information, including randomized clinical trials.
The current trend in critical care settings is to transfuse RBCs conservatively, following restrictive guidelines, and to permit modest anemia
because there appears to be no disadvantage to conservative/restrictive transfusion practices, and some patients with Hb levels maintained
close to the normal range by RBC transfusions (i.e., liberal guidelines)
have poorer outcomes. Studies in critically ill adults demonstrated better outcomes when Hb level was maintained at 7–9 g/dL vs 10–12 g/dL.
Anemic adults with significant cardiac disease did better with Hb level
maintained at 13 g/dL rather than 10 g/dL. A similar study in children admitted to intensive care units found no inferiority when RBC

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 519 u Red Blood Cell Transfusions and Erythropoietin Therapy
transfusions were given by restrictive guidelines (transfusion threshold
of 7 g/dL). It must be remembered that the children studied were in
stable clinical status and needed few transfusions. Therefore, results of
the trial cannot be automatically generalized to all patients admitted to
ICUs because unstable critically ill children (who were not included in
the study) may need more liberal RBC transfusion approaches.
With chronic anemia, the decision to transfuse RBCs should not
be based solely on blood Hb levels because children compensate well
and may be asymptomatic despite low Hb levels. Patients with iron-­
deficiency anemia are often treated successfully with oral iron alone,
even at Hb levels <5 g/dL. Factors other than Hb concentration to be
considered in the decision to transfuse RBCs include (1) the patient’s
symptoms, signs, and compensatory capacities; (2) the presence of
underlying cardiorespiratory, vascular, and central nervous system disease; (3) the cause and anticipated course of the anemia; and (4) alternative therapies, such as recombinant human erythropoietin (EPO)
therapy, which is known to reduce the need for RBC transfusions and
to improve the overall condition of children with chronic renal insufficiency (see Chapter 572.2). In anemias that are likely to be permanent,
it is also important to balance the detrimental effects of the degree of
long-­standing anemia on growth and development against the potential toxicity associated with repeated transfusions (i.e., iron overload
and risks of transfusion-­transmitted diseases) given to maintain the Hb
concentration at a specified level. RBC transfusions for disorders such
as sickle cell anemia and thalassemia are discussed in Chapters 511.1
and 511.10.

RBC TRANSFUSION IN PRETERM INFANTS AND
NEONATES

For neonates, almost all aspects of RBC transfusions remain controversial—the accepted indications for RBC transfusions, restrictive
vs liberal pretransfusion Hb/Hct levels, optimal RBC product to be
transfused, and fresh vs stored RBC units—and clinical practices vary
greatly. Generally, RBCs are given to maintain an Hb value believed
to be the most desirable for each neonate’s clinical status. Restrictive
guidelines (i.e., lower pretransfusion Hb/Hct levels) have been compared to more liberal transfusion practices, but both short-­term and
long-­term results and outcomes have been inconsistent and controversial, particularly as to neurodevelopmental status. Two multicenter
randomized controlled trials showed no difference in survival or neurodevelopmental outcome in premature infants receiving RBC transfusion based on liberal versus restrictive Hb thresholds. Importantly,
a lower Hb threshold was not inferior to a higher threshold for RBC
transfusion. However, these studies had limitations, and accordingly,
conventional guidelines are recommended to avoid problems caused
by undertransfusion or overtransfusion (see Table 519.1).
During the first few weeks of life, all neonates experience a decline in
circulating RBC mass caused by physiologic factors and, in sick premature infants, by phlebotomy blood losses. In healthy term infants, the
nadir Hb value rarely falls to <11 g/dL at age 10-­12 weeks. This benign
drop in Hb does not require transfusions. In contrast, the decline
occurs earlier and is more pronounced in premature infants, in whom
the mean Hb concentration falls to approximately 7 g/dL in infants
weighing <1 kg at birth, resulting in the anemia of prematurity, for
which there often is need for RBC transfusions, particularly when the
anemia is worsened by blood draws for laboratory testing.
A key reason that the nadir Hb values of premature infants are lower
than those of term infants is the premature infant’s relatively diminished plasma EPO level in response to anemia (see Chapters 139 and
496). Another factor is the rapid disappearance of EPO from infant
plasma (i.e., accelerated metabolism). Low plasma EPO levels provide
a rationale for the possible use of recombinant EPO in the treatment of
anemia of prematurity; treatment with EPO and iron effectively stimulate neonatal erythropoiesis. Recombinant EPO has not been widely
accepted as a treatment for anemia of prematurity (see Chapter 139).
Many low birthweight preterm infants need RBC transfusions (see
Table 519.1). Although the practice to maintain a very high Hb level
>13 g/dL (or Hct >40%) was once widely recommended, currently

3015

more restrictive guidelines have been suggested. However, one prospective, observational, multisite, birth cohort study of very low birthweight infants (≤1500 g) found a sixfold increased risk of necrotizing
enterocolitis (NEC) when an infant’s hemoglobin was ≤8 g/dL. Importantly, RBC transfusion in a given week did not significantly increase
the rate of NEC in this population. Consistent with the rationale for
oxygen delivery in neonates with severe respiratory disease, it also
seems appropriate to keep the Hb value relatively high in neonates with
severe cardiac disease leading to either cyanosis or congestive heart failure, but convincing and consistent data are lacking.
The optimal Hb level for neonates facing major surgery has not been
established. However, it seems reasonable to begin surgery in neonates
with the Hb level no lower than 10 g/dL (hematocrit >30%) and to
maintain that value during major surgery because even modest blood
loss will have a relatively large effect on the small blood volume of the
neonate. Neonates with underlying pulmonary problems have limited
ability to compensate for anemia due to the inability to increase ventilation and the inferior off-­loading of oxygen because of the diminished
interaction between fetal Hb and 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate. Postoperatively, a lower pretransfusion Hb value should be followed to “trigger”
a transfusion.
Stable neonates do not require RBC transfusion, regardless of their
blood Hb levels, unless they exhibit clinical symptoms attributable to
anemia. Proponents of RBC transfusions for symptomatic anemia in
preterm neonates believe that the low RBC mass contributes to tachypnea, dyspnea, tachycardia, apnea and bradycardia, feeding difficulties,
and lethargy, which can be alleviated by transfusion of RBCs. However,
anemia is only one of several possible causes of these problems, and
RBC transfusions should only be given when clinical benefit seems
likely.

RBC PRODUCT AND DOSE

The RBC product of choice to transfuse neonates, infants, children,
and adolescents is prestorage leukocyte-­reduced RBCs suspended in
an anticoagulant/preservative storage solution at Hct of approximately
60–70% for storage up to 35–42 days. For those infants with birthweight <1,500 g, irradiation is recommended to prevent transfusion-­
associated graft-­versus-­host disease. Additionally, both leukoreduction
and cytomegalovirus-­seronegative RBC units have been recommended
by some (estimated risk of transfusion-­transmission cytomegalovirus
[TT-­CMV] infection: 0–0.3% per unit) as first-­line therapy to prevent
TT-­CMV. However, given the low risks of TT-­CMV with improvements
in modern leukoreduction techniques, others have recommended use
of leukoreduced blood without need for CMV antibody testing as an
acceptably safe and low-­risk alternative. RBC transfusion should not
be delayed if CMV-­negative blood is unavailable, and CMV-­untested
leukoreduced blood should be used because the risk of TT-­CMV is
relatively low, with possibly more harm to the patient if transfusion is
withheld or delayed. The usual dose is 10–15 mL/kg, but transfusion
volumes vary greatly depending on clinical circumstances (continued
vs arrested bleeding, hemolysis). For neonates, some prefer a centrifuged RBC concentrate (Hct 70–90%). Unless transfusions are being
given to treat rapid bleeding, RBCs are infused slowly (over 2–4 hours)
at a dose of approximately 10–15 mL/kg. In this small-­volume setting,
because of the small quantity of extracellular fluid transfused and the
slow rate of infusion, the type of RBC anticoagulant/preservative solution does not pose any risk for premature infants when the dose does
not exceed 20 mL/kg. However, the additive solutions (e.g., AS-­1, AS-­3,
AS-­5) have not been studied by comparative randomized clinical trials
in the setting of >20 mL/kg dosing or massive transfusion settings such
as cardiopulmonary bypass, ECMO, or massive transfusion for trauma.
Although a few anecdotal reports suggest RBCs in additive solutions
are safe for large-­volume transfusions while awaiting more definitive
information, some hospitals that manage these complex neonates
and children maintain separate inventories of different RBC products
earmarked either for neonates and infants (e.g., citrate-­phosphate-­
dextrose or citrate-­phosphate-­dextrose-­adenine) or for older children
(e.g., additive solutions).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3016 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
STORAGE AGE OF RBC UNITS

The historical practice of transfusing fresh RBCs (<7 days of storage) for
the small-­volume (15 mL/kg) transfusions commonly given was supplanted several years ago in most centers by reserving a single unit of RBCs
for an infant, from which multiple aliquots were obtained for transfusions
as needed throughout the 42 days of storage. Concerns about high concentrations of extracellular potassium, loss of 2,3-­diphosphoglycerate, altered
RBC shape and deformability, and nitric oxide quenching were found not
to pose clinically significant problems. Preterm neonates allocated to “fresh
RBC” (<7 days’ storage) transfusions vs “stored RBC” (up to 42 days’ storage) transfusions have no advantage for fresh RBC transfusions in altering
the composite clinical outcome of mortality, plus NEC, retinopathy of prematurity, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and intraventricular hemorrhage,
or of the individual disorders.
For children weighing >30 kg who are to undergo elective surgery for
whom RBC transfusions are likely to be needed, autologous RBC transfusions offer an alternative to donor allogeneic RBCs. Preoperative autologous blood collections from the patient occur up to 6 weeks before the
surgery and require careful considerations for the volume to be drawn,
vascular access, and use of EPO and iron to help restore the donated RBCs.
Acute normovolemic hemodilution occurs in the preoperative period,
in which blood is withdrawn from the patient and replaced with saline, a
task often difficult in centers without experience in the process. Salvaged
autologous blood is collected from blood loss during the operation but is
impractical unless the volume of blood salvaged is fairly large to permit
washing and transfusion of a significant number of RBCs. Because of all
these difficulties, plus the relative safety of the usual allogeneic blood supply, autologous RBC transfusions are not typically used in the pediatric
setting.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 520

Platelet Transfusions
Patricia E. Zerra and Cassandra D. Josephson
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS

Guidelines for platelet (PLT) support of children and adolescents with
quantitative and qualitative PLT disorders are similar to those for
adults, in whom the risk of life-­threatening bleeding occurring after
injury or spontaneously can be related to the severity of thrombocytopenia, although somewhat imprecisely (Table 520.1).
For children and adolescents with overt bleeding, therapeutic PLT
transfusions should be given when the blood PLT count falls below
50 × 109/L and repeated as needed to maintain the PLT count >50 ×
109/L during bleeding and for 48 hours after bleeding ceases to allow
the clot to “stabilize.” Similarly, for a major invasive procedure (e.g.,
surgical), the PLT count should be maintained >50 × 109/L until any
bleeding that occurs ceases and the patient is stable. For minor invasive
procedures (e.g., lumbar puncture, intravascular catheter placement),
practices vary. It is reasonable to maintain the PLT count >25 × 109/L,
although these procedures often are performed in children with cancer
or recent transplants, and it is important to be mindful of possible clotting abnormalities and anemia that may affect hemostasis beyond the
effects of thrombocytopenia. Historical studies of patients with thrombocytopenia resulting from bone marrow failure suggest that the risk
of spontaneous bleeding increases when blood PLT levels fall to <20
× 109/L, particularly when hemorrhagic risk factors (infection, organ
failure, clotting abnormalities, minor skin/mucosal bleeding, mucosal
lesions, severe graft-­versus-­host disease [GVHD], anemia) are present.
In this high-­risk setting, prophylactic PLT transfusions are given to
maintain a PLT count >20 × 109/L. This threshold has been challenged
by several studies of adult patients, who in many instances were carefully

Table 520.1  Guidelines for Pediatric Platelet (PLT)
Transfusion*
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
1.	Maintain PLT count >50 × 109/L with bleeding.
2.	Maintain PLT count >50 × 109/L with major invasive procedure;
>25 × 109/L with minor.
3.	Maintain PLT count >20 × 109/L and marrow failure WITH
­hemorrhagic risk factors.
4.	Maintain PLT count >10 × 109/L and marrow failure WITHOUT
hemorrhagic risk factors.
5.	Maintain PLT count at any level with PLT dysfunction PLUS
­bleeding or invasive procedure.
INFANTS ≤4 MO OLD
1.	Maintain PLT count >100 × 109/L with bleeding or during
­extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
2.	Maintain PLT count >50 × 109/L and an invasive procedure.
3.	Maintain PLT count >20 × 109/L and clinically stable.
4.	Maintain PLT count >50 × 109/L and clinically unstable and/or
bleeding or not when on indomethacin, nitric oxide, antibiotics,
etc., affecting PLT function.
5.	Maintain PLT count at any level with PLT dysfunction PLUS
­bleeding invasive procedure.
*Words in italics must be defined for local transfusion guidelines.

selected to be in relatively good clinical condition without hemorrhagic risk factors. Consequently, a lower PLT transfusion trigger of
10 × 109/L is recommended for stable (i.e., low-­risk) patients.
In practice, severe thrombocytopenia that is prolonged beyond
1 week usually becomes complicated by the development of risk factors,
including fever, antimicrobial therapy, GVHD, active bleeding, need for
an invasive procedure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and liver
or kidney dysfunction with clotting abnormalities. In these situations,
prophylactic PLT transfusions are given to maintain relatively high PLT
counts (e.g., at least >30 × 109/L). Despite the desire by some physicians
to elevate the blood PLT count to 80 × 109/L or 100 × 109/L, there are no
definitive data to justify a true benefit of PLT transfusions given at a PLT
count >50 × 109/L, unless bleeding is ongoing despite a PLT count between
50 and 100 × 109/L and thrombocytopenia seems to be the only cause for
the bleeding.
Qualitative PLT disorders may be inherited or acquired, as in advanced
hepatic or renal insufficiency or when blood flows through an extracorporeal circuit, such as during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) or cardiopulmonary bypass. In patients with inherited disorders, PLT transfusions are justified only if the risk of significant bleeding is
quite high or if bleeding is overt because inherited PLT dysfunction often
is lifelong and repeated transfusions may lead to alloimmunization and
refractoriness (i.e., poor response to PLT transfusions). Accordingly, prophylactic PLT transfusions are rarely justified unless an invasive procedure
is planned, and therapeutic PLT transfusions must be given judiciously.
When managing patients with PLT dysfunction, it is important to
remember that an abnormal test result with a modern PLT function device
or, historically, a bleeding time more than twice the upper limit of normal
provides diagnostic evidence of PLT dysfunction. However, an abnormal
bleeding time or any other abnormal laboratory test is poorly predictive of
hemorrhagic risk or the need to transfuse PLTs. Alternative therapies, particularly desmopressin acetate, should be considered to avoid PLT transfusions. Antiplatelet medications (nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs)
should also be avoided.

INFANTS AND NEONATES

In neonates, thrombopoiesis and the risks of bleeding are substantially
different from that in older children; the approach to thrombocytopenia
and PLT transfusions likewise differs (see Table 520.1). Thrombopoietin
(TPO) levels are higher in healthy neonates than in older individuals. Relative to adult PLT progenitors, megakaryocyte progenitors of neonates are
more sensitive to TPO, have higher proliferative potential, and give rise
to larger megakaryocyte colonies. Fetal/neonatal megakaryocytes are
smaller in size and have lower ploidy than do their adult counterparts; this

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 520 u Platelet Transfusions
information is important because small megakaryocytes of low ploidy produce fewer PLTs than do larger megakaryocytes of higher ploidy. Presumably, this allows the expanding marrow of the growing fetus and neonate
to be supplied with sufficient numbers of megakaryocytes, yet not allowing
blood PLT counts to become excessively high during proliferation because
of the lower numbers of PLTs produced by each megakaryocyte.
An important contrasting point is that older children and adults
respond to situations of increased demand for PLTs by first increasing
megakaryocyte size and ploidy, which is followed in 3–5 days by increased
megakaryocyte number. In thrombocytopenic neonates, megakaryocyte
numbers but not size increase. Moreover, although cytoplasmic maturation is achieved per TPO stimulation, increases in ploidy are relatively
diminished and actually appear to be inhibited by TPO, resulting in large
numbers of small megakaryocytes that are cytoplasmically mature but
with low ploidy and, consequently, lower PLT production.
PLT counts ≥150 × 109/L are present after 17 weeks’ gestational age, and
it is accepted that neonates have PLT counts in the same range as older
children and adults (150,000–450,000/μL). However, other data suggest a
lower limit of 120,000/μL for extremely small preterm infants. Approximately 1% of term infants demonstrate PLT counts <150 × 109/L, but
bleeding in such infants is rare. In contrast, 18–35% of preterm neonates
treated in intensive care units (ICUs) exhibit PLT counts <150 × 109/L at
some time during admission, with approximately 4% overall receiving
PLT transfusions. Notably, when only extremely low birthweight preterm
infants (<1 kg) were considered in one report, 70% had PLT counts <150 ×
109/L, and 5–9% of infants received platelet transfusions.
Debate continues in the United States as to the appropriate prophylactic
platelet transfusion threshold for neonates, with a wide range in practice
patterns. Multiple pathogenetic mechanisms underlie thrombocytopenia
in these sick neonates, including predominantly accelerated PLT destruction plus diminished PLT production, as evidenced by decreased numbers
of megakaryocyte progenitors and relatively low upregulation of TPO levels during thrombocytopenia, when compared with thrombocytopenic
children and adults.
PLT counts <100 × 109/L pose significant clinical risks for premature
neonates. Bleeding time may be prolonged at PLT counts <100 × 109/L in
infants with birthweight <1,500 g, and PLT dysfunction is suggested by
bleeding times (a test no longer performed) that are disproportionately
long for the degree of thrombocytopenia. The risk of hemorrhage may be
increased in thrombocytopenic infants. However, in a randomized trial,
transfusing PLTs prophylactically whenever the PLT count fell to <150 ×
109/L (i.e., at the lower limit of normal range) to maintain the average PLT
count at >200 × 109/L, compared to not transfusing PLTs until the PLT
count fell to <50 × 109/L to maintain the average PLT count at approximately 100 × 109/L, did not result in a lower incidence of intracranial hemorrhage (28% vs 26%, respectively). A U.S. multicenter observational study
of very low birthweight infants in six neonatal ICUs found wide variation
in PLT thresholds for transfusion, ranging from 10,000 to 139,000/μL in
the first week of life and <10,000/μL to >50,000/μL after the first week.
The most common thresholds were 80,000–89,000/μL in the first 7 days of
life and 40,000–49,000/μL after the first 7 days. Furthermore, after controlling for severity of thrombocytopenia, the authors found PLT transfusions
were not associated with a lower risk of intraventricular hemorrhage. Thus,
there is no documented benefit for prophylactic PLT transfusions to maintain PLT counts within the normal range or to correct moderate thrombocytopenia (PLT count >50 × 109/L). As an exception, infants with inherited
PLT dysfunction disorders and bleeding, as well as infants at high risk of
bleeding because of acquired PLT dysfunction, such as during ECMO,
typically receive transfusions to keep their PLT counts >100 × 109/L.
One randomized clinical trial reported a significantly higher rate of new
major hemorrhage or death within 28 days of randomization in very low
birthweight neonates given prophylactic PLT transfusions at a pretransfusion PLT count of 50,000/μL (26%) vs a pretransfusion PLT count of
25,000/μL (19%), irrespective of their baseline risk of bleeding. Results are
too preliminary to permit changes in practice but support other published
findings indicating no need to maintain normal PLT counts and add to the
belief that a PLT count of 50,000/μL is too high to serve as the pretransfusion PLT count for transfusions in stable low birthweight neonates.
Table 520.1 lists pediatric PLT transfusion guidelines that are acceptable to many neonatologists. One particularly contentious issue is how to

3017

manage critically ill neonates receiving agents known to adversely affect
PLT function (e.g., indomethacin, nitric oxide, antibiotics). Some reports
suggest increased risk of bleeding for these neonates, but the efficacy of
PLT transfusions has not been convincingly proven, particularly when
given prophylactically. For optimal PLT transfusion practices, each hospital should modify their guidelines to comply with local practices, with
audits and reviews done to avoid violations of the recommended practices.

PLATELET PRODUCTS AND DOSING

In the United States, two types/sources of PLT units are available, although
any one blood bank or hospital may stock only one of these types. Whole
blood–derived PLT units (PLT concentrates) and PLT units collected by
apheresis (apheresis PLTs) differ in their PLT content and plasma volume.
Although a PLT concentrate contains approximately 5.5-­10 × 1010 PLTs in
approximately 50 mL, and 1 apheresis PLT unit contains at least 3 × 1011
PLTs in 300–600 mL, the PLT content may vary considerably among different blood suppliers. Accordingly, it is prudent for hospital blood banks
to confirm the composition of the PLT units they issue for transfusion, at
the very least by contacting their blood supplier. It is often easier to use
PLT concentrates for infants and small children because apheresis PLTs
usually need to be prepared as aliquots to provide the correct dose (10–15
mL/kg). However, many blood centers exclusively provide only one type
of PLT component. Platelet products generally have a 5-­day expiration
time, although 7-­day storage has been approved for apheresis platelet units
within certain stipulations to reduce the risk of bacterial contamination
and are stored at room temperature with constant agitation.
The posttransfusion goal of most PLT transfusions is to raise the
PLT count well above 50 × 109/L, hopefully to ≥100 × 109/L. These
increases can be achieved consistently in children weighing up to
30 kg by infusion of 5–10 mL/kg of standard (unmodified) PLT concentrates, obtained either from PLT concentrates or apheresis PLTs. For
larger children, the appropriate dose is 4-­8 pooled PLT concentrates or
1 apheresis unit. Because PLT concentration/quantity varies in different
PLT products made available for transfusion, each hospital should monitor
posttransfusion PLT counts to determine the dose that works best locally.
PLT concentrates may be transfused as rapidly as the patient’s overall
condition permits, certainly within 2 hours, but not longer than 4 hours.
Neonates/infants requiring repeated PLT transfusions should receive
leukocyte-­reduced blood products to diminish HLA alloimmunization
and PLT refractoriness and to reduce the risk of transfusion-­transmission
cytomegalovirus infection (TT-­CMV). For those infants weighing <1,500
g at birth, irradiation is recommended to prevent transfusion associated
GVHD. Additionally, some recommend both leukoreduction and CMV-­
seronegative RBC units (estimated risk of TT-­CMV infection: 0–0.3%
per unit) as first-­line therapy to prevent TT-­CMV. However, given the
low risks of TT-­CMV with improvements in modern leukoreduction
techniques, others have recommended use of leukoreduced blood from
CMV-­untested donors as an acceptably safe and low-­risk alternative. PLT
transfusion should not be delayed if CMV-­negative units are unavailable;
CMV-­untested leukoreduced units should be used because the risk of TT-­
CMV is relatively low and more harm may come to the patient if transfusion is withheld or delayed.
Routinely reducing the volume of PLT concentrates for infants and
small children by additional centrifugation steps is both unnecessary and
unwise. Transfusion of 10–­15 mL/kg of an unmodified PLT concentrate is
adequate because it adds approximately 10 × 109 PLTs to 70 mL of blood
(estimated intravascular blood volume of 1 kg neonate), a dose/volume
calculated to increase the PLT count by 100 × 109/L. This calculated increment is consistent with actual posttransfusion increment reported in
patients. Moreover, 10–15 mL/kg is not an excessive transfusion volume,
provided that the intake of other IV fluids, medications, and nutrients is
monitored and adjusted.
It is important to select PLT units for transfusion with the donor
ABO group identical to that of the neonate/infant and to avoid repeated
transfusion of group O PLTs to group A or B recipients, because passive
transfusion anti-­A or anti-­B in group O plasma can occasionally lead to
intravascular hemolysis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3018 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 521

Neutrophil (Granulocyte)
Transfusions
Patricia E. Zerra and Cassandra D. Josephson
Table 521.1 lists guidelines for granulocyte transfusion (GTX). GTX has
been used sparingly in older infants and children. The current ability
to collect markedly higher numbers of neutrophils from donors stimulated with combined recombinant granulocyte colony-­
stimulating
factor (G-­CSF) plus dexamethasone has led to renewed interest for
patients with neutropenic infections, particularly when severe neutropenia is prolonged (e.g., in the setting of placental/cord blood hematopoietic progenitor cell transplantation). As a result, higher neutrophil
yields are collected with this approach, making the addition of GTX to
antibiotics a therapeutic consideration. This is especially true at institutions where neutropenic patients continue to die of progressive bacterial and fungal infections or to suffer substantial morbidity despite
optimal antiinfection measures, including antibiotics and recombinant
myeloid growth factors.

GRANULOCYTE TRANSFUSIONS FOR CHILDREN

The use of GTX added to antibiotics for children with severe neutropenia (neutrophil count <0.5 × 109/L) because of bone marrow failure is
similar to that for adults. Unfortunately, two randomized clinical trials
comparing antibiotics plus GTX from donors stimulated with G-­CSF
plus dexamethasone vs antibiotics without GTX to treat neutropenic
infections in children have not provided definitive guidelines. However, in practice, neutropenic patients with bacterial infections usually
show response to antibiotics alone, provided bone marrow function
recovers within the first 7–10 days of infection onset, so that severe
neutropenia is relatively brief. Children with newly diagnosed acute
lymphoblastic leukemia show rapid response to induction chemotherapy and are rarely candidates for GTX. In contrast, infected children with more sustained bone marrow failure and consequent severe
neutropenia (e.g., acute myeloblastic leukemia, malignant neoplasms
resistant to treatment, severe aplastic anemia, placental/cord blood
hematopoietic progenitor cell transplant recipients) may benefit when
GTX is added to antibiotics.
Currently, the efficacy of GTX obtained from G-­CSF plus dexamethasone–stimulated donors for bacterial sepsis unresponsive to antibiotics in patients with severe neutropenia (neutrophil count <0.5 × 109/L)
Table 521.1  Guidelines for Pediatric Granulocyte
Transfusions*
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
1.	Severe neutropenia (blood neutrophil count <0.5 × 109/L) and
infection (bacterial, yeast, or fungal) unresponsive or progressive
despite appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
2.	Qualitative neutrophil defect, neutropenia not required, and
infection (bacterial or fungal) unresponsive or progressive to
­appropriate antimicrobial therapy.
INFANTS ≤4 MO OLD†
Blood neutrophil count <3.0 × 109/L in first week of life or <1.0 ×
109/L thereafter and fulminant bacterial infection.
*Words in italics must be defined for local transfusion guidelines.
†No longer commonly used.

is not well supported by trials in children. Furthermore, GTX efficacy
for yeast and fungal infections remains unproven, despite transfusing
GTX with relatively large numbers of neutrophils.
Children with qualitative neutrophil defects (neutrophil dysfunction) usually have adequate or even increased numbers of blood
neutrophils but develop serious infections because their neutrophils
kill pathogenic microorganisms inefficiently. Neutrophil dysfunction syndromes are rare; accordingly, no definitive studies have
established GTX efficacy. However, several patients with progressive
life-­threatening infections have shown striking improvement with
the addition of GTX, often given for long periods, to antimicrobial
therapy. These disorders are chronic and thus associated with an
increased risk of alloimmunization to leukocyte antigens, specifically to Kell system antigens on the red blood cells in some patients
with chronic granulomatous disease, and GTX is recommended
only when serious infections are clearly unresponsive to antimicrobial drugs.

GRANULOCYTE TRANSFUSION FOR NEONATES

Neonates are unusually susceptible to severe bacterial infections, and
a number of defects of neonatal defenses contribute to this susceptibility, including actual or “relative” neutropenia. Neonates with fulminant
sepsis who exhibit relative neutropenia (blood neutrophil count <3.0
× 109/L during the first week of life and <1.0 × 109/L thereafter) and
a severely diminished neutrophil marrow storage pool (with <10% of
nucleated marrow cells being postmitotic neutrophils) are at risk of
dying if treated only with antibiotics. Despite this risk, GTX has not
provided the solution. GTX is rarely used in neonates because the
results of clinical trials are mixed and not uniformly convincing, and
it is difficult to obtain neutrophil apheresis concentrates in a timely
fashion.
Current data are insufficient to conclude that recombinant myeloid
growth factors have a role in treating septic neonates, despite demonstration that both G-­CSF and granulocyte-­macrophage CSF enhance
myelopoiesis and raise neutrophil counts in infants. In contrast to
the uncertain role of G-­CSF and GM-­CSF to treat infections in many
clinical settings, it is important to remember that G-­CSF is efficacious for the long-­term treatment of several types of severe congenital
neutropenias.

GRANULOCYTE PRODUCT

If the decision to provide a GTX has been made, an adequate dose of
neutrophils/granulocytes collected by leukapheresis must be transfused as shortly after collection as possible. To facilitate this goal, experienced donors with recently performed negative testing for HIV and
hepatitis (usually within the past 30 days) are selected. Granulocyte
donors should be documented to be cytomegalovirus antibody negative (seronegative). These donors should also be ABO/Rh crossmatch
compatible with the recipient because there is a large volume of red
blood cells in the granulocyte product.

Granulocyte Product Dosing

Neonates and infants weighing <10 kg should receive 1-­2 × 109/kg
neutrophils per each GTX. Larger infants and small children should
receive a minimal total dose of 1 × 1010 neutrophils per each GTX. The
preferred dose for adolescents is 5-­8 × 1010 neutrophils per each GTX,
a dose requiring donors to be stimulated with G-­CSF plus dexamethasone. GTX should be given daily until either the infection resolves or
the blood neutrophil count is sustained above 1.5 × 109/L for a few
days. Because neutrophils transfused through the GTX often passively
increase the blood neutrophil count, it may be necessary to skip 1-­2
days of GTXs to accurately assess whether endogenous myelopoiesis
and neutrophil production have recovered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 522 u Plasma Transfusions

Chapter 522

Plasma Transfusions
Patricia E. Zerra and Cassandra D. Josephson
Guidelines for plasma transfusion in pediatric patients are similar to those
for adults but with the understanding that plasma levels of coagulant and
anticoagulant proteins can be developmentally low in preterm infants
(Table 522.1). Therefore transfusions of plasma and plasma-­derived commercial concentrates should be determined by actual bleeding or a significant risk of bleeding, not simply by prolonged clotting time results. Plasma
is transfused to replace clinically significant congenital or acquired deficiencies of plasma proteins for which more highly purified protein concentrates, treated to reduce infectious disease risks, or recombinant products
are not available. Plasma and plasma derivatives are required to provide
clotting proteins when bleeding is actually occurring or in settings when
prevention of bleeding is deemed critical.

PLASMA PRODUCTS AND PATIENT TESTING

Two interchangeable plasma products are available for transfusion, plasma
frozen within 8 hours of collection (fresh-­frozen plasma [FFP]) and
plasma frozen within 24 hours of collection (F24). Although levels of factors V and VIII are modestly reduced in F24 (generally, not more than 25%
lower), they are equally efficacious for all indications for which plasma is
transfused in infants and children (see Table 522.1). Recommendations for
the volume of plasma to be transfused vary with the specific protein being
replaced and the severity of the deficiency, but a starting dose of 15 mL/kg
is usually sufficient to elevate plasma levels satisfactorily.
Transfusion of plasma is efficacious for the treatment of deficiencies of
clotting factors II, V, X, and XI. Deficiencies of factor XIII and fibrinogen
are treated either with cryoprecipitate or specific commercial concentrates;
for patients being given large doses of plasma (e.g., in massive transfusion
settings or to treat bleeding in liver failure), however, additional sources of
fibrinogen may not be necessary because plasma contains large amounts of
fibrinogen. It is always useful to include a measurement of plasma fibrinogen (a separate test) when performing clotting assays, including prothrombin time (PT)/international normalized ratio (INR) and activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT).

PLASMA TRANSFUSION IN CHILDREN

Transfusion of plasma is not recommended for the treatment of patients
with severe hemophilia A or B, von Willebrand disease, or factor VII deficiency because safer plasma-­derived and recombinant factor products for
VII, VIII, IX, and von Willebrand factor are available. Moreover, mild to
moderate hemophilia A and certain types of von Willebrand disease can
be treated with intranasal or intravenous desmopressin (see Chapter 526).
An important use of plasma is for rapid reversal of the effects of warfarin

Table 522.1  Guidelines for Children and Infants for
Plasma Transfusions*
1.	Severe clotting factor deficiency AND bleeding.
2.	Severe clotting factor deficiency AND an invasive procedure.
3.	Emergency reversal of warfarin effects.
4.	Dilutional coagulopathy and bleeding (e.g., massive transfusion).
5.	Anticoagulant protein (antithrombin III, proteins C and S)
replacement.
6.	Plasma exchange replacement fluid for thrombotic thrombo­
cytopenic purpura or for disorders with overt bleeding or in which
there is risk of bleeding because of clotting protein abnormalities
(e.g., liver failure).
*Words in italics must be defined for local transfusion guidelines.

3019

in patients who are actively bleeding or who require emergency surgery (in
whom functional deficiencies of vitamin K–dependent factors II, VII, IX,
and X cannot be rapidly reversed by vitamin K administration). Plasma-­
derived and virally inactivated prothrombin “complex” concentrates can
also be used for this purpose.
Results of screening coagulation tests (PT/INR, aPTT, thrombin time,
and plasma fibrinogen level) should not be assumed to reflect the integrity
of the coagulation system or be regarded as indications for plasma transfusions. This is particularly true for neonates. To justify plasma transfusions,
coagulation test results must be related to the patient’s clinical condition
in regard to bleeding and the risk of bleeding. Transfusion of plasma in
patients with chronic liver disease and prolonged clotting times is not recommended unless bleeding is present, or an invasive procedure is planned
because prophylactic correction of the clotting factor deficiencies is brief
and of questionable benefit.
Plasma also contains several anticoagulant proteins (antithrombin III,
protein C, and protein S) whose deficiencies have been associated with
thrombosis. In select situations, plasma as replacement therapy along
with anticoagulant treatment may be appropriate in patients with these
disorders; when available, purified concentrates are preferred. Other indications for plasma include replacement fluid during plasma exchange in
patients with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (i.e., thrombotic
microangiopathies) or other disorders for which plasma is likely to be
beneficial. This includes plasma exchange in a patient with overt bleeding
caused by the underlying disorder (e.g., Goodpasture syndrome, vasculitis) or disorders with significant severe coagulopathy that would substantially worsen with replacement by albumin solutions only. Plasma is not
indicated for correction of hypovolemia or as immunoglobulin replacement
therapy because safer alternatives exist (albumin or crystalloid solutions and
IV immunoglobulin, respectively).

PLASMA TRANSFUSION IN NEONATES

In neonates, clotting times are “physiologically” prolonged because of
developmental deficiency of clotting proteins; plasma should be transfused
only after reference to normal values is adjusted for the birthweight and
age of the infant (not to normal ranges for older children and adults). The
indications for plasma in neonates include (1) reconstitution of red blood
cell (RBC) concentrates to simulate whole blood for use in massive transfusions (exchange transfusion, cardiac bypass surgery, and extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation), (2) hemorrhage secondary to vitamin K deficiency, (3) disseminated intravascular coagulation with bleeding, and (4)
bleeding in congenital coagulation factor deficiency when more specific
treatment is either unavailable or inappropriate. The use of prophylactic
plasma transfusion to prevent intraventricular hemorrhage in premature
infants is not recommended. Plasma should not be used as a suspending
agent to adjust the hematocrit values of RBC concentrates before small-­
volume RBC transfusions to neonates because it offers no apparent medical benefit over the use of sterile solutions such as crystalloid and albumin.
Similarly, the use of plasma in partial exchange transfusion for the treatment of neonatal hyperviscosity syndrome is unnecessary because safer
crystalloid or colloid solutions are available.
In the treatment of bleeding infants, cryoprecipitate is often considered
because of its small infusion volume. However, cryoprecipitate contains
significant quantities of only fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, and factors
VIII and XIII. Thus it is not effective for treating the usual clinical situation in bleeding infants with multiple clotting factor deficiencies. However,
cryoprecipitate is an excellent source of fibrinogen (much more concentrated than frozen plasma), and with a dose of 1–2 units/kg, the patient’s
fibrinogen level can be quickly raised by 60–­100 mg/dL.
In preliminary studies, infusions of very small volumes of recombinant activated factor VII have been lifesaving in patients with hemorrhage caused by several mechanisms. Because the efficacy and toxicity
of factor VIIa have not been fully defined in these “off-­label” uses (not
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration), it must be considered “experimental” therapy at this time.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3020 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 523

Risks of Blood
Transfusions

Table 523.1  Estimated Risks in Transfusion per Unit
Transfused in the United States
ADVERSE EFFECT (INFECTIOUS)

ESTIMATED RISK

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-­1 and HIV-­2 1:2 million
Hepatitis B

1:2 million

Hepatitis C

1:2 million

Human T-­cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV) I and II

1:3 million

Bacterial contamination (usually platelets)

1:100,000

The greatest risk of a blood transfusion is mistakenly receiving a
transfusion intended for another patient. Misidentification is usually a
result of mistakes made in labeling the patient's blood sample sent to
the blood bank or not accurately matching the unit with the patient at
the bedside when the blood is transfused. This risk is particularly high
for infants, especially if ABO type-­specific or type-­compatible blood
is transfused, because (1) identification bands may not be attached
directly to their bodies, (2) difficulties in drawing blood samples for
pretransfusion compatibility testing may lead to deviations from usual
policies, and (3) infants cannot speak to identify themselves. Thus particular care must be taken to ensure accurate patient and blood sample
identification.

Malaria

<1:3 million

Hepatitis A

Unknown

Parvovirus

Unknown

Dengue fever

Unknown

Cytomegalovirus

<1:3 million

Babesiosis

Unknown

West Nile virus

<1:3 million

Trypanosoma cruzi

<1:3 million

Leishmania spp.

Unknown

Variant Creutzfeldt-­Jakob prion disease

Unknown

INFECTIOUS RISKS OF TRANSFUSION

Zika virus

<1:3 million

Syphilis

Unknown

ADVERSE EFFECT (NONINFECTIOUS)

ESTIMATED RISK

Febrile nonhemolytic reaction

1:800

Mild-­moderate allergic reaction

1:1,000

Severe allergic reactions

1:40,000

Transfusion-­associated circulatory overload
(TACO)

1:8,500

Hypotensive

1:11,000

Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction

1:95,000

Transfusion-­associated dyspnea

1:15,000

Transfusion-­related acute lung injury (TRALI)

1:70,000

Delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction

1:20,000

Transfusion-­associated graft-­versus-­host
disease

Uncommon

Immunomodulation

Unknown

Posttransfusion purpura

1:30,000

Life-­threatening reactions, requiring major
medical intervention

1:20,000

Patricia E. Zerra and Cassandra D. Josephson

Although the infectious disease risks of allogeneic blood transfusions
are extremely low, transfusions must be given judiciously because
“emerging infections,” such as Ebola or Zika virus, when they first
arise, pose a potential threat until they are studied definitively and,
accordingly, are of constant concern, and testing is not done for every
microorganism possibly transmitted by blood transfusions (Table
523.1 and Fig. 523.1). Taking nucleic acid amplification testing (NAT)
and all other donor-­screening activities (antibody and epidemiology
screening) into account, a current estimate of the risk of transfusion-­
associated HIV infection is approximately 1 per every 2 million donor
exposures. Similarly, with NAT, the risk of hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection is 1 per every 1.5-­2 million donor exposures (see Table 523.1).
NAT identifies circulating microbial nucleic acids that appear in the
window before antibodies develop, and NAT is used routinely to detect
HIV, HCV, West Nile virus, hepatitis B virus, Trypanosoma cruzi, Babesia microti, and Zika virus.
Transfusion-­associated cytomegalovirus (CMV) has been nearly
eliminated by transfusion of leukocyte-­reduced cellular blood products or by selection of blood collected from donors who are seronegative for antibody to CMV. Although it is logical to hypothesize that
first collecting blood components from CMV-­seronegative donors and
then removing the white blood cells (WBCs) might further improve
safety, little data are available to document the superior efficacy of this
combined approach. However, in a recent prospective birth cohort
study of premature infants with birthweight ≤1,500 g, a combined
approach of leukoreduction and CMV-­
seronegative cellular blood
components yielded 0% transfusion transmission of CMV (15.3%
cumulative incidence at 12 weeks of maternal breast milk transmission
from CMV-­seropositive mothers) in >300 transfused infants studied.
Similar uncontrolled reports of hematopoietic stem cell transplant
patients found 0% transmission of CMV from leukoreduced blood
products from donors of unknown CMV antibody status. Therefore
considerable care must be taken not to place children at risk of delayed
or missed transfusions while awaiting/searching for blood from CMV-­
seronegative donors, then to leukoreduce (i.e., risks must not be taken
for practices with no established benefits).
Further data on these two mitigation strategies revealed that large
quantities of CMV viral material are present “free” in the plasma of
healthy-­appearing donors during the early phase of primary infection (while CMV antibodies are either absent [“window” phase] or are
newly emerging and at low, inconsistently detected levels in plasma),
rather than being leukocyte associated, as occurs with CMV as substantial quantities of IgG antibodies appear. As a result of this biology

Adapted from Busch MP, Bloch EM, Kleinman S. Prevention of transfusion-­transmitted
infections. Blood 2019;133:1854–1864; and Savinkina AA, Haass KA, Sapiano MRP, et al.
Transfusion-­associated adverse events and implementation of blood safety measures
– findings from the 2017 National Blood Collection and Utilization Survey. Transfusion
2020;60:S10–S16.

of CMV primary infection, plasma “free” virus will not be removed by
leukoreduction during early infection, and CMV-­seronegative donors
who may be asymptomatic or deny symptoms of infection during blood
donor screening will be misclassified as being CMV safe. They are not
necessarily as safe because antibody is below the limits of detection,
while plasma “free” CMV is plentiful during early infection. Because
almost all plasma “free” CMV disappears and becomes almost exclusively cell associated, once donors are CMV seropositive with antibody
present for several months, some propose that the best method to
reduce CMV risk may be leukoreduction of blood from donors known
to be CMV seropositive for at least 1 year. However, data to prove the
efficacy of this proposal are lacking, and in practice, several studies
have shown that the most efficacious method currently available to prevent transfusion-­transmitted CMV is to perform leukoreduction in the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 523 u Risks of Blood Transfusions
Risk per Unit

3021

1:10,000

CHIKV
XMRV

influenza

DENV
Babesia

SARS

WNV

SFV

PTLVs

T cruzi

ICL

HBV

bacteria

1:1000

vCJD

HCV

Monkey Pox
Leishmania

Emerging Infectious Disease Threats

1:100

HIV

1:100,000

1:1,000,000

<1984 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010
Revised
Donor
Deferral
Criteria

HBsAg
Screening

HIV Ab
Screening

HCV Ab
Screening

NANB Hepatitis Surrogate Testing

p24 Ag
Testing

HCV and
HIV NAT

WNV NAT

T cruzi Ab
Screening

HBV NAT

vCJD Deferral Criteria

Fig. 523.1 Risks of major transfusion-­transmitted viruses related to interventions and accelerating rate of emerging infectious diseases of concern

to blood safety. Evolution of the risks of transmission by blood transfusion for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and
hepatitis C virus (HCV). Major interventions to reduce risks are shown below the timeline on the x axis. Emerging infectious disease threats in the
past 20 years are shown above in the top right quadrant of the figure. Ab, Antibody; Ag, antigen; CHIKV, chikungunya virus; DENV, dengue virus;
HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; ICL, idiopathic CD4 T-­lymphocytopenia; NANB, non-­A, non-­B hepatitis; NAT, nucleic acid amplification testing;
PTLVs, primate T-­lymphotropic viruses; SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome; SFV, simian foamy virus; vCJD, variant Creutzfeldt-­Jakob disease;
WNV, West Nile virus; XMRV, xenotropic murine leukemia virus–related virus. (From Busch MP. Transfusion-­transmitted viral infections: Building
bridges to transfusion medicine to reduce risks and understand epidemiology and pathogenesis. 2005 Emily Cooley Award Lecture. Transfusion.
2006;46:1624–1640.)

blood center/bank without regard for the CMV antibody status of the
donor/unit (i.e., leukoreduction alone performed by the blood center/
bank, not at the bedside, is sufficient in most cases).
Additional infectious risks include other types of hepatitis (A, B,
E) and retroviruses (human T-­cell lymphotropic virus types I and
II, HIV-­2), syphilis, parvovirus B19, Epstein-­Barr virus, human herpesvirus 8, West Nile virus, yellow fever vaccine virus, malaria, babesiosis, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Chagas disease, and Zika virus.
Variant Creutzfeldt-­Jacob disease has also been transmitted by blood
transfusions in humans. All are reported very infrequently, but nonetheless provide the rationale to transfuse only when true benefits are
likely.

NONINFECTIOUS RISKS OF TRANSFUSION

Transfusion-­associated risks of a noninfectious nature that may occur
include hemolytic and nonhemolytic transfusion reactions, circulatory fluid overload, graft-­versus-­host disease (GVHD), electrolyte and
acid-­base imbalances, iron overload if repeated red blood cell (RBC)
transfusions are needed long term, increased susceptibility to oxidant
damage, exposure to plasticizers, hemolysis with T-­antigen activation of
RBCs, posttransfusion purpura, transfusion-­related acute lung injury
(TRALI), posttransfusion immunosuppression and immunomodulation, and alloimmunization (Fig. 523.2; see Table 523.1). The risk of
TRALI may be reduced by avoiding transfusion of plasma or platelets
from female donors, who were possibly alloimmunized to leukocyte
antigens during pregnancy or by selecting donors (e.g., males) who are
likely to be negative for human leukocyte antigen (HLA) antibodies.
Immunologic adverse effects, including immunosuppression,
immunomodulation, and alloimmunization, may be reduced by leukoreduction. Transfusion reactions and alloimmunization to RBC and
leukocyte antigens seem to be uncommon in infants, perhaps because
of developmental immaturity of the immune system or deficient cytokine production. When they do occur, adverse effects are seen primarily in massive transfusion settings, such as exchange transfusions and
trauma or surgery, in which relatively large quantities of blood components are needed but are rare when small-­volume transfusions are
usually given.

Premature infants are known to have immune dysfunction, but
their relative risk of posttransfusion GVHD is controversial. The
postnatal age of the infant, the number of immunocompetent lymphocytes in the transfusion product, the degree of HLA compatibility
between donor and recipient, and other, poorly described phenomena determine which infants are truly at risk for GVHD. Regardless,
many centers caring for preterm infants transfuse exclusively irradiated cellular products. As an alternative, pathogen-­reduction technology has been documented to prevent GVHD and can substitute
for irradiation. Directed donations with blood drawn from blood
relatives must always be irradiated because of the risk of engraftment
with transfused HLA-­homozygous, haploidentical lymphocytes. Cellular blood products given as intrauterine or exchange transfusions
should be irradiated, as should transfusions for patients with severe
congenital immunodeficiency disorders (severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome and DiGeorge syndrome requiring heart surgery) and transfusions for recipients of hematopoietic progenitor cell
transplants. Other groups who are potentially at risk but for whom
no conclusive data are available include patients given T-­cell antibody therapy (antithymocyte globulin or OKT3), those with organ
allografts, those receiving immunosuppressive drug regimens, and
those infected with HIV.
As an alternative, pathogen-­reduction technology has been documented to prevent T-­cell proliferation, and thus TA-­GVHD may be
used as a substitute for irradiation. Current practice uses irradiation
from a cesium, cobalt, or linear acceleration source at doses ranging
from 1,500 to 2,500 centigray (cGy); a maximum dose of 2,500 cGy
is required to hit the center of the irradiation field and a minimum of
1,500 cGy delivered to any other portion of the cannister. All cellular
blood components should be irradiated, except those frozen without a
cryoprotectant agent and to be rendered as “acellular” products, such as
plasma and cryoprecipitate, which do not require irradiation. Leukocyte reduction cannot be substituted for irradiation to prevent GVHD.
However, as mentioned, pathogen-­reduction technologies have been
demonstrated to be efficacious.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3022 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
All transfusions must be stopped when a patient is experiencing a reaction and assessed by a provider
Provide supportive therapy to support vital organ function (cardiac, pulmonary, renal)
For questions regarding transfusion reaction diagnosis or management, call the transfusion service, or other appropriate physician
Reaction

Symptoms

Interventions

Increase in temperature
Possible febrile nonhemolytic reaction

Possible bacterial
contamination

Possible hemolysis

Incremental increase <1°C above
baseline and no other new symptoms

• Close observation, frequent vital signs
• If stable and no other new symptoms then continue with transfusion

Incremental increase 1°C above
baseline, or incremental increase
<1°C with any other new symptoms
(chills or rigors, hypotension,
nausea or vomiting)

• Stop transfusion, keep intravenous line open, assess patient, check patient ID and
unit ID and compatibility
• Antipyretic drug
• Consider blood cultures (patient); empirical antibiotics if neutropenic
• Do not resume transfusion
• Strongly consider culturing blood product if 2°C increase in temperature or if high
clinical suspicion of sepsis
• Notify blood transfusion laboratory; return unit (with administration set) plus
post-transfusion patient sample to blood transfusion laboratory

For consistently febrile patient due to underlying disease or treatment, when possible:
• Avoid starting transfusion if patient’s temperature is increasing
• Treat fever with antipyretic drug before starting transfusion
• If incremental increase in temperature 1°C above baseline treat as per above (stop and do not resume transfusion,
cultures if indicated)
• Notify blood transfusion laboratory, return unit (with administration set) plus post-transfusion patient sample to blood transfusion
laboratory

Allergic symptoms

Urticaria

Mild hives, rash, or skin itching only

• Stop transfusion, keep intravenous line open, and assess patient
• Antihistamines
• Notify patient clinician and blood transfusion laboratory; sample not required
• If symptoms resolve, then can resume transfusion
• If symptoms do not improve or worsen or recur then discontinue transfusion; return unit
(with administration set) to blood transfusion laboratory

Possible allergic
reaction

Hives, rash, itching, and or any other
new symptoms (throat, eye, and
tongue swelling, etc)

• Stop transfusion, keep intravenous line open, assess patient, check patient ID and
unit ID and compatibility
• Antihistamines
• Do not resume transfusion
• Notify blood transfusion laboratory; return unit (with administration set) plus
post-transfusion patient sample to blood transfusion laboratory

Respiratory symptoms

Possible anaphylaxis,
transfusionBronchospasm, dyspnea, tachypnoea
associated circulatory
and hypoxemia, copious frothy
overload, septic
transfusion reaction, pink-tinged fluid (from endotracheal tube)
or transfusion-related
acute lung injury

• Stop transfusion, keep intravenous line open, assess patient, check patient ID and
unit ID and patient compatibility
• Treat symptoms as indicated (adrenaline, antihistamines, steroids; oxygen and
respiratory support, diuretics; fluid, blood pressure, and renal support)
• Chest radiograph for presence of bilateral interstitial infiltrate, if suggestive of
transfusion-related acute lung injury
• Blood cultures (patient and product), if high clinical suspicion of sepsis
• Do not resume transfusion
• Notify blood transfusion laboratory; return unit with administration set, plus
post-transfusion patient sample. Associated products can be quarantined

All other symptoms

Possible anaphylaxis,
hemolytic
transfusion reaction,
fluid overload, or
transfusion-related
acute lung injury

Chills, rigors, hypotension, nausea or
vomiting, feeling of impending doom,
back or chest pain, intravenous site
pain, cough, dyspnea, hypoxia

• Stop transfusion, keep intravenous line open, assess unit, check patient ID and unit ID
and patient compatibility
• Treat symptoms as indicated (adrenaline, antihistamines, steroids; oxygen and
respiratory support, diuretics; fluid, blood pressure, and renal support)
• Blood cultures (patient and product) if high clinical suspicion of sepsis
• Do not resume transfusion
• Notify blood transfusion laboratory; return unit with administration set, plus
post-transfusion patient sample. Associated products can be quarantined

Fig. 523.2 Transfusion reaction decision tree. Algorithm to guide assessment and actions to take when a transfusion reaction is initially identified.

Actions should proceed from left to right. (From Delaney M, Wendel S, Bercovitz RS. Transfusion reactions: prevention, diagnosis, and treatment.
Lancet 2016;388:2825–2836. Fig 2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 524 u Hemostasis 3023

Section 7

Hemorrhagic and
Thrombotic Diseases
Chapter 524

Hemostasis
Brian R. Branchford, Benjamin J. Samelson-­
Jones, Leslie J. Raffini, and Veronica H.
Flood
Hemostasis is the biological process that limits hemorrhage after blood
vessel injury. An initial platelet plug (primary hemostasis) is bolstered
by the product of the coagulation cascade: a factor XIII-­cross-­linked
fibrin clot (secondary hemostasis). Extraneous fibrin is lysed by plasmin (fibrinolysis), and normal blood flow is restored through the previously damaged vessel. If hemostasis is impaired, varying degrees of
bleeding may occur depending on the hemostatic defect and the site
of injury. Excess coagulation activity can lead to thrombotic complications. The hemostatic response therefore needs to be rapid and locally
regulated, such that trauma neither results in hemorrhage nor triggers
a systemic thrombotic reaction. When a platelet adheres to a site of vascular injury, the activated platelet surface provides a phospholipid reaction surface where clotting factors bind and create a “thrombin burst.”
Active clotting is controlled by negative feedback loops that inhibit the
clotting process when procoagulant products come in contact with
intact endothelium. The main components of the hemostatic process
are the vessel wall, platelets, coagulation factors, anticoagulant proteins, and fibrinolytic system. Many components of the hemostasis
system are multifunctional. Fibrinogen serves as the ligand between
platelets during platelet aggregation and as the substrate for thrombin
to produce fibrin. Platelets provide the reaction surface on which clotting reactions occur, form the plug at the site of vessel injury, release
procoagulant compounds from their granules, and contract to constrict and limit clot size.

THE HEMOSTATIC PROCESS

The intact vascular endothelium is the primary barrier against hemorrhage and thrombosis. The endothelial cells that line the vessel wall
normally inhibit coagulation and provide a smooth surface that permits rapid blood flow.
After vascular injury, vasoconstriction occurs, and flowing blood
comes in contact with the subendothelial matrix. Von Willebrand
factor (VWF) tethers platelets to the site of injury by binding subendothelial matrix components such as collagen and platelets, via the glycoprotein Ib complex on platelet membranes. Platelet binding of VWF
initiates complex cellular signaling, activating the platelets and triggering secretion of storage granules containing adenosine diphosphate
(ADP), serotonin, and stored plasma and platelet membrane proteins.
On activation, the platelet receptor for fibrinogen, αIIbβ3, is switched
on (“inside out” signaling) to bind fibrinogen and triggers the aggregation and recruitment of other platelets to form the platelet plug. Multiple physiologic agonists can trigger platelet activation and aggregation,
including ADP, collagen, thrombin, and arachidonic acid. Aggregation
involves the interaction of specific receptors on the platelet surface
with plasma hemostatic proteins, primarily fibrinogen.
One of the subendothelial matrix proteins that is exposed after vascular injury is tissue factor. Exposed tissue factor binds to factor VII

and activates the clotting cascade (Fig. 524.1). The activated clotting
factor then initiates the activation of the next sequential clotting factor
in a systematic manner. During the process of platelet activation, internalized platelet phospholipids (primarily phosphatidylserine) become
externalized supporting membrane binding of the principal enzyme
complexes of coagulation: the extrinsic and intrinsic Xase complexes
and the prothrombinase complex. These complexes are localized to the
platelet surface and bring together the active proteolytic enzyme, an
activated cofactor, and the zymogen substrate that will form the next
active enzyme in the cascade. This sequence of the coagulation cascade
serves as a biochemical amplifier where a small amount of activated
proteolytic enzyme can rapidly produce a large amount of downstream
components, in a temporally and spatially controlled manner. In vivo,
small amounts of activated factor VII (VIIa) are present, so the system
is always poised to act. Near the bottom of the cascade, the multipotent
enzyme thrombin is formed. Thrombin converts fibrinogen into fibrin,
activates factors V, VIII, and XI, and aggregates platelets. Activation
of factor XI by thrombin amplifies further thrombin generation and
contributes to inhibition of fibrinolysis. Thrombin also activates factor
XIII. The stable fibrin-­platelet plug is ultimately formed through clot
retraction and cross linking of the fibrin clot by factor XIIIa.
Virtually all procoagulant proteins are balanced by anticoagulant
proteins that regulate or inhibit procoagulant function. Four clinically
important, naturally occurring anticoagulants regulate the extension
of the clotting process: antithrombin (AT), protein C, protein S, and
tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI). AT is a serine protease inhibitor (SERPIN) that regulates primarily factor Xa and thrombin and to
a lesser extent, factors IXa, XIa, and XIIa. When thrombin encounters
intact endothelium, thrombin binds to thrombomodulin, its endothelial
receptor. The thrombin-­thrombomodulin complex then converts protein C into activated protein C. In the presence of the cofactor protein
S, activated protein C proteolyzes and inactivates factor Va and factor VIIIa. Inactivated factor Va is also a functional anticoagulant that
inhibits clotting. TFPI limits activation of factor X by factor VIIa and
tissue factor and shifts the activation site of tissue factor and factor VIIa
to that of factor IX (Fig. 524.2).
Once a stable fibrin-­platelet plug is formed, the fibrinolytic system
limits its extension and proteolyzes the clot (fibrinolysis) to reestablish vascular integrity. Plasmin, generated from plasminogen by either
urokinase-­
like or tissue-­
type plasminogen activator, degrades the
fibrin clot. In the process of dissolving the fibrin clot, fibrin degradation products are produced. The fibrinolytic pathway is regulated by
plasminogen activator inhibitors and α2-­antiplasmin, as well as by the
thrombin-­activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI).

PATHOLOGY

Congenital deficiency of an individual procoagulant protein leads to a
bleeding disorder, whereas deficiency of an anticoagulant (clotting factor
inhibitor) predisposes the patient to thrombosis. In acquired hemostatic
disorders, there are frequently multiple problems with homeostasis that
perturb and dysregulate hemostasis. A primary illness (sepsis) and its
secondary effects (shock and acidosis) activate coagulation and fibrinolysis and impair the host's ability to restore normal hemostatic function.
When sepsis triggers disseminated intravascular coagulation, platelets, procoagulant clotting factors, and anticoagulant proteins are consumed, leaving the hemostatic system unbalanced and prone to bleeding
or clotting (see Chapter 532). Similarly, newborn infants and patients
with severe liver disease have synthetic deficiencies of both procoagulant and anticoagulant proteins. Such dysregulation causes the patient to
be predisposed to both hemorrhage and thrombosis with mild or moderate triggers that result in major alterations in the hemostatic process.
In the laboratory evaluation of hemostasis, parameters are manipulated to allow assessment of isolated aspects of hemostasis and limit the
multifunctionality of some of its components. The coagulation process
is studied in plasma anticoagulated with citrate to bind calcium, with
added phospholipid to mimic the reaction surface normally provided
by the platelet membrane and with a stimulus to trigger clotting. Calcium is added to restart the clotting process. This process does not necessarily reflect the in vivo pathways of clot formation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3024 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Procoagulants

524.1 Clinical and Laboratory Evaluation of
Hemostasis

Anticoagulants

kallikrein
HMWK
prekallikrein

F XII

XIIa

F XI

XIa

F IX

IXa

in vivo

TF
PL

TFPI

For most hemostatic disorders, the clinical history provides the most
useful information. To evaluate for a bleeding disorder, the history
should determine the sites of bleeding, the severity and duration of
hemorrhage, and the age at onset. Was the bleeding spontaneous, or
did it occur after trauma? Was there a previous personal or family history of similar problems? Did the symptoms correlate with the degree
of injury or trauma? Does bruising occur spontaneously? Are there
lumps with bruises for which there is minimal trauma? If the patient
had previous surgery or significant dental procedures, was there any
increased bleeding? If a child or adolescent has had surgery that affects
the mucosal surfaces, such as a tonsillectomy or major dental extractions, the absence of bleeding usually rules out a hereditary bleeding
disorder. Delayed or slow healing of superficial injuries may suggest a
hereditary bleeding disorder. In postpubertal females, it is important
to take a careful menstrual history. Because some common bleeding
disorders, such as von Willebrand disease (VWD), have a fairly high
prevalence, mothers and family members may have the same mild
bleeding disorder and may not be cognizant that the child’s menstrual
history is abnormal. Females with mild VWD who have a moderate
history of bruising frequently have a reduction in symptoms during
pregnancy or after administration of oral contraceptives. Some medications, such as aspirin and other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), inhibit platelet function and increase bleeding symptoms in
patients with a low platelet count or abnormal hemostasis. Standardized bleeding scores have been developed but have not been widely
adopted in pediatrics.
Outside the neonatal period, thrombotic disorders are relatively rare
until adulthood. In the neonate, physiologic deficiencies of procoagulants and anticoagulants place the hemostatic mechanism at greater
risk for imbalance, and clinical events can lead to either hemorrhage or
thrombosis. If a child or teenager presents with deep vein thrombosis

P-C/S
Xa

FX
F VIII

CLINICAL HISTORY

Ca

VIIIa
von Willebrand
factor

Brian R. Branchford, Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones,
Leslie J. Raffini, and Veronica H. Flood

VIIa

VII

AT-III
FV

PL
Ca Va
prothrombin (F II)

P-C/S

thrombin (IIa)

fibrinogen (I)

AT-III

fibrin
F XIII
clot

Fig. 524.1 The clotting cascade, with sequential activation and am-

plification of clot formation. Many of the factors (F) are activated by the
clotting factors shown above them in the cascade. The activated factors
are designated by the addition of an a. On the right side, the major
anticoagulants and the sites that they regulate are shown. Tissue factor
pathway inhibitor (TFPI) regulates tissue factor (TF); factor VIIa, protein
C, and protein S (P-­C/S) regulate factors VIII and V; and antithrombin
III (AT-­III) regulates factor Xa and thrombin (factor IIa). The dotted line
shows that, in vivo, TF and factor VIIa activate both factors IX and X,
but that, in vitro, only the activation of factor X is measured. Unactivated factor VIII, when bound to its carrier protein, von Willebrand factor (VWF), is protected from protein C inactivation. When thrombin, or
factor Xa activates factor VIII, it becomes unbound from VWF, at which
point it can participate with factor IXa in the activation of factor X in
the presence of phospholipid (PL) and Ca++ (the “tenase” complex).
Factor XIIIa cross-­links the fibrin clot and thereby makes it more stable. Prekallikrein, high-­molecular-­weight kininogen (HMWK), and factor
XII are shown in purple because they do not have a physiologic role
in coagulation, although they contribute to the clotting time in partial
thromboplastin time (PTT).

Vessel injury
Tissue factor
VIIa

VWF

XIa

Subendothelial
matrix

IXa

Tissue factor
pathway inhibitor

ThrombinXa Thrombomodulin

VIIIa

Va

Thrombin
Platelet
adhesion
PGI2
Collagen
ADP
NO
TXA2
ADPases

Fibrinogen

I

F
TA

Platelet aggregation

Clo

t re

Antiplasmin
PAI

Fig. 524.2 The hemostatic mechanism.

ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; GAGs, glycosaminoglycans; NO, nitric oxide; PGI2,
prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2); PAI, plasminogen activator inhibitor; TAFI, thrombin-­
activated fibrinolytic inhibitor; TXA2, thromboxane A2; VWF, von Willebrand factor.

Plasminogen

Heparin
or GAGs

Fibrin
)

se

ina

am

tra

ctio

Plasmin

n

Hemostatic plug

IIa
XI

s

ran

(T

t
glu

F

Fibrinolysis
Limit of clot extension
Recanalization

Cell migration and
proliferation

Healing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Protein C and S

Antithrombin III

Chapter 524 u Hemostasis 3025
(DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE), a detailed family history must be
obtained to evaluate for DVT, PE, myocardial infarction (MI), or cerebrovascular accident (stroke) in other family members. The presence of
thrombosis, especially in the absence of a provoking agent in the child
or teenager, should induce the clinician to take a careful family history
and consider an evaluation for a hereditary or acquired predisposition
to thrombosis.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

The physical examination should focus on whether bleeding symptoms
are associated primarily with the mucous membranes or skin (mucocutaneous bleeding) or with the muscles and joints (deep bleeding). The
examination should determine the presence of petechiae, ecchymoses,
hematomas, hemarthroses, or mucous membrane bleeding. Patients
with defects in platelet–blood vessel wall interaction (VWD or platelet
function defects) usually have mucocutaneous bleeding, which may
include epistaxis, menorrhagia, petechiae, ecchymoses, occasional
hematomas, and less frequently, hematuria and gastrointestinal bleeding. Individuals with a clotting deficiency of factor VIII or IX (hemophilia A or B) have symptoms of deep bleeding into muscles and joints,
with much more extensive ecchymoses and hematoma formation.
Patients with mild VWD or other mild bleeding disorders may have no
abnormal findings on physical examination. Individuals with disorders
of the collagen matrix and vessel wall may have loose joints and lax
skin associated with easy bruising (Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome).
Patients undergoing evaluation for thrombotic disorders should
be asked about swollen, warm, tender extremities (venous thrombosis), unexplained dyspnea or persistent “pneumonia,” especially in the
absence of fever (PE), and skin changes suggestive of chronic thrombosis (dilated collateral veins). Arterial thrombi usually cause an acute,
dramatic impairment of organ function, such as stroke, MI, or a painful, white, cold extremity (Table 524.1).

LABORATORY TESTS

In patients who have a positive bleeding history or who are actively
hemorrhaging, a platelet count, prothrombin time (PT), and partial
thromboplastin time (PTT) should be performed as screening tests
(Fig. 524.3). In individuals with abnormal screening tests, further
evaluation should be based on those results (Table 524.2). In a patient
with an abnormal bleeding history and a positive family history, normal screening tests should not preclude further laboratory evaluation,
which may include a thrombin time, VWF testing, and platelet function studies. Historically, bleeding time and platelet function analysis
(PFA-­100) have been used as screening tests, but neither has proved to
be useful in diagnosis of mild bleeding disorders.
There are no useful routine screening tests for hereditary thrombotic disorders. If the family history is positive or clinical thrombosis
is unexplained, specific thrombophilia assays should be performed.

Thrombosis is rare in children, and when it is present, the possibility
of a hereditary predisposition should be considered (see Chapter 527).

Platelet Count

Platelet count is essential in the evaluation of the child with a positive bleeding history because thrombocytopenia is the most common acquired cause of a bleeding diathesis in children. Patients with
a platelet count of >50 × 109/L rarely have significant clinical bleeding.
Thrombocytosis in children is usually reactive and is not associated
with bleeding complications. Persistent, severe thrombocytosis in the
absence of an underlying illness may require evaluation for the very
rare pediatric presentation of essential thrombocythemia or polycythemia vera.

Prothrombin Time and Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time

Because clotting (coagulation) factors were named in the order of discovery, they do not necessarily reflect the sequential order of activation
(Table 524.3; see also Table 524.2). Only two factors have commonly
used names: fibrinogen (factor I) and prothrombin (factor II). The
dual mechanisms of activating clotting have been termed the intrinsic
(surface activation) and extrinsic (tissue factor–mediated) pathways.
PT measures the activation of clotting by tissue factor (thromboplastin) in the presence of calcium. The tissue factor–factor VIIa complex
activates factor X. Whether factor X is activated by the intrinsic or the
extrinsic pathway, factor Xa on the platelet phospholipid surface complexes with factor Va and calcium (the “prothrombinase” complex) to
activate prothrombin to thrombin (also referred to as factor IIa). Once
thrombin is generated, fibrinogen is converted to a fibrin clot, the endpoint of the reaction (see Fig. 524.2). PT is not prolonged with deficiencies of factors VIII, IX, XI, and XII. In most laboratories, the normal
PT value is 10-­13 seconds. PT has been standardized using the international normalized ratio (INR) so that values can be compared from one
laboratory or instrument to another. This ratio is used to determine
similar degrees of anticoagulation with vitamin K antagonists, such as
warfarin.

Partial Thromboplastin Time

The intrinsic pathway involves the initial activation of factor XII, which
is accelerated by two other plasma proteins, prekallikrein and high-­
molecular-­weight kininogen. In the clinical laboratory, factor XII is
activated using a surface (silica or glass) or a contact activator, such as
ellagic acid. Factor XIIa, in turn, activates factor XI to factor XIa, which
then catalyzes factor IX to factor IXa. On the platelet phospholipid surface, factor IXa complexes with factor VIIIa and calcium to activate
factor X (“tenase” complex).
This process is accelerated by interaction with phospholipid and calcium at the steps involving factors V and VIII. An isolated deficiency of

Table 524.1  	 Signs and Symptoms of Thrombosis
LOCATION OF CLOT

PRESENTING SYMPTOMS

RADIOGRAPHIC DIAGNOSIS

Venous thrombus in limbs

Swelling, pain, and/or redness

Venous ultrasonography with Doppler

Arterial thrombus in limbs

Cool limbs, diminished or absent pulse

Arterial ultrasonography with Doppler

Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis

Headache, nausea and/or vomiting, lethargy,
change in mental status

CT venography or MR venography of head/brain

Pulmonary embolism

Chest pain, shortness of breath, pleuritis

CT angiography

Thrombus in the heart

Chest pain, shortness of breath, pleuritis

Echocardiogram

Portal vein thrombosis

Abdominal pain, nausea and/or vomiting, anorexia

Right upper quadrant ultrasonography with
Doppler

Renal vein thrombosis

Hematuria, abdominal mass, abdominal pain,
thrombocytopenia

Renal ultrasonography with Doppler or CT
abdomen/pelvis with IV contrast

CT, Computed tomography; IV, intravenous; MR, magnetic resonance.
Modified from Han H, Hensch L, Hui SKR, Teruya J. Evaluation and management of coagulopathies and thrombophilias in pediatric patients. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:83–100. Table 5.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3026 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Patient presents for laboratory investigation of bleeding

Routine screening: PT, aPTT, fibrinogen, platelet count
Consider von Willebrand testing for patients with appropriate
history

Isolated
prolonged PT

Prolonged PT
and aPTT

Isolated
prolonged aPTT

Assess factor VII

Assess common
pathway
deficiencies:
factors II, V and X

Assess intrinsic
pathway
deficiencies:
factors VIII, IX
and XI

Check for mild
deficiency of:
factors II, V and X

Assess acquired
multiple factor
deficiency

Low factors V
and VII
Normal factor VIII

Low factor VII
Normal factors V
and VIII

Evaluate for liver
disease

Consider vitamin
K deficiency should correct with
vitamin K therapy

von Willebrand
testing

Low factors V, VII
and VIII*

Low fibrinogen
Consider acquired
causes (DIC, liver
disease)
If suspected
dysfibrinogenemia:
thrombin time,
reptilase time and
fibrinogen antigen

Platelet
aggregation
assay

DIC
Dilutional
coagulopathy

If abnormal,
consider platelet
glycoprotein
studies or electron
microscopy

Normal
screening tests
with high
suspicion for
bleeding
disorder
Perform
second-line
testing

Low von
Willebrand
factor/activity or
ratio
Perform
secondary von
Willebrand testing
as indicated
(See discussion
below)

Fibrinolysis
studies

Mild factor
deficiencies

Consider testing
for factor XIII,
2-antiplasmin,
plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1
(PAl-1), and tissue
plasminogen
activator (tPA)

Consider testing
for mild factor
deficiency,
particularly factors
VIII and IX

Fig. 524.3 Testing algorithm based on the screening tests (PT, aPTT, fibrinogen, and platelet count). DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation.

*Note: Factor VIII can be normal or increased in these settings secondary to the acute phase response. (From Han H, Hensch L, Hui SKR, Teruya J.
Evaluation and management of coagulopathies and thrombophilias in pediatric patients. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:83–100. Fig. 1.)

a single clotting factor may result in isolated prolongation of PT, PTT,
or both, depending on the location of the factor in the clotting cascade. This approach is useful in determining hereditary clotting factor
deficiencies; however, in acquired hemostatic disorders encountered in
clinical practice, more than one clotting factor is frequently deficient,
so the relative prolongation of PT and PTT must be assessed.
Measurement of PTT as performed in the clinical laboratory is actually “activated” PTT; most refer to it as PTT. This test measures the
initiation of clotting at the level of factor XII through sequential steps
to the final clot endpoint. It does not measure factor VII, factor XIII,
or anticoagulants. PTT uses a contact activator (silica, kaolin, or ellagic
acid) in the presence of calcium and phospholipid. Because of differences in reagents and laboratory instruments, the normal range for
PTT varies among hospital laboratories. Normal ranges for PTT have
much more interlaboratory variability than those for PT.
Thus the mechanisms studied by PT and PTT allow the evaluation
of clotting factor deficiencies, even though these pathways may not be
the same as those occurring physiologically. The PTT can be prolonged
by deficiencies of factor XII, prekallikrein, and high-­molecular-­weight
kininogen, yet these deficiencies do not result in bleeding,

Thrombin Time

Thrombin time (TT) measures the final step in the clotting cascade, in
which fibrinogen is converted to fibrin. The normal TT varies between

laboratories but is usually 11-­15 seconds. Prolongation of TT occurs
with reduced fibrinogen levels (hypofibrinogenemia or afibrinogenemia), with dysfunctional fibrinogen (dysfibrinogenemia), or in the
presence of substances that interfere with fibrin polymerization, such
as heparin and fibrin split products. If heparin contamination is a
potential cause of prolonged TT, a reptilase time can be ordered.

Reptilase Time

Reptilase time uses snake venom to clot fibrinogen. Unlike thrombin
time, reptilase time is not sensitive to heparin and is prolonged only by
reduced or dysfunctional fibrinogen and fibrin split products. Therefore, if TT is prolonged but reptilase time is normal, the prolonged TT
is caused by heparin and does not indicate the presence of fibrin split
products or reduced concentration or function of fibrinogen.

Mixing Studies

If there is unexplained prolongation of PT or PTT, a mixing study is
usually performed. Normal plasma is added to the patient's plasma,
and the PT or PTT is repeated. Correction of PT or PTT by 1:1 mixing
with normal plasma suggests deficiency of a clotting factor because a
50% level of individual clotting proteins is sufficient to produce normal
PT or PTT. If the clotting time is not corrected or only partially corrected, an inhibitor is usually present. An inhibitor of clotting may
be either a chemical similar to heparin that delays coagulation or an

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 524 u Hemostasis 3027
Table 524.2  	 Causes of Bleeding Associated with Prolonged Prothrombin Time and Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time
PROLONGED PT AND aPTT

CAUSES OF BLEEDING WITHOUT
PT/aPTT PROLONGATION

ISOLATED PROLONGED PT

ISOLATED PROLONGED aPTT

FVII deficiency

Hemophilia A (FVIII deficiency)

Disseminated intravascular
­coagulation

FXIII deficiency

Mild common pathway ­factor
­deficiency (II, V, and X),
­fibrinogen deficiency

Hemophilia B (FIX deficiency)

Dilutional coagulopathy

von Willebrand disease

Early vitamin K deficiency

Hemophilia C (FXI deficiency)

Liver synthetic dysfunction

Platelet dysfunction

Early liver synthetic dysfunction

von Willebrand disease

Marked vitamin K deficiency

Mild deficiency of FVIII, FIX, and
FXI

Direct Xa inhibitor

Acquired FVIII, FIX, or FXI
­inhibitors

Common pathway factor
­deficiency (FII, FV, and FX),
severe fibrinogen deficiency

α2-­antiplasmin deficiency and
other causes of hyperfibrinolysis

—

Heparin

Warfarin or direct thrombin
­inhibitor, DOAC (not always)

Collagen vascular diseases
(i.e., Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome)

—

—

Increased tissue factor pathway
inhibitor, FV Amsterdam or East
Texas bleeding disorder

DOAC

DOAC, Direct oral anticoagulant.
From Han H, Hensch L, Hui SKR, Teruya J. Evaluation and management of coagulopathies and thrombophilias in pediatric patients. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:83–100. Table 1.

Table 524.3  	 Coagulation (Clotting) Factors
CLOTTING FACTOR

SYNONYM

DISORDER

I

Fibrinogen

Congenital deficiency (afibrinogenemia) or dysfunction
(dysfibrinogenemia)

II

Prothrombin

Congenital deficiency or dysfunction

V

Labile factor, proaccelerin

Congenital deficiency (parahemophilia)

VII

Stable factor or proconvertin

Congenital deficiency

VIII

Antihemophilic factor

Congenital deficiency is hemophilia A (classic hemophilia)

IX

Christmas factor

Congenital deficiency is hemophilia B (sometimes referred to as
Christmas disease)

X

Stuart-­Prower factor

Congenital deficiency

XI

Plasma thromboplastin antecedent

Congenital deficiency (sometimes referred to as hemophilia C)

XII

Hageman factor

Congenital deficiency is not associated with clinical symptoms

XIII

Fibrin-­stabilizing factor

Congenital deficiency

antibody directed against a specific clotting factor or the phospholipid used in clotting tests. In the inpatient setting the most common
cause of a prolonged PTT is heparin contamination of the sample.
The presence of heparin in the sample can be ruled in or out by adding
heparinase to the sample and repeating the PTT. If the mixing study is
not corrected or if its result becomes more prolonged and the patient
has clinical bleeding, an inhibitor of a specific clotting factor (antibody
directed against the factor), most often factor VIII, factor IX, or factor
XI, may be present. If the patient has no bleeding symptoms and both
PTT and the mixing study are prolonged, a lupus-­like anticoagulant
(see Chapter 531) is often present. Patients with these findings usually
have a long PTT but do not bleed.

Platelet Aggregation

When a qualitative platelet function defect is suspected, platelet aggregation testing is usually ordered. Platelet-­rich plasma from the patient
is activated with a series of agonists (ADP, epinephrine, collagen,
thrombin or thrombin-­receptor peptide, and ristocetin). Some platelet
aggregometers measure specific adenosine triphosphate release from

the platelets, as measured by the generation of luminescence via lumiaggregometry, and are more sensitive in detecting abnormalities of the
platelet release reaction from storage granules. Repeat testing or testing of other symptomatic family members can help to determine the
hereditary nature of the defect. Many medications, especially aspirin,
other NSAIDs, and valproic acid, alter platelet function testing. Figure
524.1 provides an approach to the differential diagnosis of many common bleeding disorders based on screening tests.

Factor XIII

The PT and PTT reflect only fibrin formation and do not measure
cross-­linking by factor XIII. Therefore specific testing is required to
identify factor XIII deficiency. Clot solubility testing can be performed
but only identifies the most severely affected individuals. Quantitative
measurement of factor XIII levels can also be performed.

Testing for Thrombotic Predisposition

Hereditary predisposition to thrombosis is associated with a reduction
of anticoagulant function (protein C, protein S, AT III); the presence of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3028 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 524.4

Reference Values for Coagulation Tests in Healthy Children
15 D-­4 WK

1-­5 MO

6-­11 MO

1-­5 YR

6-­10 YR

11-­17 YR

ADULT
RANGES

SCREENING TESTS
PT (sec)
11.2 (9.5-­12.6)

11.0 (9.7-­12.8)

11.0 (9.8-­13.0)

11.3 (9.9-­13.4)

11.7 (10.0-­14.6)

11.8 (10.0-­14.1)

10.9 (9.2-­12.2)

PTT (sec)

PARAMETER

35.4 (27.6-­45.6)

33.5 (24.8-­40.7)

32.4 (25.1-­40.7)

31.6 (24.0-­39.2)

31.6 (26.9-­38.7)

31.0 (24.6-­38.4)

31.7 (27.8-­36.3)

COAGULATION PROTEINS
Fibrinogen (g/L)
2.54 (1.43-­4.02)

2.26 (1.50-­3.76)

2.33 (1.57-­3.60)

2.73 (1.88-­4.13)

2.78 (1.89-­4.75)

2.66 (1.77-­4.20)

2.75 (2.17-­3.42)

FII (IU/mL)

56 (45-­74)

75 (47-­111)

92 (74-­117)

99 (49-­130)

90 (68-­132)

94 (48-­119)

101 (75-­132)

FV (IU/mL)

100 (69-­124)

100 (60-­147)

102 (59-­160)

111 (73-­188)

101 (82-­141)

97 (62-­125)

99 (61-­142)

FVII (IU/mL)

76 (55-­108)

88 (43-­141)

88 (52-­128)

82 (48-­124)

77 (55-­135)

82 (55-­133)

95 (59-­151)

FVIII (IU/mL)

96 (65-­153)

85 (50-­187)

75 (53-­132)

95 (59-­167)

87 (61-­154)

93 (43-­155)

97 (56-­146)

FIX (IU/mL)

44 (30-­77)

53 (29-­105)

77 (51-­107)

84 (53-­129)

80 (55-­156)

97 (60-­138)

112 (70-­131)

FX (IU/mL)

85 (66-­92)

89 (68-­122)

100 (76-­134)

99 (60-­153)

99 (71-­162)

93 (64-­131)

106 (73-­150)

FXI IU/mL)

56 (33-­75)

64 (28-­126)

86 (61-­126)

92 (58-­154)

83 (32-­154)

84 (55-­139)

105 (49-­139)

FXII (U/mL)

69 (25-­81)

76 (38-­137)

109 (48-­156)

107 (50-­175)

84 (49-­154)

92 (49-­154)

108 (47-­157)

FXIII (IU/mL)

86 (78-­100)

83 (55-­133)

92 (51-­137)

97 (49-­137)

97 (54-­142)

106 (64-­133)

100 (68-­138)

Von Willebrand
antigen (IU/mL)

163 (46-­220)

102 (36-­217)

79 (48-­199)

89 (41-­186)

80 (45-­141)

92 (56-­123)

91 (43-­144)

ANTICOAGULANT PROTEINS
Antithrombin
41 (33-­63)
(IU/mL)

80 (29-­120)

96 (63-­122)

67 (61-­128)

97 (64-­136)

97 (64-­136)

112 (83-­126)

Protein C (IU/mL)

38 (30-­115)

82 (28-­128)

85 (44-­151)

86 (61-­144)

91 (39-­170)

95 (66-­127)

119 (69-­149)

Protein S (IU/mL)

90 (29-­115)

82 (33-­154)

88 (52-­1138)

97 (60-­149)

105 (67-­162)

99 (53-­147)

102 (58-­138)

Plasminogen
(U/mL)

53 (41-­83)

69 (38-­110)

81 (49-­126)

92 (60-­178)

92 (52-­158)

92 (58-­131)

94 (63-­135)

D-­dimer (ng/mL)

530 (445-­1200)

515 (90-­878)

270 (133-­844)

280 (88-­780)

275 (60-­567)

245 (69-­580)

277 (109-­560)

PT, Prothrombin time; PTT, partial thromboplastin time.
Data expressed as median (95% confidence interval).
Data adapted from Toulon P, Berruyer M, Brionne-­François M, et al. Age dependency for coagulation parameters in paediatric populations. Results of a multicentre study aimed at
defining the age-­specific reference ranges. Thromb Haemost. 2016;116:9–16.

a factor V molecule that is resistant to inactivation by protein C (factor
V Leiden); elevated levels of procoagulants (a pathogenic variant of the
prothrombin gene); or a deficiency of fibrinolysis (plasminogen deficiency); and the rare metabolic disease homocystinuria (see Chapter
527).

Tests of the Fibrinolytic System

Euglobulin clot lysis time is a screening test used in some laboratories
to assess fibrinolysis. More specific tests are available in most laboratories to determine the levels of plasminogen, plasminogen activator, and
inhibitors of fibrinolysis. An increase in fibrinolysis may be associated
with hemorrhagic symptoms, and a delay in fibrinolysis is associated
with thrombosis.

DEVELOPMENTAL HEMOSTASIS

The normal newborn infant has reduced plasma concentrations of several procoagulants and anticoagulants compared to adults (see Table
524.4), and this is even more pronounced in preterm infants. During
gestation, there is progressive maturation and increase of the clotting factors synthesized by the liver. The extremely premature infant

has prolonged PT and PTT values, as well as a marked reduction in
anticoagulant protein levels (protein C, protein S, and AT). Levels of
fibrinogen, factors V and VIII, VWF, and platelets are near-­normal
throughout the later stages of gestation (see Chapter 142). Because
protein C and protein S are physiologically reduced, factors V and
VIII, which are present at normal levels at birth, are not balanced with
their regulatory proteins. In contrast, the physiologic deficiency of vitamin K–dependent procoagulant proteins (factors II, VII, IX, and X) is
partially balanced by the physiologic reduction of AT. The net effect
is that newborns (especially premature infants) are at increased risk
for complications of bleeding, clotting, or both. Establishing absolute
cutoff values for normal ranges of coagulation proteins in newborn and
preterm infants is challenging because of the age-­dependent variation
and heterogeneity among laboratory instruments and reagents. Repeat
testing (or testing parents) may be necessary to confirm a diagnosis of
an inherited deficiency.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 525 u Hereditary Clotting Factor Deficiencies (Bleeding Disorders)

Chapter 525

Hereditary Clotting Factor
Deficiencies (Bleeding
Disorders)
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R.
Branchford, and Veronica H. Flood
Inherited deficiencies in the coagulation factors responsible for forming
cross-­linked fibrin clots (as detailed in Chapter 524) can result in bleeding disorders. Hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency) and hemophilia
B (factor IX deficiency) are the most common and serious congenital
coagulation factor deficiencies. The clinical findings in hemophilia A
and hemophilia B are virtually identical. Factor XI deficiency is a rare
autosomal bleeding disorder discussed in Chapter 525.2. Reduced levels of the contact factors (factor XII, high molecular weight kininogen,
and prekallikrein) are associated with significant prolongation of activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT; also referred to as PTT) but
are not associated with clinical bleeding, as discussed in Chapter 525.3.

525.1 Factor VIII or Factor IX Deficiency
(Hemophilia A or B)
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency) and hemophilia B (factor IX
deficiency) are the most common severe inherited bleeding disorders.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

The activated forms of factors VIII and IX participate in the enzyme
complex responsible for the sustained proteolytic activation of factor
X during coagulation. Together with phospholipids and calcium, they
form the intrinsic tenase (or factor X activating) complex. Hemophilia
A and hemophilia B have similar clinical manifestations because,
molecularly, both disorders result in a deficiency of factor X activation,
which, in turn, results in insufficient thrombin generation (see Fig.
524.1 in Chapter 524 for a depiction of the in vitro clotting process as it
occurs in the test tube). In hemostatically normal individuals, hemorrhage after an injury is constrained by the initial formation of the platelet plug, which is stabilized by the generation of a cross-­linked fibrin
clot. In people with hemophilia A or B, clot formation is delayed and
ineffectual. Inadequate thrombin production leads to failure to form a
tightly cross-­linked fibrin to support the platelet plug. When untreated
bleeding occurs in a closed space, such as a joint, bleeding may stop as
the result of tamponade. With open wounds, in which tamponade cannot occur, even minor injuries may result in significant blood loss, with
a highly friable clot forming slowly; rebleeding occurs during physiologic thrombolysis or with minimal new traumas.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The severity of the bleeding phenotype in hemophilia A and B is
strongly associated with the amount of residual factor VIII or factor
IX, respectively. Severe hemophilia is characterized by having <1%
normal factor activity, and bleeding is frequent and often spontaneous.
Patients with moderate hemophilia have factor levels of 1–5% normal
and bleed excessively with mild trauma. Individuals with mild hemophilia have factor levels 5–40% normal and usually only bleed abnormally after major trauma or surgery; people with mild hemophilia may
go many years before the condition is diagnosed.

3029

Because neither factor VIII nor factor IX crosses the placenta, bleeding symptoms may be present at birth. Between 1% and 4% of neonates
with hemophilia have intracranial hemorrhages, mostly from birth
trauma. However, about 35% and 70% of male infants with severe and
nonsevere hemophilia, respectively, do not bleed with circumcision.
Thus, in the absence of a positive family history (50% of cases), hemophilia may go undiagnosed in the newborn period. Obvious symptoms,
such as easy bruising, intramuscular hematomas, and hemarthroses,
begin when the child starts to cruise. Bleeding from minor traumatic
lacerations of the mouth (torn frenulum) may persist for hours or days
and may cause the parents to seek medical evaluation. Even in patients
with severe hemophilia, only 90% have evidence of increased bleeding
by a year of age.
Although bleeding may occur in any area of the body, the hallmark
of hemophilia bleeding is hemarthrosis, which can occur spontaneously or after minor trauma. The earliest joint hemorrhages appear
most often in the ankles. In the older child and adolescent, hemarthroses of the knees and elbows are also common. Whereas the child’s early
joint hemorrhages are recognized only after major swelling and fluid
accumulation in the joint space, older children are frequently able to
recognize bleeding before the physician does: patients report a warm,
tingling sensation in the affected joint as the first sign of a joint hemorrhage. Repeated bleeding episodes into the same joint may result in a
“target” joint, which becomes more susceptible to recurrent bleeding
because of the pathologic changes (see “Chronic Complications”).
Although most muscular hemorrhages are clinically evident
because of localized pain or swelling, bleeding into the iliopsoas muscle
requires specific mention. A patient may lose large volumes of blood
into the iliopsoas muscle, verging on hypovolemic shock, with only a
vague area of referred pain in the groin. The hip is held in a flexed,
internally rotated position because of irritation of the iliopsoas. The
diagnosis is made clinically from the inability to extend the hip but
should be confirmed with ultrasonography, CT, or MRI (Fig. 525.1).
Life-­threatening bleeding in the patient with hemophilia is caused by
bleeding into vital structures (central nervous system [CNS], upper airway) or by exsanguination (external trauma, gastrointestinal [GI] or iliopsoas hemorrhage). Prompt treatment with clotting factor concentrate
for these life-­threatening hemorrhages is imperative. If head trauma is
of sufficient concern to suggest radiologic evaluation, factor replacement should precede radiologic evaluation. Life-­threatening hemorrhages require replacement therapy to achieve a level equal to that of
normal plasma (100 IU/dL or 100%; see section below on “Treatment”).

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND DIAGNOSIS

A reduced level of factor VIII or factor IX will often result in a prolonged
PTT. In severe hemophilia, the PTT value is usually 2-­3 times the upper
limit of normal. However, depending on the PTT reagents, people with
mild hemophilia can have a PTT in the normal range. Results of the
other screening tests of the hemostatic mechanism (platelet count,
bleeding time, prothrombin time [PT]) are normal. The specific activity assays for factors VIII and IX confirm the diagnosis of hemophilia.
One IU of each factor activity is defined as that amount in 1 mL of
normal plasma, referenced against a standard established by the World
Health Organization (WHO). Thus 100 mL of normal plasma has 100
IU/dL (100% normal activity) of each factor. The term % activity refers
to the percentage found in normal plasma (100% activity). Factor concentrates are also referenced against an international WHO standard,
so treatment doses are usually referred to in IU.
In the newborn period, factor VIII activity values may be artificially
elevated because of the acute-­phase response elicited by the birth process. This artificial elevation may cause an infant with mild hemophilia
A to have a normal or near-­normal measured level. Patients with severe
hemophilia A do not have detectable levels of factor VIII. In contrast,
factor IX levels are physiologically low in all newborns and only reach
adult values at about 6 months of age. If severe hemophilia is present
in the family, an undetectable level of factor IX is diagnostic of severe
hemophilia B. In some patients with mild factor IX deficiency, the
presence of low factor IX activity can be confirmed only after several
months of life.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3030 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

A

C

B

Fig. 525.1 Massive hematoma into the iliopsoas muscle in a patient with hemophilia B. A male with severe deficiency of factor IX (hemophilia B)
was admitted for right lower abdominal pain of progressively increasing severity and tenderness. He had had a common cold with severe cough
and loss of appetite for approximately 1 week. A, Abdominal radiograph shows presence of the psoas sign on the right side and left-­shifted colon
gas. B, CT scan shows massive hematoma in the right iliopsoas muscle, resulting in anterior translocation of the right kidney. C, Reconstructed
3-­dimensional image shows more clearly the kidney translocation and the extended, but intact, large vessels. These are useful findings for the
diagnostic procedures because progressive right lower abdominal pain may closely simulate acute appendicitis. The hemorrhage was successfully
managed by replacement of factor IX for 1 week without any recurrence. The patient did not have any inhibitors to factor IX. (From Miyazaki K,
Higashihara M. Massive hemorrhage into the iliopsoas muscle. Intern Med. 2005;44:158–159.)

The mixing of normal plasma with hemophilia plasma usually corrects PTT value, unless the patient has an inhibitor, as discussed later.
An inhibitor titer can be quantified by the Bethesda assay, where 1
Bethesda Unit (BU) neutralizes 1 IU/mL of factor.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

In young infants with severe bleeding manifestations, the differential
diagnosis includes severe thrombocytopenia; severe platelet function
disorders, such as Bernard-­Soulier syndrome and Glanzmann thrombasthenia; type 3 (severe) von Willebrand disease; and vitamin K
deficiency.

GENETICS

The genes for factor VIII and IX (F8 and F9, respectively) are carried near the terminus of the long arm of the X chromosome, making
hemophilia an X-­linked disorder. It occurs in approximately 1/5,000
males, with 80% having factor VIII deficiency and 20% having factor
IX deficiency. Hemophilia appears in all ethnic groups. A third of cases
are estimated to be the result of a spontaneous pathogenic variant.
Approximately 50% of cases of severe hemophilia A have a specific F8
change, in which there is an internal inversion within the factor VIII
gene (intron 22 inversion). Meanwhile, 98% of hemophilia patients
have an identified genetic cause of their hemophilia, which can facilitate diagnosis, prenatal testing, and identification of female carriers.
Some female carriers (heterozygotes) have sufficiently low factor
level to have abnormal bleeding. Factor levels should be determined in
all known or potential carriers to assess the need for treatment in the
event of surgery or clinical bleeding. Female carriers with factor levels
<40% normal are considered to have hemophilia and should be treated
as such. Notably, about 0.2% of people with severe and moderate hemophilia are female, mostly because of skewed lyonization or Turner syndrome. Female carriers with factor levels >40% normal can also have
abnormal bleeding and are termed symptomatic hemophilia carriers.
Historically, female carriers were thought to be asymptomatic, but
newer data prove these individuals can also have significant bleeding.

TREATMENT

Disease-­specific therapy started early in life is the hallmark of excellent hemophilia care (Table 525.1). Treatment can be divided into
on-­demand therapy (hemostatic interventions to stop bleeding) and
prophylaxis therapy to prevent bleeding. Prophylaxis is the standard
of care for children with severe hemophilia in countries with sufficient

medical resources. Prophylaxis decreases catastrophic bleeding, prevents hemarthrosis, and preserves joint health. The types of hemostatic agents available for hemophilia A and hemophilia B are rapidly
expanding, with several new classes of medications receiving regulatory approval (Table 525.2).

On-­Demand Treatment

To treat acute bleeding, nothing works better than replacing the deficient coagulation factor. When mild to moderate bleeding occurs,
values of factor VIII or factor IX must be raised to hemostatic levels,
approximately 50% of normal activity. For life-­threatening or major
hemorrhages, the dose should aim to achieve levels of 100% activity. Both plasma-­derived and recombinant factor VIII and factor IX
concentrates are available. Replacement therapy requires intravenous
administration, which patients and families often learn to do themselves. The half-­lives of standard factor VIII and factor IX are 8-­12
hours and 18-­24 hours, respectively, although there is wide variability between patients with younger children often having shorter half-­
lives. There are also bioengineered factor VIII and factor IX products
designed to have longer half-­lives (termed extended half-­life products),
which reduce the frequency of intravenous administrations necessary
to treat bleeds and provide prophylaxis.
Table 525.1 summarizes the treatment recommendations of some
common types of hemorrhage in a patient with hemophilia. The calculation of the factor replacement dose is as follows, with the difference between factor VIII and factor IX being because of their different
volumes of distribution:
Factor VIII dose (IU) = [ % desired raise] × [weight (kg)] × 0.5
Factor IX dose (IU) = [ % desired raise] × [weight (kg)] × 1.3

Therefore emergency dosing for factor VIII deficiency is approximately 50 units per kg and emergency dosing for factor IX deficiency is
approximately 100-­130 units/kg.
It is important to note that patients can have variable recoveries, and
different factor products also have slightly different recoveries. Many
patients will carry dosing cards detailing their recommended treatments. In general, doses are rounded up to vial size so as not to waste
product.
For some patients with mild factor VIII deficiency, desmopressin
acetate can be used to stimulate the cellular release of endogenously

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 525 u Hereditary Clotting Factor Deficiencies (Bleeding Disorders)

3031

Table 525.1  Treatment of Hemophilia Without Inhibitors
TYPE OF HEMORRHAGE

HEMOPHILIA A

HEMOPHILIA B

Hemarthrosis*

50-­60 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate† on day 1, then
20 IU/kg the following day. Consider every other day
until joint function is normal or back to baseline.
Consider prophylaxis.

80-­100 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡ on day 1; then
40 IU/kg the following day. Consider every other
day until joint function is normal or back to baseline. Consider prophylaxis.

Muscle or significant subcutaneous
hematoma

50 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate; 20 IU/kg every other
day treatment may be needed until resolved.

80 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡; 40 IU/kg every 2-­3
days may be needed until resolved.

Mouth, deciduous tooth, or tooth
extraction

20 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate†; antifibrinolytic
therapy§; remove loose deciduous tooth.

40 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡; antifibrinolytic
therapy§; remove loose deciduous tooth.

Epistaxis

Apply pressure for 15-­20 min; pack with petrolatum
gauze; give antifibrinolytic therapy§; 20 IU/kg factor
VIII concentrate† if this treatment fails.||

Apply pressure for 15-­20 min; pack with petrolatum
gauze; antifibrinolytic therapy§; 30 IU/kg factor IX
concentrate‡ if this treatment fails.#

Major surgery, life-­threatening
hemorrhage

50-­75 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate; then initiate 25 IU/
kg q8-­12h to maintain trough level >50 IU/dL for 5-­7
days; then 50 IU/kg q24h to maintain trough >25 IU/
dL for 7 days; monitor factor VIII levels.

80-­120 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡, then 50-­60 IU/
kg q12-­24h to maintain factor IX at >40 IU/dL for
5-­7 days, and then at >30 IU/dL for 7 days; monitor
factor IX levels.

Iliopsoas hemorrhage

50 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate; then 25 IU/kg q12h
until asymptomatic; then 20 IU/kg every other day,
for a total of 10-­14 days.**

100 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡; then 50-­60 IU/kg
q12-­24h to maintain factor IX at >40 IU/dL until
patient is asymptomatic; then 40-­50 IU every other
day, for a total of 10-­14 days.**

Hematuria

Bed rest; 1.5× maintenance fluids; if not controlled
in 1-­2 days, 20 IU/kg factor VIII concentrate; if not
controlled, give prednisone (unless patient is HIV-­
infected).

Bed rest; 1.5× maintenance fluids; if not controlled
in 1-­2 days, 40 IU/kg factor IX concentrate‡; if not
controlled, give prednisone (unless patient is
HIV-­infected).

*For hip hemarthrosis, orthopedic evaluation for possible aspiration is advisable to prevent avascular necrosis of the femoral head.

†For mild or moderate hemophilia, desmopressin 0.3 μg/kg can be used instead of factor VIII concentrate if the patient is known to respond with a hemostatic level of factor VIII; if

repeated doses are given, monitor factor VIII levels for tachyphylaxis.

‡Stated doses apply for recombinant factor IX concentrate; different dosing may apply for long-­acting recombinant factor IX concentrates or plasma-­derived factor IX.
§Do not give antifibrinolytic therapy until 4-­6 hr after a dose of prothrombin complex concentrate.
#Nonprescription coagulation-­promoting products may be helpful.

**Repeat radiologic assessment should be performed before discontinuation of therapy.
HIV, Human immunodeficiency virus; IU, international units; q12-­24h, every 12 to 24 hours.
Adapted from Di Paola J, Montgomery RR, Gill JC, Flood VH. Hemophilia and von Willebrand disease. In: Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al., eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015: pp. 1028–1054.

Table 525.2  Strengths and Weaknesses of the Old and New Therapeutic Options for Hemophilia
STRENGTHS

WEAKNESSES

Standard half-­life clotting factor
concentrates

Effective for both bleeding control and prevention;
well established safety and effectiveness profile for
decades; measurable FVIII and FIX concentrations
as surrogate marker of effectiveness; can result in
normal concentrations of FVIII and FIX

Frequent intravenous injections; inhibitor
development

Extended half-­life clotting factor
concentrates

Effective for both bleeding control and prevention; a
reduced number of injections; higher trough
concentrations; measurable FVIII and FIX
concentrations as surrogate markers of
effectiveness; can result in normal concentrations of
FVIII and FIX

Intravenous route; inhibitor development

Nonreplacement therapies
(emicizumab, fitusiran, anti-­tissue factor
pathway inhibitor antibodies, SerpinPC)

Subcutaneous route; infrequent injections; standard
doses for all patients

Need for adjunctive hemostatic treatment;
steady state of coagulation activity not within
the normal range; thrombotic risk

Gene therapy

Single intravenous injection; restoration of
endogenous FVIII and FIX production

Preexisting immunity against adeno-­associated
viral vectors; immune response against
vectors and transfected cells; unknown
durability of transduction; need for
immunosuppressive therapy; unknown
long-­term safety

FVIII, factor VIII; FIX, factor IX.
From Mancuso ME, Mahlangu JN, Pipe SW. The changing treatment landscape in haemophilia: from standard half-­life clotting factor concentrates to gene editing. Lancet.
2021;397:630–640. Table 5.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3032 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
produced factor VIII to increase its plasma levels. In patients with moderate or severe factor VIII deficiency, the stored levels of factor VIII are
inadequate, and desmopressin treatment is ineffective. Desmopressin can
be administered intravenously or intranasally, with the latter facilitating
home treatment. The intranasal formulation is a higher concentration of
desmopressin than that used to treat enuresis or hypopituitarism; the dose
is 150 μg (1 spray) for children weighing <50 kg and 300 μg (2 sprays)
for children and young adults weighing >50 kg. Most centers administer a trial of desmopressin to determine if the factor VIII levels increase
sufficiently for hemostasis. Because desmopressin triggers the release of
cellularly stored factor VIII, usually it can only be given twice in a 1-­2
day period. The most serious complication is hyponatremia, which can
be mitigated by fluid restrictions for the 24 hours after administration.
Desmopressin is not effective in the treatment of factor IX deficiency.
Mucosal bleeding often benefits from antifibrinolytic agents such
as aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid that can be given orally or
intravenously.

PROPHYLAXIS

Many patients are given lifelong prophylaxis to prevent spontaneous
joint bleeding. The World Federation of Hemophilia recommends prophylaxis for children with severe hemophilia and for adults with joint
disease. Usually, such programs are initiated at the time of the first or
second joint hemorrhage. Young children often require the insertion of
a central catheter to ensure venous access for factor replacements. Such
regimens are expensive but highly effective in preventing or greatly
limiting the degree of joint pathology; complications include central
line infection and thrombosis.
The goal of prophylaxis is generally to maintain a measurable plasma
factor level (1–2%), when assayed just before the next infusion (trough
level); this converts patients from severe to moderate hemophilia. For
standard half-­life products, this typically requires intravenous administration 2-­4 times per week; this frequency is reduced with prophylaxis with extended half-­life products.
Another class of hemophilia drugs that promotes hemostasis without factor VIII or factor IX is termed nonfactor therapies. Emicizumab is approved for prophylaxis for hemophilia A. Emicizumab is
a bispecific, humanized monoclonal antibody that can bridge activated
factor IX and factor X to restore factor X activation. It is administered
subcutaneously and is given only 1-­4 times per month after four weekly
loading doses. Because emicizumab mimics some of the biochemistry
of activated factor VIII, it dramatically shortens PTT times. It is not
used to treat acute bleeds.
Efanesoctocog alfa, a modified extended half-life single recombinant
factor VIII protein that decouples recombinant factor VIII from endogenous von Willebrand factor, has demonstrated efficacy in patients with
severe hemophilia A. Fitusiran, a small interfering RNA molecule that
reduces antithrombin synthesis, has been used successfully for prophylaxis in patients with hemophilia A or B with or without inhibitors. Gene
therapy (valoctocogene roxaparvovec for hemophilia A; etranacogene
dezaparvovec for hemophilia B) has demonstrated efficacy in reducing
bleeding in adult patients with severe hemophilia.

SUPPORTIVE CARE

Effective measures to avoid trauma include anticipatory guidance,
including the use of car seats, seatbelts, and bike helmets and the avoidance of high-­risk behaviors. Older males should be counseled to avoid
violent contact sports, but this issue is admittedly a challenge; however,
active lifestyles are also encouraged to limit obesity. Early psychosocial
intervention helps the family achieve a balance between overprotection and permissiveness. Patients with hemophilia should avoid aspirin
and other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) that affect
platelet function.

Inhibitor Formation

The formation of neutralizing antibodies, termed inhibitors, is the
major complication of factor VIII or factor IX replacement therapy.
They develop in 20–30% of severe hemophilia A patients and 3–10% of
severe hemophilia B patients that receive factor therapy, usually within
20 exposures to factor. Inhibitors may be identified during routine

laboratory surveillance or become clinically apparent when bleeding
episodes fail to respond to appropriate replacement therapy. There are
both patient and product risk factors for inhibitor development, with
the underlying hemophilia-­causing gene pathogenic variant being the
most important with the majority of people with large-­gene deletions
developing inhibitors. Prophylaxis with plasma-­derived factor VIII
products decreases the risk of inhibitor development about 1.7-­fold
compared to recombinant factor VIII products. Intensive early factor
exposure during surgery or major trauma increases the risk of inhibitor
development, likely through initiating immunologic danger signaling.
Patients with inhibitors always require referral to a center that cares
for many such patients and has a comprehensive hemophilia program.
Clinically, inhibitor titers are demarcated as low-­titer (≤5 BU) and
high-­titer (>5 BU). Low-­titer inhibitors can often be overcome by large
amounts of factor, while high-­titers necessitate the use of bypassing
agents, which can circumvent the inhibitor to promote hemostasis. The
two bypassing agents available that can treat acute bleeds are activated
prothrombin complex concentrates and recombinant activated factor
VII, both of which are administered intravenously. Prophylaxis regimens for bypassing agents have been described, but most hemophilia A
patients with inhibitors currently use emicizumab prophylaxis because
of its efficacy and ease of administration.
Inhibitor eradication has been prioritized, and it is still recommended since the advent of emicizumab. Low-­titer or transient inhibitors often disappear with continued regular factor infusions. Higher
titer inhibitors often require immune tolerance induction regimens,
in which high doses of factor are administered to attempt to develop
immune tolerance. This procedure is successful in about two-­thirds of
severe hemophilia A patients. Immune tolerance induction with factor
IX products is complicated by allergic reactions and the development of
nephrotic syndrome in some patients. Rituximab, corticosteroids, and
other immunosuppressives have been used in patients with high-­titer
inhibitors in whom immune tolerance programs have failed, although
the use of immunosuppressive therapy has declined with the use of
emicizumab prophylaxis for factor VIII deficiency inhibitor patients.

CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS

Long-­term complications of hemophilia A and B include chronic
arthropathy and the risk of transfusion-­transmitted infectious diseases,
although both complications have been substantially mitigated with
modern hemophilia care, including early initiation of prophylaxis and
the use of recombinant protein products or plasma-­derived products
with advanced donor screening and highly active viricidal procedures.
Chronic arthropathy is the major long-­term disability associated
with hemophilia. The natural history of severe hemophilia without
prophylaxis is one of cyclic recurrent hemorrhages into specific joints,
including hemorrhages into the same (target) joint. In young children,
the joint distends easily, and a large volume of blood may fill the joint
until tamponade ensues or therapy intervenes. After joint hemorrhage,
proteolytic enzymes are released by white blood cells into the joint space,
and heme iron induces macrophage proliferation, leading to inflammation of the synovium. The synovium thickens and develops frondlike
projections into the joint that are susceptible to being pinched and may
induce further hemorrhage. The cartilaginous surface becomes eroded
and ultimately may even expose raw bone, leaving the joint susceptible to
articular fusion. In the older patient with advanced arthropathy, bleeding into the target joint, with its thickened synovium, causes severe pain,
because the joint has little space to accommodate blood. Once a target
joint develops, the patient is usually given short-­or long-­term prophylaxis to prevent progression of the arthropathy and reduce inflammation.
In the past, plasma-­derived products tragically transmitted hepatitis B
virus, hepatitis C virus, and HIV to large numbers of people with hemophilia. Modern plasma-­derived products pose a very low risk of spreading
identified bloodborne pathogens, but the risk of transmitting unidentified
pathogens or emerging agents such as prions remains largely undefined.

COMPREHENSIVE CARE

Patients with hemophilia are best managed through comprehensive
hemophilia care centers. Such centers are dedicated to patient and family education and the prevention and treatment of the complications of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 525 u Hereditary Clotting Factor Deficiencies (Bleeding Disorders)
hemophilia, including chronic joint disease and inhibitor development.
Such centers involve a team that includes physicians, nurses, orthopedists, physical therapists, and psychosocial workers, all focused on
hemophilia care. Education remains crucial in hemophilia care because
patients who are receiving prophylaxis may be less experienced in recognizing bleeding episodes than affected children from previous eras.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.2 Factor XI Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Factor XI deficiency (previously known as hemophilia C) is an autosomal disorder associated with mild to moderate bleeding symptoms.
Bleeding is usually after trauma and surgery, with bleeding most commonly occurring at sites of high fibrinolytic activity, such as the oropharynx and urogenital tract. This focality is likely secondary to the
role of factor XI in augmenting thrombin generation for the subsequent
activation of thrombin-­activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI). Heavy
menstrual bleeding is also common in females with factor XI deficiency.
Factor XI deficiency can occur in any ethnic group but is frequently
encountered in Ashkenazi Jews with a heterozygous frequency of 1 in
11 individuals. Factor XI deficiency usually (but not always) results in a
prolonged PTT; specific factor XI activity assays are diagnostic.
The bleeding phenotype is poorly predicted by the measured factor XI activity. Some patients with severe deficiency (<20% normal
activity) may have minimal or no symptoms, whereas other individuals with higher levels experience excessive surgical bleeding. Because
spontaneous bleeding is very rare, treatment is focused on perioperative management. Although factor XI concentrates are available in
other countries, in the United States, factor XI has to be replaced with
fresh-­frozen plasma (FFP). For minor surgeries or bleeds, antifibrinolytics such as aminocaproic acid or tranexamic acid are frequently used.
For major surgeries, 15-­25 mL/kg of FFP in combination with antifibrinolytics is recommended. The factor XI half-­life is 50 hours.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.3 Deficiencies of the Contact Factors
(Nonbleeding Disorders)
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Deficiency of the “contact factors”—factor XII, prekallikrein, and high
molecular weight kininogen—causes a prolonged PTT but no bleeding
symptoms. Because these contact factors function at the step of initiation of the intrinsic clotting system by the reagent used to determine
PTT, the PTT is markedly prolonged when these factors are absent.
Thus there is the paradoxical situation in which PTT is extremely prolonged with no evidence of clinical bleeding. It is important that individuals with these findings be well informed about the meaning of their
clotting factor deficiency because they do not need treatment, even for
major surgery.

525.4 Factor VII Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Factor VII deficiency is a rare autosomal bleeding disorder that ranges
in its presentation from mild to severe bleeding. There is a poor

3033

correlation between the clinical severity and the measured factor VII
level, although major bleeding is more frequent in patients with <1%
activity. Epistaxis and menorrhagia are the most common symptoms,
although hemarthroses and intracranial hemorrhages also occur, with
the latter reported in 1% of symptomatic cases.
Patients with this deficiency have greatly prolonged PT but normal
PTT. Specific factor VII assays are diagnostic. Some recombinant factor
VIIa products are approved for the treatment of factor VII deficiency
at a dose of 15-­30 mcg/kg, which is lower than the dose approved for
hemophilia with inhibitors. The plasma half-­life of factor VII is 2-­6
hours and usually at least three doses at this frequency are required for
major bleeding or surgery. Prophylaxis regimens with 2-­3 administrations per week have been described in patients with severe bleeding.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.5 Factor X Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Factor X deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with variable severity. Mild deficiency results in mucocutaneous and posttraumatic bleeding, whereas severe deficiency (<1–10% normal activity) is
associated with joint, GI, and intracranial hemorrhages. Intracranial
and umbilical bleeding can be the presenting symptom for neonates.
Heterozygous carriers usually have activity >50% normal and are
asymptomatic.
A reduced factor X level is associated with prolongation of both PT
and PTT; factor X specific assays are diagnostic. Replacement treatment is with FFP or prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) or
plasma-­derived factor X concentrates. The plasma half-­life of factor X
is approximately 40-­60 hours, and prophylaxis regimens with PCC or
factor X concentrates administered 1-­2 times per week are described
for patients with severe bleeding.
Although it is rarely a problem in pediatric patients, about 10% of
cases of light-­chain amyloidosis are associated with factor X deficiency, resulting from the adsorption of factor X on the amyloid protein. In the setting of amyloidosis, replacement therapy often is not
successful because of the rapid clearance of factor X.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.6 Prothrombin (Factor II) Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Prothrombin (factor II) deficiency is caused either by a markedly
reduced prothrombin level (hypoprothrombinemia) or by functionally abnormal prothrombin (dysprothrombinemia). Laboratory testing
in homozygous patients shows prolonged PT and PTT; specific prothrombin assays are diagnostic. Mucocutaneous bleeding in infancy
and posttraumatic bleeding later are common. Patients are treated with
either FFP or PCC at doses of 15-­25 mL/kg or 20-­40 U/kg, respectively.
The half-­life of prothrombin is 3-­4 days, and once weekly prophylaxis
regimens with PCC are reported.
Acquired factor II deficiency can be seen with a small percentage
of patients with a lupus anticoagulant and is usually associated with
significant bleeding. It is distinguished from inherited prothrombin deficiency by clinical history and the laboratory identification of
antiphospholipid antibodies and abnormal PTT mixing studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3034 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

525.7 Factor V Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Deficiency of factor V is an autosomal recessive, mild to moderate
bleeding disorder. Factor V circulates with 80% in plasma and 20%
in platelet α-­granules; this platelet factor V pool has been suggested
to ameliorate the bleeding that might be expected from low plasma
factor V levels. The most common symptoms are epistaxis, oral cavity
bleeding, heavy menstrual periods, and postoperative bleeding; joint,
muscle, and intracranial hemorrhages occur rarely.
Laboratory evaluation shows prolonged PT and PTT. Specific assays
for factor V show a reduction in factor V levels. FFP is the only currently available therapeutic product that contains factor V. Factor V is
lost rapidly from stored FFP. Treatment for major surgery or bleeding
is usually 15-­25 mL/kg FFP followed by additional doses of 10 mL/kg
every 12 hours. Twice weekly FFP prophylaxis regimens are sometimes
used for patients with severe bleeding. Platelet transfusions are also
an option for acute or prophylactic treatment. Rarely, a patient with a
negative family history of bleeding has an acquired antibody to factor V,
which can be identified in laboratory mixing studies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.8 Combined Deficiency of Factors V
and VIII
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Combined deficiency of factors V and VIII is an autosomal recessive
bleeding disorder that occurs secondary to the absence of intracellular
transporters responsible for the shuttling of factors V and VIII from
the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi compartments, as the result
of pathogenic variants in the genes LMAN1 or MCFD2. Factor V and
VIII levels are usually between 5–20% of normal. Bleeding symptoms
are often mild and most commonly mucocutaneous, traumatic, surgical
bleeding. Treatment for major bleeding or surgery is 15-­25 mL/kg of FFP.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.9 Congenital Fibrinogen Disorders
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Congenital fibrinogen disorders are a heterogenous group of rare autosomal recessive or dominant diseases because of qualitative (dysfibrinogenemia) or quantitative (hypofibrinogenemia or afibrinogenemia)
reductions in functional fibrinogen. Fibrinogen cleavage by thrombin into
fibrin is the final step of the coagulation cascade: polymerization follows
cleavage and results in fibrin clot formation. Fibrinogen is also the major
integrin ligand during platelet aggregation. Conversely, fibrin also sequesters thrombin to the site of clot formation and supports fibrinolysis by
enhancing the activation of plasminogen. The multiple roles of fibrinogen
and fibrin in hemostasis underlie the phenotypes of inherited fibrinogen
disorders, which can have bleeding and clotting clinical manifestations,
sometimes in the same patient. The most common bleeding symptoms
are mucocutaneous, soft-­tissue, joint, genitourinary, traumatic, surgical
bleeding, and heavy menstrual periods. Both venous and arterial thrombosis are rare in the quantitative defects but occur in about 20% of cases
of dysfibrinogenemia. Some congenital fibrinogen disorders also have
nonhematologic manifestations, including liver disease due to retention of
misfolded protein, poor wound healing, and splenic rupture.
Diagnosis is based on a decreased fibrinogen activity. Patients usually will also have a prolonged PT and PTT. Dysfibrinogenemia is
defined as a decreased ratio of fibrinogen activity compared to fibrinogen antigen. Treatment for bleeding or major surgery is with FFP, cryoprecipitate, or fibrinogen concentrates, depending on local availability.

Because of the variable clinical manifestations, including both bleeding
and clotting complications, treatment is tailored to the personal and
family history. The half-­life of fibrinogen is 2-­4 days.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.10 Factor XIII Deficiency (Fibrin-­Stabilizing
Factor or Transglutaminase Deficiency)
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Factor XIII deficiency is a rare autosomal bleeding disorder. Factor XIII
is a heterotetramer composed of two catalytic A subunits and two carrier B subunits; activation of factor XIII by thrombin frees the activated
A subunits, which covalently crosslink fibrin to increase clot strength
and constrain fibrinolysis. The different biochemical roles of the A and
B subunits result in distinct clinical manifestations. Inherited deficiencies in the factor XIII A-­subunit results in soft tissue, umbilical, surgical,
joint, and intracranial bleeding; the latter occurs in about a third of cases.
Deficiencies in the B-­subunit are associated with mild mucocutaneous
and surgical bleeding. Because of its role in stabilizing the fibrin clot,
factor XIII deficiency often presents with delayed abnormal bleeding or
bruising symptoms where patients may have mild trauma and then present with an excessive hematoma on the following day. Extrahematologic
clinical manifestation of factor XIII deficiency includes delayed umbilical cord separation, poor wound healing, and recurrent miscarriages.
Unlike the other severe inherited coagulation deficiencies, factor XIII
deficiency will have normal PTT and PT. Specific activity assays are diagnostic and should be considered in infants with delayed umbilical cord
separation, delayed bleeding symptoms, or unexplained intracranial hemorrhage. Treatment for bleeding or major surgery is 20-­40 U/kg of factor XIII concentrate. Recombinant A-­subunit protein is also available for
A-­subunit deficiencies. If specific factor XIII replacement therapies are not
available, cryoprecipitate is preferred over FFP because of the substantially
higher factor XIII content. The half-­life of factor XIII is 9-­12 days, which
facilitates prophylaxis. Because of the high prevalence of intracranial hemorrhage, prophylaxis of 20-­40 U/kg factor XIII concentrate every 4 weeks
is recommended for patients with <10% normal activity. Autoimmune
acquired factor XIII deficiency can be differentiated using specific mixing
studies or activity assays of platelet lysates.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525.11 Antiplasmin or Plasminogen
­Activator Inhibitor Deficiency
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones, Brian R. Branchford,
and Veronica H. Flood
Deficiency of either antiplasmin or plasminogen activator inhibitor,
both of which are antifibrinolytic proteins, results in increased plasmin
generation and premature lysis of fibrin clots. Affected patients have
a mild-­to-­moderate bleeding disorder characterized by delayed bleeding symptoms, typically associated with trauma or surgery. Mucocutaneous bleeding and heavy menstrual bleeding are the most described
symptoms, with rare reports of joint or intracranial hemorrhages.
Because results of the usual hemostatic tests are normal, further workup
of a patient with a positive bleeding history (especially delayed bleeding) should include euglobulin clot lysis time, which measures fibrinolytic
activity and yields a shortened result in the presence of these deficiencies.
Specific assays for α2-­antiplasmin and plasminogen activator inhibitor are
available, although the lower limit of normative values of these assays are
not well defined. Antifibrinolytic therapies such as aminocaproic acid or
tranexamic acid are the mainstay of treatments for controlling or preventing bleeding because they mitigate the hyperfibrinolysis. FFP can also be
used to replace the deficient proteins.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 526 u Von Willebrand Disease

Chapter 526

Von Willebrand Disease
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Von Willebrand disease (VWD) is the most common inherited bleeding disorder, with an estimated prevalence cited at 1 : 100 to 1 : 10,000
depending on the criteria used for diagnosis. Patients with VWD typically present with mucosal bleeding. A family history of either VWD
or bleeding symptoms and confirmatory laboratory testing are also
required for the diagnosis of VWD.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

VWD is caused by a defect in, or deficiency of, von Willebrand factor (VWF). VWF has several functions in coagulation. VWF serves to
tether platelets to injured subendothelium via binding sites for platelets
and for collagen. VWF also serves as a chaperone, or carrier protein,
for factor VIII (FVIII), protecting it from degradation in plasma. VWF
is stored in endothelial cell Weibel-­Palade bodies and platelet dense
granules and circulates as a large, multimeric glycoprotein. Shear stress
induces a conformational change in VWF that facilitates its ability to
bind platelets through an exposed binding site on platelet glycoprotein
Ib (GPIb). This enables VWF to recruit platelets to the site of clot formation, a function dependent on the high molecular weight (HMW)
multimer forms of VWF.
VWD typically presents with mucocutaneous bleeding, similar to that
seen with other platelet defects. Epistaxis, easy bruising, and menorrhagia in females are common complaints. However, symptoms are variable
and do not necessarily correlate well with VWF levels. Surgical bleeding, particularly with dental extractions or adenotonsillectomy, is another
common presentation. Severe type 3 VWD may present with joint and/
or muscle bleeds. Most patients will have a family history of bleeding, but
the VWD genetic variant demonstrates incomplete penetrance (not all
carriers of the variant express bleeding symptoms) and variable expressivity (different VWF levels can be found in individuals with the same gene
variant). Females are more likely to be diagnosed with VWD because of
the potential for symptoms with menorrhagia, but males and females
are equally likely to have VWD. However, diagnosis based on symptoms
may be difficult, since minor bruising and epistaxis are not uncommon
in childhood. Significant unexplained bruising, or bruising in unusual
areas (stomach, back, face), in infants and toddlers is more often from
nonaccidental trauma than from an underlying bleeding disorder. Gastrointestinal bleeding due to VWD may be complicated by associated
angiodysplastic lesions anywhere in the gastrointestinal tract.

CLASSIFICATION

VWD may be caused by quantitative or qualitative defects in VWF.
Mild to moderate quantitative defects are classified as type 1 VWD,
whereas severe quantitative defects, in which there is no detectable
VWF protein, are classified as type 3 VWD. The qualitative defects are
grouped together as type 2 VWD.
Type 1 VWD is by far the most common type, accounting for
60–80% of all VWD patients. Typical symptoms include mucosal
bleeding, such as epistaxis and menorrhagia, as well as easy bruising
and potentially surgical bleeding. Diagnostic guidelines use a VWF
level, as measured by the VWF antigen assay (VWF:Ag), of <30 IU/
dL for a clear diagnosis of VWD. Antigen and activity are usually symmetrically depressed in type 1 VWD. Patients with VWF:Ag <30 IU/dL
are most likely to have a genetic defect in VWF. Patients with VWF:Ag
between 30 and 50 IU/dL are said to have “low VWF.” Whether or
not this category truly represents VWD is a subject of some debate,
and the joint guidelines suggest that the resolution should be based
on presence or absence of bleeding symptoms. Because some patients
with VWF levels in this range do experience bleeding, many physicians
elect to treat them, especially perioperatively, for surgical procedures
such as tonsillectomy.

3035

Patients with type 1 VWD may have low VWF as a result of increased
clearance of their VWF, known as type 1C VWD. Diagnosis of this
subtype is important because treatment of these patients with desmopressin is likely to be ineffective, necessitating administration of VWF-­
containing products instead.
VWF levels can be influenced by external factors. Blood type has long
been known to affect VWF, with lower VWF levels seen in people with
blood group O. Stress, inflammation, exercise, menstrual cycle, and
pregnancy all increase VWF levels; therefore a single normal VWF level
does not necessarily rule out the presence of VWD. Certain diseases,
such as hypothyroidism (see Chapter 603), and medications, such as
valproic acid, can lower VWF levels in affected patients. Repeat testing
is often required to confidently rule out or confirm a diagnosis of VWD.
Type 3 VWD is the most severe form and presents with symptoms
similar to those seen in mild hemophilia. In type 3 VWD the VWF
protein is completely absent, and the activity and antigen are both
essentially zero. Type 3 VWD is seen at a frequency of approximately
1/1,000,000 members of the general population. In addition to mucosal bleeding, patients may experience joint bleeds, muscle bleeds, or
central nervous system (CNS) hemorrhage. Some physicians elect to
treat patients with prophylaxis, or modified prophylaxis, after injury,
given that these patients typically have very low FVIII (<10 IU/dL).
Because type 3 VWD is caused by a complete lack of VWF, desmopressin is ineffective and treatment with VWF-­containing concentrates
is required.
Type 2 VWD is often suspected when a discrepancy exists between
the VWF antigen level (often normal) and the VWF activity (often low)
because this type represents a qualitative defect, in which an abnormal
protein is produced in normal amounts. A ratio of activity to antigen of
less than 0.7 may raise concern for type 2 VWD, which itself has multiple subtypes. Multimer evaluation or other specialized testing can be
used to discriminate the type 2 subtypes.
Type 2A VWD is characterized by a defect in VWF multimerization and decreased VWF activity in terms of platelet binding. It is the
most common of the type 2 variants, accounting for approximately
10% of VWD cases. Type 2A VWD can result from variants that affect
multimer assembly and processing, or variants that result in increased
proteolysis of secreted VWF. Some variants affect both secretion and
clearance of the VWF. Regardless of the mechanism, all type 2A VWD
patients lack the HMW multimers, and therefore have reduced VWF
activity, which results in bleeding. Symptoms are typically more severe
than those seen in type 1 VWD. Desmopressin may have clinical efficacy for treatment of minor bleeding, but significant surgical challenges
or major bleeding symptoms generally require a VWF-­containing concentrate for treatment.
Type 2B VWD results from gain-­of-­function variants that increase
the ability of VWF to bind platelets. This leads to increased clearance
of both VWF and platelets from circulation and results in the loss of
HMW multimers and decreased VWF activity, similar to that seen in
type 2A VWD. Special testing is therefore required to diagnose type 2B
VWD, either by direct measurement of the increased platelet binding
or by an increased response to low dose ristocetin on platelet aggregation testing. Thrombocytopenia is not always present and may be
more prominent during times of stress such as surgery or pregnancy.
Desmopressin is relatively contraindicated in type 2B VWD because it
may accelerate VWF-­platelet binding and clearance, so treatment with
VWF-­containing product is necessary.
Platelet-­type pseudo-­VWD occurs when a variant in platelet GPIb
causes spontaneous binding to VWF and also presents with decreased
VWF activity, loss of HMW multimers, and thrombocytopenia similar to type 2B VWD. Specific testing is required to distinguish the two
conditions. Because the defect involves platelets, treatment generally
requires platelet transfusion.
Type 2M VWD includes those patients with decreased VWF activity
but normal (or near normal) multimer distribution. This is generally
caused by a defect in the ability of VWF to bind platelet GPIb, but this
category also includes patients with defects in VWF-­collagen interactions. Some minor bleeding in type 2M VWD may respond to desmopressin, but because type 2M VWD is a functional defect, treatment with
VWF-­containing concentrates is usually required.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3036 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 526.1

Laboratory Testing for von Willebrand Disease (VWD)

TEST

ABBREVIATION

VWF antigen

VWF:Ag

Measures total amount of VWF protein present.

PURPOSE

VWF activity

VWF:RCo*

Assesses interaction of VWF and platelets as
mediated by ristocetin.

VWF activity/antigen ratio

VWF:RCo/VWF:Ag

A decreased ratio (<0.7) is found in type 2A, type
2B, and type 2M VWD.

Factor VIII activity

FVIII

Measures circulating FVIII, which will be very low in
type 2N and type 3 VWD.

Multimer distribution

VWF multimers

Allows visualization of VWF multimers, used to
identify high molecular weight multimers, which
will be absent in types 2A and 2B VWD.

*In some laboratories a GPIb-­binding assay, the VWF:GPIbM, is available.
VWF, Von Willebrand factor; GPIb, glycoprotein Ib; RCo, ristocetin cofactor.

Table 526.2

Classification of von Willebrand Disease
TYPE 1

TYPE 3

TYPE 2A

TYPE 2B*

TYPE 2M

TYPE 2N

VWF:Ag

↓

Absent

↓

↓

↓

Normal or ↓

VWF:RCo

↓

Absent

↓↓

↓↓

↓↓

Normal or ↓

FVIII

Normal

↓↓

Normal or ↓

Normal or ↓

Normal or ↓

↓↓

Multimer distribution

Normal

Absent

Loss of HMWM

Loss of HMWM

Normal

Normal

*Platelet count is also usually decreased in type 2B VWD.
FVIII, factor VIII; HMWM, high molecular weight multimers; VWF:Ag, von Willebrand factor antigen; VWF:RCo, VWF ristocetin cofactor activity.

Type 2N VWD is characterized by a defect in the ability of VWF to
bind FVIII. Some patients with type 2N VWD may be misdiagnosed as
mild hemophilia; therefore a high index of suspicion for this diagnosis
is required in patients with low FVIII and an absent family history of
FVIII deficiency. Because the VWF in this case is dysfunctional, desmopressin is not usually helpful, and VWF-­containing product infusion is
typically required.

LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS

There are no reliable screening tests for VWD. Patients with significant
bleeding may present with anemia, and some patients with type 2B
VWD or platelet-­type pseudo-­VWD may have thrombocytopenia. The
partial thromboplastin time (PTT) may be prolonged if FVIII is low
but especially in type 1 VWD it is often normal, precluding use of the
PTT as a screening test. Platelet function analysis has been considered
as a screening test for VWD, but suboptimal sensitivity and specificity
render results difficult to interpret. Bleeding times are similarly unreliable in diagnosis of VWD.
Unfortunately, no single test can reliably diagnose VWD; therefore a panel of tests is usually required (Table 526.1). These include
VWF:Ag, which measures the total amount of VWF protein present,
and VWF activity test, typically using the ristocetin cofactor activity
assay (VWF:RCo), which provides a measure of the amount of functional VWF. FVIII activity is also usually included in the workup.
Another test measures VWF binding to platelet GPIb without ristocetin (VWF:GPIbM). This test is now FDA approved and its use is
increasing. Collagen binding measures an additional function of VWF.
Multimer distribution provides an assessment of HMW multimers
(Table 526.2; Fig. 526.1).
Additional specialized testing may be employed to help determine
the correct diagnosis. Specific testing for type 1C (clearance defects),
type 2B, and type 2N VWD can confirm these diagnoses. Genetic diagnosis is not typically performed, partly because of the large size of the

VWF gene and the high number of benign sequence variations. Large
gene deletions are responsible for some cases of VWD and will not be
detected on routine DNA sequencing. However, use of genetic diagnosis is increasing, particularly for types 2A, 2B, 2M, and 2N VWD.

TREATMENT

Treatment of VWD depends on the type of VWD present and the reason for treatment (Table 526.3). In general, type 1 VWD patients may
be treated with desmopressin, which increases the amount of circulating VWF (and FVIII) by release from storage in endothelial cells.
The exceptions are the rare type 1 patient who lacks a response to
desmopressin and patients with type 1C VWD who do respond with
an increase in VWF levels, but whose rapid clearance of circulating
endogenous VWF results in a rapid return to baseline levels. Treatment of types 2 and 3 VWD requires VWF-­containing concentrates,
similar to the treatment of hemophilia. Dosing depends on the type
of VWD and the reason for treatment. Careful monitoring of VWF
and FVIII levels is recommended to tailor treatment for surgeries and
major trauma. For all types of VWD, adjunct therapy should be considered when possible, such as the use of antifibrinolytics for oral surgery
or hormonal treatment for menorrhagia.
Alternate treatment strategies should also be considered, particularly
for difficult symptoms or severe VWD. Hormonal therapy for females
with menorrhagia, although not specific to VWD, can be very helpful
in managing symptoms and improving quality of life. Local treatment
of epistaxis, such as nasal cautery or packing, may be helpful in some
circumstances. Iron therapy for patients with iron-­deficiency anemia
may also be required.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 526 u Von Willebrand Disease

3037

Normal

Type 1

Type 1C
(Vicenza)

Type 3

Type 2A

Type 2B

Type 2N

Type 2M

PT-VWD

VWF:Ag

N

p

pp

absent

p

p

N or p

p or N

p

VWF:RCo

N

p

pp

absent

ppp

pp

N or p

pp

pp

FVIII:C

N

N or p

p

2-10 IU/dL

N or p

N or p

pp

N

N or p

VWFpp/VWF:Ag ratio

N

N

nn

absent

N or n

n

N

N

n

RIPA

N

often N

p

absent

p

often N

N

N or p

often N

LD-RIPA

absent

absent

absent

absent

absent

nnn

absent

absent

nnn

PFA'

N

N or n

n

nnn

n

n

N

n

n

BT'

N

N or n

n

nnn

n

n

N

n

n

Platelet count

N

N

N

N

N

p or N

N

N

p

VWF multimers

N

N but p

N but p

absent

abnormal

abnormal

N but p

N but p

abnormal

absent

Fig. 526.1 Specialized laboratory testing for von Willebrand disease (VWD). ↓, ↓↓, ↓↓↓, Relative decrease; ↑, ↑↑, ↑↑↑, relative increase; BT, bleeding

time; FVIII:C, factor VIII coagulant activity; LD-­RIPA, low-­dose ristocetin-­induced platelet aggregation; N, normal; N but ↓, normal but decreased in
intensity; PFA, platelet function analysis; PT-­VWD, platelet-­type VWD; RIPA, ristocetin-­induced platelet aggregation; VWF:Ag, von Willebrand factor
antigen; VWF:RCo, VWF activity by ristocetin cofactor; VWF pp, VWF propeptide. (Courtesy Dr. Robert R. Montgomery.)

Table 526.3

Treatment of Von Willebrand Disease

TREATMENT

VWD TYPES

ROUTE

DOSING

Desmopressin*

Type 1 VWD
Some type 2 VWD (use with caution)

IV or IN

0.3 μg/kg IV†

Von Willebrand factor (VWF)
concentrates‡

Type 3 VWD
Type 2 VWD
Severe type 1 VWD (or type 1
­clearance defects)

IV

40-­60 ristocetin cofactor activity units/
kg (adjust dose depending on baseline
VWF level and desired peak VWF level).
If recombinant VWF used, may need to
administer additional recombinant FVIII
for emergency treatment.

Antifibrinolytics

Mucosal bleeding, all types of VWD

PO or IV

Aminocaproic acid: 100 mg/kg PO loading
dose followed by 50 mg/kg every 6 hr§
Tranexamic acid: 1,300 mg PO 3 times
daily for 5 days

1 spray IN (<50 kg)
2 sprays IN (>50 kg)

*Recommended treatment with Stimate brand nasal spray because this form is concentrated to give 150 μg/spray. Other forms are much more dilute and will not result in desired
increase in VWF.
†Maximum recommended dose is 20-­30 μg/day.
‡Currently both Humate-­P and Wilate are approved for treatment of VWD. Vonvendi is a recombinant VWF that is also approved for treatment of VWD but does not contain FVIII.
§Maximum recommended dose is 24 g/day.
IN, Intranasal; IV, intravenous; PO, oral administration.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3038 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
The factor V Leiden pathogenic variant is the result of a single
base pair change at nucleotide 1765 within the factor V gene causing an R506Q amino acid substitution in the encoded protein. This
pathogenic variant causes activated factor V to become resistant to
inactivation by activated protein C. It is the most common inherited
risk factor for thrombosis, although its prevalence varies across ethnicities. Individuals who are heterozygous have a 5-­7–fold increased
relative risk of venous thrombosis, whereas homozygous individuals
have an even higher risk. There appears to be a synergistic prothrombotic risk enhancement with the inherited risk of factor V Leiden and
the acquired risk of estrogen-­containing contraceptives. The baseline
annual risk of thrombosis for females of reproductive age is approximately 1/10,000 and increases to 1/2,500 for those taking estrogen-­
containing contraceptives. For young females who are heterozygous
for the factor V Leiden pathogenic variant and on estrogen-­containing
contraceptives, the annual risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE)
increases to 1 in 200. The prothrombin 20210 gene pathogenic variant is a G-­to-­A transition in the 3’ untranslated region of the gene that
results in increased levels of prothrombin. It is a weaker risk factor for
venous thrombosis than factor V Leiden.
Deficiencies of the natural anticoagulation proteins (protein
C, protein S, and antithrombin) are less common than the specific
genetic pathogenic variants mentioned previously but are associated
with a stronger risk of thrombosis. Although heterozygous deficiencies do not often present during childhood, homozygous defects may
be embryonically lethal or result in significant symptoms in infancy.
Neonates with homozygous deficiencies of protein C or protein S may
present with purpura fulminans. This rare condition is characterized
by rapidly spreading purpuric skin lesions resulting from thromboses
of the small dermal vessels, followed by bleeding into the skin. In addition, these infants may also develop cerebral thrombosis, ophthalmic
thrombosis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and large-­vessel
thrombosis. An infant with purpuric skin lesions of unknown cause
should receive empiric replacement with fresh-­frozen plasma. Definitive diagnosis can be difficult in the sick premature neonate, who may
have undetectable levels of these factors but not have a true genetic
deficiency. Protein C and antithrombin concentrates are also available
and have been demonstrated to be effective.
Elevated levels of homocysteine have been associated with venous
and arterial thromboses, although the pathogenic mechanisms for
thrombosis in homocystinemia are poorly understood. Thromboembolic complications are well described in children with homocystinuria, a rare inborn error of metabolism caused by deficiency of
cystathione β-­synthase that results in plasma levels of homocysteine

Chapter 527

Hereditary Predisposition
to Thrombosis
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones and
Leslie J. Raffini
Most children that develop clots have multiple risk factors, which may
include inherited predispositions to thrombosis. The strength of the
inherited prothrombotic risk factors varies. An estimated 30–60% of
individuals with strong thrombophilias, such as antithrombin deficiency, protein C deficiency, and protein S deficiency, develop thromboembolic disease by age 60; in contrast, less than 10% of individuals
with weak thrombophilias, such as heterozygous factor V Leiden variant or prothrombin G20210A gene variant, develop thromboembolic
disease. The inherited thrombophilias with the best understood pathogenesis, population prevalence, and prothrombotic risks are listed in
Table 527.1. Some of these disorders may also be acquired or mixed
acquired and genetic (Table 527.2).
The inheritance of other thrombophilias is less well understood.
Elevated levels of factor VIII (FVIII) and homocysteine are associated with thrombosis, but their levels are not necessarily genetically
determined. Additional alterations in plasma proteins have also been
associated with increased thrombotic risk, such as elevated concentrations of factors IX and XI, heparin cofactor II deficiency, elevated
lipoprotein (a), and dysfibrinogenemia; however, these abnormalities
have not gained widespread acceptance in routine testing of children
for inherited thrombophilia.
In general, the prothrombotic tendency conferred by these defects
is either a result of an increased procoagulant effect (prothrombin
gene pathogenic variant, elevated FVIII, hyperhomocysteinemia) or a
decreased anticoagulant effect (factor V Leiden, deficiency of protein
C, protein S, or antithrombin). Although numerous inherited risk factors for thrombosis have been identified, the majority of individuals
who inherit one of these risk factors, even strong thrombophilias, do
not necessarily develop thrombosis during childhood. Before evaluating for these disorders, both the limitations of the testing and potential
benefits need to be considered.

Table 527.1  Clinically Relevant Inherited Thrombophilias and Accompanying Diagnostic Laboratory Studies
GENERAL
POPULATION
PREVALENCE (%)

VTE ADULT
PATIENT
PREVALENCE (%)

ANNUAL
INCIDENCE OF
VTE (%)

ODDS RATIO FOR
FIRST VTE
EPISODE IN
CHILDHOOD

ODDS RATIO FOR
RECURRENT
VTE EPISODE
IN CHILDHOOD

Antithrombin
deficiency

0.02-­0.04

1

1.8

9.4

3.4

Functional
coagulation
testing‡

Protein C
deficiency

0.2

3

1.5

7.7

2.5

Functional
coagulation
testing‡

Protein S
deficiency

0.03-­0.13

2

1.9

5.8

3.8

Functional
coagulation
testing‡

Factor V Leiden
variant*

3-­7

20

0.5

3.8

0.8

Gene testing

Prothrombin
20210 variant*

1-­4

5

0.3

2.6

2.2

Gene testing

THROMBOPHILIA

LABORATORY
STUDIES

*Values refer to heterozygous changes.
‡May be impacted by anticoagulation therapies.
VTE, Venous thromboembolism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 527 u Hereditary Predisposition to Thrombosis

3039

Table 527.2  Classification of Hypercoagulable States
HEREDITARY

MIXED

ACQUIRED

LOSS OF FUNCTION
Antithrombin deficiency

Hyperhomocysteinemia

Previous venous thromboembolism
Hepatic cirrhosis
Severe liver disease
Nephrotic syndrome
L-­asparaginase

Protein C deficiency

Obesity

Pregnancy, puerperium

Protein S deficiency

Cancer
Drug-­induced:
Heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia
Prothrombin complex concentrates
L -­asparaginase
Hormonal therapy

GAIN OF FUNCTION
Factor V Leiden

Postoperative

Prothrombin FII G20210A

Myeloproliferative disorders

Elevated factor VIII, IX, or XI
Modified from Hoffman R, Benz Jr. EJ, Silberstein LE, et al., eds. Hematology Basic Principles and Practice, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2018: Table 140.1, p. 2077.

that exceed 100 μmol/L. Much more common are mild to moderate
elevations of homocysteine, which may be acquired or associated with
a polymorphism in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR)
gene. Although moderate elevations of homocysteine have been associated with both venous and arterial thrombotic events, testing for
polymorphisms in the MTHFR gene is not indicated because these
polymorphisms are common and by themselves (without homocystinemia) are not associated with thromboembolism.
Increased plasma concentrations of FVIII appear to be regulated
by both genetic and environmental factors and are associated with an
increased risk of thrombosis. High FVIII levels are usually polygenic,
although rarely specific changes in the FVIII gene have been identified.
FVIII is also an acute-­phase reactant and may increase during periods
of inflammation.
Although interpretation of gene testing is fairly straightforward, several challenges in interpretation of thrombophilia studies are unique
to pediatric patients. Neonates have decreased concentrations of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin that increase rapidly over the first
6 months of life; protein C concentrations remain below adult levels
throughout much of childhood. It is important to use pediatric normal
ranges when evaluating these values and recognize that often the normal range overlaps with heterozygous defects and that retesting may
be required, particularly in young children. Several nongenetic factors may also influence the results of inherited thrombophilia testing,
including acute thrombosis, infection, inflammation, hepatic dysfunction, nephrotic syndrome, medication, and vitamin K deficiency. In
some patients the hereditary nature may be confirmed by testing the
parents.
Thrombophilia testing is considered during childhood when a child
develops thrombosis or if a child has relatives with thrombosis or
thrombophilia. Thrombophilia testing rarely influences the acute management of a child with a thrombotic event. The majority of children
who develop thrombosis have multiple, coexistent acquired risk factors
(see Table 528.1 in Chapter 528). More than 90% of thromboses in children are associated with indwelling intravascular catheters; inherited
thrombophilias are uncommon in this scenario, and testing is generally

not warranted. However, inherited thrombophilia is more common in
an otherwise healthy child or adolescent who develops a blood clot
or in a child who develops unusual or recurrent thrombosis. Thrombophilia testing may be useful in these situations because it may help
explain why the child developed a blood clot and inform on the duration of therapy. However, current treatment recommendations do not
differ based on the presence or absence of an inherited thrombophilia.
The identification of an inherited anticoagulant protein defect, such as
antithrombin or protein C deficiency, may allow for replacement therapies while off anticoagulation, such as in the perioperative setting.
The decision to perform thrombophilia testing in an otherwise
healthy child with a family history of thrombosis or thrombophilia
should be carefully considered, weighing the potential advantages and
limitations of such an approach. Given that the absolute risk of thrombosis in children is extremely low (0.07/100,000), it is unlikely that an
inherited thrombophilia will have any impact on clinical decision-­
making for a young child. The risk of thrombosis increases with age,
so identification of a thrombophilic defect in an adolescent may guide
primary thromboprophylaxis in high-­risk situations (lower-­extremity
casting or prolonged immobility), inform the discussion about
estrogen-­based contraceptives, and promote lifestyle modification to
avoid behavioral risk factors (sedentary lifestyle, dehydration, obesity,
and smoking). Limitations of such testing include the cost as well as the
potential for causing unnecessary anxiety or false reassurance.
In most patients with inherited thrombophilia, the treatment is the
same as for patients with no inherited disorders (see Chapter 528).
In neonates with purpura fulminans caused by homozygous protein
C or S deficiency or in patients with warfarin-­induced skin necrosis,
heparin-­induced thrombocytopenias and severe antithrombin deficiency often require factor replacement (protein C, S or antithrombin concentrates or plasma) in addition to unfractionated heparin or
low molecular weight heparin. In less severe antithrombin deficiency,
higher than usual doses of heparin may be needed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3040 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 528

Thrombotic Disorders in
Children
Leslie J. Raffini and Brian R. Branchford
Thromboembolic events (TEs) are seen in pediatric tertiary care centers and may result in significant acute and chronic morbidity. TEs in
children are rare. Diagnosis and treatment are often extrapolated from
adult data because of a current lack of high-­quality data in the pediatric
setting.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although the overall incidence of thrombosis in the general pediatric
population is quite low (0.07/100,000), the rate of venous thromboembolism (VTE) in hospitalized children is 60/10,000 admissions. Infants
<1 year old account for the largest proportion of pediatric VTEs, with
a second peak during adolescence.
Most children who develop a TE have multiple risk factors that may
be acquired, inherited, or anatomic (Table 528.1). The presence of a
central venous catheter (CVC) or peripherally inserted central venous
catheter (PICC) is the most important risk factor for VTE in pediatric
patients, associated with approximately 90% of neonatal VTE and 60%
of childhood VTE. PICC lines may be among the highest-­risk CVC
subtypes. CVCs are often necessary for the care of premature neonates
and children with acute and chronic diseases and are used for intravenous (IV) hyperalimentation, chemotherapy, dialysis, antibiotics, or
supportive therapy. CVCs may damage the endothelial lining and/or
cause blood flow disruption, increasing the risk of thrombosis. Many
other acquired risk factors are associated with thrombosis, including
trauma, surgery, infection, inflammation, chronic medical conditions,
and certain medications. Cancer, congenital heart disease, and prematurity are the most common medical conditions associated with TEs.
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS) is characterized by
recurrent fetal loss and/or thrombosis (Table 528.2). Antiphospholipid
antibodies are associated with venous and, less often, arterial thrombosis. The autoantibodies in APS include lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, and anti-­β2 glycoprotein I. If all three antibodies
are positive (triple positive), the risk of thrombosis is increased. The
mechanism by which these antibodies cause thrombosis is not well
understood. A diagnosis of APS requires the presence of both clinical and laboratory abnormalities (see “Laboratory Testing”). The laboratory abnormalities must be identified on two separate occasions,
at least 12 weeks apart. Because of the high risk of VTE recurrence,
patients with APS often require long-­term anticoagulation, at least
until the antibodies have resolved; the type of antibodies and the presence of arterial thrombosis may have important implications for the
type of anticoagulant therapy chosen. Up to 20% of healthy children
may have a transient lupus anticoagulant, often diagnosed because of a
prolonged partial thromboplastin time (PTT) on routine preoperative
testing. In this setting, transient antibodies may be associated with a
recent viral infection and are not a risk factor for thrombosis. APS is
also noted in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (see Chapter 199) and may also be associated with livedo reticularis, neuropsychiatric complications, thrombocytopenia, or anemia; these patients
are often persistently positive for the antiphospholipid antibody. Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome is a rare and potentially fatal
disorder characterized by rapid onset of multiorgan thrombosis and/
or thrombotic microangiopathies (Table 528.3).
Anatomic abnormalities that impede blood flow also predispose
patients to thrombosis at an earlier age. Atresia of the inferior vena
cava has been described in association with acute and chronic lower-­
extremity deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Compression of the left iliac

vein by the overlying right iliac artery (May-­Thurner syndrome)
should be considered in patients who present spontaneously with
left iliofemoral thrombosis, and thoracic outlet obstruction (Paget-­
Schroetter syndrome) frequently presents with effort-­related axillary-­
subclavian vein thrombosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Extremity Deep Vein Thrombosis

Children with acute DVT often present with extremity pain, swelling,
and discoloration (see Table 524.1). A history of a current or recent
CVC in that extremity should be very suggestive. Many times, symptoms of CVC-­associated thrombosis are more subtle and chronic,
including repeated CVC occlusion (potentially requiring clearance
with tissue plasminogen activator [tPA]) or sepsis, or prominent
venous collaterals on the chest, face, and neck.

Pulmonary Embolism

Signs and symptoms classically include shortness of breath, pleuritic
chest pain, cough, hemoptysis, fever, tachypnea, tachycardia, and/or, in
the case of massive pulmonary embolism (PE), hypotension and right-­
sided heart failure. Based on autopsy studies in pediatric centers, PE
is often undiagnosed because young children are unable to describe
their symptoms accurately, and their respiratory deterioration may be
masked by other conditions (see Chapter 458.1).

Cerebral Sinovenous Thrombosis

Signs and symptoms of cerebral sinovenous thrombosis (CSVT) may
be subtle and may develop over many hours or days (see Table 524.1).
Neonates with CSVT often present with seizures, whereas older children often complain of headache, vomiting, seizures, visual changes,
and/or focal neurologic signs. They may also have papilledema and
abducens palsy. Older patients may have a concurrent sinusitis or mastoiditis that has contributed to the thrombosis. Other risk factors may
include trauma, meningitis, or dehydration.

Renal Vein Thrombosis

Renal vein thrombosis (RVT) is the most common spontaneous VTE
in neonates (see Table 524.1). Affected infants may present with hematuria, an abdominal mass, and thrombocytopenia. Infants of diabetic
mothers are at increased risk for RVT, although the mechanism for the
increased risk is unknown. Approximately 25% of cases are bilateral.

Portal Vein Thrombosis

Portal vein thrombosis (PVT) often occurs during the neonatal period
and is often asymptomatic, only manifesting in those patients who
develop symptomatic portal hypertension (e.g., gastrointestinal [GI]
bleeding, splenomegaly) after the initial thrombotic event (see Table
524.1). The most common risk factor associated with PVT is an umbilical venous catheter, although sepsis, pancreatitis, cirrhosis, liver transplant, splenectomy, and sickle cell disease are also notable risk factors.
A known complication of PVT is cavernous transformation, which
confers a risk for variceal bleeding.

Peripheral Arterial Thrombosis

The majority of arterial TEs in children are associated with catheters,
often related to umbilical artery lines in neonates or cardiac catheterization via the femoral artery (see Table 524.1). Less common etiologies of arterial thrombosis include homocystinuria and APS. Patients
with an arterial thrombosis affecting blood flow to an extremity will
present with a cold, pale extremity with poor or absent pulses, which
can signify a limb-­threatening emergency.

Acute Ischemic Stroke

Acute ischemic stroke (AIS) typically presents with hemiparesis, slurred
speech, altered consciousness, or seizures. This condition may occur
secondary to pathology that affects the intracranial arteries (e.g., sickle
cell disease, vasculitis, vasculopathy, traumatic arterial dissection, or
paradoxical embolism across a patent foramen ovale) or may result
from venous thrombi that embolize to the arterial circulation (placental

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 528 u Thrombotic Disorders in Children
Table 528.1  Risk Factors for Thrombosis
GENERAL
Indwelling catheter, especially PICC lines
Infection
Trauma
Surgery
Cancer
Immobility
Cardiac disease/prosthetic valve
Systemic lupus
Rheumatoid arthritis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Celiac disease
Polycythemia/dehydration
Nephrotic syndrome
Diabetes
Pregnancy
Obesity
Prematurity
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (acquired)
COVID-­19
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
INHERITED THROMBOPHILIA
Factor V Leiden pathogenic variant
Prothrombin pathogenic variant
Antithrombin deficiency
Protein C deficiency
Protein S deficiency
Homocystinuria
Elevated factor VIII
Dysfibrinogenemia
GATA-­2 deficiency
Hereditary thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
ANATOMIC
Thoracic outlet obstruction (Paget-­Schroetter syndrome)
Iliac vein compression syndrome (May-­Thurner syndrome)
Absence of inferior vena cava
MEDICATIONS
Estrogen-­containing contraceptives
Asparaginase
Heparin (heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia)
Corticosteroids
Immune checkpoint inhibitors
Hemophilia bypassing agents
PICC, Peripherally inserted central venous catheter.

thrombi, children with congenital heart disease, or patent foramen
ovale allowing right-­to-­left shunting of an embolic venous thrombosis).

Rapidly Progressive Thrombosis (Thrombotic Storm)

Rapid progression or multifocal thrombosis is a rare complication of
APS (catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome), or heparin-­induced
thrombocytopenia with thrombosis (see Table 528.3). Multiorgan dysfunction develops in the presence of small vessel occlusion and elevated
D-­dimer levels, and this may progress to disseminated intravascular
coagulation. Treatment includes aggressive anticoagulation, often with
direct thrombin inhibitors or fondaparinux, followed by prolonged
warfarin therapy. In rare cases, plasmapheresis and/or immunosuppression and/or antiinflammatory therapy may be warranted.

DIAGNOSIS

Compression ultrasound with Doppler flow is the most common imaging study for the diagnosis of extremity DVT and chest CT is used most
frequently for the diagnosis of PE (Fig. 528.1). Echocardiogram is often
used to detect and follow right atrial clots, most often detected in patients
with central catheter tips in the right atrium. Other diagnostic imaging
options include CT and MR venography, which are noninvasive, although
the sensitivity and specificity of these studies is not known. These studies

3041

Table 528.2  Sydney Investigational Criteria for the Diagnosis
of the Antiphospholipid Syndrome
CLINICAL
• Vascular thrombosis (one or more episodes of arterial, venous,
or small-­vessel thrombosis). For histopathologic diagnosis, there
should be no evidence of inflammation in the vessel wall.
• Pregnancy morbidities attributable to placental insufficiency,
including: (a) three or more otherwise unexplained recurrent
spontaneous miscarriages before 10 weeks of gestation, (b) one
or more fetal losses after the 10th week of gestation, (c) stillbirth,
and (d) episode of preeclampsia, preterm labor, placental abruption, intrauterine growth restriction, or oligohydramnios that are
otherwise unexplained.
LABORATORY
• Medium-­ or high-­titer aCL or anti-­β2 GPI IgG and/or IgM antibody
present on two or more occasions, at least 12 weeks apart, measured by standard ELISA.
• Lupus anticoagulant in plasma, on two or more occasions, at least
12 weeks apart, detected according to the guidelines of the ISTH
SSC Subcommittee on Lupus Anticoagulants and Phospholipid-­
Dependent Antibodies.
“Definite APS” is considered present if at least one of the clinical
criteria and one of the laboratory criteria are met.
aCL, Anticardiolipin; aPL, antiphospholipid; β 2 GPI, β2 -­glycoprotein I; ELISA, enzyme-­
linked immunosorbent assay; Ig, immunoglobulin.
Modified from Miyakis S, Lockshin MD, Atsumi T, et al. International consensus statement on an update of the classification criteria for definite antiphospholipid syndrome
(APS). Thromb Haemost. 2006;4:295–306. Table 2.

Table 528.3  Proposed Criteria for the Classification of
Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome
1.	Evidence of involvement of three or more organs, systems and/or
tissues*
2.	Development of manifestations simultaneously or in less than a week
3.	Confirmation by histopathology of small vessel occlusion in at
least one organ or tissue†
4.	Laboratory confirmation of the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (lupus anticoagulant and/or anticardiolipin antibodies)‡
DEFINITE CATASTROPHIC APS
• All four criteria
PROBABLE CATASTROPHIC APS
• All four criteria, except for only involvement of two organs,
systems, and/or tissues
• All four criteria, except for the absence of laboratory confirmation
at least 6 weeks apart because of the early death of a patient
never previously tested for aPL before the catastrophic APS event
• Criteria 1, 2, and 4
• Criteria 1, 3, and 4 and the development of a third event in more
than a week but less than a month, despite anticoagulation
*Usually, clinical evidence of vessel occlusions, confirmed by imaging techniques when
appropriate. Renal involvement is defined by a 50% rise in serum creatinine, severe
systemic hypertension (≥180/100 mm Hg) and/or proteinuria (≥500 mg/24 h).
†For histopathologic confirmation, significant evidence of thrombosis must be present,
although, in contrast with Sydney criteria, vasculitis may coexist occasionally.
‡If the patient had not been previously diagnosed as having an APS, the laboratory confirmation requires that the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies must be detected on
two or more occasions at least 6 weeks apart (not necessarily at the time of the event),
according to the proposed preliminary criteria for the classification of definite APS.
aPL, Antiphospholipid; APS, antiphospholipid syndrome
Modified from Asherson RA, Cevera R, de Groot PG et al. Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome: international consensus statement on classification criteria and treatment
guidelines. Lupus 2003;12:530–534.

may be particularly helpful in evaluating proximal or abdominal thrombosis. For the diagnosis of CSVT and AIS, the most sensitive imaging
study is brain MRI with venography or diffusion-­weighted imaging.

LABORATORY TESTING

All children with a VTE should have a complete blood count and a baseline prothrombin time (PT) and PTT to assess their coagulation status in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3042 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
COMPLICATIONS

Complications of VTE include recurrent thrombosis (local or distant),
and development of post-­thrombotic syndrome (PTS). Over time, due
to venous hypertension or damaged endovascular valves, patients may
develop pain, swelling, edema, discoloration, and ulceration of the
affected limb. Several prospective studies in adults have shown PTS to
be present in 17–50% of patients with a history of thrombosis. The likelihood of developing PTS has been shown to increase with age, thrombus burden, and delay in anticoagulation therapy.

528.1 Anticoagulant and Thrombolytic
Therapy
Leslie J. Raffini and Brian R. Branchford

Fig. 528.1 Chest CT scan from a 15-­yr-­old male with a large pul-

monary embolism. Large filling defects are present in the right and left
main pulmonary arteries (arrows).

anticipation of anticoagulation treatment. In adults with suspected DVT, the
D-­dimer level has a high negative predictive value, but the predictive value
is not as well established for children. The D-­dimer is a fragment produced
when fibrin is degraded by plasmin and is a measure of both clot formation
and subsequent fibrinolysis. Based on the clinical scenario, other laboratory
studies, such as renal and hepatic function, may be indicated. Testing for
APS includes evaluation for the lupus anticoagulant as well as anticardiolipin
and anti–β2-­glycoprotein antibodies and should be considered in patients
with inflammatory disorders, recent trauma, surgery, or infection, and those
who present with thrombosis and no other obvious risk factors.
There is debate regarding which patients should have testing for
inherited risk factors. Thrombophilia testing rarely influences the acute
management of a child with a thrombotic event, and natural anticoagulants like protein C and S or antithrombin (AT) may appear to have
low levels due to consumption during the acute phase of thrombosis,
even if the patient does not have an existing deficiency of these proteins (see Chapter 527). Identification of an inherited thrombophilia
may influence the duration of treatment, particularly for those with a
strong thrombophilia, and may aid in counseling patients about their
risk of recurrence. Unprovoked (absence of risk factors) thrombosis
and a family history of thrombotic events may be a clue to an inherited
thrombophilia, although they may coincide with a known risk factor.
The evaluation and interpretation of coagulation studies in pediatric
patients may be complicated by the developing hemostatic system and the
differences in normal ranges between infants and adults (see Chapter 527).

TREATMENT

Therapeutic options for children with thrombosis may include observation, anticoagulation, thrombolysis, and surgery. In premature neonates
and critically ill children who are at high risk of bleeding, the potential
benefits must be weighed against the risks, and close observation with
repeat imaging may be an option. The majority of nonneonates with
symptomatic thrombosis are treated with anticoagulant therapy. The goal
of anticoagulation is to reduce the risk of embolism, halt clot extension,
and prevent recurrence (see Chapter 528.1). Systemic or endovascular
thrombolysis may be indicated for organ-­or limb-­threatening thrombosis. Surgery may be necessary for life-­or limb-­threatening thrombosis
when there is a contraindication to thrombolysis. The optimal treatment
for a child with AIS depends on the likely etiology and the size of the
infarct and may include either anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy
such as aspirin. Children with sickle cell disease who develop stroke are
treated acutely with erythrocytapheresis to rapidly lower the percentage
of hemoglobin S and may also receive ongoing chronic red blood cell
transfusions (or erythrocytapheresis) to reduce recurrence risk.
A summary of management recommendations for various types of
VTE can be found in (Tables 528.4 and 528.5)

Initial options for anticoagulation in children have generally included
unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low molecular weight heparin (LMWH),
followed by LMWH or warfarin for outpatient management (see Tables
528.4 and 528.5). Clinical trials of several direct oral anticoagulants
(DOACs) have demonstrated the safety and efficacy of these drugs to treat
VTE in children, and the landscape of treatment options for children with
thrombosis is changing rapidly as these drugs gain regulatory approval.
DOACs act by inhibiting factor Xa or thrombin (Table 528.6).
The optimal duration of anticoagulation for children with TEs is not
well established. American Society of Hematology (ASH) guidelines
recommend that pediatric patients with provoked DVT or PE receive
≤3 months of anticoagulation and those with unprovoked DVT or PE
receive 6-­12 months of therapy. Patients with strong inherited thrombophilia, recurrent thrombosis, and APS (or other nonmitigatable risk
factors) may require indefinite anticoagulation.

UNFRACTIONATED HEPARIN

Both UFH and LMWH act by catalyzing the action of AT. UFH consists of large molecular weight polysaccharide chains that interact with
AT, supporting the inhibition of factor Xa and thrombin, as well as
other serine proteases.

Heparin Dosing

A therapeutic heparin dose achieves a prolongation of the PTT of
1.5-­2.5 the upper limit of normal. A bolus dose of 75-­100 units/kg
results in a therapeutic PTT in the majority of children. This bolus
should be followed by a continuous infusion. Initial dosing is based
on age, with infants having the highest requirements. It is important
to continue to monitor the PTT closely. In some situations, such as
patients with a lupus anticoagulant, those with elevated factor VIII,
or neonates, the PTT may not accurately reflect the degree of anticoagulation, and heparin can be monitored using a heparin anti-­Xa
level of 0.35-­0.7 units/mL.

Heparin Complications

Maintaining the PTT in the therapeutic range can be difficult in young
children. The bioavailability of heparin is difficult to predict and may
be influenced by plasma proteins, including AT level. In many patients,
this results in multiple dose adjustments requiring close monitoring
with frequent venipuncture. UFH also requires continuous IV access,
which may be difficult to maintain in young children.
The most common adverse effect related to heparin therapy is
bleeding. There are case reports of life-­threatening bleeding in children treated with heparin. The true frequency of bleeding in pediatric
patients receiving heparin has not been well established and is reported
as 1–24%. If the anticoagulant effect of heparin must be reversed immediately, protamine sulfate may be administered to neutralize the heparin.
With an elimination half-­life of approximately 30 minutes, the anticoagulant effect of this drug typically wears off in approximately 2-­3 hours
after stopping the infusion. UFH is cleared by the liver and kidney.
Other adverse effects include osteoporosis (with long-­term use)
and heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia (HIT). Although rare in
pediatric populations, HIT is a prothrombotic, immune-­
mediated

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 528 u Thrombotic Disorders in Children

3043

Table 528.4  Management Considerations for Pediatric Thromboembolic Events
VTE
Symptomatic DVT

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATION

COMMENTS

Anticoagulation
Provoked—treat <3 months (or until provoking
factor is resolved)
Unprovoked—treat 6-­12 months, or longer
based on risk/benefit analysis

Observation may be necessary or reasonable for
premature neonates or critically ill children at
high risk of bleeding
Recommendations vary regarding utility of
radiographic follow-­up

Thrombolysis considered if life-­or limb-­threatening
VTE
IVC filter considered if absolute contraindication
to anticoagulation
Asymptomatic DVT

Anticoagulation or observation

Natural history is unclear, decision may vary
based on VTE-­and patient-­specific factors

Massive PE (hemodynamic compromise)

Thrombolysis followed by anticoagulation

Submassive PE (no hemodynamic
compromise)

Anticoagulation alone

CVC-­related

Anticoagulation
Removal of CVC if not functioning or no longer
needed

Renal vein thrombosis (RVT)

Unilateral: Anticoagulation alone
Bilateral: Consider thrombolysis for bilateral RVT
(life-­ or organ-­threatening)

Portal vein thrombosis (PVT)

Occlusive: Anticoagulation
Nonocclusive: Observation (close radiologic
follow-­up)

Observe for cavernous transformation.
Bleeding risk with anticoagulation increases in
the setting of portal hypertension (and associated
esophageal varices)

Cerebral Sinovenous Thrombosis (CSVT)

Anticoagulation (radiologic follow-­up
recommended)
Acetazolamide if concomitant increased
intracranial pressure

Decision in patients with intracranial hemorrhage
needs to be individualized, but some patients
may benefit from anticoagulation

Duration of anticoagulation needed before CVC
removal is still being investigated, and
recommendations vary

CVC, Central venous catheter; DVT, deep vein thrombosis; IVC, inferior vena cava; PE pulmonary embolism; VTE, venous thromboembolism

Table 528.5  Comparison of Antithrombotic Agents
rTPA

UNFRACTIONATED
HEPARIN

Indication

Recent onset of life-­or limb-­
threatening thrombus

Acute or chronic thrombus,
prophylaxis

Subacute or chronic thrombosis, thromboprophylaxis
for cardiac valves

Acute or chronic thrombus,
prophylaxis

Administration

IV continuous infusion

IV continuous infusion

PO once daily

SC injection twice daily

Monitoring

“Lytic state”: FDP or D-­dimer

PTT

INR

Anti–factor Xa activity

Other

Higher risk of bleeding

Difficult to titrate;
requires frequent dose
adjustments; higher dose
required in newborns

Heavily influenced by other
drugs and diet

More stable and easy to
titrate; concern of
osteopenia with long-­term
use

WARFARIN

LMW HEPARIN
(ENOXAPARIN)

FDP, Fibrin degradation products; INR, international normalized ratio; IV, intravenous; LMW, low-­molecular-­weight; PO, oral; PTT, partial thromboplastin time; rTPA, recombinant
tissue-­type plasminogen activator; SC, subcutaneous.

complication in which antibodies develop to a complex of heparin
and platelet factor-­4. These antibodies result in platelet activation,
stimulation of coagulation, thrombocytopenia, and in some cases, life-­
threatening thrombosis. If HIT is strongly suspected, heparin must be
discontinued immediately. An alternative parenteral anticoagulant,
including the direct thrombin inhibitors argatroban or bivalirudin,
may be used in this situation.

LOW MOLECULAR WEIGHT HEPARIN

In contrast to UFH, LMWH contains smaller molecular weight polysaccharide chains. The interaction of the smaller chains with AT
results primarily in the inhibition of factor Xa, with less of an effect
on thrombin. The several LMWHs available have variable inhibitory

effects on thrombin. For this reason, the PTT is not a reliable measure
of the anticoagulant effect of LMWH, and the anti–factor Xa activity
is used instead. Because of the ease of dosing and need for less monitoring, LMWH is the most frequently used anticoagulant in pediatric
patients. Although dalteparin was the first (and currently only) LMWH
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in children (older than 1 month of age), enoxaparin is the LMWH that has
been studied and used more often in pediatric patients.

Enoxaparin Dosing

The recommended standard starting dose of enoxaparin for infants
<2 months old is 1.5 mg/kg/dose subcutaneously every 12 hours and
for patients >2 months old, 1 mg/kg every 12 hours, although many

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3044 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 528.6  Pharmacologic Properties of Direct Oral Anticoagulants
DABIGATRAN

APIXABAN

BETRIXABAN

EDOXABAN

RIVAROXABAN

Target

Thrombin

Factor Xa

Factor Xa

Factor Xa

Factor Xa

Bioavailability, %

6–7%

50%

34%

62%

66%*

Protein binding, %

35%

87%

60%

40–59%

92–95%

Time to maximum
concentration, hr

2

1–3

3–4

1–2

2–4

Half-­life, hr

12–14

8–15

19–27

9–14

9–13

Renal elimination, %

>80%

25%

6–13%

50%

33%

Metabolism via
cytochrome P450
enzymes, %

<2%

<32%

<1%

<5%

57%

Drug interactions

Inhibitors and inducers of P-­gp

Dual inhibitors and
inducers of CYP3A4
and P-­gp

Inhibitors and inducers of P-­gp

Inhibitors and inducers of P-­gp

Dual inhibitors and
inducers of CYP3A4
and P-­gp

Specific reversal
agents

Idarucizumab

Andexanet alfa

Andexanet alfa†

Andexanet alfa†

Andexanet alfa

*Applies to the 15 mg and 20 mg doses given once a day without food; bioavailability is 80–100% when these doses are given with food.
†Expected to be effective on the basis of its mechanism of action, although not approved for these agents.
P-­gp, P-­glycoprotein.
From Chan N, Sobieraj-­Teague M, Eikelboom JW. Direct oral anticoagulants: evidence and unresolved issues. Lancet 2020;396:1767–1776. Table 1.

centers use slightly higher doses for children <2 years old. In general,
peak levels are achieved 3-­6 hours after injection. A therapeutic anti–
factor Xa level, drawn 4 hours after the second or third dose, should
be 0.5-­1.0 IU/mL; the dose can be titrated to achieve this range. The
elimination half-­life of enoxaparin is 4-­6 hours. Enoxaparin is cleared
by the kidney and should be used with caution in patients with renal
insufficiency. It should be avoided in patients with renal failure.
After an initial period of anticoagulation with heparin or LMWH,
patients may continue to receive LMWH as an outpatient for the duration of therapy or may be transitioned to an oral anticoagulant such as
warfarin.

Direct Thrombin Inhibitors

Argatroban and bivalirudin are IV direct thrombin inhibitors that are
used in the setting of HIT, complex heart disease/failure cases with
ventricular assist devices, or other relatively uncommon situations in
pediatrics. They have short half-­lives but cannot be fully reversed. Dosing has not been well established in children.

WARFARIN

Warfarin is an oral anticoagulant that competitively interferes with
vitamin K metabolism, exerting its action by decreasing concentrations of the vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and
X, as well as protein C and protein S. Therapy should be started while a
patient is anticoagulated with heparin or LMWH because of the risk of
warfarin-­induced skin necrosis. This transient hypercoagulable condition may occur when levels of protein C drop more rapidly than the
procoagulant factors.

Dosing

Warfarin therapy is often initiated with a weight-­based loading dose,
with subsequent dose adjustments made according to a nomogram.
When initiating warfarin therapy, UFH or LMWH should be continued until the international normalized ratio (INR) is therapeutic for
2 days. In most patients, this takes 5-­7 days. The PT is used to monitor the anticoagulant effect of warfarin. Because the thromboplastin
reagents used in PT assays have widely varying sensitivities, the PT
performed in one laboratory cannot be compared with that performed
in another laboratory. As a result, the INR was developed as a mechanism to standardize the variation in the thromboplastin reagent. The
target INR range depends on the clinical situation. In general, a range

of 2.0-­3.0 is the target for the treatment of VTE. High-­risk patients,
such as those with mechanical heart valves, APS, or recurrent thrombosis, may require a higher target range.
Polymorphisms in CYP2C9 and VKORC1 affect the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of warfarin. Pharmacogenetic testing can
identify wild-­type responders, as well as those who are more sensitive
(increased risk of bleeding). Genotyping in adults may help select warfarin dose, monitor for bleeding, or choose a DOAC instead of warfarin for patients highly sensitive and at risk for hemorrhage.

Complications

Bleeding is the most common adverse effect of warfarin. The risk of
serious bleeding in children receiving warfarin for the treatment of
VTE has been reported at 0.5% per year. Children who have supratherapeutic INR are at higher risk. There is considerable interpatient
variation in dose. Diet, medications, and illness may influence the
metabolism of warfarin, requiring frequent dose adjustments and laboratory studies. Numerous medications can affect the pharmacokinetics
of warfarin by altering its clearance or rate of absorption. These effects
can have a profound impact on the INR and must be considered when
monitoring a patient receiving warfarin.
The strategies used to reverse warfarin therapy depend on the clinical situation and whether there is bleeding. Vitamin K can be administered to reverse the effect of warfarin but takes some time to have
an effect. If the patient is having significant bleeding, a nonactivated
plasma-­derived 4-­factor prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) or
fresh-­frozen plasma (FFP, 15 mL/kg) should be given along with the
vitamin K. PCCs have not been well investigated in children.
Nonhemorrhagic complications are uncommon in children,
although hair loss has been reported. Warfarin is a teratogen, particularly in the first trimester. Warfarin embryopathy is characterized by
bone and cartilage abnormalities known as chondrodysplasia punctata.
Affected infants may have nasal hypoplasia and excessive calcifications
in the epiphyses and vertebrae.

DIRECT ORAL ANTICOAGULANTS

Oral direct thrombin inhibitors (dabigatran) or inhibitors of factor Xa
(apixaban, rivaroxaban, edoxaban) are approved for the prevention or
treatment of thrombosis in patients >18 years old (see Table 528.6), and
dabigatran is FDA-­approved for children older than 3 months of age.
Fixed dosing, oral administration, no dietary interference with vitamin

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 528 u Thrombotic Disorders in Children

3045

Table 528.7  Guidelines for Therapeutic Anticoagulation Treatment Duration
INDICATION

RISK FACTOR

THERAPEUTIC ANTICOAGULATION TREATMENT DURATION

First VTE episode

Provoked, reversible
Provoked, chronic
Unprovoked

3 mo
3 mo, then continue anticoagulation with either therapeutic or
prophylaxis regimens until the risk factor is resolved
6–12 mo

Recurrent VTE

Reversible
Chronic
Unprovoked

3 mo
If recurrence occurs while the patient was on prophylaxis regimen,
after first VTE episode, restart therapeutic regimen until risk factor
is resolved
Restart therapeutic regimen for at least 3 mo and then switch to
lifelong VTE prophylaxis regimen

VTE, Venous thromboembolism.
From Shoag J, Davis JA, Corrales-­Medina FF. Venous thromboembolism in pediatrics. Pediatr Rev. 2021;42:78–87.

K, and no need to monitor laboratory tests, as well as initial results suggesting noninferiority to warfarin and fewer bleeding episodes, have
favored the use of DOACs. Clinical trials have demonstrated the safety
and efficacy of dabigatran and rivaroxaban in children. Drugs are available to reverse the effects of DOACs if indicated. DOACs should be
avoided in patients with APS in the presence of arterial thrombosis.

THROMBOLYTIC THERAPY

Although anticoagulation alone is often effective at managing thrombosis while awaiting natural fibrinolysis, more rapid clot resolution
may sometimes be necessary or desirable. In these situations, a thrombolytic agent that can activate the fibrinolytic system is of potential
benefit. The pharmacologic activity of thrombolytic agents depends on
the conversion of endogenous plasminogen to plasmin. Plasmin is then
able to degrade several plasma proteins, including fibrin and fibrinogen. Because of the high risk of bleeding, thrombolytic therapy is generally reserved for patients with life-­or limb-­threatening thrombosis.
tPA is available as a recombinant product and has become the primary agent used for thrombolysis in children, although proper dose
finding studies have not been performed. Depending on the situation,
tPA may be used systemically or locally with catheter-­directed thrombolysis, sometimes with the addition of mechanical clot lysis devices
operated by interventional radiologists.

Dosing

An extremely wide range of doses of tPA has been used for systemic
therapy, and no consensus exists as to the optimal dose. Systemic tPA
doses of 0.1-­0.6 mg/kg/hr were previously recommended, although
recent reports indicate successful therapy with fewer bleeding complications using prolonged infusions with very low doses—0.01-­0.06 mg/
kg/hr.

Monitoring

There is no specific laboratory test to document a “therapeutic range”
for thrombolytic therapy. It is important to maintain the fibrinogen
>100 mg/dL and the platelet count >75,000 × 109/L during treatment.
Supplementation of plasminogen using FFP is generally recommended
in neonates before initiating thrombolysis because of their low baseline
levels.
The clinical and radiologic response to thrombolysis should be
closely monitored. The duration of therapy depends on the clinical
response. Invasive procedures, including urinary catheterization, arterial puncture, and rectal temperatures, should be avoided.

The role of adjuvant UFH during thrombolytic therapy is controversial. Animal models have demonstrated that thrombolytic therapy can
induce a procoagulant state with activation of the coagulation system,
generation of thrombin, and extension or reocclusion of the thrombosis. In pediatric patients thought to be at low risk for bleeding, adjuvant
UFH should be considered using doses of 10-­20 units/kg/hr. The recommended duration of therapy is noted in Table 528.7.

Complications

The most serious complication from thrombolysis is bleeding, which
has been reported in 0–40% of patients. Absolute contraindications to
thrombolysis include major surgery within 7 days, history of significant bleeding (intracranial, pulmonary, or GI), peripartum asphyxia
with brain damage, uncontrolled hypertension, and severe thrombocytopenia. In the event of serious bleeding, thrombolysis should be
stopped, and cryoprecipitate should be given to replace fibrinogen.

THROMBOPROPHYLAXIS

There have been no formal trials of VTE prevention in children,
although many institutions are starting to develop and use risk-­guided
algorithms to identify children who may benefit from mechanical
(sequential compression devices) or pharmacologic (low-­dose anticoagulant) prevention strategies in the absence of concomitant bleeding
risk. Hospitalized adolescents with multiple risk factors for thrombosis
who are immobilized for a prolonged period are a group that expert
consensus would suggest may benefit from prophylactic treatment
with enoxaparin, 0.5 mg/kg every 12 hours (maximum 30 mg).

ANTIPLATELET THERAPY

Inhibition of platelet function using agents such as aspirin is more likely
to be protective against arterial TEs than VTEs. Aspirin, or acetylsalicylic acid (ASA), exerts its antiplatelet effect by irreversibly inhibiting
cyclooxygenase, preventing platelet thromboxane A2 production. Aspirin is used routinely in children with Kawasaki disease and may also
be useful in children with stroke, ventricular assist devices, and single-­
ventricle cardiac defects. The recommended dose of aspirin to achieve
an antiplatelet effect in children is 1-­5 mg/kg/day.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3046 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

Chapter 529

Postneonatal Vitamin K
Deficiency
Brian R. Branchford, Benjamin J. Samelson-­
Jones, and Veronica H. Flood
Vitamin K deficiency occurring after the neonatal period is usually secondary to insufficient vitamin K intake, malabsorption, or alterations in
the intestinal flora as a consequence of antibiotics. The biologic activity of
the “vitamin K–dependent factors” (coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and
X, as well as the natural anticoagulants protein C and protein S) requires
vitamin K for their posttranslational carboxylation. In the absence of vitamin K, only nonfunctional forms of these proteins are synthesized, which
are ineffective for hemostasis. Severe vitamin K deficiency will result in a
prolonged prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT),
although early deficiency may only demonstrate a prolonged PT because of
the short half-­life of factor VII. Plasma levels of uncarboxylated factor II are
measured in the PIVKA-­II (proteins induced by vitamin K absence) test
and elevated levels are diagnostic of vitamin K deficiency, although clinical
history and basic coagulation labs are usually sufficient to make the diagnosis. It can often be clinically helpful to distinguish between deficiencies
of the vitamin K–dependent factors and deficiencies in the clotting factors
synthesized by hepatocytes due to liver disease (see Chapter 530), which
includes the vitamin K–dependent factors as well as factors V and XI.
Intestinal malabsorption of fats may accompany cystic fibrosis,
biliary atresia, or other liver diseases and results in a deficiency of fat-­
soluble dietary vitamins including vitamin K.
Prophylactic administration of water-­soluble vitamin K orally is indicated in these patients (2-­5 mg/24 hr for children and 5-­10 mg/24 hr for
adolescents and adults). Vitamin K may also be administered at 1-­2 mg
intravenously. Broad-­spectrum antibiotics can alter the intestinal flora,
reducing the vitamin K that is produced in the gastrointestinal tract.
Patients have only a few weeks of vitamin K stores. The anticoagulant properties of warfarin (Coumadin) depend on interference with vitamin K,
with a concomitant reduction of the vitamin K–dependent clotting factors.
Rat poison (superwarfarin) produces a similar deficiency that should be
considered in young children presenting with bleeding and bruising with a
history compatible with ingestion. There are also cases of illicit drugs being
adulterated with vitamin K antagonists. Vitamin K is a specific antidote for
these substances. Four factor prothrombin complex concentrates contain
all the vitamin K–­dependent clotting factors; they are available for warfarin reversal and have been used to rapidly replace vitamin K–dependent
clotting factors in urgent scenarios. Dosing is based on the international
normalized ratio (INR), and vitamin K should also be administered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 530

Coagulopathy in Liver
Disease

exclusively in hepatocytes, coagulation abnormalities are very common in patients with severe liver disease (Table 530.1). Only 15%
of such patients have significant clinical bleeding states, possibly
because of concomitant reduction in anticoagulation proteins (protein C and S). The severity of the coagulation abnormality appears
to be directly proportional to the extent of hepatocellular damage.
The most common mechanism causing the hemostasis defect is
decreased synthesis of coagulation factors. Patients with severe liver
disease characteristically have normal to increased (not reduced)
levels of factor VIII activity in plasma. In some instances, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC; see Chapter 510), hypofibrinogenemia, or hyperfibrinolysis may complicate liver disease,
making laboratory differentiation of severe liver disease from DIC-­
related clotting factor consumption difficult. These entities, as well
as vitamin K deficiency (see Chapter 529), may be distinguished by
comparing levels of a hepatically synthesized factor (such as factor
V), a hepatically synthesized vitamin K–dependent factor (such as
factor VII), and a nonhepatically synthesized factor that could be
subject to consumption (such as factor VIII).
Treatment of the coagulopathy of liver disease should be reserved
for patients with clinical bleeding rather than used to normalize the
lab values. Because a reduction in vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors is common in those with acute or chronic liver disease,
a trial of vitamin K supplementation can be given. Vitamin K can be
given orally, subcutaneously, or preferably intravenously (not intramuscularly) at a dose of 1 mg/24 hr for infants, 2-­5 mg/24 hr for
children, and 5-­10 mg/24 hr for adolescents and adults. Inability to
correct coagulopathy with vitamin K indicates that the coagulopathy may be caused by reduced levels of clotting factors that are not
vitamin K–dependent and/or by inadequate production of precursor vitamin K proteins. Treatment for bleeding consists of factor
replacement with fresh-­frozen plasma (FFP) or cryoprecipitate.
FFP (10-­15 mL/kg) contains all clotting factors, but replacement
of fibrinogen for severe hypofibrinogenemia may require cryoprecipitate at a dose of 1 unit per 5-­10 kg body weight, or a fibrinogen
concentrate if a patient is unable to tolerate excess fluid volume.
In severe liver disease, it is often difficult to attain correction of
abnormal clotting studies despite vigorous therapy with FFP and
cryoprecipitate, and such attempts are often complicated by volume
overload concerns. Some patients with bleeding as a result of liver
disease have responded to therapy with desmopressin (DDAVP),
whereas others have responded to treatment with recombinant factor VIIa, albeit at a dose lower than typically given for hemophilia.
Recombinant factor VIIa is contraindicated in DIC.
Desmopressin (0.3 μg/kg intravenously) is effective in shortening bleeding time, prompts endothelial cell release of von Willebrand factor and factor VIII, promotes platelet activation, and is
therefore used effectively to augment hemostasis before diagnostic
liver biopsy in the setting of hepatic insufficiency/failure. In clinical
trials of adults, recombinant factor VIIa has not been shown to be
effective for the treatment of bleeding caused by severe liver disease, possibly because of its short half-­life (3-­6 hours). Frequently,
severe liver disease is associated with moderate prolongation of
coagulation disorder screening tests (partial thromboplastin time
[PTT]; prothrombin time [PT]) that is not corrected by vitamin
K or plasma replacement. Another diagnostic clue may be a low
serum albumin level because this protein is also synthesized in the
liver.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Because all the clotting factors except factor VIII (which is synthesized in liver sinusoids and extrahepatic endothelium) are produced
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 532 u Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation

3047

Table 530.1  Coagulation Changes in Liver Disease
CHANGES IN PROCOAGULANT
PROTEINS

CHANGES IN ANTICOAGULANT
PROTEINS

CHANGES IN ANTIFIBRINOLYTIC
PROTEINS

Decreased fibrinogen and factors FII, FV, FVII,
FIX, FX, and FXI

Decreased protein C

Decreased α2-­antiplasmin and thrombin-­
activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor

Increased FVIII

Decreased protein S

FXIII decreased in some patients

Increased VWF, decreased ADAMTS-­13

Decreased antithrombin

Increased tissue plasminogen activator

ADAMTS-­13, A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13.
From Han H, Hensch L, Hui SKR, Teruya J. Evaluation and management of coagulopathies and thrombophilias in pediatric patients. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:83–100. Table 4.

Chapter 531

Acquired Inhibitors of
Coagulation
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Acquired circulating anticoagulants (inhibitors) are antibodies that
react, or cross-­react, with clotting factors or components used in coagulation screening tests (phospholipids), thereby prolonging screening
tests, such as prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time
(PTT), although not all of them result in a clinical bleeding state. Some
of these anticoagulants are autoantibodies that react with phospholipid
and thereby interfere with clotting in vitro but not in vivo. This group
comprises anticardiolipin and anti-­beta(2)-­glycoprotein-­Ib antibodies,
but the most common subtype of these antiphospholipid antibodies
has been referred to as the lupus anticoagulant (see Chapter 528.1).
This unfortunately named antibody is neither found exclusively in
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; see Chapter 199),
nor does its presence consistently signify the concomitant presence of
SLE in a patient. It can also be seen in those with other collagen vascular diseases and in association with HIV infection. In otherwise healthy
children, spontaneous lupus-­like inhibitors have developed transiently
after incidental viral infection and can be seen in up to 26% of screening tests in asymptomatic subjects. These transient inhibitors are usually not associated with either bleeding or thrombosis.
Although the classic lupus anticoagulant is more often associated
with a predisposition to thrombosis than with bleeding symptoms,
bleeding symptoms in a patient with the lupus anticoagulant may be
caused by thrombocytopenia, which may be a manifestation of the
antiphospholipid syndrome or of lupus itself (alone or occasionally in
context with Evans syndrome), or, rarely, by a coexistent specific autoantibody against prothrombin (factor II). The antiprothrombin antibody does not inactivate prothrombin but rather causes accelerated
clearance of the protein, resulting in low levels of prothrombin and
subsequent inadequate hemostasis.
Rarely, antibodies may arise spontaneously against a specific clotting factor, such as factor VIII or von Willebrand factor, leading to
acquired hemophilia A or von Willebrand disease (VWD), but this
is usually seen more frequently in adult patients. These patients are
prone to excessive hemorrhage and may require specific treatment. In
patients with a hereditary deficiency of a clotting factor (factor VIII or
factor IX), antibodies may develop after exposure to transfused factor
concentrates. These hemophilic inhibitory antibodies are discussed in
Chapter 525.1.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Inhibitors against specific coagulation factors usually affect factors VIII,
IX, and XI, or, rarely, prothrombin (factor II). Depending on the target
of the antibody and the target’s participation in the intrinsic, extrinsic,

or common coagulation cascade pathway, the PT and/or PTT may be
prolonged. The mechanism by which the inhibitory antibody functions
determines whether mixing patient plasma with normal plasma will
normalize (correct) the clotting time. Patient plasma that contains antibodies directed against the active site of a clotting factor (factor VIII or
factor IX) will not correct on 1:1 mixing with normal plasma, whereas
antibodies that lead to increased clearance of the factor (such as antiprothrombin antibodies) will correct on such mixing studies. Specific
factor assays are used to determine which factor is involved, and the
pattern of abnormalities in PT, PTT, and/or thrombin time (TT) is
used to guide initial investigation.

TREATMENT

Management of the bleeding patient with an acquired inhibitory
autoantibody against factor VIII or IX is the same as for the patient
with congenital hemophilia who has an alloantibody against factor
VIII or factor IX. Infusions of recombinant factor VIIa or activated
prothrombin complex concentrate may be needed to control significant bleeding. Occasionally, high-­dose coagulation factor VIII or IX
concentrates may be effective. Immunosuppressive agents have been
used “off label” to treat the inhibitor or reduce titers. Acute bleeding
caused by an antiprothrombin antibody can often be treated with a
plasma infusion and may resolve with a short course of corticosteroid
therapy.
Asymptomatic spontaneous inhibitors that arise after a viral infection tend to disappear within a few weeks to months. Inhibitors seen
with an underlying disease, such as those associated with SLE, often
resolve during the treatment of the underlying disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 532

Disseminated
Intravascular Coagulation
Benjamin J. Samelson-­Jones and
Leslie J. Raffini
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is an acquired clinicopathologic syndrome characterized by the widespread pathologic activation of the coagulation system, which results in both microvascular
thrombi and the consumption of clotting factors, anticoagulant proteins, and platelets. Microvasculature injury can contribute to organ
dysfunction, while hemorrhage can be life-­threatening in a minority
of cases. The diagnosis of DIC is based on the laboratory findings and
clinical manifestations within the appropriate clinical context. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3048 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
simultaneous occurrence of bleeding and clotting is clinically challenging, with management starting from appropriately recognizing this
syndrome.

ETIOLOGY

DIC is always a secondary complication of an underlying disorder (Table 532.1) and never an isolated diagnosis. The complex
pathogenesis involves the loss of localization and excessive activation of coagulation leading to unregulated thrombin generation
and microvascular fibrin deposition. Dysfunction of the vascular

Table 532.1  Causes of Disseminated Intravascular
Coagulation in Children
INFECTIONS
Meningococcemia (purpura fulminans)
Bacterial sepsis (staphylococcal, streptococcal, Escherichia coli,
Salmonella)
Rickettsia (Rocky Mountain spotted fever)
Viruses (cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, hemorrhagic fevers)
Malaria
Fungi
TISSUE INJURY
Central nervous system trauma (massive head injury)
Fat embolism
Crush injury
Profound shock or asphyxia
Hypothermia or hyperthermia (heat shock)
Massive burns
MALIGNANCY
Acute promyelocytic leukemia
Acute monoblastic leukemia
Disseminated solid tumors (rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma)
VENOM OR TOXINS
Toxic shock syndrome
Snakebites
Spider bites
MICROANGIOPATHIC DISORDERS
Severe thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura or hemolytic-­uremic
syndrome
Vascular malformations
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Fulminant hepatitis
Ischemic bowel
Pancreatitis
HEREDITARY THROMBOTIC DISORDERS
Homozygous/compound heterozygous protein C, protein S, or
antithrombin deficiency
PERINATAL
Maternal toxemia
Abruptio placentae
Severe respiratory distress syndrome
Meconium aspiration syndrome
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Erythroblastosis fetalis
Fetal demise of a twin
MISCELLANEOUS
Severe acute graft rejection
Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction
Severe collagen-­vascular disease
Kawasaki disease
Heparin-­induced thrombosis
Infusion of activated prothrombin complex concentrates
Hyperpyrexia/encephalopathy, hemorrhagic shock syndrome
Adapted from Montgomery RR, Scott IP. Hemostasis: diseases of the fluid phase. In
Nathan DG, Oski FA, eds. Hematology of Infancy and Childhood, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 1993.

endothelium can both precipitate and amplify this process. The
excessive activation consumes platelets, procoagulant clotting factors (factor V, factor VIII, prothrombin, and fibrinogen), and anticoagulant proteins (protein C, protein S, and antithrombin). The
fibrinolytic system can also become dysregulated with endothelial
injury and plasma protein consumption.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Although DIC is characterized by a number of abnormal laboratory findings, none are specific for the diagnosis. The consumption of coagulation factors and platelets often results in a prolonged
prothrombin time (PT), an increased partial thromboplastin time
(PTT), and low platelet counts. Low fibrinogen is seen in severe disease, but as an acute-­phase reactant, fibrinogen may be high or normal early in the disease process; declining fibrinogen levels, even
within the normal range, can suggest DIC. Fibrinogen degradation
products and D-­dimer levels are frequently highly elevated. Factors V and VIII are usually both reduced in DIC, whereas in acute
hepatic disease, factor VIII may be normal or elevated. Thrombi in
the microvasculature can lead to red blood cell fragmentation and
a microangiopathic hemolytic anemia with elevated lactate dehydrogenase and characteristic blood smear morphology, including
schistocytes, helmet cells, and microspherocytes.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

DIC may be subclinical with only laboratory abnormalities, termed
nonovert DIC. Clinical manifestations include thrombotic and hemorrhagic complications, as well as organ dysfunction. Bleeding frequently first occurs from sites of venipuncture or surgical incision,
and the skin may show petechiae, purpura, and ecchymoses. Localized large-­vessel arterial or venous thromboembolic events can
occur. Tissue necrosis may involve many organs and can be most
spectacularly seen as infarction of large areas of skin and subcutaneous tissue. A compromised blood supply can lead to organ dysfunction including organ failure, especially to the lungs, kidneys,
liver, and brain.

MANAGEMENT

The primary treatment of DIC is resolving the underlying triggering
disease process. Blood components support is recommended for
active hemorrhage or in patients requiring invasive procedures;
this may consist of platelet infusions (for thrombocytopenia), cryoprecipitate (for hypofibrinogenemia), and fresh-­frozen plasma (for
replacement of other coagulation factors and anticoagulant proteins). Blood product support in the absence of bleeding should not
be based solely on laboratory abnormalities, but clinical practice
varies on the importance of minor bleeding symptoms. Hemostatic
products with activated clotting factors such as recombinant factor VIIa (FVIIa) and activated prothrombin complex concentrate
(aPCC) theoretically may worsen the widespread and unregulated
generation of thrombin. Likewise, systemic antifibrinolytics are
generally contraindicated except in clinical scenarios associated
with hyperfibrinolysis such as acute promyelocytic leukemia and
early trauma.
DIC patients with overt thromboembolic complications should
receive therapeutic anticoagulation, usually with unfractionated
heparin, as outlined in Chapter 528.1; stringent attention to replacement therapy is warranted to maintain an adequate platelet count to
limit bleeding. Prophylactic anticoagulation may be carefully used
in patients with DIC at high risk of thromboembolic events that
are not actively bleeding. Most patients should receive mechanical
thromboprophylaxis such as sequential compression devices.
The prognosis of patients with DIC is primarily dependent on the
outcome of the treatment of the primary disease and prevention of
end-­organ damage.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders

local vasoconstriction. In addition to acting in concert with the vessel
wall to form the platelet plug, the platelet provides the catalytic phospholipid surface on which coagulation factors assemble and eventually
generate thrombin through a sequential series of enzymatic cleavages.
Lastly, the platelet contractile proteins and cytoskeleton mediate clot
retraction.

Chapter 533

Platelet and Blood Vessel
Disorders

THROMBOCYTOPENIA

The normal platelet count is 150-­450 × 109/L. Thrombocytopenia refers
to a reduction in platelet count to <150 × 109/L, although clinically
significant bleeding is not seen until counts drop well below 50 × 109/L.
Causes of thrombocytopenia include decreased production on either
a congenital or an acquired basis, sequestration of the platelets within
an enlarged spleen or other organ, and increased destruction of normally synthesized platelets on either an immune or a nonimmune basis
(Tables 533.1-­533.3, Fig. 533.2, and Chapter 524).

Brian R. Branchford, Benjamin J. Samelson-­
Jones, and Veronica H. Flood
MEGAKARYOPOIESIS

Platelets are anuclear cellular fragments produced by megakaryocytes
(large polyploid cells) within the bone marrow, lung, and other tissues. When the megakaryocyte approaches maturity, budding of the
cytoplasm occurs, and large numbers of platelets are liberated. Platelets
circulate with a life span of 7-­10 days. Thrombopoietin (TPO) is the
primary growth factor that controls platelet production (Fig. 533.1).
Levels of TPO appear to correlate inversely with platelet number and
megakaryocyte mass, with highest expression in the thrombocytopenic
states associated with decreased marrow megakaryopoiesis, and may
be variable in states of increased platelet production.
The platelet plays multiple hemostatic roles. The platelet surface possesses a number of important receptors for adhesive proteins, including
von Willebrand factor (VWF) and fibrinogen, as well as receptors for
agonists that trigger platelet aggregation, such as thrombin, collagen,
and adenosine diphosphate (ADP). After injury to the blood vessel wall,
the extracellular matrix containing adhesive and procoagulant proteins
is exposed. Subendothelial collagen binds VWF, which then undergoes
a conformational change that induces binding of the platelet glycoprotein Ib (GPIb) complex, the VWF receptor. This process is called
platelet adhesion. Platelets then undergo activation. During the process
of activation, the platelets generate thromboxane A2 from arachidonic
acid via the enzyme cyclooxygenase. After activation, platelets release
agonists, such as ADP, adenosine triphosphate (ATP), calcium ions
(Ca2+), serotonin, and coagulation factors, into the surrounding milieu
from dense and alpha granules. Binding of VWF to the GPIb complex
triggers a complex signaling cascade that results in activation of the
fibrinogen receptor, the major platelet integrin glycoprotein αIIb-­β3
(GPIIb-­IIIa). Circulating fibrinogen binds to this receptor on activated
platelets, linking platelets in a process called aggregation. This series
of events forms a hemostatic plug at the site of vascular injury. The
serotonin and histamine that are liberated during activation increase

533.1 Immune Thrombocytopenia
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
The most common cause of acute onset of thrombocytopenia in an
otherwise-­well child is immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) (also called
immune or idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

In a small number of children, estimated at 1/20,000, 1-­4 weeks after
exposure to a common viral infection, an autoantibody directed against
the platelet surface develops with resultant sudden onset of thrombocytopenia. A recent history of viral illness is described in 50–65% of children with ITP. The peak age is 1-­4 years, although the age ranges from
early in infancy to elderly. In childhood, males and females are equally
affected. ITP seems to occur more often in late winter and spring after
the peak season of viral respiratory illness. Approximately 5–10% of
ITP may recur more than 3 months after initial disease resolution.

PATHOGENESIS

The exact antigenic target for most such antibodies in most cases of
childhood acute ITP remains undetermined, although in chronic ITP,
many patients demonstrate antibodies against αIIb-­β3 and GPIb. After
binding of the antibody to the platelet surface, circulating antibody-­
coated platelets are recognized by the Fc receptor on splenic macrophages, ingested, and destroyed. The most common identifiable viruses
that have been described in association with ITP include Epstein-­Barr

Upgrade of megakaryocytopoiesis and platelet production in ITP

Proliferation

Endoreplication

Maturation

Proplatelet formation
TPO Stromal cells

TPO SCF, IL-3, IL-6, IL-11
HSC

c-MPL

MEP

MK
2-4N

MKP

SDF-1

TPO
IL-11
MK
8-64N

Mature
MK

c-MPL
Enhanced
JAK2/Stat5
signalling

Romiplostim
Eltrombopag
Bone marrow

3049

c-MPL
Endothelial cell
barrier
Vascular sinus

Fig. 533.1 Scheme of megakaryocytopoiesis
and platelet production in immune thrombocytopenia (ITP). Hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) are
mobilized, and megakaryocyte (MK) and erythroid
progenitors (MEP) accumulate with MK-­committed
progenitors (MKP), giving rise to mature MKs under control of thrombopoietin (TPO) working with
chemokines, cytokines, and growth factors, including stem cell factor (SCF) and interleukin (IL)-­3, IL-­6,
and IL-­11. Endoreplication results in ploidy changes
in MKs and increased chromosome number (up to
64N). Mature MKs migrate to the endothelial cell
barrier delimiting the vascular sinus and, under the
influence of stromal-­derived factor-­1 (SDF-­1), give
rise to proplatelets that protrude into the circulation and produce large numbers of platelets under
hemodynamic determinants. Therapeutically given
romiplostim and eltrombopag enter the marrow and
join with TPO to stimulate megakaryocytopoiesis
and platelet production. (From Nurden AT, Viallard
JF, Nurden P. New-­generation drugs that stimulate
platelet production in chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura. Lancet 2009;373:1563–1569.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3050 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 533.1  Differential Diagnosis of Thrombocytopenia in
Children and Adolescents
DESTRUCTIVE THROMBOCYTOPENIAS
Primary Platelet Consumption Syndromes
Immune thrombocytopenias
Acute and chronic ITP
Autoimmune diseases with chronic ITP as a manifestation
•
•
•
•
•
•

 yclic thrombocytopenia
C
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome and its variants
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Evans syndrome
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Neoplasia-­associated immune thrombocytopenia

Thrombocytopenia associated with HIV
Neonatal immune thrombocytopenia
• A
 lloimmune
• Autoimmune (e.g., maternal ITP)

Drug-­induced immune thrombocytopenia (including heparin-­
induced thrombocytopenia)
Posttransfusion purpura
Allergy and anaphylaxis
Posttransplant thrombocytopenia
Nonimmune thrombocytopenias
Thrombocytopenia of infection
• B
 acteremia or fungemia
• Viral infection
• Protozoan

Thrombotic microangiopathic disorders
•
•
•
•
•

 emolytic-­uremic syndrome
H
Eclampsia, HELLP syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Bone marrow transplantation–associated microangiopathy
Drug induced (quinine, etc.)

Platelets in contact with foreign material
Congenital heart disease
Drug-­induced via direct platelet effects (ristocetin, protamine)
Type 2B VWD or platelet-­type VWD
Combined Platelet and Fibrinogen Consumption Syndromes
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (inherited or acquired)
IMPAIRED PLATELET PRODUCTION
Hereditary disorders (see Table 533.2)
Acquired disorders
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

 plastic anemia
A
Myelodysplastic syndrome
Marrow infiltrative process—neoplasia
Osteopetrosis
Nutritional deficiency states (iron, folate, vitamin B12, anorexia nervosa)
Drug-­ or radiation-­induced thrombocytopenia
Neonatal hypoxia or placental insufficiency

SEQUESTRATION
Hypersplenism
Hypothermia
Burns
ASSOCIATION WITH OTHER DISEASES
Fanconi anemia
Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia
Shwachman-­Diamond syndrome
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
TAFRO syndrome

HELLP, Hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; ITP, immune thrombocytopenic purpura; TAFRO, thrombocytopenia,
ascites, myelofibrosis renal dysfunction, organomegaly (a variant of multicentric
Castleman disease); VWD, von Willebrand disease.
From Wilson DB. Acquired platelet defects. In: Orkin SH, Fisher DE, Ginsburg D, et al.,
eds. Nathan and Oski’s Hematology and Oncology of Infancy and Childhood, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2015: Box 34.1, p. 1077.

virus (EBV; see Chapter 301) and HIV (see Chapter 322), and ITP is also
noted as a rare occurrence after measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR)
vaccination. EBV-­related ITP is usually of short duration and follows
the course of infectious mononucleosis. HIV-­associated ITP is usually chronic. In some patients, ITP appears to arise in children infected
with Helicobacter pylori or rarely after vaccines. The SARS-­CoV-­2

virus responsible for the COVID-­19 infection has been associated with
development of ITP, as have some of the vaccines for this virus.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The classic presentation of ITP is a previously healthy 1–4-­year-­old
child who has sudden onset of generalized petechiae and purpura. The
parents often state that the child was fine the previous day but is now
covered with bruises and purple dots. There may be bleeding from the
gums and mucous membranes, particularly with profound thrombocytopenia (platelet count <10 × 109/L). There is a history of a preceding viral infection 1-­4 weeks before the onset of thrombocytopenia.
Findings on physical examination are typically normal, other than
petechiae and purpura. Splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, bone pain,
and pallor are rare. A simple classification system to characterize the
severity of bleeding in ITP on the basis of symptoms and signs rather
than platelet count includes:
1.	No symptoms
2.	Mild symptoms: Bruising and petechiae, occasional minor epistaxis,
very little interference with daily living
3.	Moderate symptoms: More severe skin and mucosal lesions, more
troublesome epistaxis, and menorrhagia
4.	Severe symptoms: Bleeding episodes—menorrhagia, epistaxis, melena—requiring transfusion or hospitalization, symptoms interfering seriously with the quality of life
The presence of abnormal findings such as hepatosplenomegaly,
bone or joint pain, remarkable lymphadenopathy, other cytopenias, or
congenital anomalies suggests other diagnoses (e.g., leukemia, genetic
syndromes). When the onset is insidious, especially in an adolescent,
chronic ITP or the possibility of a systemic illness, such as systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE), is more likely. In addition, presentation
at an atypical age (neonates, adolescents) should suggest an underlying
disease.

OUTCOME

Severe bleeding is rare (<3% of cases in one large international study).
In 70–80% of children who present with acute ITP, spontaneous resolution occurs within 6 months. Therapy does not appear to affect the
natural history of the illness. Fewer than 1% of patients develop an
intracranial hemorrhage (ICH). Proponents of interventional therapy
argue that the objective of early therapy is to raise the platelet count
to >20 × 109/L and prevent the rare development of ICH. There is no
evidence that therapy prevents serious bleeding. Approximately 20%
of children who present with acute ITP go on to have chronic ITP. The
outcome/prognosis may be related more to age; ITP in younger children is more likely to resolve, whereas development of chronic ITP in
adolescents approaches 50%.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count <20 × 109/L) is common, and
platelet size is normal or increased, reflective of increased platelet turnover (Fig. 533.3). In acute ITP, the hemoglobin value, white blood cell
(WBC) count, and differential count are usually normal. Hemoglobin
may be decreased in the context of profuse nosebleeds (epistaxis) or
menorrhagia. Bone marrow examination, which is not routinely indicated in this disease, shows normal granulocytic and erythrocytic
series, with characteristically normal or increased numbers of megakaryocytes. Some of the megakaryocytes may appear to be immature
and reflect increased platelet turnover. Indications for bone marrow
aspiration/biopsy include an abnormal WBC count or differential or
unexplained anemia, as well as history and physical examination findings suggestive of a bone marrow failure syndrome or malignancy.
Other laboratory tests should be performed as indicated by the history
and examination. HIV studies should be done in at-­risk populations,
especially sexually active teens. Platelet antibody testing is seldom useful in acute ITP. A direct antiglobulin test (Coombs) should be done if
there is unexplained anemia to rule out Evans syndrome (autoimmune
hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia; see Chapter 506). Evans
syndrome may be idiopathic or an early sign of SLE, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, or common variable immunodeficiency

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders

3051

Table 533.2  Inherited Platelet Disorders
PLATELET DEFECT

GENE DEFECT (CHROMOSOMAL
LOCATION)

DEFECTS IN PLATELET ADHESION
Bernard-­Soulier syndrome
Autosomal recessive:
(BSS)
GP1BA (17p13)
GP1BB (22q11)
GP9 (3q21)
Autosomal dominant:
Ala156Val, GP1BA -­Bolzano
variant

CLINICAL AND LABORATORY
CHARACTERISTICS

BLEEDING TREATMENT

• Often severe bleeding phenotype
• Thrombocytopenia
• Large platelets
• Platelet aggregation: absent
ristocetin-induced response
• Flow cytometry: reduced or
absent CD42a (GPIX)/CD42b
(GP1bα)
• GP1BA & GP1BB gene
sequencing

• Supportive care
• Platelet transfusion (risk of
alloantibodies)
• Antifibrinolytics
• rFVIIa

Velocardiofacial/DiGeorge
syndrome
(VCFS)

22q11.2 deletion including GP1BB

• Thrombocytopenia
• Large platelets and α-­granules
• Cardiac, thymus, parathyroid,
facial, and cognitive abnormalities

• Supportive care

Platelet-­type von Willebrand
disease
(PT-­VWD)

Autosomal dominant:
gain of function variants in GP1BA

• Thrombocytopenia
• Large platelets
• Platelet clumping
• Decreased VWF:Ag, VWF
multimers
• Platelet aggregation: low dose
ristocetin-­induced platelet
agglutination
• GP1BA gene sequencing

• Supportive care
• Platelet transfusion
• Antifibrinolytics
• rFVIIa

• Often severe bleeding phenotype
• Normal platelet count and
morphology
• Platelet aggregation: absent
response to all agonists except
ristocetin
• Flow cytometry: absent or
reduced CD41 and CD61

• Supportive care
• rFVIIa (considered the first line)
• Platelet transfusion (risk of HPA
alloantibodies)
• Antifibrinolytics

• Mild bleeding phenotype
• Platelet aggregation: abnormal
response to arachidonic acid and
U46619
• TBXA2R gene sequencing

• Supportive care

DEFECTS OF PLATELET AGGREGATION
Glanzmann thrombasthenia
Autosomal recessive:
(GT)
ITGA2B (17Q21.32)
ITGB3 (17q21.32)

DEFECTS IN AGONISTS RECEPTORS
Thromboxane-­prostanoid (TP) Autosomal recessive
receptor defects
TBXA2R (19p13.3)

ADP receptor defects P2Y12

Autosomal recessive
P2RY12 (3q23–25)

• Mild bleeding phenotype
• Platelet aggregation: abnormal
response to ADP
• P2RY12 gene sequencing

• Supportive care

Collagen receptor defects
GPVI

Autosomal recessive
GP6 (19q13.4)

• Mild bleeding phenotype
• Platelet aggregation: abnormal
response to collagen
• GP6 gene sequencing

• Supportive care

• Progressive myelofibrosis
• Thrombocytopenia
• Large pale platelets on blood
smears
• Absent α-­granules on TEM
• NBEAL2 gene sequencing

• Supportive care
• Antifibrinolytics
• DDVAP
• Platelet transfusion
• Splenectomy

• Thrombocytopenia
• Large pale platelets on blood
smears
• Absent α-­granules on TEM
• Lethal early in life
• VPS33B & VIPAS39 sequencing

• Supportive care
• Platelet transfusion
• Antifibrinolytics

PLATELET GRANULES DEFECTS (Α-­GRANULES)
Gray platelet syndrome (GPS) Autosomal recessive
NBEAL2 (3p21)

Arthrogryposis, renal dysfunction, and cholestasis
syndrome
(ARC syndrome)

Autosomal dominant
VPS33B (15q26)
VIPAS39 (14q24)

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3052 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 533.2  Inherited Platelet Disorders—cont’d
GENE DEFECT (CHROMOSOMAL
LOCATION)

PLATELET DEFECT

CLINICAL AND LABORATORY
CHARACTERISTICS

BLEEDING TREATMENT

Quebec platelet disorder
(QPD)

Autosomal recessive
Tandem duplication of PLAU
(10q22.2)

• Delayed-­onset bleeding not
responding to platelet transfusion
• Variable thrombocytopenia
• Abnormal urokinase in platelets
detected with immunoblot or
ELISA
• PLAU duplication testing

• Supportive care
• Antifibrinolytics

Paris-­Trousseau/Jacobsen
syndrome (PTS)

Autosomal dominant
Deletion of chromosome 11q23–24
Hemizygous deletion of FLI1
(11q24.1 – q24.3)

• Thrombocytopenia
• Large platelets
• Giant α-­granules on TEM
• Immature megakaryocytes in the
bone marrow
• Cognitive, cardiac, and facial
abnormalities

• Supportive care
• Antifibrinolytics
• Platelet transfusion

• Decreased to absent δ-­granules
• Lumiaggregometry: decreased/
absent ATP release
• Whole-­mount EM
• Gene sequencing of 10 candidate
genes
• Oculocutaneous albinism

• Supportive care
• Antifibrinolytics
• Platelet transfusion
• DDAVP

• Giant eosinophilic inclusions in
neutrophils
• Decreased to absent δ-­granules
• Lumiaggregometry: decreased/
absent ATP release
• Hypopigmentation and immunodeficiency

• Supportive care

• Thrombocytopenia
• Small platelets
• Recurrent infections and eczema
• Decreased/absent intracellular
• WASp per immunoblot/ELISA
• WAS gene sequencing

• Supportive care
• Platelet transfusion
• Antifibrinolytics
• Splenectomy (not
recommended)

PLATELET GRANULES DEFECTS (δ-­GRANULES)
Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome Autosomal recessive
(HPS)
HPS1–10 (HPS1, AP3B1, HPS3,
HPS4, HPS5, HPS6, DTNBP1,
BLOC1S3, BLOC1S6, and AP3D1)

Chediak-­Higashi syndrome
(CHS)

Autosomal recessive
LYST (1q42 – 1q42.2)

PLATELET CYTOSKELETAL DEFECTS
Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome
X-­linked
(WAS) / X-­linked
WAS (Xp11.23 – p11.22) encoding
thrombocytopenia
WAS protein

ARPC1B deficiency

Autosomal recessive
ARPC1B (7q22.1)

• Small platelets
• Inflammatory disease, recurrent
infections, small vessel vasculitis,
abnormal platelet function
• Decreased/absent intracellular
• ARPC1B per immunoblot
• ARPC1B gene sequencing

• Supportive care
• Antifibrinolytics
• Platelet transfusion

MYH9-­related disease
(MYH9-­RD)

Autosomal dominant
MYH9 (22q12–13) encoding
nonmuscle myosin heavy chain IIA

• Thrombocytopenia
• Large platelets
• Döhle-­like inclusions in
neutrophils
• Myosin IIA aggregates in
neutrophils -­immunofluorescence
microscopy
• Variable degree of renal disease,
sensorineural hearing loss,
presenile cataract

• Supportive care
• Platelet transfusion
• Antifibrinolytics
• THPO receptor agonists

VWF, Von Willebrand factor; HPA, human platelet antigen; ADP, adenosine diphosphate; TEM, transmission electron microscopy; EM, electron microscopy; ELISA, enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay; DDAVP, desmopressin; THPO, thrombopoietin.
Modified from Al-­Huniti A, Kahr WHA. Inherited platelet disorders: diagnosis and management. Transfu Med Rev 2020;34:277–285. Table 1.

syndrome. An antinuclear antibody should be considered in adolescents, especially with other features of SLE (see Chapter 199).

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The well-­appearing child with moderate to severe thrombocytopenia, an
otherwise normal complete blood cell count (CBC), and normal exam
findings has a limited differential diagnosis that includes exposure to
medication inducing drug-­dependent antibodies, splenic sequestration
because of previously unappreciated portal hypertension, and, rarely, early

aplastic processes, such as Fanconi anemia (see Chapter 517). Other than
congenital thrombocytopenia syndromes (see Chapter 533.8), such as
thrombocytopenia–absent radius (TAR) syndrome and MYH9-­related
thrombocytopenia, most marrow processes that interfere with platelet
production eventually cause abnormal synthesis of red blood cells (RBCs)
and WBCs and therefore manifest diverse abnormalities on the CBC. Disorders that cause increased platelet destruction on a nonimmune basis
are usually serious systemic illnesses with obvious clinical findings such
as hemolytic-­uremic syndrome (HUS) and disseminated intravascular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders
Table 533.3  Classification of Fetal and Neonatal
Thrombocytopenias*
Fetal

Alloimmune thrombocytopenia
Congenital infection (CMV,
toxoplasma, rubella, HIV,
syphilis)
Aneuploidy (trisomy 18, 13, or
21, triploidy, Turner syndrome)
Autoimmune condition
(maternal ITP, SLE)
Severe Rh hemolytic disease
Congenital/inherited
(Wiskott-­Aldrich, Noonan,
Cornelia deLange, Jacobsen
syndromes)

Early-­onset neonatal (<72 hr)

Placental insufficiency (PET,
IUGR, diabetes)
Perinatal asphyxia
Perinatal infection (Escherichia
coli, GBS, herpes simplex)
DIC
Alloimmune thrombocytopenia
Autoimmune condition
(maternal ITP, SLE)
Congenital infection (CMV,
toxoplasma, rubella, HIV)
Thrombosis (aortic, renal vein)
Bone marrow disease (congenital
leukemia, HLH)
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
Metabolic disease (propionic and
methylmalonic acidemia)
Congenital/inherited (TAR,
CAMT)

Late-­onset neonatal (>72 hr)

Late-­onset sepsis
NEC
Congenital infection (CMV,
toxoplasma, rubella, HIV)
Autoimmune
Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
Metabolic disease (propionic and
methylmalonic acidemia)
Congenital/inherited (TAR, CAMT)

*The most common conditions are shown in bold.
CAMT, Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia; CMV, cytomegalovirus; DIC,
disseminated intravascular coagulation; GBS, group B streptococcus; HIV, human
immunodeficiency virus; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; ITP, immune
thrombocytopenic purpura; IUGR, intrauterine growth restriction; NEC, necrotizing
enterocolitis; PET, preeclampsia; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TAR,
thrombocytopenia with absent radii.
From Roberts I, Murray NA. Neonatal thrombocytopenia: causes and management.
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2003;88:F359–F364.

coagulation (DIC) (see Fig. 533.2, and Table 532.1 in Chapter 532).
Patients receiving heparin may develop heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia. Isolated enlargement of the spleen suggests the potential for hypersplenism caused by liver disease or portal vein thrombosis. Autoimmune
thrombocytopenia may be an initial manifestation of SLE, HIV infection,

3053

WELL
Large platelets
Normal hemoglobin
and WBC

Small platelets
Congenital anomalies
n Mean corpuscular volume

Consumption

p Synthesis

Immune

Congenital

ITP
2° to SLE, HIV
Drug-induced

TAR
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
X-linked
Amegakaryocytic
Fanconi anemia

Maternal ITP
NATP
Non-immune
2B or platelet-type VWD
Hereditary macrothrombocytopenia

Acquired
Medications
Toxins
Radiation

ILL
p Fibrinogen
n Fibrin degradation
products
Large platelets
Consumption
Microangiopathy
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome
TTP
Disseminated intravascular
coagulation
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Respiratory distress
Thrombosis
UAC
Sepsis
Viral infection

Small platelets
HSM
Mass
pSynthesis
Malignancy
Storage disease
Sequestration
Hemangioma
Hypersplenism

Fig. 533.2 Differential diagnostic algorithm of childhood thrombo-

cytopenic syndromes. The syndromes initially are separated by their
clinical appearance. Clues leading to the diagnosis are shown in italics.
The mechanisms and common disorders leading to these findings are
shown in the lower part of the figure. Disorders that commonly affect
neonates are listed in the shaded boxes. HSM, Hepatosplenomegaly;
ITP, immune thrombocytopenia; NATP, neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenic purpura; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TAR, thrombocytopenia–absent radius; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura;
UAC, umbilical artery catheter; VWD, von Willebrand disease; WBC,
white blood cell. (From Scott JP. Bleeding and thrombosis. In Kliegman RM, ed. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 1996. p. 849; and Kliegman RM, Marcdante KJ,
Jenson HB, et al., eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders, 2006. p. 716.)

common variable immunodeficiency, and, rarely, lymphoma or autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome (WAS)
must be considered in young males found to have thrombocytopenia with
small platelets, particularly if there is a history of eczema and recurrent
infection (see Chapter 165.2). Bernard-­Soulier syndrome, on the other
hand, involves a macrothrombocytopenia. Gray platelet syndrome is usually associated with splenomegaly and pale-­colored platelets on peripheral
smear.

TREATMENT

A number of treatment options exist (Table 533.4), but there are no
current high-­quality data showing that treatment affects either short-­
or long-­term clinical outcome of ITP in children. Many patients with
new-­onset ITP have mild symptoms, with findings limited to petechiae
and purpura on the skin, despite severe thrombocytopenia. Compared
with untreated controls, treatment appears to be capable of inducing
a more rapid rise in platelet count to the presumed safe level of >20
× 109/L, although no data indicate that early therapy prevents ICH.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3054 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Antiplatelet antibodies bind to transfused platelets as well as they do
to autologous platelets. Thus platelet transfusion in ITP is usually contraindicated unless life-­threatening bleeding is present. Management
guidelines for ITP in children and adults reinforce existing emphasis on
prioritizing watchful waiting for spontaneous resolution or outpatient
therapy in the uncommon cases for which treatment is needed. Initial
approaches to the management of pediatric ITP include the following:
1.	No therapy other than education and counseling of the family and
patient for patients with minimal, mild, and moderate symptoms, as
defined earlier. This approach emphasizes the usually benign nature
of ITP and avoids the therapeutic roller coaster that ensues once interventional therapy is begun. This approach is much less costly, and
side effects are minimal. Observation is recommended for children
with no bleeding or only mild bleeding symptoms such as bruising
or petechiae.
2.	Treatment with either intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or corticosteroids, particularly for children who present with mucocutaneous bleeding. IVIG at a dose of 0.8-­1.0 g/kg/day for 1-­2 days induces
a rapid rise in platelet count (usually >20 × 109/L) in 95% of patients within 48 hours. IVIG appears to induce a response by downregulating Fc-­mediated phagocytosis of antibody-­coated platelets.
IVIG therapy is both expensive and time-­consuming and typically
requires inpatient admission. Additionally, after infusion, there is a
risk of headaches and vomiting, suggestive of IVIG-­induced aseptic
meningitis.
3.	Corticosteroid therapy has been used for many years to treat acute
and chronic ITP in adults and children. Doses of prednisone at 1-­4
mg/kg/day appear to induce a more rapid rise in platelet count than

in untreated patients with ITP. Corticosteroid therapy is usually
continued for a short course (approximately 5 days) until a rise in
platelet count to >20 × 109/L has been achieved to avoid the long-­
term side effects of corticosteroid therapy, especially growth failure,
diabetes mellitus, and osteoporosis.
Each of these medications may also be used to treat subsequent ITP
exacerbations/recurrences, which usually occur several weeks after an
initial course of therapy in 5–10% of patients. In the special case of
ICH, multiple modalities should be used, including platelet transfusion
(although not recommended in other bleeding manifestations), IVIG,
high-­dose corticosteroids, and prompt consultation by neurosurgery
and general surgery (splenectomy).
Patients who are bleeding significantly (<5% of children with ITP)
should be treated. ICH remains rare, and there are no data showing
that treatment actually reduces its incidence. Mucosal bleeding in particular is the most significant in terms of predicting severe bleeding,
but specific predictive indices, such as positive or negative predictive
values, are not currently well established.
The role of splenectomy in ITP should be reserved for one of two
circumstances: (1) the older child (≥4 years) with severe ITP that
has lasted >1 year (chronic ITP) and whose symptoms are not easily controlled with therapy and/or (2) when life-­threatening hemorrhage (e.g., ICH) complicates acute ITP if the platelet count cannot be
corrected rapidly with transfusion of platelets and administration of
IVIG and corticosteroids. Splenectomy is associated with a lifelong risk
of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection caused by encapsulated
organisms, increased risk of thrombosis, and the potential development of pulmonary hypertension in adulthood. As an alternative to
splenectomy, rituximab has been used in children to treat chronic ITP.
In 30–40% of children, rituximab has induced a partial or complete
remission. TPO receptor agonists have also been used to increase platelet count and are approved for pediatric use.

CHRONIC AUTOIMMUNE THROMBOCYTOPENIC
PURPURA

A

B

Fig. 533.3 Blood and marrow aspirate from child with immune throm-

bocytopenia. A, Blood smear shows large platelets. B, Bone marrow
aspirate shows increased numbers of megakaryocytes, many of which
appear immature. (From Blanchette V, Bolton-­Maggs P: Childhood immune thrombocytopenic purpura: diagnosis and management. Pediatr
Clin North Am 2008;55:393–420. Fig 4.)

Approximately 20% of patients who present with acute ITP have persistent thrombocytopenia for >12 months and are said to have chronic
ITP. At that time, a careful reevaluation for associated disorders should
be performed, especially for autoimmune disease (e.g., SLE), chronic
infectious disorders (e.g., HIV), and nonimmune causes of chronic
thrombocytopenia, such as type 2B and platelet-­type von Willebrand
disease (VWD), X-­linked thrombocytopenia, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, common variable immunodeficiency syndrome,
autosomal macrothrombocytopenia, and WAS. The presence of coexisting H. pylori and hepatitis C infection should be considered and, if
found, treated. Therapy should be aimed at controlling symptoms and

Table 533.4  Treatment Options for Immune Thrombocytopenia (ITP)
PROS

CONS

COST

Observation

Does not expose patient to
unnecessary medications

May increase parent and physician
anxiety

Relatively inexpensive

IVIG

Rapid response in most cases

IV administration, side effects

Expensive

Corticosteroids

Oral, effective in 70–80% of
patients, minimal side effects
with short courses

Side effects, may not affect long
term outcome

Inexpensive

Rituximab

Long-­term remission in 40–60% of
patients

IV administration, immune suppression, potential for reactivation of hepatitis

Very expensive

Splenectomy

Curative in 80% of patients

Requires surgery and anesthesia,
lifelong risk of infection

Expensive

Thrombopoietin receptor agonists

Potential for oral administration,
40–60% of patients respond

Not curative, usually required long
term, can cause elevated liver
enzymes

Very expensive

IV, Intravenous; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin.
Adapted from Flood VH, Scott JP. Bleeding and thrombosis. In: Kliegman R, Lye P, Bordini B, et al. eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders
preventing serious bleeding. In ITP, the spleen is the primary site of
both antiplatelet antibody synthesis and platelet destruction. Splenectomy is successful in inducing complete remission in 64–88% of children with chronic ITP. This effect must be balanced against the lifelong
risk of overwhelming postsplenectomy infection and/or thrombosis.
This decision is often affected by quality-­of-­life issues, as well as the
ease with which the child can be managed using medical therapy, such
as IVIG, corticosteroids, IV anti-­D, or rituximab. Two effective agents
that act to stimulate thrombopoiesis, romiplostim and eltrombopag
(see Fig. 533.1), are approved to treat adults and children with chronic
ITP. Although these do not address the mechanism of action of ITP,
the increase in platelet count may be enough to compensate for the
increased destruction and allow the patient to have resolution of bleeding and maintain a platelet count >50 × 109/L.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

533.2 Drug-­Induced Thrombocytopenia
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
A number of drugs are associated with immune thrombocytopenia
as the result of either an immune process or megakaryocyte injury.
Some common drugs used in pediatrics that cause thrombocytopenia
include valproic acid, phenytoin, carbamazepine, sulfonamides, vancomycin, and trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole. Most of these drugs
may affect platelet function as well as the count itself. Heparin-­induced
thrombocytopenia (and rarely an associated thrombosis) is seldom
seen in pediatrics, but it occurs when, after exposure to heparin, the
patient has an antibody directed against the heparin–platelet factor 4
complex. Recommended treatment for heparin-­induced thrombocytopenia includes direct thrombin inhibitors such as argatroban or bivalirudin and removal of all sources of heparin, including central venous
catheter line flushes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3055

form is more common and usually presents in adults and occasionally
in adolescents. Microvascular thrombi within the CNS cause subtle,
shifting neurologic signs that vary from changes in affect and orientation to aphasia, blindness, and seizures. Initial manifestations are
often nonspecific (weakness, pain, emesis), and prompt recognition of
this disorder is critical. Laboratory findings provide important clues to
the diagnosis and show microangiopathic hemolytic anemia characterized by morphologically abnormal RBCs, with schistocytes, spherocytes, helmet cells, and an elevated reticulocyte count in association
with thrombocytopenia. Coagulation studies are usually nondiagnostic.
Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine are sometimes elevated. The treatment of acquired TTP is plasmapheresis (plasma exchange), which is
effective in 80–95% of patients. Treatment with plasmapheresis should
be instituted on the basis of thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia even if other symptoms are not yet present because
of the high mortality (80–90%) in patients without timely intervention.
Rituximab, corticosteroids, and splenectomy are reserved for refractory
cases. Caplacizumab, an anti-­VWF humanized immunoglobulin, blocks
the interaction of ultralarge (i.e., most likely to bind platelets) VWF multimers with platelets, and many result in rapid resolution of acute TTP.
The majority of cases of TTP are acquired, caused by an autoantibody-­
mediated deficiency of ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif member 13) that is responsible
for cleaving the high-­molecular-­weight multimers of VWF and appears
to play a pivotal role in the evolution of the thrombotic microangiopathy (Fig. 533.4) that results in a preponderance of ultralarge multimers that more adeptly bind platelets, triggering the microangiopathy. In
contrast, levels of ADAMTS13 in HUS are usually normal.
Congenital ADAMTS13 deficiency causes rare familial cases of
TTP/HUS, usually manifested as recurrent episodes of thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, jaundice, and renal involvement, with or without neurologic changes, that often present in infancy in the context of
an intercurrent illness. Treatment of hereditary TTP with recombinant
ADAMTS13 has been successful when patients are refractory to fresh
frozen plasma therapy. Abnormalities of the complement system have
now also been implicated in rare cases of familial TTP. ADAMTS13
deficiency can be treated by repeated infusions of fresh-­frozen plasma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

533.3 Nonimmune Platelet Destruction
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
The syndromes of DIC (see Chapter 532), HUS (see Chapter 560.5),
and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (see Chapter 533.5) share
the hematologic picture of a thrombotic microangiopathy in which
there exists RBC destruction and consumptive thrombocytopenia
caused by platelet and fibrin deposition in the microvasculature. The
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia is characterized by the presence of
RBC fragments, including helmet cells, schistocytes, spherocytes, and
burr cells.

533.4 Hemolytic-­Uremic Syndrome
See Chapter 560.5.

533.5 Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic
Purpura
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is a rare thrombotic
microangiopathy characterized by the pentad of fever, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, abnormal renal function,
and central nervous system (CNS) changes; TTP is clinically similar
to HUS (Table 533.5). Although TTP can be congenital, the acquired

533.6 Kasabach-­Merritt Syndrome
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
See also Chapter 691.
The association of a giant hemangioma with localized intravascular coagulation causing consumptive thrombocytopenia and hypofibrinogenemia is called Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome. In most patients,
the site of the hemangioma is obvious, but retroperitoneal and intra-­
abdominal hemangiomas may require body imaging for detection.
Platelet trapping and activation of coagulation occurs inside the hemangioma, with fibrinogen consumption and generation of fibrin(ogen)
degradation products. Arteriovenous malformation within the lesions
can cause heart failure. Pathologically, Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome
appears to develop more often as a result of a kaposiform hemangioendothelioma or tufted hemangioma rather than a simple hemangioma.
The peripheral blood smear shows microangiopathic changes.
Multiple modalities have been used to treat Kasabach-­Merritt syndrome, including propranolol, surgical excision (if possible), laser
photocoagulation, high-­dose corticosteroids, local radiation therapy,
antiangiogenic agents such as interferon-­α2, and vincristine. Over
time, most patients who present in infancy have regression of the hemangioma. Treatment of the associated coagulopathy may benefit from a
trial of antifibrinolytic therapy with ε-­aminocaproic acid (Amicar) or
anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3056 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 533.5  ADAMTS13 Deficiency and Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura
DISEASE

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP)

Acquired: Ab to ADAMTS13
Congenital: Inadequate
ADAMTS13 production

LAB FINDINGS
Ab to ADAMTS13
ADAMTS13 <10%

MANAGEMENT
Acquired: Plasmapheresis with
plasma
Congenital: Scheduled plasma
infusions

Autoimmune TTP may be transient, recurrent, drug (ticlopidine, clopidogrel) associated, or seen in some pregnancy-­associated cases of TTP.
ADAMTS13 pathogenic variants are often familial and chronic-­relapsing RRP.

Blood Flow
Platelet GPIb
ADAMTS13

VWF
Subendothelium

Fig. 533.4 Pathogenesis of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura

(TTP). The von Willebrand factor (VWF) multimers facilitate platelet adhesion to the subendothelium by binding to exposed connective tissue
and then to platelet glycoprotein Ib (GPIb). In flowing blood shear stress
unfolds ultralarge VWF multimers in the platelet-­rich thrombus and enables ADAMTS13 to cleave a specific Tyr-­Met bond in the second of
the three A domains in VWF subunits. Cleavage reduces VWF multimer
size and limits thrombus growth. In the absence of ADAMTS13, VWF-­
dependent platelet accumulation continues and eventually results in
microvascular thrombosis and TTP. (Courtesy Dr. J. Evan Sadler, Washington University.)

533.7 Sequestration
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Thrombocytopenia develops in individuals with massive splenomegaly, such as those with portal vein thrombosis or liver disease, because
the spleen acts as a reservoir for platelets and may sequester a large
number of them. Most such patients also have mild leukopenia and
anemia on CBC. Individuals who have thrombocytopenia caused by
splenic sequestration should undergo a workup to diagnose the etiology of splenomegaly, including infectious, inflammatory, infiltrative,
neoplastic, obstructive, and hemolytic causes.

533.8 Congenital Thrombocytopenic
Syndromes
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
See Table 533.2.
Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT) usually
manifests within the first few days to week of life, when the child presents with petechiae and purpura caused by profound thrombocytopenia. CAMT is caused by a rare defect in hematopoiesis as a result of
pathogenic variants in the MPL gene that encodes the stem cell TPO
receptor. Other than skin and mucous membrane abnormalities, findings on physical examination are normal. Examination of the bone
marrow shows an absence of megakaryocytes. These patients often
progress to marrow failure (aplasia). Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is curative.

Thrombocytopenia–absent radius (TAR) syndrome consists of
thrombocytopenia (absence or hypoplasia of megakaryocytes) that
presents in early infancy with bilateral radial anomalies of variable
severity, ranging from mild changes to marked limb shortening (Fig.
533.5). Many such individuals also have other skeletal abnormalities
of the ulna, radius, and lower extremities. Present thumbs help to differentiate this disorder from Fanconi anemia. Intolerance to cow’s milk
formula (present in 50%) may complicate management by triggering
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, increased thrombocytopenia, eosinophilia, and a leukemoid reaction. The thrombocytopenia of TAR syndrome frequently remits over the first few years of life. The molecular
basis of TAR syndrome is linked to RBM8A. A few patients have been
reported to have a syndrome of amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia with radioulnar synostosis caused by a pathogenic variant in the
HOXA11 gene. In contrast to TAR syndrome, this clinical disorder
presents with marrow aplasia.
WAS is characterized by microthrombocytopenia, with tiny platelets, eczema, and recurrent infection as a consequence of immune deficiency (see Chapter 165.2). WAS is inherited as an X-­linked disorder,
and the gene implicated in WAS has been identified. The WAS protein
appears to play an integral role in regulating the cytoskeletal architecture of both platelets and T lymphocytes in response to receptor-­
mediated cell signaling. The WAS protein is common to all cells of
hematopoietic lineage. Molecular analysis of families with X-­linked
thrombocytopenia has shown that many affected members have a single nucleotide pathogenic variant within the WAS gene, whereas individuals with the full manifestation of WAS have large gene deletions.
Examination of the bone marrow in WAS shows the normal number of
megakaryocytes, although they may have bizarre morphologic features.
Transfused platelets have a normal life span in these patients. Splenectomy often corrects the thrombocytopenia, suggesting that the platelets formed in WAS have accelerated destruction. After splenectomy,
these patients are at increased risk for overwhelming infection and
require lifelong antibiotic prophylaxis against encapsulated organisms.
Approximately 5–15% of patients with WAS develop lymphoreticular
malignancies (involving mostly leukemias and lymphomas). Successful
HSCT from an unaffected donor cures WAS. X-­linked macrothrombocytopenia and dyserythropoiesis have been linked to pathogenic
variants in GATA1, which encodes an erythroid and megakaryocytic
transcription factor.
MYH9-­related thrombocytopenias include a number of diverse
hereditary thrombocytopenia syndromes (e.g., Sebastian, Epstein,
May-­Hegglin, Fechtner) characterized by autosomal dominant macrothrombocytopenia, neutrophil inclusion bodies, and a variety of
physical anomalies, including sensorineural deafness, renal disease,
and eye disease. These have all been shown to be caused by different
pathogenic variants in the MYH9 gene (nonmuscle myosin-­IIa heavy
chain 9). The thrombocytopenia is usually mild and not progressive.
Some other individuals with recessively inherited macrothrombocytopenia have abnormalities in chromosome 22q11. Pathogenic variants
in the gene for glycoprotein Ibβ, an essential component of the platelet
VWF receptor, can result in Bernard-­Soulier syndrome (see Chapter
533.13), a macrothrombocytopenic disease. A diagnostic approach to
genetic platelet disorders is noted in Figure 533.6.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders

Fig. 533.5 A newborn, the first child of young, healthy parents, with

fully expressed thrombocytopenia–absent radius (TAR) syndrome, including hypereosinophilia and anemia. Hypoplasia of the distal humeri
and the shoulder girdles, bilateral hip dysplasia, mild talipes calcaneus,
and clinodactyly of both little fingers are seen. This patient had a pronounced allergy to cow’s milk, with exposure followed by diarrhea,
vomiting, and decreased weight and platelet count, making a cow’s
milk–free diet mandatory. A persistent depressed nasal bridge and development of pronounced bowed legs are seen. (From Wiedemann H-­
R, Kunze J, Grosse F-­R, eds. Clinical Syndromes, 3rd ed. [English translation]. London: Mosby-­Wolfe, 1997. p. 430.)

533.9 Neonatal Thrombocytopenia
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Thrombocytopenia in the newborn rarely is indicative of a primary
disorder of megakaryopoiesis. It is usually the result of systemic illness
or transfer of maternal antibodies directed against fetal platelets (see
Table 533.3). Neonatal thrombocytopenia often occurs in association
with congenital viral infections, especially rubella, cytomegalovirus,
protozoal infection (e.g., toxoplasmosis), and syphilis, and perinatal
bacterial infections, especially those caused by gram-­negative bacilli.

3057

Thrombocytopenia associated with DIC may be responsible for severe
spontaneous bleeding. The constellation of marked thrombocytopenia
and abnormal abdominal findings is common in necrotizing enterocolitis and other causes of necrotic bowel. Thrombocytopenia in an ill
child requires a prompt search for viral and bacterial pathogens.
Antibody-­
mediated thrombocytopenia in the newborn occurs
because of transplacental transfer of maternal antibodies directed
against fetal platelets. Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
(NAIT) is caused by the development of maternal antibodies against
paternally inherited antigens present on fetal platelets that are recognized as foreign by the maternal immune system. The incidence of
NATP is 1/4,000-­5,000 live births. The clinical manifestations of NAIT
are those of an apparently well child who, within the first few days after
delivery, has generalized petechiae and purpura. Laboratory studies
show a normal maternal platelet count but moderate to severe thrombocytopenia in the newborn. Detailed review of the history should
show no evidence of maternal thrombocytopenia. Up to 30% of infants
with severe NAIT may have ICH, either prenatally or in the perinatal
period. Unlike Rh disease, first pregnancies may be severely affected.
Subsequent pregnancies are often more severely affected than the first.
The diagnosis of NAIT is made by checking for the presence of
maternal alloantibodies directed against the father’s platelets. Specific
studies can be done to identify the target alloantigen. The most common cause is incompatibility for the platelet alloantigen HPA-­1a. Specific DNA sequence polymorphisms have been identified that permit
informative prenatal testing to identify at-­risk pregnancies. The differential diagnosis of NAIT includes transplacental transfer of maternal
IgG antiplatelet autoantibodies (maternal ITP), and, more commonly,
viral or bacterial infection.
Treatment of NAIT requires the administration of IVIG prenatally to the mother if the status is known before birth. Therapy usually begins in the second trimester and is continued throughout the
pregnancy. Fetal platelet count can be monitored by percutaneous
umbilical blood sampling. Delivery should be performed by cesarean
section to reduce risk for ICH from vaginal delivery. After delivery,
if severe thrombocytopenia persists, transfusion of platelets that share
the maternal alloantigens (e.g., washed maternal platelets) will cause a
rise in platelet counts to provide effective hemostasis. However, a random donor platelet transfusion is more likely to be readily available.
Some centers have units available that may lack the antigens most often
involved. After there has been one affected child, genetic counseling is
critical to inform the parents of the high risk of thrombocytopenia in
subsequent pregnancies.
Children born to mothers with immune thrombocytopenic purpura
(maternal ITP) appear to have a lower risk of serious hemorrhage
than infants born with NAIT, although severe thrombocytopenia may
occur. The mother’s preexisting platelet count may have some predictive value in that severe maternal thrombocytopenia before delivery
appears to predict a higher risk of fetal thrombocytopenia. In mothers
who have had splenectomy for ITP, the maternal platelet count may be
normal and is not predictive of fetal thrombocytopenia.
Treatment includes prenatal administration of corticosteroids to the
mother and IVIG and sometimes corticosteroids to the infant after
delivery. Thrombocytopenia in an infant, whether a result of NAIT or
maternal ITP, usually resolves within 2-­4 months after delivery. The
period of highest risk is the immediate perinatal period.
Two syndromes of congenital failure of platelet production often
present in the newborn period. In CAMT the newborn manifests
petechiae and purpura shortly after birth. Findings on physical examination are otherwise normal. Megakaryocytes are absent from the
bone marrow. This syndrome is caused by a pathogenic variant in the
megakaryocyte TPO receptor that is essential for development of all
hematopoietic cell lines. Pancytopenia eventually develops, and HSCT
is curative. TAR syndrome consists of thrombocytopenia that presents in early infancy, with bilateral radial anomalies of variable severity,
ranging from mild changes to marked limb shortening. It frequently
remits over the first few years of life (see Chapter 533.8 and Fig. 533.5).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3058 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
When IPD is suspected

Decreased platelet count

Small
platelet
size

WAS
XLT

Normal platelet count

Large
platelet
size

Normal
platelet
size

BM
failure

Bony
defect

Storage pool
deficiency
(a-granule)

Erythroid
dysplasia

Nephritis
SNHL

Platelet
adhesion
defect

Storage pool
deficiency
(a-granule)

Platelet
aggregation
defect

Storage pool
deficiency
(dense-granule)

CAMT

RUSAT
TAR

QPD

XLTDA

MYH9

BSS
Pseudo-vWD
22q11 del

GPS
JS/PTS

GT

HPS
CHS

Fig. 533.6 Diagnostic algorithm for sequence and flow in inherited platelet disorders (IPDs). BM, bone marrow; WAS, Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome; XLT, X-­linked thrombocytopenia; CAMT, congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia; RUSAT, radioulnar synostosis with amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia; TAR, thrombocytopenia-­absent radius; QPD, Quebec platelet disorder; XLTDA, X-­linked thrombocytopenia with or without dyserythropoietic anemia; MYH9, MYH9-­related disorders; BSS, Bernard-­Soulier syndrome; vWD, von Willebrand disease; 22q11 del, 22q11
deletion syndrome; GPS, gray platelet syndrome; JS, Jacobsen syndrome; PTS, Paris-­Trousseau syndrome; GT, Glanzmann thrombasthenia; HPS,
Hermansky-­Pudlak syndrome; CHS, Chediak-­Higashi syndrome. (From Shim YJ. Genetic classification and confirmation of inherited platelet disorders: current status in Korea. CEP 2020;63:79–87. Fig. 2.)

533.10 Thrombocytopenia From Acquired
Disorders Causing Decreased
Production
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Disorders of the bone marrow that inhibit megakaryopoiesis usually
affect RBC and WBC production. Infiltrative disorders, including malignancies, such as acute lymphocytic leukemia, histiocytosis, lymphomas,
and storage disease, usually cause either abnormalities on physical examination (lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, or masses), abnormalities of the WBC count, or anemia. Aplastic processes may present as
isolated thrombocytopenia, although there are usually clues on the CBC
(leukopenia, neutropenia, anemia, or macrocytosis). Children with constitutional aplastic anemia (Fanconi anemia) often (but not always) have
abnormalities on examination, including radial and/or thumb anomalies, other skeletal anomalies, short stature, microcephaly, and hyperpigmentation. Bone marrow examination should be performed when
thrombocytopenia is associated with abnormalities found on physical
examination or on examination of the other blood cell lines.

533.11 Platelet Function Disorders

either collagen-­epinephrine or collagen-­ADP. Results are reported as
the closure time in seconds. The use of the PFA-­100 as a screening test
remains controversial. For patients with a positive history of bleeding
suggestive of VWD or platelet dysfunction, specific VWF testing and
platelet function studies should be done, irrespective of the results of
the bleeding time or PFA-­100.
Platelet function in the clinical laboratory is measured using platelet
aggregometry. In the aggregometer, agonists, such as collagen, ADP, ristocetin, epinephrine, arachidonic acid, and thrombin (or the thrombin
receptor peptide), are added to platelet-­rich plasma, and the clumping
of platelets over time is measured by an automated machine through
either light transmission or electric impedance. At the same time, other
instruments measure the release of granular contents, such as ATP,
from the platelets after activation. The ability of platelets to aggregate
and their metabolic activity can thus be assessed simultaneously. When
a patient is being evaluated for possible platelet dysfunction, it is critically important to exclude the presence of other exogenous agents and
to study the patient, if possible, off all medications for 2 weeks, especially those with any potential antiplatelet effects. Further evaluation
using flow cytometric analysis of surface receptors or molecular and/or
genetic testing is often necessary to make a more definitive diagnosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
There is no simple and reliable test to screen for abnormal platelet
function. Bleeding time and the platelet function analyzer (PFA-­100)
have been used, but neither has sufficient sensitivity or specificity to
rule in or rule out a platelet defect, especially one with mild-­moderate
phenotypic expression. Bleeding time measures the interaction of
platelets with the blood vessel wall and thus is affected by both platelet count and platelet function. The predictive value of bleeding time
is problematic because bleeding time is dependent on other factors,
including the technician’s skill and the patient’s cooperation, often a
challenge in the infant or young child; it is not recommended in high
resource settings. The PFA-­100 measures platelet adhesion and aggregation in whole blood at high shear when the blood is exposed to

533.12 Acquired Disorders of Platelet
Function
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
A number of systemic illnesses are associated with platelet dysfunction, most frequently liver disease, kidney disease (uremia), and disorders that trigger increased amounts of fibrin degradation products.
These disorders frequently cause prolonged bleeding time and are often
associated with other abnormalities of the coagulation mechanism.
The most important element of management is to treat the primary illness. If treatment of the primary process is not feasible, infusions of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 533 u Platelet and Blood Vessel Disorders
desmopressin have been helpful in augmenting hemostasis and correcting bleeding time. In some patients, transfusions of platelets and
cryoprecipitate have also been helpful in improving hemostasis.
Many medications alter platelet function. The most common drug in
adults that alters platelet function is acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin). Aspirin irreversibly acetylates the enzyme cyclooxygenase, which is critical
in the formation of thromboxane A2. Aspirin usually causes moderate
platelet dysfunction that becomes more prominent if there is another
abnormality of the hemostatic mechanism. In children, common drugs
that reversibly inhibit platelet function include other nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), valproic acid, and high-­dose penicillin.
Specific agents to inhibit platelet function therapeutically include those
that block the platelet ADP receptor (clopidogrel) and αIIb-­β3 receptor
antagonists, as well as aspirin.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

533.13 Congenital Abnormalities of Platelet
Function
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Severe platelet function defects usually present with petechiae and
purpura shortly after birth, especially after vaginal delivery (see Table
533.2). Defects in the platelet GPIb complex (the VWF receptor) or
the αIIb-­β3 complex (the fibrinogen receptor) cause severe congenital
platelet dysfunction. Although laboratory tests of platelet function are
available, molecular characterization by genetic testing is rapidly progressing for platelet disorders.
Bernard-­S oulier syndrome, a severe congenital platelet function disorder, is caused by absence or severe deficiency of the
GPIb complex (VWF receptor) on the platelet membrane. This
syndrome is characterized by a macrothrombocytopenia, with
giant platelets and greatly prolonged bleeding time (>20 min) or
PFA-­1 00 closure time. Patients may have significant mucocutaneous and GI bleeding. Platelet aggregation tests classically demonstrate absent ristocetin-­induced platelet aggregation but normal
aggregation to all other agonists. Ristocetin induces the binding

3059

of VWF to platelets and agglutinates platelets. Results of studies of VWF antigen and activity are normal. The GPIb complex
interacts with the platelet cytoskeleton; a defect in this interaction
is believed to be the cause of the large platelet size. This receptor deficiency can also be detected by flow cytometry. Bernard-­
Soulier syndrome is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder.
Causative pathogenic variants are usually identified in the genes
encoding the GPIb complex of glycoproteins Ibα, Ibβ, V, and IX.
Glanzmann thrombasthenia is a congenital disorder associated with
severe platelet dysfunction that yields prolonged bleeding time and a
normal platelet count. Platelets have normal size and morphologic features on the peripheral blood smear, and closure times for PFA-­100 or
bleeding time are extremely abnormal. Aggregation studies classically
demonstrate abnormal or absent aggregation with all agonists used
except ristocetin because ristocetin agglutinates platelets and does not
require a metabolically active platelet. This disorder is caused by deficiency of the platelet fibrinogen receptor αIIb-­β3, the major integrin
complex on the platelet surface that undergoes conformational changes
by inside-­out signaling when platelets are activated. This receptor deficiency can also be detected by flow cytometry. Fibrinogen binds to this
complex when the platelet is activated and causes platelets to aggregate.
Glanzmann thrombasthenia is caused by pathogenic variants in the
genes for αIIb or β3 and is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
For both Bernard-­Soulier syndrome and Glanzmann thrombasthenia,
the diagnosis is confirmed by flow cytometry of the patient’s platelet glycoproteins. Bleeding in Glanzmann thrombasthenia may be quite severe
and is typically mucocutaneous, including epistaxis, gingival, and GI
bleeding. There are reports of curative therapy using stem cell transplant.
Hereditary deficiency of platelet storage granules occurs in two
well-­characterized but rare syndromes that involve deficiency of
intracytoplasmic granules. Dense granule deficiency is characterized by absence of the granules that contain ADP, ATP, Ca2+, and
serotonin. This disorder is diagnosed by the finding that ATP is not
released on platelet aggregation studies and ideally is characterized
by transmission electron microscopic studies. Hermansky-­Pudlak
syndrome (with nine subtypes) is a dense granule deficiency caused
by defects in lysosomal storage. Affected patients present with
oculocutaneous albinism and hemorrhage caused by the platelet
defect; some patients also develop granulomatous colitis resembling

Table 533.6  Comparison of Nine Types of Hermansky-­Pudlak Syndrome
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Oculocutaneous
albinism

Variable,
mild-­
moderate:
brown to
white hair

Severe: lack of
hair and iris
pigment

Mild-­
moderate:
light skin
pigment

Severe:
blonde
hair, gray
iris

Variable:
light-­
brown hair,
brown iris

Variable: iris
heterochromia

Variable

Variable:
tan skin,
silver hair,
brown iris

Pale skin,
silver-­
blonde
hair, pale-­
blue iris

Platelet
defect/
bruising

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

Granulomatous colitis

+

−

−

+

−

+

+

−

−

Pulmonary
fibrosis/
ILD

+

+

−

+

−

−

−

−

−

Depression

High
cholesterol

Other
symptoms

Neutropenia
Failure to
thrive
Hypothyroidism
CAH

+, Present; −, absent; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia; ILD, interstitial lung disease.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Cutaneous
infections

3060 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Crohn disease or pulmonary fibrosis/interstitial lung disease (Table
533.6). Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome also presents with a dense
granule defect, immune dysfunction, and albinism. Gray platelet
syndrome is caused by the absence of platelet α granules, resulting in large platelets that are large and appear gray on Wright stain
of peripheral blood. In this rare syndrome, aggregation and release
are absent with most agonists other than thrombin and ristocetin.
Transmission electron microscopic studies are diagnostic. Autosomal recessive gray platelet syndrome is caused by defects in the
NBEAL2 gene, while autosomal dominant disease is associated with
a pathogenic variant in GFI1B. This disorder may also be associated with familial leukemia. Quebec platelet syndrome is caused
by degradation of platelet α granules caused by defects in PLAU,
which encodes a urokinase-­type plasminogen activator. Treatment
usually involves antifibrinolytic therapy.

OTHER HEREDITARY DISORDERS OF PLATELET
FUNCTION

Abnormalities in the pathways of platelet signaling/activation and
release of granular contents cause a heterogeneous group of platelet
function defects that are usually manifested as increased bruising,
epistaxis, and menorrhagia. Symptoms may be subtle and are often
made more obvious by high-­risk surgery, such as tonsillectomy or
adenoidectomy, or by administration of NSAIDs. In the laboratory,
bleeding time is variable, and closure time as measured by the PFA-­
100 is frequently, but not always, prolonged. Platelet aggregation
studies show deficient aggregation with one or two agonists and/or
abnormal release of granular contents.
The formation of thromboxane from arachidonic acid (AA) after
the activation of phospholipase is critical to normal platelet function.
Deficiency or dysfunction of enzymes, such as cyclooxygenase and
thromboxane synthase, which metabolize AA, causes abnormal platelet function. In the aggregometer, platelets from such patients do not
aggregate in response to AA.
The most common platelet function defects are those characterized by variable bleeding time/PFA closure times and abnormal
aggregation with one or two agonists, usually ADP and/or collagen. Some of these individuals have only decreased release of ATP
from intracytoplasmic granules; the significance of this finding is
debated.

TREATMENT OF PATIENTS WITH PLATELET
DYSFUNCTION

Successful treatment depends on the severity of both the diagnosis and the hemorrhagic event. In all but severe platelet function
defects, desmopressin, 0.3 μg/kg intravenously, may be used for
mild to moderate bleeding episodes. In addition to its effect on
stimulating levels of VWF and factor VIII, desmopressin corrects
bleeding time and augments hemostasis in many individuals with
mild to moderate platelet function defects. Antifibrinolytic therapy
may be useful for mucosal bleeds. For individuals with Bernard-­
Soulier syndrome or Glanzmann thrombasthenia, platelet transfusions of 0.5-­1 unit single donor platelets correct the defect in
hemostasis and may be lifesaving. Rarely, alloantibodies develop to
the deficient platelet protein, rendering the patient refractory to the
transfused platelets. In such patients, the use of recombinant factor
VIIa has been effective, and this treatment was recently approved
for platelet-­refractory Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia. In both conditions, HSCT has been curative.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

533.14 Disorders of the Blood Vessels
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Disorders of the vessel walls or supporting structures mimic the findings of a bleeding disorder, although coagulation studies are usually

normal. The findings of petechiae and purpuric lesions in such patients
are often attributable to an underlying vasculitis or vasculopathy. Skin
biopsy can be particularly helpful in elucidating the type of vascular
pathology.

IgA VASCULITIS (HENOCH-­SCHÖNLEIN PURPURA)
See Chapter 210.1.

EHLERS-­DANLOS SYNDROME
See Chapter 744.

OTHER ACQUIRED DISORDERS

Scurvy, chronic corticosteroid therapy, and severe malnutrition are
associated with “weakening” of the collagen matrix that supports the
blood vessels. Therefore these factors are associated with easy bruising,
and, particularly in the case of scurvy, bleeding gums and loosening of
the teeth. Lesions of the skin that initially appear to be petechiae and
purpura may be seen in vasculitic syndromes, such as SLE. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis may present with nonthrombocytopenic purpura (see
Chapter 210). A unique variant of leukocytoclastic vasculitis is associated with exercise.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 8

The Spleen
Chapter 534

Anatomy and Function of
the Spleen
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
ANATOMY

The splenic precursor is recognizable by 5 weeks of gestation. At
birth, the spleen weighs approximately 11 g. Thereafter, it enlarges
until puberty, reaching an average weight of 150 g, and then diminishes in size during adulthood. Approximately 15% of patients will
have an accessory spleen. The major splenic components are a lymphoid compartment (white pulp) and a filtering system (red pulp).
The white pulp consists of periarterial lymphatic sheaths (PALS;
T-­zone) of T lymphocytes with embedded germinal centers containing B lymphocytes. The red pulp has a skeleton of fixed reticular
cells, mobile macrophages, partially collapsed endothelial passages
(cords of Billroth), and splenic sinuses. A perifollicular zone (PFZ)
(known as the marginal zone in murine models) is rich in dendritic
(antigen-­presenting) cells and natural killer cells and separates the
red pulp from the white pulp. The splenic capsule contains smooth
muscle and contracts in response to epinephrine. Approximately
10% of the blood delivered to the spleen flows rapidly through a
closed vascular network. The other 90% flows more slowly through
an open system (the splenic cords), where it is filtered through 1-­5
μm slits before entering the splenic sinuses.

FUNCTION

The unique anatomy and blood flow of the spleen enable it to perform reservoir, filtering, and immunologic functions. The spleen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3060 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Crohn disease or pulmonary fibrosis/interstitial lung disease (Table
533.6). Chédiak-­Higashi syndrome also presents with a dense
granule defect, immune dysfunction, and albinism. Gray platelet
syndrome is caused by the absence of platelet α granules, resulting in large platelets that are large and appear gray on Wright stain
of peripheral blood. In this rare syndrome, aggregation and release
are absent with most agonists other than thrombin and ristocetin.
Transmission electron microscopic studies are diagnostic. Autosomal recessive gray platelet syndrome is caused by defects in the
NBEAL2 gene, while autosomal dominant disease is associated with
a pathogenic variant in GFI1B. This disorder may also be associated with familial leukemia. Quebec platelet syndrome is caused
by degradation of platelet α granules caused by defects in PLAU,
which encodes a urokinase-­type plasminogen activator. Treatment
usually involves antifibrinolytic therapy.

OTHER HEREDITARY DISORDERS OF PLATELET
FUNCTION

Abnormalities in the pathways of platelet signaling/activation and
release of granular contents cause a heterogeneous group of platelet
function defects that are usually manifested as increased bruising,
epistaxis, and menorrhagia. Symptoms may be subtle and are often
made more obvious by high-­risk surgery, such as tonsillectomy or
adenoidectomy, or by administration of NSAIDs. In the laboratory,
bleeding time is variable, and closure time as measured by the PFA-­
100 is frequently, but not always, prolonged. Platelet aggregation
studies show deficient aggregation with one or two agonists and/or
abnormal release of granular contents.
The formation of thromboxane from arachidonic acid (AA) after
the activation of phospholipase is critical to normal platelet function.
Deficiency or dysfunction of enzymes, such as cyclooxygenase and
thromboxane synthase, which metabolize AA, causes abnormal platelet function. In the aggregometer, platelets from such patients do not
aggregate in response to AA.
The most common platelet function defects are those characterized by variable bleeding time/PFA closure times and abnormal
aggregation with one or two agonists, usually ADP and/or collagen. Some of these individuals have only decreased release of ATP
from intracytoplasmic granules; the significance of this finding is
debated.

TREATMENT OF PATIENTS WITH PLATELET
DYSFUNCTION

Successful treatment depends on the severity of both the diagnosis and the hemorrhagic event. In all but severe platelet function
defects, desmopressin, 0.3 μg/kg intravenously, may be used for
mild to moderate bleeding episodes. In addition to its effect on
stimulating levels of VWF and factor VIII, desmopressin corrects
bleeding time and augments hemostasis in many individuals with
mild to moderate platelet function defects. Antifibrinolytic therapy
may be useful for mucosal bleeds. For individuals with Bernard-­
Soulier syndrome or Glanzmann thrombasthenia, platelet transfusions of 0.5-­1 unit single donor platelets correct the defect in
hemostasis and may be lifesaving. Rarely, alloantibodies develop to
the deficient platelet protein, rendering the patient refractory to the
transfused platelets. In such patients, the use of recombinant factor
VIIa has been effective, and this treatment was recently approved
for platelet-­refractory Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia. In both conditions, HSCT has been curative.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

533.14 Disorders of the Blood Vessels
Brian R. Branchford and Veronica H. Flood
Disorders of the vessel walls or supporting structures mimic the findings of a bleeding disorder, although coagulation studies are usually

normal. The findings of petechiae and purpuric lesions in such patients
are often attributable to an underlying vasculitis or vasculopathy. Skin
biopsy can be particularly helpful in elucidating the type of vascular
pathology.

IgA VASCULITIS (HENOCH-­SCHÖNLEIN PURPURA)
See Chapter 210.1.

EHLERS-­DANLOS SYNDROME
See Chapter 744.

OTHER ACQUIRED DISORDERS

Scurvy, chronic corticosteroid therapy, and severe malnutrition are
associated with “weakening” of the collagen matrix that supports the
blood vessels. Therefore these factors are associated with easy bruising,
and, particularly in the case of scurvy, bleeding gums and loosening of
the teeth. Lesions of the skin that initially appear to be petechiae and
purpura may be seen in vasculitic syndromes, such as SLE. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis may present with nonthrombocytopenic purpura (see
Chapter 210). A unique variant of leukocytoclastic vasculitis is associated with exercise.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Section 8

The Spleen
Chapter 534

Anatomy and Function of
the Spleen
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
ANATOMY

The splenic precursor is recognizable by 5 weeks of gestation. At
birth, the spleen weighs approximately 11 g. Thereafter, it enlarges
until puberty, reaching an average weight of 150 g, and then diminishes in size during adulthood. Approximately 15% of patients will
have an accessory spleen. The major splenic components are a lymphoid compartment (white pulp) and a filtering system (red pulp).
The white pulp consists of periarterial lymphatic sheaths (PALS;
T-­zone) of T lymphocytes with embedded germinal centers containing B lymphocytes. The red pulp has a skeleton of fixed reticular
cells, mobile macrophages, partially collapsed endothelial passages
(cords of Billroth), and splenic sinuses. A perifollicular zone (PFZ)
(known as the marginal zone in murine models) is rich in dendritic
(antigen-­presenting) cells and natural killer cells and separates the
red pulp from the white pulp. The splenic capsule contains smooth
muscle and contracts in response to epinephrine. Approximately
10% of the blood delivered to the spleen flows rapidly through a
closed vascular network. The other 90% flows more slowly through
an open system (the splenic cords), where it is filtered through 1-­5
μm slits before entering the splenic sinuses.

FUNCTION

The unique anatomy and blood flow of the spleen enable it to perform reservoir, filtering, and immunologic functions. The spleen

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 535 u Splenomegaly

3061

receives 5–6% of the cardiac output but normally contains only 25
mL of blood. It can retain much more when it enlarges, leading to
cytopenias. Hematopoiesis in the red pulp is a major splenic function at 3-­6 months of fetal life but subsequently disappears. Splenic
hematopoiesis can be resumed in patients with myelofibrosis or
severe hemolytic anemia. Factor VIII, iron, plasmablasts, plasma
cells, and one third of the circulating platelet mass are sequestered
in the spleen and can be released by stress or epinephrine stimulation. Thrombocytosis and leukocytosis occur with loss of the
splenic reservoir function. A high platelet count after the loss of
splenic function or splenectomy is not associated with an increased
risk of thrombosis in children.
Slow blood flow past macrophages and through small openings
in the sinus walls facilitates the filtering functions of the spleen
removing any particles >1 micron in size from the circulation.
Excess membrane is removed from young red blood cells (RBCs)
and loss of this function is characterized by target cells, poikilocytosis, and decreased osmotic fragility. The spleen is the primary
site for destruction of old RBCs, and this function is assumed by
other reticuloendothelial cells after splenectomy. The spleen also
removes damaged/abnormal RBCs (e.g., spherocytes, antibody-­
coated RBCs) and damaged/senescent platelets. Intracytoplasmic
inclusions may be removed from RBCs without cell lysis. Functional or anatomic hyposplenia is characterized by continued circulation of cells containing nuclear remnants (Howell-­Jolly bodies),
denatured hemoglobin (Heinz bodies), and other debris in RBCs.
This debris may appear as “pits” on indirect microscopy.
The spleen plays a large role in host defense against infection.
Mechanical filtration occurs removing parasitized erythrocytes, as
well as unopsonized bacteria. The spleen is the largest lymphoid organ
in the body and contains almost half the body’s total immunoglobulin-­
producing B lymphocytes. The spleen processes foreign material to
stimulate production of opsonizing antibody. Upon antigenic challenge, B and T cells are developed in the spleen, with subsequent
release of immunoglobulins. Production of immune-­mediating proteins important in bacterial clearance occurs in the spleen including
complement, opsonins, properdin, and tuftsin. Thus young (nonimmune) or hyposplenic individuals are at increased risk for sepsis
caused by pneumococci and other encapsulated bacteria. The spleen
can also use phagocytosis to trap and destroy intracellular parasites.
The spleen has a minor role in antibody response to intramuscularly
or subcutaneously injected antigens but is required for early antibody
production after exposure to intravenous antigens. Additionally, the
spleen is important in the pathogenesis of immune-­mediated cytopenias (IMCs). Antibody-­coated platelets or erythrocytes are phagocytosed via mechanisms associated with splenic macrophages. The
spleen also serves as a reservoir for antibody producing plasma cells
involved in IMCs.

by palpating across the abdomen as the patient inspires deeply or
with the patient in the right lateral decubitus position. A splenic
edge felt more than 2 cm below the left costal margin is abnormal.
An enlarged spleen might descend into the pelvis; when splenomegaly is suspected, the abdominal examination should begin at a
lower starting point. Superficial abdominal venous distention may
be present when splenomegaly is a result of portal hypertension.
Patients may also complain of left upper quadrant pain as the spleen
enlarges. Radiologic detection or confirmation of splenic enlargement is done with ultrasonography, CT, MRI, positron emission
tomography, or technetium-­99m sulfur colloid scan. The latter also
assesses splenic function.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Splenomegaly may result from obstruction in the hepatic, portal, or
splenic veins leading to hypersplenism. Wilson disease (see Chapter
405.2), galactosemia (see Chapter 107.2), biliary atresia (see Chapter 404.1), and α1-­antitrypsin deficiency (see Chapter 405) may
result in hepatic inflammation, fibrosis, and vascular obstruction.
Congenital abnormalities (absence or hypoplasia) of the portal or
splenic veins may cause vascular obstruction. Septic omphalitis or
thrombophlebitis (spontaneous or as a result of umbilical venous
catheterization in neonates) may result in secondary obliteration
of these vessels. Splenic venous flow may be obstructed by masses
of sickled erythrocytes leading to infarction. When the spleen is
the site of vascular obstruction, splenectomy cures hypersplenism. However, because obstruction usually is in the hepatic or portal systems, portacaval shunting may be more helpful since both
portal hypertension and thrombocytopenia contribute to variceal
bleeding.

Chapter 535

Splenomegaly
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

A soft, thin spleen is palpable in 15% of neonates, 10% of normal
children, and 5% of adolescents. In most individuals, the spleen
must be 2-­3 times its normal size before it is palpable. The spleen is
best examined when standing on the right side of a supine patient

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Table 535.1 lists specific causes of splenomegaly. A thorough history
with a focus on systemic complaints (e.g., fever, night sweats, malaise, weight loss) and a complete physical examination (with special
attention to lymphadenopathy, jaundice, hepatomegaly, rashes, joint
swelling, petechiae, ecchymoses), in combination with a complete
blood count and careful review of the peripheral smear, can help guide
diagnosis.

Pseudosplenomegaly

Abnormally long mesenteric connections may produce a wandering or ptotic spleen. An enlarged left lobe of the liver, a left upper
quadrant mass, or a splenic hematoma may be mistaken for splenomegaly. Splenic cysts may contribute to splenomegaly or mimic
it; these may be congenital (epidermoid) or acquired (pseudocyst)
after trauma or infarction. Cysts are usually asymptomatic and are
found on radiologic evaluation. Splenosis after splenic rupture or
an accessory spleen (present in 15% of normal individuals) may
also mimic splenomegaly; most are not palpable. The syndrome of
congenital polysplenism includes cardiac defects, left-­sided organ
anomalies, bilobed lungs, biliary atresia, and pseudosplenomegaly
(see Chapter 480.11).

Hypersplenism

Increased splenic function (sequestration or destruction of circulating cells) can result in peripheral blood cytopenias (thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, anemia), increased bone marrow activity, and
splenomegaly. It is usually secondary to another disease and may
be cured by treatment of the underlying condition or, if absolutely
necessary, may be moderated by splenectomy. Table 535.1 lists the
most common diseases associated with massive splenomegaly.

Congestive Splenomegaly

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3062 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 535.1  Differential Diagnosis of Splenomegaly by Pathophysiology
ANATOMIC LESIONS
Cysts, pseudocysts
Hamartomas
Polysplenia syndrome
Hemangiomas and lymphangiomas
Hematoma or rupture (traumatic)
Peliosis
HYPERPLASIA CAUSED BY HEMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Acute and Chronic Hemolysis*
Hemoglobinopathies (sickle cell disease in infancy with or without
sequestration crisis and sickle variants, thalassemia major, unstable
hemoglobins)‡
Erythrocyte membrane disorders (hereditary spherocytosis,
elliptocytosis, pyropoikilocytosis)
Erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies (severe G6PD deficiency, pyruvate
kinase deficiency)
Immune hemolysis (autoimmune and isoimmune hemolysis)
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Chronic Iron Deficiency
Extramedullary Hematopoiesis
Myeloproliferative diseases: CML, juvenile CML, myelofibrosis with
myeloid metaplasia, polycythemia vera
Osteopetrosis
Patients receiving granulocyte and granulocyte-­macrophage
colony-­stimulating factors
INFECTIONS†
Bacterial
Acute sepsis: Salmonella typhi, Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae type b, Staphylococcus aureus
Chronic infections: infective endocarditis, chronic meningococcemia,
brucellosis, tularemia, cat-­scratch disease
Local infections: splenic abscess (S. aureus, streptococci, less often
Salmonella spp., polymicrobial infection), pyogenic liver abscess
(anaerobic bacteria, gram-­negative enteric bacteria), cholangitis
Viral*
Acute viral infections
Congenital CMV, herpes simplex, rubella
Hepatitis A, B, and C; CMV
EBV
Viral hemophagocytic syndromes: CMV, EBV, HHV-­6
HIV‡
Spirochetal
Syphilis, especially congenital syphilis
Leptospirosis
Rickettsial
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Q fever
Typhus

Fungal/Mycobacterial
Miliary tuberculosis
Disseminated histoplasmosis
South American blastomycosis
Systemic candidiasis (in immunosuppressed patients)
Parasitic
Malaria‡
Toxoplasmosis, especially congenital
Toxocara canis, Toxocara cati (visceral larva migrans)
Leishmaniasis (kala-­azar)‡
Schistosomiasis (hepatic-­portal involvement)
Trypanosomiasis
Fascioliasis
Babesiosis
IMMUNOLOGIC AND INFLAMMATORY PROCESSES*
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Mixed connective tissue disease
Systemic vasculitis
Serum sickness
Drug hypersensitivity, especially to phenytoin
Graft-­versus-­host disease
Sjögren syndrome
Cryoglobulinemia
Amyloidosis
Sarcoidosis
Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome‡
Castleman disease‡
Posttransplant lymphoproliferative disease
Large granular lymphocytosis and neutropenia
Histiocytosis syndromes‡
Macrophage activation syndrome
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (genetic, acquired)‡
MALIGNANCIES
Primary: leukemia (acute, chronic)‡, lymphoma‡, angiosarcoma,
mastocytosis
Metastatic
STORAGE DISEASES
Lipidosis (Gaucher disease‡, Niemann-­Pick disease, infantile GM1
gangliosidosis)
Mucopolysaccharidoses (Hurler, Hunter-­type)
Mucolipidosis (I-­cell disease, sialidosis, multiple sulfatase deficiency,
fucosidosis)
Defects in carbohydrate metabolism: galactosemia, fructose
intolerance, glycogen storage disease IV
Sea-­blue histiocyte syndrome
Tangier disease
Wolman disease
Hyperchylomicronemia type I, IV
CONGESTIVE DISEASE*
Heart failure
Intrahepatic cirrhosis or fibrosis
Extrahepatic portal (thrombosis), splenic, and hepatic vein obstruction
(thrombosis, Budd-­Chiari syndrome)

*Common.
†Chronic or recurrent infection suggests underlying immunodeficiency.
‡Associated with hypersplenomegaly.
CML, Chronic myelogenous leukemia; CMV, cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; G6PD, glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase; HHV-­6, human herpesvirus 6; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 536 u Hyposplenism, Splenic Trauma, and Splenectomy

Chapter 536

Hyposplenism, Splenic
Trauma, and Splenectomy
Allison S. Remiker and Amanda M. Brandow
HYPOSPLENISM

Congenital absence (asplenia) or underdevelopment (hyposplenia)
of the spleen is associated with complex cyanotic heart defects, dextrocardia, bilateral trilobed lungs, and heterotopic abdominal organs
(Ivemark syndrome; see Chapter 480.11). Patients with isolated congenital asplenia have pathogenic variants in RPSA in ∼40% of cases.
Right atrial isomerism (Ivemark syndrome), a form of heterotaxy, may
have asplenia associated with pathogenic variants of GDF1. Splenic
function is usually normal in children with congenital polysplenia.
Functional hyposplenism may occur in normal neonates, especially
premature infants. Children with sickle cell hemoglobinopathies (see
Chapter 511.1) may have splenic hypofunction as early as 6 months
of age. In this setting, the spleen eventually autoinfarcts and becomes
fibrotic and permanently nonfunctional. Functional hyposplenism
may also occur in malaria (see Chapter 334), after irradiation to the
left upper quadrant, and when the reticuloendothelial function of the
spleen is overwhelmed (as in severe hemolytic anemia or metabolic
storage disease). Thrombosis of the splenic/celiac arteries or splenic
vein is associated with functional hyposplenism. Splenic hypofunction
has been reported occasionally in patients with autoimmune diseases
(i.e., juvenile idiopathic arthritis, lupus, sarcoidosis), nephritis, inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, chronic hepatitis, Pearson syndrome, Fanconi anemia, those with use of high-­dose corticosteroids,
and graft-­versus-­host disease (Table 536.1).
Splenic hypofunction is characterized by red blood cell (RBC)
inclusions in peripheral blood smears (Howell-­Jolly or Heinz bodies),
“pits” on interference microscopy, and poor uptake of technetium or
other spleen scans (Table 536.2 and Fig. 536.1). Reduced immunoglobulin M memory B cells may also be detected and is a risk factor
for overwhelming sepsis. Patients with functional hyposplenism or
asplenia are at increased risk for sepsis from encapsulated bacteria
and benefit from antibiotic prophylaxis and urgent evaluation when
febrile.

SPLENIC TRAUMA

Injury to the spleen may occur with abdominal trauma. Small splenic
capsular tears may cause abdominal or referred left shoulder pain as a
result of diaphragmatic irritation by blood. Larger tears result in more
severe blood loss, with similar pain and signs of hypovolemic shock.
Previously enlarged spleens (as in patients with infectious mononucleosis) are more likely to rupture with minor trauma. Patients with splenomegaly should avoid contact sports and other activities that increase
the risk of splenic trauma. CT scan with intravenous contrast is the
best imaging modality to assess splenic trauma in a hemodynamically
stable patient. In emergent situations extended focused assessment
with sonography in trauma (E-­FAST) should be considered as an initial evaluation, although the sensitivity and specificity in children is
variable.
Treatment of a small capsular injury should include careful observation with attention to changes in vital signs or abdominal findings,
serial hemoglobin determinations, and the availability of prompt surgical intervention if a patient's condition deteriorates (see Chapter 80).
RBC transfusion requirements should be minimal (<25 mL/kg/48 hr).
These patients are usually hospitalized for 10-­14 days and have their
activities restricted for months. Laparotomy, with or without splenectomy, is indicated for more marked abdominal bleeding, in patients
who have clinical instability or deterioration, or when other organ

3063

Table 536.1  Diseases Associated with Hyposplenism or
Splenic Atrophy
CONGENITAL FORMS
Normal and premature neonates
Isolated congenital hypoplasia
Ivemark syndrome
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidiasis–ectodermal
dystrophy (APECED) syndrome
Hypoparathyroidism syndrome
Stormorken syndrome
Heterotaxia syndromes

AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Glomerulonephritis
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Goodpasture syndrome
Sjögren syndrome
Polyarteritis nodosa
Thyroiditis
Sarcoidosis

GASTROINTESTINAL
DISORDERS
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Whipple disease
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Intestinal lymphangiectasia
Idiopathic chronic ulcerative
enteritis

INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Pneumococcal meningitis
HIV/AIDS
Malaria

HEPATIC DISORDERS
Active chronic hepatitis
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Hepatic cirrhosis and portal
hypertension
Alcoholism and alcoholic
hepatopathy
HEMATOLOGIC AND
ONCOLOGIC DISORDERS
Sickle cell disease (all genotypes)
Bone marrow transplantation
Chronic graft-­versus-­host disease
Acute leukemia
Chronic myeloproliferative
disorders
Fanconi syndrome
Splenic tumors
Mastocytosis

IATROGENIC FORMS
Exposure to methyldopa
High-­dose steroids
Total parenteral nutrition
Splenic irradiation
ALTERATION IN SPLENIC
CIRCULATION
Thrombosis of splenic artery
Thrombosis of splenic vein
Thrombosis of celiac artery
MISCELLANEOUS
Amyloidosis

From Di Sabatino A, Carsetti R, Corazza GR. Post-­splenectomy and hyposplenic states.
Lancet 2011;378:86–97.

damage is suspected. Partial splenectomy and splenic repair should
be substituted for total splenectomy when feasible to maintain some
splenic immune function. Nonoperative management is typically
possible in >90% of patients. Delayed splenic rupture is quite rare in
children.

SPLENECTOMY

Splenectomy should be limited to specific indications where medical
therapy is (or has been) ineffective. These include traumatic splenic
rupture, anatomic defects, splenic malignancy (i.e., splenic marginal
zone lymphoma [SMZL]), severe transfusion-­dependent hemolytic
anemia, refractory and severe immune-­mediated cytopenias, metabolic storage diseases, and secondary hypersplenism. There are certain
conditions where splenectomy should be avoided because of increased
risk of complications and/or better alternative treatments. These
include autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), hereditary stomatocytosis (HSt), hereditary xerocytosis (HX), cold agglutinin
disease (CAD), paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (PCH), Gaucher disease, and thrombocytopenia in hepatic cirrhosis. The major long-­term
risk of splenectomy is sudden, overwhelming postsplenectomy infections
(sepsis or meningitis). This risk is especially high in children <5 years
old at surgery. The risk of sepsis is less when splenectomy is performed
for trauma, RBC membrane defects, and immune thrombocytopenia
(2–4%) than when there is sickle cell anemia, thalassemia, or a preexisting immune deficiency (Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, Hodgkin disease)
or reticuloendothelial blockade (storage disease, severe hemolytic anemia) (8–30%). The overall risk is 2-­5 per 1,000 asplenic patient-­years,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3064 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 536.2

Diagnostic Techniques for and Features of Spleen Dysfunction
DESCRIPTION

COMMENTS

Immunoglobulin M memory B cells

Cells dependent on spleen for survival.
Produced in marginal zone.

Special tests required.

Technetium-­99m–labeled sulfur
colloidal scintiscan

Quantitation of splenic uptake of colloidal
sulfur particles enables a fairly accurate
static assessment of spleen function.

Hypertrophy of the left hepatic lobe might be a limiting
factor (this technique does not clearly show whether the
mass originated in the liver or the spleen in the presence of an overlapping hypertrophic left hepatic lobe).

Technetium-­99m–labeled or rubidium­81–labeled heat-­damaged
autologous erythrocyte clearance

Measurement of clearance time allows a
dynamic evaluation of spleen function.

Preexisting erythrocyte defects, difficult erythrocyte incorporation of the radioisotope, and false-­positive or false-­
negative results in relation to excessive or insufficient heat
damage make the test not suitable for clinical practice.

Detection of Howell-­Jolly bodies by
staining

Erythrocytes with nuclear remnants
Flow cytometry

No need for special equipment; inaccurate in the quantitation of splenic hypofunction.

Detection of pitted erythrocytes by
phase-­interference microscopy

Erythrocytes with membrane indentations
(4% upper limit of the normal range)

Need for phase-­interference microscopy; counts enable a
wide range of measurements and correlate with radioisotopic methods.

From Di Sabatino A, Carsetti R, Corazza GR. Post-­splenectomy and hyposplenic states. Lancet 2011;378:86–97. Table 1.

Fig. 536.1 Characteristic pitted erythrocytes in hyposplenism. A pit-

ted erythrocyte is recognizable on phase-­interference microscopy by
the characteristic “pit” on the cell membrane (arrows). (From Di Sabatino A, Carsetti R, Corazza GR. Post-­splenectomy and hyposplenic
states. Lancet. 2011;378:86–97. Fig 2.)

with a lifelong risk of overwhelming postsplenectomy infections of
5%; more than half occur within 2 years after splenectomy, although
the risk remains lifelong. The use of laparoscopic splenectomy has
decreased surgical morbidity and hospitalization time.
Encapsulated bacteria, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae (>60% of
cases), Haemophilus influenzae, and Neisseria meningitidis, account for
>80% of cases of postsplenectomy sepsis. Because the spleen is responsible for filtering the blood and for early antibody responses, sepsis
(with or without meningitis) can progress rapidly, leading to death
within 12-­24 hours of onset. Febrile splenectomized patients should be
evaluated and treated promptly with antibiotics to cover the organisms
previously mentioned. This treatment should be initiated at home if
access to definitive medical care will be delayed. Common empiric antibiotics include amoxicillin-­clavulanate or cefdinir. A broad-­spectrum
cephalosporin (cefotaxime or ceftriaxone) is recommended until specific antibiotic susceptibility and presence, or absence of meningitis
is known. Vancomycin (to cover penicillin-­resistant pneumococci)
should be initiated, depending on the illness severity and susceptibilities of pneumococci at the institution. Splenectomized patients are also
at increased risk for contracting protozoal infections, such as malaria
and babesiosis. Serious infections may occur after an animal bite or lick
(particularly dogs) and is caused by Capnocytophaga canimorsus or C.
cynodegmi. Prophylactic antibiotics should be given after a bite potentially to prevent sepsis caused by these organisms (see Chapter 765).
Preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative management may
decrease the risk of postsplenectomy infection. It is important to be

certain of the need for splenectomy and, if possible, to postpone the
operation until the patient is ≥5 years of age. Pneumococcal, meningococcal, and H. influenzae conjugate vaccines given at least 14 days before
splenectomy may reduce postsplenectomy sepsis. The 7-­valent (PCV7) was
replaced by the 13-­valent pneumococcal polysaccharide-­protein conjugate vaccine (PCV13). Thus, depending on what primary pneumococcal
vaccine was given, a single dose of PCV13 may be recommended. In
addition, the 23-­valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (Pneumovax) should be given at age ≥2 years and a second dose 5 years later.
Yearly influenza vaccine should also be given because influenza infection
is a risk factor for secondary pneumococcal infections. Prophylaxis with
oral penicillin VK (125 mg twice daily for children <5 years old; 250 mg
twice daily for children ≥5 years) should be given until at least 5 years of
age and for at least 2 years after splenectomy. Although the greatest risk
is in the immediate postoperative period, reports of deaths occurring
years after splenectomy suggest that the risk (and the need for prophylaxis) may be lifelong. Lifelong prophylaxis should be strongly considered in patients who have had an invasive pneumococcal infection or
who have an underlying immune deficiency. In children with sickle cell
disease, penicillin prophylaxis should be started as soon as the diagnosis
is made. Prophylaxis may be continued into adulthood for higher-­risk
patients, including those with a history of pneumococcal sepsis, but
effectiveness in this older group has not been well documented.
In patients with traumatic injury, splenic repair or partial splenectomy should be considered in an attempt to preserve splenic function.
Partial splenectomy or partial splenic embolization may be sufficient to
ameliorate some forms of hemolytic anemia. Up to 50% of children
whose spleen is removed because of trauma have spontaneous splenosis; surgical splenosis (distributing small pieces of spleen throughout
the abdomen) may decrease the risk of sepsis in patients whose splenectomy is necessitated by trauma. However, in both these settings, the
splenic tissue that regrows frequently has poor function.
In addition to postsplenectomy sepsis, splenectomized patients may
be at risk for thromboembolic complications, including arterial and
venous thrombosis and pulmonary hypertension. These findings have
been reported regardless of the underlying reason for splenectomy and
the postsplenectomy platelet count. Proposed mechanisms include loss
of filtering function of the spleen, allowing abnormal RBCs to remain in
the circulation and activate the coagulation cascade. Portal vein thrombosis has been reported as a complication of laparoscopic splenectomy.
The etiology of pulmonary hypertension is not well understood. It has
been described in chronic hemolytic conditions including thalassemia,
sickle cell disease, and hereditary spherocytosis, indicating there may
be a relation to ongoing chronic hemolysis postsplenectomy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 538 u Abnormalities of Lymphatic Vessels

Section 9

The Lymphatic System
Chapter 537

Anatomy and Function of
the Lymphatic System
Michael E. Kelly and Richard L. Tower
The lymphatic system participates in many biologic processes,
including fluid homeostasis, absorption of dietary fat, and initiation of specific immune responses. Besides these well-­known,
classical functions, several novel and unexpected physiologic and
pathophysiologic functions of the lymphatics have been recently
discovered, including blood pressure regulation, reverse cholesterol
transport, association with metabolic diseases and obesity, and an
important role in the preparation for neonatal respiration. This
system includes circulating lymphocytes, lymphatic vessels, lymph
nodes, spleen, tonsils, adenoids, Peyer patches, and thymus. Lymph
is an ultrafiltrate of blood and is collected by lymphatic capillaries
that are present in all organs where blood flows except the bone
marrow and retina. Lymphatic capillaries form progressively larger
vessels that drain regions of the body. The lymphatic vessels carry
lymph to the lymph nodes, where it is filtered through sinuses,
particulate matter and infectious organisms are phagocytosed, and
antigens are presented to surrounding lymphocytes. These actions
stimulate antibody production, T-­
cell responses, and cytokine
secretion (see Chapter 165). Lymph is ultimately returned to the
intravascular circulation.
The composition of lymph can vary with the site of lymph drainage. It is usually clear, but lymph drained from the intestinal tract
may be milky (chylous) because of the presence of fats. The protein
content is intermediate between an exudate and a transudate. The
protein level may be increased with inflammation and in lymph
drained from the liver or intestines. Lymph also contains variable
numbers of lymphocytes and antigen-­presenting cells.
Embryonic lymphatic development is a stepwise process that
starts in the embryonic veins, where lymphatic endothelial cell
(LEC) progenitors are initially specified. The differentiation and
maturation of these progenitors continues as they bud from the
veins to produce scattered primitive lymph sacs, from which most
of the lymphatic vasculature is derived. PROX1 gene expression is
important to LEC specification, and studies have shown the critical importance of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), Wnt, Notch,
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling pathways
in lymphatic system development.
Little is known about the establishment of organ-­specific lymphatics at later stages. Studies using lineage-­tracing technology
suggest a venous and nonvenous origin of LECs giving rise to
organ-­specific lymphatics in the mesentery, skin, and heart. Lymphatic vessels also run parallel to the dural sinuses in the central
nervous system. The embryonic origin of the meningeal lymphatics
has not been determined.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3065

Chapter 538

Abnormalities of
Lymphatic Vessels
Michael E. Kelly and Richard L. Tower
LYMPHATIC MALFORMATIONS

Developmental lymphatic anomalies including lymphatic malformations (LMs) and complex lymphatic anomalies (CLAs) manifest as
localized or multifocal lesions of the lymphatic vasculature, respectively (see International Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies
[ISSVA] classification; www.issva.org).
Cystic LMs are the most common congenital lymphatic anomalies.
They occur as solitary lesions of variable size that are classified as macrocystic, microcystic, or mixed cystic LM. LMs commonly infiltrate
soft tissues and can be found anywhere on the body, although they
occur more frequently on the head, neck, and axilla.
CLAs are multifocal lymphatic vascular lesions involving both soft
tissue and bone and often result in disruption of central collecting lymphatic channels. They include generalized lymphatic anomaly (GLA),
Gorham-­Stout disease (GSD) (Fig. 538.1), kaposiform lymphangiomatosis (KLA), and central conducting lymphatic anomalies
(CCLA) (Fig. 538.2). CLAs are rare diseases with overlapping and
variable clinical features. Common features include bone involvement,
lymphatic leakage into the thoracic (chylous effusion) and abdominal (chylous ascites) cavities and mesenteric involvement leading to
protein losing enteropathy. In addition to common features, GSD is
uniquely associated with progressive cortical bone loss (see Fig. 538.1).
KLA can be distinguished by the presence of spindle cells on histology,
an aggressive clinical course, and evidence of consumptive coagulopathy and hemorrhage. CCLA, or channel type anomaly is characterized
by dilation, malformation, and dysfunction of the major abdominal or
thoracic lymphatic vessels.
LMs can also occur as combined malformations with other blood
vessel types like capillaries (capillary-­
lymphatic malformation) or
veins (lymphatic-­venous malformation). LMs are commonly associated with PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum (PROS) disorders,
which include Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome (KTS), CLOVES (congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal
nevi, and scoliosis/skeletal/spinal anomalies) and Proteus syndrome
(Fig. 538.3).

Genetics

Somatic, activating variants in the PIK3CA gene that encodes the p110α
catalytic subunit of PI3K are present at variable frequencies in most (80%)
isolated LMs and LMs associated with PROS. These activating PIK3CA
variants are identical to those found in venous malformations and in many
human cancers. The genetics of CLAs are far more diverse. Activating
PIK3CA gene variants have been identified in several patients diagnosed
with GLA. In addition, pathologic genetic variants in genes involved in
the RAS-­MAPK signaling pathway have been implicated in other CLAs.
Activating NRAS gene variants are associated with KLA while two patients
with GSD were found to have activating gene variants in KRAS. Somatic,
pathologic genetic variants in both the ARAF and CBL genes have been
found in patients diagnosed with CCLA as have inactivating germline
pathogenic variants in EPHB4. The role of RAS/MAPK pathway activation
in CLAs is further reinforced by the observation that patients with known
RASopathies, including Noonan and Noonan-­like syndrome, can present
with central conducting lymphatic anomalies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3066 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

A

C

B

Fig. 538.1 Gorham–Stout disease. A, CT sagittal reformat. Multiple erosive changes in the occiput, clivus, and the cervical spine. (B) Sagittal T2-­
weighted fat-­saturated (FS) MRI sequence. High signal is seen in the clivus and C 1–5 vertebral and the surrounding soft tissue. C, Postgadolinium T1
FS MRI. Enhancement is seen in the areas of osseous and soft tissue abnormalities. (From Trenor III CC, Chaudry G. Complex lymphatic anomalies.
Sem Pediatr Surg 2014;23:186–190. Fig. 3.)

Most patients with CLAs have extensive and invasive disease,
necessitating systemic therapeutic approaches. The mTOR inhibitor
sirolimus has had excellent effects in patients with vascular anomalies, including those patients with CLAs. A majority of CLA patients
showed improvements in functional impairment and quality of life
measures, whereas fewer showed evidence of decreased disease burden by imaging. Combining sirolimus with bisphosphonates may
be even more effective in CLA patients with significant bone disease. Alpelisib, a PIK3CA inhibitor, has been used with success in
patients with PROS and in a growing number of GLA patients with
a known PIK3CA pathologic variant. Small numbers of patients
with KLA who were known to have pathogenic variants in either
NRAS or CBL experienced clinical improvement with trametinib,
a MEK inhibitor. Trametinib also induced remodeling of the central lymphatics and induced symptom resolution in a patient with
CCLA who had an ARAF pathogenic variant, as well a patient with
Noonan syndrome and a SOS1 pathogenic variant with severe lymphatic abnormalities.

LYMPHEDEMA

Fig. 538.2 Intranodal lymphangiogram in 15-­year-­old male with central conducting lymphatic anomaly and recurrent pericardial effusions.
Stagnant flow is seen in the patulous superior portion of the thoracic
duct. Direct puncture of the terminal portion demonstrates marked dilation with no spontaneous emptying.

Treatment

A decision to treat an LM depends on the anatomic location,
involvement of local structures, and symptoms. Referral to a specialized vascular anomalies clinic with the expertise to guide
appropriate imaging and treatment decisions is recommended. For
localized macrocystic LMs, interventional radiology (IR) administration of sclerosing agents (OK432, ethanol, bleomycin) is most
effective. For lesions involving skin and mucosa, laser treatments
may be used.

Lymphedema is a localized swelling caused by impaired lymphatic
flow and can be primary (congenital) or acquired. Primary lymphedemas are grouped as LMs because they result from dysgenesis
of lymphatic networks during early development. Primary lymphedema may be found in Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome,
autosomal dominantly inherited Milroy disease, and other chromosomal abnormalities. Pathologic variants in multiple genes,
including the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor–3 gene
(VEGFR3), GJC2, PTPN14, and GATA2, are associated with primary
lymphedema (www.issva.org) (Table 538.1). Autosomal recessive,
dominant or de novo pathogenic variants of VEGFR3 produce Milroy disease. Pathologic variants in other genes are associated with
specific syndromes: CCBE1 (Hennekam), FOXC2 (lymphedema
distichiasis), SOX18 (hypotrichosis-­telangiectasia-­lymphedema),
KMT2D/MLL2, and KDM6A (Kabuki). Unilateral or bilateral lower
extremity lymphedema in an adolescent may be Meige disease.
Acquired obstruction of the lymphatics is much more common than
primary disorders and result from tumor, postirradiation fibrosis, and
postinflammatory scarring. Filariasis is an important cause of lymphedema in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. One third of the 120 million
infected persons (primarily older adolescents and adults) have lymphedema or a hydrocele. Injury to the major lymphatic vessels can cause

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 538 u Abnormalities of Lymphatic Vessels

3067

A

B

C

D

Fig. 538.3 Photographs and MRIs of participants with isolated LM, CLOVES, KTS, and FAVA. A, An 8-­month-­old male with isolated LM. Note
swelling in deltoid region without cutaneous vascular signs. Coronal and sagittal fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI demonstrates macrocystic LM
(a multilocular cystic mass) involving the anterolateral aspects of the right shoulder without muscular infiltration (arrows); humeral head star. B, A
19-­month-­old female with CLOVES syndrome. Note asymmetric distribution of truncal lipomatous masses and bilateral lower extremity involvement. Coronal fat-­saturated T1-­weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates moderate heterogeneous enhancement of the bilateral
truncal masses (arrows). Axial T1-­weighted MRI without contrast depicts truncal lipomatous overgrowth (arrows); segment VI of the liver (asterisk).

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3068 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Fig. 538.3, cont’d C, A 3-­yr-­old male (KT4) with KTS. Note capillary-­lymphatic malformation and overgrowth involving right lower extremity.

Coronal and axial fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI shows the persistent marginal vein system (bent arrows) and marked enlargement of the subcutaneous tissues because of a combination of lymphatic fluid and fat (straight arrow). There are also intramuscular venous malformations. D, A 9-­yr-­old
male (F8) with FAVA of the left gastrocnemius muscle; note absence of overgrowth and cutaneous vascular anomalies. Sagittal fat-­saturated T1-­
weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates the longitudinal distribution of the diffuse, fibro-­adipose vascular anomaly (arrows). Axial
fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI with (upper) and without (lower) contrast. Note right head of the gastrocnemius muscle is diffusely replaced by a
contrast enhancing heterogeneous soft tissue lesion (arrows). CLOVES, congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevis,
spinal/skeletal anomalies/scoliosis; FAVA, fibro-adipose vascular anomaly; KTS, Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome; LM, lymphatic malformations. (From
Luks VL, Kamitaki N, Vivero MP, et al. Lymphatic and other vascular malformative/overgrowth disorders are caused by somatic mutations in PIK3CA.
J Pediatr. 2015;166:1048–1054.)

Table 538.1

Chromosomal, Gene, and Syndromes Associated with Lymphedema
KNOWN GENES, CHROMOSOMAL LOCI,
INHERITANCE PATTERN

SYNDROMES
Primary lymphedema

Milroy disease
Meige disease

VEGFR3 AR, AD
Familial lymphedema
No known gene

Chromosomal aneuploidy

Turner syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
Trisomy 21
Trisomy 13
Trisomy 18

45,X
47,XXY
47,XX+21; 47,XY+21
47,XX+13; 47,XY+13
47,XX+18; 47,XY+18

Other genetic and
syndromic disorders

Emberger syndrome (primary lymphedema with myelodysplasia)
Lymphedema-­distichiasis syndrome
Hennekam lymphangiectasia-­lymphedema syndrome 1 (HKLLS1)
Hennekam lymphangiectasia-­lymphedema syndrome 2 (HKLLS2)
Hypotrichosis-­lymphedema-­telangiectasia ± renal defect
syndrome (HLTRS)
Microcephaly with or without chorioretinopathy, lymphedema, or
mental retardation (MCLMR)
Microcephaly and chorioretinopathy, 1 (MCCRP1)
Noonan syndrome
Cholestasis-­lymphedema syndrome (Aagenaes syndrome)
Ectodermal dysplasia, hypo/anhidrotic, lymphedema and
immunodeficiency; immunodeficiency 33

GATA2 (3q21.3), AD
FOXC2 (16q24.1), AD
CCBE1 (18q21.32), AR
FAT4 (4q28.1), AR
SOX18 (20q13.33), AR/AD
KIF11 (10q23.33), AD
TUBGCP6 (22q13.33), AR
PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, RIT1, KRAS, AD
LSC1, AR
IKBKG, (Xq28), XLR

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; XLR, X-­linked recessive.
Modified from Unolt M, Barry J, Digilio MC, et al. Primary lymphedema and other lymphatic anomalies are associated with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Eur J Med Genetics.
2018;61:411–415. Table 1.

collection of lymph fluid in the abdomen (chylous ascites) or chest
(chylothorax).
Untreated lymphedema can be disabling and is associated with
immune dysfunction, inflammation, fibrosis, adipose tissue overgrowth, and lymphangiosarcoma. Treatment modalities attempt
to reduce localized swelling through massage, exercise, and compression. Lymphatic reconstructive procedures, including lymphovenous bypass and lymphatico-­
lymphatic anastomosis are
increasingly used to achieve lymphatic decongestion, especially in
the early stages of disease.

LYMPHANGIOLEIOMYOMATOSIS

Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is characterized by proliferation of lymphatic endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells in the
lungs, leading to airway and lymphatic obstruction, cyst formation,
pneumothorax, and respiratory failure. It may initially be mistaken

for asthma. LAM occurs in young females and is associated with
pathogenic variants in the tuberous sclerosis tumor-­
suppressor
gene TSC2 in one third of cases. Sirolimus stabilizes lung function,
reduces symptoms, and improves life quality. Lung transplantation
may be required.

LYMPHANGITIS

Lymphangitis is an inflammation of the lymphatics that drain an
area of infection. Tender, erythematous streaks extend proximally
from the infected area. Regional nodes may also be tender. Group
A streptococci and Staphylococcus aureus are the most common
pathogens, and therapy should include antibiotics that treat these
organisms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 538 u Abnormalities of Lymphatic Vessels
Bibliography
Adams DM, et al. Efficacy and Safety of Sirolimus in the Treatment of Complicated
Vascular Anomalies. Pediatrics. 2016;137:e20153257.
Chang DW, Dayan J, Greene AK, et al. Surgical treatment of lymphedema: a systematic review and meta-­analysis of controlled trials. Results of a consensus conference. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2021;1(4):975–993. 147.
Dentici ML, Di Pede A, Lepri FR, et al. Kabuki syndrome: clinical and molecular
diagnosis in the first year of life. Arch Dis Child. 2015;100:158–164.
Frosk P, Chodirker B, Simard L, et al. A novel CCBE1 pathogenic variant leading to a
mild form of hennekam syndrome: case report and review of the literature. BMC
Med Genet. 2015;16:28.
Iacobas I, et al. Multidisciplinary guidelines for initial evaluation of complicated
lymphatic anomalies—expert opinion consensus. Pediatric Blood & Cancer.
2020;67:e28036.

3068.e1

Kuentz P, et al. Molecular diagnosis of PIK3CA-­
related overgrowth spectrum
(PROS) in 162 patients and recommendations for genetic testing. Genet Med.
2017;19:989–997.
Li D, et al. ARAF recurrent pathogenic variant causes central conducting lymphatic
anomaly treatable with a MEK inhibitor. Nature Medicine. 2019;25:1116–1122.
Mäkinen T, Boon LM, Vikkula M, Alitalo K. Lymphatic Malformations: Genetics,
Mechanisms and Therapeutic Strategies. Circ Res. 2021;129(1):136–154.
Ricci KW, et al. Efficacy of systemic sirolimus in the treatment of generalized lymphatic anomaly and Gorham–Stout disease. Pediatric Blood & Cancer. 2019;66:e27614.
Rodriguez-­Laguna L, et al. Somatic activating pathogenic variants in PIK3CA cause
generalized lymphatic anomaly. J Exper Med. 2018;216:407–418.
Trenor II CC, Chaudry G. Complex lymphatic anomalies. Semin Pediatr Surg.
2014;23:186–190.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 538 u Abnormalities of Lymphatic Vessels

Section 9

The Lymphatic System
Chapter 537

Anatomy and Function of
the Lymphatic System
Michael E. Kelly and Richard L. Tower
The lymphatic system participates in many biologic processes,
including fluid homeostasis, absorption of dietary fat, and initiation of specific immune responses. Besides these well-­known,
classical functions, several novel and unexpected physiologic and
pathophysiologic functions of the lymphatics have been recently
discovered, including blood pressure regulation, reverse cholesterol
transport, association with metabolic diseases and obesity, and an
important role in the preparation for neonatal respiration. This
system includes circulating lymphocytes, lymphatic vessels, lymph
nodes, spleen, tonsils, adenoids, Peyer patches, and thymus. Lymph
is an ultrafiltrate of blood and is collected by lymphatic capillaries
that are present in all organs where blood flows except the bone
marrow and retina. Lymphatic capillaries form progressively larger
vessels that drain regions of the body. The lymphatic vessels carry
lymph to the lymph nodes, where it is filtered through sinuses,
particulate matter and infectious organisms are phagocytosed, and
antigens are presented to surrounding lymphocytes. These actions
stimulate antibody production, T-­
cell responses, and cytokine
secretion (see Chapter 165). Lymph is ultimately returned to the
intravascular circulation.
The composition of lymph can vary with the site of lymph drainage. It is usually clear, but lymph drained from the intestinal tract
may be milky (chylous) because of the presence of fats. The protein
content is intermediate between an exudate and a transudate. The
protein level may be increased with inflammation and in lymph
drained from the liver or intestines. Lymph also contains variable
numbers of lymphocytes and antigen-­presenting cells.
Embryonic lymphatic development is a stepwise process that
starts in the embryonic veins, where lymphatic endothelial cell
(LEC) progenitors are initially specified. The differentiation and
maturation of these progenitors continues as they bud from the
veins to produce scattered primitive lymph sacs, from which most
of the lymphatic vasculature is derived. PROX1 gene expression is
important to LEC specification, and studies have shown the critical importance of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), Wnt, Notch,
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling pathways
in lymphatic system development.
Little is known about the establishment of organ-­specific lymphatics at later stages. Studies using lineage-­tracing technology
suggest a venous and nonvenous origin of LECs giving rise to
organ-­specific lymphatics in the mesentery, skin, and heart. Lymphatic vessels also run parallel to the dural sinuses in the central
nervous system. The embryonic origin of the meningeal lymphatics
has not been determined.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

3065

Chapter 538

Abnormalities of
Lymphatic Vessels
Michael E. Kelly and Richard L. Tower
LYMPHATIC MALFORMATIONS

Developmental lymphatic anomalies including lymphatic malformations (LMs) and complex lymphatic anomalies (CLAs) manifest as
localized or multifocal lesions of the lymphatic vasculature, respectively (see International Society for the Study of Vascular Anomalies
[ISSVA] classification; www.issva.org).
Cystic LMs are the most common congenital lymphatic anomalies.
They occur as solitary lesions of variable size that are classified as macrocystic, microcystic, or mixed cystic LM. LMs commonly infiltrate
soft tissues and can be found anywhere on the body, although they
occur more frequently on the head, neck, and axilla.
CLAs are multifocal lymphatic vascular lesions involving both soft
tissue and bone and often result in disruption of central collecting lymphatic channels. They include generalized lymphatic anomaly (GLA),
Gorham-­Stout disease (GSD) (Fig. 538.1), kaposiform lymphangiomatosis (KLA), and central conducting lymphatic anomalies
(CCLA) (Fig. 538.2). CLAs are rare diseases with overlapping and
variable clinical features. Common features include bone involvement,
lymphatic leakage into the thoracic (chylous effusion) and abdominal (chylous ascites) cavities and mesenteric involvement leading to
protein losing enteropathy. In addition to common features, GSD is
uniquely associated with progressive cortical bone loss (see Fig. 538.1).
KLA can be distinguished by the presence of spindle cells on histology,
an aggressive clinical course, and evidence of consumptive coagulopathy and hemorrhage. CCLA, or channel type anomaly is characterized
by dilation, malformation, and dysfunction of the major abdominal or
thoracic lymphatic vessels.
LMs can also occur as combined malformations with other blood
vessel types like capillaries (capillary-­
lymphatic malformation) or
veins (lymphatic-­venous malformation). LMs are commonly associated with PIK3CA-­related overgrowth spectrum (PROS) disorders,
which include Klippel-­Trenaunay syndrome (KTS), CLOVES (congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal
nevi, and scoliosis/skeletal/spinal anomalies) and Proteus syndrome
(Fig. 538.3).

Genetics

Somatic, activating variants in the PIK3CA gene that encodes the p110α
catalytic subunit of PI3K are present at variable frequencies in most (80%)
isolated LMs and LMs associated with PROS. These activating PIK3CA
variants are identical to those found in venous malformations and in many
human cancers. The genetics of CLAs are far more diverse. Activating
PIK3CA gene variants have been identified in several patients diagnosed
with GLA. In addition, pathologic genetic variants in genes involved in
the RAS-­MAPK signaling pathway have been implicated in other CLAs.
Activating NRAS gene variants are associated with KLA while two patients
with GSD were found to have activating gene variants in KRAS. Somatic,
pathologic genetic variants in both the ARAF and CBL genes have been
found in patients diagnosed with CCLA as have inactivating germline
pathogenic variants in EPHB4. The role of RAS/MAPK pathway activation
in CLAs is further reinforced by the observation that patients with known
RASopathies, including Noonan and Noonan-­like syndrome, can present
with central conducting lymphatic anomalies.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3066 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

A

C

B

Fig. 538.1 Gorham–Stout disease. A, CT sagittal reformat. Multiple erosive changes in the occiput, clivus, and the cervical spine. (B) Sagittal T2-­
weighted fat-­saturated (FS) MRI sequence. High signal is seen in the clivus and C 1–5 vertebral and the surrounding soft tissue. C, Postgadolinium T1
FS MRI. Enhancement is seen in the areas of osseous and soft tissue abnormalities. (From Trenor III CC, Chaudry G. Complex lymphatic anomalies.
Sem Pediatr Surg 2014;23:186–190. Fig. 3.)

Most patients with CLAs have extensive and invasive disease,
necessitating systemic therapeutic approaches. The mTOR inhibitor
sirolimus has had excellent effects in patients with vascular anomalies, including those patients with CLAs. A majority of CLA patients
showed improvements in functional impairment and quality of life
measures, whereas fewer showed evidence of decreased disease burden by imaging. Combining sirolimus with bisphosphonates may
be even more effective in CLA patients with significant bone disease. Alpelisib, a PIK3CA inhibitor, has been used with success in
patients with PROS and in a growing number of GLA patients with
a known PIK3CA pathologic variant. Small numbers of patients
with KLA who were known to have pathogenic variants in either
NRAS or CBL experienced clinical improvement with trametinib,
a MEK inhibitor. Trametinib also induced remodeling of the central lymphatics and induced symptom resolution in a patient with
CCLA who had an ARAF pathogenic variant, as well a patient with
Noonan syndrome and a SOS1 pathogenic variant with severe lymphatic abnormalities.

LYMPHEDEMA

Fig. 538.2 Intranodal lymphangiogram in 15-­year-­old male with central conducting lymphatic anomaly and recurrent pericardial effusions.
Stagnant flow is seen in the patulous superior portion of the thoracic
duct. Direct puncture of the terminal portion demonstrates marked dilation with no spontaneous emptying.

Treatment

A decision to treat an LM depends on the anatomic location,
involvement of local structures, and symptoms. Referral to a specialized vascular anomalies clinic with the expertise to guide
appropriate imaging and treatment decisions is recommended. For
localized macrocystic LMs, interventional radiology (IR) administration of sclerosing agents (OK432, ethanol, bleomycin) is most
effective. For lesions involving skin and mucosa, laser treatments
may be used.

Lymphedema is a localized swelling caused by impaired lymphatic
flow and can be primary (congenital) or acquired. Primary lymphedemas are grouped as LMs because they result from dysgenesis
of lymphatic networks during early development. Primary lymphedema may be found in Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome,
autosomal dominantly inherited Milroy disease, and other chromosomal abnormalities. Pathologic variants in multiple genes,
including the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor–3 gene
(VEGFR3), GJC2, PTPN14, and GATA2, are associated with primary
lymphedema (www.issva.org) (Table 538.1). Autosomal recessive,
dominant or de novo pathogenic variants of VEGFR3 produce Milroy disease. Pathologic variants in other genes are associated with
specific syndromes: CCBE1 (Hennekam), FOXC2 (lymphedema
distichiasis), SOX18 (hypotrichosis-­telangiectasia-­lymphedema),
KMT2D/MLL2, and KDM6A (Kabuki). Unilateral or bilateral lower
extremity lymphedema in an adolescent may be Meige disease.
Acquired obstruction of the lymphatics is much more common than
primary disorders and result from tumor, postirradiation fibrosis, and
postinflammatory scarring. Filariasis is an important cause of lymphedema in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. One third of the 120 million
infected persons (primarily older adolescents and adults) have lymphedema or a hydrocele. Injury to the major lymphatic vessels can cause

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 538 u Abnormalities of Lymphatic Vessels

3067

A

B

C

D

Fig. 538.3 Photographs and MRIs of participants with isolated LM, CLOVES, KTS, and FAVA. A, An 8-­month-­old male with isolated LM. Note
swelling in deltoid region without cutaneous vascular signs. Coronal and sagittal fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI demonstrates macrocystic LM
(a multilocular cystic mass) involving the anterolateral aspects of the right shoulder without muscular infiltration (arrows); humeral head star. B, A
19-­month-­old female with CLOVES syndrome. Note asymmetric distribution of truncal lipomatous masses and bilateral lower extremity involvement. Coronal fat-­saturated T1-­weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates moderate heterogeneous enhancement of the bilateral
truncal masses (arrows). Axial T1-­weighted MRI without contrast depicts truncal lipomatous overgrowth (arrows); segment VI of the liver (asterisk).

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3068 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Fig. 538.3, cont’d C, A 3-­yr-­old male (KT4) with KTS. Note capillary-­lymphatic malformation and overgrowth involving right lower extremity.

Coronal and axial fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI shows the persistent marginal vein system (bent arrows) and marked enlargement of the subcutaneous tissues because of a combination of lymphatic fluid and fat (straight arrow). There are also intramuscular venous malformations. D, A 9-­yr-­old
male (F8) with FAVA of the left gastrocnemius muscle; note absence of overgrowth and cutaneous vascular anomalies. Sagittal fat-­saturated T1-­
weighted MRI after contrast administration demonstrates the longitudinal distribution of the diffuse, fibro-­adipose vascular anomaly (arrows). Axial
fat-­saturated T2-­weighted MRI with (upper) and without (lower) contrast. Note right head of the gastrocnemius muscle is diffusely replaced by a
contrast enhancing heterogeneous soft tissue lesion (arrows). CLOVES, congenital lipomatous overgrowth, vascular malformations, epidermal nevis,
spinal/skeletal anomalies/scoliosis; FAVA, fibro-adipose vascular anomaly; KTS, Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome; LM, lymphatic malformations. (From
Luks VL, Kamitaki N, Vivero MP, et al. Lymphatic and other vascular malformative/overgrowth disorders are caused by somatic mutations in PIK3CA.
J Pediatr. 2015;166:1048–1054.)

Table 538.1

Chromosomal, Gene, and Syndromes Associated with Lymphedema
KNOWN GENES, CHROMOSOMAL LOCI,
INHERITANCE PATTERN

SYNDROMES
Primary lymphedema

Milroy disease
Meige disease

VEGFR3 AR, AD
Familial lymphedema
No known gene

Chromosomal aneuploidy

Turner syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
Trisomy 21
Trisomy 13
Trisomy 18

45,X
47,XXY
47,XX+21; 47,XY+21
47,XX+13; 47,XY+13
47,XX+18; 47,XY+18

Other genetic and
syndromic disorders

Emberger syndrome (primary lymphedema with myelodysplasia)
Lymphedema-­distichiasis syndrome
Hennekam lymphangiectasia-­lymphedema syndrome 1 (HKLLS1)
Hennekam lymphangiectasia-­lymphedema syndrome 2 (HKLLS2)
Hypotrichosis-­lymphedema-­telangiectasia ± renal defect
syndrome (HLTRS)
Microcephaly with or without chorioretinopathy, lymphedema, or
mental retardation (MCLMR)
Microcephaly and chorioretinopathy, 1 (MCCRP1)
Noonan syndrome
Cholestasis-­lymphedema syndrome (Aagenaes syndrome)
Ectodermal dysplasia, hypo/anhidrotic, lymphedema and
immunodeficiency; immunodeficiency 33

GATA2 (3q21.3), AD
FOXC2 (16q24.1), AD
CCBE1 (18q21.32), AR
FAT4 (4q28.1), AR
SOX18 (20q13.33), AR/AD
KIF11 (10q23.33), AD
TUBGCP6 (22q13.33), AR
PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, RIT1, KRAS, AD
LSC1, AR
IKBKG, (Xq28), XLR

AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, Autosomal recessive; XLR, X-­linked recessive.
Modified from Unolt M, Barry J, Digilio MC, et al. Primary lymphedema and other lymphatic anomalies are associated with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Eur J Med Genetics.
2018;61:411–415. Table 1.

collection of lymph fluid in the abdomen (chylous ascites) or chest
(chylothorax).
Untreated lymphedema can be disabling and is associated with
immune dysfunction, inflammation, fibrosis, adipose tissue overgrowth, and lymphangiosarcoma. Treatment modalities attempt
to reduce localized swelling through massage, exercise, and compression. Lymphatic reconstructive procedures, including lymphovenous bypass and lymphatico-­
lymphatic anastomosis are
increasingly used to achieve lymphatic decongestion, especially in
the early stages of disease.

LYMPHANGIOLEIOMYOMATOSIS

Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) is characterized by proliferation of lymphatic endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells in the
lungs, leading to airway and lymphatic obstruction, cyst formation,
pneumothorax, and respiratory failure. It may initially be mistaken

for asthma. LAM occurs in young females and is associated with
pathogenic variants in the tuberous sclerosis tumor-­
suppressor
gene TSC2 in one third of cases. Sirolimus stabilizes lung function,
reduces symptoms, and improves life quality. Lung transplantation
may be required.

LYMPHANGITIS

Lymphangitis is an inflammation of the lymphatics that drain an
area of infection. Tender, erythematous streaks extend proximally
from the infected area. Regional nodes may also be tender. Group
A streptococci and Staphylococcus aureus are the most common
pathogens, and therapy should include antibiotics that treat these
organisms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 539 u Lymphadenopathy 3069

Chapter 539

Table 539.1  Differential Diagnosis of Generalized
Lymphadenopathy

Lymphadenopathy

NEONATE

Zachary T. Graff and Richard L. Tower
Palpable lymph nodes are common in pediatrics and often pose a diagnostic challenge. Lymph node enlargement can be caused by proliferation of normal lymphoid elements or by infiltration with malignant or
other phagocytic cells. In most patients, a careful history and a complete physical examination suggest the proper diagnosis.

DIAGNOSIS
What Is the Site of the Mass?

The differential diagnosis of a mass varies greatly based on anatomic
location. Although pathologic masses can occur in any site, masses
occurring in the supraclavicular and lower half of the neck are more
likely to reflect pathologic lymphadenopathy than in other sites of the
body.

Is the Mass a Lymph Node?

Nonlymphoid masses (cervical rib, thyroglossal cyst, branchial cleft
cyst or infected sinus, cystic hygroma, goiter, thyroiditis, sternomastoid
muscle tumor of infancy, neurofibroma) occur frequently in the neck
and less often in other areas.

Is the Node Enlarged?

Lymph nodes are not usually palpable in the newborn. With antigenic
exposure, lymphoid tissue increases in volume. They are not considered enlarged until their diameter exceeds 1 cm for cervical and
axillary nodes, 1.5 cm for inguinal nodes, and epitrochlear >0.5 cm.
Other lymph nodes usually are not palpable or visualized with plain
radiographs.

What are the Characteristics of the Node?

Acutely infected nodes are usually tender. There may also be erythema
and warmth of the overlying skin. Fluctuance suggests abscess formation. Tuberculous nodes may be matted. With chronic infection, many
of these signs are not present. A firm, fixed, nonmobile (to adjacent or
underlying tissues), nontender node should always raise the question
of malignancy, regardless of the presence or absence of systemic symptoms or other abnormal physical findings. Tumors or tumor-­involved
nodes are often present for >2 weeks and may be associated with local
extension (voice change, dysphagia, otalgia) or systemic signs (fever,
weight loss, night sweats).

Is the Lymphadenopathy Localized or Generalized?

Generalized adenopathy (enlargement of >2 noncontiguous node
regions) is caused by systemic disease (Table 539.1) and is often accompanied by abnormal physical findings in other systems. In contrast,
regional adenopathy is most frequently the result of infection in the
involved node and/or its drainage area (Table 539.2). When caused by
infectious agents other than bacteria, adenopathy may be characterized by atypical anatomic areas, a prolonged course, a draining sinus,
lack of prior pyogenic infection, and unusual clues in the history (cat
scratches, tuberculosis exposure, venereal disease). The histopathologic pattern may also help with a differential diagnosis (Table 539.3).

TREATMENT

Evaluation and treatment of lymphadenopathy is guided by the probable etiologic factor, as determined from the history and physical
examination. Many patients with cervical adenopathy have a history
compatible with viral infection and are observed without intervention. If bacterial infection is suspected, antibiotic treatment covering
at least streptococci and staphylococci is indicated. Those who do not

CHILD

COMMON CAUSES
CMV
Nonspecific viral
HIV
infections
Syphilis
EBV
Toxoplasmosis
CMV
HIV
Toxoplasmosis
Measles
RARE CAUSES
Chagas disease
(congenital)
Congenital
leukemia
Congenital
tuberculosis
Reticuloendotheliosis
Metabolic storage
disease
Histiocytic
disorders
Listeria sepsis

Serum sickness
SLE, JIA
Leukemia/lymphoma
Tuberculosis (miliary)
Sarcoidosis
DRESS
Fungal infections
Plague
Leptospirosis
Brucellosis
Langerhans cell
histiocytosis
Macrophage activation
syndrome
Hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis
Castleman disease (very
rare in this age group)
Chronic granulomatous
disease
Sinus histiocytosis
(Rosai-­Dorfman
disease)
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto
disease
Autoimmune
lymphoproliferative
disease (ALP)
Rickettsial infection

ADOLESCENT
Viral infections
EBV
CMV
HIV
Measles
Toxoplasmosis
Syphilis

Serum sickness
SLE, JIA
Leukemia/
lymphoma
Tuberculosis
Sarcoidosis
DRESS
Fungal infections
Plague
Leptospirosis
Brucellosis
Drug reaction
(immune)
Castleman disease
Rickettsial infection

CMV, Cytomegalovirus; DRESS, drug reaction, eosinophilia, systemic symptoms; EBV,
Epstein-­Barr virus; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (as Still disease); SLE, systemic
lupus erythematosus.
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis: Common Diseases and Their Mimics, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023:
Table 48.3, p. 891.

respond to oral antibiotics, as demonstrated by persistent swelling and
fever, require intravenous (IV) antistaphylococcal antibiotics. If there
is no response in 1-­2 days, or if there are signs of airway obstruction
or significant toxicity, ultrasound, CT, or MRI of the neck with contrast should be obtained. If pus is present, it may be aspirated, or if it
is extensive, it may require incision and drainage. Gram stain and culture of the pus should be obtained. The sizes of involved nodes should
be documented before treatment. Failure to decrease in size within 14
days also suggests the need for further evaluation. This evaluation may
include a complete blood cell count (CBC) with differential; Epstein-­
Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, Toxoplasma, and Bartonella henselae
titers; anti–streptolysin O or anti-­DNase B serologic tests; tuberculin
skin test or gamma interferon assay; and chest radiograph to evaluate for mediastinal adenopathy. If these are not diagnostic, consultation with an infectious diseases or oncology specialist may be helpful.
Biopsy should be considered if there is persistent or unexplained fever,
weight loss, night sweats, supraclavicular location, mediastinal mass,
hard nodes, or fixation of the nodes to surrounding tissues. Biopsy may
also be indicated if there is an increase in size over baseline in 2 weeks,
no decrease in size in 4-­6 weeks, no regression to “normal” in 8-­12
weeks, or if new signs and symptoms develop.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3070 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood
Table 539.2  Sites of Regional Lymphadenopathy and
Associated Diseases
CERVICAL
Oropharyngeal infection (viral, group A streptococcal, staphylococcal,
or fusobacterial)
Scalp infection (tinea)
Mycobacterial lymphadenitis (tuberculous and nontuberculous
mycobacteria)
Viral infection (EBV, CMV, HHV-­6, measles)
Cat-­scratch disease
Kawasaki disease
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) associated
with COVID-­19
Thyroid disease
Kimura disease
Rosai-­Dorfman (sinus histiocytosis)
Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, cervical adenopathy
(PFAPA) syndrome
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease
Unicentric Castleman disease
ANTERIOR AURICULAR
Conjunctivitis or other eye infections
Oculoglandular tularemia, cat-­scratch disease, EBV, adenovirus
POSTERIOR AURICULAR
Otitis media
Viral infection (especially rubella, parvovirus)
SUPRACLAVICULAR
Malignancy or infection in the mediastinum (right)
Metastatic malignancy from abdomen (left)
Lymphoma
Tuberculosis
EPITROCHLEAR
Hand infection, arm infection*
Lymphoma†
Sarcoidosis
Syphilis
EBV
HIV
INGUINAL
Urinary tract infection
Sexually transmitted infection (especially syphilis or lymphogranuloma
venereum)
Lower extremity suppurative infection
Plague
HILAR (NOT PALPABLE, FOUND ON CHEST RADIOGRAPH OR
CT) (SEE TABLE 539.1)
Tuberculosis†
Histoplasmosis†
Blastomycosis†
Coccidioidomycosis†
Leukemia/lymphoma†
Hodgkin disease†
Metastatic malignancy*
Sarcoidosis†
Castleman disease
AXILLARY
Cat-­scratch disease
Arm infection
Malignancy of chest wall
Leukemia/lymphoma
Brucellosis
*Unilateral.
†Bilateral.
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­Barr virus; HHV-­6, human herpesvirus 6.
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis: Common Diseases and Their Mimics, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023:
Table 48.2, p. 890.

Differentiating benign disorders from a malignancy may initially be
difficult. Hard, nontender, nonerythematous nodes involving multiple
regions (including mediastinum and abdomen), hepatic or splenic
enlargement, fever, night sweats, and weight loss suggest malignancy
or a granulomatous process. Persistence of symptoms and lymphadenopathy >2 weeks and certain locations (supraclavicular, mediastinal,
abdominal) also suggest malignancy. Cytopenias and elevated blood
lactate dehydrogenase are associated with malignancy and certain
infectious and inflammatory disorders. Ultrasound is useful in distinguishing malignancy from reactive nodes. CT with contrast is helpful
in identifying other affected nodes and organs. Although fine needle
aspiration (FNA) is sometimes used as an initial approach to diagnosis,
excisional biopsies are often needed and are the preferred diagnostic
approach to fully appreciate the lymph node architecture and genomic
profiling when malignant conditions are being considered.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

539.1 Kikuchi-­Fujimoto Disease (Histiocytic
Necrotizing Lymphadenitis)
Zachary T. Graff and Richard L. Tower
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease is a rare, usually self-­limiting disease that is
seen in all ethnic groups; children and adults may be affected. Familial
cases have been reported. The etiology is unknown, although infectious
and autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
have been associated. The differential diagnosis includes infectious
lymphadenitis, lymphoma, tuberculosis, and SLE.
Presentation is varied but most often presents as firm, painful unilateral posterior cervical adenopathy evolving over several weeks. Fever
is frequently reported. Labs are often normal; however, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), elevated CRP, atypical lymphocytosis,
and leukopenia can be seen. Nodes range in size from 0.5-­6.0 cm, are
painful or tender in only 50% of cases, may be multiple, and must be
differentiated from lymphoma. Node involvement may occasionally be
bilateral or rarely present in axillary, supraclavicular, or intraabdominal
lymph nodes. Ultrasound usually shows multiple conglomerated, unilateral cervical lymphadenopathy with perinodal fat swelling and even
size distribution. Aseptic meningitis is an uncommon associated feature.
The diagnosis is made by lymph node biopsy. Histologic features include
paracortical lymph node expansion with patchy, well-­circumscribed areas
of necrosis showing karyorrhexis, an absence of neutrophils and eosinophils, a CD68+/MPO+ histiocytic infiltrate, and CD123+/TCL1+ plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Kikuchi-­Fujimoto disease usually resolves within
6 months, although relapses have occurred up to 16 years later. Treatment
is typically symptomatic including rest and analgesics. Therapy with systemic steroids is reserved for patients with severe symptoms. Recurrences
occur in ∼5-20% depending on site (higher recurrences with bone, CNS,
or skin involvement). Patients should be followed for the possible development of systemic lupus erythematosus. Rarely, the disease has been fatal.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

539.2 Sinus Histiocytosis with Massive
Lymphadenopathy (Rosai-­Dorfman
Disease)
Zachary T. Graff and Richard L. Tower
The uncommon, benign, and usually self-­limited Rosai-­Dorfman disease (RDD) is a non-­Langerhans cell histiocytosis that has a worldwide
distribution but is more common in individuals of African descent. The
etiology is unknown, but immune dysfunction is suspected. Lesional
histiocytes are S100+, CD68+, and CD1a−. It is not a single entity, but a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 539 u Lymphadenopathy 3071
Table 539.3

Differential Diagnosis for the Histologic Patterns Seen in Pediatric Lymphadenopathies

HISTOLOGIC PATTERN

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

KEY FEATURES

Isolated follicular hyperplasia

Nonspecific reactive pattern
Viral infections
HIV lymphadenitis
Measles
Follicular lymphoma
Primary immunodeficiencies

Multinucleated Warthin-­Finkeldey cells seen in both HIV and
measles
Expansile irregular follicles in acute HIV
Normal polarization of germinal center cells and
phenotyping helpful to rule out follicular lymphoma

Follicular hyperplasia with
PTGC

Nonspecific reactive pattern
Nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin
lymphoma

Cytologically atypical cells seen in nodular lymphocyte
predominant Hodgkin lymphoma are absent in PTGC

Paracortical hyperplasia

EBV infectious mononucleosis
HSV1/2
CMV
Varicella
Measles
Classic Hodgkin lymphoma
Drug-­induced lymphadenopathy
Primary immunodeficiencies
Non-­Hodgkin B-­cell and T-­cell lymphoma

Polymorphic with numerous immunoblasts
RS-­like cells express CD20, unlike RS cells of classic Hodgkin
lymphoma
Warthin-­Finkeldey cells may be seen in measles and HSV
lymphadenitis
Well-­delineated necrosis in HSV
Intranuclear inclusions may be seen in CMV, HSV, and
varicella
Associated monocytoid B-­cell hyperplasia seen in CMV
lymphadenitis

Suppurative

Bacterial lymphadenitis, Staphylococcus,
Streptococcus, Haemophilus, Yersinia,
Francisella tularensis, Brucella
HSV lymphadenitis
Kawasaki

Poorly formed granulomas also may be seen in
bacterial infections
Necrotic foci beneath the capsule seen in Kawasaki

Necrotizing granulomas

Mycobacteria, tuberculous, and nontuberculous
Fungal infections
CSD
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto lymphadenitis/SLE

Acellular (caseating) necrosis with numerous giant cells
seen in mycobacterial and fungal infections
CSD palisading histiocytes with neutrophilic
microabscesses
Kikuchi-­Fujimoto lymphadenitis/SLE necrosis with nuclear
debris and absence of neutrophils; C-­shaped histiocytes;
clusters of immunoblasts and plasmacytoid dendritic cells

Nonnecrotizing granulomas

Sarcoidosis; infections; nonspecific

Histiocytoses

HLH, Rosai-­Dorfman disease

Miscellaneous

Toxoplasmosis
• Triad: follicular hyperplasia, monocytoid B-­cell hyperplasia, epithelioid histiocytes extend into lymphoid
­follicles
• Kimura
• Follicular hyperplasia and interfollicular eosinophils

CMV, cytomegalovirus; CSD, cat-scratch disease; EBV, Epstein Barr virus; HLH, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; HSV, herpes simplex virus; PTGC, progressive transformation of
germinal centers; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
From Faraz M, Rosando FGN. Reactive lymphadenopathies. Clin Lab Med. 2021;41:433–451. Table 1.

pattern, and can be associated with neoplasia or autoimmune disease.
It can be sporadic or associated with inherited conditions. Some patients
have somatic pathogenic variants in NRAS, KRAS, and MAP2K1. Familial
RDD has been noted in patients with pathogenic variants in SLC29A3.
RDD may coexist with SLE, JIA, and autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
Patients can be classified as classical (nodal) RDD or extranodal RDD.
Classical RDD patients present with massive bilateral, painless, mobile
cervical adenopathy with or without fever, night sweats, and weight
loss. Other lymph node involvement can include mediastinal, axillary,
and inguinal, although retroperitoneal involvement is rare. Extranodal
RDD occurs in 43% of cases. Soft tissue involvement has been reported
in many organ systems. The most common sites are the skin, followed
by the nasal cavity and sinuses, palate, orbit, bone, and central nervous
system. Lab abnormalities can include normocytic anemia, leukocytosis (typically neutrophilia), elevated ESR, and polyclonal elevation of
immunoglobulin G (hypergammaglobulinemia). Initial imaging studies are determined by symptoms and sites of suspected disease.
A biopsy that demonstrates histiocytes with hypochromatic nuclei
with pale cytoplasm containing engulfed erythrocytes, plasma cells, and
lymphocytes (emperipolesis), and immunoreactivity to S100 protein, in
conjunction with expected clinical features, is diagnostic. IgG4-­positive

cells are often abundant. Occasionally, autoantibodies to erythrocytes or
synovium may be present. The differential diagnosis includes Langerhans cell histiocytosis, myeloproliferative disorders, lymphoma, and
hyper-­IgG4 syndrome. After diagnosis, whole-­body imaging with MRI
or PET scan is recommended to evaluate for extranodal RDD.
Observation alone is a reasonable treatment choice for patients with
uncomplicated nodal/cutaneous disease, as spontaneous remissions are
seen in 20–50% of these patients. Symptomatic patients may benefit from
surgical resection or debulking with the presence of single-­site disease.
Systemic therapy is typically reserved for severe, refractory, multifocal,
or unresectable disease. Steroids are helpful in reducing nodal size; however, durable responses are often not seen with steroids alone. Various
immunomodulatory (sirolimus) and chemotherapy regimens have been
used successfully in severe disease, with treatment courses ranging from
6-­12 months followed by close observation. Targeted therapies, including MEK inhibitors, have shown promising early results with studies
ongoing. Radiation therapy has modest efficacy in RDD but has been
used successfully in emergent therapy with visual or airway compromise.
RDD may recur for many years with an unpredictable clinical course.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3072 Part XIX u Diseases of the Blood

539.3 Castleman Disease (Angiofollicular
Lymph Node Hyperplasia)
Zachary T. Graff and Richard L. Tower
Castleman disease (CD) is an uncommon nonmalignant B-­
cell
lymphoproliferative disorder and is also called angiofollicular
lymph node hyperplasia. CD causes lymph node enlargement and
is classified as either unicentric (involving a single lymph node or
lymph node region) or multicentric (involving multiple lymph node
regions). Unicentric CD typically presents with enlargement of a
single bulky lymph node, most often in the mediastinum, neck, or
abdomen, which can be asymptomatic or present with locally compressive symptoms. Patients may have fever, night sweats, weight loss,
and fatigue. Diagnosis is made by an excisional lymph node biopsy.
Staging imaging is performed with CT scan of chest/abdomen/pelvis
or PET-­CT scan to evaluate for multicentric disease. Management
includes surgical resection when possible and is associated with a
benign course, although patients should be educated on an increased
risk of lymphoma.
Multicentric CD is subclassified based on the etiologic driver of the
disease, either human herpes virus-­8 (HHV-­8), peripheral neuropathy,
organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal plasma cell disorder, skin
changes (POEMS) syndrome, or idiopathic. An underlying immunocompromised state is the primary risk factor for HHV-­8 CD, particularly patients with HIV. Other forms of multicentric CD have no
known risk factors. HHV-­8 and idiopathic multicentric CD are driven
by the excessive production of interleukin-­6 (IL-­6). Lymphadenopathy
is often small volume and is present in peripheral and central lymph

node chains. Constitutional symptoms such as fever, night sweats,
and weight loss are more common at presentation compared to unicentric CD. Fluid collections including ascites, cytopenias, and liver/
kidney dysfunction are also seen and indicate more aggressive disease.
Diagnosis is again made by excisional lymph node biopsy as well as
consistent clinical features. To determine type of multicentric CD,
testing for HIV, HHV-­8, and evaluation for POEMS (polyneuropathy,
organomegaly, edema/endocrinopathy, monoclonal-­
protein, skin)
syndrome is needed. Serum inflammatory markers are often tested at
baseline and used to track disease. The differential diagnosis is broad
even after lymph node biopsy, including infection, autoimmune disease, and malignancy. There is no standard treatment for multicentric
Castleman disease. For symptomatic HHV-­8+ multicentric CD, rituximab +/-­etoposide with antiretroviral therapy for HIV+ patients have
achieved excellent relapse-­free survival. Idiopathic multicentric CD
is managed with anti-­IL-­6 directed therapy (siltuximab) and steroids.
Even after initial responses, symptoms can return after stopping therapy.
Rituximab, steroids, and additional immunomodulatory medications
(particularly the mTOR inhibitor sirolimus) are used next in patients
that have had an inadequate response to therapy. Cytotoxic chemotherapy can be used for severe disease with organ dysfunction after failure
of first-­line therapy.
TAFRO (thrombocytopenia, anasarca, fever, reticulum fibrosis,
organomegaly) syndrome is thought to be a subtype of multicentric
Castleman disease based on the histologic appearance of the lymph
node. Although there are overlapping features, TAFRO may be a distinct entity (Fig. 539.1).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

iMCD-NOS

Histopathologic
findings

Clinical findings

TAFRO syndrome

• Thrombocytopenia
• Severe anasarca
• Abdominal pain
• Elevated serum ALP level
with normal ALT and AST
• Lower level of
serum gamma globulin

• Fever
• Organomegaly
• Anemia
• Hypoalbuminemia
• Elevated serum level
of CRP and IL-6

• Thrombocytosis
• Higher level of
serum gamma globulin

Reticulin fibrosis in BM
• Megakaryocytic hyperplasia with
slight atypia

LN
• Atrophic GC
• Expanded interfollicular area
• HHV-8 negative
• No light chain restriction

LN
• Sheets of plasma cells
• Hyperplastic GC

Slightly enlarged LN in size
• Dense endothelial venules
• Large nuclei of endothelial cells
• Expanded FDC network

Fig. 539.1 Summary of the clinical and histopathologic features of TAFRO syndrome and iMCD-­NOS. Although TAFRO syndrome and iMCD-­
NOS have clinicopathologic features in common, TAFRO syndrome has unique characteristics that can distinguish it from iMCD-­NOS. ALP, alkaline
phosphatase; ALT, Alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase; BM, bone marrow; CRP, C-­reactive protein; FDC, follicular dendritic cell;
GC, germinal center; HHV, human herpes virus; LN, lymph node; iMCD, idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease; NOS, not otherwise specified;
TAFRO, thrombocytopenia, anasarca, fever, reticulin fibrosis, organomegaly. (From Igawa T, Sato Y. TAFRO syndrome. Hematol Oncol Clin N Am.
2018;32:107–118. Fig. 4.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

