The Ear
Chapter 676

General Considerations
and Evaluation of the Ear
Joseph Haddad Jr.
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Diseases of the ear and temporal bone typically manifest with one or
more of eight clinical signs and symptoms.
Otalgia usually is associated with inflammation of the middle ear
(about 50% of cases) or external ear, but it can represent pain referred from
involvement of the teeth, temporomandibular joint, or pharynx (Table
676.1). In young infants, pulling or rubbing the ear along with general irritability or poor sleep, especially when associated with fever, may be the
only signs of ear pain. Ear pulling alone is not diagnostic of ear pathology.
Purulent otorrhea is a sign of otitis externa, otitis media (OM) with
perforation of the tympanic membrane (TM), drainage from the middle ear through a patent tympanostomy tube, or, rarely, drainage from a
first branchial cleft sinus. Bloody drainage may be associated with acute
or chronic inflammation (often with granulation tissue and/or an ear
tube), trauma, neoplasm, foreign body, or blood dyscrasia. Clear drainage suggests a perforation of the TM with a serous middle-­ear effusion
or, rarely, a cerebrospinal fluid leak draining through defects (congenital or traumatic) in the external auditory canal or from the middle ear.
Hearing loss results either from disease of the external or middle ear
(conductive hearing loss) or from pathology in the inner ear, retrocochlear structures, or central auditory pathways (sensorineural hearing
loss [SNHL]); the underlying etiology can be genetic or nongenetic,
syndromic or nonsyndromic, or idiopathic. The most common cause
of hearing loss in children is OM.
Swelling around the ear most commonly is a result of inflammation
(e.g., external otitis, perichondritis, mastoiditis), trauma (e.g., hematoma), benign cystic masses, or neoplasm.
Vertigo is a specific type of dizziness that is defined as any illusion
or sensation of motion. Dizziness is less specific than vertigo and refers
to a sensation of altered orientation in space. Vertigo is an uncommon
complaint in children; the child or parent might not volunteer information about balance unless asked specifically. The most common
cause of dizziness in young children is eustachian tube–middle-­ear
disease, but true vertigo also may be caused by labyrinthitis, perilymphatic fistula between the inner and middle ear as a result of trauma or
a congenital inner ear defect, cholesteatoma in the mastoid or middle
ear, vestibular neuronitis, benign paroxysmal vertigo, Meniere disease,
or disease of the central nervous system. Older children might describe
a feeling of the room spinning or turning; younger children might
express the dysequilibrium only by falling, stumbling, or clumsiness.
Nystagmus may be unidirectional, horizontal, or jerk nystagmus. It
is vestibular in origin and usually is associated with vertigo.
Tinnitus rarely is described spontaneously by children, but it is
common, especially in patients with eustachian tube–middle-­ear disease or SNHL. Children can describe tinnitus if asked directly about it,
including laterality and the quality of the sound.

FACIAL PARALYSIS

The facial nerve may be dehiscent in its course through the middle ear
as a normal variant in as many as 50% of people. Infection with local

PART

XXVIII
inflammation, most commonly in acute OM, can lead to a temporary
paralysis of the facial nerve. It also can result from Lyme disease, cholesteatoma, Bell palsy, Ramsay Hunt syndrome (herpes zoster oticus),
fracture, neoplasm, or infection of the temporal bone. Congenital facial
paralysis can result from birth trauma or congenital abnormality of the
seventh nerve or from a syndrome such as Möbius or CHARGE (coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanae, retarded growth, genital hypoplasia, and ear anomalies), or it may be associated with other cranial nerve
abnormalities and craniofacial anomalies.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Complete examination with special attention to the head and neck can
reveal a condition that can predispose to or be associated with ear disease in children. The facial appearance and the character of speech can
give clues to an abnormality of the ear or hearing. Many craniofacial
anomalies, such as cleft palate, mandibulofacial dysostosis (Treacher
Collins syndrome), and trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), are associated
with disorders of the ear and eustachian tube. Mouth breathing and
hyponasality can indicate intranasal or postnasal obstruction. Hypernasality is a sign of velopharyngeal insufficiency. Examining the oropharyngeal cavity might uncover an overt cleft palate or a submucous
cleft (usually associated with a bifid uvula), both of which predispose to
OM with effusion. A nasopharyngeal tumor with nasal and eustachian
tube blockage may be associated with OM.
The position of the patient for examination of the ear, nose, and throat
depends on the patient’s age and ability to cooperate, the clinical setting,
and the examiner’s preference. The child can be examined on an examination table or on the parent’s lap. The presence of a parent or assistant
usually is necessary to minimize movement and provide better examination results. An examining table may be desirable for uncooperative
older infants or when a procedure, such as microscopic evaluation or
tympanocentesis, is performed. Lap examination is adequate in most
infants and young children; the parent may assist in restraining the child
by folding the child’s wrists and arms over the child’s own abdomen with
one hand and holding the child’s head against the parent’s chest with the
other hand. If necessary, the child’s legs can be held between the parent’s
knees. To avoid ear trauma with movement, the examiner should hold
the otoscope with the hand placed firmly against the child’s head or face,
so that the otoscope moves with the head. Pulling up and out on the
pinna straightens the ear canal and allows better exposure of the TM.
When examining the ear, inspecting the auricle and external auditory meatus for infection can aid in evaluating complications of OM.
External otitis can result from acute OM with discharge, or inflammation of the posterior auricular area can indicate a periostitis or subperiosteal abscess extending from the mastoid air cells. The presence
of preauricular pits or skin tags also should be noted because affected
children have a slightly higher incidence of SNHL; ear pits can develop
chronic infection.
Cerumen is a protective, waxy, water-­repellent coating in the ear
canal that can interfere with examination. Cerumen usually is removed
using the surgical head of the otoscope, which allows passage of a
wire loop or a blunt curette under direct visualization. Other methods
include gentle irrigation of the ear canal with warm water, which should
be performed only if the TM is intact, or instillation of a solution such
as diluted hydrogen peroxide in the ear canal (with intact TM only) for
a few minutes to soften the wax for suction removal or irrigation. Commercial preparations such as trolamine polypeptide oleate–condensate
(Cerumenex) may cause dermatitis of the external canal with chronic
use and should be used only under a physician’s supervision.
Inflammation of the ear canal with associated pain often indicates
external otitis. Abnormalities of the external auditory canal include

3981
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3982 Part XXVIII u The Ear
Table 676.1  Causes of Otalgia and Sources for Referred
Pain
INTRINSIC
External Ear
External otitis
Cerumen impaction
Foreign body
Perichondritis
Preauricular cyst or sinus
Impacted insects
Myringitis
Trauma
Tumor
Middle Ear, Eustachian Tube, and Mastoid
Barotrauma
Middle ear effusion
Negative intratympanic pressure (eustachian tube dysfunction)
Acute otitis media
Mastoiditis
Aditus block
Complication of otitis media
Gradenigo syndrome (otorrhea, CN VI palsy, pain in CN V
distribution, petrositis)
Tumor
Eosinophilic granuloma
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
EXTRINSIC
Trigeminal Nerve
Dental
Jaw
Temporomandibular joint
Oral cavity (tongue)
Infratemporal fossa tumors
Facial Nerve
Bell palsy
Tumors
Herpes zoster
Glossopharyngeal Nerve
Tonsil
Oropharynx
Nasopharynx
Vagus Nerve
Laryngopharynx
Esophagus
Gastroesophageal reflux
Thyroid
Cervical Nerves
Lymph nodes
Cysts
Cervical spine
Neck infections
Miscellaneous
Migraine
Neuralgias
Paranasal sinuses
Central nervous system
Drug induced (mesalazine, sulfasalazine)
Factitious disorder by proxy
From Bluestone CD, Stool SE, Alper CM, et al. Pediatric Otolaryngology, 4th ed., vol. 1.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2003:288.

stenosis (common in children with trisomy 21), bony exostoses, otorrhea, and the presence of foreign bodies. Cholesteatoma of the middle
ear can manifest in the canal as intermittent foul-­smelling drainage,
sometimes associated with white debris; cholesteatoma of the external
canal can appear as a white, pearl-­like mass in the canal skin. White or
gray debris of the canal suggests fungal external otitis. Newborn ear

canals are filled with vernix caseosa, which is soft and pale yellow and
should disappear shortly after birth.
The TM and its mobility are best assessed with a pneumatic otoscope. The normal TM is in a neutral position; a bulging TM may be
caused by increased middle-­ear air pressure, with or without pus or
effusion in the middle ear; a bulging drum can obscure visualization of
the malleus and annulus. Retraction of the TM usually indicates negative middle-­ear pressure, but it also can result from previous middle-­
ear disease with fixation of the ossicles, ossicular ligaments, or TM.
When retraction is present, the bony malleus appears more prominent,
and the incus may be more visible posterior to the malleus.
The normal TM has a silvery gray, “waxed paper” appearance. A white
or yellow TM can indicate a middle-­ear effusion. A red TM alone might
not indicate pathology, because the blood vessels of the membrane may
be engorged as a result of crying, sneezing, or nose blowing, though hemorrhagic redness is associated with acute OM. A normal TM is translucent, allowing the observer to visualize the middle-­ear landmarks: incus,
promontory, round window niche, and often the chorda tympani nerve. If
a middle-­ear effusion is present, an air-­fluid level or bubbles may be visible (Fig. 676.1). Inability to visualize the middle-­ear structures indicates
opacification of the drum, usually caused by thickening of the TM or a
middle-­ear effusion or both. Assessment of the light reflex often is not
helpful, because a middle ear with effusion reflects light as well as a normal
ear. Bullae (blister of the TM) formation is associated with acute OM.
TM mobility is helpful in assessing middle-­ear pressures and the
presence or absence of fluid (see Fig. 676.1). To best perform pneumatic otoscopy, a speculum of adequate size is used to obtain a good
seal and allow air movement in the canal. A rubber ring around the tip
of the speculum can help obtain a better canal seal. Normal middle-­ear
pressure is characterized by a neutral TM position and brisk TM movement to both positive and negative pressures.
Eardrum retraction is most common when negative middle-­ear
pressure is present; with even moderate negative middle-­ear pressure,
there is no visible inward movement with applied positive pressure in
the ear canal. However, negative canal pressure, which is produced by
releasing the rubber bulb of the pneumatic otoscope, can cause the TM
to bounce out toward the neutral position. The TM can retract in both
the presence and absence of middle-­ear fluid, and if the middle-­ear
fluid is mixed with air, the TM might still have some mobility. Outward
eardrum movement is less likely in the presence of severe negative
middle-­ear pressure or middle-­ear effusion.
The TM that exhibits fullness (bulging) moves to applied positive
pressure but not to applied negative pressure if the pressure within
the middle ear is positive. A full TM and positive middle-­ear pressure
without an effusion may be seen in young infants who are crying during the otoscopic examination, in older infants and children with nasal
obstruction, and in the early stage of acute OM. When the middle-­
ear–mastoid air cell system is filled with an effusion and little or no
air is present, the mobility of the TM is severely decreased or absent in
response to both applied positive and negative pressures.
Tympanocentesis, or aspiration of the middle ear, is the definitive
(but not usually needed) method of verifying the presence and type of
a middle-­ear effusion and is performed by inserting an 18-­gauge spinal
needle attached to a syringe or a collection trap through the inferior
portion of the TM (Fig. 676.2). Culturing of the ear canal and alcohol
cleansing should precede tympanocentesis and culture of the middle-­
ear aspirate; a canal culture is taken first to help determine whether
organisms cultured from the middle ear are contaminants from the
external canal or true middle-­ear pathogens.
Further diagnostic studies of the ear and hearing include audiometric evaluation, impedance audiometry (tympanometry), acoustic
reflectometry, and specialized eustachian tube function studies. Diagnostic imaging studies, including CT and MRI, often provide further
information about anatomic abnormalities and the extent of inflammatory processes or neoplasms. Specialized assessment of labyrinthine
function should be considered in the evaluation of a child with a suspected vestibular disorder (see Chapter 682).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 677 u Hearing Loss 3983
FLUID LEVEL
Position—retracted
Color—yellow or amber
Translucency—translucent
Mobility—same as with high
negative pressure, but fluid
level and bubbles change with
applied pressure

NORMAL
Position—neutral
Color—normal
Translucency—translucent
Mobility—moves briskly with
slight positive and negative
pressure

A

D

OTITIS MEDIA WITH
EFFUSION
Position—usually retracted
Color—white (or yellow or blue)
Translucency—opaque (may be
translucent)
Mobility—poor when both
positive and negative
pressures are applied

NEGATIVE MIDDLE-EAR
PRESSURE
Position—retracted
Color—normal
Translucency—translucent
Mobility—moves only with
applied negative pressure

B

E
ACUTE OTITIS MEDIA
Position—full to bulging
Color—red (can be pink,
white, or yellow)
Translucency—opaque
Mobility—poor when both
positive and negative
pressures are applied

C

PERFORATION (OR PATENT
TYMPANOSTOMY TUBE)
Position—neutral or retracted
Color—white, pink, red, or
normal
Translucency—translucent or
opaque
Mobility—none

F

Fig. 676.1 A–F, Common conditions of the middle ear, as assessed with the otoscope. (From Bluestone CD, Klein JO. Otitis Media in Infants and
Children, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001:131.)

the world’s population, including 32 million children) have disabling
hearing loss. An additional 364 million people have mild hearing loss.
Half of these cases could have been prevented. In the United States, the
average incidence of neonatal hearing loss is 1.6 per 1,000 infants; the
rate by state varies from 0.22 to 3.61 per 1,000. Among children and
adolescents, the prevalence of mild or greater hearing loss is 3.1% and
is higher among persons from lower-­income families.
Onset of hearing loss in children can occur at any time in childhood.
When less severe hearing loss or the transient hearing loss that commonly accompanies middle-­ear disease in young children is considered, the number of affected children increases substantially.
Trap

Suction

Fig. 676.2 Tympanocentesis can be performed with a needle at-

tached to a tuberculin syringe (left) or by using an Alden-­Senturia collection trap (Storz Instrument Co, St. Louis). (From Bluestone CD, Klein
JO. Otitis Media in Infants and Children, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1995:127.)

Chapter 677

Hearing Loss
Joseph Haddad Jr.
See also Chapter 55.

INCIDENCE AND PREVALENCE

Bilateral neural hearing loss is categorized as mild (20-­30 dB hearing
level [HL]), moderate (30-­50 dB HL), moderately severe (50-­70 dB
HL), severe (75-­85 dB HL), or profound (>85 dB). The World Health
Organization estimates that approximately 360 million people (5% of

TYPES OF HEARING LOSS

Hearing loss can be peripheral or central in origin. Peripheral hearing
loss can be conductive, sensorineural, or mixed. Conductive hearing
loss (CHL) is the most common type of hearing loss in children and
occurs when sound transmission is physically impeded in the external and/or middle ear, most commonly by otitis media (OM) with
effusion. Sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) is caused by damage to
or maldevelopment of structures of the inner ear, including hair cell
destruction, cochlear malformation; perilymphatic fistula of the round
or oval window membrane, and failure in development or lesions of
the acoustic division of the eighth nerve. Coexistent CHL and SNHL is
considered a mixed hearing loss.
An auditory deficit originating along the central auditory nervous
system pathways from the proximal eighth nerve to the cerebral cortex
usually is considered central (or retrocochlear) hearing loss. Tumors
or demyelinating disease of the eighth nerve and cerebellopontine angle
can cause hearing deficits but spare the outer, middle, and inner ear.
These causes of hearing loss are rare in children. Functional disorders of
the eighth nerve and/or brainstem pathways may manifest in a variety of
clinical defects known collectively as auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder (ANSD) or auditory dyssynchrony, without abnormalities demonstrable on imaging. Other forms of central auditory deficits, known as
central auditory processing disorders, include those that make it difficult even for children with normal hearing sensitivity to listen selectively
in the presence of noise, to combine information from the two ears properly, to process speech when it is slightly degraded, and to integrate auditory information when it is delivered faster, although they can process it
when delivered at a slow rate. These deficits can manifest as specific language disorders or poor attention or as academic or behavior problems

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3984 Part XXVIII u The Ear
in school. Strategies for coping with such disorders are available for older
children, and identification and documentation of the central auditory
processing disorder allow parents and teachers to make appropriate
accommodations to enhance learning.

ETIOLOGY

Most CHL is acquired, with middle-­ear fluid the most common cause.
Congenital causes include anomalies of the pinna, external ear canal,
tympanic membrane (TM), and ossicles. Rarely congenital cholesteatoma or other masses in the middle ear manifest as CHL. TM perforation (e.g., trauma, OM), ossicular discontinuity (e.g., infection,
cholesteatoma, trauma), tympanosclerosis, acquired cholesteatoma, or
masses in the ear canal or middle ear (Langerhans cell histiocytosis,
salivary gland tumors, glomus tumors, rhabdomyosarcoma) also can
manifest as CHL. Uncommon diseases that affect the middle ear and
temporal bone and can manifest with CHL include otosclerosis, osteopetrosis, fibrous dysplasia, and osteogenesis imperfecta. Rare autoimmune or inflammatory syndromes may include hearing loss. Susac
syndrome is manifest as a subacute encephalopathy, visual impairment, and hearing loss. Cogan syndrome presents with interstitial
keratitis, sudden hearing loss, and vestibular impairment.
SNHL may be congenital or acquired. Acquired SNHL may be
caused by genetic, infectious, autoimmune, anatomic, traumatic, ototoxic, and idiopathic factors (Tables 677.1-­677.4). The recognized risk
factors account for approximately 50% of cases of moderate to profound SNHL.

Infectious Causes

The most common infectious cause of congenital SNHL is cytomegalovirus (CMV), which infects 1 in 100 newborns in the United
States (see Chapters 149 and 302). Of these, 6,000-­8,000 infants each
year have clinical manifestations, including approximately 75% with
SNHL. Congenital CMV warrants special attention because it is associated with hearing loss in its symptomatic and asymptomatic forms
with bilateral and unilateral hearing loss, respectively; the hearing
loss may be progressive. Some children with congenital CMV have
suddenly lost residual hearing at 4-­5 years of age. Much less common congenital infectious causes of SNHL include toxoplasmosis
and syphilis. Congenital CMV, toxoplasmosis, and syphilis also can
manifest with delayed onset of SNHL months to years after birth.
Rubella, once the most common viral cause of congenital SNHL, is
very uncommon because of effective vaccination programs. In utero
infection with herpes simplex virus is rare, and hearing loss is not an
isolated manifestation.
Other postnatal infectious causes of SNHL include neonatal group
B streptococcal sepsis and bacterial meningitis at any age. Streptococcus pneumoniae is the most common cause of bacterial meningitis that
results in SNHL after the neonatal period and has become less common with the routine administration of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine. Haemophilus influenzae type b, once the most common cause of
meningitis resulting in SNHL, is rare owing to the H. influenzae type
b conjugate vaccine. Uncommon infectious causes of SNHL include
Lyme disease, parvovirus B19, and varicella. Mumps, rubella, and
measles, all once common causes of SNHL in children, are rare owing
to vaccination programs. When these infectious etiologies occur, the
resulting hearing loss is frequently bilateral and severe.

Genetic Causes

Genetic causes of SNHL probably are responsible for as many as 50% of
SNHL cases (see Tables 677.3 and 677.4). These disorders may be associated with other abnormalities, may be part of a named syndrome, or
can exist in isolation. SNHL often occurs with abnormalities of the ear
and eye and with disorders of the metabolic, musculoskeletal, integumentary, renal, and nervous systems.
Autosomal dominant hearing losses account for approximately
10% of all cases of childhood SNHL. Waardenburg (types I and II) and
branchiootorenal syndromes represent two of the most common autosomal dominant syndromic types of SNHL. Types of SNHL are coded
with a four-­letter code and a number, as follows: DFN = deafness, A =

Table 677.1  Indicators Associated with Hearing Loss
INDICATORS ASSOCIATED WITH SENSORINEURAL AND/OR
CONDUCTIVE HEARING LOSS
Neonates (Birth to 28 Days) When Universal Screening Is Not
Available
• Family history of hereditary childhood sensorineural hearing loss
• In utero infection, such as cytomegalovirus, rubella, syphilis,
herpes simplex, or toxoplasmosis
• Craniofacial anomalies, including those with morphologic
abnormalities of the pinna, ear canal, ear tags, ear pits, and
temporal bone anomalies
• Birth weight <1,500 g (3.3 lb)
• Hyperbilirubinemia at a serum level requiring exchange
transfusion
• Ototoxic medications, including but not limited to the
aminoglycosides, used in multiple courses or in combination with
loop diuretics
• Bacterial meningitis
• Apgar scores of 0-­4 at 1 min or 0-­6 at 5 min
• Mechanical ventilation lasting ≥5 days; extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation
• Stigmata or other findings associated with a syndrome known to
include a sensorineural and/or conductive hearing loss; white forelock
Infants and Toddlers (Age 29 Days to 2 Yr) When Certain Health
Conditions Develop that Require Rescreening
• Parent or caregiver concern regarding hearing, speech, language,
and/or developmental delay
• Bacterial meningitis and other infections associated with
sensorineural hearing loss
• Head trauma associated with loss of consciousness or skull fracture
• Stigmata or other findings associated with a syndrome known
to include a sensorineural and/or conductive hearing loss;
neurofibromatosis, osteopetrosis, and Usher Hunter, Waardenburg,
Alport, Pendred, or Jervell and Lange-­Nielsen syndrome
• Ototoxic medications, including but not limited to
chemotherapeutic agents or aminoglycosides used in multiple
courses or in combination with loop diuretics
• Recurrent or persistent otitis media with effusion for 3 mo or longer
• Skeletal dysplasia
Infants and Toddlers (Age 29 Days to 3 Yr) Who Require Periodic
Monitoring of Hearing
• Some newborns and infants pass initial hearing screening but
require periodic monitoring of hearing to detect delayed-­onset
sensorineural and/or conductive hearing loss. Infants with these
indicators require hearing evaluation at least every 6 mo until age
3 yr and at appropriate intervals thereafter
INDICATORS ASSOCIATED WITH DELAYED-­ONSET
SENSORINEURAL HEARING LOSS
• Family history of hereditary childhood hearing loss
• In utero infection, such as cytomegalovirus, rubella, syphilis,
herpes simplex, or toxoplasmosis
• Neurofibromatosis type 2 and neurodegenerative disorders
• Cogan syndrome (vasculitis: keratitis, uveitis, vertigo, arthritis,
dermatitis)
INDICATORS ASSOCIATED WITH CONDUCTIVE HEARING LOSS
• Recurrent or persistent otitis media with effusion
• Anatomic deformities and other disorders that affect eustachian
tube function
• Neurodegenerative disorders
Note: At all ages, parents’ concern about hearing loss must be taken seriously even in
the absence of risk factors.
Adapted from American Academy of Pediatrics, Joint Committee on Infant Hearing.
Joint Committee on Infant Hearing 1994 position statement. Pediatrics. 1995;95:152.

dominant, B = recessive, and number = order of discovery (e.g., DFNA
13). Autosomal dominant conditions in addition to those just discussed include DFNA 1-­18, 20-­25, 30, 36, 38, and pathologic variants
in the crystallin gene (CRYM).
Autosomal recessive genetic SNHL, both syndromic and nonsyndromic, accounts for approximately 80% of all childhood cases of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 677 u Hearing Loss 3985
Table 677.2  Infectious Pathogens Implicated in
Sensorineural Hearing Loss in Children
CONGENITAL INFECTIONS
Cytomegalovirus
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
Rubella virus
Toxoplasma gondii
Treponema pallidum
ACQUIRED INFECTIONS
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease)
Cytomegalovirus
Epstein-­Barr virus
Haemophilus influenzae
Herpes simplex
Lassa fever virus
Measles virus
Mumps virus
Neisseria meningitidis
Nonpolio enteroviruses
Plasmodium falciparum
Rubella
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Syphilis
Varicella-­zoster virus
From Smith RJH, Bale JF Jr., White KR. Sensorineural hearing loss in children. Lancet.
2005;365:879–890.

SNHL. Usher syndrome (types 1, 2, and 3: all associated with blindness
and retinitis pigmentosa), Pendred syndrome, and Jervell and Lange-­
Nielsen syndrome (one form of long QT syndrome) are three of the
most common syndromic recessive types of SNHL. Other autosomal
recessive conditions include Alström syndrome, type 4 Bartter syndrome, biotinidase deficiency, and DFNB 1-­18, 20-­23, 26-­27, 29-­33,
35-­40, 42, 44, 46, 48, 49, 53, and 55.
Unlike children with an easily identified syndrome or with anomalies of the outer ear, who may be identified as being at risk for hearing loss and consequently monitored, children with nonsyndromic
hearing loss present greater diagnostic difficulty. Pathogenic variants of the connexin-­26 and -­30 genes are identified in autosomal
recessive (DNFB 1) and autosomal dominant (DNFA 3) SNHL and
in sporadic patients with nonsyndromic SNHL; up to 50% of nonsyndromic SNHLs may be related to a pathogenic variation of connexin­26. Pathologic variants of the GJB2 gene co-localize with DFNA 3
and DFNB 1 loci on chromosome 13, are associated with autosomal
nonsyndromic susceptibility to deafness, and are associated with as
many as 30% of cases of sporadic severe to profound congenital deafness and 50% of cases of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic deafness. In addition, pathogenic variants in GJB6 are associated with
approximately 5% of recessive nonsyndromic deafness. Sex-­linked
disorders associated with SNHL, thought to account for 1–2% of
SNHLs, include Norrie disease, otopalatal digital syndrome, Nance
deafness, and Alport syndrome. Chromosomal abnormalities such as
trisomy 13-­15, trisomy 18, and trisomy 21 also can be accompanied
by hearing impairment. Patients with Turner syndrome have monosomy for all or part of one X chromosome and can have CHL, SNHL,
or mixed hearing loss. The hearing loss may be progressive. Mitochondrial genetic abnormalities (MELAS, MERRF) also can result in
SNHL (see Table 677.3).
Many genetically determined causes of hearing impairment, both
syndromic and nonsyndromic, do not express themselves until sometime after birth. Alport, Alström, Down, and Hunter-­Hurler syndromes and von Recklinghausen disease are genetic diseases that can
have SNHL as a late manifestation.

Physical Causes

Agenesis or malformation of cochlear structures may be genetic; these
include Scheibe, Mondini (Fig. 677.1), Alexander, and Michel anomalies, enlarged vestibular aqueducts (in isolation or associated with

Pendred syndrome), and semicircular canal anomalies. These anomalies most likely develop before the eighth week of gestation and result
from arrest in normal development, aberrant development, or both.
Many of these anomalies also have been described in association with
other congenital conditions such as intrauterine CMV and rubella
infections. These abnormalities are quite common; in as many as 20%
of children with SNHL, obvious or subtle temporal bone abnormalities
are seen on high-­resolution CT scanning or MRI.
Conditions, diseases, or syndromes that include craniofacial abnormalities may be associated with CHL and possibly with SNHL. Pierre
Robin sequence, Stickler syndrome, and Treacher Collins, Klippel-­Feil,
Crouzon, and branchiootorenal syndromes and osteogenesis imperfecta often are associated with hearing loss. Congenital anomalies
causing CHL include malformations of the ossicles and middle-­ear
structures and atresia of the external auditory canal.
SNHL also can occur secondary to exposure to toxins, chemicals,
antimicrobials, and noise exposure. Early in pregnancy, the embryo
is particularly vulnerable to the effects of toxic substances. Ototoxic
drugs, including aminoglycosides, loop diuretics, and chemotherapeutic agents (cisplatin) also can cause SNHL. Congenital SNHL can occur
secondary to exposure to these drugs as well as to thalidomide and
retinoids. Certain chemicals, such as quinine, lead, and arsenic, can
cause hearing loss both prenatally and postnatally. Among adolescents,
the use of personal listening devices at high volume settings has been
found to be correlated with hearing loss.
Trauma, including temporal bone fractures, inner ear concussion,
head trauma, iatrogenic trauma (e.g., surgery, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation), radiation exposure, and noise, also can cause
SNHL. Other uncommon causes of SNHL in children include autoimmune disease (systemic or limited to the inner ear), metabolic abnormalities, and neoplasms of the temporal bone.

EFFECTS OF HEARING IMPAIRMENT

The effects of hearing impairment depend on the nature and degree
of the hearing loss and on the individual characteristics of the child.
Hearing loss may be unilateral or bilateral, conductive, sensorineural, or mixed; mild, moderate, severe, or profound; of sudden or
gradual onset; stable, progressive, or fluctuating; and affecting a
part or all of the audible spectrum. Other factors, such as intelligence, medical or physical condition (including accompanying syndromes), family support, age at onset, age at time of identification,
and promptness of intervention, also affect the impact of hearing
loss on a child (see Chapter 55).
Most hearing-­impaired children have some useable hearing. Only
6% of those in the hearing-­impaired population have bilateral profound
hearing loss. Hearing loss very early in life can affect the development
of speech and language, social and emotional development, behavior,
attention, and academic achievement. Some cases of hearing impairment are misdiagnosed because affected children have sufficient hearing to respond to environmental sounds and can learn some speech
and language but when challenged in the classroom cannot perform
to full potential.
Even mild or unilateral hearing loss can have a detrimental effect
on the development of a young child and on school performance.
Children with such hearing impairments have greater difficulty when
listening conditions are unfavorable (e.g., background noise and
poor acoustics), as can occur in a classroom. The fact that schools
are auditory-­verbal environments is unappreciated by those who
minimize the impact of hearing impairment on learning. Hearing
loss should be considered in any child with speech and language difficulties or below-­par performance, poor behavior, or inattention in
school (Table 677.5).
Children with moderate, severe, or profound hearing impairment and
those with other impairing conditions often are educated in classes or
schools for children with special needs. There is a strong trend toward
integrating a child with hearing loss into the least restrictive learning
environment; this approach can only be successful if there are sufficient
supportive services available for auditory and other learning needs. The
auditory management and choices regarding modes of communication

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3986 Part XXVIII u The Ear
Table 677.3  Common Types of Early-­Onset Hereditary Nonsyndromic Sensorineural Hearing Loss
LOCUS

GENE

AUDIO PHENOTYPE

DFN3*

POU3F4

Conductive hearing loss as a result of stapes fixation mimicking otosclerosis; superimposed progressive SNHL.

DFNA1

DIAPH1

Low-­frequency loss beginning in the first decade and progressing to all frequencies to produce a flat audio
profile with profound losses throughout the auditory range.

DFNA2

KCNQ4
GJB3

Symmetric high-­frequency sensorineural loss beginning in the first decade and progressing over all frequencies.
Symmetric high-­frequency sensorineural loss beginning in the third decade.

DFNA3

GJB2
GJB6

Childhood-­onset, progressive, moderate to severe high-­frequency sensorineural hearing impairment.
Childhood-­onset, progressive, moderate to severe high-­frequency sensorineural hearing impairment.

DFNA6, 14, and 38

WFS1

Early-­onset low-­frequency sensorineural loss; approximately 75% of families dominantly segregating this audio
profile carry missense mutations in the C-­terminal domain of wolframin.

DFNA8, and 12

TECTA

Early-­onset stable bilateral hearing loss affecting mainly mid to high frequencies.

DFNA10

EYA4

Progressive loss beginning in the second decade as a flat to gently sloping audio profile that becomes steeply
sloping with age.

DFNA11

MYO7A

Ascending audiogram affecting low and middle frequencies at young ages and then affecting all frequencies
with increasing age.

DFNA13

COL11A2

Congenital midfrequency sensorineural loss that shows age-­related progression across the auditory range.

DFNA15

POU4F3

Bilateral progressive sensorineural loss beginning in the second decade.

DFNA20, and 26

ACTG1

Bilateral progressive sensorineural loss beginning in the second decade; with age, the loss increases with
threshold shifts in all frequencies, although a sloping configuration is maintained in most cases.

DFNA22

MYO6

Postlingual, slowly progressive, moderate to severe hearing loss.

DFNB1

GJB2, GJB6

Hearing loss varies from mild to profound. The most common genotype, 35delG/35delG, is associated with
severe to profound SNHL in about 90% of affected children; severe to profound deafness is observed in
only 60% of children who are compound heterozygotes carrying 1 35delG allele and any other GJB2 SNHL-­
causing allele variant; in children carrying 2 GJB2 SNHL-­causing missense mutations, severe to profound
deafness is not observed.

DFNB3

MYO7A

Severe to profound sensorineural hearing loss.

DFNB4

SLC26A4

DFNB4 and Pendred syndrome (see Table 677.5) are allelic. DFNB4 hearing loss is associated with dilation
of the vestibular aqueduct and can be unilateral or bilateral. In the high frequencies, the loss is severe to
profound; in the low frequencies, the degree of loss varies widely. Onset can be congenital (prelingual), but
progressive postlingual loss also is common.

DFNB7, and 11

TMC1

Severe to profound prelingual hearing impairment.

DFNB9

OTOF

OTOF-­related deafness is characterized by two phenotypes: prelingual nonsyndromic hearing loss and, less
frequently, temperature-­sensitive nonsyndromic auditory neuropathy spectrum disorder. The nonsyndromic
hearing loss is bilateral severe to profound congenital deafness.

DFNB12

CDH23

Depending on the type of mutation, recessive mutations of CDH23 can cause nonsyndromic deafness or type
1 Usher syndrome (USH1), which is characterized by deafness, vestibular areflexia, and vision loss as a result
of retinitis pigmentosa.

DFNB16

STRC

Early-­onset, nonsyndromic, autosomal recessive sensorineural hearing loss.

mtDNA

MTRNR1
MTTS1

Degree of hearing loss varies from mild to profound but usually is symmetric; high frequencies are
preferentially affected; precipitous loss in hearing can occur after aminoglycoside therapy; variable
penetrance.

*Approximately 45 DFNA genes are inherited as autosomal recessive or dominant and, less often, X-­linked.
SNHL, Sensorineural hearing loss.
Adapted from Smith RJH, Bale JF Jr,. White KR. Sensorineural hearing loss in children. Lancet. 2005;365:879–890.

and education for children with hearing impairments must be individualized, because these children are not a homogeneous group. A team
approach to individual case management is essential because each child
and family unit have unique needs and abilities (see Chapter 55).

HEARING SCREENING

Hearing impairment can have a major impact on a child’s development,
and because early identification improves prognosis, screening programs have been widely and strongly advocated. The National Center
for Hearing Assessment and Management estimates that the detection
and treatment at birth of hearing loss saves $400,000 per child in special education costs; screening costs approximately $8-­$50/child. Data

from the Colorado newborn screening program suggest that if hearing-­
impaired infants are identified and treated by age 6 months, these children (with the exception of those with bilateral profound impairment)
should develop the same level of language as their age-­matched peers
who are not hearing impaired. These data provide compelling support
for establishing mandated newborn hearing screening programs for all
children. The American Academy of Pediatrics endorses the goal of
universal detection of hearing loss in infants before 3 months of age,
with appropriate intervention no later than 6 months of age. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that of the approximately 4 million infants born in the United States in 2014, 97.9% were
screened for hearing loss.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 677 u Hearing Loss 3987
Table 677.4  Common Types of Syndromic Sensorineural Hearing Loss
SYNDROME

GENE

PHENOTYPE

DOMINANT
Waardenburg
(WS1)
(may also be recessive)

PAX3

Major diagnostic criteria include dystopia canthorum, congenital hearing loss,
heterochromic irises, white forelock, and an affected first-­degree relative. Approximately
60% of affected children have congenital hearing loss; in 90%, the loss is bilateral.

Waardenburg (WS2)
(WS2D)
(WS2E)
(WS4A)
(WS4B)

MITF, others
SNAI12
SOX10
EDNRB
EDN3

Major diagnostic criteria are as for WS1 but without dystopia canthorum. Approximately
80% of affected children have congenital hearing loss; in 90%, the loss is bilateral.

Branchiootorenal

EYA1
SIX1
SIX5

Diagnostic criteria include hearing loss (98%); preauricular pits (85%); and branchial (70%),
renal (40%), and external ear (30%) abnormalities. The hearing loss can be conductive,
sensorineural, or mixed and mild to profound in degree.

CHARGE syndrome

CHD7

Choanal atresia, colobomas, heart defect, retardation, genital hypoplasia, ear anomalies,
deafness. Can lead to sensorineural or mixed hearing loss. Can be autosomal dominant or
isolated cases.

Goldenhar syndrome

Unknown

Part of the hemifacial microsomia spectrum. Facial hypoplasia, ear anomalies,
hemivertebrae, and parotid gland dysfunction. Can cause conductive or mixed hearing
loss. Can be autosomal dominant or sporadic.

Stickler

COL2A1
COL11A1
COL11A2
COL9A1

Myopia, cleft palate, hearing loss, joint hypermobility, micrognathia.

SLC26A4

Diagnostic criteria include sensorineural hearing loss that is congenital, nonprogressive,
and severe to profound in many cases, but can be late-­onset and progressive; bilateral
dilation of the vestibular aqueduct with or without cochlear hypoplasia; and an abnormal
perchlorate discharge test or goiter.

Alport syndrome

COL4A3, COL4A4, and
COL4A5
(X-­linked)

Nephritis, deafness, lens defects, retinitis. Can lead to bilateral sensorineural hearing loss in
the 2,000-­8,000 Hz range. The hearing loss develops gradually and is not generally present
in early infancy.

Usher syndrome type 1
(USH1)

USH1A, MYO7A, USH1C,
CDH23, USH1E,
PCDH15, USH1G

Diagnostic criteria include congenital, bilateral, and profound hearing loss; vestibular
areflexia; and retinitis pigmentosa (commonly not diagnosed until tunnel vision and
nyctalopia become severe enough to be noticeable).

Usher syndrome type 2
(USH2)

USH2A, USH2B, USH2C,
WHRN, ADGRV1

Diagnostic criteria include mild to severe, congenital, bilateral hearing loss and retinitis
pigmentosa; hearing loss may be perceived as progressing over time because speech
perception decreases as diminishing vision interferes with subconscious lip reading.

Usher syndrome type 3
(USH3)

USH3
CLRN1

Diagnostic criteria include postlingual, progressive sensorineural hearing loss; late-­onset
retinitis pigmentosa; and variable impairment of vestibular function.

Jervell and Lange-­
Nielsen syndrome

KCNQ1
KCNE1

Severe hearing loss, prolonged QT interval (ECG), and sudden death.

RECESSIVE
Pendred syndrome

Adapted from Smith RJH, Bale JF Jr., White KR. Sensorineural hearing loss in children. Lancet. 2005;365:879–890.

Hearing screening is mandated in at least 45 states, but until screening programs are universally mandated, some hospitals will continue
to use other criteria to screen for hearing loss. Some use the high-­risk
criteria (see Table 677.1) to decide which infants to screen, some screen
all infants who require intensive care, and some do both. The problem with using high-­risk criteria to screen is that 50% of cases of hearing impairment will be missed, either because the infants are hearing
impaired but do not meet any of the high-­risk criteria or because they
develop hearing loss after the neonatal period.
The recommended hearing screening techniques are either otoacoustic emissions (OAE) testing or auditory brainstem evoked
responses (ABRs). The ABR test, an auditory evoked electrophysiologic
response that correlates highly with hearing, has been used successfully and cost-­effectively to screen newborns and to identify further
the degree and type of hearing loss. OAE tests, used successfully in
most universal newborn screening programs, are quick, easy to administer, and inexpensive, and they provide a sensitive indication of the

presence of hearing loss. Results are relatively easy to interpret. OAE
tests elicit no response if hearing is worse than 30-­40 dB, no matter
what the cause; children who fail OAE tests undergo an ABR for a more
definitive evaluation, as ABR has a higher sensitivity and specificity.
It is recommended that both OAE measurement and ABR screening
be used in the intensive care unit setting. Screening methods such as
observing behavioral responses to uncalibrated noisemakers or using
automated systems such as the Crib-­o-­gram (Canon) or the auditory
response cradle (in which movement of the infant in response to sound
is recorded by motion sensors) are not recommended.
Many children become hearing impaired after the neonatal period
and therefore are not identified by newborn screening programs. Often
it is not until children are in preschool or kindergarten that further
hearing screening takes place; an evidence-­based systematic review
has identified pure-­tone and OAE screening to be effective, with pure-­
tone screening having higher sensitivity. Among adolescents, high-­
frequency hearing loss is associated with exposure to loud noises, so

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3988 Part XXVIII u The Ear
attention should be paid to those frequencies on a hearing screen; most
noise-­induced hearing loss is around 4 kHz. Figure 677.2 provides recommendations for postneonatal screening.
Cochlear
dysplasia

*

IDENTIFICATION OF HEARING IMPAIRMENT
Mondini
dysplasia
Dilated
vestibular
aqueduct

Fig. 677.1 Mondini dysplasia shown by CT of the temporal bone

in a child with Pendred syndrome. Both dilation of the vestibular
aqueduct and cochlear dysplasia are present in this section. In the
larger of the two inset images of a normal temporal bone, the vestibular aqueduct is visible but much smaller (arrow). The cochlea
appears normal, and in the smaller inset image of a more inferior
axial section, the expected number of cochlear turns can be clearly
counted. Internal auditory canal (asterisk). (From Smith RJH, Bale
JF Jr., White KR. Sensorineural hearing loss in children. Lancet.
2005;365:879–890.)

The impact of hearing impairment is greatest on an infant who has yet
to develop language; consequently, identification, diagnosis, description, and treatment should begin as soon as possible. Infants with a
prenatal or perinatal history that puts them at risk (see Table 677.3) or
those who have failed a formal hearing screening should be evaluated
by an experienced clinical audiologist until a reliable assessment of
auditory sensitivity has been obtained. Primary care clinicians should
encourage families to cooperate with the follow-­up plan. Infants who
are born at risk but who were not screened as neonates (e.g., because of
transfer from one hospital to another) should have a hearing screening
by age 3 months.
Hearing-­impaired infants who are born at risk or are screened for
hearing loss in a neonatal hearing screening program account for
only a portion of hearing-­impaired children. Children who are congenitally deaf because of autosomal recessive inheritance or subclinical congenital infection often are not identified until 1-­3 years
of age. Usually those with more severe hearing loss are identified
at an earlier age, but identification often occurs later than the age
at which intervention can provide an optimal outcome, especially
in countries lacking technologic resources. Children who hear normally develop extensive receptive and expressive language by 3 years
of age (Table 677.6) and exhibit behavior reflecting normal auditory

Table 677.5  Hearing Impairment as a Function of Average Hearing Threshold Level of the Better Ear
AVERAGE
THRESHOLD
LEVEL (dB) AT
500-­2,000 Hz
(ANSI)

DESCRIPTION

0-­15
16-­25

COMMON CAUSES

WHAT CAN BE
HEARD WITHOUT
AMPLIFICATION

DEGREE OF
IMPAIRMENT (IF NOT
TREATED IN FIRST
YEAR OF LIFE)

PROBABLE NEEDS

Normal range

Conductive hearing loss

All speech sounds

None

None

Slight hearing loss

Otitis media, TM
perforation,
tympanosclerosis;
eustachian tube
dysfunction; some
SNHL

Vowel sounds heard
clearly, may miss
unvoiced consonant
sounds

Mild auditory
dysfunction in
language learning
Difficulty in perceiving
some speech sounds

Consideration of
need for hearing
aid, speech reading,
auditory training,
speech therapy,
appropriate surgery,
preferential seating

26-­30

Mild

Otitis media, TM
perforation,
tympanosclerosis,
severe eustachian
dysfunction, SNHL

Hears only some
speech sounds, the
louder voiced sounds

Auditory learning
dysfunction
Mild language
retardation
Mild speech problems
Inattention

Hearing aid
Lip reading
Auditory training
Speech therapy
Appropriate surgery

31-­50

Moderate hearing loss

Chronic otitis, ear canal/
middle ear anomaly,
SNHL

Misses most speech
sounds at normal
conversational level

Speech problems
Language retardation
Learning dysfunction
Inattention

All of the above, plus
consideration of
special classroom
situation

51-­70

Severe hearing loss

SNHL or mixed loss due
to a combination of
middle-­ear disease
and sensorineural
involvement

Hears no speech
sound of normal
conversations

Severe speech
problems
Language retardation
Learning dysfunction
Inattention

All of the above;
probable assignment
to special classes

71+

Profound hearing loss

SNHL or mixed

Hears no speech or
other sounds

Severe speech
problems
Language retardation
Learning dysfunction
Inattention

All of the above;
probable assignment
to special classes or
schools

ANSI, American National Standards Institute; SNHL, sensorineural hearing loss; TM, tympanic membrane.
Modified from Northern JL, Downs MP. Hearing in Children, 4th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 1991.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Newborn hearing screening (otoacoustic emissions)
Pass

Refer

No further testing required

Audiometric brain testing
Pass

Refer

No further testing required

Consider further diagnostic testing
Radiographic:
1. High-resolution temporal
bone CT and/or
2. CNS MRI
Genetic:
1. Connexin 26
2. SLC26A4
3. Genetic counseling
Hematologic:
1. CBC
Immunologic/infectious:
1. IgM assay
2. CMV workup
3. ESR
4. Anticardiolipin Ab
5. Complement studies

Endocrine:
1. T4, T3, TSH, thyroglobulin
2. Perchlorate discharge test
Metabolic:
1. Urine for
glycosaminoglycans
Renal:
1. Urinalysis
Cardiac:
1. ECG

Treatment

Fig. 677.2 Algorithm for newborn hearing screening. Ab, Antibody; CBC, complete blood count; CMV, cytomegalovirus; CNS, central nervous

system; CT, computed tomography; ECG, electrocardiogram; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; IgM, immunoglobulin M; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; T3, triiodothyronine; T4, thyroxine; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone. (From Norton SJ, Bhama PK, Perkins JA. Early detection and
diagnosis of infant hearing impairment. In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund VJ, et al., eds. Cummings Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Mosby; 2010: Fig. 190.1.)

Table 677.6  Criteria for Referral for Audiologic and
Speech and Language Evaluation
SHOULD ABSOLUTELY REFER FOR A SPEECH-­LANGUAGE
EVALUATION IF:
AT AGE
(mo)

Table 677.7  Guidelines for Referral of Infants/Toddlers
with Suspected Hearing Loss
AGE (mo)

NORMAL DEVELOPMENT

0-­4

Should startle to loud sounds, quiet to mother’s voice,
momentarily cease activity when sound is presented
at a conversational level

RECEPTIVE

EXPRESSIVE

15

Does not look/point at 5-­10
objects/people named by
parent

Not using three words

5-­6

18

Does not follow simple
directions (“get your
shoes.”)

Not using Mama, Dada, or
other names

Should correctly localize to sound presented in a
horizontal plane, begin to imitate sounds in own
speech repertoire or at least reciprocally vocalize with
an adult

7-­12

Does not point to pictures
or body parts when they
are named

Not using 25 words

Should correctly localize to sound presented in any
plane
Should respond to name, even when spoken quietly

13-­15

Should point toward an unexpected sound or to
familiar objects or persons when asked

30

Does not verbally respond
or nod/shake head to
questions

Not using unique two-­word
phrases, including noun-­
verb combinations

16-­18

Should follow simple directions without gestural or
other visual cues; can be trained to reach toward an
interesting toy at midline when a sound is presented

36

Does not understand
prepositions or action
words; does not follow
two-­step directions

Vocabulary <200 words;
does not ask for things
by name; echolalia to
questions; regression of
language after acquiring
two-­word phrases

19-­24

Should point to body parts when asked; by 21-­24 mo,
can be trained to perform play audiometry

24

From Matkin ND. Early recognition and referral of hearing-­impaired children. Pediatr
Rev. 1984;6:151–156.

From Schum RL. Language screening in the pediatric office setting. Pediatr Clin North
Am. 2007;54(3):425–436.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3990 Part XXVIII u The Ear
function (Table 677.7). Failure to fulfill these criteria should be the
reason for an audiologic evaluation. Parents’ concern about hearing
and any delayed development of speech and language should alert
the pediatrician, because parents’ concern usually precedes formal
identification and diagnosis of hearing impairment by 6-­12 months.

CLINICAL AUDIOLOGIC EVALUATION

When hearing impairment is suspected in a young child, reliable
and valid estimates of auditory function can be obtained using electrophysiologic and age-­appropriate behavioral measurement. Successful treatment strategies for hearing-­impaired children rely on
prompt identification and ongoing assessment to define the dimensions of auditory function. Cooperation among primary care providers and specialists in areas such as audiology, speech and language
pathology, education, and child development is necessary to optimize auditory-­verbal development. Therapy for hearing-­impaired
children may include an amplification device, a frequency modulation (FM) system in the classroom, close monitoring of hearing and
auditory skills, speech and language therapy, counseling of parents
and families, advising teachers, and dealing with public agencies.

Audiometry

Audiologic evaluation technique varies as a function of the age and
developmental level of the child, the reason for the evaluation, and
the child’s otologic condition or history. An audiogram provides the
fundamental description of hearing sensitivity (Fig. 677.3). Hearing
thresholds are assessed as a function of frequency using pure tones
(single-­frequency stimuli) at octave intervals from 250 to 8,000 Hz.
When the child is old enough to accept their placement, earphones
typically are used to assess each ear independently. Before this stage,
testing may be performed in a sound-­treated environment with stimuli
delivered via speakers; this approach permits description only of the
better-­hearing ear.
Air-­conducted signals are presented through earphones (or
loudspeakers) and are used to provide information about the sensitivity of the entire auditory system. These same test sounds can

250

500

1000

2000

Speech-­Recognition Threshold

Another measure useful for describing auditory function is the
speech-­recognition threshold (SRT), which is the lowest intensity
level at which a score of approximately 50% correct is obtained on
a task of recognizing spondee words. Spondee words are 2-­syllable
words or phrases that have equal stress on each syllable, such as
baseball, hotdog, and pancake. Listeners must be familiar with all
the words for a valid test result to be obtained. The SRT should correspond to the average of pure-­tone thresholds at 500, 1,000, and
2,000 Hz, the pure-­tone average. The SRT is relevant as an indicator of a child’s potential for development and use of speech and
language; it also serves as a check of the validity of a test because
children with nonorganic hearing loss (malingerers) might show a
discrepancy between the pure-­tone average and SRT. An SRT may
be obtained in a child with expressive speech or language limitations
using modified techniques, such as picture-­pointing responses.
The basic battery of hearing tests concludes with an assessment of
a child’s ability to understand monosyllabic words when presented at
a comfortable listening level. Performance on such word recognition
tests assists in the differential diagnosis of hearing impairment and
provides a measure of how well a child performs when speech is presented at loudness levels similar to those encountered in conversation.
For speech recognition as well, a picture-­pointing response may be
obtained with standardized tests.

Play Audiometry

PURE-TONE AUDIOGRAM
Frequency (cycles/sec)
125

be delivered to the ear through an oscillator that is placed on the
head, usually on the mastoid. Such signals are considered bone-­
conducted because the bones of the skull transmit vibrations as
sound energy directly to the inner ear, essentially bypassing the
outer and middle ears. In a normal ear, and also in children with
SNHL, the air-­and bone-­conduction thresholds are equivalent.
In those with CHL, bone-­conduction thresholds are more sensitive than air-­conducted responses; this is called the air-­b one gap,
which indicates the amount of hearing loss attributable to dysfunction in the outer and/or middle ear. In mixed hearing loss, both
the bone-­and air-­conduction thresholds are abnormal, and there is
additionally an air-­bone gap.

4000

8000

10
0
10
20

Hearing testing technique is age dependent. For children at or
above the developmental level of a 5-­to 6-­year-­old, conventional
test methods can be used. For children 30 months to 5 years of age,
play audiometry can be used. Responses in play audiometry usually are conditioned motor activities associated with a game, such as
dropping blocks in a bucket, placing rings on a peg, or completing
a puzzle. The technique can be used to obtain a reliable audiogram
for a preschool child.

Visual Reinforcement Audiometry

30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
AUDIOGRAM KEY
Air

Bone

Right

For children between the ages of about 6 and 30 months, visual
reinforcement audiometry (VRA) is commonly used. In this technique, the child is conditioned to turn the head in response to a
tonal signal from a speaker in the same location as an animated
(mechanical) toy or video reinforcer. If infants are properly conditioned, by presenting sounds associated with the reinforcer, VRA
can provide reliable estimates of hearing sensitivity for tonal signals
and speech sounds. In most applications of VRA, sounds are presented by loudspeakers in a sound field, so ear-­specific information
is not obtained. Assessment of an infant often is designed to rule out
hearing loss that would be sufficient to affect the development of
speech and language. Normal sound-­field response levels of infants
indicate sufficient hearing for this purpose despite the possibility
of different HLs in the two ears. When ear-­specific information
is needed in this age-­group, the ABR is conducted under sleep-­
deprived or sedated conditions.

Behavioral Observation Audiometry

Left

Fig. 677.3 Audiogram showing bilateral conductive hearing loss.

Used as a screening device for infants <5 months of age, behavioral observation audiometry is limited to unconditioned, reflexive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 677 u Hearing Loss 3991
responses to complex (not frequency-­specific) test sounds such as
warble tones, narrow-­band noise, speech, or music presented using
calibrated signals from a loudspeaker. Response levels can vary widely
within and among infants and usually do not provide a reliable estimate of hearing sensitivity. The types of responses observed during this
testing may include alterations in sucking behavior, initiation or cessation in crying, pupillary dilatation, and alterations in respiration.
Assessment of a child with suspected hearing loss is not complete
until pure-­tone hearing thresholds and SRTs (a reliable audiogram)
have been obtained in each ear. Behavioral observation audiometry
and VRA in sound-­field testing give estimates of hearing responsivity
in the better-­hearing ear. When significant hearing loss is suspected in
infants, electrophysiologic assessments must be conducted to permit
early intervention.

Acoustic Immittance Testing

Acoustic immittance testing is a standard part of the clinical audiologic test battery and includes tympanometry, acoustic reflex threshold
measurement, and acoustic reflex decay testing. It is a useful objective
assessment technique that provides information about the status of the
TM, middle ear, and acoustic reflex arc. Tympanometry can be performed in a physician’s office and is helpful in the diagnosis and management of OM with effusion, a common cause of mild to moderate
hearing loss in young children.

Tympanometry

Tympanometry provides a graph (tympanogram) of the middle ear’s
ability to transmit sound energy (admittance or compliance) or impede
sound energy (impedance) as a function of air pressure in the external
ear canal. Because most immittance test instruments measure acoustic
admittance, the term admittance is used here. The principles apply to
whatever units of measurement are used.
A probe is inserted into the entrance of the external ear canal so
that an airtight seal is obtained. A manometer in the probe varies
air pressure, while a sound generator presents a tone, and a microphone measures the sound pressure level reflected back. The sound
pressure measured in the ear canal relative to the known intensity
of the probe signal is used to estimate the acoustic admittance of
the ear canal and middle-­ear system. Admittance can be expressed
in a unit called a millimho (mmho) or as a volume of air (mL)
with equivalent acoustic admittance. Additionally, an estimate can
be made of the volume of air enclosed between the probe tip and
TM. The acoustic admittance of this volume of air is deducted from
the overall admittance measure to obtain a measure of the admittance of the middle-­ear system alone. Estimating ear canal volume
also has a diagnostic benefit, because an abnormally large value is
consistent with the presence of an opening in the TM (perforation,
pressure equalization tube, or surgical defect).
Once the admittance of the air mass in the external auditory canal
has been eliminated, it is assumed that the remaining admittance
measure accurately reflects the admittance of the entire middle-­ear
system. Its value is controlled largely by the dynamics of the TM.
Abnormalities of the TM can dictate the shape of tympanograms,
thus obscuring abnormalities medial to the TM. In addition, the
frequency of the probe tone, the speed and direction of the air
pressure change, and the air pressure at which the tympanogram
is initiated can all influence the outcome. The effect of the probe
tone frequency is well documented, and in young children (<4-­6
months) with small ear canals, use of a high-­f requency probe tone,
either 678 or 1,000 Hz, is recommended.
When air pressure in the ear canal is equal to that in the middle
ear, the middle-­ear system is functioning optimally. That is, the pressure equalization function of the eustachian tube permits the middle
ear to rest at atmospheric pressure, equivalent to the condition in the
ear canal. Therefore the ear canal pressure at which there is the greatest flow of energy (admittance) should be a reasonable estimate of
the air pressure in the middle-­ear space. This pressure is determined
by finding the maximum or peak admittance on the tympanogram
and obtaining its value on the x axis. The value on the y axis at the

Table 677.8  Norms for Peak (Static) Admittance Using a
226-­Hz Probe Tone for Children and Adults
SPEED OF AIR PRESSURE
SWEEP

ADMITTANCE
(mL)

<50 daPa/sec*

200 daPa/sec†

Children (3-­5 yr)

Lower limit
Median
Upper limit

0.30
0.55
0.90

0.36
0.61
1.06

Adults

Lower limit
Median
Upper limit

0.56
0.85
1.36

0.27
0.72
1.38

AGE GROUP

*Ear canal volume measurement based on admittance at lowest tail of tympanogram.
†Ear canal measurement based on admittance at lowest tail of tympanogram for
children and at +200 daPa for adults.
daPa, decaPascals.
Adapted from Margolis RH, Shanks JE. Tympanometry: basic principles of clinical
application. In: Rintelman WS, ed. Hearing Assessment, 2nd ed. Austin: PRODED; 1991:
pp. 179–245.

tympanogram peak is an estimate of peak admittance based on admittance tympanometry (Table 677.8). This peak measure sometimes is
referred to as static acoustic admittance, even though it is estimated
from a dynamic measure. Normative values for peak admittance as a
function of air pressure are well established.

Tympanometry in Otitis Media with Effusion

Children who have OM with effusion often have reduced peak
admittance or high negative tympanometric peak pressures (see Fig.
680.5C). However, in the diagnosis of effusion, the tympanometric
measure with the greatest sensitivity and specificity is the shape of
the tympanogram rather than its peak pressure or admittance. The
tympanogram is classified based on shape and peak admittance
location. The greater the stiffening of the TM and ME, the lower the
peak. As negative pressure within the middle ear increases, the peak
becomes more negatively displaced. The more rounded the peak
(or, in an absent peak, a flat tympanogram), the higher is the probability that an effusion is present (see Fig. 680.5B). The stage of OM
may affect the tympanometric findings. An immobile TM/ME system based on significant effusion, as reflected in flat tympanogram,
may evolve into findings of negative ME pressure and later positive
pressure as the OM resolves, returning to a normal tympanogram.

Acoustic Reflex Threshold Test

The acoustic reflex threshold test also is part of the immittance test
battery. With a properly functioning middle-­ear system, admittance
at the TM decreases due to the stiffening action of the middle ear
muscles (stapedius and, to a lesser extent, tensor tympani). In healthy
ears, the stapedial reflex occurs after exposure to loud sounds as a
protective mechanism. Admittance instruments are designed to present reflex-­activating signals (pure tones of various frequencies or
noise), either to the same ear or the contralateral ear, while measuring the concomitant changes in admittance. Very small admittance
changes that are time locked to presentations of the signal are considered to be a result of middle-­ear muscle reflexes. Admittance changes
may be absent when the hearing loss is sufficient to prevent the signal
from reaching the loudness level necessary to elicit the reflex or when
a middle-­ear condition affects HLs or introduces sufficient stiffening
to obscure reading the reflex activity. The acoustic reflex test also is
used in the assessment of SNHL and the integrity of the neurologic
components of the reflex arc, including crossed and uncrossed activity of cranial nerves VII and VIII.

Auditory Brainstem Response

The auditory brainstem response (ABR) test is used to screen
newborn hearing, confirm hearing loss in young children, obtain

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3992 Part XXVIII u The Ear
ear-­specific information in young children, and test children who
cannot, for whatever reason, cooperate with behavioral test methods. It also is important in the diagnosis of auditory dysfunction
(i.e., estimation of hearing thresholds) and of disorders of the
auditory nervous system. The ABR test is a far-­field recording of
minute electrical discharges from numerous neurons. The stimulus
therefore must be able to cause synchronous discharge of the large
numbers of neurons involved. Stimuli with very rapid onset, such as
clicks or tone bursts, must be used. Unfortunately, the rapid onset
required to create a measurable ABR also causes energy to be spread
in the frequency domain, reducing the frequency specificity of the
response.
The ABR result is not affected by sedation or general anesthesia.
Infants and children from about 4 months to 4 years of age routinely
are sedated to minimize electrical interference caused by muscle activity during testing. The ABR also can be performed in the operating
room when a child is anesthetized for another procedure. Children
younger than 4 months of age might sleep for a long enough period
after feeding to allow an ABR to be done.
The ABR is recorded as 5-­7 waves. Waves I, III, and V can be obtained
consistently in all age-­groups; waves II and IV appear less consistently.
The latency of each wave (time of occurrence of the wave peak after
stimulus onset) increases and the amplitude decreases with reductions
in stimulus intensity; latency also decreases with increasing age, with
the earliest waves reaching mature latency values earlier in life than the
later waves. Age-­specific normative data have been obtained in several
studies.
The ABR test has two major uses in a pediatric setting. As an
audiometric test, it provides information on the ability of the
peripheral auditory system to transmit information to the auditory nerve and beyond. It also is used in the differential diagnosis
or monitoring of central nervous system pathology. For hearing
threshold estimation, the goal is to find the minimum stimulus
intensity that yields an observable ABR, generally relying on wave
V, the most robust aspect of morphology. Plotting latency versus
intensity for various waves also aids in the differential diagnosis of hearing impairment. A major advantage of auditory assessment using the ABR test is that ear-­specific threshold estimates can
be obtained on infants or patients who are difficult to test. ABR
thresholds using click stimuli correlate best with behavioral hearing
thresholds in the higher frequencies (1,000-­4,000 Hz); responsivity
in the low frequencies requires different stimuli (tone bursts/pips or
filtered clicks) or the use of masking, neither of which isolates the
low-­f requency region of the cochlea in all cases, and this can affect
interpretation.
The ABR test does not assess “hearing.” It reflects auditory neuronal electrical responses that can be correlated to behavioral hearing
thresholds, but a normal ABR result only suggests that the auditory
system, up to the level of the midbrain, is responsive to the stimulus
used. Conversely, a failure to elicit an ABR indicates an impairment of
the system’s synchronous response but does not necessarily mean that
there is no “hearing.” The behavioral response to sound sometimes is
normal when no ABR can be elicited, such as in neurologic demyelinating disease.
Hearing losses that are sudden, progressive, or unilateral are
indications for ABR testing. Although it is believed that the different waves of the ABR reflect activity in increasingly rostral levels
of the auditory system, the neural generators of the response have
not been precisely determined. Each ABR wave beyond the earliest waves probably is the result of neural firing at many levels of
the system, and each level of the system probably contributes to
several ABR waves. High-­intensity click stimuli are used for the
neurologic application. The morphology of the response and wave,
interwave latencies, and interaural latency differences are examined
with respect to age-­appropriate forms. Delayed or missing waves in
the ABR result often have diagnostic significance.
The ABR and other electrical responses are extremely complex and
difficult to interpret. A number of factors, including instrumentation

design and settings, environment, degree and configuration of hearing loss, and patients’ characteristics, can influence the quality of the
recording. Therefore testing and interpretation of electrophysiologic
activity as it possibly relates to hearing should be carried out by trained
audiologists to avoid the risk that unreliable or erroneous conclusions
will affect a patient’s care.

Otoacoustic Emissions

During normal hearing, OAEs originate from the outer hair cells
in the cochlea and are detected by sensitive amplifying processes.
They travel from the cochlea through the middle ear to the external
auditory canal, where they can be detected using miniature microphones. Transient evoked OAEs (TEOAEs) may be used to check
the integrity of the cochlea. In the neonatal period, detection of
OAEs can be accomplished during natural sleep, and TEOAEs can
be used as screening tests in infants and children for hearing down
to the 30 dB level of hearing loss. They are less time consuming and
elaborate than ABRs and may be used when behavioral tests cannot be accomplished. TEOAEs are reduced or absent owing to various dysfunctions in the middle and inner ears. They are absent in
patients with >30 dB of hearing loss and are not used to determine
the hearing threshold; rather, they provide a screen for whether
hearing is present at >30-­40 dB. CHL, such as OM or congenitally
abnormal middle-­ear structures, reduces the transfer of TEOAEs
and may be incorrectly interpreted as a cochlear hearing disorder. If
a hearing loss is suspected based on the absence of OAEs, the ears
should be examined for the evidence of pathology, tympanometry
should be conducted, and then ABR testing should be used for confirmation and identification of the type, degree, and laterality of
hearing loss.

TREATMENT

With widespread hearing screening within the United States, early
diagnosis and treatment of children with hearing loss are common.
Testing for hearing loss is possible even in very young children, and
it should be done if parents suspect a problem. Any child with a
known risk factor for hearing loss should be evaluated in the first 6
months of life.
Once a hearing loss is identified, a full developmental and speech
and language evaluation is needed. Counseling and involvement of
parents are required in all stages of the evaluation and treatment or
rehabilitation. A CHL often can be corrected through treatment of a
middle-­ear effusion (i.e., ear tube placement) or surgical correction of
the abnormal sound-­conducting mechanism. Dependent on the level
of hearing loss, children with SNHL should be evaluated for possible
hearing aid use by a pediatric audiologist. Current guidelines indicate
that within 1 month of diagnosis of SNHL, children should be fitted
with hearing aids, and hearing aids may be fitted for children as young
as 1 month of age. Compelling evidence from the hearing screening
program in Colorado shows that identification and amplification before
age 6 months make a very significant difference in the speech and language abilities of affected children compared with cases identified and
amplified after the age of 6 months. In these children, repeat audiologic
testing is needed to reliably identify the degree of hearing loss and to
fine-­tune the use of hearing aids. Hearing aids remain the rehabilitative
device of choice, in the context of an individually designed treatment
plan, for children with mild, moderate, or moderately severe CHL,
mixed HL, or SNHL. For children with severe or profound SNHL, a
trial with hearing aids is needed to determine if this approach is sufficient for the development of language; other options may need to be
explored if there are indications that speech and language are delayed
with a hearing aid in this HL group. Importantly, efficacy of hearing
aids depends on their consistent use. There is great variability in how
often children wear their hearing aids. Though there is no specific recommendation regarding the minimal number of hours per day that the
hearing aids should be worn, parents should be encouraged to have
their child use hearing aids full-­time in order to facilitate speech and
language development.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 677 u Hearing Loss 3993
When it is clear that hearing aids are not providing the auditory
stimulation needed to support language development, the parents
require counseling to consider alternative treatments. A cochlear
implant may be necessary to facilitate intelligible oral communication (i.e., oralism). This approach requires years of intensive speech
and language training and is dependent on providing the best possible auditory stimulation. This option is very attractive to parents
with hearing because it is the most familiar form of communication
to them. Although there is a heavy emphasis in the medical world
valuing the development of oral language (speech production), parents should also be provided with information about alternatives
such as sign language, total communication, and cued speech (see
Chapter 55). Each of these communication modalities has advantages and disadvantages. Sign language allows the child to develop
a language system early and can support academic training. The
consequence of this option is that the dominant hearing world does
not interact easily with users of sign language, and the child may
face significant challenges integrating into hearing society. Such
possibilities as academic success and college/graduate school training are not excluded by the use of sign language, but a narrower
set of venues may be available to accommodate the child’s learning needs. Whereas this option may be acceptable to deaf parents
already in the deaf community, many hearing parents are uncomfortable with this path for their child. This option also requires that
the parents become fluent in sign language.
Total communication is an educational philosophy in which
both sign and oral language as well as other forms of communication are encouraged. In theory, the two systems support and clarify
information transfer and enhance academic progress. Depending on the particular school and/or teachers, one system may be
emphasized over the other. Cued speech is an approach in which
the development of oral language is supported by a system of hand
gestures near the mouth and throat to disambiguate confusions that
result from lip reading alone. This system can be highly successful
in supporting spoken language and requires that parents become
fluent in the use of the cues. Other factors should be considered in
making the choice of communication modality. Significant comorbidities, such as visual impairment or other developmental delays,
may limit the ability of a child to derive benefit from some choices.
Support for the parents in making this decision may require counseling from an audiologist, social worker, deaf educator, and/or
psychologist. Organizations of parents of deaf children, such as
the A.G. Bell Association and the John Tracy Clinic, can provide a
wealth of support and information to parents in this process.
Infants and young children with profound congenital or prelingual onset of deafness have benefited from multichannel cochlear
implants (Fig. 677.4). Cochlear implants are systems that combine
internal (surgically implanted) and externally worn components.
These implants consist of 4 main components: the externals—which
include a microphone, a minicomputer sound (speech) processor,
and a transmitter—and the internal—an electrode array. These
implants bypass injury to the organ of Corti and provide neural
stimulation through the digitization of auditory stimuli into digital radiofrequency impulses. Specifically, sound is initially detected
by the microphone and then is processed by the speech processor.
The speech processor is programmed by an audiologist to implement the manufacturer’s proprietary speech processing strategies
that are highly sophisticated manipulations of the input signal. Signals from the speech processor are transmitted across the skin by
an FM signal to the internal receiver, which converts these signals
into electrical impulses. Finally, these electrical impulses are sent
to the electrode array located in the cochlea, where electrical fields
are created that act on the cochlear nerve. This contrasts with the
transmission of sound in a healthy ear, which involves the transmission of sound vibrations to the hair cells of the cochlea, the release
of ions and neurotransmitters in the cochlea, and the transmission
of neural impulses to the cochlear nerve and then the brain.
Surgical implantation is done under general anesthesia and
involves mastoidectomy and widening of the facial recess because

Fig. 677.4 All cochlear implants share key components, including a

microphone, speech processor, and transmitter coil, shown in a behind-­
the-­ear position in this diagram. The microphone and speech processor
pick up environmental sounds and digitize them into coded signals.
The signals are sent to the transmitter coil and relayed through the
skin to the internal device embedded in the skull. The internal device
converts the code to electronic signals, which are transmitted to the
electrode array wrapping around the cochlea. The inset shows the radiographic appearance of the stimulating electrode array. (From MED-­
EL Corporation, Innsbruck, Austria. From Smith RJH, Bale JF Jr., White
KR. Sensorineural hearing loss in children. Lancet. 2005;365:879–890.)

the approach to the cochlea is through the facial recess. After fastening the internal stimulator package in the mastoid process, the
cochlea must be opened to insert the electrode array, which is most
commonly done through an opening made in the round window.
Care is taken to avoid contamination of the cochlear fluids by bone
dust or blood. After the cochlea is closed, generally with fascia, the
wound is closed. An audiologist performs testing in the operating
room to verify the functional integrity of the implanted device.
These electrophysiologic responses from cranial nerve VIII are critical to determining a starting point for programming the external
device after the wound has healed. A plain x-­ray is often performed
in the operating room as well to document placement of the array
in the scala tympani.
The healing process after surgery is approximately 3-­4 weeks for
a child. During this time, the child cannot hear. When the child is
brought in for the first stimulation using the external equipment, programs are developed that provide the first access to sound. The methods to create the programs entail a combination of electrophysiologic
measures and behavioral testing that is like the pediatric audiologic
assessments described earlier. The initial programs are a starting point,
followed by modifications and enhancements that are based on the
parents’ and audiologist’s observations of changing auditory awareness
and vocalization.
When parents elect to pursue cochlear implantation for their child,
a long-­term commitment is necessary to ongoing engagement with
a team of rehabilitation specialists. Audiologic management entails
consistent monitoring of the child’s response to the implant and
impact on emerging language skills. Speech and language therapy is
necessary to stimulate language and to teach parents skills to support speech development. The child should be in a preschool setting
in which speech, language, social, and academic precursor skills are
fostered. For some parents, this engagement is very challenging, not
only in terms of time required but also in terms of the emotional
consequences of attempting to minimize the impact of hearing loss
on their child’s future; support for the parents is often needed in this
process from the team.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3994 Part XXVIII u The Ear
Table 677.9  Recommended Pneumococcal Vaccination Schedule for Persons with Cochlear Implants
AGE AT FIRST PCV13
DOSE (mo)*

PCV12 PRIMARY SERIES

PCV13 ADDITIONAL DOSE

PPV23 DOSE

2-­6

3 doses, 2 mo apart†

1 dose at 12-­15 mo of age‡

Indicated at ≥24 mo of age§

7-­11

2 doses, 2 mo apart†

1 dose at 12-­15 mo of age‡

Indicated at ≥24 mo of age§

12-­23

2 doses, 2 mo apart¶

Not indicated

Indicated at ≥24 mo of age§

24-­59

2 doses, 2 mo apart¶

Not indicated

Indicated§

≥60

Not indicated

Not indicated**

Indicated

*A schedule with a reduced number of total 13-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) doses is indicated if children start late or are incompletely vaccinated. Children with a
lapse in vaccination should be vaccinated according to the catch-­up schedule (see Chapter 228).
†For children vaccinated at younger than age 1 yr, minimum interval between doses is 4 wk.
‡The additional dose should be administered 8 wk or more after the primary series has been completed.
§Children younger than age 5 yr should complete the PCV13 series first; 23-­valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV23) should be administered to children 24 mo of age
or older 8 wk or more after the last dose of PCV13 (see Chapter 228) (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices: Preventing
pneumococcal disease among infants and young children: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP]. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2000;49[RR-­9]:1–
35, and Licensure of a 13-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine [PCV13] and recommendations for use among children—Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices [ACIP].
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010;59[9]:258–261.)
¶Minimum interval between doses is 8 wk.
**PCV13 is not recommended generally for children age 5 yr or older.
PCV, Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine; PPV, pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Pneumococcal vaccination for cochlear implant candidates and recipients:
Updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2003;52(31):739–740.

A serious possible complication of cochlear implantation is
pneumococcal meningitis. All children receiving a cochlear
implant must be vaccinated with the pneumococcal polyvalent
vaccine PCV13 (Table 677.9), and rates of pneumococcal meningitis have declined considerably since implementation of the
vaccine.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved
cochlear implantation in patients over 9 months of age with severe
to profound bilateral hearing loss not benefitting from hearing
aids; off-­label use of cochlear implants has demonstrated efficacy
in younger children and those with residual hearing. Cochlear
implantation before age 2 years improves hearing and speech,
enabling more than 90% of children to be in mainstream education. Most develop age-­appropriate auditory perception and oral
language skills. There is increasing evidence to support expansion
of the candidacy for cochlear implantation in children to be based
on outcomes of advanced testing using speech stimuli, especially in
noise. To date, implantation of children with devices that combine
acoustic input (like a hearing aid) with electric stimulation from a
cochlear implant has not been approved by the FDA. These devices,
called electroacoustic cochlear implants, or hybrids, may offer hope
for children using hearing aids but struggling with noise in the
classroom or social contexts.
Valganciclovir has been effective in treating hearing deficits in children with congenital CMV and isolated SNHL (see Chapter 302).

GENETIC COUNSELING

Families of children with the diagnosis of SNHL or a syndrome associated with SNHL and/or CHL should be referred for genetic counseling.
This will give the parents an idea of the likelihood of similar diagnoses
in future pregnancies, and the geneticist can assist in the evaluation
and testing of the patient to establish a diagnosis.

677.1 Idiopathic Sudden Sensorineural
Hearing Loss
Joseph Haddad Jr.
Sudden SNHL in a previously healthy child is uncommon but may be
from OM or other cochlear pathologies such as autoimmunity (Cogan
syndrome, others). Usually, these causes are obvious from the history
and physical examination. Sudden loss of hearing in the absence of
obvious causes may also be the result of a vascular event affecting the
cochlear apparatus or nerve, such as embolism or thrombosis (secondary to prothrombotic conditions) or hemorrhage. Additional causes
include perilymph fistula, medications, trauma, and the first episode
of Meniere syndrome. In adults, sudden SNHL is often idiopathic and
unilateral; it may be associated with a sensation of ear fullness, tinnitus, and vertigo. Identifiable causes of sudden SNHL include infections (Epstein-­Barr virus, varicella-­zoster virus, herpes simplex virus)
(see Table 677.2), vascular injury to the cochlea, enlarged vestibular
aqueduct, endolymphatic hydrops, and autoimmune inflammatory
diseases. In most (∼75%) patients with sudden SNHL, no etiology is
discovered, and it is termed idiopathic sudden SNHL. This entity is
defined by a rapid (≤72 hours) onset that may be unilateral (bilateral in
25%) and associated with a hearing loss of ≥30 dB. Patients should be
evaluated immediately to exclude other etiologies and obtain a focused
MRI of the auditory vestibular region.
Management of idiopathic sudden SNHL has included oral prednisone, intratympanic (also called transtympanic) dexamethasone perfusion, or a combination of both; the latter combination may be the most
useful. Recovery of hearing is more likely in patients with early treatment and with mild or moderate hearing loss and those with unilateral
involvement.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 678 u Congenital Malformations of the Ear

Chapter 678

Congenital Malformations
of the Ear
Joseph Haddad Jr.
The external and middle ears, derived from the first and second branchial arches and grooves, grow throughout puberty, but the inner ear,
which develops from the otocyst, reaches adult size and shape by midfetal development. The ossicles are derived from the first and second arches
(malleus and incus), and the stapes arises from the second arch and the
otic capsule. The malleus and incus achieve adult size and shape by the
15th week of gestation, and the stapes achieves adult size and shape by
the 18th week of gestation. Although the pinna, ear canal, and tympanic
membrane (TM) continue to grow after birth, congenital abnormalities
of these structures develop during the first half of gestation. Malformed
external and middle ears may be associated with serious renal anomalies, mandibulofacial dysostosis, hemifacial microsomia, and other craniofacial malformations (Table 678.1). Facial nerve abnormalities may
be associated with any of the congenital abnormalities of the ear and
temporal bone. Malformations of the external and middle ears also may
be associated with abnormalities of the inner ear and both conductive
hearing loss (CHL) and sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL).
Congenital ear problems may be either minor and mainly cosmetic
or major, affecting both appearance and function. Any child born with
an abnormality of the pinna, external auditory canal, or TM should
have a complete audiologic evaluation in the neonatal period. Imaging
studies are necessary for evaluation and treatment; in the patient with
other craniofacial abnormalities, a team approach with other specialists can assist in guiding therapy.

PINNA MALFORMATIONS

Severe malformations of the external ear are rare, but minor deformities
are common. Isolated abnormalities of the external ear occur in approximately 1% of children (Fig. 678.1). A pitlike depression just in front of
the helix and above the tragus may represent a cyst or an epidermis-­lined
fistulous tract (Fig. 678.2). These are common, with an incidence of
approximately 8 in 1,000 children, and may be unilateral or bilateral and
familial. The pits require surgical removal only if there is recurrent infection. Accessory skin tags, with an incidence of 1-­2/1,000 live births, can
be removed for cosmetic reasons by simple ligation if they are attached by
a narrow pedicle. If the pedicle is broad based or contains cartilage, the
defect should be corrected surgically. An unusually prominent or “lop”
ear results from lack of bending of the cartilage that creates the antihelix.
It may be improved cosmetically in the neonatal period by applying a firm
framework (sometimes soldering wire is used) attached by Steri-­Strips to
the pinna and worn continuously for weeks to months. Otoplasty for cosmetic correction can be considered in children older than 5 years of age,
when the pinna has reached approximately 80% of its adult size.
The term microtia may indicate subtle abnormalities of the size,
shape, and location of the pinna and ear canal or major abnormalities
with only small nubbins of skin and cartilage and the absence of the ear
canal opening; anotia indicates complete absence of the pinna and ear
canal (Fig. 678.3). Microtia can have a genetic or environmental predisposition. Several hereditary forms of microtia have been identified that
exhibit either autosomal dominant or recessive mendelian inheritance.
In addition, some forms due to chromosomal aberrations have been
reported. Most of the responsible genes that have been identified are
homeobox genes, which are involved in the development of pharyngeal
arches. Microtic ears often are more anterior and inferior in placement
than normal auricles, and the location and function of the facial nerve
may be abnormal. Surgery to correct microtia is considered for both
cosmetic and functional reasons; children who have some pinna can

3995

wear regular glasses, a hearing aid, and earrings and feel more normal
in appearance. If the microtia is severe, some patients may opt for creation and attachment of a prosthetic ear, which cosmetically closely
Table 678.1  Diseases with Anomalies of the External and
Middle Ears Listed by Pathologic Defect and
Traditional Name
PATHOLOGIC NAME

EPONYM

4p-­syndrome

Wolf-­Hirschhorn syndrome

Acrocephalosyndactyly type I

Apert syndrome

Acrocephalosyndactyly type III

Saethre-­Chotzen syndrome

Acrocephalosyndactyly type V

Pfeiffer syndrome

Anus imperforate with hand,
foot, and ear anomalies

Townes-­Brocks syndrome

Arteriohepatic dysplasia

Alagille syndrome

Branchio-­oto-­renal syndrome

Melnick Fraser syndrome

Brevicollis

Klippel-­Feil syndrome

Cervico-­oculoacoustic syndrome

Wildervanck syndrome

Cleft palate, microcephaly, large
ears, and short stature

Say syndrome

Cleft palate, micrognathia, and
glossoptosis

Pierre Robin sequence

Congenital contractural
arachnodactyly

Beals syndrome

Congenital facial diplegia

Möbius syndrome

Constitutional aplastic
pancytopenia with multiple
anomalies

Fanconi syndrome

Craniofacial dysostosis

Crouzon disease

Craniometaphyseal dysplasia

Pyle disease

Dyschondrosteosis

Léri-­Weill syndrome

Exomphalos-­macroglossia-­
gigantism syndrome

Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome

Faciodigitogenital syndrome

Aarskog syndrome

Gargoylism

Hurler syndrome

Gonadal aplasia

Turner syndrome

Hemifacial microsomia
(oculoauriculovertebral
dysplasia)

Goldenhar syndrome

Lacrimoauriculodentodigital
syndrome

Levy-­Hollister syndrome

Mandibulofacial dysostosis

Treacher Collins syndrome

Orofaciodigital syndrome type II

Mohr syndrome

Osteodysplasty

Melnick-­Needles syndrome

Osteopetrosis

Albers-­Schönberg disease

Renal agenesis, bilateral

Potter syndrome

Third and fourth pharyngeal
pouch syndrome

DiGeorge syndrome

Trisomy 13-­15 syndrome

Patau syndrome

Trisomy 18 syndrome

Edwards syndrome

Trisomy 21 syndrome

Down syndrome

From Lesperance MM, Flint PW, eds. Cummings Pediatric Otolaryngology.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015, Table 15.1, p. 197.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3996 Part XXVIII u The Ear

A

C

B

D

Fig. 678.1 Minor congenital auricular deformities. A, In this infant, the superior portion of the helix is folded over, obscuring the triangular fossa;

the antihelix is sharply angulated; and there are three preauricular skin tags. B, This neonate with orofaciodigital and Turner syndromes has a simple helix and a redundant folded lobule. The ear is low set and posteriorly rotated, and the antitragus is anteriorly displaced. C, This infant with
Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome has an exaggerated elongated intertragal notch. D, Prominent ear in an otherwise normal child. The auricular cartilage
is abnormally contoured, making the ear protrude forward. (C courtesy Dr. Michael E. Sherlock, Lutherville, Maryland; from Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC,
Nowalk AJ, eds. Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 24.17, p. 875.)

A

Fig. 678.2 Preauricular sinuses. A, These congenital
remnants are located anterior to the pinna and have an
overlying surface dimple. B, In this child, the sinus has
become infected, forming an abscess. (A courtesy Michael Hawke, MD; from Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk
AJ, eds. Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 24.18,
p. 876.)

B

A

B

C

D

Fig. 678.3 A, Type I microtia with constricted ear and minimal tissue deficiency. B, Type II microtia, conchal type: absence of superior portions of

the ear and preservation of inferior conchal anatomy. C, Type III microtia, lobular type: markedly deformed and no identifiable concha and preservation of the lobule. D, Type IV, anotia. (From Lesperance MM, ed. Cummings Pediatric Otolaryngology, 2nd ed, Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig.
18.2, p. 250.)

resembles a real ear. Surgery to correct severe microtia may involve a
multistage procedure, including carving and transplantation of autogenous cartilage rib grafts and local soft tissue flaps. Cosmetic reconstruction of the auricle usually is performed between 5 and 7 years of
age and is performed before canal atresia repair in children deemed
appropriate for this surgery.

CONGENITAL STENOSIS OR ATRESIA OF THE
EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL

Stenosis or atresia of the ear canal often occurs in association with
malformation of the auricle and middle ear. Malformations can occur

in isolation or as part of a genetic syndrome. For example, the ear
canal is narrow in trisomy 21, and external canal stenosis or atresia is
common in branchiooculofacial syndrome, leading to CHL. Audiometric evaluation of these children should be undertaken as early
in life as possible. Most children with significant CHL secondary to
bilateral atresia wear bone conduction hearing aids for the first several years of life. Diagnosis, evaluation, and surgical planning often
are aided by CT, and sometimes MRI, of the temporal bone. Mild
cases of ear canal stenosis do not require surgical enlargement unless
the patient develops chronic external otitis or severe cerumen impaction that affects hearing.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 678 u Congenital Malformations of the Ear
Reconstructive ear canal and middle-­ear surgery for atresia usually
is considered for children older than 5 years of age who have bilateral
deformities resulting in significant CHL. The aim of reconstructive surgery is to improve hearing to a point where the child may not need a
hearing aid or to provide an ear canal and pinna so that the child can
derive improved benefit from an air-­conduction hearing aid. Hearing
results for atresiaplasty range from fair to excellent. CT evidence of an
adequate middle-­ear cleft, ossicles, and mastoid is required to perform
the surgery; the position of the facial nerve, which often is in an abnormal location in these children, also must be considered (Fig. 678.4).
The use of bone-­anchored hearing aids is a safe, reliable, and low-­risk
alternative to atresiaplasty, and hearing results are generally excellent.
Bone-­anchored hearing aids may also be useful for rehabilitation of
nonoptimal atresiaplasty hearing results. These devices are approved
by the US Food and Drug Administration for surgical placement in
children age 5 years and older; before age 5 years, they can be worn
with a soft band around the head. Disadvantages include the fact that
cosmesis is not very good (a bone-­anchored hearing aid has a visible
titanium abutment and snap-­on hearing aid) and frequent wound care
is required. Middle ear implants are effective alternatives for those who
cannot tolerate foreign bodies in the ear for medical reasons or rely on
good perception of high-­frequency sounds.

CONGENITAL MIDDLE-­EAR MALFORMATIONS

Children may have congenital abnormalities of the middle ear as an
isolated defect or in association with other abnormalities of the temporal bone, especially the ear canal and pinna, or as part of a syndrome.

A

3997

Affected children usually have CHL but may have mixed CHL and
SNHL. Most malformations involve the ossicles, with the incus most
commonly affected. Other less common abnormalities of the middle
ear include persistent stapedial artery, high-­riding jugular bulb, and
abnormalities of the shape and volume of the aerated portion of the
middle ear and mastoid; all present problems for a surgeon. Depending on the type of abnormality and the presence of other anomalies,
surgery may be considered to improve hearing.

CONGENITAL INNER EAR MALFORMATIONS

Congenital inner ear malformations are classified as a result of
improvements in imaging modalities (Table 678.2). As many as 20%
of children with SNHL may have anatomic abnormalities identified
on CT or MRI. Congenital malformations of the inner ear usually
are associated with SNHL of various degrees, from mild to profound.
These malformations are most commonly found in infants and may
occur as isolated anomalies or in association with other syndromes,
genetic abnormalities, or structural abnormalities of the head and neck
(Table 678.3). High-­resolution temporal bone CT can identify enlarged
vestibular aqueducts and cochlear nerve canal stenosis in association
with SNHL. Although no therapy exists for this condition, it may be
associated with progressive SNHL in some children; therefore diagnosis may have some prognostic value.
Congenital perilymphatic fistula of the oval or round window membrane may present as a rapid-­onset, fluctuating, or progressive SNHL
with or without vertigo and often is associated with congenital inner ear
abnormalities. Middle-­ear exploration may be required to confirm this

B

m

C

D

Fig. 678.4 External auditory canal atresia on CT scans. A, Coronal scan of right ear shows absent external auditory canal with thick bony atresia

plate (white arrows). Malleus neck is rotated and fused to superior portion of atresia plate (black arrow). B, Axial scan through attic shows fused
ossicular mass (arrow). C, Coronal scan more posterior to (A) shows mastoid segment of facial nerve canal positioned more anteriorly than normal
(arrows). D, Axial scan more inferior to (B) shows anterior-­posterior mastoid segment of the facial nerve en face (arrow). Note abnormally close relationship to mandibular condyle. (From Faerber EN, Booth TN, Swartz JD. Temporal bone and ear. In Slovis TL, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic
Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008: Fig. 44.7, p. 584.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3998 Part XXVIII u The Ear
diagnosis, because no reliable nonoperative diagnostic test exists. It may
be necessary to repair a perilymphatic fistula to prevent possible spread
of infection from the middle ear to the labyrinth or meninges, to stabilize
hearing loss, and to improve vertigo when present.

Table 678.2  Classification of Congenital Inner Ear
Malformations
MALFORMATIONS LIMITED TO THE MEMBRANOUS LABYRINTH
Complete membranous labyrinthine dysplasia
Limited membranous labyrinthine dysplasia
Cochleosaccular dysplasia (Scheibe)
Cochlear basal turn dysplasia
MALFORMATIONS OF THE OSSEOUS AND MEMBRANOUS
LABYRINTH
Complete labyrinthine aplasia (Michel)
Cochlear anomalies
Cochlear aplasia
Cochlear hypoplasia
Incomplete partition (Mondini)
Common cavity
Labyrinthine anomalies
Semicircular canal dysplasia
Semicircular canal aplasia
Aqueductal anomalies
Enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct
Enlargement of the cochlear aqueduct
Internal auditory canal anomalies
Narrow internal auditory canal
Wide internal auditory canal
Eighth cranial nerve anomalies
Hypoplasia
Aplasia
From Lesperance MM, ed. Cummings Pediatric Otolaryngology, 2nd ed, Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2022: Box 13.1, p. 178.

CONGENITAL CHOLESTEATOMA

A congenital cholesteatoma (approximately 2–5% of all cholesteatomas) is a nonneoplastic, destructive, cystic lesion that usually appears
as a white, round, cystlike structure medial to an intact TM. Cysts
are seen most commonly in boys and in the anterior-­superior portion of the middle ear, although they can present in other locations
and within the TM or in the skin of the ear canal. They can be classified as “open,” meaning in direct continuity with mucosa of the middle
ear, or “closed.” Affected children often have no prior history of otitis
media. One theory for the pathogenesis is that the cyst derives from
a congenital rest of epithelial tissue that persists beyond 33 weeks of
gestation, when it ordinarily would disappear. Other theories include
squamous metaplasia of the middle ear, entrance of squamous epithelium through a nonintact eardrum into the middle ear, ectodermal implants between the first and second branchial arch remnants,
and residual amniotic fluid squamous debris. Congenital or acquired
cholesteatoma should be suspected when deep retraction pockets,
keratin debris, chronic drainage, aural granulation tissue, or a mass
behind or involving the TM is present. Congenital cholesteatoma is
often asymptomatic, whereas acquired cholesteatoma commonly
presents with otorrhea. Besides acting as a benign tumor causing
local bone destruction, the keratinaceous debris of a cholesteatoma
serves as a culture medium, leading to chronic otitis media. Complications include ossicular erosion with hearing loss, bone erosion
into the inner ear with dizziness, or exposure of the dura, with consequent meningitis or a brain abscess. Evaluation includes a CT scan
(Fig. 678.5) to detect bone erosion and audiometry to assess air and
bone conduction and speech reception and discrimination. Treatment includes cholesteatoma removal, repair of damaged small middle ear bones, and mastoidectomy in 50% of congenital and >90% of
acquired cholesteatoma cases. A second-­look procedure 6-­9 months
after primary surgery is usually recommended to detect and remove
small amounts of residual disease before more extensive recurrence or
development of complications. Higher initial stage of disease, erosion
of ossicles, cholesteatoma abutting or enveloping the incus or stapes,

Table 678.3  Inner Ear Malformations in Syndromic Hearing Loss
SYNDROME

GENETIC ABNORMALITY

RADIOGRAPHIC ANOMALIES

ASSOCIATED ANOMALIES

Apert

FGFR2

Vestibular dysplasia, high-­riding
jugular bulb

Stapes footplate fixation

Branchio-­oto-­renal

EYA1

Hypoplastic cochlea, enlarged VA

Malleus or incus dysplasia, aberrant facial nerve

CHARGE

CHD7

Hypoplastic or absent SCC

Coloboma, heart defects, choanal atresia, growth
retardation, genital/urinary abnormalities

Down

Trisomy 21

Hypoplastic cochlea, SCC dysplasia,
cochlear nerve canal hypoplasia

Narrow external auditory canal, eustachian tube
dysfunction

Edwards

Trisomy 18

Hypoplastic cochlea, absent SCC

Microtia, low-­set ears

Pendred

SLC26A4

Hypoplastic cochlea, enlarged VA,
modiolar deficiency

Goiter, hypothyroidism

Waardenburg type I

PAX3

Hypoplastic cochlea and/or SCC,
enlarged VA

Telecanthus, white forelock, heterochromia
iridum

Waardenburg type II

MITF, SNAI2, SOX10

Enlarged vestibule, hypoplastic SCC

White forelock, heterochromia iridum

Waardenburg type III

PAX3

Hypoplastic cochlea and/or SCC,
enlarged VA

Upper limb abnormalities, white forelock,
heterochromia iridum

Waardenburg type IV

EDNRB, EDN3, SOX10

Enlarged vestibule, hypoplastic SCC

Hirschsprung disease, white forelock,
heterochromia iridum

SCC, Semicircular canal; VA, vestibular aqueduct.
Modified from Lesperance MM, ed. Cummings Pediatric Otolaryngology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 13.2, p. 189.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 679 u External Otitis (Otitis Externa)

3999

The normal flora of the external canal consists mainly of aerobic
bacteria and includes coagulase-­negative staphylococci (see Chapter
227.3), Corynebacterium (diphtheroids; see Chapter 233), Micrococcus, and occasionally Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227.1), viridans streptococci (see Chapter 231), and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (see
Chapter 251.1). Excessive wetness (swimming, bathing, increased
environmental humidity), dryness (dry canal skin and lack of cerumen), the presence of other skin pathologic conditions (previous infection, eczema, or other forms of dermatitis), and trauma (due to digital
or foreign body, use of cotton-­tipped swabs) make the skin of the canal
vulnerable to infection by the normal flora or exogenous bacteria and
predispose to colonization with gram-­negative bacteria.

ETIOLOGY

Fig. 678.5 Congenital cholesteatoma. Axial CT of left ear shows soft
tissue mass (arrow) in the middle ear. This mass was noted otoscopically
behind an intact membrane. (From Faerber EN, Booth TN, Swartz JD.
Temporal bone and ear. In Slovis TL, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic
Imaging, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2008: Fig. 44.31, p. 598.)

External otitis (swimmer’s ear, although it can occur without swimming) is caused most by P. aeruginosa (up to 60%), but S. aureus,
Enterobacter aerogenes, Proteus mirabilis, Klebsiella pneumoniae, streptococci, coagulase-­negative staphylococci and diphtheroids, and fungi
such as Candida and Aspergillus also may rarely be isolated. External
otitis results from chronic irritation and maceration from excessive
moisture in the canal. The loss of protective cerumen may play a role,
as may trauma, but cerumen impaction with trapping of water also
can cause infection. Inflammation of the ear canal due to herpesvirus,
varicella-­zoster virus, other skin exanthems, and eczema also may predispose to external otitis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
and need for removal of the ossicles are associated with increased likelihood of residual cholesteatoma, which occurs in ∼10% of congenital
and ∼25% of acquired cases. More extensive disease at initial surgery
is associated with poorer hearing outcomes. Children with significant
inflammation or extensive scarring may require a 2-­stage procedure
with initial removal of the cholesteatoma and subsequent repair of
damaged middle ear structures.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 679

External Otitis (Otitis
Externa)
Joseph Haddad Jr.
In an infant, the outer two thirds of the ear canal is cartilaginous and
the inner one third is bony. In an older child and adult, the outer one
third is cartilaginous and the inner two thirds is bony. The epithelium
is thinner in the bony portion than in the cartilaginous portion, there
is no subcutaneous tissue, and epithelium is tightly applied to the
underlying periosteum; hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and apocrine
glands are scarce or absent. The skin in the cartilaginous area has well-­
developed dermis and subcutaneous tissue and contains hair follicles,
sebaceous glands, and apocrine glands. The highly viscid secretions of
the sebaceous glands and the watery, pigmented secretions of the apocrine glands in the outer portion of the canal combine with exfoliated
surface cells of the skin to form cerumen, a protective, waxy, water-­
repellent coating.

The predominant symptom is acute rapid onset (typically within 48
hours) of ear pain (otalgia), often severe, accentuated by manipulation of the pinna or by pressure on the tragus and by jaw motion. The
severity of the pain and tenderness (tragus or pinna, or both) may be
disproportionate to the degree of inflammation, because the skin of the
external ear canal is tightly adhered to the underlying perichondrium
and periosteum. Itching often is a precursor of pain and usually is characteristic of chronic inflammation of the canal or resolving acute otitis
externa. Conductive hearing loss (CHL) may result from edema of the
skin and tympanic membrane (TM), serous or purulent secretions, or
the canal skin thickening associated with chronic external otitis.
Edema of the ear canal, erythema, and thick, clumpy otorrhea are
prominent signs of acute disease. The cerumen usually is white and
soft in consistency, as opposed to its usual yellow color and firmer consistency (Fig. 679.1). The canal often is so tender and swollen that the
entire ear canal and TM cannot be adequately visualized, and complete otoscopic examination may be delayed until the acute swelling
subsides. If the TM can be visualized, it may appear either normal or
opaque. TM mobility may be normal, or, if the TM is thickened, mobility may be reduced in response to positive and negative pressure.
Other physical findings may include palpable and tender lymph
nodes in the periauricular region and erythema and swelling of the
pinna and periauricular skin. Rarely, facial paralysis, other cranial
nerve abnormalities, vertigo, and/or sensorineural hearing loss are
present. If these occur, necrotizing (malignant) otitis externa, an
invasive infection of the temporal bone and skull base, is probable. Fortunately, this disease is rare in children and is seen only in association
with immunocompromise or severe malnourishment. In adults, it is
associated with diabetes mellitus.

DIAGNOSIS

Diffuse external otitis may be confused with furunculosis, otitis
media (OM), and mastoiditis (Table 679.1). Furuncles occur in the
lateral hair-­bearing part of the ear canal; furunculosis usually causes a
localized swelling of the canal limited to one quadrant, whereas external otitis is associated with concentric swelling and involves the entire
ear canal. In OM, the TM may be perforated, severely retracted, or
bulging and immobile; hearing usually is impaired. If the middle ear is
draining through a perforated TM or tympanostomy tube, secondary
external otitis may occur; if the TM is not visible owing to drainage
or ear canal swelling, it may be difficult to distinguish acute OM with
drainage from an acute external otitis. Pain on manipulation of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4000 Part XXVIII u The Ear

Fig. 679.1 Acute otitis externa. A, Erythema, edema,

A

and copious purulent debris. B, In some cases an edematous canal with granulation tissue necessitates the
placement of an ear wick to assist with topical drug delivery in the acute setting. (Courtesy Dr. John W. House,
Los Angeles.)

B

Table 679.1  Differential Diagnosis of Painful External Ear and Auditory Canal Disorders
DISORDER

CLINICAL FEATURES

Acute otitis externa

Diffuse redness, swelling, and pain of the canal with greenish to whitish exudate; often very tender pinna

Necrotizing (malignant)
otitis externa (± skull base
osteomyelitis)

Rapidly progressive, severe swelling and redness of pinna; pinna may be laterally displaced; risk factors
include diabetes mellitus, congenital or acquired immunodeficiency, severe neutropenia

Dermatitis
Eczema

History of atopy, presence of lesions elsewhere; lesions are scaly, red, pruritic, and weeping

Contact

History of cosmetic use or irritant exposure; lesions are scaly, red, pruritic, and weeping

Seborrhea

Scaly, red, papular dermatitis; scalp may have thick, yellow scales

Psoriasis

History or presence of psoriasis elsewhere; erythematous papules that coalesce into thick, white plaques

Cellulitis

Diffuse redness, tenderness, and swelling of the pinna

Furuncles

Red, tender papules in areas with hair follicles (distal third of the ear canal)

Infected periauricular cyst

Discrete, palpable lesions; history of previous swelling at same site; cellulitis may develop, obscuring cystic
structure

Insect bites

History of exposure; lesions are red, tender papules

Herpes zoster oticus

Painful, vesicular lesions in the ear canal and tympanic membrane, hearing loss, vestibulitis; with addition of
seventh cranial nerve palsy—Ramsay Hunt syndrome

Perichondritis

Inflammation of the cartilage, usually secondary to cellulitis

Relapsing polychondritis

Recurrent episodes, involves other cartilage sites (nose)

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis

Fever, weight loss, respiratory and/or renal manifestations

Tumors including Langerhans cell
histiocytosis

Palpable mass, destruction of surrounding structures

Foreign body

Foreign body may cause secondary trauma to the ear canal or become a nidus for an infection of the ear
canal

Trauma

Bruising and swelling of external ear; there may be signs of basilar skull fracture (cerebrospinal fluid otorrhea,
hemotympanum)

Red ear syndrome

Paroxysmal unilateral or bilateral burning and reddening. Associated with migraines or trigeminal cephalgias

Erythromelalgia

Burning, erythema from heat exposure relieved by cold; isolated ear involvement unusual

Modified from Kliegman R, Bordini B, Toth H, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 5.2.

auricle and significant lymphadenitis are not common features of OM,
and these findings assist in the differential diagnosis. In some patients
with external otitis, the periauricular edema is so extensive that the
auricle is pushed forward, creating a condition that may be confused
with acute mastoiditis and a subperiosteal abscess. In mastoiditis, the
postauricular fold is obliterated, whereas in external otitis, the fold is

usually better preserved. In acute mastoiditis, a history of OM and
hearing loss is usual; tenderness is noted over the mastoid and not on
movement of the auricle; and otoscopic examination may show sagging
of the posterior canal wall.
Referred otalgia may come from disease in the paranasal sinuses,
teeth, pharynx, parotid gland, neck and thyroid, and cranial nerves

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 679 u External Otitis (Otitis Externa)
(trigeminal neuralgia; herpes simplex virus, varicella-­zoster virus; see
Table 676.1).

TREATMENT

Topical otic preparations containing acetic acid, with or without
hydrocortisone, or neomycin (active against gram-­positive organisms and some gram-­negative organisms, notably Proteus spp.),
polymyxin (active against gram-­negative bacilli, notably Pseudomonas spp.), or a quinolone (ciprofloxacin), with or without hydrocortisone, are all highly effective in treating most forms of acute
external otitis. A nonototoxic (quinolone) antibiotic should be
chosen in the setting of known TM perforation or tympanostomy
tube. If canal edema is marked, the patient may need referral to a
specialist for cleaning and possible wick placement. An otic antibiotic and corticosteroid eardrop is often recommended. A wick can
be inserted into the ear canal and topical antibiotics applied to the
wick 3 times a day for 24-­48 hours. The wick can be removed after
2-­3 days, at which time the edema of the ear canal usually is markedly improved and the ear canal and TM are better seen. Topical
antibiotics are then continued by direct instillation. When the pain
is severe, oral analgesics (e.g., ibuprofen, acetaminophen) may be
necessary for a few days.
Someone other than the patient should place the drops in the ear
canal while the patient is recumbent with the affected ear facing
up. The drops should fill the canal, and the patient should remain

4001

in place for 3-­5 minutes. Gently moving the ear to and fro may
enhance the drops to fill the ear canal. Patients should respond to
initial therapeutics in 48-­72 hours. Failure to improve in this time
frame should prompt assessment of drug delivery and adherence
to therapy, consideration for change in therapy, and consideration
of alternative diagnoses. Careful evaluation for underlying conditions should also be undertaken in patients with severe or recurrent
otitis externa. Figure 679.2 outlines an approach to managing acute
external otitis.
As the inflammatory process subsides, cleaning the canal with a
suction or cotton-­tipped applicator to remove the debris enhances
the effectiveness of the topical medications. In subacute and
chronic infections, periodic cleansing of the canal is essential. In
severe acute external otitis associated with fever and lymphadenitis,
oral or parenteral antibiotics may be indicated; an ear canal culture should be done, and empirical antibiotic treatment can then
be modified if necessary, based on susceptibility of the organism
cultured. A fungal infection of the external auditory canal, or otomycosis, is characterized by fluffy white debris, sometimes with
black spores seen; treatment includes cleaning and application of
antifungal solutions such as clotrimazole or nystatin; other antifungal agents include boric acid powder, m-­cresyl acetate 25%, gentian
violet 2%, and thimerosal 1:1,000.
Necrotizing otitis externa, commonly caused by P. aeruginosa (see
Chapter 251.1), requires immediate culture, intravenous antibiotics,

Patient age 2 yr or older
with diffuse AOE

Prescribe analgesics based on pain severity

Extension outside
ear canal or host
factors* requiring
systemic therapy?

Yes

No
Perforated tympanic
membrane (known or
suspected) or
tympanostomy tube?

Prescribe systemic antimicrobial active
against Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Staphylococcus aureus, with or without
topical therapy, plus other management
based on underlying condition

Go to
A
below

*Factors requiring systemic therapy include
diabetes, immune deficiency, or inability to
effectively deliver topical therapy despite aural toilet

Yes

No
Prescribe topical therapy based on
benefits, cost, compliance, preference

Obstructed ear canal

Yes

No

Prescribe topical therapy with a
nonototoxic preparation
Perform aural toilet to remove
obstructing debris; place wick if
edema prevents drug delivery

Educate patient or caregiver on how
to administer topical drops

A

Clinically improved
in 48-72 hr?

Yes
Complete course of therapy

No

Reassess
patient
Assess drug delivery,
adherence to therapy,
need to change therapy

Illness other
than AOE?

No

Yes

Treat
other
illness

Fig. 679.2 Management algorithm for acute
otitis externa (AOE). (From Rosenfeld RM, Brown
L, Cannon CR, et al. Clinical practice guideline:
acute otitis externa. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg.
2006;134:S4–S23. Copyright 2006 American Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery
Foundation, Inc.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4002 Part XXVIII u The Ear
and imaging studies to evaluate the extent of the disease. Surgical
intervention to obtain cultures or debride devitalized tissue may be
necessary.

PREVENTION

Preventing external otitis may be necessary for individuals susceptible to recurrences, especially children who swim. The most effective prophylaxis is instillation of dilute alcohol or acetic acid (2%)
immediately after swimming or bathing. During an acute episode
of otitis externa, patients should not swim, and the ears should be
protected from excessive water during bathing. A hair dryer may be
used to clear moisture from the ear after swimming as a method of
prevention. Cotton-­tipped swabs (or another material) may cause
trauma to the ear canal, including tympanic membrane perforation, cerumen impaction, or retained foreign body and should be
avoided.

OTHER DISEASES OF THE EXTERNAL EAR
Furunculosis

Furunculosis, caused by S. aureus, affects only the hair-­containing
outer third of the ear canal and typically occurs at the inferior
entrance to the meatus. Mild forms are treated with oral antibiotics
active against S. aureus. If an abscess develops, incision and drainage may be necessary.

Acute Cellulitis

Acute cellulitis of the auricle and external auditory canal usually is
caused by group A streptococcus and occasionally by S. aureus. The
skin is red, hot, and indurated, without a sharply defined border. Fever
may be present with little or no exudate in the canal. Parenteral administration of penicillin G or a penicillinase-­resistant penicillin is the
therapy of choice.

Perichondritis and Chondritis

sumac also may produce contact dermatitis. Hair care products have
been implicated in sensitive individuals.
Infectious eczematoid dermatitis is caused by a purulent infection
of the external canal, middle ear, or mastoid; the purulent drainage
infects the skin of the canal or auricle, or both. The lesion is weeping,
erythematous, or crusted.
Atopic dermatitis occurs in children with a familial or personal history of allergy; the auricle, particularly the postauricular fold, becomes
thickened, scaly, and excoriated.
Neurodermatitis is recognized by intense itching and erythematous,
thickened epidermis localized to the concha and orifice of the meatus.
Treatment of these dermatoses depends on the type but should
include application of an appropriate topical medication, elimination
of the source of infection or contact when identified, and management
of any underlying dermatologic problem. In addition to topical antibiotics (or antifungals), topical steroids are helpful if contact dermatitis
(see Chapter 696.1), atopic dermatitis (see Chapter 696), or eczematoid
dermatitis is suspected.

Herpes Simplex Virus

See Chapter 299.
Herpes simplex virus may appear as vesicles on the auricle and lips.
The lesions eventually become encrusted and dry and may be confused
with impetigo. Topical application of a 10% solution of carbamide peroxide in anhydrous glycerol is symptomatically helpful. Ramsay Hunt
syndrome (herpes zoster oticus with facial paralysis) may present initially with otalgia, with subsequent appearance of vesicles in the ear
canal and on the pinna and with facial paralysis and pain. Other cranial
nerves may be affected as well, especially the eighth nerve. Treatment
of herpes zoster oticus includes systemic antiviral agents, such as acyclovir, and systemic corticosteroids. As many as 50% of patients with
Ramsay Hunt syndrome do not completely recover their facial nerve
function.

Perichondritis is an infection involving the skin and perichondrium
of the auricular cartilage; extension of infection to the cartilage is
termed chondritis. The ear canal, especially the lateral aspect, also
may be involved. Early perichondritis may be difficult to differentiate from cellulitis because both are characterized by skin that is red,
edematous, and tender. The main cause of perichondritis/chondritis
and cellulitis is trauma (accidental or iatrogenic, laceration or contusion), including ear piercing, especially when done through the
cartilage. The most commonly isolated organism in perichondritis
and chondritis is P. aeruginosa, although other gram-­negative and,
occasionally, gram-­positive organisms may be found. Treatment
involves systemic, often parenteral, antibiotics; surgery to drain an
abscess or remove nonviable skin or cartilage may also be needed.
Removal of all ear jewelry is mandatory in the presence of infection.

Bullous Myringitis

Dermatoses

Exostoses represent benign hyperplasia of the perichondrium and
underlying bone. Those involving the auditory canal tend to be
found in people who swim often in cold water. Exostoses are broad
based, often multiple, and bilateral. Osteomas are benign bony
growths in the ear canal of uncertain cause (see Chapter 550.2).
They usually are solitary and attached by a narrow pedicle to the
tympanosquamous or tympanomastoid suture line. Both are more
common in males; exostoses are more common than osteomas. Surgical treatment is recommended when large masses cause cerumen
impaction, ear canal obstruction, or hearing loss.

Various dermatoses (seborrheic, contact, infectious eczematoid, or
neurodermatoid) are common causes of inflammation of the external
canal; scratching and the introduction of infecting organisms cause
acute external otitis in these conditions.
Seborrheic dermatitis is characterized by greasy scales that flake
and crumble as they are detached from the epidermis; associated
changes in the scalp, forehead, cheeks, brow, postauricular areas, and
concha are usual.
Contact dermatitis of the auricle or canal may be caused by earrings or by topical otic medications such as neomycin, which may produce erythema, vesiculation, edema, and weeping. Poison ivy, oak, and

Commonly associated with an acute upper respiratory tract infection,
bullous myringitis presents as an ear infection with more severe pain
than usual. On examination, hemorrhagic or serous blisters (bullae)
may be seen on the TM. The disease sometimes is difficult to differentiate from acute OM because a large bulla may be confused with a bulging TM. The organisms involved are the same as those that cause acute
OM, including both bacteria and viruses. Treatment consists of empiric
antibiotic therapy and pain medications. In addition to ibuprofen or
codeine for severe pain, a topical anesthetic eardrop may also provide
some relief. Incision of the bullae, although not necessary, promptly
relieves the pain.

Exostoses and Osteomas

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 680 u Otitis Media

4003

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Chapter 680

Several factors affect the occurrence of OM, including age, gender,
genetic background, socioeconomic status, breast milk feeding, degree
of exposure to tobacco smoke, degree of exposure to other children,
presence or absence of respiratory allergy, season of the year, and pneumococcal vaccination status. Children with certain types of immune
deficiencies and congenital craniofacial anomalies (i.e., cleft palate,
Down syndrome) are particularly prone to OM.

Otitis Media
Brittany Player
The term otitis media (OM) has two main categories: acute infection, which is termed suppurative or acute otitis media (AOM), and
inflammation accompanied by middle-­ear effusion (MEE), termed
nonsuppurative or secretory OM, or otitis media with effusion
(OME). These two main types are interrelated: acute infection usually is succeeded by residual inflammation and effusion that, in turn,
predispose children to recurrent infection. MEE is a feature of both
AOM and OME and is an expression of the underlying middle-­ear
mucosal inflammation. MEE results in the conductive hearing loss
associated with OM, ranging from none to as much as 50 dB of hearing loss (moderate hearing loss).
The peak incidence and prevalence of OM are during the first 2 years
of life. More than 80% of children experience at least one episode of
OM by the age of 3 years. Conservative estimates for OM-­related costs
place the annual burden at $3-­5 billion per year. Accounting for >10%
of pediatric primary care encounters, OM is a leading reason for pediatric visits and use of antibiotics and figures importantly in the differential diagnosis of fever. Recurrent OM is defined as a minimum
of three episodes of AOM in 6 months or four episodes of AOM in 12
months with at least one of those episodes occurring in the preceding 6 months. It often serves as the main justification for myringotomy
with insertion of tympanostomy tubes and adenoidectomy, the most
frequently performed operations in infants and young children. OM is
also the most common cause of acquired hearing loss in children. OM
has a propensity to become chronic and recur. The earlier in life a child
experiences the first episode, the greater the frequency of recurrence,
severity, and persistence of MEE.
Accurate diagnosis of AOM in infants and young children may be
difficult (Figs. 680.1-­680.3). Symptoms may not be apparent, especially in early infancy and in chronic stages of the disease. Accurate
visualization of the tympanic membrane (TM) and middle-­ear space
may be difficult because of anatomy, patient cooperation, or blockage
by cerumen, removal of which may be arduous and time consuming. Abnormalities of the eardrum may also be subtle or difficult to
appreciate. In the face of these difficulties, both underdiagnosis and
overdiagnosis occur.

At least two of:
1. Abnormal TM color:
white, yellow, amber, or blue
2. Opacification not due to scarring
3. Decreased or absent mobility
Yes

Or

Bubbles or air–fluid interfaces
behind the TM

The age of onset of OM is an important predictor of the development
of recurrent and chronic OM, with earlier age of onset having an
increased risk for exhibiting these difficulties later in life. The development of at least one episode of OM is reported as 63–85% by 12 months
and 66–99% by 24 months of age. The percentage of days with MEE is
5–27% during the first year of life and 6–18% during the second year
of life. Across groups, rates are highest at 6-­20 months of age. After
the age of 2, the incidence and prevalence of OM decline progressively,
although the disease remains relatively common into the early school-­
age years. The most likely reasons for the higher rates in infants and
younger children include less well-­developed immunologic defenses
and less favorable eustachian tubal structure and function.

Gender

Epidemiologic data suggest an incidence of OM greater in males than
in females, although some studies have found no gender-­related differences in the occurrence of OM.

Genetic Background

That middle-­ear disease tends to run in families is a commonplace
observation, suggesting that OM may have a heritable component.
The degree of concordance for the occurrence of OM is much greater
among monozygotic than among dizygotic twins. OM is especially
prevalent and severe among Native American, Inuit, and Indigenous
Australian children.

Socioeconomic Status

Elements contributing to the association of poverty with OM include
crowding, limited hygienic facilities, suboptimal nutritional status,
limited access to medical care, and limited resources for complying
with prescribed medical regimens.

Breast Milk Compared with Formula Feeding

Most studies have found a protective effect of breast milk feeding
against OM. This protective effect may be greater in socioeconomically

Acute purulent otorrhea
not due to otitis externa

Yes

Middle-ear effusion
(MEE)
No acute
inflammation

Age

Yes

Acute
inflammation
At least one of:
1. Substantial ear pain, including
unaccustomed tugging or
rubbing of the ear
2. Marked redness of the TM
3. Distinct fullness or bulging of the TM
Yes

Otitis media with effusion
(OME)

Acute otitis media
(AOM)

Fig. 680.1 Algorithm for distinguishing between acute otitis media and otitis media with effusion. TM, Tympanic membrane.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4004 Part XXVIII u The Ear
Season

In keeping with the pattern of occurrence of upper respiratory tract
infections in general, the highest rates of occurrence of OM are observed
during cold weather months and the lowest rates during warm weather
months. In OM, it is likely that these findings strongly depend on the
significant association of OM with viral respiratory illnesses.

Congenital Anomalies
A

B

OM is universal among infants with unrepaired palatal clefts and is
also highly prevalent among children with submucous cleft palate,
other craniofacial anomalies, and Down syndrome (see Chapter 57).
The common feature in these congenital anomalies is a deficiency in
eustachian tube function, which predisposes these children to middle-­
ear disease.

Other Factors

C

D

Fig. 680.2 Examples of normal tympanic membrane (A) and of mild
bulging (B), moderate bulging (C), and severe bulging (D) of the tympanic membrane from middle-­ear effusion. (Courtesy Alejandro Hoberman, MD.)

Fig. 680.3 Tympanic membrane in acute otitis media.
disadvantaged children than in more advantaged children. The protective effect is attributable to the milk itself rather than to the mechanics
of breastfeeding.

Exposure to Tobacco Smoke

Tobacco smoke exposure is an important preventable risk factor in
the development of OM. Studies that have used objective measures to
determine infant exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke, such as cotinine levels, have consistently identified a significant linkage between
tobacco smoke and OM.

Exposure to Other Children

OM is more common with repeated exposure to other children,
whether at home or in out-­of-­home group daycare. Together, but independently, family socioeconomic status and the extent of exposure to
other children appear to constitute two of the most important identifiable risk factors for developing OM.

Pacifier use is linked with an increased incidence of OM and recurrence of OM, although the effect is small. Neither maternal age nor
birthweight nor season of birth appears to influence the occurrence
of OM once other demographic factors are accounted for. Some suggest an association of OM with bottle feeding in the recumbent position (propped bottle). Children with HIV infection have a high risk for
recurrent OM.

ETIOLOGY
Acute Otitis Media

Pathogenic bacteria can be isolated by standard culture techniques from
middle-­ear fluid in most documented AOM cases. Three pathogens
predominate in AOM: Streptococcus pneumoniae (see Chapter 228),
nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae (see Chapter 240), and Moraxella
catarrhalis (see Chapter 242). The overall incidence of these organisms
has changed with the use of the conjugate pneumococcal vaccine. Widespread use of the expanded serotype coverage 13-­valent as compared
with the 7-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine has further reduced
the prevalence of S. pneumoniae as a cause of AOM, particularly the
virulent 19A serotype. Less common pathogens include group A streptococcus (see Chapter 229), Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227.1),
and gram-­negative organisms. Gram-­negative organisms and S. aureus
are found most commonly in neonates and very young infants who are
hospitalized; in outpatient settings, the distribution of pathogens in
these young infants is similar to that in older infants. Molecular techniques to identify nonculturable bacterial pathogens have suggested the
importance of other bacterial species such as Alloiococcus otitidis.
Respiratory viruses may also be identified in MEEs of children with
AOM, either alone or, more commonly, in association with pathogenic
bacteria. Of these viruses, rhinovirus (see Chapter 310) and respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV; see Chapter 307) are found most often. AOM is a
known complication of bronchiolitis; middle-­ear aspirates in children
with bronchiolitis regularly contain bacterial pathogens, suggesting
that RSV is rarely, if ever, the sole cause of their AOM. Viral pathogens
have a negative impact on eustachian tube function, can impair local
immune function and increase bacterial adherence, and can change
the pharmacokinetic dynamics, reducing the efficacy of antimicrobial
medications. However, it remains uncertain whether viruses alone can
cause AOM or whether their role is limited to setting the stage for bacterial invasion, and perhaps also to amplify the inflammatory process,
thereby interfering with resolution of the bacterial infection.

Otitis Media with Effusion

Using standard culture techniques, the pathogens typically found in
AOM are recoverable in only 30% of children with OME. However,
using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), MEEs contain evidence of
bacterial DNA and viral RNA in much larger proportions of these
children. Biofilms of pathogenic bacteria are present on the middle-­
ear mucosa and adenoid pad in most children with chronic OM. Biofilms consist of aggregated and adherent bacteria, embedded in an
extracellular matrix and in neutrophil extracellular traps, allowing for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 680 u Otitis Media
protection against antimicrobials; their presence may contribute to the
persistence of pathogens and the recalcitrance of chronic OM to antibiotic treatment.

PATHOGENESIS

A multifactorial disease process, risk profile, and host-­pathogen interactions play important roles in the pathogenesis of OM. Such events as
alterations in mucociliary clearance through repeated viral exposure
experienced in daycare settings or through exposure to tobacco smoke
may tip the balance of pathogenesis in less virulent OM pathogens in
their favor, especially in children with a unique host predisposition.

Anatomic Factors

Patients with significant craniofacial abnormalities affecting eustachian
tube function have an increased incidence of OM. During the pathogenesis of OM, the eustachian tube demonstrates decreased effectiveness in ventilating the middle-­ear space.
Under usual circumstances the eustachian tube is passively closed
and is opened by contraction of the tensor veli palatini muscle. In
relation to the middle ear, the tube has three main functions: ventilation, protection, and clearance. The middle-­ear mucosa depends on
a continuing supply of air from the nasopharynx delivered by way of
the eustachian tube. Interruption of this ventilatory process by tubal
obstruction initiates an inflammatory response that includes secretory
metaplasia, compromise of the mucociliary transport system, and effusion of liquid into the tympanic cavity. Measurements of eustachian
tube function have demonstrated that the tubal function is suboptimal
during the events of OM with increased opening pressures.
Eustachian tube obstruction may result from extraluminal blockage via hypertrophied nasopharyngeal adenoid tissue or tumor or may
result from intraluminal obstruction via inflammatory edema of the
tubal mucosa, most commonly as a consequence of a viral upper respiratory tract infection. Progressive reduction in tubal wall compliance
with increasing age may explain the progressive decline in the occurrence of OM as children grow older. The protection and clearance functions of the eustachian tube may also be involved in the pathogenesis of
OM. Thus, if the eustachian tube is patulous or excessively compliant,
it may fail to protect the middle ear from reflux of infective nasopharyngeal secretions, whereas impairment of the mucociliary clearance
function of the tube might contribute to both the establishment and
persistence of infection. The shorter and more horizontal orientation of
the tube in infants and young children may increase the likelihood of
reflux from the nasopharynx and impair passive gravitational drainage
through the eustachian tube.
Children with craniofacial abnormalities experience an increased
incidence of OM associated with the abnormal eustachian tube function. In children with cleft palate, where OM is a universal finding, a
main factor underlying the chronic middle-­ear inflammation appears
to be impairment of the opening mechanism of the eustachian tube.
Possible factors include muscular changes, tubal compliance factors,
and defective velopharyngeal valving, which may result in disturbed
aerodynamic and hydrodynamic relationships in the nasopharynx and
proximal portions of the eustachian tubes. In children with other craniofacial anomalies and with Down syndrome, the high prevalence of
OM has also been attributed to structural and/or functional eustachian
tubal abnormalities.

Host Factors

The effectiveness of a child’s immune system in response to the bacterial and viral infections of the upper airway and middle ear during
early childhood probably is the most important factor in determining
which children are otitis prone. The maturation of this immune system
during early childhood is most likely the primary event leading to the
decrease in incidence of OM with increased age. Immunoglobulin A
(IgA) deficiency is found in some children with recurrent AOM, but
the significance is questionable; many children with IgA deficiency do
not experience recurrent episodes of AOM. Selective immunoglobulin

4005

G (IgG) subclass deficiencies (despite normal total serum IgG) may be
found in children with recurrent AOM in association with recurrent
sinopulmonary infection, and these deficiencies probably underlie the
susceptibility to infection. Children with HIV infection have recurrent
and difficult-­to-­treat episodes of AOM in the first and second year of
life. Children with recurrent OM that is not associated with recurrent
infection at other anatomic sites rarely have a readily identifiable immunologic deficiency. Evidence that subtle immune deficits play a role in
the pathogenesis of recurrent AOM is provided by studies involving
antibody responses to various types of infection and immunization; by
the observation that breast milk feeding, as opposed to formula feeding, confers some protection against the occurrence of OM in infants
with cleft palate; and by studies in which young children with recurrent
AOM achieved a measure of protection from intramuscularly administered bacterial polysaccharide immunoglobulin or intravenously
administered polyclonal immunoglobulin. This evidence, along with
the documented decrease in incidence of upper respiratory tract infections and OM as children’s immune systems develop and mature, is
indicative of the importance of a child’s innate immune system in the
pathogenesis of OM (see Chapter 164).

Viral Pathogens

Although OM may develop and persist in the absence of apparent
respiratory tract infection, many, if not most, episodes are initiated by
viral or bacterial upper respiratory tract infection. Among children in
group daycare, AOM was observed in approximately 30–40% of children with respiratory illness caused by RSV (see Chapter 307), influenza viruses (see Chapter 305), or adenoviruses (see Chapter 309) and
in approximately 10–15% of children with respiratory illness caused
by parainfluenza viruses (see Chapter 306), rhinoviruses (see Chapter
310), or enteroviruses (see Chapter 297). Viral infection of the upper
respiratory tract results in release of cytokines and inflammatory mediators, some of which may cause eustachian tube dysfunction.
Respiratory viruses also may enhance nasopharyngeal bacterial
colonization and adherence and impair host immune defenses against
bacterial infection.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Symptoms of AOM are variable, especially in infants and young children. In young children, evidence of ear pain may be manifested by
irritability or a change in sleeping or eating habits and, occasionally,
holding or tugging at the ear. Pulling at the ear alone has a low sensitivity and specificity. Fever may also be present and may occasionally be
the only sign. Rupture of the TM with purulent otorrhea is uncommon.
Systemic symptoms and symptoms associated with upper respiratory
tract infections also occur; occasionally there may be no symptoms,
with the disease having been discovered at a routine health examination. The Acute Otitis Media Severity of Symptom (AOM-­SOS) scale
is a five-­item validated symptom score that has proven beneficial as
a tool to monitor AOM symptoms in patients and studies of antimicrobial effectiveness in OM. OME often is not accompanied by overt
complaints of the child but can be accompanied by hearing loss. This
hearing loss may manifest as changes in speech patterns but often goes
undetected if unilateral or mild in nature, especially in younger children. Balance difficulties or disequilibrium can rarely be associated
with OME, and older children may complain of mild discomfort or a
sense of fullness in the ear.

EXAMINATION OF THE TYMPANIC MEMBRANE
Otoscopy

Two types of otoscope heads are available: surgical or operating and
diagnostic or pneumatic. The surgical head embodies a lens that can
swivel over a wide arc and an unenclosed light source, thus providing ready access of the examiner’s instruments to the external auditory
canal and TM. Use of the surgical head is optimal for removing cerumen or debris from the canal under direct observation and is necessary
for satisfactorily performing tympanocentesis or myringotomy. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4006 Part XXVIII u The Ear
diagnostic head incorporates a larger lens, an enclosed light source,
and a nipple for the attachment of a rubber bulb and tubing. When an
attached speculum is fitted snugly into the external auditory canal, an
airtight chamber is created comprising the vault of the otoscope head,
the bulb and tubing, the speculum, and the proximal portion of the
external canal. Although examination of the ear in young children is a
relatively invasive procedure that is often met with lack of cooperation
by the patient, this task can be enhanced if done with as little pain as
possible. The outer portion of the ear canal contains hair-­bearing skin
and subcutaneous fat and cartilage that allow a speculum to be placed
with relatively little discomfort. Closer to the TM the ear canal is made
of bone and is lined only with skin and no adnexal structures or subcutaneous fat; a speculum pushed too far forward and placed in this
area often causes skin abrasion and pain. Using a rubber-­tipped speculum or adding a small sleeve of rubber tubing to the tip of the plastic
speculum may serve to minimize patient discomfort and enhance the
ability to achieve a proper fit and an airtight seal, facilitating pneumatic
otoscopy.
Learning to perform pneumatic otoscopy is a critical skill in being
able to assess a child’s ear and in making an accurate diagnosis of AOM.
The degree of TM mobility in response to both positive and negative pressure can be estimated by observing as the bulb is alternately
squeezed gently and released, thus providing a critical assessment of
middle-­ear fluid, which is a hallmark sign of both AOM and OME (see
Fig. 680.1). With both types of otoscope heads, bright illumination is
also critical for adequate visualization of the TM.

Clearing the External Auditory Canal

Children’s ears are “self-­cleaning” because of squamous migration of
ear canal skin. Cleaning of cerumen with cotton-­tipped swabs should
be avoided, as it often worsens impaction by pushing cerumen deeper
into the canal, compacting it. If the TM is obscured by cerumen, the
cerumen should be removed. This can be accomplished through direct
visualization using a headlight or through the surgical head of the
otoscope by using an ear curette or gentle suction with a No. 5 or 7
French ear suction tube. During this procedure, it may be most advantageous to restrain the infant or young child in the prone position,
turning the child’s head to the left or right as each ear is cleared. In
children old enough to cooperate, clearing of the external canal may be
achieved more easily and less traumatically by lavage than by mechanical removal, provided one can be certain that a TM perforation is not
present.

Tympanic Membrane Findings

Important characteristics of the TM consist of contour, color, translucence, structural changes, if any, and mobility. The TM is anatomically
divided into the pars tensa and pars flaccida. The pars tensa comprises
the lower two thirds of the drum inferior to the lateral process of the
malleus. Its contour is normally slightly concave; abnormalities consist of fullness or bulging or, conversely, extreme retraction. The normal color of the pars tensa is pearly gray, with the pars flaccida being
slightly more vascular in nature. Erythema may be a sign of inflammation or infection, but unless intense, erythema alone may result from
crying or vascular flushing. Abnormal whiteness of the membrane may
result from either scarring or the presence of effusion in the middle-­ear
cavity; this effusion also may impart an amber, pale yellow, or, rarely,
bluish color. Rarely a persistent focal white area may be indicative of a
congenital cholesteatoma in the middle-­ear space. Normally, the membrane is translucent, although some degree of opacity may be normal in
the first few months of life; later, opacification denotes either scarring
or, more commonly, underlying effusion. Structural changes include
scars, perforations, and retraction pockets. Retractions or perforations, especially in the posterior-­superior quadrant, or pars flaccida,
of the TM may be a sign of cholesteatoma formation. Of all the visible
characteristics of the TM, mobility is the most sensitive and specific
in determining the presence or absence of MEE. Mobility is generally
not an all-­or-­none phenomenon. A total absence of mobility does exist
with a TM perforation that can develop after a substantial increase in
middle-­ear pressure associated with effusion. When a perforation is

not present, substantial impairment of mobility is the more common
finding with MEE. Bulging of the TM is the most specific finding of
AOM (97%) but has lower sensitivity (51%) (see Figs. 680.2 and 680.3).

Diagnosis

A diagnosis of AOM should be made in children who present with:
• Moderate to severe bulging of the TM or new-­onset otorrhea not
caused by otitis externa
• Mild bulging of the TM and recent (<48 hours) onset of ear pain or
intense TM erythema
A diagnosis of AOM should not be made in children without MEE.
AOM and OME may evolve into the other without any clearly differentiating physical findings; any schema for distinguishing between
them is to some extent arbitrary. In an era of increasing bacterial resistance, distinguishing between AOM and OME is important in determining treatment, because OME in the absence of acute infection does
not require antimicrobial therapy. Purulent otorrhea of recent onset
is indicative of AOM. Difficulty in distinguishing clinically between
AOM and OME is limited to circumstances in which purulent otorrhea is not present. Both AOM without otorrhea and OME are accompanied by physical signs of MEE, namely, the presence of at least two of
three TM abnormalities: white, yellow, amber, or (rarely) blue discoloration; opacification other than that caused by scarring; and decreased
or absent mobility. Alternatively, in OME, either air-­fluid levels or air
bubbles outlined by small amounts of fluid may be visible behind the
TM, a condition often indicative of impending resolution (see Fig.
680.4).
To support a diagnosis of AOM instead of OME in a child with MEE,
distinct fullness or bulging of the TM may be present, with or without
accompanying erythema, or, at a minimum, MEE should be accompanied by ear pain that appears clinically important. Unless intense,
erythema alone is insufficient because erythema, without other abnormalities, may result from crying or vascular flushing. In AOM, the malleus may be obscured, and the TM may resemble a bagel without a hole
but with a central depression (see Fig. 680.3). Rarely, the TM may be
obscured by surface bullae or may have a cobblestone appearance. Bullous myringitis is a physical manifestation of AOM and not an etiologically discrete entity. Within days after onset, fullness of the membrane
may diminish, even though infection may still be present.
In OME, bulging of the TM is absent or slight or the membrane
may be retracted (Fig. 680.4); erythema also is absent or slight but may
increase with crying or with superficial trauma to the external auditory
canal incurred in clearing the canal of cerumen.
Both before and after episodes of OM and also in the absence of OM,
the TM may be retracted as a consequence of negative middle-­ear air
pressure. The presumed cause is diffusion of air from the middle-­ear

Fig. 680.4 Tympanic membrane in otitis media with effusion.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 680 u Otitis Media
cavity more rapidly than it is replaced via the eustachian tube. Mild
retraction is generally self-­limited, although in some children it is
accompanied by mild conductive hearing loss. More extreme retraction is of concern, as discussed later in the section on sequelae of OM.

Conjunctivitis-­Associated Otitis Media

Simultaneous appearance of purulent and erythematous conjunctivitis with an ipsilateral OM is a well-­recognized presentation, caused by
nontypeable H. influenzae in most children. The disease often is present in multiple family members and affects young children and infants.
Topical ocular antibiotics are ineffective. In an era of resistant organisms, this clinical association can be important in antibiotic selection,
with oral antibiotics (see later) effective against resistant forms of nontypeable H. influenzae.

Asymptomatic Purulent Otitis Media

Rarely, a child will present during a routine exam without fever, irritability, or other overt signs of infection, but on exam, the patient will
demonstrate an obvious purulent MEE and bulging TM. Although an
uncommon presentation of “acute” OM, the bulging nature of the TM
and the obvious purulence of the effusion do warrant antimicrobial
therapy.

Tympanometry

Tympanometry, or acoustic immittance testing, is a simple, rapid,
atraumatic test that, when performed correctly, offers objective evidence of the presence or absence of MEE. The tympanogram provides
information about TM compliance in electroacoustic terms that can
be thought of as approximately equivalent to TM mobility as perceived
visually during pneumatic otoscopy. The absorption of sound by the
TM varies inversely with its stiffness. The stiffness of the membrane
is least, and its compliance is greatest, when the air pressures impinging on each of its surfaces—middle-­ear air pressure and external canal
air pressure—are equal. Anything tending to stiffen the TM, such as
TM scarring or middle-­ear fluid, reduces the TM compliance, which
is recorded as a flattening of the curve of the tympanogram. An ear
filled with middle-­ear fluid generally has a very noncompliant TM and
therefore a flattened tympanogram tracing.
Tympanograms may be grouped into one of three categories (Fig.
680.5). Tracings characterized by a relatively steep gradient, sharp-­
angled peak, and middle-­ear air pressure (location of the peak in
terms of air pressure) that approximates atmospheric pressure (see
Fig. 680.5A) (type A curve) are assumed to indicate normal middle-­
ear status. Tracings characterized by a shallow peak or no peak are
often termed “flat” or type B (see Fig. 680.5B) and usually are assumed
to indicate the presence of a middle-­ear abnormality that is causing
decreased TM compliance. The most common such abnormality in
infants and children is MEE. Tracings characterized by intermediate
findings—somewhat shallow peak, often in association with a gradual
gradient (obtuse-­angled peak) or negative middle-­ear air pressure peak

A

B

4007

(often termed type “C”), or combinations of these features (see Fig.
680.5C)—may or may not be associated with MEE and must be considered nondiagnostic or equivocal with respect to OM. However, type
C tympanograms do suggest eustachian tube dysfunction and some
ongoing pathology in the middle ear and warrant follow-­up.
When reading a tympanogram, it is important to look at the volume measurement. The type B tympanometric response is analyzed
within the context of the recorded volume. A flat, “low”-­volume (≤1
mL) tracing typically reflects the volume of the ear canal only, representing MEE, which impedes the movement of an intact eardrum. A
flat, high-­volume (>1 mL) tracing typically reflects the volume of the
ear canal and middle-­ear space, representing a perforation (or patent
tympanostomy tube) in the TM. In a child with a tympanostomy tube
present, a flat tympanogram with a volume <1 mL would suggest a
plugged or nonfunctioning tube and middle-­ear fluid, whereas a flat
tympanogram with a volume >1 mL would suggest a patent tympanostomy tube.
Although tympanometry is quite sensitive in detecting MEE, it can
be limited by patient cooperation, the skill of the individual administering the test, and the age of the child, with less reliable results in very
young children. Use of tympanometry may be helpful in office screening, may supplement the examination of difficult-­to-­examine patients,
and may help to identify patients who require further attention because
their tympanograms are abnormal. Tympanometry also may be used
to help confirm, refine, or clarify questionable otoscopic findings; to
objectify the follow-­up evaluation of patients with known middle-­ear
disease; and to validate otoscopic diagnoses of MEE. Even though tympanometry can predict the probability of MEE, it cannot distinguish
the effusion of OME from that of AOM.

PREVENTION

General measures to prevent OM that have been supported by numerous investigations include avoiding exposure to individuals with
respiratory infection, appropriate vaccination strategies against pneumococci and influenzae, avoiding environmental tobacco smoke, and
breast milk feeding.

IMMUNOPROPHYLAXIS AND VACCINATION
STATUS

Heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7) reduced the
overall number of episodes of AOM by only 6–8% but with a 57%
reduction in serotype-­specific episodes. Reductions of 9–23% are seen
in children with histories of frequent episodes, and a 20% reduction is
seen in the number of children undergoing tympanostomy tube insertion. The 13-­valent pneumococcal polysaccharide-­protein conjugate
vaccine (PCV13) contains the seven serotypes included in PCV7 (serotypes 4, 6B, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F, and 23F) and six additional serotypes
(serotypes 1, 3, 5, 6A, 7F, and 19A). Early data indicate a significant
reduction in the number of invasive pneumococcal mastoiditis cases
since the introduction of PCV13. With the widespread use of PCV13,

C

Fig. 680.5 Tympanograms obtained with a Grason-­Stadler GSI 33 Middle Ear Analyzer, exhibiting (A) high admittance, steep gradient (i.e.,
sharp-­angled peak), and middle-­ear air pressure approximating atmospheric pressure (0 decaPascals [daPa]); (B) low admittance and indeterminate
middle-­ear air pressure; and (C) somewhat low admittance, gradual gradient, and markedly negative middle-­ear air pressure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4008 Part XXVIII u The Ear
continued surveillance will be necessary to detect other emerging serotypes, which are also demonstrating increasing resistance. Although
the influenza vaccine also provides a measure of protection against
OM, the relatively limited time during which individuals and even
communities are exposed to influenza viruses limits the vaccine’s effectiveness in broadly reducing the incidence of OM. Limitation of OM
disease is only a portion of the benefit realized from the vaccinations
for pneumococci and influenza viruses.

TREATMENT
Management of Acute Otitis Media

AOM can be very painful. Whether or not antibiotics are used for
treatment, pain should be assessed and, if present, treated (Table
680.1). Individual episodes of AOM have traditionally been treated
with antimicrobial drugs, and a sharp decline in complications from
AOM during the last half-­century seems, at least in part, attributable
to the widespread routine use of antimicrobials. However, concerns
about increasing bacterial resistance have prompted consideration for
withholding antimicrobial treatment in certain, well-­defined clinical
situations (Table 680.2). Although viral and bacterial pathogens have
been cultured from middle-­ear fluid obtained by tympanocentesis,
two factors may argue in favor of prescribing antimicrobial therapy for
children who have AOM. First, symptomatic improvement and resolution of infection may occur more promptly and more consistently with
antimicrobial treatment than without, even though most untreated
cases eventually resolve. Second, prompt and adequate antimicrobial
treatment may prevent the development of suppurative complications. Whereas data from the Netherlands in the 1990s suggested an

Table 680.1  Therapy for Otalgia in Acute Otitis Media
APPROACH

RECOMMENDATIONS

Acetaminophen, ibuprofen

Preferred therapy

Benzocaine, antipyrine (topical)

Brief, benefit over
acetaminophen in patients
older than 5 yr

Topical antibiotics
(fluoroquinolones) with or
without steroids for chronic
suppurative otitis (perforated
tympanic membrane)

Preferred treatment with ear
canal cleaning; must culture

Homeopathic agents

Not recommended

Narcotic analgesia with codeine
or analogs

Not recommended

Tympanostomy/myringotomy

Not recommended for initial
approach; an option for
otitis media unresponsive to
antibiotic therapy

increased incidence of acute mastoiditis with watchful waiting as the
initial approach to treatment of AOM, other studies from several countries have contradicted these findings, demonstrating no increased
incidence in acute mastoiditis with changes in recommendations for
more conservative antimicrobial prescribing practices.
Given that most episodes of OM will spontaneously resolve, consensus guidelines have been published to assist clinicians who wish to
consider a period of “watchful waiting” or observation before treating
AOM with antibiotics (see Table 680.2 and Table 680.3; Fig. 680.6). The
most important aspect of these guidelines is that close follow-­up of the
patient must be ensured to assess for lack of spontaneous resolution or
worsening of symptoms and that patients should be provided with adequate analgesic medications (acetaminophen, ibuprofen) during the
period of observation. When pursuing the practice of watchful waiting in patients with AOM, the certainty of the diagnosis, the patient’s
age, and the severity of the disease should be considered. For patients
<2 years of age, it is recommended to treat all confirmed diagnoses of
AOM. In patients, <6 months of age, even presumed episodes of AOM
should be treated because of the increased potential of significant morbidity from infectious complications. In children between 6 and 24
months of age who have a questionable diagnosis of OM but severe
disease, defined as temperature of >39°C (102°F), significant otalgia,
or toxic appearance, antibiotic therapy is also recommended. Children in this age-­group with a questionable diagnosis and nonsevere
disease can be observed for a period of 2-­3 days with close follow-­up.
In children older than 2 years of age, observation might be considered
in all episodes of nonsevere OM or episodes of questionable diagnosis,
whereas antibiotic therapy is reserved for confirmed, severe episodes
of AOM. Information from Finland suggests that the “watchful waiting” or delayed treatment approach does not worsen the recovery from
AOM or increase the complication rates.
Accurate diagnosis is the most crucial aspect of the treatment of
OM. In studies using stringent criteria for diagnosis of AOM, the benefit of antimicrobial treatment is enhanced. In addition, subpopulations
of patients clearly receive more benefit from oral antimicrobial therapy
than others. Younger children, children with otorrhea, and children with
bilateral AOM have a significantly enhanced benefit from antimicrobial
therapy in comparison with older children, children without otorrhea, or
children with unilateral AOM.

Bacterial Resistance

Persons at greatest risk of harboring resistant bacteria are those who
are younger than 2 years of age; who are in regular contact with large
groups of other children, especially in daycare settings; or who recently
have received antimicrobial treatment. The development of resistant
bacterial strains and their rapid spread have been fostered and facilitated by selective pressure resulting from extensive use of antimicrobial drugs, the most common target of which in children is OM. Many
strains of each of the pathogenic bacteria that commonly cause AOM
are resistant to commonly used antimicrobial drugs.
Although antimicrobial resistance rates vary between countries, in the
United States approximately 40% of strains of nontypeable H. influenzae

Table 680.2  Recommendations for Initial Management for Uncomplicated Acute Otitis Media*
AGE

OTORRHEA WITH AOM*

UNILATERAL OR BILATERAL
AOM* WITH SEVERE SYMPTOMS†

BILATERAL AOM*
WITHOUT OTORRHEA

UNILATERAL AOM*
WITHOUT OTORRHEA

6 mo to 2 yr

Antibiotic therapy

Antibiotic therapy

Antibiotic therapy

Antibiotic therapy or
additional observation

≥2 yr

Antibiotic therapy

Antibiotic therapy

Antibiotic therapy or
additional observation

Antibiotic therapy or
additional observation‡

*Applies only to children with well-­documented AOM with high certainty of diagnosis.
†A toxic-­appearing child, persistent otalgia more than 48 hours, temperature ≥39°C (102.2°F) in the past 48 hours, or if there is uncertain access to follow-­up after the visit.
‡This plan of initial management provides an opportunity for shared decision-­making with the child’s family for those categories appropriate for additional observation. If observation
is offered, a mechanism must be in place to ensure follow-­up and begin antibiotics if the child worsens or fails to improve within 48-­72 hr of AOM onset.
NOTE: For infants younger than age 6 mo, a suspicion of AOM should result in antibiotic therapy.
AOM, Acute otitis media.
From Lieberthal AS, Carroll AE, Chonmaitree T, et al. The diagnosis and management of acute otitis media. Pediatrics. 2013;131:e964–e999, Table 4.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 680 u Otitis Media

4009

Table 680.3  Suggested Antibiotics for Treatment of Otitis Media and for Patients Who Have Failed First-­Line Antibiotic
Treatment
INITIAL IMMEDIATE OR DELAYED ANTIBIOTIC TREATMENT

ANTIBIOTIC TREATMENT AFTER 48-­72 HR OF
FAILURE OF INITIAL ANTIBIOTIC TREATMENT

ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT (IF PENICILLIN
ALLERGY OR SUSPICION OF β-­LACTAMASE–
PRODUCING ORGANISMS)

RECOMMENDED FIRST-­LINE
TREATMENT

RECOMMENDED
TREATMENT

Amoxicillin (pathogens include
Pneumococcus, H. influenzae
non–type B, Moraxella)

Cefdinir

Amoxicillin-­clavulanate

or

or

or

Amoxicillin-­clavulanate
Ceftriaxone

Cefpodoxime
Ceftriaxone
Levofloxacin (type I hypersensitivity to penicillin)
Clindamycin + third generation cephalosporin
(non–type I hypersensitivity to penicillin)

Ceftriaxone

ALTERNATIVE
TREATMENT
Ceftriaxone

Tympanocentesis*

ANTIBIOTIC DOSAGE
• Amoxicillin 80-90 mg/kg/day bid for 10 days**
• Amoxicillin-­clavulanate (ratio 14:1) 80-90 mg/kg/day of amoxicillin component bid for 10 days**
• Ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg/day daily IM or IV for 1-­3 days
• Cefdinir 14 mg/kg/day daily for 10 days**
• Cefpodoxime 10 mg/kg/day bid for 10 days**
• Levofloxacin 20 mg/kg/day bid if ≤5 yr for 10 days; 10 mg/kg/day bid if >5 yr for 10 days
*Tympanocentesis for those who fail second-­line therapy.
**Durations of antibiotic therapy may vary based on symptom severity and patient age. For patients 2-5 yr old with mild or moderate disease severity, a 7-day course may be
appropriate. For patients 6 yr and older, a 5- to 7-day course may be adequate for mild to moderate symptoms.
IM, Intramuscular; IV intravenous; bid, twice daily.

Initial management of normal child with uncomplicated AOM from 2 mo to 12 yr

Age

<6 mo

6 mo–2 yr

>2 yr
Is there severe disease?
1. Moderate or severe otalgia
2. Fever ≥39° C

Yes

No

No

Yes

Certain diagnosis?
1. Acute onset signs/symptoms
2. Signs/symptoms ME inflammation
3. Presence of MEE
4. Bilateral to line 3

Yes

Amoxicillin 80–90 mg/kg/day
in two divided doses. If
received antibiotics in last
30 days start with second-line
therapy e.g., amoxicillin
80-90 mg/kg/day + clavulanic
acid 6.4 mg/kg/day in two
divided doses, cefuroxime
(30 mg/kg/day in 2 divided
doses), ceftriaxone (50 mg IM
or IV per day for 1 or 3 days)

Amoxicillin 80–90
mg/kg/day alone
or with clavulanic
acid 6.4 mg/kg/day
in 2 divided doses

No

Yes or No

Observation with follow-up in 48–72 hr
Caregiver must agree, be able
to return with child if condition worsens.
System in place to communicate
with clinician for re-evaluation and
get medication if needed

Amoxicillin 80–90
mg/kg/day alone
or with clavulanic
acid 6.4 mg/kg/day
in 2 divided doses

Fig. 680.6 Algorithm for management of acute otitis media. (From Mazer BD: Otitis media. In: Leung DYM, Szefler SJ, Bonilla FA, et al., eds.
Pediatric Allergy: Principles and Practices, 3 ed, Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016: Fig. 25-­3.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4010 Part XXVIII u The Ear
and almost all strains of M. catarrhalis are resistant to aminopenicillins
(e.g., ampicillin and amoxicillin). In most cases the resistance is attributable to production of β-­lactamase and can be overcome by combining
amoxicillin with a β-­lactamase inhibitor (clavulanate) or by using a β-­
lactamase–stable antibiotic. Occasional strains of nontypeable H. influenzae that do not produce β-­lactamase are resistant to aminopenicillins
and other β-­lactam antibiotics by virtue of alterations in their penicillin-­
binding proteins. It is worth noting that bacterial resistance rates in
Northern European countries where antibiotic use is not routine are lower
(β-­lactamase resistance in 6–10% of isolates) than in the United States.
In the United States, approximately 50% of strains of S. pneumoniae are penicillin-­nonsusceptible, divided approximately equally
between penicillin-­intermediate and, even more difficult to treat,
penicillin-­resistant strains. A much higher incidence of resistance
is seen in children attending daycare. Resistance by S. pneumoniae
to the penicillins and other β-­lactam antibiotics is mediated not by
β-­lactamase production but by alterations in penicillin-­binding proteins. This mechanism of resistance can be overcome if higher concentrations of β-­lactam antibiotics at the site of infection can be achieved
for a sufficient time interval. Many penicillin-­resistant strains of S.
pneumoniae are also resistant to other antimicrobial drugs, including sulfonamides, macrolides, and cephalosporins. In general, as
penicillin resistance increases, so also does resistance to other antimicrobial classes. Resistance to macrolides, including azithromycin
and clarithromycin, by S. pneumoniae has increased, rendering these
antimicrobials far less effective in treating AOM. One mechanism
of resistance to macrolides also results in resistance to clindamycin,
which otherwise is effective against resistant strains of S. pneumoniae.
Unlike resistance to β-­lactam antibiotics, macrolide resistance cannot
be overcome by increasing the dose.

First-­Line Antimicrobial Treatment

Amoxicillin remains the drug of choice for uncomplicated AOM under
many circumstances because of its excellent safety record, relative efficacy, palatability, and low cost. Amoxicillin is the most efficacious of
available oral antimicrobial drugs against both penicillin-­susceptible
and penicillin-­
nonsusceptible strains of S. pneumoniae. Increasing the dose from the traditional 40-­45 mg/kg/day to 80-­90 mg/kg/
day will generally provide efficacy against penicillin-­intermediate and
some penicillin-­resistant strains. This higher dose should be used particularly in children younger than 2 years old, in children who have
recently received treatment with β-­
lactam drugs, and in children
who are exposed to large numbers of other children because of their
increased likelihood of an infection with a nonsusceptible strain of S.
pneumoniae. A limitation of amoxicillin is that it may be inactivated
by the β-­lactamases produced by many strains of nontypeable H. influenzae and most strains of M. catarrhalis. However, episodes of AOM
caused by these two pathogens often resolve spontaneously.
Allergies to penicillin antibiotics should be categorized into type I
hypersensitivity, consisting of urticaria or anaphylaxis, and those that
fall short of type I reactions, such as rash formation. For children with
a non–type I reaction in which cross reactivity with cephalosporins is
less of a concern, first-­line therapy with cefdinir would be an appropriate choice. In children with a type I reaction or known sensitivity
to cephalosporin antibiotics, there are far fewer choices. Resistance to
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole by many strains of both nontypeable
H. influenzae and S. pneumoniae and a reported high clinical failure
rate in children with AOM treated initially with this antimicrobial
argue against its use. Similarly, increasing rates of macrolide resistance
argue against the efficacy of azithromycin. Because of concerns for
arthropathy and damage to weight-­bearing bones in animal models,
fluoroquinolone use in children has been limited; fluoroquinolone use
is recommended in certain clinical situations and/or when alternative
therapies are deemed suboptimal. Early alternative management in
allergic patients with tympanostomy tubes can allow for lessening of the
severity of their disease and the use of topical antimicrobials.

Duration of Treatment

The duration of treatment of AOM has historically been set at 10 days,
and most efficacy studies examining antimicrobial treatment in AOM

have used this duration as a benchmark. Studies comparing shorter
with longer durations of antimicrobial treatment have reported higher
treatment failure rates in younger children, particularly those younger
than 2 years old. Antibiotic courses shorter than 10 days, more severe
disease, exposure to larger groups of other children, such as in daycare
settings, and in children with a history of OME are also associated with
higher treatment failure rates. The clinical practice guidelines published in 2013 by the American Academy of Pediatrics suggest shorter
durations of antibiotic therapy may be adequate for treatment of AOM
in children older than 2 years. However, compelling evidence substantiating the efficacy of shorter antibiotic courses to treat AOM in older
children is limited.
Most patients improve within 72 hours; however, patients should not
stop therapy. If there are persistent symptoms after 72 hours of therapy,
the child should be reexamined for persistent OM or a complication
such as mastoiditis (see Chapter 681).

Follow-­Up

The principal goals of follow-­up are to assess the outcome of treatment and to differentiate between inadequate response to treatment
and early recurrence. The appropriate interval for follow-­up should
be individualized. Follow-­up within days is advisable in the young
infant with a severe episode or in a child of any age with continuing
pain. Follow-­up within 2 weeks is appropriate for the infant or young
child who has been having frequent recurrences. At that point, the
TM is not likely to have returned to normal, but substantial improvement in its appearance should be evident. In the child with only a
sporadic episode of AOM and prompt symptomatic improvement,
follow-­up 1 month after initial examination is early enough, or in
older children, no follow-­up may be necessary. The continuing presence of MEE alone after an episode of AOM is not an indication for
additional or second-­line antimicrobial treatment. However, persisting MEE does warrant additional follow-­up to ensure that the effusion resolves and does not lead to persisting hearing loss or other
complications.

Unsatisfactory Response to First-­Line Treatment

AOM is essentially a closed-­
space infection, and its resolution
depends both on eradication of the offending organism and restoration of middle-­ear ventilation. Factors contributing to unsatisfactory
response to first-­line treatment, in addition to inadequate antimicrobial efficacy, include poor compliance with treatment regimens,
concurrent or intercurrent viral infection, persistent eustachian tube
dysfunction and middle-­ear under-­aeration, reinfection from other
sites or from incompletely eradicated middle-­
ear pathogens, and
immature or impaired host defenses. The identification of biofilm formation in the middle ear of children with chronic OM also indicates
that, in some children, eradication with standard antimicrobial therapy is likely to be unsuccessful. Despite these many potential factors,
switching to an alternative or second-­line drug is reasonable when
there has been inadequate improvement in symptoms or in middle-­
ear status as reflected in the appearance of the TM or when the persistence of purulent nasal discharge suggests that the antimicrobial drug
being used has less-­than-­optimal efficacy. Second-­line drugs may also
appropriately be used when AOM develops in a child already receiving antimicrobial therapy, or in an immunocompromised child, or in
a child with severe symptoms whose previous experience with OM has
been problematic.

Second-­Line Treatment

When treatment of AOM with a first-­line antimicrobial drug has
proven inadequate, numerous second-­line alternatives are available
(see Table 680.3). Drugs chosen for second-­line treatment should be
effective against β-­
lactamase–producing strains of nontypeable H.
influenzae and M. catarrhalis and against susceptible and most nonsusceptible strains of S. pneumoniae. Because high-­dose amoxicillin
(80-­90 mg/kg/day) is effective against most strains of S. pneumoniae
and because the addition of clavulanate extends the effective antibacterial spectrum of amoxicillin to include β-­lactamase–producing bacteria, high-­dose amoxicillin-­clavulanate is particularly well-­suited as a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 680 u Otitis Media
second-­line drug for treating AOM. The 14:1 amoxicillin-­clavulanate
formulation contains twice as much amoxicillin as the previously
available 7:1 formulation. Diarrhea, especially in infants and young
children, is a common adverse effect and usually is not severe enough
to require cessation of treatment. Cefdinir has demonstrated efficacy
in treatment, is generally well tolerated with respect to taste, and can
be given as a once-­daily regimen. The ability to also use cefdinir in
most children with mild type I hypersensitivity reactions has further
added to its favorable selection as a second-­line agent. Intramuscular
ceftriaxone has important limitations for use in young children; treatment entails both the pain of intramuscular injection and substantial
cost, and the injection may need to be repeated once or twice at 2-­day
intervals to achieve the desired degree of effectiveness. Nonetheless,
use of ceftriaxone is appropriate in severe cases of AOM when oral
treatment is not feasible, in highly selected cases after treatment failure
using orally administered second-­line antimicrobials, or when highly
resistant S. pneumoniae is found in aspirates obtained from diagnostic
tympanocentesis.
Clarithromycin and azithromycin have only limited activity against
nonsusceptible strains of S. pneumoniae and against β-­lactamase–producing strains of nontypeable H. influenzae. Macrolide use also appears
to be a major factor in causing increases in rates of resistance to macrolides by group A streptococcus and S. pneumoniae. Clindamycin is
active against most strains of S. pneumoniae, including resistant strains,
but is not active against nontypeable H. influenzae or M. catarrhalis.
Other antimicrobial agents that have been traditionally used in the
management of AOM have such significant lack of effectiveness against
resistant organisms that use seldom outweighs the potential side
effects or complications. This includes cefaclor, loracarbef, cefixime,
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, and erythromycin-­sulfisoxazole. Cefpodoxime has demonstrated reasonable effectiveness in some investigations but is generally poorly tolerated because of its taste.

ANTIMICROBIAL PROPHYLAXIS

In children who have developed frequent episodes of AOM, antimicrobial prophylaxis with subtherapeutic doses of an aminopenicillin or
a sulfonamide has been used in the past to provide protection against
recurrences of AOM (although not of OME). However, because of the
increased incidence of resistant organisms and the contribution of
antimicrobial usage to bacterial resistance, the risks of sustained antimicrobial prophylaxis clearly outweigh potential benefits.

Myringotomy and Tympanocentesis

Myringotomy is a long-­standing treatment for AOM but is not commonly needed in children receiving antimicrobials. Indications
for myringotomy in children with AOM include severe, refractory
pain; hyperpyrexia; complications of AOM such as facial paralysis,
mastoiditis, labyrinthitis, or central nervous system infection; and
immunologic compromise from any source. Myringotomy should
be considered as third-­line therapy in patients who have failed two
courses of antibiotics for an episode of AOM. In children with AOM
in whom clinical response to vigorous, second-­line treatment has been
unsatisfactory, either diagnostic tympanocentesis or myringotomy is
indicated to enable identification of the offending organism and its
sensitivity profile. Either procedure may be helpful in effecting relief
of pain. Tympanocentesis with culture of the middle-­ear aspirate may
also be indicated as part of the sepsis workup in very young infants
with AOM who show systemic signs of illness such as fever, vomiting,
or lethargy and whose illness accordingly cannot be presumed to be
limited to infection of the middle ear. Performing tympanocentesis can
be facilitated by use of a specially designed tympanocentesis aspirator. Studies reporting the use of strict, individualized criteria for the
diagnosis of AOM that include office tympanocentesis with bacterial
culture followed by culture-­guided antimicrobial therapy demonstrate
significant reduction in the frequency of recurrent AOM episodes
and tympanostomy tube surgery. However, many primary care physicians do not feel comfortable performing this procedure, there is the
potential for complications, and parents may view this procedure as

4011

traumatic. Often, children requiring this intervention have a strong
enough history of recurrent OM to warrant the consideration of tympanostomy tube placement, so that the procedure can be performed
under general anesthesia.

Early Recurrence After Treatment

Recurrence of AOM after apparent resolution may be caused by either
incomplete eradication of infection in the middle ear or upper respiratory tract reinfection by the same or a different bacteria or bacterial
strain. Recent antibiotic therapy predisposes patients to an increased
incidence of resistant organisms, which should also be considered in
choosing therapy, and, generally, initiating therapy with a second-­line
agent is advisable (see Table 680.3).

Myringotomy and Insertion of Tympanostomy Tubes

When AOM is recurrent, despite appropriate medical therapy, consideration of surgical management of AOM with tympanostomy tube
insertion is warranted. Although this surgical procedure may improve
the quality of life in patients with recurrent AOM, some studies have
suggested the procedure is effective at reducing the rate of AOM,
whereas others found postprocedure rates of AOM were no different
than patients managed with antibiotics. Individual patient factors,
including the risk profile, severity of AOM episodes, child’s development and age, presence of a history of adverse drug reactions, concurrent medical problems, and parental wishes, will affect the timing of a
decision to consider referral for this procedure. When a patient experiences three episodes of AOM in a 6-­month period or four episodes
in a 12-­month period with one episode in the preceding 6 months,
potential surgical management of the child’s AOM should be discussed
with the parents. Guidelines on tympanostomy tube placement indicate that if MEE is persistent in one or two ears and present at the time
of evaluation by the otolaryngologist, then myringotomy is indicated.
However, if MEE has cleared, the guidelines recommend holding off on
myringotomy and offering observation unless there are additional considerations such as difficulty with tolerating antibiotic therapy (allergic
concerns or other tolerance difficulties), severe episodes of acute OM,
or other developmental considerations. Not infrequently, one or more
of these additional considerations do affect a child’s care.

AOM-­Associated Tube Otorrhea

Although tympanostomy tubes may reduce the incidence of AOM in
some children, patients with tympanostomy tubes may still develop
AOM. One advantage of tympanostomy tubes in children with recurrent AOM is that if patients do develop an episode of AOM with a
functioning tube in place, these patients will manifest purulent drainage from the tube. By definition, children with functioning tympanostomy tubes without otorrhea do not have bacterial AOM as a cause
for a presentation of fever or behavioral changes and should not be
treated with oral antibiotics. If tympanostomy tube otorrhea develops,
ototopical treatment, and not oral antibiotics, should be considered
as first-­line therapy. With a functioning tube in place, the infection is
able to drain, there is usually negligible pain associated with the infection, and the possibility of developing a serious complication from an
episode of AOM is remote. Importantly, strict water precautions after
tympanostomy tube placement do not appear to affect the occurrence
of posttympanostomy otorrhea, and as such, water precautions are no
longer recommended in children with myringotomy tubes. However,
when otorrhea does occur, it is important to keep the ear canal dry
while ototopical treatment is administered. The current quinolone otic
drops approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use in
the middle-­ear space in children are formulated with ciprofloxacin/
dexamethasone (Ciprodex) and ofloxacin (Floxin). The topical delivery
of these otic drops allows them to use a higher antibiotic concentration than can be tolerated by administering oral antibiotics, and they
have excellent coverage of even the most resistant strains of common
middle-­ear pathogens, as well as coverage of S. aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The high rate of success of these topical preparations,
their broad coverage, the lower likelihood of their contributing to the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4012 Part XXVIII u The Ear
development of resistant organisms, the relative ease of administration, the lack of significant side effects, and the lack of ototoxicity make
them the first choice for tube otorrhea. Oral antibiotic therapy should
be reserved for cases of tube otorrhea that have other associated systemic symptoms, patients who have difficulty in tolerating the use of
topical preparations, or, possibly, patients who have failed an attempt
at topical otic drops. Despite these advantages of ototopical therapy,
survey data have indicated that, compared with otolaryngologists, primary care practitioners are less likely to prescribe ototopicals as first-­
line therapy in tympanostomy tube otorrhea.
As a result of the relative ease in obtaining fluid for culture and
the possibility of the development of fungal otitis, which has shown
an increase with the use of broad-­spectrum quinolone ototopicals,
patients who fail topical therapy should also have culture performed.
Other otic preparations are available; although these either have some
risk of ototoxicity or have not received approval for use in the middle
ear, many of these preparations were widely used before the development of the current quinolone drops and were generally considered
reasonably safe and effective. In all cases of tube otorrhea, attention to
aural toilet (e.g., cleansing the external auditory canal of secretions and
avoidance of external ear water contamination) is important. In some
cases, with very thick, tenacious discharge, topical therapy may be
inhibited due to lack of delivery of the medication to the site of infection. Suctioning and removal of the secretions, often done through
referral to an otolaryngologist, may be quite helpful. When children
with tube otorrhea fail to improve satisfactorily with conventional outpatient management, they may require tube removal, hospitalization to
receive parenteral antibiotic treatment, or both.

MANAGEMENT OF OTITIS MEDIA WITH EFFUSION

Management of OME depends on an understanding of its natural history and its possible complications and sequelae. Children with OME
should be assessed for any baseline sensory, physical, cognitive, or
behavioral factors that may portend risk of learning problems from
MEE. Moreover, clinicians should evaluate developmentally at-­risk
children for OME at the time of diagnosis of an at-­risk condition such
as Down syndrome, autism, speech and language delay, permanent
hearing loss, craniofacial syndromes, cleft palate, blindness, or global
developmental delay and at 12-­18 months of age (if diagnosed as being
at risk before this time). However, children who do not have symptoms that could be attributed to OME, such as hearing difficulties, ear
discomfort, balance (vestibular) problems, poor school performance,
or behavioral problems, and are not at developmental risk should not
be routinely screened for OME. When MEE persists for longer than
3 months, an age-­appropriate hearing test and consideration of referral to an otolaryngologist are appropriate. In older children (generally
older than 4 years) and depending on the expertise in the primary
care office, hearing screening may be achieved in primary care. For
any child who fails a hearing screening in the primary care office,
referral to an otolaryngologist is warranted. In considering the decision to refer the patient for consultation, the clinician should attempt
to determine the impact of the OME on the child and educate the
family in this regard. Most cases of OME resolve without treatment
within 3 months. For children with OME being managed expectantly,
the guidelines for management of OME recommend examination
should be performed at 3-­to 6-­month intervals, until the effusion is
no longer present, significant hearing loss is identified, or structural
abnormalities of the eardrum or middle ear are suspected. Although
hearing loss may be of primary concern, OME causes several other
difficulties in children that should also be considered. These include
predisposition to recurring AOM, pain, disturbance of balance, and
tinnitus. In addition, long-­term sequelae that have been demonstrated
to be associated with OME include pathologic middle-­ear changes,
atelectasis of the TM and retraction pocket formation, adhesive OM,
cholesteatoma formation and ossicular discontinuity, and conductive and sensorineural hearing loss. Long-­term adverse effects on
speech, language, cognitive, and psychosocial development have also
been demonstrated. This impact is related to the duration of effusion
present, whether the effusion is unilateral or bilateral, the degree of

underlying hearing loss, and other developmental and social factors
affecting the child. In considering the impact of OME on development, it is especially important to take into consideration the overall
presentation of the child. Although it is unlikely that OME causing
unilateral hearing loss in the mild range will have long-­term negative
effects on an otherwise healthy and developmentally normal child,
even a mild hearing loss in a child with other developmental or speech
delays certainly has the potential to compound this child’s difficulties
(Table 680.4). At a minimum, children with OME persisting longer
than 3 months deserve close monitoring of their hearing levels with
skilled audiologic evaluation, frequent assessment of developmental
milestones, including speech and language assessment, and attention
paid to their rate of recurrent AOM.

Variables Influencing Otitis Media with Effusion
Management Decisions

Patient-­related variables that affect decisions on how to manage OME
include the child’s age, the frequency and severity of previous episodes
of AOM and interval since the last episode, the child’s current speech
and language development, presence of a history of adverse drug reactions, concurrent medical problems, or risk factors such as daycare
attendance, and parental wishes. In considering surgical management
of OME with tympanostomy tubes, particular benefit is seen in patients
with persisting OME punctuated by episodes of AOM, because the
tubes may provide resolution of both conditions. Persistence of MEE
after recurrent AOM (three episodes in 6 months or four in 12 months)
may be treated with tympanostomy tube placement. Disease-­related
variables that most otolaryngologists consider in the treatment of
OME include whether the effusion is unilateral or bilateral, the apparent quantity of effusion, the duration if known, the degree of hearing
impairment, the presence or absence of other possibly related symptoms (such as tinnitus, vertigo, or disturbance of balance), and the
presence or absence of mucopurulent or purulent rhinorrhea, which, if
sustained for longer than 2 weeks, would suggest that concurrent nasopharyngeal or paranasal sinus infection is contributing to continuing
compromise of middle-­ear ventilation.

Medical Treatment

Antimicrobials have demonstrated limited efficacy in resolving OME,
presumably because they help to eradicate nasopharyngeal infection,
unapparent middle-­ear infection, or both. The most significant effects
of antibiotics for OME have been shown with treatment durations of
4 weeks and 3 months. However, with the risk of bacterial antimicrobial resistance, the small potential benefit of antimicrobial therapy is
outweighed by the negative potential of treatment and is not recommended. Instead, antibiotic treatment should be limited to cases in
which there is evidence of associated bacterial upper respiratory tract
infection or untreated middle-­ear infection. For this purpose, the most
broadly effective drug available should be used as recommended for
AOM.
Table 680.4  Sensory, Physical, Cognitive, or Behavioral
Factors that Place Children Who Have Otitis
Media with Effusion at an Increased Risk
for Developmental Difficulties (Delay or
Disorder)
Permanent hearing loss independent of otitis media with effusion
Suspected or diagnosed speech and language delay or disorder
Autism spectrum disorder and other pervasive developmental
disorders
Syndromes (e.g., Down) or craniofacial disorders that include
cognitive, speech, and language delays
Blindness or uncorrectable visual impairment
Cleft palate with or without associated syndrome
Developmental delay
From Rosenfeld RM, Shin JJ, Schwartz SJ, et al. American Academy of Otolaryngology-­
Head and Neck Surgery Foundation. Clinical practice guideline. Otitis media with
effusion (update). Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016;154(2):201–214, Table 3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 680 u Otitis Media
The efficacy of corticosteroids in the treatment of OME has been
demonstrated to be short term. Therefore the risk-­to-­benefit ratio for
steroids is such that they are no longer recommended for treatment
of OME. Antihistamine-­decongestant combinations are not effective
in treating children with OME and are not indicated. Antihistamines
alone, decongestants alone, and mucolytic agents are also ineffective
and not recommended. The risk profile for decongestants and antihistamines in children are such that, unless there is some other medical
condition such as documented allergic disease for antihistamine therapy, these medications are contraindicated for OME treatment. Randomized controlled trials do not support the use of topical intranasal
steroid sprays to treat the manifestations of eustachian tube dysfunction, and their use for OME resolution is also not recommended. Inflation of the eustachian tube by the Valsalva maneuver or other means
has not demonstrated long-­term efficacy. Other “alternative” therapies,
including spinal manipulation, currently have no demonstrated efficacy or role in children with OME.

Myringotomy and Insertion of Tympanostomy Tubes

When OME persists despite an ample period of watchful waiting, generally 3-­6 months or perhaps longer in children with unilateral effusion, consideration of surgical intervention with tympanostomy tubes
is appropriate. Myringotomy alone, without tympanostomy tube insertion, permits evacuation of MEE and may sometimes be effective, but
often the incision heals before the middle-­ear mucosa returns to normal, and the effusion soon reaccumulates. Inserting a tympanostomy
tube offers the likelihood that middle-­ear ventilation will be sustained
for at least as long as the tube remains in place and functional. Tympanostomy tubes have a variable duration of efficacy based on design.
Tubes that are designed for a shorter duration, 6-­12 months, have a
lesser impact on disease-­free middle-­ear spaces in children. Some
studies comparing the efficacy of tympanostomy tube types, including shorter-­acting tubes, with watchful waiting provide a less helpful
assessment of the differences between these approaches. Tubes that are
somewhat longer acting, effective for 12-­18 months, are generally more
appropriate for most children undergoing tube placement. Regardless
of type, tympanostomy tube placement nearly uniformly reverses the
conductive hearing loss associated with OME. Occasional episodes of
obstruction of the tube lumen and premature tube extrusion may limit
the effectiveness of tympanostomy tubes, and tubes can also be associated with otorrhea. However, placement of tympanostomy tubes is
generally quite effective in providing resolution of OME in children.
Tympanostomy tubes generally extrude on their own but rarely require
surgical removal after several years in place. Sequelae after tube extrusion include residual perforation of the eardrum, tympanosclerosis,
localized or diffuse atrophic scarring of the eardrum (which may predispose to the development of a retraction pocket), residual conductive
hearing loss, and cholesteatoma. The more serious of these sequelae
are quite infrequent. Recurrence of MEE after the extrusion of tubes
does develop, especially in younger children. However, most children
without underlying craniofacial abnormalities require only one set of
tympanostomy tubes. In developed countries, immunologic maturity
and other developmental changes provide improved middle-­ear health
and resolution of chronic OME by the time of tube extrusion. However,
in some populations, including Australian Aboriginal people, Indigenous Nations in the United States, and Alaskan Natives, even with
an absence of craniofacial abnormalities, there is a preponderance of
chronic OME; these patients should have increased follow-­up after tube
extrusion. Because persistent OME may clear spontaneously during the
summer months, watchful waiting through the summer season may be
advisable in children with OME who are otherwise well and without
developmental or speech concerns. In considering surgical management of OME in children, primarily in those with bilateral disease and
hearing loss, it has been demonstrated that placement of tympanostomy tubes results in a significant improvement in their quality of life.

Adenoidectomy

Adenoidectomy may reduce the risk of subsequent recurrences of both
AOM and OME in older children who have undergone tube insertion

4013

and in whom, after extrusion of tubes, OM continues to be a problem. Efficacy appears to be independent of adenoid size and probably
derives from removal of the focus of infection in the nasopharynx
as a site of biofilm formation, chronic inflammation affecting eustachian tube function, and recurrent seeding of the middle ear via the
eustachian tube. Current guidelines state that adenoidectomy should
not be performed at the time of tympanostomy tube insertion in children younger than 4 years old unless a distinct indication exists (nasal
obstruction, chronic adenoiditis). However, in children older than 4
years, one should recommend tympanostomy tubes, adenoidectomy,
or both when surgery is performed for OME.

Complications of Acute Otitis Media

Most complications of AOM consist of the spread of infection to
adjoining or nearby structures, the development of chronicity, or both.
Suppurative complications are relatively uncommon in children in
developed countries but occur not infrequently in disadvantaged children whose medical care is limited. The complications of AOM may be
classified as either intratemporal or intracranial (Table 680.5).

Intratemporal Complications

Direct but limited extension of AOM leads to complications within the
local region of the ear and temporal bone. These complications include
dermatitis, TM perforation, chronic suppurative OM (CSOM), mastoiditis, petrositis, brain abscess, hearing loss, facial nerve paralysis,
cholesteatoma formation, and labyrinthitis.

Infectious Dermatitis

This is an infection of the skin of the external auditory canal resulting from contamination by purulent discharge from the middle ear.
The skin is often erythematous, edematous, and tender. Management
consists of proper hygiene combined with systemic antimicrobials and
ototopical drops as appropriate for treating AOM and tube otorrhea.

Tympanic Membrane Perforation

Rupture of the TM can occur with episodes of either AOM or OME.
Although damage to the TM from these episodes generally heals spontaneously, chronic perforations can develop in a small number of cases
and require further surgical intervention.

Chronic Suppurative Otitis Media

CSOM consists of persistent middle-­
ear infection with discharge
through a TM perforation. The disease is initiated by an episode of
AOM with rupture of the membrane. The mastoid air cells are invariably involved. The most common etiologic organisms are P. aeruginosa
and S. aureus; however, the typical AOM bacterial pathogens may also
be the cause, especially in younger children or in the winter months.
Treatment is guided by the results of microbiologic investigation. If an
associated cholesteatoma is not present, parenteral antimicrobial treatment combined with assiduous aural cleansing is likely to be successful
in clearing the infection, but in refractory cases, tympanomastoidectomy can be required.

Mastoiditis

Mastoiditis is an important complication associated with OM (see
Chapter 681).

Facial Paralysis

As it traverses the middle ear and mastoid bone, the facial nerve may be
affected by adjacent infection. Facial paralysis occurring as a complication of AOM is uncommon and often resolves after myringotomy and
parenteral antibiotic treatment. Facial paralysis in the presence of AOM
requires urgent attention because prolonged infection can result in the
development of permanent facial paralysis, which can have a devastating effect on a child. Facial paralysis in an infant or child requires complete and unequivocal examination of the TM and middle-­ear space.
Any difficulty in examination requires urgent consultation with an otolaryngologist. Any examination that demonstrates an ear abnormality
also requires urgent referral to an otolaryngologist. If facial paralysis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4014 Part XXVIII u The Ear
Table 680.5  Manifestations of the Sequelae and Complications of Otitis Media
COMPLICATION

CLINICAL FEATURES

ACUTE
Perforation with otorrhea
Acute mastoiditis with periostitis
Acute mastoid osteitis
Petrositis
Facial nerve palsy
Labyrinthitis
Lateral (or transverse) sinus thrombosis
Meningitis
Extradural empyema
Subdural empyema
Brain abscess
Gradenigo syndrome
NONACUTE
Chronic perforation
Otitis media with effusion (OME)
Adhesive otitis
Tympanosclerosis
Chronic suppurative otitis media
Cholesteatoma
Otitic hydrocephalus

Immobile tympanic membrane secondary to visible perforation, exudate in ear canal
Tenderness and erythema over mastoid process, no destruction of bony trabeculae
Destruction of bony trabeculae; tenderness and erythema over mastoid process coupled with
outward displacement of pinna
Infection of perilabyrinthine cells; may present with otitis, paralysis of lateral rectus, and ipsilateral
orbital or facial pain (Gradenigo syndrome)
Peripheral cranial nerve VII paralysis
Vertigo, fever, ear pain, nystagmus, hearing loss, tinnitus, nausea and vomiting
Headache, fever, seizures, altered states of consciousness, septic emboli
Fever, headache, nuchal rigidity, seizures, altered states of consciousness
Fever, headache, seizures, altered states of consciousness
Fever, headache, seizures, altered states of consciousness
Fever, headache, seizures, altered states of consciousness, focal neurologic examination
OM, sixth cranial nerve palsy, pain in first and second distribution of trigeminal nerve.
Immobile tympanic membrane secondary to perforation
Immobile, opaque tympanic membrane
Irreversible conductive hearing loss secondary to chronic OME
Thickened white plaques may cause conductive hearing loss
After acute otitis media with perforation, secondary infection with Staphylococcus aureus,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, or anaerobes develops, causing chronic otorrhea
White, pearl-­like destructive tumor with otorrhea arising near or within tympanic membrane; may be
secondary to chronic negative middle ear pressure
Increased intracranial pressure secondary to AOM; signs and symptoms include severe headaches,
blurred vision, nausea, vomiting, papilledema, diplopia (abducens paralysis)

AOM, Acute otitis media.
From Kliegman RM, Bordini BJ, Toth H, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Table 5.6.

develops in a child with mastoid osteitis or with CSOM, mastoidectomy should be undertaken urgently.

Cholesteatoma

Cholesteatoma is a cystlike growth originating in the middle ear, lined
by keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium and containing desquamated epithelium and/or keratin (see Chapter 678; Fig. 680.7).
Acquired cholesteatoma develops most often as a complication of
long-­standing chronic OM. The condition also may develop from a deep
retraction pocket of the TM or as a consequence of epithelial implantation in the middle-­ear cavity from traumatic perforation of the TM
or insertion of a tympanostomy tube. Cholesteatomas tend to expand
progressively, causing bony resorption, often extend into the mastoid
cavity, and may extend intracranially with potentially life-­threatening
consequences. Acquired cholesteatoma commonly presents as a chronically draining ear in a patient with a history of previous ear disease.
Cholesteatoma should be suspected if otoscopy demonstrates an area
of TM retraction or perforation with white, caseous debris persistently
overlying this area. Along with otorrhea from this area, granulation
tissue or polyp formation identified in conjunction with this history
and presentation should prompt suspicion of cholesteatoma. The most
common location for cholesteatoma development is in the superior
portion of the TM (pars flaccida). Most patients also present with conductive hearing loss on audiologic evaluation. When cholesteatoma is
suspected, otolaryngology consultation should be sought immediately.
Delay in recognition and treatment can have significant long-­term
consequences, including the need for more extensive surgical treatment, permanent hearing loss, facial nerve injury, labyrinthine damage
with loss of balance function, and intracranial extension. The required
treatment for cholesteatoma is tympanomastoid surgery.
Congenital cholesteatoma is an uncommon condition generally
identified in younger patients (Fig. 680.8). The etiology of congenital
cholesteatoma is thought to be a result of epithelial implantation in the
middle-­ear space during otologic development in utero. Congenital

cholesteatoma most commonly presents in the anterior-­superior quadrant of the TM but can be found elsewhere. Congenital cholesteatoma
appears as a discrete, white opacity in the middle-­ear space on otoscopy. Unlike patients with acquired cholesteatoma, there is generally
not a strong history of OM or chronic ear disease, history of otorrhea,
or changes in the TM anatomy such as perforation or retraction. Similar to acquired cholesteatoma, many patients do have some degree of
abnormal findings on audiologic evaluation, unless identified very
early. Congenital cholesteatoma also requires surgical resection.

Labyrinthitis

Labyrinthitis occurs uncommonly as a result of the spread of infection from the middle ear and/or mastoid to the inner ear (see Chapter
682). Cholesteatoma or CSOM is the usual source. Symptoms and signs
include vertigo, tinnitus, nausea, vomiting, hearing loss, nystagmus,
and clumsiness. Treatment is directed at the underlying condition and
must be undertaken promptly to preserve inner-­ear function and prevent the spread of infection.

INTRACRANIAL COMPLICATIONS

Meningitis, epidural abscess, subdural abscess, focal encephalitis, brain
abscess (see Chapters 643, 644, and 681), transverse (lateral) and sigmoid sinus thrombosis and otitic hydrocephalus each may develop as
a complication of acute or chronic middle-­ear or mastoid infection
through direct extension, hematogenous spread, or thrombophlebitis.
Bony destruction adjacent to the dura is often involved, and a cholesteatoma may be present. In a child with middle-­ear or mastoid infection,
the presence of any systemic symptom, such as high spiking fevers,
headache, or lethargy of extreme degree or a finding of meningismus
or of any abnormal central nervous system sign on physical examination should prompt suspicion of an intracranial complication.
When an intracranial complication is suspected, lumbar puncture
should be performed only after imaging studies establish that there is no
evidence of mass effect or hydrocephalus. In addition to examination

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 680 u Otitis Media

4015

Fig. 680.7 A, Primary acquired

A

cholesteatoma in the region of
the pars flaccida with scutum erosion. B, Cholesteatoma developing at the margin of perforation
(secondary acquired cholesteatoma) with secondary infection.
(From Chole RA, Sudhoff HH.
Chronic otitis media, mastoiditis, and petrositis. In: Flint PW,
Haughey BH, Lund VJ, et al, eds.
Cummings
Otolaryngology—
Head and Neck Surgery, 5th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010: Figs.
139-­4, 139-­5.)

B

Fig. 680.8 Congenital chronic otitis media with cholesteatoma. (From

Chole RA, Sudhoff HH. Chronic otitis media, mastoiditis, and petrositis.
In: Flint PW, Haughey BH, Lund VJ, et al., eds. Cummings Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2010: Fig.
139-­6.)

of the cerebrospinal fluid, culture of middle-­ear exudate obtained via
tympanocentesis may identify the causative organism, thereby helping
to guide the choice of antimicrobial medications. Myringotomy should
be performed to permit middle-­ear drainage. Concurrent tympanostomy tube placement is preferable to allow for continued decompression of the “infection under pressure” that is the causative event leading
to intracranial spread of the infection.
Treatment of intracranial complications of OM requires urgent, otolaryngologic, and often, neurosurgical consultation, intravenous antibiotic therapy, drainage of mastoiditis, and tympanomastoidectomy
in patients with coalescent mastoiditis. Many brain abscesses may be
managed without drainage but require long-­
term broad-­
spectrum
antibiotic therapy (see Chapter 644).
Lateral (transverse) or sigmoid sinus thrombosis may be complicated by dissemination of infected thrombi with resultant development of septic infarcts in various organs. Diagnosis is confirmed by
MRI. Mastoidectomy may be required even in the absence of osteitis or coalescent mastoiditis, especially in the case of propagation or

embolization of infected thrombi. In the absence of coalescent mastoiditis, sinus thrombosis can often be treated with tympanostomy tube
placement, anticoagulation, and intravenous antibiotics. Otolaryngology consultation should be obtained before initiating this anticoagulation to coordinate the possible need for surgical intervention before
anticoagulation.
Otitic hydrocephalus, a form of idiopathic intracranial hypertension, or pseudotumor cerebri (see Chapter 645), is an uncommon
condition that consists of increased intracranial pressure without
dilation of the cerebral ventricles occurring in association with acute
or chronic OM or mastoiditis. The condition is commonly also associated with lateral sinus thrombosis, and the pathophysiology is
thought to involve obstruction by thrombus of intracranial venous
drainage into the neck, producing a rise in cerebral venous pressure
and a consequent increase in cerebrospinal fluid pressure. Symptoms
are those of increased intracranial pressure. Signs may include, in
addition to evidence of OM, paralysis of one or both lateral rectus
muscles and papilledema with or without visual acuity loss. MRI can
confirm the diagnosis. Treatment measures include the use of antimicrobials and medications such as acetazolamide or furosemide to
reduce intracranial pressure, mastoidectomy, repeated lumbar puncture, lumboperitoneal shunt, and ventriculoperitoneal shunt. If left
untreated, otitic hydrocephalus may result in loss of vision secondary
to optic atrophy.

Physical Sequelae

The physical sequelae of OM consist of structural middle-­ear abnormalities resulting from long-­standing middle-­ear inflammation. In
most instances, these sequelae are consequences of severe and/or
chronic infection, but some may also result from the noninfective
inflammation of long-­standing OME. The various sequelae may occur
singly or interrelatedly in various combinations.
Tympanosclerosis consists of whitish plaques in the TM and nodular deposits in the submucosal layers of the middle ear. The changes
involve hyalinization with deposition of calcium and phosphate crystals. Uncommonly, there may be associated conductive hearing loss. In
developed countries, probably the most common cause of tympanosclerosis is tympanostomy tube insertion.
Atelectasis of the TM is a descriptive term applied to either severe
retraction of the TM caused by high negative middle-­ear pressure
or loss of stiffness and medial prolapse of the membrane from long-­
standing retraction or severe or chronic inflammation. A retraction
pocket is a localized area of atelectasis. Atelectasis is often transient
and usually unaccompanied by symptoms, but a deep retraction pocket
may lead to erosion of the ossicles and adhesive otitis and may serve
as the nidus of a cholesteatoma. For a deep retraction pocket, and for
the unusual instance in which atelectasis is accompanied by symptoms

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4016 Part XXVIII u The Ear
such as otalgia, tinnitus, or conductive hearing loss, the required treatment is tympanostomy tube insertion and, at times, tympanoplasty.
Patients with persisting atelectasis and retraction pockets should have
referral to an otolaryngologist.
Adhesive OM consists of proliferation of fibrous tissue in the
middle-­ear mucosa, which may, in turn, result in severe TM retraction,
conductive hearing loss, impaired movement of the ossicles, ossicular
discontinuity, and cholesteatoma. The hearing loss may be amenable to
surgical correction.
Cholesterol granuloma is an uncommon condition in which the TM
may appear to be dark blue secondary to middle-­ear fluid of this color.
Cholesterol granulomas are rare, benign cysts that occur in the temporal
bone. They are expanding masses that contain fluids, lipids, and cholesterol crystals surrounded by a fibrous lining and generally require surgical removal. Tympanostomy tube placement will not provide satisfactory
relief. This lesion requires differentiation from bluish middle-­ear fluid,
which can also rarely develop in patients with the more common OME.
Chronic perforation may rarely develop after spontaneous rupture
of the TM during an episode of AOM or from acute trauma, but more
commonly results as a sequela of CSOM or as a result of failure of TM
closure after extrusion of a tympanostomy tube. Chronic perforations
are generally accompanied by conductive hearing loss. Surgical repair
of a TM perforation is recommended to restore hearing, prevent infection from water contamination in the middle-­ear space, and prevent
cholesteatoma formation. Chronic perforations are almost always amenable to surgical repair, usually after the child has been free of OM for
an extended period.
Permanent conductive hearing loss (see Chapter 677) may result
from any of the conditions just described. Rarely, permanent sensorineural hearing loss may occur in association with acute or chronic
OM, secondary to spread of infection or products of inflammation
through the round window membrane, or as a consequence of suppurative labyrinthitis.

POSSIBLE DEVELOPMENTAL SEQUELAE

Permanent hearing loss in children has a significant negative impact
on development, particularly in speech and language. The degree to
which OM affects long-­term development in children is difficult to
assess, and there have been conflicting studies examining this question. Developmental impact is most likely to be significant in children
who have greater levels of hearing loss, hearing loss that is sustained
for longer periods, or hearing loss that is bilateral and in children who
have other developmental difficulties or risk factors for developmental
delay (see Table 680.4).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 681

Acute Mastoiditis
Brittany Player
Mastoiditis, a suppurative infection of the mastoid air cell system, is the
most common infectious complication of acute otitis media (AOM),
typically affecting younger children. Coalescent mastoiditis occurs
when the suppurative infection leads to bony breakdown of the fine
bony septa separating individual mastoid air cells.

ANATOMY

The temporal bone forms a portion of the skull base and has multiple
complex anatomic functions. The mastoid process is a pyramid-­shaped
outgrowth of the temporal bone. The inferior extent is attached to the
sternocleidomastoid muscle. The mastoid process borders the middle

cranial fossa, posterior cranial fossa, and sigmoid sinus. It is composed
of a system of interlinked mucosa-­lined air cells that communicate with
the middle ear space and contains the fallopian canal, which includes
the facial nerve, the chorda tympani supplying taste to the anterior two
thirds of the tongue, and the semicircular canal system. Because the
mastoid cavity is anatomically adjacent to the meninges, brain, venous
sinuses of the brain, facial nerve, and cervical lymph nodes, mastoiditis
often accompanies or precedes intracranial complications of AOM (see
Chapter 680).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

In the preantibiotic era, acute mastoiditis was a much more common complication of AOM with high rates of intracranial infectious
complications, morbidity, and mortality. Currently, mastoiditis is a
rare complication, occurring in approximately 1-­4 cases per 100,000
population of children <2 years old and less commonly among older
children. A multicenter study with 223 consecutive cases of acute
mastoiditis reported 28% of patients were younger than 1 year old,
38% of patients were between 1 and 4 years old, 22% of patients were
between 4 and 8 years old, and 8% of patients were between 8 and
18 years old. Some studies reported decreased incidence of acute
mastoiditis after introduction of the 7-­valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV7), whereas others reported no change or nominal
increases. One study reported a sharp decrease in acute mastoiditis
beginning in 2010, which coincided with licensure and widespread
use of the 13-­
valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13).
Another study, which included data from eight hospitals, found that
the proportion of PCV13 serotypes isolated from cases of mastoiditis decreased from 50% in 2011 to 29% in 2013, with most of the
decrease attributable to decreases in serotype 19A. Changes in rates
of mastoiditis are likely related to changing incidence of AOM in
response to pneumococcal conjugate vaccines. Other factors influencing the occurrence of mastoiditis include rates of antibiotic prescriptions for AOM, access to healthcare, and rates of antimicrobial
resistance. Whereas groups in countries such as the Netherlands
and Iceland reported adherence to a watchful waiting strategy for
treatment of AOM, this resulted in slightly increased rates of acute
mastoiditis compared with countries where antibiotics are routinely
used to treat AOM. Other studies from several countries have contradicted these findings, demonstrating no increased incidence in acute
mastoiditis, with changes in recommendations for more conservative
antimicrobial prescribing practices. Despite large differences in antibiotic prescription rates in different countries, because of the overall
low incidence of acute mastoiditis, the number of children needed
to be treated with antibiotics to prevent one case of acute mastoiditis
ranges from 2,500 to 4,800. Some studies have reported an increase
in incidence, which has correlated with an increase in infections with
drug-­resistant bacteria. All-­cause mortality among children with
mastoiditis is 0.03%.

MICROBIOLOGY

Streptococcus pneumoniae remains the most common pathogen
cultured from cases of acute mastoiditis (Table 681.1). After introduction of PCV7, pneumococcal serotype 19A was commonly associated with acute mastoiditis. This serotype is frequently resistant to
Table 681.1  Etiology of Acute Mastoiditis
BACTERIA

FREQUENCY

Streptococcus pneumoniae

10–51%

Streptococcus pyogenes

0–12%

Staphylococcus aureus

2–10%

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

10%

Haemophilus influenzae

2–3%

No growth

20–40%

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 681 u Acute Mastoiditis 4017
penicillin and macrolide antibiotics. PCV13 use has been associated
with fewer serotype 19A infections overall; its impact on the etiology of mastoiditis is less clear. Other bacteria commonly cultured
include Streptococcus pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Fusobacterium necrophorum, and Haemophilus
influenzae. P. aeruginosa is more likely in patients with chronic
otitis media and/or cholesteatoma, older children, and those with
previous tympanostomy tubes, though higher rates of P. aeruginosa
recovery should suggest consideration of the method of sample collection when interpreting this culture result.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Acute mastoiditis and AOM present similarly in children. Ninety-­
seven percent of children with an acute mastoiditis have a coexisting AOM on the affected side. The remaining 3% of children with
acute mastoiditis either had a serous middle ear effusion at the time
of presentation or had a history of AOM within the past 2 weeks.
Other clinical manifestations include protrusion of the ear (87%),
retroauricular swelling and tenderness (67%), retroauricular erythema (87%), fever (60%), otalgia, and hearing loss (Tables 681.2
and 681.3). Prolonged symptoms during the treatment of AOM
may suggest concurrent mastoiditis. Children with acute mastoiditis were less likely to have bilateral infection. Some children do not
have external signs of infection.

DIAGNOSIS AND IMAGING

Acute mastoiditis is usually diagnosed based on history and clinical findings (see Table 681.2). CT scan of the temporal bone can

Table 681.2  Diagnosis of Acute Mastoiditis
Fever, otalgia, postauricular swelling plus redness
• Older child: ear up and out
• Infant: ear down and out
Tympanic membrane: acute otitis media
Radiograph: mastoid air cells coalescent or clouded
Computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, or bone scan
as needed
From Wald ER, Conway JH. Mastoiditis. In: Long SS, Prober CG, Fischer M, eds.
Principles and Practice of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2018: p. 227.

confirm the diagnosis, whereas head CT can identify intracranial
complications (see Chapter 680), including epidural abscess or
subdural empyema. Findings of acute mastoiditis include bony
demineralization, loss of bony septations in the mastoid cavity (Fig.
681.1), and, occasionally, subperiosteal abscess (Fig. 681.2). CT
scans have the advantage of being readily available in most emergency rooms, can quickly evaluate for intracranial complications,
and can identify whether there is bony destruction or a drainable
fluid collection. Contrast-­enhanced CT scan or MRI allows evaluation for vascular thrombosis (Fig. 681.3) and abscess formation.
MRI is generally reserved for patients in whom there is a suspected
intracranial complication (Figs. 681.4 and 681.5). Incidental detection of mastoid air cell opacification occurs in more than 20% of
children (and in 40% of children <2 years old) undergoing MRI
for other reasons, so imaging findings must be interpreted in the
appropriate clinical context.
There is a limited role for ultrasound in the diagnosis of acute
mastoiditis. Ultrasound can be used as a screening test when a postauricular subperiosteal abscess is suspected due to clinical findings such as protrusion of the pinna and retroauricular erythema.
If there is a fluid collection on ultrasound or concern for a defect
in the cranial vault, further imaging with a CT and/or MRI would
be recommended. Because ultrasound cannot identify intracranial
complications, its use must be limited to a highly selected patient
population.

MANAGEMENT

Acute mastoiditis is a rare complication of AOM, and there is a large
degree of overlap between the presentations of children with both
disease processes. For the pediatrician confronted with a majority of
uncomplicated AOM, it is difficult to decide when to initiate a more
extensive evaluation. Any time there is a purulent middle-­ear effusion
along with postauricular findings, acute mastoiditis needs to be in the
differential diagnosis. In general, children with acute mastoiditis will
appear sicker than children with uncomplicated AOM, and many of
them have already failed to respond to appropriate antibiotic therapy
for AOM. Focal neurologic deficits, including facial paresis, in a child
with AOM or mastoiditis suggest intracranial spread of infection. In
a child with suspected mastoiditis, it is critical to document normal
facial nerve function at the time of the initial exam so that if this complication does develop during treatment, the treating team is able to
document this complication.

Table 681.3  Differential Diagnosis of Postauricular Involvement of Acute Mastoiditis with Periostitis/Abscess
POSTAURICULAR SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
DISEASE

CREASE*

ERYTHEMA

MASS

TENDERNESS

EXTERNAL CANAL
INFECTION

MIDDLE-­EAR
EFFUSION

Acute mastoiditis
with periostitis

May be absent

Yes

No

Usually

No

Usually

Acute
mastoiditis with
subperiosteal
abscess

Absent

Maybe

Yes

Yes

No

Usually

Periostitis of
pinna with
postauricular
extension

Intact

Yes

No

Usually

No

No

External otitis with
postauricular
extension

Intact

Yes

No

Usually

Yes

No

Postauricular
lymphadenitis

Intact

No

Yes†

Maybe

No

No

*Postauricular crease (fold) between pinna and postauricular area.
†Circumscribed.

From Bluestone CD, Klein JO, eds. Otitis Media in Infants and Children, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2001: p. 333.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4018 Part XXVIII u The Ear

A

C

B

Fig. 681.1 Coalescent mastoiditis with subperiosteal abscess formation. A and B, Axial CT images with soft tissue windows and bone windows,
respectively. Arrow in A points to the subperiosteal abscess. Star in B shows the loss of bony septations in the mastoid cavity, and the arrow points
to the erosion of the bony cortex. C, Coronal image shows demineralization of the mastoid tegmen abutting the middle cranial fossa, a precursor
to epidural abscess formation.

A

C

B

Fig. 681.2 Advanced case of coalescent mastoiditis with subperiosteal abscess formation. Axial (A) and coronal (B) images; arrow points to the
subperiosteal abscess C, Extensive loss of bony septations in the mastoid cavity (star).

Fig. 681.3 A, Axial CT scan with bone windows shows

A

B

Complete blood count typically reveals leukocytosis with neutrophil predominance. C-­reactive protein is often highly elevated.
If otorrhea is present, implying a perforated tympanic membrane,
the fluid should be sent for Gram stain and culture. Blood culture
should be considered in any child appearing toxic. For children with
postauricular findings consistent with acute mastoiditis, admission
to the hospital for intravenous antibiotic therapy and serial exams is
recommended.

opacification of the mastoid air cells, a small region of
coalescence (arrow), and opacification of the middle ear
space. B, CT venogram with a sigmoid sinus thrombosis. The arrow points to the area where a patent sigmoid
sinus should be present.

In highly selected cases, ultrasound may be helpful to differentiate postauricular erythema from a postauricular abscess and avoids
the risk of ionizing radiation exposure. However, ultrasound is not
as sensitive as CT scanning and will underdiagnose postauricular
abscess formation and will provide no information as to whether
there is an intracranial complication present such as a brain abscess.
Some authors advocate deferring CT scanning in patients with
clinically suspected acute mastoiditis and without focal neurologic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 681 u Acute Mastoiditis 4019

Fig. 681.4 Axial T2-­weighted MRI showing left mastoiditis and petrous apicitis (arrows) as high signal in mastoid and petrous apex. (From
Budenz CL, El-­Kashlan HK. Complications of temporal bone infections.
In: Flint PW, Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds. Cummings Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, 7th ed., vol. 2. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2021: Fig 141.17A.)

the most sensitive readily available test and should be ordered upon
presentation.
Antibiotic therapy should initially be administered intravenously.
Empiric antibiotic selection may include a β-­lactam/β-­lactamase
inhibitor combination (e.g., ampicillin-­
sulbactam, piperacillin-­
tazobactam) or third-­generation cephalosporin (e.g., cefotaxime,
ceftriaxone). In children with chronically draining ears or concern for cholesteatoma, there is an increased incidence of gram-­
negative infection, and coverage should include antibiotics with
activity against Pseudomonas spp. (e.g., ceftazidime, cefepime). If
intracranial infection is suspected, broader-­spectrum antimicrobial
coverage (e.g., vancomycin plus a third-­generation cephalosporin)
should be initiated. In cases of uncomplicated acute mastoiditis
(e.g., absence of intracranial complications or localized abscess
formation), a 24-­to 48-­hour trial of intravenous antibiotics may
yield clinical improvement without surgical intervention. Therapy
should be adjusted when cultures and susceptibilities are available. The total duration of therapy is 4 weeks, with transition from
intravenous to oral therapy at discharge for those without intracranial complications. The optimal duration of intravenous therapy is
unknown, but some experts recommend a minimum of 7-­10 days
of intravenous therapy before oral transition, whereas others transition once the patient demonstrates clinical improvement and surgical intervention is no longer required.
Otolaryngology consultation can be helpful to assist with management and to determine whether surgical intervention would
be beneficial. Many patients will benefit from tympanostomy tube
placement at the time of the acute infection to allow localized ototopical antibiotic treatment and aspiration of middle-­ear fluid for
culture and sensitivity. In a patient with an additional extracranial
complication such as facial paresis, drainage of the middle-­ear space
with placement of a tympanostomy tube is required and should take
place urgently. A small group of patients may necessitate mastoidectomy—surgical removal of diseased bone and granulation tissue
in the mastoid cavity. At the time of surgery, a drain is often placed
to allow purulent secretions an egress. Indications for mastoidectomy include coalescent mastoiditis, postauricular abscess formation, infectious intracranial complication, and failure to respond to
appropriate IV antibiotics. When intracranial complications occur
or there are mental status changes, evaluation by otolaryngology
and neurosurgery and emergent mastoidectomy are indicated. Most
children with mastoiditis make a full recovery. Long-­term otologic
complications like sensorineural or conductive hearing loss are
uncommon. A posttreatment audiogram is often obtained to evaluate the hearing status after an infection.

SPECIAL SITUATIONS

Fig. 681.5 Coronal enhanced T1-­weighted MRI of the patient show-

ing enhancing tissue in left mastoid (white arrow) and temporal lobe
abscess with enhancing capsule (black arrow). (From Budenz CL, El-­
Kashlan HK. Complications of temporal bone infections. In: Flint PW,
Francis HW, Haughey BH, et al, eds. Cummings Otolaryngology Head &
Neck Surgery, 7th ed., vol. 2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig 141.17D)

findings to allow for an initial 24-­to 48-­hour period of inpatient
intravenous antibiotic therapy. If there is any concern about the
possibility of an intracranial complication, a contrasted CT scan is

When treating acute mastoiditis, several uncommon situations
require particular attention. Selecting empiric antibiotics for unvaccinated and undervaccinated children is challenging, and in this
patient population, it is especially important to obtain a sample
of middle-­ear fluid for Gram stain and culture to guide antibiotic therapy. There is an increased incidence of acute mastoiditis
in children with autism spectrum disorder. Immunocompromised
patients should be treated with more aggressive and prolonged
courses of antibiotic; they may benefit from more aggressive surgical treatment to remove infected tissue. Sigmoid sinus thrombosis
can occur secondary to acute mastoiditis. If this does occur, in addition to the standard treatment for acute mastoiditis, consideration
should be given to involving hematology and for administering
systemic anticoagulation. Otitic hydrocephalus, which is elevated
intracranial pressure after middle-­
ear infection, manifests with
emesis, headache, and visual impairment and is associated with lateral or sigmoid sinus thrombosis; management requires antibiotics,
anticoagulation, treatment of increased intracranial pressure, and
surgical decompression with drainage of the mastoid infection.
Children with cochlear device implantation may have a 3.5%
incidence of acute mastoiditis. Despite having a foreign body present in the middle ear and inner ear space, the majority of these

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4020 Part XXVIII u The Ear

A

B

Fig. 681.6 Axial (A) and coronal (B) CT scans of a patient with Langerhans cell histiocytosis of the right temporal bone. A, Opacification of the

mastoid with loss of bony septations and erosion of the bone separating the cranial fossa from the mastoid cavity (arrow). B, Bony erosion caused
by the tumor and the erosion of the mastoid tegmen (arrow).

acute mastoiditis cases can be managed with tympanostomy tube
placement, intravenous antibiotic therapy, and incision and drainage of an abscess without removal of the device.
Although very rare, benign and malignant tumors can affect the
temporal bone of children. The presentation mimics that of chronic
otitis media and chronic mastoiditis, and this often leads to a delay in
diagnosis. Hearing loss, otalgia, and otorrhea are common symptoms.
The main differentiating factor is the protracted course of otorrhea and
refractory nature of symptoms despite appropriate medical therapy.
Aural polyps or a mass lesion may be present on physical exam. Potential causes include rhabdomyosarcoma, nonrhabdomyosarcomatous
sarcoma (including chondrosarcoma, chordoma, osteosarcoma, Ewing
sarcoma, fibrosarcoma, angiosarcoma, and chloroma), Langerhans cell
histiocytosis (formerly histiocytosis X) (Fig. 681.6), lymphoma, and
metastasis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 682

The Inner Ear and
Diseases of the Bony
Labyrinth
Joseph Haddad Jr.
Genetic factors can affect the anatomy and function of the inner ear.
Infectious agents, including viruses, bacteria, and protozoa, also can
cause abnormal function, most commonly as sequelae of congenital
infection (see Table 677.2) or bacterial meningitis (see Chapter 643.1).
Other acquired diseases of the labyrinthine capsule include otosclerosis, osteopetrosis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis (see Chapter 556.1),
fibrous dysplasia, and other types of bony dysplasia. All of these can
cause both conductive hearing loss (CHL) and sensorineural hearing
loss (SNHL), as well as vestibular dysfunction.

OTHER DISEASES OF THE INNER EAR

Labyrinthitis (also called vestibular neuritis) may be a complication of direct spread of infection from acute or chronic otitis media
or mastoiditis and also can complicate bacterial meningitis as a result
of organisms entering the labyrinth through the internal auditory

meatus, endolymphatic duct, perilymphatic duct, vascular channels,
or hematogenous spread. Clinical manifestations of vestibular neuritis can include a sudden onset of rotatory vertigo, dysequilibrium,
postural imbalance (furniture walking) with falls to the affected side,
deep-­seated ear pain, nausea, vomiting, and spontaneous horizontal
(occasionally rotary) nystagmus.
The dizziness may last a few days, but balance issues, particularly
after rapid head movements toward the affected ear, may last for
months. Vestibular neuritis is usually unilateral and is not associated
with other neurologic defects; subjective hearing loss is unusual in
vestibular neuritis. If hearing loss is present, idiopathic SNHL should
be considered, as well as classical labyrinthitis (vestibular and cochlear
nerves). Treatment of vestibular neuritis may include prednisone and
vestibular rehabilitative exercises. Recurrent episodes should suggest
another diagnosis such as vestibular migraine or benign paroxysmal
positional vertigo.
In children, viral labyrinthitis is often associated with hearing loss.
Acute serous labyrinthitis, characterized by mild symptoms of vertigo
and hearing loss, most commonly develops secondary to middle-­ear
infection without direct invasion. Acute suppurative labyrinthitis,
characterized by abrupt, severe onset of these symptoms, may be caused
by bacterial meningitis or acute middle-­ear or mastoid infection via a
dehiscent horizontal semicircular canal. In these latter cases, a cholesteatoma is almost always present. Treatment of acute infectious labyrinthitis includes antimicrobial agents in cases of bacterial infection
or antiviral agents (acyclovir, valacyclovir) in cases of herpes zoster
oticus. Oral corticosteroids reduce labyrinthine inflammation and may
prevent sequelae. A short course (≤3 days) of vestibular suppressants
(dimenhydrinate 1-­2 mg/kg) alleviates acute symptoms such as nausea.
If it is secondary to otitis media, otologic surgery may be required to
remove underlying cholesteatoma or drain the middle ear and mastoid. Chronic labyrinthitis, most often associated with cholesteatoma,
manifests with SNHL and vestibular dysfunction that develops over
time; surgery is required to remove the cholesteatoma. Chronic labyrinthitis also occurs uncommonly secondary to long-­standing otitis
media, with the slow development of SNHL, usually starting in the
higher frequencies, and possibly with vestibular dysfunction. In addition, and more commonly, children with chronic middle-­ear fluid
often are unsteady or off balance, a situation that improves immediately
when the fluid resolves.
Vertigo and dizziness are common among older children and adolescents. Benign paroxysmal vertigo, the most common cause of vertigo in pediatric patients, is characterized by short periods of vertigo or
dizziness lasting seconds to a few minutes and associated with imbalance and nystagmus; tinnitus or hearing loss is unusual. Basilar/vestibular migraine is a common cause of episodic vertigo or dizziness
and is associated with headache (50–70% of patients), rotary or to-­
and-­fro nystagmus, and sensitivity to noise and bright light (see Chapter 635.1). Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo is less common in
young children and more common with increasing age into adulthood.
Particles form in the semicircular canals (canalithiasis), most often the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 683 u Traumatic Injuries of the Ear and Temporal Bone
posterior canal; symptoms occur with position changes of the head and
may last seconds to minutes. Vertigo and nystagmus may be demonstrated by changing position (sitting to lying down on the right or left).
Treatment involves canalith repositioning maneuvers to shift the debris
from the canals into the utricle. Additional etiologies of vertigo include
vestibular migraine, trauma, superior semicircular canal dehiscence,
isolated autoimmune inner ear disease or syndrome-­associated autoimmune diseases including Cogan syndrome (interstitial keratitis, vertigo, hearing loss), Vogt-­Koyanagi-­Harada syndrome (uveomeningitis,
vitiligo, vertigo, hearing loss), Susac syndrome (microangiopathy with
retinopathy, encephalopathy, deafness), granulomatosis with polyangiitis, mixed connective tissue disease, and, most rarely, CNS tumor.
Otosclerosis, an autosomal dominant disease that affects only
the temporal bones, causes abnormal bone growth that can result
in fixation of the stapes in the oval window, leading to progressive
hearing loss. In one series in North America, otosclerosis was found
in 0.6% of temporal bones of children younger than 5 years of age
and 4% of those ages 5-­18 years. The hearing loss is usually conductive at first, but SNHL can develop. Females are affected most commonly, with onset of otosclerosis in teenagers or young adults, often
associated with pregnancy. Corrective surgery to replace the stapes
with a mobile prosthesis often is successful.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is a systemic disease that can involve
both the middle and inner ears (see Chapter 742). Hearing loss
occurs in approximately 20% of young children and as many as 50%
of adults by the age of 50 with this disease. The hearing loss most
commonly is conductive but can be sensorineural or mixed. Etiologies of hearing loss include otosclerosis, ossicle fractures, or neural
degeneration. If the hearing loss is severe enough, a hearing aid may
be a preferable alternative to surgical correction of the fixed stapes,
because stapedectomy in children with osteogenesis imperfecta can
be technically very difficult, and the disease and the hearing loss
may be progressive.
Osteopetrosis, a very uncommon skeletal dysplasia, can involve the
temporal bone, including the middle ear and ossicles, usually resulting in a moderate to severe CHL. Recurrent facial nerve paralysis also
can occur because of excess bone deposition; with each recurrence, less
facial function might return (see Chapter 740).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 683

Traumatic Injuries of the
Ear and Temporal Bone
Joseph Haddad Jr.
AURICLE AND EXTERNAL AUDITORY CANAL

Auricle trauma is common in certain sports. Hematoma, with accumulation of blood between the perichondrium and the cartilage,
can follow trauma to the pinna and is especially common in teenagers involved in wrestling or boxing. Prompt drainage of a hematoma
can prevent irreversible damage. Immediate needle aspiration or,
when the hematoma is extensive or recurrent, incision and drainage and a pressure dressing are necessary to prevent perichondritis,
which can result in cartilage loss and a “cauliflower ear deformity.”
Sports helmets should be worn when appropriate during activities
when head trauma is possible.

4021

Frostbite of the auricle should be managed by rapidly rewarming
the exposed pinna with warm irrigation or warm compresses.
Foreign bodies in the external canal are common in childhood.
Often these can be removed in the office setting without general
anesthesia if the child is mature enough to understand and cooperate and is properly restrained; if an adequate headlight, surgical
head otoscope, or otomicroscope is used for visualizing the object;
and if appropriate instruments such as alligator forceps, wire loops
or a blunt cerumen curette or suction are used, depending on the
shape of the object. Gentle irrigation of the ear canal with body-­
temperature water or saline may be used to remove very small
objects, but only if the tympanic membrane (TM) is intact. Attempts
to remove an object from a struggling child or with poor visualization and inadequate tools result in a terrified child with a swollen
and bleeding ear canal and can then mandate general anesthesia to
remove the object. Difficult foreign bodies, especially those that are
large, deeply embedded, or associated with canal swelling, are best
removed by an otolaryngologist and/or under general anesthesia.
Disk batteries are removed emergently because they leach a basic
fluid that can cause severe tissue destruction. Insects in the canal
are first killed with mineral oil or lidocaine and are then removed
under otomicroscopic examination. Objects retained in the external
auditory canal can lead to complications such as otalgia, conductive
hearing loss, infection, and aural drainage.
After a foreign body is removed from the external canal, the
TM should be inspected carefully for traumatic perforation,
middle-­e ar effusion, abrasions, and bleeding. If a foreign body has
resulted in acute inflammation of the canal, topical otic medications as described for acute external otitis should be instituted
(see Chapter 679).

TYMPANIC MEMBRANE AND MIDDLE EAR

Traumatic perforation of the TM usually results from sudden external compression, such as a slap, or penetration by a foreign object
such as a stick or cotton-­tipped swab. The perforation may be linear or stellate. It is most commonly in the anterior portion of the
pars tensa when it is caused by compression, and it may be in any
quadrant of the TM when caused by a foreign object. Systemic antibiotics and topical otic medications are not required unless suppurative otorrhea is present. Small traumatic TM perforations often
heal spontaneously, but it is important to evaluate and monitor
the patient’s hearing to ensure that spontaneous healing occurs. If
the TM does not heal within several months, surgical graft repair
should be considered. If a perforation is present, otorrhea can occur
from water entering the middle ear from the ear canal during swimming or bathing; appropriate precautions should be taken. Perforations resulting from penetrating foreign bodies are less likely to
heal than those caused by compression. Audiometric examination
reveals a conductive hearing loss, with larger air-­bone gaps seen
in larger perforations. Immediate surgical exploration may be indicated if the injury is accompanied by one or more of the following:
vertigo, nystagmus, severe tinnitus, moderate to severe hearing loss,
or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) otorrhea. At the time of exploration, it
is necessary to inspect the ossicles, especially the stapes, for possible dislocation or fracture and to clear sharp objects that might
have penetrated the oval or round windows. Sensorineural hearing
loss results if the stapes subluxates or dislocates into the oval window or if either the oval or round window is penetrated. Children
should not be given access to cotton-­tipped applicators, because the
applicators commonly cause ear trauma. Contact with small objects
should be limited to times of parental supervision.
Perilymphatic fistula can occur after barotrauma or an increase
in CSF pressure. It should be suspected in a child who develops
a sudden SNHL or vertigo after physical exertion, deep water
diving, air travel, playing a wind instrument, or significant head
trauma. The leak characteristically is at the oval (Fig. 683.1) or the
round window and may be associated with congenital abnormalities of these structures or an anatomic abnormality of the cochlea
or semicircular canals. Perilymphatic fistulas occasionally close

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4022 Part XXVIII u The Ear

Fig. 683.1 Intraoperative view of traumatic oval window perilymphat-

ic fistula. (From Kim SH, Kazahaya K, Handler SD. Traumatic perilymphatic fistulas in children: etiology, diagnosis and management. Int J
Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2001;60:147–153, Fig. 2.)

A

B
Fig. 683.3 Basilar skull fracture. A, Basilar skull fracture involving the
Fig. 683.2 High-­resolution axial CT of uncomplicated longitudinal

fracture (arrows). A hematoma is present. The course of the fracture has
been highlighted. (From Schubiger O, Valavanis A, Stuckman G, et al.
Temporal bone fractures and their complications: examination with high
resolution CT. Neuroradiology. 1986;28:93–99.)

spontaneously, but immediate surgical repair of the fistula is recommended to control vertigo and to stop any progression of the SNHL;
even timely surgery does not usually restore the SNHL. No reliable
test is known for perilymphatic fistula, so middle-­ear exploration is
required for diagnosis and treatment.

TEMPORAL BONE FRACTURES

Children are particularly prone to basilar skull fractures, which
usually involve the temporal bone. Temporal bone trauma should
be considered in head injuries, and the status of the ear and hearing
should be evaluated. Temporal bone fractures are divided into longitudinal (70–80%), transverse (10–20%), and mixed. Longitudinal
fractures (Fig. 683.2) are commonly manifested by bleeding from
a laceration of the external canal or TM; postauricular ecchymosis

temporal bone is often signaled by postauricular ecchymotic discoloration, termed the Battle sign. B, The force of the blow may also cause
tearing of the ear canal or, as shown here, middle ear hemorrhage with
hemotympanum. Depending on the timing of examination, this may
appear red or blue. (B courtesy Michael Hawke, MD; from Zitelli BJ,
McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, eds. Zitelli and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Fig. 24-­15, p. 874.)

(Battle sign); hemotympanum (blood behind an intact TM); conductive hearing loss resulting from TM perforation, hemotympanum, or ossicular injury; delayed onset of facial paralysis (which
usually improves spontaneously); and temporary CSF otorrhea or
rhinorrhea (from CSF running down the eustachian tube) (Fig.
683.3). Transverse fractures of the temporal bone have a graver
prognosis than longitudinal fractures and are often associated with
immediate facial paralysis and damage to the labyrinth or internal
auditory canal. Facial paralysis might improve if caused by edema,
but surgical decompression of the nerve is often recommended if
there is no evidence of clinical recovery and facial nerve studies are
unfavorable. If the facial nerve has been transected, surgical decompression and anastomosis offer the possibility of some functional
recovery. Transverse fractures are also associated with severe SNHL,
vertigo, nystagmus, tinnitus, nausea, and vomiting associated with

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 684 u Tumors of the Ear and Temporal Bone
loss of cochlear and vestibular function; hemotympanum; rarely,
external canal bleeding; and CSF otorrhea, either in the external
auditory canal or behind the TM, which can exit the nose via the
eustachian tube.
If temporal bone fracture is suspected or seen on radiographs, gentle examination of the pinna and ear canal is indicated; lacerations or
avulsion of soft tissue is common with temporal bone fractures. Vigorous removal of external auditory canal blood clots or tympanocentesis
is not indicated, because removing the clot can further dislodge the
ossicles or reopen CSF leaks. The effectiveness of prophylactic antibiotics to prevent meningitis in patients with basilar skull fractures and
CSF otorrhea or rhinorrhea cannot be determined because studies to
date are flawed by biases. If a patient is afebrile and the drainage is
not cloudy, watchful waiting without antibiotics is indicated. Surgical
intervention is reserved for children who require repair of a nonhealing TM perforation, who have suffered dislocation of the ossicular
chain, or who need decompression of the facial nerve. SNHL can also
follow a blow to the head without an obvious fracture of the temporal
bone (labyrinthine concussion).

ACOUSTIC TRAUMA

Acoustic trauma results from exposure to high-­intensity sound (fireworks, gunfire, loud music, heavy machinery) and is initially manifested
by a temporary decrease in the hearing threshold, most commonly at
4,000 Hz on an audiometric examination, and tinnitus. If the sound is
between 85 and 140 dB, the loss is usually temporary (after a rock concert), but both the hearing loss and the tinnitus can become permanent
with chronic noise exposure; the frequencies from 3,000-­6,000 Hz are
most often involved. Sudden, extremely loud (>140 dB), short-­duration
noises with loud peak components (gunfire, bombs) can cause permanent hearing loss after a single exposure. Noise-­induced hearing loss
results from interactions between genes and the environment. A meta-­
analysis demonstrated that loud music exposure resulted in increased
hearing thresholds and decreased otoacoustic emissions in children
and adolescents. Ear protection and avoidance of chronic exposure to
loud noise are preventive measures. Hearing loss from chronic noise
exposure should be entirely preventable. Parents should be made aware
of the dangers of acoustic trauma, from the environment and from the
use of headphones, and should take measures to minimize exposure.
Treatment with high-­dose steroids for 1-­2 weeks should be considered
to treat acute hearing loss related to noise trauma.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

A

4023

Chapter 684

Tumors of the Ear and
Temporal Bone
Joseph Haddad Jr.
Benign tumors of the external canal include osteomas and monostotic
and polyostotic fibrous dysplasia. Osteomas are usually unilateral and
located lateral in the bony canal; they require removal only if hearing
is impaired or external otitis results. Exostoses (see Chapter 550.2), or
localized bony hyperplasias, may be confused with osteomas; however,
exostoses are usually bilateral and located in the region of the annulus
of the tympanic membrane. Masses occurring over the mastoid bone,
such as first branchial cysts, dermoid cysts, and lipomas, may be confused with primary mastoid tumors; imaging can help with the diagnosis and treatment plan.
Eosinophilic granuloma, which can occur in isolation or as part
of systemic Langerhans cell histiocytosis (see Chapter 556.1), should
be suspected in patients with otalgia, otorrhea (sometimes bloody),
hearing loss, abnormal tissue within the middle ear or ear canal, and
roentgenographic findings of a sharply delineated destructive lesion
of the temporal bone. Definitive diagnosis is made by biopsy. Treatment depends on the site of the lesion and histology. Depending on
the site, it may be treated by surgical excision, curettage, or local radiation. If the lesion is part of a systemic presentation of Langerhans cell
histiocytosis, chemotherapy in addition to local therapy (surgery with
or without radiation) is indicated. Long-­term follow-­up is necessary
whether the temporal bone lesion is a single isolated lesion or part of a
multisystem disease.
Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common malignancy of the
temporal bone in children. Symptoms and signs of rhabdomyosarcoma (see Chapter 549) originating in the middle ear or ear canal
include a mass or polyp in the middle ear or ear canal, bleeding
from the ear, otorrhea, otalgia, facial paralysis, and hearing loss.
Other cranial nerves also may be involved. Diagnosis is based on
biopsy, but the extent of disease is determined by both CT and MRI
of the temporal and facial bones, skull base, and brain (Fig. 684.1).

B

Fig. 684.1 Rhabdomyosarcoma in a 2-­yr-­old male with hearing loss and right periauricular swelling. A, Axial CT shows a large soft tissue mass
of the right temporal bone (arrows) with extensive osseous destruction. B, Coronal STIR MR image shows hyperintense mass of the right temporal
bone. Focal loss of integrity of the floor of the right middle cranial fossa (yellow arrow) and intact dura (black arrows) are shown. Destruction of
the bony labyrinth (white arrow) by the mass. (Modified from Koral K. Neoplasia. In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed,
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2019: Fig. 12.1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4024 Part XXVIII u The Ear
Management usually involves a combination of chemotherapy, radiation, and surgery.
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma (see Chapter 545.2) and leukemia (see
Chapter 544) also occur rarely in the temporal bone. Although
primary neoplasms of the middle ear are very uncommon in children, they include adenoid cystic carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and
squamous cell carcinoma. Benign tumors of the temporal bone
include glomus tumors. The initial signs and symptoms of the more

common nasopharyngeal neoplasms (angiofibroma, rhabdomyosarcoma, epidermoid carcinoma) may be associated with insidious
onset of chronic otitis media with effusion (often unilateral). A high
index of suspicion is needed for diagnosing these tumors early.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

