Fluid and Electrolyte
Disorders
Chapter 73

Electrolyte and Acid-­Base
Disorders
73.1 Composition of Body Fluids
Larry A. Greenbaum

TOTAL BODY WATER

Total body water (TBW) as a percentage of body weight varies
with age (Fig. 73.1). The fetus has very high TBW, which gradually
decreases to approximately 75% of birthweight for a term infant.
Premature infants have higher TBW than term infants. During
the first year of life, TBW decreases to approximately 60% of body
weight and remains at this level until puberty. At puberty, the fat
content of females increases more than that in males, who acquire
more muscle mass than females. Because fat has very low water
content and muscle has high water content, by the end of puberty
TBW in males remains at 60%, but TBW in females decreases to
approximately 50% of body weight. The high fat content in overweight children causes a decrease in TBW as a percentage of body
weight. During dehydration, TBW decreases and thus is a smaller
percentage of body weight.

PART

VI

ECF volume. This is followed by continued expansion of the ICF
volume, which results from cellular growth. By 1 year of age, the
ratio of ICF volume to ECF volume approaches adult levels. The
ECF volume is approximately 20–25% of body weight, and the ICF
volume is approximately 30–40% of body weight, close to twice the
ECF volume (Fig. 73.2). With puberty, the increased muscle mass of
males causes them to have a higher ICF volume than females. There
is no significant difference in the ECF volume between postpubertal
females and males.
The ECF is further divided into the plasma water and the interstitial fluid (see Fig. 73.2). The plasma water is 5% of body weight.
The blood volume, given a hematocrit of 40%, is usually 8% of body
weight, although it is higher in newborns and young infants; in
premature newborns it is approximately 10% of body weight. The
volume of plasma water can be altered by pathologic conditions,
including dehydration, anemia, polycythemia, heart failure, abnormal plasma osmolality, and hypoalbuminemia. The interstitial fluid,
normally 15% of body weight, can increase dramatically in diseases
associated with edema, such as heart failure, protein-­losing enteropathy, liver failure, nephrotic syndrome, and sepsis. An increase
in interstitial fluid also occurs in patients with ascites or pleural
effusions.
There is a delicate equilibrium between the intravascular fluid
and the interstitial fluid. The balance between hydrostatic and

FLUID COMPARTMENTS

TBW is divided between two main compartments: intracellular
fluid (ICF) and extracellular fluid (ECF). In the fetus and newborn, the ECF volume is larger than the ICF volume (see Fig. 73.1).
The normal postnatal diuresis causes an immediate decrease in the
Intracellular
(30-40%)
100
90

% Body Weight

80

Total body
water (TBW)

70
60
50

Intracellular fluid (ICF)

40
30
10
0

Interstitial
(15%)

Extracellular
fluid (ECF)

20

2468
Birth

6

12

3

Months

6

9

12 15

Extracellular
(20-25%)

Adult

Years
Age

Fig. 73.1 Total body water, intracellular fluid, and extracellular fluid as
a percentage of body weight as a function of age. (From Winters RW.
Water and electrolyte regulation. In: Winters RW, ed. The Body Fluids
in Pediatrics. Little, Brown; 1973.)

Plasma
(5%)

Fig. 73.2 Compartments of total body water, expressed as percentages of body weight, in an older child or adult.

485
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

486 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
oncotic forces regulates the intravascular volume, which is critical for proper tissue perfusion. The intravascular fluid has a higher
concentration of albumin than the interstitial fluid, and the consequent oncotic force draws water into the intravascular space. The
maintenance of this gradient depends on the limited permeability
of albumin across the capillaries. The hydrostatic pressure of the
intravascular space, which is caused by the pumping action of the
heart, drives fluid out of the intravascular space. These forces favor
movement into the interstitial space at the arterial ends of the capillaries. The decreased hydrostatic forces and increased oncotic
forces, which result from the dilutional increase in albumin concentration, cause movement of fluid into the venous ends of the capillaries. Overall, there is usually a net movement of fluid out of the
intravascular space to the interstitial space, but this fluid is returned
to the circulation via the lymphatics.
An imbalance in these forces may cause expansion of the interstitial volume at the expense of the intravascular volume. In children with hypoalbuminemia, the decreased oncotic pressure of the
intravascular fluid contributes to the development of edema. Loss
of fluid from the intravascular space may compromise the intravascular volume, placing the child at risk for inadequate blood flow
to vital organs. This is especially likely in diseases in which capillary leak occurs because the loss of albumin from the intravascular
space is associated with an increase in the albumin concentration
in the interstitial space, further compromising the oncotic forces
that normally maintain intravascular volume. In contrast, with
heart failure, there is an increase in venous hydrostatic pressure
from expansion of the intravascular volume, which is caused by
impaired pumping by the heart, and the increase in venous pressure causes fluid to move from the intravascular space to the interstitial space. Expansion of the intravascular volume and increased
intravascular pressure also cause the edema that occurs with acute
glomerulonephritis.

ELECTROLYTE COMPOSITION

The composition of the solutes in the ICF and ECF are very different (Fig. 73.3). Sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl−) are the dominant
cation and anion, respectively, in ECF. The sodium and chloride
concentrations ([Na+], [Cl−]) in the ICF are much lower. Potassium
(K+) is the most abundant cation in the ICF, and its concentration

PLASMA
Cations
Anions

INTRACELLULAR
Cations
Anions

Na (140)

K (140)

Cl (104)

Phos (107)

HCO3 (24)
Prot (40)

K (4)
Ca (2.5)
Mg (1.1)

Prot (14)
Na (13)
Other (6)
Phos (2)

Mg (7)

HCO3 (10)
Cl (3)

Fig. 73.3 Concentrations of the major cations and anions in the intra-

([K+]) within the cells is approximately 30 times higher than in the
ECF. Proteins, organic anions, and phosphate are the most plentiful anions in the ICF. The dissimilarity between the anions in the
ICF and the ECF is largely determined by the presence of intracellular molecules that do not cross the cell membrane, the barrier separating the ECF and the ICF. In contrast, the difference in
the distribution of cations (Na+ and K+) relies on activity of the
Na+,K+-­adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) pump and membrane
ion channels.
The difference in the electrolyte compositions of the ECF and the
ICF has important ramifications in the evaluation and treatment of
electrolyte disorders. Serum concentrations of electrolytes ([Na+],
[K+], and [Cl−]) do not always reflect total body content. Intracellular [K+] is much higher than the serum concentration. A shift of K+
from the intracellular space (ICS) can maintain a normal or even
an elevated serum [K+] despite massive losses of K+ from the ICS.
This effect is seen in diabetic ketoacidosis, in which significant K+
depletion is masked by transmembrane shift of K+ from the ICF to
the ECF. Therefore, for K+ and phosphorus, electrolytes with a high
intracellular concentration, serum level may not reflect total body
content. Similarly, the serum calcium concentration ([Ca2+]) does
not reflect total body content of Ca2+, which is largely contained in
bone (see Chapter 69).

OSMOLALITY

The ICF and the ECF are in osmotic equilibrium because the cell
membrane is permeable to water. If the osmolality in one compartment changes, then water movement leads to a rapid equalization
of osmolality, with a shift of water between the ICS and extracellular space (ECS). Clinically, the primary process is usually a change
in the osmolality of the ECF, with resultant shift of water into the
ICF if ECF osmolality decreases, or vice versa if ECF osmolality
increases. The ECF osmolality can be determined and usually equals
ICF osmolality. Plasma osmolality, normally 285-­295 mOsm/kg, is
measured by the degree of freezing-­point depression. The plasma
osmolality can also be estimated by a calculation based on the following formula:
Osmolality = 2 × [Na] + [glucose] /18 + [BUN] /2.8

Glucose and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) are reported in mg/dL.
Division of these values by 18 and 2.8, respectively, converts the
units into mmol/L. Multiplication of the [Na+] value by 2 accounts
for its accompanying anions, principally Cl− and bicarbonate.
The calculated osmolality is usually slightly lower than measured
osmolality.
Urea is not confined to the ECS because it readily crosses the
cell membrane, and its intracellular concentration approximately
equals its extracellular concentration. Whereas an elevated [Na+]
causes a shift of water from the ICS, with uremia there is no osmolar gradient between the two compartments and consequently no
movement of water. The only exception is during hemodialysis,
when the decrease in extracellular urea is so rapid that intracellular urea does not have time to equilibrate. Disequilibrium syndrome during hemodialysis may result in a shift of water into brain
cells and lead to severe symptoms. Ethanol, because it freely crosses
cell membranes, is another ineffective osmole. Hence, the effective
osmolality can be calculated as follows:
Effective osmolality = 2 × [Na] + [glucose] /18

The effective osmolality determines the osmotic force that is mediating the shift of water between the ECF and the ICF.

cellular space and the plasma, expressed in mEq/L.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 487
Hyperglycemia causes an increase in the plasma osmolality
because it is not in equilibrium with the ICS. During hyperglycemia, there is shift of water from the ICS to the ECS. This shift
causes dilution of the Na+ in the ECS, causing hyponatremia despite
elevated plasma osmolality. The magnitude of this effect can be calculated as follows:
[Na]corrected = [Na]measured + 1.6 × ([glucose] − 100 mg / dL) /100

where [Na]measured = Na+ concentration measured by the clinical
laboratory and [Na]corrected = corrected Na+ concentration (the Na+
concentration if the glucose concentration were normal and its accompanying water moved back into the cells). The [Na]corrected is the more
reliable indicator of the ratio of total body Na+ to TBW, the usual determinant of the [Na+].
Normally, measured osmolality and calculated osmolality are within
10 mOsm/kg. However, there are some clinical situations in which
this difference does not occur. The presence of unmeasured osmoles
causes measured osmolality to be significantly elevated in comparison
with the calculated osmolality. An osmolal gap is present when the
difference between measured osmolality exceeds calculated osmolality
by >10 mOsm/kg. Examples of unmeasured osmoles include ethanol,
ethylene glycol, methanol, sucrose, sorbitol, and mannitol. These substances increase measured osmolality but are not part of the equation
for calculating osmolality. The presence of an osmolal gap is a clinical
clue to the presence of unmeasured osmoles and may be diagnostically
useful when there is clinical suspicion of poisoning with methanol or
ethylene glycol.
Pseudohyponatremia is a second situation in which there is discordance between measured osmolality and calculated osmolality.
Lipids and proteins are the solids of the serum. In patients with
elevated serum lipids or proteins, the water content of the serum
decreases because water is displaced by the larger amounts of solids. Some instruments measure [Na+] by determining the amount
of Na+ per liter of serum, including the solid component. When
the solid component increases, there is a decrease in [Na+] per
liter of serum, despite a normal concentration when based on the
amount of Na+ per liter of serum water. It is the concentration of
Na+ in serum water that is physiologically relevant. A similar problem occurs when using instruments that require dilution of the
sample before measurement of Na+ (indirect potentiometry). In
both situations, the plasma osmolality is normal despite the presence of pseudohyponatremia, because the method for measuring
osmolality is not appreciably influenced by the percentage of serum
that is composed of lipids and proteins. Pseudohyponatremia is
diagnosed by the finding of a normal measured plasma osmolality
despite hyponatremia. This laboratory artifact does not occur if the
[Na+] in water is measured directly with an ion-­specific electrode,
as with arterial blood gas (ABG) analyzers. Pseudohypernatremia
may occur in patients with very low levels of serum proteins by a
similar mechanism.
When there are no unmeasured osmoles and pseudohyponatremia is not a concern, the calculated osmolality provides an accurate
estimate of the plasma osmolality. Measurement of plasma osmolality is useful for detecting or monitoring unmeasured osmoles
and confirming the presence of true hyponatremia. Whereas many
children with high plasma osmolality are dehydrated—as seen with
hypernatremic dehydration or diabetic ketoacidosis—high osmolality does not always equate with dehydration. A child with salt poisoning or uremia has an elevated plasma osmolality but may be volume
overloaded.

POINT-­OF-­CARE TESTING

Point-­of-­care (POC) testing offers a number of advantages, including rapid turnaround and usually smaller blood sample volume

required. POC devices may provide more accurate results in certain
situations, such as pseudohyponatremia (see earlier) and pseudohyperkalemia (see Chapter 73.4). However, the agreement between
POC and the laboratory is variable, and thus caution is needed
when interpreting results. Because of bias, POC and laboratory
results should not be used on an alternating basis when following
critical trends (e.g., during correction of hypernatremia or hyponatremia; see Chapter 73.3).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.2 Regulation of Osmolality and Volume
Larry A. Greenbaum
The regulation of plasma osmolality and the intravascular volume is controlled by independent systems for water balance, which
determines osmolality, and sodium balance, which determines volume status. Maintenance of normal osmolality depends on control
of water balance. Control of volume status depends on regulation of
sodium balance. When present, volume depletion takes precedence
over regulation of osmolality, and retention of water contributes to
the maintenance of intravascular volume.

REGULATION OF OSMOLALITY

The plasma osmolality is tightly regulated and maintained at 285-­295
mOsm/kg. Modification of water intake and excretion maintains normal plasma osmolality. In the steady state, the combination of water
intake and water produced by the body from oxidation balances water
losses from the skin, lungs, urine, and gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Only
water intake and urinary losses can be regulated.
Osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus sense plasma osmolality
(see Chapter 594). An elevated effective osmolality leads to secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) by neurons in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei in the hypothalamus. The axons
of these neurons terminate in the posterior pituitary. Circulating
ADH binds to its V2 receptors in the collecting duct cells of the
kidney and causes insertion of water channels (aquaporin-­2) into
the renal collecting duct cells. This produces increased permeability to water, permitting resorption of water into the hypertonic
renal medulla. Urine concentration increases and water excretion
decreases. Urinary water losses cannot be eliminated because there
is obligatory excretion of urinary solutes, such as urea and sodium.
The regulation of ADH secretion is tightly linked to plasma osmolality, responses being detectable with a 1% change in osmolality.
ADH secretion virtually disappears when plasma osmolality is low,
allowing excretion of maximally dilute urine. The resulting loss
of free water (i.e., water without Na+) corrects plasma osmolality.
ADH secretion is not an all-­or-­nothing response; there is a graded
adjustment as the osmolality changes.
Water intake is regulated by hypothalamic osmoreceptors, which
stimulate thirst when the serum osmolality increases. Thirst occurs
with a small increase in the serum osmolality. Control of osmolality
is subordinate to maintenance of an adequate intravascular volume.
When volume depletion is present, both ADH secretion and thirst are
stimulated, regardless of the plasma osmolality. The sensation of thirst
requires moderate volume depletion but only a 1–2% change in the
plasma osmolality.
A number of conditions can limit the kidney’s ability to excrete
adequate water to correct low plasma osmolality. In the syndrome
of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), ADH continues
to be produced despite a low plasma osmolality (see Chapters 73.3
and 597).
The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) affects the kidney’s ability to
eliminate water. With a decrease in the GFR, less water is delivered to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

488 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
the collecting duct, limiting the amount of water that can be excreted.
The impairment in the GFR must be quite significant to limit the kidney’s ability to respond to an excess of water.
The minimum urine osmolality is approximately 30-­50 mOsm/
kg. This places an upper limit on the kidney’s ability to excrete water;
sufficient solute must be present to permit water loss. Massive water
intoxication may exceed this limit, whereas a lesser amount of water
is necessary in the child with a diet that has very little solute. This
can produce severe hyponatremia in children who receive little salt
and have minimal urea production as a result of inadequate protein intake. Volume depletion is an extremely important cause of
decreased water loss by the kidney despite a low plasma osmolality.
This “appropriate” secretion of ADH occurs because volume depletion takes precedence over the osmolality in the regulation of ADH.
The maximum urine osmolality is approximately 1,200 mOsm/
kg. The obligatory solute losses dictate the minimum volume of
urine that must be produced, even when maximally concentrated.
Obligatory water losses increase in patients with high salt intake or
high urea losses, as may occur after relief of a urinary obstruction
or during recovery from acute kidney injury. An increase in urinary solute and thus water losses occurs with an osmotic diuresis,
which results classically from glycosuria in diabetes mellitus as well
as iatrogenically after mannitol administration. There are developmental changes in the kidney’s ability to concentrate the urine. The
maximum urine osmolality in a newborn, especially a premature
newborn, is less than that in an older infant or child. This limits the
ability to conserve water and makes such a patient more vulnerable
to hypernatremic dehydration. Very high fluid intake, as seen with
psychogenic polydipsia, can dilute the high osmolality in the renal
medulla, which is necessary for maximal urinary concentration. If
fluid intake is restricted in patients with this condition, the kidney’s ability to concentrate the urine may be somewhat impaired,
although this defect corrects after a few days without polydipsia.
This may also occur during the initial treatment of central diabetes
insipidus with desmopressin acetate; the renal medulla takes time to
achieve its normal maximum osmolality.

REGULATION OF VOLUME

An appropriate intravascular volume is critical for survival; both volume depletion and volume overload may cause significant morbidity
and mortality. Because sodium is the principal extracellular cation and
is restricted to the ECF, adequate body sodium is necessary for maintenance of intravascular volume. The principal extracellular anion, Cl−,
is also necessary, but for simplicity, Na+ balance is considered the main
regulator of volume status because body content of sodium and that of
chloride usually change proportionally, given the need for equal numbers of cations and anions. In some situations, Cl− depletion is considered the dominant derangement causing volume depletion (metabolic
alkalosis with volume depletion).
The kidney determines sodium balance because there is little
homeostatic control of sodium intake, even though salt craving
does occasionally occur, typically in children with chronic renal
salt loss. The kidney regulates Na+ balance by altering the percentage of filtered Na+ that is resorbed along the nephron. Normally,
the kidney excretes <1% of the Na+ filtered at the glomerulus. In
the absence of disease, extrarenal losses and urinary output match
intake, with the kidney having the capacity to adapt to large variations in sodium intake. When necessary, urinary sodium excretion can be reduced to virtually undetectable levels or increased
dramatically.
The most important determinant of renal Na+ excretion is the volume status of the child; it is the effective intravascular volume that
influences urinary Na+ excretion. The effective intravascular volume is
the volume status that is sensed by the body’s regulatory mechanisms.
Heart failure is a state of volume overload, but the effective intravascular volume is low because poor cardiac function prevents adequate
perfusion of the kidneys and other organs. This explains the avid renal
Na+ retention often present in patients with heart failure.

The renin-­angiotensin system is an important regulator of renal
Na+ excretion. The juxtaglomerular apparatus produces renin in
response to decreased effective intravascular volume. Specific stimuli for renin release are decreased perfusion pressure in the afferent
arteriole of the glomerulus, decreased delivery of sodium to the distal nephron, and β1-­adrenergic agonists, which increase in response
to intravascular volume depletion. Renin, a proteolytic enzyme,
cleaves angiotensinogen, producing angiotensin I. Angiotensin-­
converting enzyme (ACE) converts angiotensin I into angiotensin
II. The actions of angiotensin II include direct stimulation of the
proximal tubule to increase sodium resorption and stimulation of
the adrenal gland to increase aldosterone secretion. Through its
actions in the distal nephron—specifically, the late distal convoluted tubule and the collecting duct—aldosterone increases sodium
resorption. Aldosterone also stimulates potassium excretion,
increasing urinary losses. Along with decreasing urinary loss of
sodium, angiotensin II acts as a vasoconstrictor, which helps maintain adequate blood pressure in the presence of volume depletion.
Volume expansion stimulates the synthesis of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), which is produced by the atria in response to atrial wall
distention. Along with increasing the GFR, ANP inhibits Na+ resorption in the medullary portion of the collecting duct, facilitating an
increase in urinary Na+ excretion.
Volume overload occurs when Na+ intake exceeds output. Children with kidney failure have impaired ability to excrete Na+. The
GFR is low at birth, limiting a newborn’s ability to excrete a Na+
load. In other situations, there is a loss of the appropriate regulation
of renal Na+ excretion. This loss of regulation occurs in patients
with excessive aldosterone, as seen in primary hyperaldosteronism or renal artery stenosis, where excess renin production leads to
high aldosterone levels. In acute glomerulonephritis, even without
significantly reduced GFR, the normal intrarenal mechanisms that
regulate Na+ excretion malfunction, causing excessive renal retention of Na+ and volume overload.
Renal retention of Na+ occurs during volume depletion, but this
appropriate response causes the severe excess in total body Na+ that
is present in heart failure, liver failure, nephrotic syndrome, and other
causes of hypoalbuminemia. In these diseases, the effective intravascular volume is decreased, causing the kidney and the various regulatory systems to respond, leading to renal Na+ retention and edema
formation.
Volume depletion usually occurs when Na+ losses exceed intake.
The most common etiology in children is gastroenteritis. Excessive losses of sodium may also occur from the skin in children with
burns, in sweat from patients with cystic fibrosis, or after vigorous
exercise. Inadequate intake of Na+ is uncommon except in neglect,
in famine, or with an inappropriate choice of liquid diet in a child
who cannot take solids. Urinary Na+ wasting may occur in a range
of renal diseases, from renal dysplasia to tubular disorders, such as
Bartter syndrome. The neonate, especially if premature, has a mild
impairment in the ability to conserve Na+. Iatrogenic renal Na+
wasting takes place during diuretic therapy. Renal Na+ loss occurs
as a result of derangement in the normal regulatory systems. An
absence of aldosterone, seen most frequently in children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia caused by 21-­hydroxylase deficiency,
causes sodium wasting (see Chapter 616).
Isolated disorders of water balance can affect volume status and Na+
balance. Because the cell membrane is permeable to water, changes in
TBW influence both the extracellular volume and the intracellular volume. In isolated water loss, as occurs in diabetes insipidus, the impact
is greater on the ICS because it has a greater volume than the ECS.
Thus, compared with other types of dehydration, hypernatremic dehydration has less impact on plasma volume; most of the fluid loss comes
from the ICS. Yet, significant water loss eventually affects intravascular
volume and will stimulate renal Na+ retention, even if total body Na+
content is normal. Similarly, with acute water intoxication or SIADH,
there is an excess of TBW, but most is in the ICS. However, there is
some effect on the intravascular volume, which causes renal excretion

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 489
of Na+. Children with SIADH or water intoxication have high urine
Na+ concentration despite hyponatremia. This finding reinforces the
concept of independent control systems for water and Na+, but the 2
systems interact when pathophysiologic processes dictate, and control
of effective intravascular volume always takes precedence over control
of osmolality.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.3 Sodium
Larry A. Greenbaum

SODIUM METABOLISM
Body Content and Physiologic Function

Sodium is the dominant cation of the ECF (see Fig. 73.3), and it is
the principal determinant of extracellular osmolality. Na+ is therefore
necessary for the maintenance of intravascular volume. Less than 3%
of Na+ is intracellular. More than 40% of total body Na+ is in bone;
the remainder is in the interstitial and intravascular spaces. The low
intracellular [Na+], approximately 10 mEq/L, is maintained by Na+,K+-­
ATPase, which exchanges intracellular Na+ for extracellular K+.

Sodium Intake

A child’s diet determines the amount of Na+ ingested—a predomi-

nantly cultural determination in older children. An occasional child
has salt craving because of an underlying salt-­wasting renal disease or
adrenal insufficiency. Children in the United States tend to have very
high salt intakes because their diets include a large amount of “junk”
food or fast food. Infants receive sodium from breast milk (approximately 7 mEq/L) and formula (7-­13 mEq/L, for 20 calorie/oz formula).
Sodium is readily absorbed throughout the GI tract. Mineralocorticoids increase sodium transport into the body, although this effect has
limited clinical significance. The presence of glucose enhances sodium
absorption because of the presence of a co-­transport system. This is the
rationale for including sodium and glucose in oral rehydration solutions (see Chapter 387).

Sodium Excretion

Sodium excretion occurs in stool and sweat, but the kidney regulates
Na+ balance and is the principal site of Na+ excretion. There is some
Na+ loss in stool, but it is minimal unless diarrhea is present. Normally,
sweat has 5-­40 mEq/L of sodium. Sweat [Na+] is increased in children
with cystic fibrosis, aldosterone deficiency, or pseudohypoaldosteronism. The higher sweat losses in these conditions may cause or contribute to Na+ depletion.
Sodium is unique among electrolytes because water balance, not
Na+ balance, usually determines its concentration. When the [Na+]
increases, the resultant higher plasma osmolality causes increased
thirst and increased secretion of ADH, which leads to renal conservation of water. Both these mechanisms increase the water content of
the body, and the [Na+] returns to normal. During hyponatremia, the
decrease in plasma osmolality stops ADH secretion, and consequent
renal water excretion leads to an increase in the [Na+]. Even though
water balance is usually regulated by osmolality, volume depletion
does stimulate thirst, ADH secretion, and renal conservation of water.
Volume depletion takes precedence over osmolality; volume depletion
stimulates ADH secretion, even if a patient has hyponatremia.
The excretion of Na+ by the kidney is not regulated by the plasma
osmolality. The patient’s effective plasma volume determines the amount
of sodium in the urine. This is mediated by a variety of regulatory systems, including the renin-­angiotensin-­aldosterone system and intrarenal
mechanisms. In hyponatremia or hypernatremia, the underlying pathophysiology determines the amount of urinary Na+, not the serum [Na+].

Table 73.1  Causes of Hypernatremia
EXCESSIVE SODIUM
Improperly mixed formula
Excess sodium bicarbonate
Ingestion of seawater or sodium chloride
Intentional salt poisoning (child abuse or fictitious disorder inflicted
on another)
Intravenous hypertonic saline
Sodium phosphate enemas
Hyperaldosteronism
WATER DEFICIT
Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus
Acquired
X-­linked (OMIM 304800)
Autosomal recessive (OMIM 125800)
Autosomal dominant (OMIM 125800)
Central Diabetes Insipidus
Acquired*
Autosomal recessive (OMIM 125700/600955)
Autosomal dominant (OMIM 125700)
Wolfram syndrome (OMIM 222300/604928/598500)
Hypothalamic neurogenic (essential) adipsic hypernatremia
Increased Insensible Losses
Premature infants
Radiant warmers
Phototherapy
Inadequate Intake
Ineffective breastfeeding
Child neglect or abuse
Adipsia (lack of thirst)
WATER AND SODIUM DEFICITS
Gastrointestinal Losses
Diarrhea
Emesis/nasogastric suction
Osmotic cathartics (lactulose)
Cutaneous Losses
Burns
Excessive sweating
Renal Losses
Osmotic diuretics (mannitol)
Diabetes mellitus
Chronic kidney disease (dysplasia and obstructive uropathy)
Polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis
Postobstructive diuresis
*Acquired: central diabetes insipidus from CNS malformations, trauma, meningitis,
tumor, infiltration, unknown.
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

HYPERNATREMIA

Hypernatremia is a [Na+] >145 mEq/L, although it is sometimes
defined as >150 mEq/L. Mild hypernatremia is common in children,
especially among infants with gastroenteritis. Hypernatremia in hospitalized patients may be iatrogenic, which is caused by inadequate water
administration or, less often, by excessive Na+ administration. Moderate or severe hypernatremia has significant morbidity because of the
underlying disease, the effects of hypernatremia on the brain, and the
risks of overly rapid correction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

490 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Etiology and Pathophysiology

There are three basic mechanisms of hypernatremia (Table 73.1).
Sodium intoxication may be iatrogenic in a hospital setting because
of correction of metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate. Baking soda, a putative home remedy for upset stomach, is another
source of sodium bicarbonate; the hypernatremia is accompanied
by a profound metabolic alkalosis. Hypernatremia may develop following sodium phosphate emesis. In hyperaldosteronism, there is
renal retention of sodium and resultant hypertension; hypernatremia may not be present or is usually mild.
The classic causes of hypernatremia from a water deficit are nephrogenic and central diabetes insipidus (see Chapters 570 and 596).
Hypernatremia develops in diabetes insipidus only if the patient
does not have access to water or cannot drink adequately because
of immaturity, neurologic impairment, emesis, or anorexia. Infants
are at high risk because of their inability to control their own water
intake. Central diabetes insipidus and the genetic forms of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus typically cause massive urinary water losses
and very dilute urine. The water losses are less dramatic, and the
urine often has the same osmolality as plasma when nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus is secondary to intrinsic renal disease (obstructive uropathy, renal dysplasia, sickle cell disease).
The other causes of a water deficit are also secondary to an imbalance between losses and intake. Newborns, especially if premature,
have high insensible water losses. Losses are further increased if
the infant is placed under a radiant warmer or with the use of phototherapy for hyperbilirubinemia. The renal concentrating mechanisms are not optimal at birth, providing an additional source of
water loss. Ineffective breastfeeding, often in a primiparous mother,
can cause severe hypernatremic dehydration. Adipsia, the absence
of thirst, is usually secondary to damage to the hypothalamus, such
as from trauma, tumor, hydrocephalus, or histiocytosis. Primary
adipsia (essential hypernatremia) is rare but is seen in children
with central nervous system (CNS) malformations (septo-­
optic
dysphasia, holoprosencephaly, optic nerve hypoplasia).
When hypernatremia occurs in conditions with deficits of sodium
and water, the water deficit exceeds the sodium deficit. This occurs
only if the patient is unable to ingest adequate water. Diarrhea results
in depletion of both Na+ and water. Because diarrhea is hypotonic—
typical Na+ concentration of 35-­65 mEq/L—water losses exceed Na+
losses, potentially leading to hypernatremia. Most children with gastroenteritis do not have hypernatremia because they drink enough
hypotonic fluid to compensate for stool water losses (see Chapter
387). Fluids such as water, juice, and formula are more hypotonic
than the stool losses, allowing correction of the water deficit and
potentially even causing hyponatremia. Hypernatremia is most likely
to occur in the child with diarrhea who has inadequate intake because
of emesis, lack of access to water, or anorexia.
Osmotic agents, including mannitol, and glucose in diabetes mellitus, cause excessive renal losses of water and Na+. Because the urine
is hypotonic ([Na+] of approximately 50 mEq/L) during an osmotic
diuresis, water loss exceeds Na+ loss, and hypernatremia may occur if
water intake is inadequate. Certain chronic kidney diseases, such as
renal dysplasia and obstructive uropathy, are associated with tubular
dysfunction, leading to excessive losses of water and Na+. Many children with such diseases have disproportionate water loss and are at risk
for hypernatremic dehydration, especially if gastroenteritis supervenes.
Similar mechanisms occur during the polyuric phase of acute kidney
injury and after relief of urinary obstruction (postobstructive diuresis).
Patients with either condition may have an osmotic diuresis from urinary losses of urea and an inability to conserve water because of tubular
dysfunction.

Clinical Manifestations

Most children with hypernatremia are dehydrated and show the typical
clinical signs and symptoms (see Chapter 75). Children with hypernatremic dehydration tend to have better preservation of intravascular
volume because of the shift of water from the ICS to the ECS. This shift

maintains blood pressure and urine output and allows hypernatremic
infants to be less symptomatic initially and potentially to become
more dehydrated before medical attention is sought. Breastfed infants
with hypernatremia are often profoundly dehydrated, with failure to
thrive (malnutrition). Probably because of intracellular water loss, the
pinched abdominal skin of a dehydrated, hypernatremic infant has a
“doughy” feel.
Hypernatremia, even without dehydration, causes central nervous
system (CNS) symptoms that tend to parallel the degree of [Na+]
elevation and the acuity of the increase. Patients are irritable, restless, weak, and lethargic. Some infants have a high-­pitched cry and
hyperpnea. Alert patients are very thirsty, even though nausea may be
present. Hypernatremia may cause fever, although many patients have
an underlying process that contributes to the fever. Hypernatremia is
associated with hyperglycemia and mild hypocalcemia; the mechanisms are unknown. Beyond the sequelae of dehydration, there is no
clear direct effect of hypernatremia on other organs or tissues, except
the brain.
Brain hemorrhage is the most devastating consequence of untreated
hypernatremia. As the extracellular osmolality increases, water moves
out of brain cells, leading to a decrease in brain volume. This decrease
can result in tearing of intracerebral veins and bridging blood vessels
as the brain moves away from the skull and the meninges. Patients may
have subarachnoid, subdural, and parenchymal hemorrhages. Seizures
and coma are possible sequelae of the hemorrhage, although seizures
are more common during correction of hypernatremia. The cerebrospinal fluid protein is often elevated in infants with significant hypernatremia, probably because of leakage from damaged blood vessels.
Neonates, especially if premature, seem especially vulnerable to hypernatremia and excessive sodium intake. There is an association between
rapid or hyperosmolar sodium bicarbonate administration and the
development of intraventricular hemorrhages in neonates. Even
though osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS), which includes
central pontine myelinolysis and extrapontine myelinolysis, is classically associated with overly rapid correction of hyponatremia, it can
occur in children with hypernatremia (see “Treatment”). Thrombotic
complications occur in severe hypernatremic dehydration, including
stroke, dural sinus thrombosis, peripheral thrombosis, and renal vein
thrombosis. This is secondary to dehydration and possibly hypercoagulability associated with hypernatremia.

Diagnosis

The etiology of hypernatremia is usually apparent from the history.
Hypernatremia resulting from water loss occurs only if the patient
does not have access to water or is unable to drink. In the absence
of dehydration, it is important to ask about sodium intake. Children with excess salt intake do not have signs of dehydration, unless
another process is present. Severe Na+ intoxication causes signs of
volume overload, such as pulmonary edema and weight gain. Salt
poisoning is associated with an elevated fractional excretion of
Na+, whereas hypernatremic dehydration causes a low fractional
excretion of Na+. Gastric sodium concentrations are often elevated
in salt poisoning. In hyperaldosteronism, hypernatremia is usually
mild or absent and is associated with edema, hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis.
When there is isolated water loss, the signs of volume depletion
are usually less severe initially because much of the loss is from the
ICS. When pure water loss causes signs of dehydration, the hypernatremia and water deficit are usually severe. In the child with
renal water loss, either central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus,
the urine is inappropriately dilute and urine volume is not low. The
urine is maximally concentrated and urine volume is low if the
losses are extrarenal or caused by inadequate intake. With extrarenal causes of loss of water, the urine osmolality should be >1,000
mOsm/kg. When diabetes insipidus is suspected, the evaluation
may include measurement of ADH and a water-­deprivation test,
including a trial of desmopressin acetate (synthetic ADH analog)
to differentiate between nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and central

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 491
diabetes insipidus (see Chapters 570 and 596). A water-­deprivation
test is unnecessary if the patient has simultaneous documentation
of hypernatremia and poorly concentrated urine (osmolality lower
than that of plasma). In children with central diabetes insipidus,
administration of desmopressin acetate increases the urine osmolality above the plasma osmolality, although maximum osmolality
does not occur immediately because of the decreased osmolality of
the renal medulla as a result of the chronic lack of ADH. In children with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, there is no response to
desmopressin acetate. Hypercalcemia or hypokalemia may produce a
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus–like syndrome.
With combined Na+ and water deficits, analysis of the urine differentiates between renal and nonrenal etiologies. When the losses are extrarenal, the kidney responds to volume depletion with low urine volume,
concentrated urine, and Na+ retention (urine [Na+] <20 mEq/L, fractional excretion of Na+ <1%). With renal causes, the urine volume is
not appropriately low, the urine is not maximally concentrated, and the
urine [Na+] may be inappropriately elevated.

Treatment

As hypernatremia develops, the brain generates idiogenic osmoles
to increase the intracellular osmolality and prevent the loss of brain
water. This mechanism is not instantaneous and is most prominent
when hypernatremia has developed gradually. If the serum [Na+] is
lowered rapidly, there is movement of water from the serum into the
brain cells to equalize the osmolality in the two compartments. The
resultant brain swelling may manifest as seizures or coma.
Because of the associated dangers, chronic hypernatremia should not
be corrected rapidly. The goal is to decrease the serum [Na+], but avoid
a decrease of more than 10 mEq/L every 24 hours. The most important component of correcting moderate or severe hypernatremia is frequent monitoring of the serum [Na+] value so that fluid therapy can
be adjusted to provide adequate correction, neither too slow nor too
fast. If a child has seizures because of brain edema secondary to rapid
correction, administration of hypotonic fluid should be stopped. An
infusion of 3% saline can acutely increase the serum [Na+], reversing
the cerebral edema.
Chapter 75 outlines a detailed approach to the child with hypernatremic dehydration. Acute, severe hypernatremia, usually secondary to
sodium administration, can be corrected more rapidly with 5% dextrose in water (D5W) because idiogenic osmoles have not had time to
accumulate. This fact balances the high morbidity and mortality rates
associated with hypernatremia with the dangers of overly rapid correction. When hypernatremia is severe and is caused by sodium intoxication, it may be impossible to administer enough water to correct
the hypernatremia rapidly without worsening the volume overload.
In this situation, dialysis allows for removal of the excess Na+, with
the precise strategy dependent on the mode of dialysis. In less severe
cases, the addition of a loop diuretic increases the removal of excess
Na+ and water, decreasing the risk of volume overload. With Na+ overload, hypernatremia is corrected with Na+-­free intravenous (IV) fluid
(D5W).
Hyperglycemia from hypernatremia is not usually a problem and
is not treated with insulin because the acute decrease in glucose may
precipitate cerebral edema by lowering plasma osmolality. Rarely, the
glucose concentration of IV fluids must be reduced (from 5% to 2.5%
dextrose in water). The secondary hypocalcemia is treated as needed.
It is important to address the underlying cause of the hypernatremia, if possible. The child with central diabetes insipidus should
receive desmopressin acetate. Because this treatment reduces renal
excretion of water, excessive intake of water must be avoided to
prevent both overly rapid correction of the hypernatremia and
the development of hyponatremia. Over the long-­term, reduced
sodium intake and the use of medications can somewhat ameliorate the water losses in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (see Chapter
570). The daily water intake of a child receiving tube feeding may
need to be increased to compensate for high losses. The patient with

significant ongoing losses, such as through diarrhea, may need supplemental water and electrolytes (see Chapter 74). Sodium intake is
reduced if it contributed to the hypernatremia.

HYPONATREMIA

Hyponatremia, a very common electrolyte abnormality in hospitalized
patients, is a serum sodium level <135 mEq/L. Both total body sodium
and TBW determine the serum sodium concentration. Hyponatremia
exists when the ratio of water to Na+ is increased. This condition can
occur with low, normal, or high levels of body Na+. Similarly, body
water can be low, normal, or high.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

Table 73.2 lists the causes of hyponatremia. Pseudohyponatremia
is a laboratory artifact present when the plasma contains very high
concentrations of protein (multiple myeloma, intravenous immune
globulin [IVIG] infusion) or lipid (hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia). It does not occur when a direct ion-­selective electrode determines the [Na+] in undiluted plasma, a technique that
is used by ABG analyzers or POC instruments (see Chapter 73.1).
In true hyponatremia, the measured osmolality is low, whereas it
is normal in pseudohyponatremia. Hyperosmolality, as may occur
with hyperglycemia, causes a low [Na+] because water moves down
its osmotic gradient from the ICS into the ECS, diluting the [Na+].
However, because the manifestations of hyponatremia are a result
of the low plasma osmolality, patients with hyponatremia resulting from hyperosmolality do not have symptoms of hyponatremia.
When the etiology of the hyperosmolality resolves, such as hyperglycemia in diabetes mellitus, water moves back into the cells, and
the [Na+] rises to its “true” value. Mannitol or sucrose, a component of IVIG preparations, may cause hyponatremia because of
hyperosmolality.
Classification of hyponatremia is based on the patient’s volume
status. In hypovolemic hyponatremia, the child has lost Na+ from
the body. The water balance may be positive or negative, but Na+
loss has been higher than water loss. The pathogenesis of the hyponatremia is usually a combination of Na+ loss and water retention to
compensate for the volume depletion. The patient has a pathologic
increase in fluid loss, and this fluid contains Na+. Most fluid that is
lost has a lower [Na+] than that of plasma. Viral diarrhea fluid has
an average [Na+] of 50 mEq/L. Replacing diarrhea fluid, which has
[Na+] of 50 mEq/L, with formula, which has only approximately
7-­10 mEq/L of Na+, reduces the serum [Na+]. Intravascular volume
depletion interferes with renal water excretion, the body’s usual
mechanism for preventing hyponatremia. The volume depletion
stimulates ADH synthesis, resulting in renal water retention. Volume depletion also decreases the GFR and enhances water resorption in the proximal tubule, thereby reducing water delivery to the
collecting duct.
Diarrhea as a result of gastroenteritis is the most common cause
of hypovolemic hyponatremia in children. Emesis causes hyponatremia if the patient takes in hypotonic fluid, either IV or enterally,
despite the emesis. Most patients with emesis have either a normal
[Na+] or hypernatremia. Burns may cause massive losses of isotonic
fluid and resultant volume depletion. Hyponatremia develops if
the patient receives hypotonic fluid. Losses of sodium from sweat
are especially high in children with cystic fibrosis, aldosterone
deficiency, or pseudohypoaldosteronism, although high losses can
also occur in a hot climate. Third space losses are isotonic and can
cause significant volume depletion, leading to ADH production
and water retention, which can cause hyponatremia if the patient
receives hypotonic fluid. In diseases that cause volume depletion through extrarenal Na + loss, the urine Na + level should be
low (<10 mEq/L) as part of the renal response to maintain the
intravascular volume. The only exceptions are diseases that cause
both extrarenal and renal Na+ losses: adrenal insufficiency and
pseudohypoaldosteronism.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

492 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Table 73.2  Causes of Hyponatremia
PSEUDOHYPONATREMIA
Hyperlipidemia
Hyperproteinemia
HYPEROSMOLALITY
Hyperglycemia
Iatrogenic (mannitol, sucrose, glycine)
HYPOVOLEMIC HYPONATREMIA
Extrarenal Losses
Gastrointestinal (emesis, diarrhea)
Skin (sweating or burns)
Third space losses (bowel obstruction, peritonitis, sepsis)
Renal Losses
Thiazide or loop diuretics
Osmotic diuresis
Postobstructive diuresis
Polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis
Juvenile nephronophthisis (OMIM 256100/606966/602088/604387/6
11498)
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (OMIM 263200)
Tubulointerstitial nephritis
Obstructive uropathy
Cerebral salt wasting
Proximal (type II) renal tubular acidosis (OMIM 604278)*
Lack of aldosterone effect (high serum potassium):
Absence of aldosterone (e.g., 21-­hydroxylase deficiency [OMIM
201910])
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type I (OMIM 264350/177735)
Urinary tract obstruction and/or infection
Addison disease
EUVOLEMIC HYPONATREMIA
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH)
Nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (OMIM 304800)
Desmopressin acetate
Glucocorticoid deficiency
Hypothyroidism
Antidepressant medications
Water intoxication
Iatrogenic (excess hypotonic intravenous fluids)
Feeding infants excessive water products
Swimming lessons
Tap water enema
Child abuse
Psychogenic polydipsia
Diluted formula
Beer potomania
Exercise-­induced hyponatremia
HYPERVOLEMIC HYPONATREMIA
Heart failure
Cirrhosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Acute, chronic kidney injury
Capillary leak caused by sepsis
Hypoalbuminemia caused by gastrointestinal disease (protein-­losing
enteropathy)
*Most cases of proximal renal tubular acidosis are not caused by this primary genetic
disorder. Proximal renal tubular acidosis is usually part of Fanconi syndrome, which
has multiple etiologies.
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

Renal Na+ loss may occur in a variety of situations. In some
situations the urine [Na+] is >140 mEq/L; thus hyponatremia may
occur without any fluid intake. In many cases, the urine Na+ level
is less than the serum [Na+]; hence, the intake of hypotonic fluid

Table 73.3  Diagnostic Criteria for Syndrome of
Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone Secretion
• Absence of:
Renal, adrenal, or thyroid insufficiency
Heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, or cirrhosis
Diuretic ingestion
Dehydration
• Urine osmolality >100 mOsm/kg (usually > plasma)
• Serum osmolality <280 mOsm/kg and serum sodium <135 mEq/L
• Urine sodium >30 mEq/L
• Reversal of “sodium wasting” and correction of hyponatremia
with water restriction

is necessary for hyponatremia to develop. In diseases associated
with urinary Na+ loss, the urine Na+ level is >20 mEq/L despite
volume depletion. This may not be true if the urinary Na+ loss is
no longer occurring, as is frequently the case if diuretics are discontinued. Because loop diuretics prevent generation of a maximally hypertonic renal medulla, the patient can neither maximally
dilute nor concentrate the urine. The inability to maximally retain
water provides some protection against severe hyponatremia. The
patient receiving thiazide diuretics can concentrate the urine and
is at higher risk for severe hyponatremia. Osmotic agents, such as
glucose during diabetic ketoacidosis, cause loss of both water and
Na+. Urea accumulates during kidney failure and then acts as an
osmotic diuretic after relief of urinary tract obstruction and during the polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis. Transient tubular damage in these conditions further impairs Na+ conservation.
The serum [Na+] in these conditions depends on [Na+] of the fluid
used to replace the losses. Hyponatremia develops when the fluid is
hypotonic relative to the urinary losses.
Renal salt wasting occurs in hereditary kidney diseases, such
as juvenile nephronophthisis and autosomal recessive polycystic
kidney disease. Obstructive uropathy, most often a result of posterior urethral valves, produces salt wasting, but patients with the
disease may also have hypernatremia as a result of impaired ability
to concentrate urine and high-­water loss. Acquired tubulointerstitial nephritis, usually secondary to either medications or infections,
may cause salt wasting, along with other evidence of tubular dysfunction. CNS injury may produce cerebral salt wasting, which is
theoretically caused by the production of a natriuretic peptide that
causes renal salt wasting. In type II renal tubular acidosis (RTA),
usually associated with Fanconi syndrome (see Chapter 569.1),
there is increased excretion of Na+ and bicarbonate in the urine.
Patients with Fanconi syndrome also have glycosuria, aminoaciduria, and hypophosphatemia because of renal phosphate wasting.
Aldosterone is necessary for renal Na+ retention and for the
excretion of K+ and acid. In congenital adrenal hyperplasia caused
by 21-­hydroxylase deficiency, the block of aldosterone production
results in hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis.
Decreased aldosterone secretion may be seen in Addison disease
(adrenal insufficiency). In pseudohypoaldosteronism, aldosterone
levels are elevated, but there is no response because of either a
defective Na+ channel or a deficiency of aldosterone receptors. A
lack of tubular response to aldosterone may occur in children with
urinary tract obstruction, especially during an acute urinary tract
infection.
In hypervolemic hyponatremia, there is an excess of TBW and
Na+, although the increase in water is greater than the increase in
Na+. In most conditions that cause hypervolemic hyponatremia,
there is a decrease in the effective blood volume, resulting from third
space fluid loss, vasodilation, or poor cardiac output. The regulatory systems sense a decrease in effective blood volume and attempt
to retain water and Na+ to correct the problem. ADH causes renal
water retention, and the kidney, under the influence of aldosterone
and other intrarenal mechanisms, retains sodium. The patient’s

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 493
sodium concentration decreases because water intake exceeds
sodium intake and ADH prevents the normal loss of excess water.
In these disorders, there is low urine [Na+] (<10 mEq/L) and an
excess of both TBW and Na+. The only exception is in patients with
kidney failure and hyponatremia. These patients have an expanded
intravascular volume, and hyponatremia can therefore appropriately
suppress ADH production. Water cannot be excreted because very
little urine is being made. Serum Na+ is diluted through ingestion of
water. Because of renal dysfunction, the urine [Na+] may be elevated,
but urine volume is so low that urine Na+ excretion has not kept up
with Na+ intake, leading to sodium overload. The urine [Na+] in kidney failure varies. In patients with acute glomerulonephritis, because it
does not affect the tubules, the urine Na+ level is usually low, whereas
in patients with acute tubular necrosis, it is elevated because of tubular
dysfunction.
Patients with hyponatremia and no evidence of volume overload
or volume depletion have euvolemic hyponatremia. These patients
typically have an excess of TBW and a slight decrease in total body
Na+. Some of these patients have an increase in weight, implying
that they are volume overloaded. Nevertheless, from a clinical
standpoint, they usually appear normal or have subtle signs of fluid
overload. In SIADH the secretion of ADH is not inhibited by either
low serum osmolality or expanded intravascular volume (see Chapter 597). The result is that the child with SIADH is unable to excrete
water. This results in dilution of the serum Na+ and hyponatremia.
The expansion of the extracellular volume because of the retained
water causes a mild increase in intravascular volume. The kidney
increases Na+ excretion to decrease intravascular volume to normal;
thus the patient has a mild decrease in body Na+. SIADH typically
occurs with disorders of the CNS (infection, hemorrhage, trauma,
tumor, thrombosis, Guillain-­
Barré syndrome), but lung disease
(infection, asthma, positive pressure ventilation) and malignant
tumors (producing ADH) are other potential causes. A variety of
medications may cause SIADH, including recreational use of 3,4
-­methylenedioxymethylamphetamine (MDMA, or “Ecstasy”), opiates, antiepileptic drugs (carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, valproate),
tricyclic antidepressants, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). The diagnosis of SIADH
is one of exclusion, because other causes of hyponatremia must be
eliminated (Table 73.3). Because SIADH is a state of intravascular
volume expansion, low serum uric acid and BUN levels are supportive of the diagnosis. A rare gain-­of-­function pathogenic variant
in the renal ADH receptor causes nephrogenic syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis. Patients with this X-­linked disorder appear
to have SIADH but have undetectable levels of ADH.
Hyponatremia in hospitalized patients is frequently caused by
inappropriate production of ADH and administration of hypotonic
IV fluids (see Chapter 74). Causes of inappropriate ADH production include stress, medications such as narcotics or anesthetics,
nausea, and respiratory illness. The synthetic analog of ADH, desmopressin acetate, causes water retention and may cause hyponatremia if fluid intake is not appropriately limited. The main uses of
desmopressin acetate in children are for the management of central
diabetes insipidus and nocturnal enuresis.
Excess water ingestion can produce hyponatremia. In these
cases, [Na+] decreases as a result of dilution. This decrease suppresses ADH secretion, and there is a marked water diuresis by the
kidney. Hyponatremia develops only because the intake of water
exceeds the kidney’s ability to eliminate water. This condition is
more likely to occur in infants because their lower GFR limits their
ability to excrete water.
Hyponatremia may develop in infants <6 months of age when caregivers offer water to their infant as a supplement, during hot weather,
or when they run out of formula. Hyponatremia may result in transient
seizures, hypothermia, and poor tone. With cessation of water intake,
the hyponatremia rapidly corrects. Infants <6 months of age should not
be given water to drink; infants 6-­12 months of age should not receive
>1-­2 ounces. If the infant appears thirsty, the parent should offer formula
or breastfeed the child.

In some situations the water intoxication causes acute hyponatremia and is caused by a massive acute water load. Causes include
infant swimming lessons, inappropriate use of hypotonic IV fluids,
water enemas, and forced water intake as a form of child abuse.
Chronic hyponatremia occurs in children who receive water but
limited sodium and protein. The minimum urine osmolality is
approximately 50 mOsm/kg; the kidney can excrete 1 L of water
only if there is enough solute ingested to produce 50 mOsm for
urinary excretion. Because Na+ and urea (a breakdown product of
protein) are the principal urinary solutes, a lack of intake of Na+ and
protein prevents adequate water excretion. This occurs with the use
of diluted formula or other inappropriate diets. Subsistence on beer,
a poor source of Na+ and protein, causes hyponatremia because
of the inability to excrete the high water load (“beer potomania”).
Exercise-­induced hyponatremia, reported frequently during marathons, is caused by excessive water intake, salt losses from sweat,
and secretion of ADH.
The pathogenesis of the hyponatremia in glucocorticoid deficiency
(adrenal insufficiency) is multifactorial and includes increased ADH
secretion. In hypothyroidism there is an inappropriate retention
of water by the kidney, but the precise mechanisms are not clearly
elucidated.
Cerebral salt wasting, an uncommon disorder in children, may
be confused with SIADH and is often associated with CNS injury or
lesions. Cerebral salt wasting produces renal salt losses and hypovolemia (orthostatic hypotension and elevated hematocrit, BUN, or creatinine). Hypovolemia is not seen in SIADH.

Clinical Manifestations

Hyponatremia causes a decrease in the osmolality of the ECS. Because
the ICS then has a higher osmolality, water moves from the ECS to
the ICS to maintain osmotic equilibrium. The increase in intracellular water causes cells to swell. Although cell swelling is not problematic in most tissues, it is dangerous for the brain, which is confined
by the skull. As brain cells swell, there is an increase in intracranial
pressure (ICP), which impairs cerebral blood flow. Acute, severe hyponatremia can cause brainstem herniation and apnea; respiratory support is often necessary. Brain cell swelling is responsible for most of the
symptoms of hyponatremia. Neurologic symptoms of hyponatremia
include anorexia, nausea, emesis, malaise, lethargy, confusion, agitation, headache, seizures, coma, and decreased reflexes. Patients may
have hypothermia and Cheyne-­Stokes respirations. Hyponatremia can
cause muscle cramps and weakness; rhabdomyolysis can occur with
water intoxication.
The symptoms of hyponatremia are mostly a result of the decrease
in extracellular osmolality and the resulting movement of water down
its osmotic gradient into the ICS. Brain swelling can be significantly
obviated if the hyponatremia develops gradually, because brain cells
adapt to the decreased extracellular osmolality by reducing intracellular osmolality. This reduction is achieved by extrusion of the main
intracellular ions (K+, Cl−) and a variety of small organic molecules.
This process explains why the range of symptoms in hyponatremia is
related to both the serum [Na+] and its rate of decrease. A patient with
chronic hyponatremia may have only subtle neurologic abnormalities with a serum [Na+] of 110 mEq/L, but another patient may have
seizures because of an acute decline in serum [Na+] from 140 to 125
mEq/L.

Diagnosis

The history usually points to a likely etiology of the hyponatremia.
Most patients with hyponatremia have a history of volume depletion.
Diarrhea and diuretic use are common causes of hyponatremia in children. A history of polyuria, perhaps with enuresis, and/or salt craving is present in children with primary kidney diseases or absence of
aldosterone effect. Children may have signs or symptoms suggesting a
diagnosis of hypothyroidism or adrenal insufficiency (see Chapters 603
and 615). Brain injury raises the possibility of SIADH or cerebral salt
wasting, with the caveat that SIADH is much more likely. Liver disease,
nephrotic syndrome, kidney failure, or congestive heart failure may be

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

494 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
acute or chronic. The history should include a review of the patient’s
intake, both IV and enteral, with careful attention to the amounts of
water, Na+, and protein.
The traditional first step in the diagnostic process is determination
of the plasma osmolality. This is done because some patients with a low
serum [Na+] do not have low osmolality. The clinical effects of hyponatremia are secondary to the associated low osmolality. Without a low
osmolality, there is no movement of water into the ICS.
A patient with hyponatremia can have a low, normal, or high osmolality. A normal osmolality in combination with hyponatremia occurs
in pseudohyponatremia. Children with elevation of serum glucose
concentration or of another effective osmole (mannitol) have a high
plasma osmolality and hyponatremia. The presence of a low osmolality
indicates “true” hyponatremia. Patients with low osmolality are at risk
for neurologic symptoms and require further evaluation to determine
the etiology of the hyponatremia.
In some situations, true hyponatremia is present despite a normal
or elevated plasma osmolality. The presence of an ineffective osmole,
usually urea, increases the plasma osmolality, but because urea has
the same concentration in the ICS, it does not cause fluid to move
into the ECS. There is no dilution of the serum Na+ by water, and the
[Na+] remains unchanged if the ineffective osmole is eliminated. Most
importantly, the ineffective osmole does not protect the brain from
edema caused by hyponatremia. Therefore a patient may have symptoms of hyponatremia despite having a normal or increased osmolality
because of uremia.
In patients with true hyponatremia, the next step in the diagnostic
process is to clinically evaluate the volume status. Patients with hyponatremia can be hypovolemic, hypervolemic, or euvolemic. The diagnosis of volume depletion relies on the usual findings with dehydration
(see Chapter 75), although subtle volume depletion may not be clinically apparent. Children with hypervolemia are edematous on physical
examination. They may have ascites, pulmonary edema, pleural effusion, or hypertension.
Hypovolemic hyponatremia can have renal or nonrenal causes.
The urine [Na+] is very useful in differentiating between renal and
nonrenal causes. When the losses are nonrenal and the kidney is
working properly, there is renal retention of Na+, a normal homeostatic response to volume depletion. Thus the urinary [Na+] is low,
typically <10 mEq/L, although Na+ conservation in neonates is less
avid. When the kidney is the cause of the Na+ loss, the urine [Na+] is
>20 mEq/L, reflecting the defect in renal Na+ retention. The interpretation of the urine Na+ level is challenging with diuretic therapy
because it is high when diuretics are being used but low after the
diuretic effect is gone. This becomes an issue only when diuretic
use is surreptitious. The urine [Na+] is not useful if a metabolic
alkalosis is present; the urine [Cl−] must be used instead (see Chapter 73.7).
Differentiating among the nonrenal causes of hypovolemic hyponatremia is usually facilitated by the history. Although the renal causes
are more challenging to distinguish, a high serum [K+] is associated
with disorders in which the Na+ wasting is caused by absence of or
ineffectiveness of aldosterone.
In the patient with hypervolemic hyponatremia, the urine [Na+] is a
helpful parameter. It is usually <10 mEq/L, except in the patient with
kidney failure.

Treatment

The management of hyponatremia is based on the pathophysiology of
the specific etiology. The management of all causes requires judicious
monitoring and avoidance of an overly quick normalization of the
serum [Na+]. A patient with severe symptoms (seizures), no matter
the etiology, should be given a bolus of hypertonic saline to produce
a small, rapid increase in serum sodium. Hypoxia worsens cerebral
edema, and hyponatremia may exacerbate hypoxic cell swelling. Therefore pulse oximetry should be monitored and hypoxia aggressively
corrected.
With all causes of hyponatremia, it is important to avoid overly
rapid correction, which may cause osmotic demyelination syndrome

(ODS), which includes central pontine myelinolysis and extrapontine
myelinolysis. This syndrome, which occurs within several days of rapid
correction of hyponatremia, produces neurologic symptoms, including confusion, agitation, flaccid or spastic quadriparesis, and death.
There are usually characteristic pathologic and radiologic changes in
the brain. Despite severe symptoms, full recovery does occur in some
patients.
ODS is more common in patients who are treated for chronic
hyponatremia than for acute hyponatremia. Presumably, this difference is based on the adaptation of brain cells to the hyponatremia.
The reduced intracellular osmolality, an adaptive mechanism for
chronic hyponatremia, makes brain cells susceptible to dehydration during rapid correction of the hyponatremia, which may be the
mechanism of ODS. Even though ODS is rare in pediatric patients,
it is advisable to avoid correcting the serum [Na+] by >10 mEq/L/24
hr or >18 mEq/L/48 hr. Desmopressin is a potential option if the
serum [Na+] is increasing too rapidly. This guideline does not
apply to acute hyponatremia, as may occur with water intoxication, because the hyponatremia is more often symptomatic, and the
adaptive decrease in brain osmolality has not had time to occur.
The consequences of brain edema in acute hyponatremia exceed the
small risk of ODS.
Patients with hyponatremia can have severe neurologic symptoms,
such as seizures and coma. The seizures associated with hyponatremia generally are poorly responsive to anticonvulsants. The child with
hyponatremia and severe symptoms needs treatment that will quickly
reduce cerebral edema. This goal is best accomplished by increasing the
extracellular osmolality so that water moves down its osmolar gradient
from the ICS to the ECS.
Intravenous hypertonic saline rapidly increases serum [Na+], and
the effect on serum osmolality leads to a decrease in brain edema.
Each mL/kg of 3% NaCl increases the serum [Na+] by approximately
1 mEq/L. A child with active symptoms often improves after receiving
4-­6 mL/kg of 3% NaCl.
The child with hypovolemic hyponatremia has a deficiency in Na+
and may have a deficiency in water. The cornerstone of therapy is to
replace the Na+ deficit and any water deficit present. The first step in
treating any dehydrated patient is to restore the intravascular volume
with isotonic saline. Ultimately, complete restoration of intravascular
volume suppresses ADH production, thereby permitting excretion of
the excess water. Chapter 75 discusses the management of hyponatremic dehydration.
The management of hypervolemic hyponatremia is difficult;
patients have an excess of both water and Na+. Administration of
Na+ leads to worsening volume overload and edema. In addition,
patients are retaining water and Na+ because of their ineffective
intravascular volume or renal insufficiency. The cornerstone of
therapy is water and Na+ restriction, because patients have volume
overload. Diuretics may help by causing excretion of both Na+ and
water. Vasopressin receptor antagonists (vaptans), by blocking the
action of ADH and causing a water diuresis, are effective in correcting the hypervolemic hyponatremia caused by heart failure. Vaptans
are contraindicated if there are moderate to severe CNS symptoms.
Hyponatremic patients with low albumin from nephrotic syndrome have a better response to diuretics after an infusion of 25%
albumin; the [Na+] often normalizes as a result of expansion of
the intravascular volume. A child with heart failure may have an
increase in renal water and Na+ excretion if there is an improvement
in cardiac output. This improvement will “turn off ” the regulatory
hormones causing renal water (ADH) and Na+ (aldosterone) retention. The patient with kidney failure cannot respond to any of these
therapies except fluid restriction. Insensible fluid losses eventually
result in an increase in the [Na+] as long as insensible and urinary
losses are greater than intake. A more definitive approach in children with kidney failure is to perform dialysis, which removes water
and Na+.
In isovolumic hyponatremia there is usually an excess of water and
a mild Na+ deficit. Therapy is directed at eliminating the excess water.
The child with acute excessive water intake loses water in the urine

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 495
because ADH production is turned off as a result of the low plasma
osmolality. Children may correct their hyponatremia spontaneously
over 3-­6 hours. For acute, symptomatic hyponatremia as a result of
water intoxication, hypertonic saline may be needed to reverse cerebral edema. For chronic hyponatremia from poor solute intake, the
child needs an appropriate formula, and excess water intake should be
eliminated.
Children with iatrogenic hyponatremia caused by the administration of hypotonic IV fluids should receive 3% saline if symptomatic.
Subsequent management is dictated by the patient’s volume status. The
hypovolemic child should receive isotonic IV fluids. The child with
nonphysiologic stimuli for ADH production should undergo fluid
restriction. Prevention of this iatrogenic complication requires judicious use of IV fluids (see Chapter 74).
Specific hormone replacement is the cornerstone of therapy for the
hyponatremia of hypothyroidism or cortisol deficiency. Correction of
the underlying defect permits appropriate elimination of the excess
water.
SIADH is a condition of excess water, with limited ability of the
kidney to excrete water. The mainstay of its therapy is fluid restriction with normal sodium intake. Furosemide and NaCl supplementation are effective in the patient with SIADH and severe
hyponatremia. Even in a patient with SIADH, furosemide causes an
increase in water and Na+ excretion. The loss of Na+ is somewhat
counterproductive, but this Na+ can be replaced with hypertonic
saline. Because the patient has a net loss of water and the urinary
losses of Na+ have been replaced, there is an increase in the [Na+],
but no significant increase in blood pressure. Vaptans, which block
the action of ADH and cause a water diuresis, are effective at correcting euvolemic hyponatremia, but overly rapid correction is
a potential complication. Vaptans are not appropriate for treating
symptomatic hyponatremia because it can take a few hours before
the water diuresis occurs.
Treatment of chronic SIADH is challenging. Fluid restriction in children is difficult for nutritional and behavioral reasons. Other options
are long-­term furosemide therapy with Na+ supplementation, an oral
vaptan (tolvaptan), or oral urea.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.4 Potassium
Larry A. Greenbaum

POTASSIUM METABOLISM
Body Content and Physiologic Function

The intracellular [K+], approximately 150 mEq/L, is much higher than
the plasma [K+] (see Fig. 73.3). The majority of body K+ is contained in
muscle. As muscle mass increases, there is an increase in body K+. Thus
an increase in body K+ occurs during puberty, and it is more significant
in males. The majority of extracellular K+ is in bone; <1% of total body
K+ is in plasma.
Because most K+ is intracellular, the plasma concentration does
not always reflect the total body K+ content. A variety of conditions alter the distribution of K+ between the intracellular and
extracellular compartments. Na+,K+-­ATPase maintains the high
intracellular [K+] by pumping Na+ out of the cell and K+ into
the cell. This activity balances the normal leak of K + out of cells
via potassium channels that is driven by the favorable chemical
gradient. Insulin increases K+ movement into cells by activating Na +,K+-­ATPase. Hyperkalemia stimulates insulin secretion,
which helps mitigate the hyperkalemia. Acid-­b ase status affects
K+ distribution, probably via K+ channels and the Na +,K +-­ATPase.
A decrease in pH drives potassium extracellularly; an increase in
pH has the opposite effect. β-­Adrenergic agonists stimulate the

Na +,K +-­ATPase, increasing cellular uptake of K +. This increase
is protective, in that hyperkalemia stimulates adrenal release of
catecholamines. α-­Adrenergic agonists and exercise cause a net
movement of K+ out of the ICS. An increase in plasma osmolality,
as with mannitol infusion, leads to water movement out of the
cells, and K + follows as a result of solvent drag. The serum [K +]
increases by approximately 0.6 mEq/L with each 10 mOsm rise in
plasma osmolality.
The high intracellular concentration of K+, the principal intracellular cation, is maintained through Na+,K+-­ATPase. The resulting
chemical gradient is used to produce the resting membrane potential of cells. K+ is necessary for the electrical responsiveness of nerve
and muscle cells and for the contractility of cardiac, skeletal, and
smooth muscle. The changes in membrane polarization that occur
during muscle contraction or nerve conduction make these cells
susceptible to changes in serum [K+]. The ratio of intracellular to
extracellular K+ determines the threshold for a cell to generate an
action potential and the rate of cellular repolarization. The intracellular [K+] affects cellular enzymes. K+ is necessary for maintaining
cell volume because of its important contribution to intracellular
osmolality.

Potassium Intake

Potassium is plentiful in food. Dietary consumption varies considerably, even though 1-­2 mEq/kg is the recommended intake.
The intestines normally absorb approximately 90% of ingested K+.
Most absorption occurs in the small intestine, whereas the colon
exchanges body K+ for luminal Na+. Regulation of intestinal losses
normally has a minimal role in maintaining potassium homeostasis,
although kidney failure, aldosterone, and glucocorticoids increase
colonic secretion of K+. The increase in intestinal losses in the setting of kidney failure and hyperkalemia, which stimulates aldosterone production, is clinically significant, helping to protect against
hyperkalemia.

Potassium Excretion

Some loss of K+ occurs in sweat but is normally minimal. The colon
has the ability to eliminate some K+. In addition, after an acute K+ load,
much of the K+ (>40%) moves intracellularly, through the actions of
epinephrine and insulin, which are produced in response to hyperkalemia. This process provides transient protection from hyperkalemia,
but most ingested K+ is eventually excreted in the urine. The kidneys
principally regulate long-­term K+ balance, and they alter excretion in
response to a variety of signals. K+ is freely filtered at the glomerulus, but 90% is resorbed before reaching the distal tubule and collecting duct, the principal sites of K+ regulation that have the ability to
absorb and secrete K+. The amount of tubular secretion regulates the
amount of K+ that appears in the urine. The plasma [K+] directly influences secretion in the distal nephron. As the [K+] increases, secretion
increases.
The principal hormone regulating potassium secretion is aldosterone, which is released by the adrenal cortex in response to
increased plasma K+. Its main site of action is the cortical collecting duct, where aldosterone stimulates Na+ movement from the
tubule into the cells. This movement creates a negative charge in the
tubular lumen, facilitating K+ excretion. In addition, the increased
intracellular Na+ stimulates the basolateral Na+,K+-­ATPase, causing
more K+ to move into the cells lining the cortical collecting duct.
Glucocorticoids, ADH, a high urinary flow rate, and high Na+ delivery to the distal nephron also increase urinary K+ excretion. Insulin, catecholamines, and urinary ammonia decrease K+ excretion.
Whereas ADH increases K+ secretion, it also causes water resorption, decreasing urinary flow. The net effect is that ADH has little
overall impact on K+ balance. Alkalosis causes potassium to move
into cells, including the cells lining the collecting duct. This movement increases K+ secretion, and because acidosis has the opposite
effect; acidosis decreases K+ secretion.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

496 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
The kidney can dramatically vary K+ excretion in response to changes
in intake. Normally, approximately 10–15% of the filtered load is
excreted. In an adult, excretion of K+ can vary from 5-­1,000 mEq/day.

HYPERKALEMIA

Hyperkalemia—because of the potential for lethal arrhythmias—is one
of the most alarming electrolyte abnormalities.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

Three basic mechanisms cause hyperkalemia including increased
intake, cellular shifts, and decreased excretion; spurious lab values are
also commonly seen (Table 73.4). In the individual patient, the etiology
is sometimes multifactorial.
Spurious hyperkalemia or pseudohyperkalemia is very common
in children because of the difficulties in obtaining blood specimens.
This laboratory result is usually caused by hemolysis during a heelstick
or phlebotomy, but it can be the result of prolonged tourniquet application or fist clenching, either of which causes local potassium release
from muscle.
The serum [K+] is normally 0.4 mEq/L higher than the plasma value,
secondary to K+ release from cells during clot formation. This phenomenon is exaggerated with thrombocytosis because of K+ release from
platelets. For every 100,000/m3 increase in the platelet count, the serum
[K+] rises by approximately 0.15 mEq/L. This phenomenon also occurs
with the marked white blood cell (WBC) count elevations sometimes
seen with leukemia. Elevated WBC counts, typically >200,000/m3, can
cause a dramatic elevation in the measured serum [K+]. Analysis of
a plasma sample usually provides an accurate result. It is important
to analyze the sample promptly to avoid K+ release from cells, which
occurs if the sample is stored in the cold, or cellular uptake of K+ and
spurious hypokalemia, which occurs with storage at room temperature. Pneumatic tube transport can cause pseudohyperkalemia if cell
membranes are fragile (leukemia). Occasionally, heparin causes lysis of
leukemic cells and a false elevation of the plasma sample; a blood gas
syringe has less heparin and may provide a more accurate reading than
a standard tube. There are rare genetic disorders causing in vitro leakage of K+ from red blood cells (RBCs) that may causes familial pseudohyperkalemia (autosomal dominant; ABCB6 gene).
Because of the kidney’s ability to excrete K+, it is unusual for excessive intake, by itself, to cause hyperkalemia. This condition can occur in
a patient who is receiving large quantities of IV or oral K+ for excessive
losses that are no longer present. Frequent or rapid blood transfusions
can acutely increase the [K+] because of the K+ content of blood, which
is variably elevated. Increased intake may precipitate hyperkalemia if
there is an underlying defect in K+ excretion.
The ICS has a very high [K+], so a shift of K+ from the ICS to the ECS
can have a significant effect on the plasma [K+]. This shift occurs with
metabolic acidosis, but the effect is minimal with an organic acid (lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis). A respiratory acidosis has less impact than
a metabolic acidosis. Cell destruction, as seen with rhabdomyolysis,
tumor lysis syndrome, tissue necrosis, or hemolysis, releases K+ into
the extracellular milieu. The K+ released from RBCs in internal bleeding, such as hematomas, is resorbed and enters the ECS.
Normal doses of succinylcholine or β blockers and fluoride or digitalis intoxication all cause a shift of K+ out of the intracellular compartment. Succinylcholine should not be used during anesthesia in patients
at risk for hyperkalemia. β Blockers prevent the normal cellular uptake
of K+ mediated by binding of β-­agonists to the β2-­adrenergic receptors. K+ release from muscle cells occurs during exercise, and levels can
increase by 1-­2 mEq/L with high activity. With an increased plasma
osmolality, water moves from the ICS, and K+ follows. This process
occurs with hyperglycemia, although in nondiabetic patients the resultant increase in insulin causes K+ to move intracellularly. In diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA), the absence of insulin causes potassium to leave
the ICS, and the problem is compounded by the hyperosmolality. The
effect of hyperosmolality causes a transcellular shift of K+ into the ECS

Table 73.4  Causes of Hyperkalemia
SPURIOUS LABORATORY VALUE
Hemolysis
Tissue ischemia during blood drawing
Thrombocytosis
Leukocytosis
Familial pseudohyperkalemia (OMIM 609153)
INCREASED INTAKE
Intravenous or oral
Blood transfusions
TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS
Acidosis
Rhabdomyolysis
Tumor lysis syndrome
Tissue necrosis
Hemolysis/hematomas/gastrointestinal bleeding
Succinylcholine
Digitalis intoxication
Fluoride intoxication
β-­Adrenergic blockers
Exercise
Hyperosmolality
Insulin deficiency
Malignant hyperthermia (OMIM 145600/601887/601888)
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (OMIM 170500)
DECREASED EXCRETION
Kidney failure
Primary adrenal disease
Acquired Addison disease
21-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 201910)
3β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 201810)
Lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia (OMIM 201710)
Adrenal hypoplasia congenita (OMIM 300200)
Aldosterone synthase deficiency (OMIM 203400/610600)
Adrenoleukodystrophy (OMIM 300100)
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism
Urinary tract obstruction
Sickle cell disease (OMIM 603903)
Kidney transplant
Lupus nephritis
Renal tubular disease
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type I (OMIM 264350/177735)
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (OMIM 614491/614492/614495)
Bartter syndrome, type 2 (OMIM 241200)
Urinary tract obstruction
Kidney transplant
Medications
Renin inhibitors
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors
Angiotensin II blockers
Potassium-­sparing diuretics
Calcineurin inhibitors
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Trimethoprim
Heparin
Drospirenone (in some oral contraceptives)
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

after mannitol or hypertonic saline infusions. Malignant hyperthermia, which is triggered by some inhaled anesthetics, causes muscle
release of potassium (see Chapter 651.2). Hyperkalemic periodic
paralysis is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by pathogenic
variants in SCN4A, the gene for a Na+ channel. It results in episodic
cellular release of K+ and attacks of paralysis (see Chapter 651.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 497
The kidneys excrete most of the daily K+ intake, so a decrease in kidney function can cause hyperkalemia. Newborn infants in general, and
especially premature infants, have decreased kidney function at birth;
thus they are at increased risk for hyperkalemia despite an absence of
intrinsic renal disease. Neonates also have decreased expression of K+
channels, further limiting K+ excretion.
A wide range of primary adrenal disorders, both hereditary
and acquired, can cause decreased production of aldosterone, with
secondary hyperkalemia (see Chapters 615 and 616). Patients with
these disorders typically have metabolic acidosis and salt wasting
with hyponatremia. Children with subtle adrenal insufficiency may
have electrolyte problems only during acute illnesses. The most
common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 21-­hydroxylase
deficiency, typically manifests in male infants as hyperkalemia,
metabolic acidosis, hyponatremia, and volume depletion. Females
with this disorder usually are diagnosed as newborns because of
their ambiguous genitals; treatment prevents the development of
electrolyte problems.
Renin, via angiotensin II, stimulates aldosterone production. A deficiency in renin, a result of kidney damage, can lead to decreased aldosterone production. Hyporeninemia occurs in many kidney diseases, with
some of the more common pediatric causes listed in Table 73.4. These
patients typically have hyperkalemia and a metabolic acidosis, without
hyponatremia. Some of these patients have impaired renal function, partially accounting for the hyperkalemia, but the impairment in K+ excretion is more extreme than expected for the degree of renal insufficiency.
A variety of renal tubular disorders impair renal excretion of
K+. Children with pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 have hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and salt wasting (kidney, colon, sweat)
leading to hyponatremia and volume depletion; aldosterone values
are elevated. In the autosomal recessive variant, there is a defect
in the renal Na+ channel that is normally activated by aldosterone.
Patients with this variant have severe symptoms (failure to thrive,
diarrhea, recurrent respiratory infections, miliaria-­r ubra like rash),
beginning in infancy. Patients with the autosomal dominant form
have a defect in the aldosterone receptor, and the disease is milder,
often remitting in adulthood. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type 2
(familial hyperkalemic hypertension), also called Gordon syndrome, is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hypertension caused by salt retention and impaired excretion of K+ and
acid, leading to hyperkalemia and hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Pathogenic variants in at least four genes (WNK4, WNK1,
KLHL3, CUL3) may cause Gordon syndrome. Patients may respond
well to thiazide diuretics. In Bartter syndrome, caused by pathogenic variants in the potassium channel ROMK (type 2 Bartter
syndrome), there can be transient hyperkalemia in neonates, but
hypokalemia subsequently develops (see Chapter 571.1).
Acquired renal tubular dysfunction, with an impaired ability to excrete
K+, occurs in a number of conditions. These disorders, all characterized
by tubulointerstitial disease, are often associated with impaired acid
secretion and a secondary metabolic acidosis. In some affected children,
the metabolic acidosis is the dominant feature, although a high K+ intake
may unmask the defect in K+ handling. The tubular dysfunction can
cause renal salt wasting, potentially leading to hyponatremia. Because of
the tubulointerstitial damage, these conditions may also cause hyperkalemia as a result of hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism.
The risk of hyperkalemia resulting from medications is greatest
in patients with underlying renal insufficiency. The predominant
mechanism of medication-­induced hyperkalemia is impaired renal
excretion, although ACE inhibitors may worsen hyperkalemia in
anuric patients, probably by inhibiting GI potassium loss, which
is normally upregulated in renal insufficiency. The hyperkalemia
caused by trimethoprim is especially problematic at higher doses.
Potassium-­sparing diuretics may easily cause hyperkalemia because
they are often used in patients receiving oral K+ supplements. Oral
contraceptives containing drospirenone, which blocks the action
of aldosterone, may cause hyperkalemia and should not be used in
patients with decreased renal function.

Clinical Manifestations

The most important effects of hyperkalemia result from the role
of K+ in membrane polarization. The cardiac conduction system is
usually the dominant concern. Changes in the electrocardiogram
(ECG) begin with peaking of the T waves. This is followed, as K+
level increases, by ST-­segment depression, an increased PR interval,
flattening of the P wave, and widening of the QRS complex (Fig.
73.4). However, the correlation between K+ level and ECG changes
is poor. This process can eventually progress to ventricular fibrillation. Asystole may also occur. Some patients have paresthesias, fasciculations, weakness, and even an ascending paralysis, but cardiac
toxicity usually precedes these clinical symptoms, emphasizing the
danger of assuming that an absence of symptoms implies an absence
of danger. Chronic hyperkalemia is generally better tolerated than
acute hyperkalemia.
Lead V3

A

B

C
Fig. 73.4 The effects of progressive hyperkalemia on the electrocar-

diogram. All of the ECGs are from lead V3. A, Serum potassium concentration ([K+]) = 6.8 mEq/L; note the peaked T waves together with normal sinus rhythm. B, Serum [K+] = 8.9 mEq/L; note the peaked T waves
and absent P waves. C, Serum [K+] >8.9 mEq/L; note the classic sine
wave with absent P waves, marked prolongation of the QRS complex,
and peaked T waves. (From Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil
Medicine. 26th ed. Elsevier; 2020. Fig. 109.2, p. 727.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

498 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Diagnosis

The etiology of hyperkalemia is often readily apparent. Spurious
hyperkalemia is very common in children, so obtaining a second
potassium measurement is often appropriate. If there is a significant elevation of WBC or platelet count, the second measurement
should be performed on a plasma sample that is evaluated promptly.
The history should initially focus on potassium intake, risk factors
for transcellular shifts of K+, medications that cause hyperkalemia,
and signs of renal insufficiency, such as oliguria and edema. Initial
laboratory evaluation should include creatinine, BUN, and assessment of the acid-­base status. Many etiologies of hyperkalemia cause
metabolic acidosis, which worsens hyperkalemia through the transcellular shift of K+ out of cells. Decreased kidney function is a
common cause of the combination of metabolic acidosis and hyperkalemia, also seen in diseases associated with aldosterone insufficiency or aldosterone resistance. Children with absent or ineffective
aldosterone often have hyponatremia and volume depletion because
of salt wasting. Genetic diseases, such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia and pseudohypoaldosteronism, usually manifest in infancy
and should be strongly considered in the infant with hyperkalemia
and metabolic acidosis, especially if hyponatremia is present.
It is important to consider the various etiologies of a transcellular K+ shift. In some of these disorders, the K+ level continues to
increase, despite the elimination of all K+ intake, especially with
concurrent renal insufficiency. This increase is potentially seen
in tumor lysis syndrome, hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, and other
causes of cell death. All these entities can cause concomitant hyperphosphatemia and hyperuricemia. Rhabdomyolysis produces an
elevated creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) value and hypocalcemia, whereas children with hemolysis have hemoglobinuria and a
decreasing hematocrit. For the child with diabetes, elevated blood
glucose and acidosis suggest a transcellular shift of K+.

Treatment

The plasma K+ level, the ECG, and the risk of the problem worsening
determine the aggressiveness of the therapeutic approach. High serum
[K+] and the presence of ECG changes require vigorous treatment. An
additional source of concern is the patient in whom plasma K+ levels
are rising despite minimal intake. This situation can happen if there is
cellular release of K+ (tumor lysis syndrome), especially in the setting
of diminished excretion (kidney failure).
The first action in a child with a concerning elevation of plasma
[K+] is to stop all sources of additional K+ (oral, IV). Washed RBCs
can be used for patients who require blood transfusions. If the [K+]
is >6.5 mEq/L, an ECG should be obtained to help assess the urgency
of the situation. Peaked T waves are the first sign of hyperkalemia,
followed by a prolonged PR interval, and when most severe, prolonged QRS complex. Life-­threatening ventricular arrhythmias may
also develop. The treatment of hyperkalemia has two basic goals:
(1) to stabilize the heart to prevent life-­threatening arrhythmias
and (2) to remove K+ from the body. The treatments that acutely
prevent arrhythmias all have the advantage of working quickly
(within minutes) but do not remove K+ from the body. Calcium
stabilizes the cell membrane of heart cells, preventing arrhythmias;
it is given IV over a few minutes, and its action is almost immediate. Calcium should be given over 30 minutes in a patient receiving
digitalis because the calcium may cause arrhythmias. Bicarbonate
causes potassium to move intracellularly, lowering the plasma [K+];
it is most efficacious in a patient with a metabolic acidosis. Insulin
causes K+ to move intracellularly but must be given with glucose
to avoid hypoglycemia. The combination of insulin and glucose
works within 30 minutes. Nebulized albuterol, by stimulation
of β1-­adrenergic receptors, leads to rapid intracellular movement
of K+. This has the advantage of not requiring an IV route of
administration, allowing it to be given concurrently with the other
measures.

It is critical to begin measures that remove K+ from the body. In
patients who are not anuric, a loop diuretic increases renal excretion
of K+. A high dose may be required in a patient with significant renal
insufficiency. Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS; Kayexalate) is an
exchange resin that is given either rectally or orally. Patiromer and
sodium zirconium cyclosilicate are oral exchange resins for treating
hyperkalemia. Some patients require dialysis for acute K+ removal.
Dialysis is often necessary if the patient has either severe kidney failure
or an especially high rate of endogenous K+ release, as is sometimes
present with tumor lysis syndrome or rhabdomyolysis. Hemodialysis
rapidly lowers plasma [K+]. Peritoneal dialysis is not nearly as quick
or reliable, but it is usually adequate as long as the acute problem can
be managed with medications and the endogenous release of K+ is not
high.
Long-­term management of hyperkalemia includes reducing intake
through dietary changes and eliminating or reducing medications that
cause hyperkalemia (see Chapter 572). Some patients require medications to increase potassium excretion, such as SPS, patiromer, sodium
zirconium cyclosilicate, and loop or thiazide diuretics. Some infants
with chronic kidney disease may need to start dialysis to allow adequate caloric intake without hyperkalemia. It is unusual for an older
child to require dialysis principally to control chronic hyperkalemia.
The disorders caused by aldosterone deficiency respond to replacement
therapy with fludrocortisone.

HYPOKALEMIA

Hypokalemia is common in children, with most cases related to
gastroenteritis.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

There are four basic mechanisms of hypokalemia (Table 73.5). Spurious hypokalemia occurs in patients with leukemia and very elevated
WBC counts if plasma for analysis is left at room temperature, permitting the WBCs to take up K+ from the plasma. With a transcellular
shift, there is no change in total body K+, although there may be concomitant potassium depletion resulting from other factors. Decreased
intake, extrarenal losses, and renal losses are all associated with total
body K+ depletion. In addition, seasonal pseudo-­hypokalemia is seen
during warm summer months as a laboratory phenomenon when
blood samples are exposed to a warm environment. On immediate
retesting, the potassium level is normal. This should not be confused
with a pseudo-­Bartter syndrome (hypokalemic, hypochloremic, alkalosis) seen in children with cystic fibrosis in a very warm environment
due to excessive sweating.
Because the intracellular [K+] is much higher than the plasma
level, a significant amount of K+ can move into cells without greatly
changing the intracellular [K+]. Alkalemia is one of the more common causes of a transcellular shift. The effect is much greater with
a metabolic alkalosis than with a respiratory alkalosis. The impact
of exogenous insulin on K+ movement into the cells is substantial
in patients with DKA. Endogenous insulin may be the cause when
a patient is given a bolus of glucose. Both endogenous (epinephrine
in stress) and exogenous (albuterol) β-­adrenergic agonists stimulate cellular uptake of K+. Theophylline overdose, barium intoxication, administration of cesium chloride (a homeopathic cancer
remedy), and toluene intoxication from paint or glue sniffing can
cause a transcellular shift hypokalemia, often with severe clinical
manifestations. Children with hypokalemic periodic paralysis, a
rare autosomal dominant disorder, have acute cellular uptake of K+
(see Chapter 651). Thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, which is more
common in Asians, is an unusual initial manifestation of hyperthyroidism. Affected patients have dramatic hypokalemia as a result of
a transcellular shift of potassium. Hypokalemia can occur during
refeeding syndrome (see Chapters 63 and 385.7).
Inadequate K+ intake occurs in anorexia nervosa; accompanying
bulimia and laxative or diuretic abuse exacerbates the K+ deficiency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 499
Table 73.5  Causes of Hypokalemia
SPURIOUS LABORATORY VALUE
High white blood cell count
TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS
Alkalemia
Insulin
α-­Adrenergic agonists
Drugs/toxins (theophylline, barium, toluene, cesium chloride,
hydroxychloroquine)
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (OMIM 170400)
Thyrotoxic period paralysis
Refeeding syndrome
DECREASED INTAKE
Anorexia nervosa
EXTRARENAL LOSSES
Diarrhea
Laxative abuse
Sweating
Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate) or clay ingestion
RENAL LOSSES
With Metabolic Acidosis
Distal renal tubular acidosis (OMIM 179800/602722/267300/611590)
Proximal renal tubular acidosis (OMIM 604278)*
Ureterosigmoidostomy
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Without Specific Acid-­Base Disturbance
Tubular toxins: amphotericin, cisplatin, aminoglycosides
Interstitial nephritis
Diuretic phase of acute tubular necrosis
Postobstructive diuresis
Hypomagnesemia
High urine anions (e.g., penicillin or penicillin derivatives)

With Metabolic Alkalosis
Low urine chloride
Emesis or nasogastric suction
Chloride-­losing diarrhea (OMIM 214700)
Cystic fibrosis (OMIM 219700)
Low-­chloride formula
Posthypercapnia
Previous loop or thiazide diuretic use
High urine chloride and normal blood pressure
Gitelman syndrome (OMIM 263800)
Bartter syndrome (OMIM 241200/607364/602522/601678/300971/6
01198/613090)
Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200)
EAST syndrome (OMIM 612780)
Autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia due to RRAGD
variant (OMIM not assigned)
Loop and thiazide diuretics (current)
High urine chloride and high blood pressure
Adrenal adenoma or hyperplasia
Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism (OMIM 103900)
Hyperaldosteronism type II (OMIM 605635)
Familial hyperaldosteronism type III (OMIM 613677)
Familial hyperaldosteronism type IV (OMIM 617027)
Renovascular disease
Renin-­secreting tumor
17β-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202110)
11β-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202010)
Cushing syndrome
11β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 218030)
Licorice ingestion
Liddle syndrome (OMIM 177200)
Early-­onset autosomal dominant hypertension with exacerbation in
pregnancy (OMIM 605115)

*Most cases of proximal renal tubular acidosis are not caused by this primary genetic disorder. Proximal renal tubular acidosis is usually part of Fanconi syndrome, which has multiple
etiologies.
EAST, Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

Sweat losses of K+ can be significant during vigorous exercise in
a hot climate. Associated volume depletion and hyperaldosteronism increase renal losses of K+ (discussed later). Diarrheal fluid has
a high concentration of K+, and hypokalemia because of diarrhea
is usually associated with metabolic acidosis resulting from stool
losses of bicarbonate. In contrast, normal acid-­base balance or mild
metabolic alkalosis is seen with laxative abuse. Intake of potassium-­
binding resins (SPS) or ingestion of clay because of pica increases
stool losses of potassium.
Urinary potassium wasting may be accompanied by a metabolic
acidosis (proximal or distal RTA). In DKA, although it is often
associated with normal plasma [K+] from transcellular shifts, there
is significant total body K+ depletion from urinary losses because
of the osmotic diuresis, and the K+ level may decrease dramatically
with insulin therapy (see Chapter 629). Both the polyuric phase of
acute tubular necrosis and postobstructive diuresis cause transient,
highly variable K+ wasting and may be associated with metabolic
acidosis. Tubular damage, which occurs either directly from medications or secondary to interstitial nephritis, is often accompanied
by other tubular losses, including magnesium, Na+, and water. Such
tubular damage may cause a secondary RTA with metabolic acidosis. Isolated magnesium deficiency causes renal K+ wasting. Penicillin is an anion excreted in the urine, resulting in increased K+
excretion because the penicillin anion must be accompanied by a

cation. Hypokalemia from penicillin therapy occurs only with the
sodium salt of penicillin, not with the potassium salt.
Urinary K+ wasting is often accompanied by a metabolic alkalosis. This condition is usually associated with increased aldosterone,
which increases urinary K+ and acid losses, contributing to the
hypokalemia and the metabolic alkalosis. Other mechanisms often
contribute to both the K+ losses and the metabolic alkalosis. With
emesis or nasogastric suction, there is gastric loss of K+, but this is
minimal given the low K+ content of gastric fluid, approximately
10 mEq/L. More important is the gastric loss of hydrochloric acid
(HCl), leading to metabolic alkalosis and a state of volume depletion. The kidney compensates for metabolic alkalosis by excreting
bicarbonate in the urine, but there is obligate loss of K+ and Na+
with the bicarbonate. The volume depletion raises aldosterone levels, further increasing urinary K+ losses and preventing correction
of metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia until the volume depletion
is corrected.
Urinary chloride (Cl−) is low as a response to the volume depletion.
Because the volume depletion is secondary to Cl− loss, this is a state of
Cl− deficiency. There were cases of Cl− deficiency resulting from infant
formula deficient in Cl−, which caused a metabolic alkalosis with hypokalemia and low urine [Cl−]. Current infant formula is not deficient in
Cl−. A similar mechanism occurs in cystic fibrosis because of Cl− loss in
sweat. In congenital chloride-­losing diarrhea, an autosomal recessive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

500 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
disorder, there is high stool loss of Cl−, leading to metabolic alkalosis,
an unusual sequela of diarrhea. Because of stool K+ losses, Cl− deficiency, and metabolic alkalosis, patients with congenital chloride-­
losing diarrhea have hypokalemia.
During respiratory acidosis, there is renal compensation, with
retention of bicarbonate and excretion of Cl−. After the respiratory
acidosis is corrected, the patients have Cl− deficiency and post–
hypercapnic alkalosis with secondary hypokalemia. Patients with
Cl− deficiency, metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia have a urinary
[Cl−] of <10 mEq/L. Loop and thiazide diuretics lead to hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and Cl− deficiency. During treatment,
these patients have high urine chloride levels resulting from the
effect of the diuretic. However, after the diuretics are discontinued,
there is residual Cl− deficiency, the urinary [Cl−] is appropriately
low, and neither the hypokalemia nor the alkalosis resolves until the
Cl− deficiency is corrected.
The combination of metabolic alkalosis, hypokalemia, high urine
[Cl−], and normal blood pressure is characteristic of Bartter syndrome, Gitelman syndrome, and current diuretic use. Patients with
any of these conditions have high urinary losses of Cl− despite a
state of relative volume depletion with secondary hyperaldosteronism with high plasma renin. Bartter and Gitelman syndromes are
autosomal recessive disorders caused by defects in tubular transporters (see Chapter 571). Bartter syndrome is usually associated
with hypercalciuria, and often with nephrocalcinosis, whereas children with Gitelman syndrome have low urinary calcium losses
but hypomagnesemia because of urinary magnesium losses. Some
patients with Bartter syndrome have hypomagnesemia. A transient
antenatal form of Bartter syndrome is associated with severe polyhydramnios and pathogenic variants in MAGED2.
Some patients with hypoparathyroidism and hypocalcemia
caused by activating pathogenic variants of the calcium-­sensing
receptor (autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism) have hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and metabolic alkalosis. The reason is
that activation of the calcium-­sensing receptor in the loop of Henle
impairs tubular resorption of sodium and chloride, causing volume
depletion and secondary hyperaldosteronism. EAST syndrome, an
autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathologic variants in the
gene for a potassium channel in the kidney, inner ear, and brain,
consists of epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy (hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, and
hypocalciuria).
In the presence of high aldosterone levels, there is urinary loss of
K+, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and elevated urinary [Cl−];
renal retention of Na+ leads to hypertension. Primary hyperaldosteronism caused by adenoma or hyperplasia is much less
common in children than in adults (see Chapters 619 and 620).
Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism, an autosomal dominant disorder that leads to high levels of aldosterone (but low renin
levels), is often diagnosed in childhood, although hypokalemia is
not always present. Familial hyperaldosteronism type II, an autosomal dominant disorder, is due to a gain-­of-­function variant in
CLCN2 that causes increased aldosterone synthesis. Familial hyperaldosteronism type III, an autosomal dominant disorder, is due to
a gain-­of-­function variant in KCNJ5 that causes a dramatic increase
in aldosterone synthesis and severe hypertension and hypokalemia.
Familial hyperaldosteronism type IV, an autosomal dominant disorder, is due to a gain-­of-­function variant in CACNA1H that causes
increased aldosterone synthesis.
Increased aldosterone levels may also be secondary to increased
renin production. Renal artery stenosis leads to hypertension
from increased renin and secondary hyperaldosteronism. The
increased aldosterone can cause hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis, although most patients have normal electrolyte levels. Renin-­
producing tumors, which are extremely rare, can cause hypokalemia.
A variety of disorders cause hypertension and hypokalemia without increased aldosterone levels. Some are a result of increased
levels of mineralocorticoids other than aldosterone. Such increases

occur in two forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (see Chapter 616). In 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency, which is associated with
virilization, 11-­deoxycorticosterone is elevated, causing variable
hypertension and hypokalemia. A similar mechanism, increased
11-­deoxycorticosterone, occurs in 17α-­hydroxylase deficiency, but
patients with this disorder are more uniformly hypertensive and
hypokalemic, and they have a defect in sex hormone production.
Cushing syndrome, frequently associated with hypertension, less
frequently causes metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia, secondary
to the mineralocorticoid activity of cortisol. In 11β-­hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency, an autosomal recessive disorder, the
enzymatic defect prevents the conversion of cortisol to cortisone in
the kidney. Because cortisol binds to and activates the aldosterone
receptor, children with this deficiency have all the features of excessive mineralocorticoids, including hypertension, hypokalemia, and
metabolic alkalosis, but low levels of aldosterone and renin. Patients
with this disorder, which is also called apparent mineralocorticoid
excess, respond to spironolactone therapy, which blocks the mineralocorticoid receptor. An acquired form of 11β-­hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency occurs from the ingestion of substances
that inhibit this enzyme. A classic example is glycyrrhizic acid,
which is found in natural licorice. Liddle syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder that results from activating pathogenic
variants of the distal nephron sodium channel that is normally
upregulated by aldosterone. Patients have the characteristics of
hyperaldosteronism—hypertension, hypokalemia, and alkalosis—
but low serum renin and aldosterone levels. These patients respond
to the potassium-­sparing diuretics (triamterene and amiloride) that
inhibit this sodium channel (see Chapter 571.3). A pathogenic variant in the mineralocorticoid receptor causes early-­onset autosomal
dominant hypertension with exacerbation in pregnancy. Hypokalemia is usually mild but worsens during pregnancy; renin and
aldosterone levels are low.

Clinical Manifestations

The heart and skeletal muscle are especially vulnerable to hypokalemia.
ECG changes include a flattened T wave, a depressed ST segment, and
the appearance of a U wave, which is located between the T wave (if still
visible) and the P wave (Fig. 73.5). Ventricular fibrillation and torsades
de pointes may occur, although usually only in the context of underlying heart disease. Hypokalemia makes the heart especially susceptible
to digitalis-­induced arrhythmias, such as supraventricular tachycardia,
ventricular tachycardia, and heart block (see Chapter 484).
The clinical consequences of hypokalemia in skeletal muscle include
muscle weakness and cramps. Paralysis is a possible complication, generally only at [K+] <2.5 mEq/L. It usually starts in the legs and moves
to the arms. Respiratory paralysis may require mechanical ventilation.
Some patients have rhabdomyolysis; the risk increases with exercise.
Hypokalemia slows GI motility. This effect manifests as constipation;
with K+ levels <2.5 mEq/L, an ileus may occur. Hypokalemia impairs
bladder function, potentially leading to urinary retention.
Hypokalemia causes polyuria and polydipsia by impairing urinary
concentrating ability, which produces nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
Hypokalemia stimulates renal ammonia production, an effect that is
clinically significant if hepatic failure is present, because the liver cannot metabolize the ammonia. Consequently, hypokalemia may worsen
hepatic encephalopathy. Chronic hypokalemia may cause kidney damage, including interstitial nephritis and renal cysts.

Diagnosis

Most causes of hypokalemia are readily apparent from the history. It is
important to review the child’s diet, GI losses, and medications. Both
emesis and diuretic use can be surreptitious. The presence of hypertension suggests excess mineralocorticoid effects or levels. Concomitant
electrolyte abnormalities are useful clues. The combination of hypokalemia and metabolic acidosis is characteristic of diarrhea and distal
and proximal RTA. A concurrent metabolic alkalosis is characteristic
of emesis or nasogastric losses, aldosterone excess, use of diuretics, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 501
V2

V3

V4

Fig. 73.5 The ECG manifestations of hypokalemia. The serum po-

tassium concentration was 2.2 mEq/L. The ST segment is prolonged,
primarily because of a U wave following the T wave, and the T wave is
flattened. (From Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman-­Cecil Medicine.
26th ed. Elsevier; 2020. Fig. 109.1, p 727.)

Bartter and Gitelman syndromes. Figure 73.6 shows an approach to
persistent hypokalemia.
If a clear etiology is not apparent, the measurement of urinary K+
distinguishes between renal and extrarenal losses. The kidneys should
conserve K+ in the presence of extrarenal losses. Urinary K+ losses can
be assessed with a 24-­hour urine collection, spot K+:creatinine ratio,
fractional excretion of K+, or calculation of the transtubular K+ gradient (TTKG), which is the most widely used approach in children:
TTKG = [K]urine /[K]plasma × (plasma osmolality / urine osmolality)

where [K]urine = urine potassium concentration and [K]plasma =
plasma potassium concentration.
The urine osmolality must be greater than the serum osmolality for
the result of this calculation to be valid. A TTKG >4 in the presence of
hypokalemia suggests excessive urinary losses of K+. The urinary K+
excretion value can be misleading if the stimulus for renal loss, such as
a diuretic, is no longer present.

Treatment

Factors that influence the treatment of hypokalemia include the K+
level, clinical symptoms, kidney function, the presence of transcellular shifts of K+, ongoing losses, and the patient’s ability to tolerate oral K+. Severe, symptomatic hypokalemia requires aggressive
treatment. Supplementation is more cautious if renal function is
decreased because of the kidney’s limited ability to excrete excessive

K+. The plasma potassium level does not always provide an accurate
estimation of the total body K+ deficit because there may be shifts
of K+ from the ICS to the plasma. Clinically, such shifts occur most
often with metabolic acidosis and the insulin deficiency of DKA; the
plasma [K+] measurement underestimates the degree of total body
K+ depletion. When these problems are corrected, K+ moves into the
ICS, so more K+ supplementation is required to correct the hypokalemia. Likewise, the presence of a transcellular shift of K+ into the cells
indicates that the total body K+ depletion is less severe. In an isolated
transcellular shift, as in hypokalemic periodic paralysis, K+ supplementation should be used cautiously, given the risk of hyperkalemia when the transcellular shift resolves. This caution is especially
required in thyrotoxic periodic paralysis, which responds dramatically to propranolol, with correction of weakness and hypokalemia.
Patients who have ongoing losses of K+ need correction of the deficit
and replacement of the ongoing losses.
Because of the risk of hyperkalemia, IV K+ should be used very cautiously. Oral K+ is safer, but not as rapid in urgent situations. Liquid
preparations are bitter tasting; microencapsulated or wax matrix formulations are less irritating than tablets to the gastric mucosa. Oral
dosing is variable depending on the clinical situation. A typical starting
dose is 1-­2 mEq/kg/day, with a maximum of 60 mEq/day in divided
doses. The dose of IV potassium is 0.5-­1.0 mEq/kg, usually given over 1
hour. The adult maximum dose is 40 mEq. Conservative dosing is generally preferred. Potassium chloride is the usual choice for supplementation, although the presence of concurrent electrolyte abnormalities
may dictate other options. Patients with acidosis and hypokalemia can
receive potassium acetate or potassium citrate. If hypophosphatemia is
present, some of the potassium deficit can be replaced with potassium
phosphate. It is sometimes possible to decrease ongoing K+ losses. For
patients with excessive urinary losses, potassium-­sparing diuretics are
effective, but they need to be used cautiously in patients with decreased
kidney function. If hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and volume
depletion are present (with gastric losses), restoration of intravascular volume with adequate NaCl will decrease urinary K+ losses. Correction of concurrent hypomagnesemia is important because it may
cause hypokalemia. Disease-­specific therapy is effective in many of the
genetic tubular disorders.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.5 Magnesium
Larry A. Greenbaum

MAGNESIUM METABOLISM
Body Content and Physiologic Function

Magnesium is the fourth most common cation in the body and the
third most common intracellular cation (see Fig. 73.3). From 50–60%
of body magnesium is in bone, where it serves as a reservoir because
30% is exchangeable, allowing movement to the ECS. Most intracellular magnesium is bound to proteins; only approximately 25% is
exchangeable. Because cells with higher metabolic rates have higher
magnesium concentrations, most intracellular magnesium is present
in muscle and liver.
The normal plasma magnesium concentration is 1.5-­2.3 mg/dL (1.2-­
1.9 mEq/L; 0.62-­0.94 mmol/L), with some variation among clinical
laboratories. Infants have slightly higher plasma magnesium concentrations than older children and adults. Only 1% of body magnesium
is extracellular (60% ionized, 15% complexed, 25% protein bound). In
the United States, serum magnesium is reported as mg/dL (Table 73.6).
Values in the left-­column unit are converted into the right-­column unit
by multiplying the conversion factor (e.g., calcium of 10 mg/dL × 0.25
= 2.5 mmol/L). Dividing the right-­column unit by the conversion factor converts to the units of the left-­column unit.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

502 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Hypokalemia*
Cellular uptake of K

Reduced total body K
Insufficient K intake

Excessive K loss

Extra-renal loss
(Urine K  15 mEq/L ; TTKG  4)

Sweat loss
Gi loss
-Pica / geophagia
-K binders, fistulas
-Diarrhea, laxatives

Metabolic alkalosis

Renal loss
(Urine K  15 mEq/L ; TTKG  4)

Metabolic acidosis

Variable acid-base status
Drugs (antibiotics, etc.)
Polyuric disorders
Saline diuresis (Kfree)
Magnesium depletion
Congenital K wasting
Acquired K wasting
Leukemia

Renal tubular acidosis (I and II)
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Ureterosigmoid diversion
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Urine Cl  15

Urine Cl  15
Cl Deficient diet
GI Cl loss (emesis / NG drainage)
Sweat Cl loss
Post-hypercapnea
Post-diuretic effect

PRA  0.5 ng/mL/hr; DR  15 mU/L

Hypertension

Acute alkalosis
Insulin
β-adrenergic stimulants
Periodic paralysis
Barium poisoning
Acute increase in blood cells

Low / normal BP

Recent diuretic effect
Bartter syndrome
Gitelman syndrome
Hypovolemia

PRA  0.5 ng/mL/hr; DR  15 mU/L

Renal parenchymal disease
Renovascular disease
Renal compression
Renal tumors
Pheochromocytoma
Excess ACTH / Glucocorticoids**
High aldosterone
Low / Normal DOC

Variable aldosterone
High DOC

Low aldosterone
Low / Normal DOC

Primary aldosteronism
- tumors, hyperplasia
- GRA (FH-I), FH-II

High 17-OHP
Low cortisol
High ACTH
11-β hydroxylase deficiency

Low / normal 17-OHP
Low cortisol
High ACTH

AME, licorice, Carbenoxolone
Chronic grapefruit juice intake
Liddle syndrome (PA-I)
MR activating mutation (PA-II)
Exogenous mineralocorticoid
Excess ACTH / Glucocorticoids**

High 17-OHP
High cortisol
High ACTH

17-α hydroxylase deficiency

GR resistance

Normal 17-OHP
Normal cortisol
Normal ACTH
DOC-secreting tumors

Fig. 73.6 Diagnostic algorithm to evaluate persistent hypokalemia. *Spurious hypokalemia must be excluded. **Hypokalemia is uncommon in

uncomplicated edematous disorders and in conditions associated with excessive glucocorticosteroids. Conditions associated with high circulating levels of glucocorticosteroids often have normal renin activity. 17-­OHP, 17-­Hydroxyprogesterone; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; AME,
apparent mineralocorticoid excess; BP, blood pressure; Cl−, chloride; DOC, 11-­deoxycorticosterone; DR, direct renin assay; GI, gastrointestinal;
FH-­II, familial hyperaldosteronism type II; GR, glucocorticoid receptor; GRA (FH-­I), glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism (familial hyperaldosteronism type I); K+, potassium; MR, mineralocorticoid receptor; PA-­I, pseudohyperaldosteronism type I; PA-­II, pseudohyperaldosteronism type
II; PRA, plasma renin activity; TTKG, transtubular potassium gradient. (From Shoemaker LR, Eaton BV, Buchino JJ. A three-­year-­old with persistent
hypokalemia. J Pediatr. 2007;151[6]:696–699.)

Magnesium is a necessary cofactor for hundreds of enzymes. It is
important for membrane stabilization and nerve conduction. Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and guanosine triphosphate need associated
magnesium when they are used by ATPases, cyclases, and kinases.

Magnesium Intake

Between 30% and 50% of dietary magnesium is absorbed. Good
dietary sources include green vegetables, cereals, nuts, meats, and hard
water, although many foods contain magnesium. Human milk contains
approximately 35 mg/L of magnesium; formula contains 40-­70 mg/L.
The small intestine is the major site of magnesium absorption, but
the regulation of magnesium absorption is poorly understood. There
is passive absorption, which permits high absorption in the presence

of excessive intake. It probably occurs by a paracellular mechanism.
Absorption is diminished in the presence of substances that complex
with magnesium (free fatty acids, fiber, phytate, phosphate, oxalate);
increased intestinal motility and calcium also decrease magnesium
absorption. Vitamin D and parathyroid hormone (PTH) may enhance
absorption, although this effect is limited. Intestinal absorption does
increase when intake is decreased, possibly by a saturable, active transport system. If there is no oral intake of magnesium, obligatory secretory losses prevent the complete elimination of intestinal losses.

Magnesium Excretion

Renal excretion is the principal regulator of magnesium balance. There
is no defined hormonal regulatory system, although PTH may increase

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 503
tubular resorption. Approximately 15% of resorption occurs in the
proximal tubule and 70% in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the loop
of Henle. Proximal resorption may be higher in neonates. High serum
magnesium levels inhibit resorption in the TAL, suggesting that active
transport is involved. Approximately 5–10% of filtered magnesium is
resorbed in the distal tubule. Hypomagnesemia increases absorption
in the TAL and the distal tubule.

HYPOMAGNESEMIA

Hypomagnesemia is relatively common in hospitalized patients,
although most cases are asymptomatic. Detection requires a high index
of suspicion because magnesium is not measured in most basic metabolic panels.

Table 73.6  Conversion Factors for Calcium, Magnesium,
and Phosphorus
UNIT

CONVERSION
FACTOR

UNIT

Calcium

mg/dL
mEq/L
mg/dL

0.25
0.5
0.5

mmol/L
mmol/L
mEq/L

Magnesium

mg/dL
mEq/L
mg/dL

0.411
0.5
0.822

mmol/L
mmol/L
mEq/L

Phosphorus

mg/dL

0.32

mmol/L

Etiology and Pathophysiology

GI and renal losses are the major causes of hypomagnesemia (Table
73.7). Diarrheal fluid contains up to 200 mg/L of magnesium; gastric
contents have only approximately 15 mg/L, but high losses can cause
depletion. Steatorrhea causes magnesium loss because of the formation
of magnesium-­lipid salts; restriction of dietary fat can decrease losses.
The potassium-­lowering agent patiromer binds magnesium and may
cause hypomagnesemia.
Hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia, a rare autosomal recessive disorder, is caused by decreased intestinal absorption of
magnesium and renal magnesium wasting. Patients with this disorder
have pathogenic variants in a gene expressed in intestine and kidney;
TRPM6 codes for a transient receptor potential cation channel. The
patients have seizures, tetany, tremor, or restlessness at 2-­8 weeks of
life because of severe hypomagnesemia (0.2-­0.8 mg/dL) and secondary
hypocalcemia.
Renal losses may occur because of medications that are direct tubular toxins. Amphotericin frequently causes significant magnesium
wasting and is typically associated with other tubular defects (especially potassium wasting). Cisplatin produces dramatic renal magnesium losses. Diuretics affect tubular handling of magnesium. Loop
diuretics cause a mild increase in magnesium excretion, and thiazide
diuretics have even less effect. Chronic use of proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) may cause hypomagnesemia. Potassium-­sparing diuretics
reduce magnesium losses. Osmotic agents, such as mannitol, glucose
in diabetes mellitus, and urea in the recovery phase of acute tubular
necrosis, increase urinary magnesium losses. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor inhibitors cause renal magnesium wasting. IV fluid,
by expanding the intravascular volume, decreases renal resorption of

Table 73.7  Causes of Hypomagnesemia
GASTROINTESTINAL LOSSES
Diarrhea
Nasogastric suction or emesis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Celiac disease
Cystic fibrosis
Intestinal lymphangiectasia
Small bowel resection or bypass
Pancreatitis
Protein-­calorie malnutrition
Patiromer
Hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia (OMIM 602014)*
RENAL DISORDERS
Medications
Amphotericin
Cisplatin
Cyclosporine, tacrolimus
Loop and thiazide diuretics
Mannitol
Pentamidine
Proton pump inhibitors
Aminoglycosides
Thiazide diuretics
Epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors
Diabetes
Acute tubular necrosis (recovery phase)
Postobstructive nephropathy
Chronic kidney diseases
Interstitial nephritis
Glomerulonephritis
Post–renal transplantation
Hypercalcemia
Intravenous fluids

Primary aldosteronism
Genetic diseases
Gitelman syndrome (OMIM 263800)
Bartter syndrome (OMIM 241200/607364/602522/601678/300971/6
01198/613090)
Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis
(OMIM 248250)
Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis,
and severe ocular involvement (OMIM 248190)
Autosomal recessive renal magnesium wasting with normocalciuria
(OMIM 611718)
Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome due to HNF1β variants (OMIM
137920)
Autosomal dominant hypomagnesemia (OMIM
160120/613882/154020)
EAST syndrome (OMIM 612780)
Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200)
Mitochondrial disorders (OMIM 500005)
Hyperuricemia, pulmonary hypertension, renal failure in infancy and
alkalosis, HUPRA syndrome (OMIM 613845)
Transient neonatal hyperphenylalaninemia followed by hypomagnesemia
and maturity onset diabetes of the young (OMIM 264070)
Hypomagnesemia, seizures and mental retardation due to CNNM2
pathogenic variants (OMIM 616418)
Autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia due to RRAGD
pathogenic variants (OMIM not assigned)
MISCELLANEOUS CAUSES
Poor intake
Hungry bone syndrome
Insulin administration
Pancreatitis
Intrauterine growth restriction
Infants of diabetic mothers
Exchange transfusion

*This disorder is also associated with renal magnesium wasting.
EAST, Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

504 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
sodium and water, thereby impairing magnesium resorption. Hypercalcemia inhibits magnesium resorption in the loop of Henle, although
this inhibition does not occur in hypercalcemia caused by familial
hypercalcemic hypocalciuria or lithium.
A number of rare genetic diseases cause renal magnesium loss.
Gitelman and Bartter syndromes, both autosomal recessive disorders, are the most common entities (see Chapter 571). Gitelman
syndrome, caused by a defect in the thiazide-­sensitive Na+-­Cl− co-­
transporter in the distal tubule, is usually associated with hypomagnesemia. Hypomagnesemia occurs in a minority of patients with
Bartter syndrome, which can be caused by pathogenic variants in
multiple genes necessary for Na+ and Cl− reabsorption in the loop
of Henle. In both disorders, there is hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis. Typically, hypomagnesemia is not severe and is asymptomatic,
although tetany as a result of hypomagnesemia occasionally occurs.
Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis (Michelis-­C astrillo syndrome), an autosomal recessive
disorder, is caused by pathogenic variants in the gene for claudin
16 (paracellin-­1), located in the tight junctions of the TAL of the
loop of Henle. Patients with the disease have severe renal wasting
of magnesium and calcium with secondary hypomagnesemia and
nephrocalcinosis; serum calcium levels are normal. Chronic kidney
failure frequently occurs during childhood. Other features include
kidney stones, urinary tract infections, hematuria, increased PTH
levels, tetany, seizures, incomplete distal RTA, hyperuricemia, polyuria, and polydipsia. Patients with familial hypomagnesemia with
hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and severe ocular involvement
have pathogenic variants in the gene for claudin 19.
Autosomal recessive renal magnesium wasting with normocalciuria is caused by pathogenic variants in the EGF gene. Clinical manifestations include seizures, mild to moderate psychomotor retardation,
and brisk tendon reflexes.
Autosomal dominant renal magnesium wasting is caused by
pathogenic variants in a number of different genes. A dominant-­
negative pathogenic variant in the gene encoding the Na+,K+-­
ATPase γ subunit is associated with hypomagnesemia, increased
urinary magnesium losses, hypocalciuria, and normocalcemia.
Patients may present with seizures; most are asymptomatic, despite
serum magnesium levels of 0.8-­1.5 mg/dL. Pathogenic variants
in CNNM2, which encodes a protein that mediates magnesium-­
sensitive sodium currents, cause isolated hypomagnesemia. A
pathogenic variant in KCNA1, a gene that encodes a K+ channel,
also causes an autosomal dominant form of hypomagnesemia;
symptoms may be severe.
Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome, which is caused by pathogenic variants in the gene for hepatocyte nuclear factor-­
1β, is
associated with hypomagnesemia, despite the frequent presence
of decreased kidney function. The hypomagnesemia is usually
mild but may cause symptomatic hypocalcemia. EAST syndrome
is caused by pathogenic variants in a potassium channel, and
patients with this autosomal recessive disorder have hypokalemia,
metabolic alkalosis, and hypomagnesemia. Pathogenic variants of
RRAGD cause autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia,
and affected patients may have hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia,
metabolic alkalosis, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and a severe
cardiomyopathy. Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism is
caused by an activating pathogenic variant in the calcium-­sensing
receptor, which also senses magnesium levels in the kidney (see
Chapter 611). The abnormal receptor inappropriately perceives that
magnesium and calcium levels are elevated, leading to urinary wasting of both cations. Hypomagnesemia, if present, is usually mild.
A pathogenic variant in a mitochondrially encoded transfer RNA
is associated with hypomagnesemia, hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia. Hypomagnesemia is occasionally present in children
with other mitochondrial disorders.
Poor intake is an unusual cause of hypomagnesemia, although
it can be seen in children who are hospitalized and receive only IV
fluids without magnesium. In hungry bone syndrome, which most

frequently occurs after parathyroidectomy in patients with hyperparathyroidism, magnesium moves into bone as a result of accelerated bone formation. These patients usually have hypocalcemia and
hypophosphatemia through the same mechanism. A similar mechanism can occur during the refeeding phase of protein-­c alorie malnutrition in children, with high magnesium use during cell growth
depleting the patient’s limited reserves. Insulin therapy stimulates
uptake of magnesium by cells, and in DKA, in which total body
magnesium is low because of osmotic losses, hypomagnesemia frequently occurs. In pancreatitis there is saponification of magnesium and calcium in necrotic fat, causing both hypomagnesemia
and hypocalcemia.
Transient hypomagnesemia in newborns, which is sometimes idiopathic, is more common in infants of diabetic mothers, presumably as
a result of maternal depletion from osmotic losses. Other maternal diseases that cause magnesium losses predispose infants to hypomagnesemia. Hypomagnesemia is more common in infants with intrauterine
growth restriction. Hypomagnesemia may develop in newborn infants
who require exchange transfusions because of magnesium removal by
the citrate in banked blood.

Clinical Manifestations

Hypomagnesemia causes secondary hypocalcemia by impairing the
release of PTH by the parathyroid gland and through blunting of the
tissue response to PTH. Thus hypomagnesemia is part of the differential diagnosis of hypocalcemia. It usually occurs only at magnesium
levels <0.7 mg/dL. The dominant manifestations of hypomagnesemia
are caused by hypocalcemia: tetany, presence of Chvostek and Trousseau signs, and seizures. However, with severe hypomagnesemia, these
same signs and symptoms may be present despite normocalcemia.
Persistent hypocalcemia caused by hypomagnesemia is a rare cause of
rickets.
Many causes of hypomagnesemia also result in hypokalemia. Hypomagnesemia may produce renal potassium wasting and hypokalemia
that corrects only with magnesium therapy. ECG changes with hypomagnesemia include flattening of the T wave and lengthening of the
ST segment. Arrhythmias may occur, almost always in the setting of
underlying heart disease.

Diagnosis

The etiology of hypomagnesemia is often readily apparent from the
clinical situation. The child should be assessed for GI disease, adequate
intake, and kidney disease, with close attention paid to medications that
may cause renal magnesium wasting. When the diagnosis is uncertain,
an evaluation of urinary magnesium losses distinguishes between renal
and nonrenal causes. The fractional excretion of magnesium (FEMg) is
calculated via the following formula:
FEMg = (UMg × PCr ) / ([0.7 × PMg ] × UCr ) × 100

where UMg = urinary magnesium concentration, PCr = plasma creatinine concentration, PMg = plasma magnesium concentration, and
UCr = urinary magnesium concentration. The plasma magnesium concentration is multiplied by 0.7 because approximately 30% is bound to
albumin and not filtered at the glomerulus.
The FEMg does not vary with age, but it does change according to
the serum magnesium concentration. The FEMg ranges from 1–8% in
children with normal magnesium levels. In the patient with hypomagnesemia as a result of extrarenal causes, FEMg should be low because of
renal conservation, typically <2%. The FEMg is inappropriately elevated
in the setting of renal magnesium wasting; values are usually >4%
and frequently >10%. The measurement should not be made during a
magnesium infusion, because the acute increase in serum magnesium
increases urinary magnesium. Other approaches for evaluating urinary
magnesium losses include calculation of 24-­hour urinary magnesium
losses and the urine magnesium/creatinine ratio, both of which vary
with age.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 505
The genetic causes of renal magnesium loss are distinguished based
on the measurement of other serum and urinary electrolytes. Children
with Gitelman or Bartter syndrome have hypokalemia and metabolic
alkalosis.

Treatment

Severe hypomagnesemia is treated with parenteral magnesium.
Magnesium sulfate is given at a dose of 25-­50 mg/kg (0.05-­0.1 mL/
kg of a 50% solution; 2.5-­5.0 mg/kg of elemental magnesium). It is
administered as a slow IV infusion, although it may be given intramuscularly in neonates. The rate of IV infusion should be slowed
if a patient experiences diaphoresis, flushing, or a warm sensation. The dose is often repeated every 6 hours (every 8-­12 hours
in neonates), for a total of 2-­3 doses, before the plasma magnesium
concentration is rechecked. Lower doses are used in children with
decreased kidney function.
Long-­term therapy is usually given orally. Preparations include
magnesium gluconate (5.4 mg elemental magnesium/100 mg),
magnesium oxide (60 mg elemental magnesium/100 mg), and
magnesium sulfate (10 mg elemental magnesium/100 mg).
Sustained-­release preparations include Slow-­Mag (60 mg elemental magnesium/tablet) and Mag-­Tab SR (84 mg elemental magnesium/tablet). Oral magnesium dosing should be divided to decrease
cathartic side effects. Alternatives to oral magnesium are intramuscular injections and nighttime nasogastric infusion, both designed
to minimize diarrhea. Magnesium supplementation must be used
cautiously in the context of renal insufficiency.

HYPERMAGNESEMIA

Clinically significant hypermagnesemia is almost always secondary to
excessive intake. It is unusual, except in neonates born to mothers who
are receiving IV magnesium for preeclampsia or eclampsia (see Chapter 121.5).

Etiology and Pathophysiology

There is no feedback mechanism to prevent magnesium absorption
from the GI tract. Magnesium is present in high amounts in certain
laxatives, enemas, cathartics used to treat drug overdoses, and antacids. It is also usually present in total parenteral nutrition (TPN),
and neonates may receive high amounts transplacentally if maternal levels are elevated. Usually the kidneys excrete excessive magnesium, but this ability is diminished in patients with chronic kidney
disease. In addition, neonates and young infants are vulnerable to
excessive magnesium ingestion because of their reduced GFR. Most
pediatric cases not related to maternal hypermagnesemia occur
in infants because of excessive use of antacids or laxatives. Mild
hypermagnesemia may occur in chronic kidney disease, familial
hypocalciuric hypercalcemia, DKA, lithium ingestion, milk-­alkali
syndrome, and tumor lysis syndrome. The hypermagnesemia in
DKA occurs despite significant intracellular magnesium depletion
because of urinary losses; hypomagnesemia often occurs after insulin treatment.

Clinical Manifestations

Symptoms usually do not appear until the plasma magnesium level
is >4.5 mg/dL. Hypermagnesemia inhibits acetylcholine release at
the neuromuscular junction, producing hypotonia, hyporeflexia,
and weakness; paralysis occurs at high concentrations. The neuromuscular effects may be exacerbated by aminoglycoside antibiotics. Direct CNS depression causes lethargy and sleepiness; infants
have a poor suck. Elevated magnesium values are associated with
hypotension because of vascular dilation, which also causes flushing. Hypotension can be profound at higher concentrations from a
direct effect on cardiac function. ECG changes include prolonged
PR interval, QRS complex, and QT interval. Severe hypermagnesemia (>15 mg/dL) causes complete heart block and cardiac arrest.
Other manifestations of hypermagnesemia include nausea, vomiting, and hypocalcemia.

Diagnosis

Except for the case of the neonate with transplacental exposure, a high
index of suspicion and a good history are necessary to determine the
etiology of hypermagnesemia. Prevention is essential; magnesium-­
containing compounds should be used judiciously in children with
decreased kidney function.

Treatment

Most patients with normal kidney function rapidly clear excess magnesium. Intravenous hydration and loop diuretics can accelerate this
process. In severe cases, especially in patients with underlying renal
insufficiency, dialysis may be necessary. Hemodialysis works faster
than peritoneal dialysis. Exchange transfusion is another option in
newborn infants. Supportive care includes monitoring of cardiorespiratory status, provision of fluids, monitoring of electrolyte levels, and
the use of pressors for hypotension. In acute emergencies, especially in
the context of severe neurologic or cardiac manifestations, 100 mg/kg
of IV calcium gluconate is transiently effective.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.6 Phosphorus
Larry A. Greenbaum
Approximately 65% of plasma phosphorus is in phospholipids, but
these compounds are insoluble in acid and are not measured by clinical
laboratories. It is the phosphorus content of plasma phosphate that is
determined. The result is reported as either phosphate or phosphorus,
although even when the term phosphate is used, it is actually the phosphorus concentration that is measured and reported. The result is that
the terms phosphate and phosphorus are often used interchangeably.
The term phosphorus is preferred when referring to the plasma concentration. Conversion from the units used in the United States (mg/dL)
to mmol/L is straightforward (see Table 73.6).

PHOSPHORUS METABOLISM
Body Content and Physiologic Function

Most phosphorus is in bone or is intracellular, with <1% in plasma. At
a physiologic pH, there are monovalent and divalent forms of phosphate because the pKa (ionization constant of acid) of these forms is
6.8. Approximately 80% is divalent, and the remainder is monovalent
at a pH of 7.4. A small percentage of plasma phosphate, approximately
15%, is protein bound. The remainder can be filtered by the glomerulus, with most existing as free phosphate and a small percentage complexed with calcium, magnesium, or sodium. Phosphate is the most
plentiful intracellular anion, although the majority is part of a larger
compound (ATP).
More than that of any other electrolyte, the phosphorus concentration varies with age (Table 73.8). The teleologic explanation for the
high concentration during childhood is the need for phosphorus to
facilitate growth. There is diurnal variation in the plasma phosphorus
concentration, with the peak during sleep.

Table 73.8  Serum Phosphorus Levels During Childhood
AGE

PHOSPHORUS LEVEL (mg/dL)

0-­5 day

4.8-­8.2

1-­3 yr

3.8-­6.5

4-­11 yr

3.7-­5.6

12-­15 yr

2.9-­5.4

16-­19 yr

2.7-­4.7

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

506 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Phosphorus, as a component of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
other trinucleotides, is critical for cellular energy metabolism. It is necessary for cell signaling and nucleic acid synthesis, and it is a component of cell membranes and other structures. Along with calcium,
phosphorus is necessary for skeletal mineralization. A net positive
phosphorus balance is required during growth, with the growing skeleton especially vulnerable to deficiency.

Phosphorus Intake

Phosphorus is readily available in food. Milk and milk products are the
best sources of phosphorus; high concentrations are present in meat
and fish. Vegetables have more phosphorus than fruits and grains.
GI absorption of phosphorus is proportional to intake, with approximately 65% of intake being absorbed, including a small amount that is
secreted. Absorption, almost exclusively in the small intestine, occurs
via a paracellular diffusive process and a vitamin D–regulated transcellular pathway. However, the impact of the change in phosphorus
absorption caused by vitamin D is relatively small compared with the
effect of variations in phosphorus intake.

Phosphorus Excretion

Despite the wide variation in phosphorus absorption dictated
by oral intake, excretion matches intake, except for the needs for
growth. The kidney regulates phosphorus balance, which is determined by intrarenal mechanisms and hormonal actions on the
nephron.
Approximately 90% of plasma phosphate is filtered at the glomerulus, although there is some variation based on plasma phosphate and
calcium concentrations. There is no significant secretion of phosphate
along the nephron. Resorption of phosphate occurs mostly in the
proximal tubule, although a small amount can be resorbed in the distal
tubule. Normally, approximately 85% of the filtered load is resorbed.
Sodium-­phosphate co-­transporters mediate the uptake of phosphate
into the cells of the proximal tubule.
Dietary phosphorus determines the amount of phosphate resorbed
by the nephron. There are both acute and chronic changes in phosphate resorption that are based on intake. Many of these changes
appear to be mediated by intrarenal mechanisms that are independent of regulatory hormones. Fibroblast growth factor-­23 (FGF-­23)
inhibits renal resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule, and
its level increases in the setting of hyperphosphatemia. FGF-­23 also
inhibits synthesis of 1,25-­vitamin D in the kidney by decreasing 1α-­
hydroxylase activity.
Secreted in response to a low plasma calcium level, PTH decreases
resorption of phosphate, increasing the urinary phosphate level. This
process appears to have a minimal effect during normal physiologic
variation in PTH levels. However, it does affect urinary phosphate in
the setting of pathologic changes in PTH synthesis.
Low plasma phosphorus stimulates the 1α-­hydroxylase in the kidney
that converts 25-­hydroxyvitamin D (25-­D) to 1,25-­dihydroxyvitamin D
(1,25-­D; calcitriol). Calcitriol increases intestinal absorption of phosphorus and is necessary for maximal renal resorption of phosphate.
The effect of a change in calcitriol on urinary phosphate is significant
only when the level of calcitriol was initially low, arguing against a role
for calcitriol in nonpathologic conditions.

HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA

Because of the wide variation in normal plasma phosphorus levels, the
definition of hypophosphatemia is age dependent (see Table 73.8). The
normal range reported by a laboratory may be based on adult normal
values and therefore may be misleading in children. A serum phosphorus level of 3 mg/dL, a normal value in an adult, indicates clinically
significant hypophosphatemia in an infant.
The plasma phosphorus level does not always reflect the total body
stores because only 1% of phosphorus is extracellular. Thus a child
may have significant phosphorus deficiency despite a normal plasma
phosphorus concentration when there is a shift of phosphorus from
the ICS.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

A variety of mechanisms cause hypophosphatemia (Table 73.9). A
transcellular shift of phosphorus into cells occurs with processes that
stimulate cellular usage of phosphorus (glycolysis). Usually, this shift
causes only a minor, transient decrease in plasma phosphorus, but if
intracellular phosphorus deficiency is present, the plasma phosphorus
level can decrease significantly, producing symptoms of acute hypophosphatemia. Glucose infusion stimulates insulin release, leading to
entry of glucose and phosphorus into the cells. Phosphorus is then used
during glycolysis and other metabolic processes. A similar phenomenon
can occur during the treatment of DKA, and patients with DKA are typically phosphorus depleted because of urinary phosphorus losses.
Table 73.9  Causes of Hypophosphatemia
TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS
Glucose infusion
Insulin
Refeeding
Total parenteral nutrition
Respiratory alkalosis
Tumor growth
Bone marrow transplantation
Hungry bone syndrome
DECREASED INTAKE
Nutritional
Premature infants
Low phosphorus formula
Antacids and other phosphate binders
RENAL LOSSES
Hyperparathyroidism
Parathyroid hormone–related peptide
X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets (OMIM 307800)
Overproduction of fibroblast growth factor-­23
Tumor-­induced rickets
McCune-­Albright syndrome (OMIM 174800)
Epidermal nevus syndrome
Neurofibromatosis
Autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (OMIM 193100)
Autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets, types 1, 2, and 3
(OMIM 241520/613312)
Ferric carboxymaltose
Dent disease (OMIM 300009/300555)
Fanconi syndrome (OMIM 134600/613388/615605/616026/618913/
612392)*
Hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria (OMIM 241530)
Hypophosphatemic rickets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis
types 1 and 2 (OMIM 612286/612287)
Volume expansion and intravenous fluids
Metabolic acidosis
Diuretics
Glycosuria
Glucocorticoids
Chemotherapy (cisplatin, ifosfamide)
Kidney transplantation
MULTIFACTORIAL
Vitamin D deficiency
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type 1 (OMIM 264700)
Vitamin D–dependent rickets type 2 (OMIM 277440)
Alcoholism
Sepsis
Dialysis
*These are primary genetic causes of Fanconi syndrome. Fanconi syndrome may also
be secondary to medications, genetic disorders (cystinosis) or systemic disease
(Sjögren syndrome).
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 507
Refeeding of patients with protein-­calorie malnutrition causes
anabolism, which leads to significant cellular demand for phosphorus (see Chapter 63). The increased phosphorus uptake for incorporation into newly synthesized compounds containing phosphorus
leads to hypophosphatemia, which can be severe and symptomatic.
Refeeding hypophosphatemia occurs frequently during treatment of severe anorexia nervosa. It can occur during treatment of
children with malnutrition from any cause, such as cystic fibrosis,
Crohn disease, burns, neglect, chronic infection, or famine. Hypophosphatemia usually occurs within the first 5 days of refeeding
and is prevented by a gradual increase in nutrition with appropriate
phosphorus supplementation. TPN without adequate phosphorus
can cause hypophosphatemia.
Phosphorus moves into the ICS during a respiratory alkalosis and
during recovery from a respiratory acidosis. An acute decrease in
the carbon dioxide concentration, by raising the intracellular pH,
stimulates glycolysis, leading to intracellular use of phosphorus and
hypophosphatemia. Because a metabolic alkalosis has less effect on
the intracellular pH (CO2 diffuses across cell membranes much faster
than bicarbonate), transcellular phosphorus movement is minimal
with a metabolic alkalosis.
Tumors that grow rapidly, such as those associated with leukemia and lymphoma, may use large amounts of phosphorus, leading
to hypophosphatemia. A similar phenomenon may occur during
the hematopoietic reconstitution that follows bone marrow transplantation. In hungry bone syndrome, there is avid bone uptake of
phosphorus, along with calcium and magnesium, which can produce plasma deficiency of all three ions. Hungry bone syndrome
is most common after parathyroidectomy for hyperparathyroidism
because the stimulus for bone dissolution is acutely removed, but
bone synthesis continues.
Nutritional phosphorus deficiency is unusual because most foods
contain phosphorus. However, infants are especially susceptible
because of their high demand for phosphorus to support growth,
especially of the skeleton. Very low birthweight infants have particularly rapid skeletal growth, and phosphorus deficiency and rickets
may develop if they are fed human milk or formula for term infants.
There is also a relative deficiency of calcium. The provision of additional calcium and phosphorus, using breast milk fortifier or special
premature infant formula, prevents this complication. Phosphorus
deficiency, sometimes with concomitant calcium and vitamin D
deficiencies, occurs in infants who are not given enough milk or
who receive a milk substitute that is nutritionally inadequate.
Antacids containing aluminum hydroxide (e.g., Maalox,
Mylanta) bind dietary phosphorus and secreted phosphorus, preventing absorption. This process can cause phosphorus deficiency
and rickets in growing children. A similar mechanism causes hypophosphatemia in patients who are overtreated for hyperphosphatemia with phosphorus binders. In children with kidney failure, the
addition of dialysis to phosphorus binders increases the risk of iatrogenic hypophosphatemia in these normally hyperphosphatemic
patients. This complication, which is more common in infants, can
worsen kidney osteodystrophy.
Excessive renal losses of phosphorus occur in a variety of inherited and acquired disorders. Because PTH inhibits the resorption of
phosphorus in the proximal tubule, hyperparathyroidism causes
hypophosphatemia (see Chapter 613). The dominant clinical manifestation, however, is hypercalcemia, and the hypophosphatemia is
usually asymptomatic. The phosphorus level in hyperparathyroidism is not extremely low, and there is no continued loss of phosphorus because a new steady state is achieved at the lower plasma
phosphorus level. Renal excretion therefore does not exceed intake
over the long term. Occasional malignancies produce PTH-­related
peptide, which has the same actions as PTH and causes hypophosphatemia and hypercalcemia.
A variety of diseases cause renal phosphate wasting, hypophosphatemia, and rickets resulting from excess FGF-­23 (see Chapter

69). These disorders include X-­linked hypophosphatemic rickets,
tumor-­induced osteomalacia, autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets, and autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets
types 1-­3. Ferric carboxymaltose, an IV iron preparation for correcting iron deficiency, causes hypophosphatemia via increased
levels of FGF-­23.
Fanconi syndrome is a generalized defect in the proximal tubule
leading to urinary wasting of bicarbonate, phosphorus, amino
acids, uric acid, and glucose (see Chapter 569.1). The clinical
sequelae result from the metabolic acidosis and hypophosphatemia.
In children, an underlying genetic disease, usually cystinosis, often
causes Fanconi syndrome, but it can be secondary to a variety of
toxins and acquired diseases. Some patients have incomplete
Fanconi syndrome, and phosphorus wasting may be one of the
manifestations.
Dent disease, an X-­linked disorder, can cause renal phosphorus
wasting and hypophosphatemia, although the latter is not present in most cases. Other possible manifestations of Dent disease
include tubular proteinuria, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, rickets, and decreased kidney function. Dent disease may be secondary
to pathologic variants in a gene that encodes a chloride channel
or the OCRL1 gene, which may also cause Lowe syndrome (see
Chapter 569.1). Hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria
is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, principally described in kindreds from the Middle East (see Chapter 69). Pathologic variants
in a sodium-­phosphate co-­transporter cause hypophosphatemia in
this disorder, and complications may include nephrolithiasis and
osteoporosis. Similar findings are seen in hypophosphatemic rickets with nephrolithiasis and osteoporosis types 1 and 2 (see Chapter 69).
Metabolic acidosis inhibits resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule. In addition, metabolic acidosis causes a transcellular
shift of phosphorus out of cells because of intracellular catabolism.
This released phosphorus is subsequently lost in the urine, leading to significant phosphorus depletion, even though the plasma
phosphorus level may be normal. This classically occurs in DKA,
in which renal phosphorus loss is further increased by the osmotic
diuresis. With correction of the metabolic acidosis and the administration of insulin, both of which cause a transcellular movement of
phosphorus into the cells, there is a marked decrease in the plasma
phosphorus level.
Volume expansion from any cause, such as hyperaldosteronism or
SIADH, inhibits resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule. This
effect also occurs with high rates of IV fluids. Thiazide and loop diuretics can increase renal phosphorus excretion, but the increase is seldom
clinically significant. Glycosuria and glucocorticoids inhibit renal
conservation of phosphorus. Hypophosphatemia is common after
kidney transplantation because of urinary phosphorus losses. Possible explanations include preexisting secondary hyperparathyroidism
from chronic kidney disease, glucocorticoid therapy, and upregulation of FGF-­23 before transplantation. The hypophosphatemia usually
resolves in a few months.
Both acquired and genetic causes of vitamin D deficiency are
associated with hypophosphatemia (see Chapter 69). The pathogenesis is multifactorial. By impairing intestinal calcium absorption, vitamin D deficiency causes secondary hyperparathyroidism that leads
to increased urinary phosphorus wasting. An absence of vitamin D
decreases intestinal absorption of phosphorus and directly decreases
renal resorption of phosphorus. The dominant clinical manifestation
is rickets, although some patients have muscle weakness that may be
related to phosphorus deficiency.
Alcoholism is the most common cause of severe hypophosphatemia in adults. Fortunately, many of the risk factors that predispose
alcoholic adults to hypophosphatemia are not usually present in
adolescents (malnutrition, antacid abuse, recurrent DKA episodes).
Hypophosphatemia often occurs in sepsis, but the mechanism is
not clear. Aggressive, protracted hemodialysis, as might be used for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

508 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
the treatment of methanol or ethylene glycol ingestion, can cause
hypophosphatemia.

Clinical Manifestations

There are acute and chronic manifestations of hypophosphatemia.
Rickets occurs in children with long-­term phosphorus deficiency. The
clinical features of rickets are described in Chapter 69.
Severe hypophosphatemia, typically at levels <1.0-­1.5 mg/dL, may
affect every organ in the body because phosphorus has a critical role
in maintaining adequate cellular energy. Phosphorus is a component
of ATP and is necessary for glycolysis. With inadequate phosphorus,
2,3-­diphosphoglycerate levels in RBCs decrease, impairing release of
oxygen to the tissues. Severe hypophosphatemia can cause hemolysis
and dysfunction of WBCs. Chronic hypophosphatemia causes proximal muscle weakness and atrophy. In the intensive care unit, phosphorus deficiency may slow weaning from mechanical ventilation or
cause acute respiratory failure. Rhabdomyolysis is the most common
complication of acute hypophosphatemia, usually in the setting of an
acute transcellular shift of phosphorus into cells in a child with chronic
phosphorus depletion (anorexia nervosa). The rhabdomyolysis is actually somewhat protective, in that cellular release of phosphorus occurs.
Other manifestations of severe hypophosphatemia include cardiac dysfunction and neurologic symptoms, such as tremor, paresthesia, ataxia,
seizures, delirium, and coma.

Diagnosis

The history and basic laboratory evaluation often suggest the etiology of hypophosphatemia. The history should investigate nutrition,
medications, and familial disease. Hypophosphatemia and rickets
in an otherwise healthy young child suggest a genetic defect in renal
phosphorus conservation, Fanconi syndrome, inappropriate use of
antacids, poor nutrition, vitamin D deficiency, or a genetic defect in
vitamin D metabolism. The patient with Fanconi syndrome usually
has metabolic acidosis, glycosuria, aminoaciduria, and a low plasma
uric acid level. Measurement of 25-­D and 1,25-­D, calcium, and PTH
differentiates among the various vitamin D deficiency disorders and
primary renal phosphate wasting (see Chapter 69). Hyperparathyroidism is easily distinguished by the presence of elevated plasma
PTH and calcium values.

Treatment

The plasma phosphorus level, the presence of symptoms, the likelihood of chronic depletion, and the presence of ongoing losses
dictate the approach to therapy. Mild hypophosphatemia does not
require treatment unless the clinical situation suggests that chronic
phosphorus depletion is present or that losses are ongoing. Oral
phosphorus can cause diarrhea, so the doses should be divided.
IV therapy is effective in patients who have severe deficiency or
who cannot tolerate oral medications. IV phosphorus is available as
either sodium phosphate or potassium phosphate, with the choice
usually based on the patient’s plasma potassium level. Starting doses
are 0.08-­0.16 mmol/kg over 6 hours. The oral preparations of phosphorus are available with various ratios of sodium and potassium.
This is an important consideration because some patients may not
tolerate the potassium load, whereas supplemental potassium may
be helpful in some diseases, such as Fanconi syndrome and malnutrition. Oral maintenance dosages are 2-­3 mmol/kg/day in divided
doses, although the maintenance dose varies considerably between
patients.
Increasing dietary phosphorus is the only intervention needed
in infants with inadequate intake. Other patients may also benefit
from increased dietary phosphorus, usually from dairy products.
Phosphorus-­binding antacids should be discontinued in patients
with hypophosphatemia. Certain diseases require specific therapy (see Chapter 69). Specifically, X-­
linked hypophosphatemia
responds to burosumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting FGF-­23.

Table 73.10  Causes of Hyperphosphatemia
TRANSCELLULAR SHIFTS
Tumor lysis syndrome
Rhabdomyolysis
Acute hemolysis
Diabetic ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis
INCREASED INTAKE
Enemas and laxatives
Cow’s milk in infants
Treatment of hypophosphatemia
Vitamin D intoxication
DECREASED EXCRETION
Kidney failure
Hypoparathyroidism or pseudohypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200/
603233/103580/241410/203330)
Acromegaly
Hyperthyroidism
Tumoral calcinosis with hyperphosphatemia: genetic (OMIM
211900/617993/617994) or autoimmune
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.n
cbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim).

HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA
Etiology and Pathophysiology

Renal insufficiency is the most common cause of hyperphosphatemia,
with the severity proportional to the degree of kidney impairment (see
Chapter 572). This occurs because GI absorption of the large dietary
intake of phosphorus is unregulated, and the kidneys normally excrete
this phosphorus. As kidney function deteriorates, increased excretion
of phosphorus is able to compensate. When kidney function is <30%
of normal, hyperphosphatemia usually develops, although this varies
considerably depending on dietary intake. Many of the other causes
of hyperphosphatemia are more likely to develop in the setting of
decreased kidney function (Table 73.10).
Cellular content of phosphorus is high relative to plasma phosphorus, and cell lysis can release substantial phosphorus. This is the
etiology of hyperphosphatemia in tumor lysis syndrome, rhabdomyolysis, and acute hemolysis. These disorders cause concomitant
potassium release and the risk of hyperkalemia. Additional features of
tumor lysis and rhabdomyolysis are hyperuricemia and hypocalcemia,
whereas indirect hyperbilirubinemia and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) values are often present with hemolysis. An elevated CPK
level is suggestive of rhabdomyolysis. During lactic acidosis or DKA,
use of phosphorus by cells decreases, and phosphorus shifts into the
ECS. This problem reverses when the underlying problem is corrected,
and especially with DKA, patients subsequently become hypophosphatemic because of previous renal phosphorus loss.
Excessive intake of phosphorus is especially dangerous in children
with decreased kidney function. Neonates are at risk because kidney
function is normally reduced during the first few months of life. In
addition, they may erroneously be given doses of phosphorus that are
meant for an older child or adult. In infants fed cow’s milk, which has
higher phosphorus content than breast milk or formula, hyperphosphatemia may develop. Fleet Enema has a high amount of phosphorus
that can be absorbed, especially in the patient with an ileus; infants and
children with Hirschsprung disease are especially vulnerable. There is
often associated hypernatremia from sodium absorption and water loss
from diarrhea. Sodium phosphorus laxatives may cause hyperphosphatemia if the dose is excessive or if renal insufficiency is present. Hyperphosphatemia occurs in children who receive overaggressive treatment
for hypophosphatemia. Vitamin D intoxication causes excessive GI
absorption of both calcium and phosphorus, and the suppression of
PTH by hypercalcemia decreases renal phosphorus excretion.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 509
The absence of PTH in hypoparathyroidism or PTH responsiveness in pseudohypoparathyroidism causes hyperphosphatemia
because of increased resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule
of the kidney (see Chapters 611 and 612). The associated hypocalcemia is responsible for the clinical symptoms. The hyperphosphatemia
in hyperthyroidism or acromegaly is usually mild. It is secondary to
increased resorption of phosphorus in the proximal tubule from the
actions of thyroxine or growth hormone. Excessive thyroxine can
also cause bone resorption, which may contribute to the hyperphosphatemia and cause hypercalcemia. Patients with familial tumoral
calcinosis (three types), a rare autosomal recessive disorder, have
hyperphosphatemia because of decreased renal phosphate excretion and heterotopic calcifications. The disease may be secondary to
pathologic variants in the genes for a glycosyltransferase (most common etiology), FGF-­23, or klotho, which encodes the co-­receptor for
FGF-­23. Autoimmune hyperphosphatemic tumoral calcinosis occurs
with antibodies producing FGF-­23 resistance.

Clinical Manifestations

The principal clinical consequences of hyperphosphatemia are
hypocalcemia and systemic calcification. The hypocalcemia is
probably caused by tissue deposition of calcium-­phosphorus salt,
inhibition of 1,25-­D production, and decreased bone resorption.
Symptomatic hypocalcemia is most likely to occur when the phosphorus level increases rapidly or when diseases predisposing to
hypocalcemia are present (chronic kidney disease, rhabdomyolysis).
Systemic calcification occurs because the solubility of phosphorus
and calcium in the plasma is exceeded. Clinically, this condition is
often apparent in the conjunctiva, where it manifests as a foreign
body feeling, erythema, and injection. More ominous manifestations are hypoxia from pulmonary calcification and kidney failure
from nephrocalcinosis.

Diagnosis

Plasma creatinine and BUN levels should be assessed in any patient
with hyperphosphatemia. The history should focus on intake of
phosphorus and the presence of chronic diseases that may cause
hyperphosphatemia. Measurement of K+, uric acid, calcium, LDH,
bilirubin, hemoglobin, and CPK may be indicated if rhabdomyolysis, tumor lysis, or hemolysis is suspected. With mild hyperphosphatemia and significant hypocalcemia, measurement of the
serum PTH level distinguishes between hypoparathyroidism and
pseudohypoparathyroidism.

Treatment

The treatment of acute hyperphosphatemia depends on its severity
and etiology. Mild hyperphosphatemia in a patient with reasonable
renal function spontaneously resolves; the resolution can be accelerated by dietary phosphorus restriction. If kidney function is not
impaired, IV fluids can enhance renal phosphorus excretion. For
more significant hyperphosphatemia or a situation such as tumor
lysis or rhabdomyolysis, in which endogenous phosphorus generation is likely to continue, addition of an oral phosphorus binder prevents absorption of dietary phosphorus and can remove phosphorus
from the body by binding what is normally secreted and absorbed
by the GI tract. Phosphorus binders are most effective when given
with food. Binders containing aluminum hydroxide are especially
efficient, but calcium carbonate is an effective alternative and may
be preferred if there is a need to treat concomitant hypocalcemia.
Preservation of renal function, as with high urine flow in rhabdomyolysis or tumor lysis, is an important adjunct because it will permit
continued excretion of phosphorus. If the hyperphosphatemia is not
responding to conservative management, especially if acute kidney
injury is supervening, dialysis may be necessary to increase phosphorus removal.
Dietary phosphorus restriction is necessary for diseases causing
chronic hyperphosphatemia. However, such diets are often difficult

to follow, given the abundance of phosphorus in a variety of foods.
Dietary restriction is often sufficient in conditions such as hypoparathyroidism and mild chronic kidney disease. For more problematic hyperphosphatemia, such as with moderate chronic kidney
disease and end-­stage kidney disease, phosphorus binders are usually necessary. They include calcium carbonate, calcium acetate,
sevelamer, ferric citrate, sucroferric oxyhydroxide, and lanthanum.
Aluminum-­containing phosphorus binders are no longer used in
patients with chronic kidney disease because of the risk of aluminum toxicity. Dialysis directly removes phosphorus from the blood
in patients with end-­stage kidney disease, but it is only an adjunct
to dietary restriction and phosphorus binders; removal by dialysis
does not keep up with normal dietary intake.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

73.7 Acid-­Base Balance
Larry A. Greenbaum

ACID-­BASE PHYSIOLOGY
Terminology

Chronic, mild derangements in acid-­base status may interfere with
normal growth and development, whereas acute, severe changes in pH
can be fatal. Control of acid-­base balance depends on the kidneys, the
lungs, and intracellular and extracellular buffers.
A normal pH is 7.35-­7.45. There is an inverse relationship between
the pH and the hydrogen ion concentration([H+]). At a pH of 7.40, [H+]
is 40 nmol/L. A normal serum sodium concentration, 140 mEq/L, is 1
million times higher. Maintaining a normal pH is necessary because
hydrogen ions are highly reactive and are especially likely to combine
with proteins, altering their function.
An acid is a substance that releases (“donates”) a hydrogen ion (H+).
A base is a substance that accepts a hydrogen ion. An acid (HA) can
dissociate into a hydrogen ion and a conjugate base (A−), as follows:
HA ↔ H + + A −

A strong acid is highly dissociated, so in this reaction, there is little HA. A weak acid is poorly dissociated; not all the hydrogen ions
are released from HA. A− acts as a base when the reaction moves
to the left. These reactions are in equilibrium. When HA is added
to the system, there is dissociation of some HA until the concentrations of H+ and A− increase enough that a new equilibrium is
reached. Addition of hydrogen ions causes a decrease in A− and an
increase in HA. Addition of A− causes a decrease in hydrogen ions
and an increase in HA.
Buffers are substances that attenuate the change in pH that occurs
when acids or bases are added to the body. Given the extremely low
[H+] in the body at physiologic pH, without buffers a small amount
of hydrogen ions could cause a dramatic decline in the pH. Buffers
prevent the decrease in pH by binding the added hydrogen ions, as
follows:
A − + H + → HA

The increase in [H+] drives this reaction to the right. Similarly, when
base is added to the body, buffers prevent the pH from increasing by
releasing hydrogen ions, as follows:
HA → A − + H +

The best buffers are weak acids and bases. This is because a buffer
works best when it is 50% dissociated (half HA and half A−). The pH
at which a buffer is 50% dissociated is its pKa (ionization constant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

510 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
of acid). The best physiologic buffers have a pKa close to 7.40. The
concentration of a buffer and its pKa determine the buffer’s effectiveness (buffering capacity). When the pH is lower than the pKa of
a buffer, there is more HA than A−. When the pH is higher than the
pKa, there is more A− than HA.
The bicarbonate and nonbicarbonate buffers protect the body against
major changes in pH. The bicarbonate buffer system is routinely
monitored clinically and is based on the relationship between carbon
dioxide (CO2) and bicarbonate (HCO3−):

and intracellular proteins, including hemoglobin. Proteins are effective buffers, largely because of the presence of the amino acid histidine, which has a side chain that can bind or release H+. The pKa of
histidine varies slightly, depending on its position in the protein molecule, but its average pKa is approximately 6.5. This is close enough to
a normal pH (7.4) to make histidine an effective buffer. Hemoglobin
and albumin have 34 and 16 histidine molecules, respectively.
Phosphate can bind up to three hydrogen molecules, so it can exist
as PO43−, HPO42−, H2PO41−, or H3PO4. However, at a physiologic pH,
most phosphate exists as either HPO42− or H2PO41−. H2PO41− is an
acid, and HPO42− is its conjugate base:

CO2 + H2 O ↔ H + + HCO3 −

H2 PO4 1 − ↔ H + + HPO4 2 −

Physiologic Buffers

CO2 acts as an acid in that, after combining with water, it releases
an H+; bicarbonate acts as its conjugate base in that it accepts an H+.
The pKa of this reaction is 6.1. The Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation
expresses the relationship among pH, pKa, and the concentrations of
an acid and its conjugate base. This relationship is valid for any buffer. The Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation for bicarbonate and CO2 is
as follows:
pH = 6.1 + log [HCO3 − ] / [CO2 ]

The Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation for the bicarbonate buffer system has three variables: pH, bicarbonate concentration
([HCO3−]), and carbon dioxide concentration ([CO2]). Thus, if
any two of these variables are known, it is possible to calculate the
third. When one is using the Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation, it
is important that CO2 and bicarbonate have the same units. CO2 is
reported clinically as mm Hg and must be multiplied by its solubility constant, 0.03 mmol/L/mm Hg, before the equation can be used.
Mathematical manipulation of the Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation produces the following relationship:
H  
 24  PCO2 / HCO3 

At a normal [H+] of 40 nmol (pH 7.40), the partial pressure of
carbon dioxide (Pco2), which is expressed as mm Hg in this equation, is 40 when the [HCO3−] is 24 mEq/L. This equation emphasizes
that [H+], and thus pH, can be determined by the ratio of Pco2 and
[HCO3−].
The bicarbonate buffer system is very effective because of the
high concentration of bicarbonate in the body (24 mEq/L) and
because it is an open system. The remaining body buffers are in
a closed system. The bicarbonate buffer system is an open system
because the lungs increase CO2 excretion when the blood CO2 concentration increases. When acid is added to the body, the following
reaction occurs:
H + + HCO3 − → CO2 + H2 O

In a closed system, the CO2 would increase. The higher CO2 concentration would lead to an increase in the reverse reaction:
CO2 + H2 O → H + + HCO3 −

This would increase [H+], limiting the buffering capacity of
bicarbonate. However, because the lungs excrete the excess CO2, the
reverse reaction does not increase; this fact enhances the buffering
capacity of bicarbonate. The same principle holds with the addition
of base, because the lungs decrease CO2 excretion and prevent the
CO2 level from falling. The lack of change in [CO2] dramatically
increases the buffering capacity of bicarbonate.
The nonbicarbonate buffers include proteins, phosphate, and
bone. Protein buffers consist of extracellular proteins, mostly albumin

The pKa of this reaction is 6.8, making phosphate an effective buffer.
The concentration of phosphate in the ECS is relatively low, limiting
the overall buffering capacity of phosphate; it is less important than
albumin. However, phosphate is found at a much higher concentration
in the urine, where it is an important buffer. In the ICS, most phosphate
is covalently bound to organic molecules (ATP), but it still serves as an
effective buffer.
Bone is an important buffer. Bone is basic—it is composed of compounds such as sodium bicarbonate and calcium carbonate—and thus
dissolution of bone releases base. This release can buffer an acid load,
although at the expense of bone density, if it occurs over an extended
period. In contrast, bone formation, by consuming base, helps buffer
excess base.
Clinically, we measure the extracellular pH, but it is the intracellular pH that affects cell function. Measurement of the intracellular pH
is unnecessary because changes in the intracellular pH parallel the
changes in the extracellular pH. However, the change in the intracellular pH tends to be less than the change in the extracellular pH because
of the greater buffering capacity in the ICS.

NORMAL ACID-­BASE BALANCE

The lungs and kidneys maintain a normal acid-­base balance. Carbon dioxide generated during normal metabolism is a weak acid.
The lungs prevent an increase in the Pco2 in the blood by excreting the CO2 that the body produces. CO2 production varies according to the body’s metabolic needs, increasing with physical activity.
The rapid pulmonary response to changes in the CO2 concentration
occurs via central sensing of the Pco2 and a subsequent increase or
decrease in ventilation to maintain a normal Pco2 (35-­45 mm Hg).
An increase in ventilation decreases the Pco2, and a decrease in
ventilation increases the Pco2.
The kidneys excrete endogenous acid. An adult normally produces approximately 1-­2 mEq/kg/24 hr of H+. Children normally
produce 2-­3 mEq/kg/24 hr of H+. The three principal sources of H+
are dietary protein metabolism, incomplete metabolism of carbohydrates and fat, and stool losses of bicarbonate. Because metabolism
of protein generates H+, endogenous acid production varies with
protein intake. The complete oxidation of carbohydrates or fats to
CO2 and water does not generate H+; the lungs remove the CO2.
However, incomplete metabolism of carbohydrates or fats produces
H+. Incomplete glucose metabolism can produce lactic acid, and
incomplete triglyceride metabolism can produce ketoacids, such as
β-­hydroxybutyric acid and acetoacetic acid. There is always some
baseline incomplete metabolism that contributes to endogenous
acid production. This factor increases in pathologic conditions,
such as lactic acidosis and diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). Stool loss
of bicarbonate is the third major source of endogenous acid production. The stomach secretes H+, but most of the remainder of the GI
tract secretes bicarbonate, and the net effect is a loss of bicarbonate
from the body. To secrete bicarbonate, the cells of the intestine produce hydrogen ions that are released into the bloodstream. For each
bicarbonate molecule lost in the stool, the body gains one H+. This
source of endogenous acid production is normally minimal but may
increase dramatically in a patient with diarrhea.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 511
The hydrogen ions formed from endogenous acid production are
neutralized by bicarbonate, potentially causing the bicarbonate concentration to decrease. The kidneys regenerate this bicarbonate by
secreting H+. The lungs cannot regenerate bicarbonate, even though
loss of CO2 lowers the [H+], as shown in the following reaction:

H + + HCO3 − → CO2 + H2 O

H + + HCO3 − → CO2 + H2 O

Proximal tubule

An increase in [HCO3−] also causes the reaction to move to the
right, which increases [CO2] while simultaneously decreasing [H+].
During a respiratory acidosis, increased renal generation of bicarbonate can decrease [H+] and increase pH but cannot repair the respiratory
acidosis. Both the lungs and the kidneys can affect [H+] and thus pH.
However, only the lungs can regulate [CO2], and only the kidneys can
regulate [HCO3−].

NH4

HCO3

Collecting
duct

HCO3

H

NH3
Loop of Henle

Fig. 73.7 Tubular sites involved in acid-­base balance. The proximal

tubule is the site where most filtered bicarbonate is reclaimed, even
though other sites along the nephron, especially the thick ascending
limb of the loop of Henle, resorb some of the filtered bicarbonate. The
collecting duct is the principal location for the hydrogen ion secretion
that acidifies the urine. The proximal tubule generates the ammonia
that serves as a urinary buffer in the collecting duct.

Tubular
lumen

Peritubular
fluid

Proximal tubule
Na

Filtered
 H
HCO3
H2CO3

2
Na

H

5

H2O

3HCO3

3

4

H2O  CO2

 OH

CO2

A decrease in [CO2] causes the reaction to move to the right, which
decreases [H+], but it also lowers [HCO3−]. During a metabolic acidosis,
hyperventilation can lower [CO2], decrease [H+], and thus increase pH. The
underlying metabolic acidosis is still present. Similarly, the kidneys cannot
correct an abnormally high [CO2], as shown in the following reaction:

HCO3
2Na
1
3K

Fig. 73.8 Resorption of filtered bicarbonate in the proximal tubule.

The Na+,K+-­ATPase (1) excretes sodium across the basolateral cell
membrane, maintaining a low intracellular sodium concentration.
The low intracellular sodium concentration provides the energy for
the Na+,H+ antiporter (2), which exchanges sodium from the tubular
lumen for intracellular hydrogen ions. The hydrogen ions that are secreted into the tubular lumen then combine with filtered bicarbonate
to generate carbonic acid. CO2 and water are produced from carbonic
acid (H2CO3). This reaction is catalyzed by luminal carbonic anhydrase
(3). CO2 diffuses into the cell and combines with OH− ions to generate bicarbonate. This reaction is catalyzed by an intracellular carbonic
anhydrase (4). The dissociation of water generates an OH− ion and an
H+ ion. The Na+,H+ antiporter (2) secretes the hydrogen ions. Bicarbonate ions cross the basolateral membrane and enter the blood via
the 3HCO3−/1Na+ co-­transporter (5). The energy for the 3HCO3−/1Na+
co-­transporter comes from the negatively charged cell interior, which
makes it electrically favorable to transport a net negative charge (i.e., 3
bicarbonates and only 1 sodium) out of the cell.

Renal Mechanisms

The kidneys regulate the serum bicarbonate concentration by modifying acid excretion in the urine. This requires a two-­step process. First,
the renal tubules resorb the bicarbonate that is filtered at the glomerulus. Second, there is tubular secretion of H+. The urinary excretion of
H+ generates bicarbonate that neutralizes endogenous acid production.
The tubular actions necessary for renal acid excretion occur throughout the nephron (Fig. 73.7).
The resorption of filtered bicarbonate is a necessary first step in
renal regulation of the acid-­base balance. A normal adult has a GFR
of approximately 180 L/24 hr. This fluid enters Bowman’s space with
[HCO3−] that is essentially identical to the plasma concentration, normally 24 mEq/L. Multiplying 180 L by 24 mEq/L indicates that >4,000
mEq of bicarbonate enters Bowman’s space each day. This bicarbonate, if not reclaimed along the nephron, would be lost in the urine and
would cause a profound metabolic acidosis.
The proximal tubule reclaims approximately 85% of the filtered bicarbonate (Fig. 73.8). The final 15% is reclaimed beyond
the proximal tubule, mostly in the ascending limb of the loop of
Henle. Bicarbonate molecules are not transported from the tubular
fluid into the cells of the proximal tubule. Rather, hydrogen ions
are secreted into the tubular fluid, leading to conversion of filtered
bicarbonate into CO2 and water. The secretion of H+ by the cells
of the proximal tubule is coupled to generation of intracellular
bicarbonate, which is transported across the basolateral membrane
of the proximal tubule cell and enters the capillaries. The bicarbonate produced in the cell replaces the bicarbonate filtered at the
glomerulus.
Increased bicarbonate resorption by the cells of the proximal
tubule—the result of increased H+ secretion—occurs in a variety of
clinical situations. Volume depletion increases bicarbonate resorption.
This is partially mediated by activation of the renin-­angiotensin system; angiotensin II increases bicarbonate resorption. Increased bicarbonate resorption in the proximal tubule is one of the mechanisms that
accounts for the metabolic alkalosis that may occur in some patients
with volume depletion. Other stimuli that increase bicarbonate
resorption include hypokalemia and an increased Pco2. This partially
explains the observations that hypokalemia causes a metabolic alkalosis, and that a respiratory acidosis leads to a compensatory increase in
serum [HCO3−].
Stimuli that decrease bicarbonate resorption in the proximal tubule
may cause a decrease in the serum [HCO3−]. A decrease in the Pco2
(respiratory alkalosis) decreases proximal tubule bicarbonate resorption, partially mediating the decrease in serum [HCO3−] that compensates for a respiratory alkalosis. PTH decreases proximal tubule
bicarbonate resorption; hyperparathyroidism may cause a mild metabolic acidosis. A variety of medications and diseases cause a metabolic
acidosis by impairing bicarbonate resorption in the proximal tubule.
Examples are the medication acetazolamide, which directly inhibits
carbonic anhydrase, and the many disorders that cause proximal RTA
(see Chapter 569.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

512 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
After reclaiming filtered bicarbonate, the kidneys perform the second step in renal acid-­base handling, the excretion of the acid created
by endogenous acid production. Excretion of acid occurs mostly in the
collecting duct, with a small role for the distal tubule.
Along with secretion of H+ by the tubular cells lining the collecting duct, adequate excretion of endogenous acid requires the presence of urinary buffers. The hydrogen pumps in the collecting duct
cannot lower the urine pH below 4.5. The [H+] at pH 4.5 is <0.04
mEq/L; it would require >25 L of water with a pH of 4.5 to excrete
one mEq of H+. A 10-­kg child, with an endogenous acid production
of 20 mEq H+ each day, would need to have a daily urinary output of
>500 L without the presence of urinary buffers. As in the blood, buffers in the urine attenuate the decrease in pH that occurs with the
addition of H+. The two principal urinary buffers are phosphate and
ammonia.
Urinary phosphate is proportional to dietary intake. Whereas
most of the phosphate filtered at the glomerulus is resorbed in the
proximal tubule, the urinary phosphate concentration is usually
much greater than the serum phosphate concentration. This arrangement allows phosphate to serve as an effective buffer through the following reaction:
H + + HPO4 2–→ H2 PO4 1–

The pKa of this reaction is 6.8, making phosphate an effective buffer
as the urinary pH decreases from 7.0 to 5.0 within the collecting duct.
Although phosphate is an effective buffer, its buffering capacity is limited by its concentration; there is no mechanism for increasing urinary
phosphate excretion in response to changes in acid-­base status.
In contrast, ammonia production can be modified, allowing for
regulation of acid excretion. The buffering capacity of ammonia (NH3)
is based on the reaction of ammonia with hydrogen ions to form
ammonium:
NH3 + H + → NH4 +

The cells of the proximal tubule are the source of the excreted
ammonia, mostly through metabolism of glutamine through the following reactions:
Glutamine → NH4 + + glutamate −

Tubular
lumen

Peritubular
fluid

Collecting duct
Na

Cl

1

3
HCO3

H
H
HPO42  H

H2O
2

H2PO4

OH  CO2
NH4

H  NH3

HCO3
NH3

NH4

Fig. 73.9 Secretion of hydrogen ions in the collecting duct. The disso-

ciation of water generates an OH− ion and an H+ ion. The H+-­ATPase (1)
secretes hydrogen ions into the tubular lumen. Bicarbonate is formed
when an OH− ion combines with CO2 in a reaction mediated by carbonic anhydrase (2). Bicarbonate ions cross the basolateral membrane and
enter the blood via the HCO3−/Cl− exchanger (3). The hydrogen ions
in the tubular lumen are buffered by phosphate and ammonia (NH3).
NH3 can diffuse from the peritubular fluid into the tubular lumen, but
ammonium (NH4+) cannot pass through the cells of the collecting duct.

Glutamate − → NH4 + + α − ketoglutarate3 −

The metabolism of glutamine generates two ammonium ions. In
addition, the metabolism of α-­ketoglutarate generates two bicarbonate molecules. The ammonium ions are secreted into the lumen of the
proximal tubule, whereas the bicarbonate molecules exit the proximal
tubule cells via the basolateral Na+,3HCO3− co-­transporter (see Fig.
73.8). This arrangement would seem to accomplish the goal of excreting H+ (as NH4+) and regenerating bicarbonate molecules. However,
the ammonium ions secreted in the proximal tubule do not remain
within the tubular lumen. Cells of the TAL of the loop of Henle resorb
the ammonium ions. The result is that there is a high medullary interstitial concentration of ammonia, but the tubular fluid entering the
collecting duct does not have significant amounts of ammonium ions.
Moreover, the hydrogen ions that were secreted with ammonia (as
ammonium ions) in the proximal tubule enter the bloodstream, canceling the effect of the bicarbonate generated in the proximal tubule.
The excretion of ammonium ions, and thus of hydrogen ions, depends
on the cells of the collecting duct.
The cells of the collecting duct secrete H+ and regenerate bicarbonate, which is returned to the bloodstream (Fig. 73.9). This bicarbonate
neutralizes endogenous acid production. Phosphate and ammonia
buffer the H+ secreted by the collecting duct. Ammonia is an effective buffer because of the high concentrations in the medullary interstitium and because the cells of the collecting duct are permeable
to ammonia but not to ammonium. As ammonia diffuses into the
lumen of the collecting duct, the low urine pH causes almost all the
ammonia to be converted into ammonium. This process maintains
a low luminal ammonia concentration. Because the luminal pH is
lower than the pH in the medullary interstitium, there is a higher
concentration of ammonia within the medullary interstitium than in
the tubular lumen, favoring movement of ammonia into the tubular
lumen. Even though the concentration of ammonium in the tubular
lumen is higher than in the interstitium, the cells of the collecting
duct are impermeable to ammonium, preventing back-­diffusion of
ammonium out of the tubular lumen and permitting ammonia to be
an effective buffer.
The kidneys adjust H+ excretion according to physiologic needs.
There is variation in endogenous acid production, largely a result of
diet and pathophysiologic stresses, such as diarrheal losses of bicarbonate, which increase the need for acid excretion. H+ excretion is
increased by upregulation of H+ secretion in the collecting duct, causing the pH of the urine to decrease. This response is prompt, occurring
within hours of an acid load, but it is limited by the buffering capacity
of the urine; the hydrogen pumps in the collecting duct cannot lower
the pH to <4.5. A more significant increase in acid excretion requires
upregulation of ammonia production by the proximal tubule so that
more ammonia is available to serve as a buffer in the tubular lumen of
the collecting duct. This response to a low serum pH reaches its maximum within 5-­6 days; ammonia excretion can increase approximately
10-­fold over the baseline value.
Acid excretion by the collecting duct increases in a number of different clinical situations. The extracellular pH is the most important regulator of renal acid excretion. A decrease in the extracellular pH from
either a respiratory or a metabolic acidosis causes an increase in renal
acid excretion. Aldosterone stimulates H+ excretion in the collecting
duct, causing an increase in the serum bicarbonate concentration.
This explains the metabolic alkalosis that occurs with primary hyperaldosteronism or secondary hyperaldosteronism caused by volume
depletion. Hypokalemia increases acid secretion, by both stimulating
ammonia production in the proximal tubule and increasing H+ secretion in the collecting duct. Hypokalemia therefore tends to produce a
metabolic alkalosis. Hyperkalemia has the opposite effects, which may
cause a metabolic acidosis.
In patients with an increased pH, the kidney has two principal mechanisms for correcting the problem. First, less bicarbonate is resorbed
in the proximal tubule, leading to an increase in urinary bicarbonate
losses. Second, in a limited number of specialized cells, the process for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 513
secretion of H+ by the collecting duct can be reversed (see Fig. 73.9),
leading to secretion of bicarbonate into the tubular lumen and secretion of hydrogen ions into the peritubular fluid, where they enter the
bloodstream.

CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF ACID-­BASE DISORDERS

The following rearrangement of the Henderson-­Hasselbalch equation
emphasizes the relationship among Pco2, bicarbonate concentration,
and hydrogen ion concentration:
[ +]
H = 24 × PCO2 [HCO-3 ]
An increase in the Pco2 or a decrease in [HCO3−] increases [H+];
the pH decreases. A decrease in the Pco2 or an increase in [HCO3−]
decreases [H+]; the pH increases.

Terminology

Acidemia is a pH below normal (<7.35), and alkalemia is a pH above
normal (>7.45). An acidosis is a pathologic process that causes an
increase in [H+], and an alkalosis is a pathologic process that causes a
decrease in [H+]. Whereas acidemia is always accompanied by an acidosis, a patient can have an acidosis and a low, normal, or high pH.
For example, a patient may have a mild metabolic acidosis but a simultaneous, severe respiratory alkalosis; the net result may be alkalemia.
Acidemia and alkalemia indicate the pH abnormality; acidosis and
alkalosis indicate the pathologic process that is taking place.
A simple acid-­base disorder is a single primary disturbance.
During a simple metabolic disorder, there is respiratory compensation. With a metabolic acidosis, the decrease in the pH increases
the ventilatory drive, causing a decrease in Pco2. The decrease in
the [CO2] leads to an increase in the pH. This appropriate respiratory compensation is expected with a primary metabolic acidosis.
Despite the decrease in [CO2], appropriate respiratory compensation is not a respiratory alkalosis, even though it is sometimes
erroneously called a “compensatory” respiratory alkalosis. A low
Pco2 can result either from a primary respiratory alkalosis or from
appropriate respiratory compensation for a metabolic acidosis.
Appropriate respiratory compensation also occurs with a primary

metabolic alkalosis, although in this case [CO2] increases to attenuate the increase in the pH. The respiratory compensation for a metabolic process happens quickly and is complete within 12-­24 hours;
it cannot overcompensate for or normalize the pH.
During a primary respiratory process, there is metabolic compensation, mediated by the kidneys. The kidneys respond to a respiratory
acidosis by increasing H+ excretion, thereby increasing bicarbonate
generation and raising the serum [HCO3−]. The kidneys increase bicarbonate excretion to compensate for a respiratory alkalosis; [HCO3−]
decreases. Unlike respiratory compensation, which occurs rapidly, it
takes 3-­4 days for the kidneys to complete appropriate metabolic compensation. There is, however, a small and rapid compensatory change
in [HCO3−] during a primary respiratory process. The expected appropriate metabolic compensation for a respiratory disorder depends on
whether the process is acute or chronic.
A mixed acid-­base disorder is present when there is more than
one primary acid-­base disturbance. An infant with bronchopulmonary dysplasia may have a respiratory acidosis from chronic lung disease and a metabolic alkalosis from the furosemide used to treat the
chronic lung disease. More dramatically, a child with pneumonia and
sepsis may have severe acidemia because of a combined metabolic
acidosis caused by lactic acid and respiratory acidosis caused by ventilatory failure.
There are formulas for calculating the appropriate metabolic or
respiratory compensation for the six primary simple acid-­base disorders (Table 73.11). The appropriate compensation is expected in
a simple disorder; it is not optional. If a patient does not have the
appropriate compensation, a mixed acid-­base disorder is present.
For example, if a patient has a primary metabolic acidosis with a
serum [HCO3−] of 10 mEq/L, the expected respiratory compensation is [CO2] of 23 mm Hg ± 2 (1.5 × 10 + 8 ± 2 = 23 ± 2; see Table
73.11). If the patient’s [CO2] is >25 mm Hg, a concurrent respiratory acidosis is present; [CO2] is higher than expected. A patient
may have a respiratory acidosis despite a CO2 level below the “normal” value of 35-­45 mm Hg. In this example, [CO2] <21 mm Hg
indicates a concurrent respiratory alkalosis; [CO2] is lower than exp
ected.

Diagnosis
Table 73.11  Appropriate Compensation During Simple
Acid-­Base Disorders
DISORDER

EXPECTED COMPENSATION

Metabolic acidosis

Pco2 = 1.5 × [HCO3−] + 8 ± 2

Metabolic alkalosis

Pco2 increases by 7 mm Hg for each
10 mEq/L increase in serum [HCO3−]

Respiratory Acidosis
Acute

[HCO3−] increases by 3.5 for each
10 mm Hg increase in Pco2

Chronic
Respiratory Alkalosis
Acute
Chronic

[HCO3−] increases by 1 for each 10 mm
Hg increase in Pco2

[HCO3−] falls by 2 for each 10 mm Hg
decrease in Pco2
[HCO3−] falls by 4 for each 10 mm Hg
decrease in Pco2

Table 73.12  Normal Values of Arterial Blood Gases
pH

7.35-­7.45

[HCO3−]

20-­28 mEq/L

Pco2

35-­45 mm Hg

A systematic evaluation of an arterial blood gas (ABG) sample, combined with the clinical history, can usually explain the patient’s acid-­
base disturbance. Assessment of an ABG sample requires knowledge
of normal values (Table 73.12). In most cases, this is accomplished
through a three-­step process (Fig. 73.10):
1.	Determine whether acidemia or alkalemia is present.
2.	Determine a cause of the acidemia or alkalemia.
3.	Determine whether a mixed disorder is present.
Most patients with an acid-­base disturbance have an abnormal
pH, although there are two exceptions. One exception is in the
patient with a mixed disorder in which the two processes have
opposite effects on pH (a metabolic acidosis and a respiratory alkalosis) and cause changes in [H+] that are comparable in magnitude,
although opposite. The other exception is in the patient with a
simple chronic respiratory alkalosis; in some cases, the appropriate
metabolic compensation is enough to normalize the pH. In both
situations, the presence of an acid-­base disturbance is deduced
because of the abnormal CO2 and bicarbonate levels. Determining
the acid-­base disturbance in these patients requires proceeding to
the third step of the process.
The second step requires inspection of the serum [HCO3−] and Pco2
to determine a cause of the abnormal pH (see Fig. 73.10). In most
cases, there is only one obvious explanation for the abnormal pH. In
some mixed disorders, however, there may be two possibilities (e.g.,
a high Pco2 and a low [HCO3−] in a patient with acidemia). In such
cases, the patient has two causes for abnormal pH—a metabolic acidosis and a respiratory acidosis, in this instance—and it is unnecessary to
proceed to the third step.
The third step requires determining whether the patient’s compensation is appropriate. It is assumed that the primary disorder was

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

514 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Acidemia or Alkalemia
Step 1
Alkalemia

Acidemia

Decreased
[HCO3]

Step 2

Respiratory
acidosis

Metabolic
acidosis

Step 3

Low
PCO2
Mixed
Met.
Acid.
and
Resp.
Alk.

Expected
PCO2
Simple
Met.
Acid.

Increased
[HCO3]

Increased
PCO2

High
PCO2
Mixed
Met.
Acid.
and
Resp.
Acid.

Low
HCO3
Mixed
Resp.
Acid.
and
Met.
Acid.

Expected
HCO3
Simple
Resp.
Acid.

Decreased
PCO2

Metabolic
alkalosis
High
HCO3
Mixed
Resp.
Acid.
and
Met.
Alk.

Low
PCO2
Mixed
Met.
Alk.
and
Resp.
Alk.

Expected
PCO2
Simple
Met.
Alk.

Respiratory
alkalosis
High
PCO2
Mixed
Met.
Alk.
and
Resp.
Acid.

Low
HCO3
Mixed
Resp.
Alk.
and
Met.
Acid.

Expected
HCO3
Simple
Resp.
Alk.

High
HCO3
Mixed
Resp.
Alk.
and
Met.
Alk.

Fig. 73.10 Three-­step process for interpreting acid-­base disturbances. In step 1, determine whether the pH is low (acidemia) or high (alkalemia).

In step 2, establish an explanation for the acidemia or alkalemia. In step 3, calculate the expected compensation (see Table 73.11) and determine
whether a mixed disturbance is present. Met. Acid., metabolic acidosis; Met. Alk., metabolic alkalosis; Resp. Acid., respiratory acidosis; Resp. Alk.,
respiratory alkalosis.

diagnosed in the second step, and the expected compensation is calculated (see Table 73.11). If the compensation is appropriate, a simple
acid-­base disorder is present. If the compensation is not appropriate, a
mixed disorder is present. The identity of the second disorder is determined by deciding whether the compensation is too little or too much
compared with what was expected (see Fig. 73.10).
The history is always useful in evaluating and diagnosing patients
with acid-­base disturbances. It is especially helpful in a respiratory process. The expected metabolic compensation for a respiratory process
changes according to whether the process is acute or chronic, which
can be deduced only from the history. The metabolic compensation for
an acute respiratory acidosis is less than that for a chronic respiratory
acidosis. In a patient with a respiratory acidosis, a small increase in
[HCO3−] would be consistent with a simple acute respiratory acidosis
or a mixed disorder (a chronic respiratory acidosis and a metabolic
acidosis). Only the history can differentiate among the possibilities.
Knowledge of the length of the respiratory process and the presence or
absence of a risk factor for a metabolic acidosis (diarrhea) allows the
correct conclusion to be reached.
An alternative to the physiologic approach just described (which
includes calculation of the anion gap; see later) is the physiochemical
approach, often called the Stewart method. Some view this approach
as superior to the physiologic approach, but it requires multiple calculations and additional laboratory values and is thus more challenging
to use in the clinical setting. The physiochemical approach requires
measurement of the blood pH and Pco2 and calculation of the apparent strong ion difference (SIDa), the effective strong ion difference
(SIDe), the strong ion gap (SIG), and the total concentration of weak
acids (ATOT).

METABOLIC ACIDOSIS

Metabolic acidosis occurs frequently in hospitalized children; diarrhea
is the most common etiology. For a patient with an unknown medical
problem, the presence of a metabolic acidosis is often helpful diagnostically, because it suggests a relatively narrow differential diagnosis.
Patients with a metabolic acidosis have a low serum [HCO3−],
although not every patient with a low serum [HCO3−] has a metabolic
acidosis. The exception is the patient with a respiratory alkalosis, which
causes a decrease in the serum [HCO3−] as part of appropriate renal
compensation. In a patient with an isolated metabolic acidosis, there is
a predictable decrease in the blood [CO2], as follows:

PCO2 = 1.5 × [HCO-3 ] + 8 ± 2

A mixed acid-­base disturbance is present if the respiratory compensation is not appropriate. If the Pco2 is greater than predicted,
the patient has a concurrent respiratory acidosis. A lower Pco2 than
predicted indicates a concurrent respiratory alkalosis or, less frequently, an isolated respiratory alkalosis. Because the appropriate
respiratory compensation for a metabolic acidosis never normalizes
the patient’s pH, the presence of a normal pH and a low [HCO3−]
occurs only if some degree of respiratory alkalosis is present. In this
situation, distinguishing an isolated chronic respiratory alkalosis
from a mixed metabolic acidosis and acute respiratory alkalosis
may be possible only clinically. In contrast, the combination of a
low serum pH and a low [HCO3−] occurs only if a metabolic acidosis is present.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

There are many causes of a metabolic acidosis (Table 73.13), resulting
from three basic mechanisms:
1.	Loss of bicarbonate from the body
2.	Impaired ability to excrete acid by the kidney
3.	Addition of acid to the body (exogenous or endogenous)
Diarrhea, the most common cause of metabolic acidosis in children, causes a loss of bicarbonate from the body. The amount of
bicarbonate lost in the stool depends on the volume of diarrhea
and [HCO3−] of the stool, which tends to increase with more severe
diarrhea. The kidneys attempt to balance the losses by increasing
acid secretion, but metabolic acidosis occurs when this compensation is inadequate. Diarrhea often causes volume depletion because
of losses of sodium and water, potentially exacerbating the acidosis
by causing shock and a lactic acidosis. In addition, diarrheal losses
of potassium lead to hypokalemia. Moreover, the volume depletion
causes increased production of aldosterone. This increase stimulates renal retention of sodium, helping to maintain intravascular
volume, but also leads to increased urinary losses of potassium,
exacerbating the hypokalemia.
There are four forms of renal tubular acidosis (RTA): distal (type I),
proximal (type II), mixed (type III), and hyperkalemic (type IV) (see
Chapter 569). In distal RTA, children may have accompanying hypokalemia, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, and nephrocalcinosis. Failure

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 515
Table 73.13  Causes of Metabolic Acidosis
NORMAL ANION GAP
Diarrhea
RTA
Distal (type I) RTA (OMIM 179800/602722/267300/611590)*
Proximal (type II) RTA (OMIM 604278)†
Mixed (type III) RTA (OMIM 259730)
Hyperkalemic (type IV) RTA (OMIM 201910/264350/177735/145260)‡
Urinary tract diversions
Posthypocapnia
Ammonium chloride intake
INCREASED ANION GAP
Lactic Acidosis
Tissue hypoxia
Shock
Hypoxemia
Severe anemia
Liver failure
Malignancy
Intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Inborn errors of metabolism
Medications
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Metformin
Propofol
Linezolid
Ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Starvation ketoacidosis
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
Kidney Failure
Poisoning
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
Salicylate
Toluene
Paraldehyde
*Along with these genetic disorders, distal RTA may be secondary to renal disease or
medications.
†Most cases of proximal RTA are not caused by this primary genetic disorder. Proximal

RTA is usually part of Fanconi syndrome, which has multiple etiologies.
‡Hyperkalemic RTA can be secondary to a genetic disorder (some of the more common

are listed) or other etiologies.
OMIM, database number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.nc
bi.nlm.nih.gov/omim); RTA, renal tubular acidosis.

to thrive because of chronic metabolic acidosis is the most common
presenting complaint. Patients with distal RTA cannot acidify their
urine and thus have a urine pH >5.5 despite a metabolic acidosis.
Proximal RTA is rarely present in isolation. In most patients,
proximal RTA is part of Fanconi syndrome, a generalized dysfunction of the proximal tubule. The dysfunction leads to glycosuria,
aminoaciduria, and excessive urinary losses of phosphate and uric
acid. The presence of a low serum uric acid level, glycosuria, and
aminoaciduria is helpful diagnostically. Chronic hypophosphatemia
leads to rickets in children (see Chapter 69). Rickets and/or failure
to thrive may be the presenting complaint. The ability to acidify
the urine is intact in proximal RTA; thus untreated patients have a
urine pH <5.5. However, bicarbonate therapy increases bicarbonate losses in the urine, and the urine pH increases. A mixed RTA
(combined distal and proximal) occurs in patients with autosomal
recessive osteopetrosis caused by pathologic variants in the gene for
carbonic anhydrase II.

In hyperkalemic RTA, renal excretion of acid and potassium is
impaired. Hyperkalemic RTA is the result of hyperkalemia, absence
of aldosterone, or inability of the kidney to respond to aldosterone.
In severe aldosterone deficiency, as occurs with congenital adrenal
hyperplasia because of 21α-­hydroxylase deficiency, the hyperkalemia
and metabolic acidosis are accompanied by hyponatremia and volume
depletion from renal salt wasting. Incomplete aldosterone deficiency
causes less severe electrolyte disturbances; children may have isolated
hyperkalemic RTA, hyperkalemia without acidosis, or isolated hyponatremia. Patients may have aldosterone deficiency caused by decreased
renin production by the kidney; renin normally stimulates aldosterone
synthesis. Children with hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism usually
have either isolated hyperkalemia or hyperkalemic RTA. The manifestations of aldosterone resistance depend on the severity of the resistance. In the autosomal recessive form of pseudohypoaldosteronism
type I, which is the result of an absence of the sodium channel that
normally responds to aldosterone, there is often severe salt wasting
and hyponatremia. In contrast, the aldosterone resistance in kidney
transplant recipients usually produces either isolated hyperkalemia or
hyperkalemic RTA; hyponatremia is unusual. Similarly, the medications that cause hyperkalemic RTA do not cause hyponatremia. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II, an autosomal dominant disorder also
known as Gordon syndrome, is a unique cause of hyperkalemic RTA
because the genetic defect causes volume expansion and hypertension.
Children with abnormal urinary tracts, usually secondary to congenital malformations, may require diversion of urine through intestinal segments. Ureterosigmoidostomy, anastomosis of a ureter to the
sigmoid colon, almost always produces a metabolic acidosis and hypokalemia. Consequently, ileal conduits are the more commonly used
procedure, although there is still a risk of a metabolic acidosis.
The appropriate metabolic compensation for a chronic respiratory alkalosis is a decrease in renal acid excretion. The resultant
decrease in the serum [HCO3−] lessens the alkalemia caused by the
respiratory alkalosis. If the respiratory alkalosis resolves quickly,
the patient continues to have a decreased serum [HCO3−], causing
acidemia as the result of a metabolic acidosis. This resolves over 1-­2
days through increased acid excretion by the kidneys.
Lactic acidosis (l-­lactic) typically occurs when inadequate oxygen delivery to the tissues leads to anaerobic metabolism and excess
production of lactic acid. Lactic acidosis may be secondary to shock,
severe anemia, or hypoxemia. When the underlying cause of the
lactic acidosis is alleviated, the liver is able to metabolize the accumulated lactate into bicarbonate, correcting the metabolic acidosis.
There is normally some tissue production of lactate metabolized
by the liver. In children with severe liver dysfunction, impairment of lactate metabolism may produce a lactic acidosis. Rarely,
a metabolically active malignancy grows so fast that its blood supply becomes inadequate, with resultant anaerobic metabolism and
lactic acidosis. Patients who have short bowel syndrome resulting
from small bowel resection can have bacterial overgrowth. In these
patients, excessive intestinal bacterial metabolism of glucose into
d-­lactic acid can cause a lactic acidosis. Lactic acidosis occurs in
a variety of inborn errors of metabolism, especially those affecting mitochondrial oxidation (see Chapters 107.4 and 108). Medications also can cause lactic acidosis. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors that are used to treat HIV infection inhibit mitochondrial
replication; lactic acidosis is a rare complication, although elevated
serum lactate concentrations without acidosis are quite common.
Metformin, used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus, is most likely to
cause a lactic acidosis in patients with chronic kidney disease. High
dosages and prolonged use of propofol can cause lactic acidosis.
Propylene glycol is a diluent in a variety of oral and IV medications;
excessive intake causes a lactic acidosis, principally from accumulation of d-­lactic acid. Linezolid is another medication that may cause
a lactic acidosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

516 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
In insulin-­dependent diabetes mellitus, inadequate insulin leads to
hyperglycemia and DKA (see Chapter 629). Production of acetoacetic
acid and β-­hydroxybutyric acid causes the metabolic acidosis. Administration of insulin corrects the underlying metabolic problem and
permits conversion of acetoacetate and β-­hydroxybutyrate into bicarbonate, which helps correct the metabolic acidosis. However, in some
patients, urinary losses of acetoacetate and β-­hydroxybutyrate may
be substantial, preventing rapid regeneration of bicarbonate. In these
patients, full correction of the metabolic acidosis requires renal regeneration of bicarbonate, a slower process. The hyperglycemia causes an
osmotic diuresis, usually producing volume depletion, along with substantial losses of potassium, sodium, and phosphate.
In starvation ketoacidosis the lack of glucose leads to ketoacid production, which in turn can produce a metabolic acidosis, although it
is usually mild as a result of increased acid secretion by the kidney. In
alcoholic ketoacidosis, which is much less common in children than
in adults, the acidosis usually follows a combination of an alcoholic
binge with vomiting and poor intake of food. The acidosis is potentially
more severe than with isolated starvation, and the blood glucose level
may be low, normal, or high. Hypoglycemia and acidosis also suggest
an inborn error of metabolism.
Kidney failure causes a metabolic acidosis because of the need for
the kidneys to excrete the acid produced by normal metabolism. With
mild or moderate chronic kidney disease, the remaining nephrons are
usually able to compensate by increasing acid excretion. When the
GFR is <20–30% of normal, the compensation is inadequate, and a
metabolic acidosis develops. In some children, especially those with
chronic kidney disease because of tubular damage, the acidosis develops at a higher GFR because of a concurrent defect in acid secretion by
the distal tubule (distal RTA).
A variety of toxic ingestions can cause a metabolic acidosis (see
Chapter 94). Salicylate intoxication is now much less common because
aspirin is no longer recommended for fever control in children. Acute
salicylate intoxication occurs after a large overdose. Chronic salicylate
intoxication is possible with gradual buildup of the drug. Especially
in adults, respiratory alkalosis may be the dominant acid-­base disturbance. In children, the metabolic acidosis is usually the more significant
finding. Other symptoms of salicylate intoxication are fever, seizures,
lethargy, and coma. Hyperventilation may be particularly marked. Tinnitus, vertigo, and hearing impairment are more likely with chronic
salicylate intoxication.
Ethylene glycol, a component of antifreeze, is converted in the
liver to glyoxylic and oxalic acids, causing a severe metabolic acidosis.
Excessive oxalate excretion causes calcium oxalate crystals to appear in
the urine, and calcium oxalate precipitation in the kidney tubules can
cause kidney failure. The toxicity of methanol ingestion also depends
on liver metabolism; formic acid is the toxic end product that causes
the metabolic acidosis and other sequelae, which include damage to
the optic nerve and CNS. Symptoms may include nausea, emesis, visual
impairment, and altered mental status. Toluene inhalation and paraldehyde ingestion are other potential causes of a metabolic acidosis.
Many inborn errors of metabolism cause a metabolic acidosis (see
Chapters 104-­107). The metabolic acidosis may be the result of excessive production of ketoacids, lactic acid, and other organic anions.
Some patients have accompanying hypoglycemia or hyperammonemia. In most patients, the acidosis occurs episodically during acute
decompensations, which may be precipitated by ingestion of specific
dietary substrates, the stress of a mild illness, or poor compliance
with dietary or medical therapy. In a few inborn errors of metabolism,
patients have a chronic metabolic acidosis.

Clinical Manifestations

The underlying disorder usually produces most of the signs and symptoms in children with a mild or moderate metabolic acidosis. The clinical manifestations of the acidosis are related to the degree of acidemia;
patients with appropriate respiratory compensation and less severe

acidemia have fewer manifestations than those with a concomitant
respiratory acidosis. At a serum pH <7.2, there may be impaired cardiac contractility and an increased risk of arrhythmias, especially if
underlying heart disease or other predisposing electrolyte disorders are
present. With acidemia, there may be a decrease in the cardiovascular
response to catecholamines, potentially exacerbating hypotension in
children with volume depletion or shock. Acidemia causes vasoconstriction of the pulmonary vasculature, which is especially problematic in newborn infants with persistent pulmonary hypertension (see
Chapter 130).
The normal respiratory response to metabolic acidosis—compensatory hyperventilation— may be subtle with mild metabolic acidosis,
but it causes discernible increased respiratory effort with worsening acidemia. The acute metabolic effects of acidemia include insulin
resistance, increased protein degradation, and reduced ATP synthesis.
Chronic metabolic acidosis causes failure to thrive in children. Acidemia causes potassium to move from the ICS to the ECS, thereby
increasing the serum [K+]. Severe acidemia impairs brain metabolism,
eventually resulting in lethargy and coma.

Diagnosis

The etiology of a metabolic acidosis is often apparent from the history
and physical examination. Acutely, diarrhea and shock are common
causes of a metabolic acidosis. Shock, which causes a lactic acidosis,
is usually apparent on physical examination and can be secondary
to dehydration, acute blood loss, sepsis, or heart disease. Failure to
thrive suggests a chronic metabolic acidosis, as with renal insufficiency
or RTA. New onset of polyuria occurs in children with undiagnosed
diabetes mellitus and DKA. Metabolic acidosis with seizures and/
or a depressed sensorium, especially in an infant, warrants consideration of an inborn error of metabolism. Meningitis and sepsis with
lactic acidosis are more common explanations for metabolic acidosis
with neurologic signs and symptoms. Identification of a toxic ingestion (e.g., ethylene glycol, methanol) is especially important because
of the potentially excellent response to specific therapy. A variety of
medications can cause a metabolic acidosis, whether prescribed or
accidentally ingested. Hepatomegaly and metabolic acidosis may occur
in children with sepsis, congenital or acquired heart disease, hepatic
failure, or inborn errors of metabolism.
Basic laboratory tests in a child with a metabolic acidosis should
include measurements of BUN, serum creatinine, serum glucose, urinalysis, and serum electrolytes. Metabolic acidosis, hyperglycemia, glycosuria, and ketonuria support a diagnosis of DKA. Starvation causes
ketosis, but the metabolic acidosis, if present, is usually mild (HCO3−
>18 mEq/L). Most children with ketosis from poor intake and metabolic acidosis have a concomitant disorder, such as gastroenteritis with
diarrhea, that explains the metabolic acidosis. Alternatively, metabolic
acidosis with or without ketosis occurs in inborn errors of metabolism;
patients with these disorders may have hyperglycemia, normoglycemia,
or hypoglycemia. Adrenal insufficiency may cause metabolic acidosis
and hypoglycemia. Metabolic acidosis with hypoglycemia also occurs
with liver failure. Metabolic acidosis, normoglycemia, and glycosuria
occur in children when type II RTA is part of Fanconi syndrome; the
defect in resorption of glucose by the proximal tubule of the kidney
causes the glycosuria.
The serum [K+] is often abnormal in children with a metabolic acidosis. Even though a metabolic acidosis causes potassium to move
from the ICS to the ECS, many patients with a metabolic acidosis have
a low serum [K+] because of excessive body losses of K+. With diarrhea, there are high stool losses of K+ and, often, secondary renal losses
of K+, whereas in type I or type II RTA, there are increased urinary
losses of K+. In DKA, urinary losses of K+ are high, but the shift of
K+ out of cells because of a lack of insulin and metabolic acidosis is
especially significant. Consequently, the initial serum [K+] can be low,
normal, or high, even though total body K+ is almost always decreased.
The serum [K+] is usually increased in patients with acidosis caused

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 517
Normal plasma
UC

UA

Acidosis (no gap)
UC

UA

HCO3
Na

Cl

UC

HCO3

HCO3

Na

UA

Acidosis (gap)

Na
Cl

Cl

Fig. 73.11 Anion gap. The anion gap is the difference between the

sodium concentration and the combined concentrations of chloride
and bicarbonate (vertical black bars). In both a gap and a nongap metabolic acidosis, there is a decrease in the bicarbonate concentration.
There is an increase in unmeasured anions (UA) in patients with a gap
metabolic acidosis. In a nongap metabolic acidosis, there is an increase
in the serum chloride concentration. UC, Unmeasured cations.

by renal insufficiency; urinary K+ excretion is impaired. The combination of metabolic acidosis, hyperkalemia, and hyponatremia occurs in
patients with severe aldosterone deficiency (adrenogenital syndrome)
or aldosterone resistance. Patients with less severe, type IV RTA often
have only hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis. Very ill children with
metabolic acidosis may have an elevated serum K+ because of a combination of renal insufficiency, tissue breakdown, and a shift of K+ from
the ICS to the ECS secondary to the metabolic acidosis.
The plasma anion gap is useful for evaluating patients with a metabolic acidosis. It divides patients into two diagnostic groups, those with
normal anion gap and those with increased anion gap. The following
formula determines the anion gap:
]
[
Anion gap = Na + − ([Cl − ] + [HCO3 − ])

A normal anion gap is 4-­11, although there is variation among laboratories. Approximately 11 mEq of the anion gap is normally secondary
to albumin. A 1 g/dL decrease in the albumin concentration decreases
the anion gap by approximately 2.5 mEq/L. Thus, if the albumin is not
close to 4 g/dL, the anion gap should be corrected for the albumin
concentration:
Anion gap ( corrected for albumin) = Na + − ([ Cl − ] +
[HCO3 − ]) + [2.5 x ( 4 − observed albumin)]

The number of serum anions must equal the number of serum cations to maintain electrical neutrality (Fig. 73.11). The anion gap is the
difference between the measured cation (Na+) and the measured anions
(Cl− + bicarbonate). The anion gap is also the difference between the
unmeasured cations (K+, magnesium, calcium) and the unmeasured
anions (albumin, phosphate, urate, sulfate). An increased anion gap
occurs when there is an increase in unmeasured anions. With a lactic acidosis, there is endogenous production of lactic acid, which is
composed of positively charged hydrogen ions and negatively charged
lactate anions. The hydrogen ions are largely buffered by serum bicarbonate, resulting in a decrease in [HCO3−]. The hydrogen ions that are
not buffered by bicarbonate cause the serum pH to decrease. The lactate anions remain, causing the increase in the anion gap.

An increase in unmeasured anions, along with H+ generation, is
present in all causes of an increased gap metabolic acidosis (see Table
73.13). In DKA, the ketoacids β-­hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate are
the unmeasured anions. In kidney failure there is retention of unmeasured anions, including phosphate, urate, and sulfate. The increase in
unmeasured anions in kidney failure is usually less than the decrease
in [HCO3−]. Kidney failure is thus a mix of an increased-­gap and a
normal-­gap metabolic acidosis. The normal-­gap metabolic acidosis is
especially prominent in children with kidney failure because of tubular
damage, as occurs with renal dysplasia or obstructive uropathy, because
these patients have a concurrent RTA. The unmeasured anions in toxic
ingestions vary: formate in methanol intoxication, glycolate in ethylene
glycol intoxication, and lactate and ketoacids in salicylate intoxication.
In inborn errors of metabolism, the unmeasured anions depend on the
specific etiology and may include ketoacids, lactate, and other organic
anions. In a few inborn errors of metabolism, the acidosis occurs without generation of unmeasured anions; thus the anion gap is normal.
A normal–anion gap metabolic acidosis occurs when there is a
decrease in [HCO3−] without an increase in the unmeasured anions.
With diarrhea, there is a loss of bicarbonate in the stool, causing a
decrease in the serum pH and [HCO3−]; the serum [Cl−] increases to
maintain electrical neutrality (see Fig. 73.11). Hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis is an alternative term for a normal–anion gap metabolic
acidosis. Calculation of the anion gap is more precise than using [Cl −]
to differentiate between a normal-­gap and an increased-­gap metabolic acidosis, in that the anion gap directly determines the presence
of unmeasured anions. Electrical neutrality dictates that the [Cl−]
increases or decreases according to the serum [Na+], making [Cl−] a
less reliable predictor of unmeasured anions than the more direct measure, calculation of the anion gap.
An increase in unmeasured cations, such as calcium, potassium,
and magnesium, decreases the anion gap. Conversely, a decrease in
unmeasured cations is a very unusual cause of an increased anion gap.
Because of these variables, the broad range of a normal anion gap, and
other variables, the presence of a normal or an increased anion gap
is not always reliable in differentiating among the causes of a metabolic acidosis, especially when the metabolic acidosis is mild. In some
patients, there is more than one explanation for the metabolic acidosis,
such as the child with diarrhea and lactic acidosis as a result of poor
perfusion. The anion gap should not be interpreted in dogmatic isolation; consideration of other laboratory abnormalities and the clinical
history improves its diagnostic utility.

Treatment

The most effective therapeutic approach for patients with a metabolic
acidosis is repair of the underlying disorder, if possible. The administration of insulin in DKA and the restoration of adequate perfusion with
IV fluids in lactic acidosis because of hypovolemia or shock eventually
result in normalization of the acid-­base balance. In other diseases, the
use of bicarbonate therapy is indicated because the underlying disorder is irreparable. Children with metabolic acidosis caused by RTA or
chronic kidney disease require long-­term base therapy. Patients with
acute kidney injury and metabolic acidosis may need base therapy
until their kidneys’ ability to excrete hydrogen normalizes. In other
disorders the cause of the metabolic acidosis eventually resolves, but
base therapy may be necessary during the acute illness. In salicylate
poisoning, alkali administration increases renal clearance of salicylate
and decreases the amount of salicylate in brain cells. Short-­term base
therapy is often necessary in other poisonings (ethylene glycol, methanol) and inborn errors of metabolism (pyruvate carboxylase deficiency,
propionic acidemia). Some inborn errors of metabolism require long-­
term base therapy.
The use of base therapy in DKA with lactic acidosis is controversial; there is little evidence that it improves patient outcome, and it has a
variety of potential side effects. The risks of giving sodium bicarbonate

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

518 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
include the possibility of causing hypernatremia or volume overload.
Furthermore, the patient may have overcorrection of the metabolic
acidosis once the underlying disorder resolves, because metabolism
of lactate or ketoacids generates bicarbonate. The rapid change from
acidemia to alkalemia can cause a variety of problems, including hypokalemia and hypophosphatemia. Bicarbonate therapy increases the
generation of CO2, which can accumulate in patients with respiratory
failure. Because CO2 readily diffuses into cells, the administration of
bicarbonate can lower the intracellular pH, potentially worsening cell
function. Base therapy is usually reserved for children with severe
acute lactic acidosis and severe DKA.
Oral base therapy is given to children with chronic metabolic acidosis. Sodium bicarbonate tablets are available for older children. Younger
children generally take citrate solutions; the liver generates bicarbonate
from citrate. Citrate solutions are available as sodium citrate, potassium citrate, and a 1:1 mix of sodium citrate and potassium citrate.
The patient’s potassium needs dictate the choice. Children with type
I or type II RTA may have hypokalemia and benefit from potassium
supplements, but most children with chronic kidney failure cannot tolerate additional potassium.
Oral or IV base can be used in acute metabolic acidosis; IV therapy
is generally used when a rapid response is necessary. Sodium bicarbonate may be given as a bolus, usually at a dose of 1 mEq/kg, in an
emergency situation. Another approach is to add sodium bicarbonate
or sodium acetate to the patient’s IV fluids, remembering to remove
an equal amount of sodium chloride from the solution to avoid giving an excessive sodium load. Careful monitoring is mandatory so that
the dose of base can be titrated appropriately. Tris(hydroxymethyl)
aminomethane (tromethamine, THAM) is an option in patients with
a metabolic acidosis and a respiratory acidosis, because it neutralizes
acids without releasing CO2. THAM also diffuses into cells and therefore provides intracellular buffering.
Hemodialysis is another option for correcting a metabolic acidosis, and it is an appropriate choice in patients with renal insufficiency,
especially if significant uremia or hyperkalemia is also present. Hemodialysis is advantageous for correcting the metabolic acidosis caused
by methanol or ethylene glycol intoxication, because hemodialysis efficiently removes the offending toxin. In addition, these patients often
have a severe metabolic acidosis that does not respond easily to IV
bicarbonate therapy. Peritoneal dialysis is another option for correcting the metabolic acidosis due to chronic kidney disease.
Many causes of metabolic acidosis require specific therapy. Administration of a glucocorticoid and a mineralocorticoid is necessary in
patients with adrenal insufficiency. Patients with DKA require insulin therapy, whereas patients with lactic acidosis respond to measures that alleviate tissue hypoxia. Along with correction of acidosis,
patients with methanol or ethylene glycol ingestion should receive an
agent that prevents the breakdown of the toxic substance to its toxic
metabolites. Fomepizole has supplanted ethanol as the treatment of
choice. These agents work by inhibiting alcohol dehydrogenase, the
enzyme that performs the first step in the metabolism of ethylene
glycol or methanol. There are a variety of disease-­specific therapies
for patients with a metabolic acidosis resulting from an inborn error
of metabolism.

METABOLIC ALKALOSIS

Metabolic alkalosis in children is most often secondary to emesis or
diuretic use. The serum bicarbonate concentration is increased with a
metabolic alkalosis, although a respiratory acidosis also leads to a compensatory elevation of the serum [HCO3−]. With a simple metabolic
alkalosis, however, the pH is elevated; alkalemia is present. Patients
with a respiratory acidosis are acidemic. Decreasing ventilation causes
appropriate respiratory compensation for a metabolic alkalosis. Pco2
increases by 7 mm Hg for each 10 mEq/L increase in the serum
[HCO3−]. Appropriate respiratory compensation never exceeds a Pco2
of 55-­60 mm Hg. The patient has a concurrent respiratory alkalosis

Table 73.14  Causes of Metabolic Alkalosis
CHLORIDE-­RESPONSIVE (URINARY CHLORIDE <15 MEQ/L)
Gastric losses
Emesis
Nasogastric suction
Diuretics (loop or thiazide)
Chloride-­losing diarrhea (OMIM 214700)
Low chloride formula
Cystic fibrosis (OMIM 219700)
Posthypercapnia
CHLORIDE-­RESISTANT (URINARY CHLORIDE >20 MEQ/L)
High Blood Pressure
Adrenal adenoma or hyperplasia
Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism/Familial
hyperaldosteronism type I (OMIM 103900)
Familial hyperaldosteronism type II (OMIM 605635)
Familial hyperaldosteronism type III (OMIM 613677)
Familial hyperaldosteronism type IV (OMIM 617027)
Renovascular disease
Renin-­secreting tumor
17α-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202110)
11β-­Hydroxylase deficiency (OMIM 202010)
Cushing syndrome
11β-­Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 218030)
Licorice ingestion
Liddle syndrome (OMIM 177200)
Normal Blood Pressure
Gitelman syndrome (OMIM 263800)
Bartter syndrome (OMIM 241200/607364/602522/601678/300971/60
1198/613090)
Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism (OMIM 146200)
EAST syndrome (OMIM 612780)
Hyperuricemia, Pulmonary Hypertension, Renal Failure in Infancy and
Alkalosis, HUPRA Syndrome (OMIM 613845)
Autosomal dominant kidney hypomagnesemia due to RRAGD
variant (OMIM not assigned)
Base administration
EAST, Epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural hearing loss, and tubulopathy; OMIM, database
number from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go
v/omim).

if the Pco2 is lower than the expected compensation. A greater than
expected Pco2 occurs with a concurrent respiratory acidosis.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

The kidneys normally respond promptly to a metabolic alkalosis by
increasing base excretion. Two processes are therefore usually present
to produce a metabolic alkalosis: (1) the generation of the metabolic
alkalosis, which requires the addition of base to the body, and (2) the
maintenance of the metabolic alkalosis, which requires impairment in
the kidney’s ability to excrete base.
The etiologies of a metabolic alkalosis are divided into two categories based on the urinary chloride level (Table 73.14). The alkalosis
in patients with a low urinary [Cl−] is maintained by volume depletion; thus volume repletion is necessary for correction of the alkalosis.
The volume depletion in these patients is caused by losses of Na+ and
K+, but the loss of Cl− is usually greater than the losses of Na+ and K+
combined. Because Cl− losses are the dominant cause of the volume
depletion, these patients require Cl− to correct the volume depletion
and metabolic alkalosis; they are said to have Cl−-­responsive metabolic alkalosis. In contrast, the alkalosis in a patient with an elevated
urinary [Cl−] does not respond to volume repletion and so is termed
Cl−-­resistant metabolic alkalosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 519
Emesis or nasogastric suction results in loss of gastric fluid, which
has a high content of HCl. Generation of H+ by the gastric mucosa
causes simultaneous release of bicarbonate into the bloodstream. Normally, the hydrogen ions in gastric fluid are reclaimed in the small
intestine (by neutralizing secreted bicarbonate); thus there is no net
loss of acid. With loss of gastric fluid, this does not occur, and a metabolic alkalosis develops. This period is the generation phase of the metabolic alkalosis.
The maintenance phase of the metabolic alkalosis from gastric
losses is caused by the volume depletion (“chloride depletion” from
gastric loss of HCl). Volume depletion interferes with urinary loss
of bicarbonate, the normal renal response to a metabolic alkalosis.
During volume depletion, several mechanisms prevent renal bicarbonate loss. First, there is a reduction in the GFR, so less bicarbonate is filtered. Second, volume depletion increases resorption
of sodium and bicarbonate in the proximal tubule, limiting the
amount of bicarbonate that can be excreted in the urine. This effect
is mediated by angiotensin II and adrenergic stimulation of the
kidney, both of which are increased in response to volume depletion. Third, the increase in aldosterone during volume depletion
increases bicarbonate resorption and H+ secretion in the collecting
duct.
In addition to volume depletion, gastric losses are usually associated with hypokalemia as a result of both gastric loss of K+ and, most
importantly, increased urinary K+ losses. The increased urinary losses
of K+ are mediated by aldosterone, through volume depletion, and by
the increase in intracellular K+ secondary to the metabolic alkalosis,
which causes K+ to move into the cells of the kidney, causing increased
K+ excretion. Hypokalemia contributes to the maintenance of the metabolic alkalosis by decreasing bicarbonate loss. Hypokalemia increases
H+ secretion in the distal nephron and stimulates ammonia production
in the proximal tubule. Ammonia production enhances renal excretion
of H+.
A metabolic alkalosis can develop in patients receiving loop or
thiazide diuretics. Diuretic use leads to volume depletion, which
increases angiotensin II, aldosterone, and adrenergic stimulation of
the kidney. Diuretics increase the delivery of sodium to the distal
nephron, further enhancing acid excretion. Moreover, these diuretics cause hypokalemia, which increases acid excretion by the kidney. The increase in renal acid excretion generates the metabolic
alkalosis, and the decrease in bicarbonate loss maintains it. In addition, patients who are receiving diuretics have a “contraction alkalosis.” Diuretic use causes fluid loss without bicarbonate; thus the
remaining body bicarbonate is contained in a smaller total body
fluid compartment. The [HCO3−] increases, helping to generate the
metabolic alkalosis.
Diuretics are often used in patients with edema, such as those
with nephrotic syndrome, heart failure, or liver failure. In many of
these patients, metabolic alkalosis resulting from diuretic use develops despite the continued presence of edema. This is because the
effective intravascular volume is low, and it is the effective intravascular volume that stimulates the compensatory mechanisms that
cause and maintain a metabolic alkalosis. Many of these patients
have a decreased effective intravascular volume before they begin
diuretic therapy, increasing the likelihood of diuretic-­induced metabolic alkalosis.
Diuretic use increases chloride excretion in the urine. Consequently, while a patient is receiving diuretics, the urine [Cl−] is
typically high (>20 mEq/L). After the diuretic effect has worn off,
the urinary [Cl−] is low (<15 mEq/L) because of appropriate renal
Cl− retention in response to volume depletion. Thus categorization
of diuretics because of urinary [Cl−] depends on the timing of the
measurement. However, the metabolic alkalosis from diuretics is Cl−
responsive; it is corrected after adequate volume repletion. This is the
rationale for including this process among the chloride-­responsive
causes of a metabolic alkalosis.

Most patients with diarrhea have a metabolic acidosis because of
stool losses of bicarbonate. In chloride-­losing diarrhea, an autosomal recessive disorder, there is a defect in the normal intestinal
exchange of bicarbonate for chloride, causing excessive stool losses
of chloride (see Chapter 385). In addition, stool losses of H+ and K+
cause metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia, both of which are exacerbated by increased renal H+ and K+ losses from volume depletion.
Treatment is with oral supplements of K+ and NaCl. Use of a gastric
proton pump inhibitor (PPI), by decreasing gastric HCl production,
reduces both the volume of diarrhea and the need for electrolyte
supplementation.
Formulas with extremely low Cl− content have led to Cl− deficiency and volume depletion. There is secondary metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia. Cystic fibrosis can rarely cause metabolic
alkalosis, hypokalemia, and hyponatremia because of excessive
NaCl losses in sweat (see Chapter 454). The volume depletion
causes the metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia through increased
urinary losses, whereas the hyponatremia, a less common finding,
is secondary to Na+ loss combined with renal water conservation in
an effort to protect the intravascular volume (“appropriate” ADH
production).
A posthypercapnic metabolic alkalosis occurs after the correction of a chronic respiratory acidosis. This is typically seen in
patients with chronic lung disease who are started on mechanical
ventilation. During chronic respiratory acidosis, appropriate renal
compensation leads to an increase in the serum [HCO3−]. Because it
is still present after acute correction of the respiratory acidosis, the
elevated [HCO3−] causes a metabolic alkalosis. The metabolic alkalosis persists because the patient with a chronic respiratory acidosis is intravascularly depleted because of the Cl− loss that occurred
during the initial metabolic compensation for the primary respiratory acidosis. In addition, many children with a chronic respiratory
acidosis receive diuretics, which further decrease the intravascular
volume. The metabolic alkalosis responds to correction of the intravascular volume deficit.
The chloride-­resistant causes of metabolic alkalosis can be subdivided according to blood pressure status. Patients with hypertension
either have increased aldosterone levels or act as if they do. Aldosterone
levels are elevated in children with adrenal adenomas or hyperplasia.
Aldosterone causes renal retention of sodium, with resultant hypertension. Metabolic alkalosis and hypokalemia result from aldosterone-­
mediated renal excretion of H+ and K+. The urinary Cl− level is not low
because these patients are volume overloaded, not volume depleted.
The volume expansion and hypertension allow normal excretion of
Na+ and Cl− despite the presence of aldosterone. This is known as the
mineralocorticoid escape phenomenon.
In glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism, an autosomal
dominant disorder, excess production of aldosterone results from
the presence of an aldosterone synthase gene regulated by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) (see Chapter 616.8). Glucocorticoids
effectively treat this disorder by inhibiting ACTH production by the
pituitary, downregulating the inappropriate aldosterone production.
Familial hyperaldosteronism type II, which causes elevated aldosterone levels, responds to spironolactone. Familial hyperaldosteronism
type III typically requires bilateral adrenalectomy due to the severity
of the hyperaldosteronism. Renovascular disease and renin-­secreting
tumors both cause excessive renin, leading to an increase in aldosterone, although hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis are less common findings than hypertension. In two forms of congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, 11β-­
hydroxylase deficiency and 17α-­hydroxylase
deficiency, there is excessive production of the mineralocorticoid
11-­deoxycorticosterone (see Chapters 616.2 and 616.4). Hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis are more likely in 17α-­
hydroxylase deficiency than in 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency. These
disorders respond to glucocorticoids because the excess production
of 11-­deoxycorticosterone is under the control of ACTH.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

520 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Cushing syndrome frequently causes hypertension. Cortisol has
some mineralocorticoid activity, and high levels can produce hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis in patients with Cushing syndrome.
Cortisol can bind to the mineralocorticoid receptors in the kidney and function as a mineralocorticoid. This binding normally
does not occur because 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the
kidney converts cortisol to cortisone, which does not bind to the
mineralocorticoid receptor. In the autosomal recessive disorder
11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency, also called apparent
mineralocorticoid excess, cortisol is not converted in the kidney
to cortisone. Cortisol is therefore available to bind to the mineralocorticoid receptor in the kidney and act as a mineralocorticoid.
Patients with this deficiency, despite low levels of aldosterone, are
hypertensive and hypokalemic, and they have a metabolic alkalosis.
The same phenomenon can occur with excessive intake of natural
licorice, a component of which, glycyrrhizic acid, inhibits 11β-­
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. The autosomal dominant disorder
Liddle syndrome is secondary to an activating variant in the gene
for the sodium channel in the distal nephron (see Chapter 571.3).
Upregulation of this sodium channel is one of the principal actions
of aldosterone. Because this Na+ channel is continuously open, children with Liddle syndrome have the features of hyperaldosteronism, including hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis,
but low serum levels of aldosterone.
Bartter and Gitelman syndromes are autosomal recessive disorders associated with normal blood pressure, elevated urinary Cl−,
metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia (see Chapter 571). In Bartter syndrome, patients have a defect in Na+ and Cl− resorption
in the loop of Henle. This leads to excessive urinary losses of Na+
and Cl−, and as in patients receiving loop diuretics, volume depletion and secondary hyperaldosteronism occur, causing hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. Gitelman syndrome is usually milder
than Bartter syndrome. Patients have renal Na+ and Cl− wasting
with volume depletion caused by variants in the gene encoding the
thiazide-­sensitive Na+-­Cl− transporter in the distal tubule. As in
patients receiving a thiazide diuretic, affected patients have volume
depletion and secondary hyperaldosteronism with hypokalemia
and metabolic alkalosis. Children with Gitelman syndrome have
hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia. Some patients with autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism have hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis from impaired Na+ and Cl− resorption in the loop of
Henle. EAST syndrome causes hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis,
and hypomagnesemia.
Excessive base intake can cause a metabolic alkalosis. Affected
patients do not have low urine [Cl−], unless there is associated volume depletion. In the absence of volume depletion, excess base is
rapidly corrected via renal excretion of bicarbonate. Rarely, massive
base intake can cause a metabolic alkalosis by overwhelming the
kidney’s ability to excrete bicarbonate. This may occur in infants
who are given baking soda as a “home remedy” for colic or stomach upset. Each teaspoon of baking soda has 42 mEq of sodium
bicarbonate. Infants have increased vulnerability because of a lower
GFR, limiting the rate of compensatory renal bicarbonate excretion.
A metabolic alkalosis may also occur in patients who receive a large
amount of sodium bicarbonate during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Blood products are anticoagulated with citrate, which is
converted into bicarbonate by the liver. Patients who receive large
amounts of blood products may have a metabolic alkalosis. Iatrogenic metabolic alkalosis can occur because of acetate in TPN.
Aggressive use of bicarbonate therapy in a child with a lactic acidosis or DKA may cause a metabolic alkalosis. This is especially
likely in a patient in whom the underlying cause of the lactic acidosis is successfully corrected (restoration of intravascular volume
in a patient with severe dehydration). Once the cause of the lactic
acidosis resolves, lactate can be converted by the liver into bicarbonate, which when combined with infused bicarbonate can create

a metabolic alkalosis. A similar phenomenon can occur in a child
with DKA because the administration of insulin allows ketoacids
to be metabolized, producing bicarbonate. However, this phenomenon rarely occurs because of judicious use of bicarbonate therapy in
DKA and because there are usually significant pretreatment losses
of ketoacids in the urine, preventing massive regeneration of bicarbonate. Base administration is most likely to cause a metabolic alkalosis in patients who have an impaired ability to excrete bicarbonate
in the urine. This impairment occurs in patients with concurrent
volume depletion or renal insufficiency.

Clinical Manifestations

The symptoms in patients with a metabolic alkalosis are often related
to the underlying disease and associated electrolyte disturbances.
Children with Cl−-­responsive causes of metabolic alkalosis often have
symptoms related to volume depletion, such as thirst and lethargy. In
contrast, children with Cl−-­unresponsive causes may have symptoms
related to hypertension.
Alkalemia causes potassium to shift into the ICS, producing a
decrease in the extracellular [K+]. Alkalemia leads to increased urinary
losses of K+. Increased K+ losses are present in many of the conditions
that cause a metabolic alkalosis. Therefore most patients with a metabolic alkalosis have hypokalemia, and their symptoms may be related
to the hypokalemia (see Chapter 73.4).
The symptoms of a metabolic alkalosis are caused by the associated
alkalemia. The magnitude of the alkalemia is related to the severity
of the metabolic alkalosis and the presence of concurrent respiratory
acid-­base disturbances. During alkalemia, the ionized calcium concentration decreases because of increased binding of calcium to albumin.
The decrease in the ionized calcium concentration may cause symptoms of tetany (carpopedal spasm).
Arrhythmias are a potential complication of a metabolic alkalosis,
and the risk for arrhythmia increases if there is concomitant hypokalemia. Alkalemia increases the risk of digoxin toxicity, and antiarrhythmic medications are less effective in the presence of alkalemia. In
addition, alkalemia may decrease cardiac output. A metabolic alkalosis
causes a compensatory increase in the Pco2 by decreasing ventilation.
The decrease in ventilatory drive can cause hypoxia.

Diagnosis

Measurement of the urine [Cl−] is the most helpful test in differentiating among the causes of a metabolic alkalosis. The urine [Cl−]
is low in patients with a metabolic alkalosis resulting from volume
depletion, unless there is a defect in renal handling of Cl−. The
urine [Cl−] is superior to the urine [Na+] in assessment of volume
status in patients with a metabolic alkalosis because the normal
renal response to a metabolic alkalosis is to excrete bicarbonate.
Because bicarbonate is negatively charged, it can only be excreted
with cations, usually Na+ and K+. Therefore a patient with a metabolic alkalosis may excrete Na+ in the urine despite the presence of
volume depletion, which normally causes avid Na+ retention. The
urine [Cl−] is usually a good indicator of volume status, and it differentiates Cl−-­resistant and Cl−-­responsive causes of a metabolic
alkalosis.
Diuretics and gastric losses are the most common causes of metabolic alkalosis and are usually apparent from the patient history.
Occasionally, metabolic alkalosis, usually with hypokalemia, may
be a clue to the presence of bulimia or surreptitious diuretic use
(see Chapter 41). Patients with bulimia have a low urine Cl− level,
indicating that they have volume depletion because of an extrarenal
etiology, but there is no alternative explanation for their volume
depletion. Surreptitious diuretic use may be diagnosed by obtaining
a urine toxicology screen for diuretics. The urine [Cl−] is increased
while a patient is using diuretics but is low when the patient stops
taking them. Rarely, children with mild Bartter or Gitelman syndrome are misdiagnosed as having bulimia or abusing diuretics. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 521
urine [Cl−] is always elevated in Bartter and Gitelman syndromes,
and the urine toxicology screen for diuretics has a negative result.
Metabolic alkalosis with hypokalemia is occasionally the initial
manifestation of cystic fibrosis. An elevated sweat Cl− finding is
diagnostic.
Patients with a metabolic alkalosis and a high urinary [Cl−] are
subdivided according to blood pressure status. Children with normal blood pressure may have Bartter or Gitelman syndrome. Excess
base administration is another diagnostic possibility, but it is usually apparent from the history. In patients with sodium bicarbonate
ingestion (baking soda), which may be unreported by the parent, the
metabolic alkalosis usually occurs with significant hypernatremia. In
addition, unless volume depletion is superimposed, the metabolic
alkalosis from base ingestion resolves itself once the source of base
is eliminated.
Measuring serum concentrations of renin and aldosterone differentiates children with a metabolic alkalosis, a high urinary [Cl−], and
elevated blood pressure. Both renin and aldosterone are elevated in
children with either renovascular disease or a renin-­secreting tumor.
Aldosterone is high and renin is low in patients with adrenal adenomas
or hyperplasia and glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism. Renin
and aldosterone are low in children with Cushing syndrome, Liddle
syndrome, licorice ingestion, and 17α-­hydroxylase, 11β-­hydroxylase,
and 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiencies. An elevated 24-­
hour urine cortisol value is diagnostic of Cushing syndrome, which
is suspected from the presence of the other classic features of this disease (see Chapter 619). Elevations of 11-­deoxycorticosterone values are
seen in 17α-­hydroxylase and 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency.

Treatment

The approach to treatment of metabolic alkalosis depends on the severity of the alkalosis and the underlying etiology. In children with a mild
metabolic alkalosis ([HCO3−] <32 mEq/L), intervention is often unnecessary, although this depends on the specific circumstances. In a child
with congenital heart disease who is receiving a stable dose of a loop
diuretic, a mild alkalosis does not require treatment. In contrast, intervention may be appropriate in a child with a worsening mild metabolic
alkalosis because of nasogastric suction. The presence of a concurrent
respiratory acid-­base disturbance also influences therapeutic decision-­
making. A patient with a concurrent respiratory acidosis should have
some increase in bicarbonate from metabolic compensation; thus the
severity of the pH elevation is more important than [HCO3−]. In contrast, a patient with respiratory alkalosis and a metabolic alkalosis is
at risk for severe alkalemia; treatment may be indicated, even if the
increase in bicarbonate value is only mild.
Intervention is usually necessary in children with moderate or severe
metabolic alkalosis. The most effective approach is to address the underlying etiology. In some children, nasogastric suction may be decreased or
discontinued. Alternatively, the addition of a gastric PPI reduces gastric
secretion and losses of HCl. Diuretics are an important cause of metabolic alkalosis, and if a change is tolerated, they should be eliminated or
the dose reduced. Adequate potassium supplementation or the addition
of a potassium-­sparing diuretic is also helpful in a child with a metabolic
alkalosis from diuretics. Potassium-­sparing diuretics not only decrease
renal K+ losses but, by blocking the action of aldosterone, also decrease
H+ secretion in the distal nephron, increasing urinary bicarbonate excretion. Many children cannot tolerate discontinuation of diuretic therapy;
hence, potassium supplementation and potassium-­sparing diuretics are
the principal therapeutic approach. Arginine HCl may also be used to
treat chloride-­responsive metabolic acidosis if sodium or potassium salts
are not appropriate. Arginine HCl may raise the serum K+ levels during administration. Rarely, in cases of severe metabolic alkalosis, acetazolamide is an option. A carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, acetazolamide
decreases resorption of bicarbonate in the proximal tubule, causing
significant bicarbonate loss in the urine. The patient receiving this drug

must be monitored closely, because acetazolamide produces major losses
of potassium in the urine and increases fluid losses, potentially necessitating a reduction in dosage of other diuretics.
Most children with a metabolic alkalosis have one of the chloride-­
responsive etiologies. In these situations, administration of sufficient
sodium chloride and potassium chloride to correct the volume deficit and
the potassium deficit is necessary to correct the metabolic alkalosis. This
approach may not be an option in the child who has volume depletion due
to diuretics, because volume repletion may be contraindicated. Adequate
replacement of gastric losses of sodium and potassium in a child with a
nasogastric tube can minimize or prevent the development of the metabolic alkalosis. With adequate intravascular volume and a normal serum
[K+], the kidney excretes the excess bicarbonate within 2 days.
In children with the chloride-­resistant causes of a metabolic
alkalosis that are associated with hypertension, volume repletion is
contraindicated because it would exacerbate the hypertension and
would not repair the metabolic alkalosis. Ideally, treatment focuses
on eliminating the excess aldosterone effect. Adrenal adenomas can
be resected, licorice intake can be eliminated, and renovascular disease can be repaired. Glucocorticoid-­remediable aldosteronism, 17α-­
hydroxylase deficiency, and 11β-­hydroxylase deficiency respond to
the administration of glucocorticoids. The mineralocorticoid effect
of cortisol in 11β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency can be
decreased with the use of spironolactone, which blocks the mineralocorticoid receptor. In contrast, the metabolic alkalosis in children
with Liddle syndrome does not respond to spironolactone; however,
either triamterene or amiloride is effective therapy because both
agents block the sodium channel that is constitutively active in Liddle
syndrome.
In children with Bartter or Gitelman syndrome, therapy includes oral
potassium and sodium supplementation; potassium-­sparing diuretics
may be helpful in select cases. Children with Gitelman syndrome often
require magnesium supplementation, whereas children with severe
Bartter syndrome often benefit from indomethacin.

RESPIRATORY ACIDOSIS

A respiratory acidosis is an inappropriate increase in blood carbon dioxide tension (Pco2). CO2 is a by-­product of metabolism and is removed
from the body by the lungs. During a respiratory acidosis, the effectiveness of CO2 removal by the lungs is decreased. A respiratory acidosis
is secondary to either pulmonary disease, such as severe bronchiolitis,
or nonpulmonary disease, such as a narcotic overdose (see Chapter 86).
Even though body production of CO2 can vary, normal lungs are able to
accommodate this variation; excess production of CO2 is not an isolated
cause of a respiratory acidosis. With impairment of alveolar ventilation,
the rate of body production of CO2 may affect the severity of the respiratory acidosis, but this is usually not a significant factor.
A respiratory acidosis causes a decrease in the blood pH, but there is
normally a metabolic response that partially compensates, minimizing
the severity of the acidemia. The acute metabolic response to a respiratory alkalosis occurs within minutes. The metabolic compensation for
an acute respiratory acidosis is secondary to titration of acid by nonbicarbonate buffers. This buffering of H+ causes a predictable increase in
the serum [HCO3−]: Plasma bicarbonate increases by 1 for each 10 mm
Hg increase in the Pco2 (acute compensation).
With a chronic respiratory acidosis, there is more significant metabolic compensation and thus less severe acidemia than in an acute
respiratory acidosis with the same increase in Pco2. During a chronic
respiratory acidosis, the kidneys increase acid excretion. This response
occurs over 3-­4 days and causes a predictable increase in the serum
[HCO3−]: Plasma bicarbonate increases by 3.5 for each 10 mm Hg
increase in the Pco2 (chronic compensation).
The increase of serum [HCO3−] during a chronic respiratory acidosis is associated with a decrease in body chloride. After acute correction
of a chronic respiratory acidosis, the plasma bicarbonate continues to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

522 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Table 73.15  Causes of Respiratory Acidosis
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM DEPRESSION
Encephalitis
Head trauma
Brain tumor
Central sleep apnea
Primary pulmonary hypoventilation (Ondine curse)
Stroke
Hypoxic brain damage
Obesity-­hypoventilation (Pickwickian) syndrome
Increased intracranial pressure
Medications
Narcotics
Barbiturates
Anesthesia
Benzodiazepines
Propofol
Alcohols
DISORDERS OF SPINAL CORD, PERIPHERAL NERVES, OR
NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION
Diaphragmatic paralysis
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Poliomyelitis
Acute flaccid myelitis
Spinal muscular atrophies
Tick paralysis
Botulism
Myasthenia
Multiple sclerosis
Spinal cord injury
Medications
Vecuronium
Aminoglycosides
Organophosphates (pesticides)

PULMONARY DISEASE
Pneumonia
Pneumothorax
Asthma
Bronchiolitis
Pulmonary edema
Pulmonary hemorrhage
Acute respiratory distress syndrome
Neonatal respiratory distress syndrome
Cystic fibrosis
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Hypoplastic lungs
Meconium aspiration
Pulmonary thromboembolus
Interstitial fibrosis
UPPER AIRWAY DISEASE
Aspiration
Laryngospasm
Angioedema
Obstructive sleep apnea
Tonsillar hypertrophy
Vocal cord paralysis
Extrinsic tumor
Extrinsic or intrinsic hemangioma
MISCELLANEOUS
Flail chest
Cardiac arrest
Kyphoscoliosis
Decreased diaphragmatic movement due to ascites or peritoneal
dialysis

RESPIRATORY MUSCLE WEAKNESS
Muscular dystrophy
Hypothyroidism
Malnutrition
Hypokalemia
Hypophosphatemia
Medications
Succinylcholine
Corticosteroids

be increased, and the patient has a metabolic alkalosis. Because of the
Cl− deficit, this is a chloride-­responsive metabolic alkalosis; it corrects
once the patient’s Cl− deficit is replaced.
A mixed disorder is present if the metabolic compensation is inappropriate. A higher than expected bicarbonate value occurs in the setting of a concurrent metabolic alkalosis, and a lower than expected
bicarbonate value occurs in the setting of a concurrent metabolic acidosis. Evaluating whether compensation is appropriate during a respiratory acidosis requires clinical knowledge of the acuity of the process,
because the expected compensation is different, depending on whether
the process is acute or chronic.
The Pco2 cannot be interpreted in isolation to determine whether
a patient has a respiratory acidosis. A respiratory acidosis is always
present if a patient has acidemia and an elevated Pco2. However, an
elevated Pco2 also occurs as appropriate respiratory compensation
for a simple metabolic alkalosis. The patient is alkalemic; this is not a
respiratory acidosis. During a mixed disturbance, a patient can have
a respiratory acidosis and a normal or even low Pco2. This condition may occur in a patient with a metabolic acidosis. A respiratory
acidosis is present if the patient does not have appropriate respiratory

compensation (the Pco2 is higher than expected from the severity of
the metabolic acidosis).

Etiology and Pathophysiology

The causes of a respiratory acidosis are either pulmonary or nonpulmonary (Table 73.15). CNS disorders can decrease the activity of the
central respiratory center, reducing ventilatory drive. A variety of medications and illicit drugs suppress the respiratory center. The signals
from the respiratory center need to be transmitted to the respiratory
muscles via the nervous system. Respiratory muscle failure can be secondary to disruption of the signal from the CNS in the spinal cord,
the phrenic nerve, or the neuromuscular junction. Disorders directly
affecting the muscles of respiration can prevent adequate ventilation,
causing a respiratory acidosis.
Mild or moderate lung disease often causes a respiratory alkalosis as
a result of hyperventilation secondary to hypoxia or stimulation of lung
mechanoreceptors or chemoreceptors. Only more severe lung disease
causes a respiratory acidosis. Upper airway diseases, by impairing air
entry into the lungs, may decrease ventilation, producing a respiratory
acidosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 73 u Electrolyte and Acid-­Base Disorders 523
Increased production of CO2 is never the sole cause of a respiratory
acidosis, but it can increase the severity of the disease in a patient with
decreased ventilation of CO2. Increased production of CO2 occurs in
patients with fever, hyperthyroidism, excess caloric intake, and high
levels of physical activity. Increased respiratory muscle work also
increases CO2 production.

Clinical Manifestations

Patients with a respiratory acidosis are often tachypneic in an effort to
correct the inadequate ventilation. Exceptions include patients with a
respiratory acidosis resulting from CNS depression and patients who
are on the verge of complete respiratory failure secondary to fatigue of
the respiratory muscles.
The symptoms of respiratory acidosis are related to the severity of
the hypercarbia. Acute respiratory acidosis is usually more symptomatic than chronic respiratory acidosis. Symptoms are also increased by
concurrent hypoxia or metabolic acidosis. In a patient breathing room
air, hypoxia is always present if a respiratory acidosis is present. The
potential CNS manifestations of respiratory acidosis include anxiety,
dizziness, headache, confusion, asterixis, myoclonic jerks, hallucinations, psychosis, coma, and seizures.
Acidemia, no matter the etiology, affects the cardiovascular system. An arterial pH <7.2 impairs cardiac contractility and the normal response to catecholamines in both the heart and the peripheral
vasculature. Hypercapnia causes vasodilation, most dramatically in
the cerebral vasculature, but hypercapnia produces vasoconstriction
of the pulmonary circulation. Respiratory acidosis increases the risk
of cardiac arrhythmias, especially in a child with underlying cardiac
disease.

Diagnosis

The history and physical findings often point to a clear etiology.
For the obtunded patient with poor respiratory effort, evaluation of
the CNS is often indicated. This may include imaging studies (CT
or MRI) and, potentially, a lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid
analysis. A toxicology screen for illicit drugs may also be appropriate. A response to naloxone is both diagnostic and therapeutic.
In many of the diseases affecting the respiratory muscles, there is
evidence of weakness in other muscles. Stridor is a clue that the
child may have upper airway disease. Along with a physical examination, a chest radiograph is often helpful in diagnosing pulmonary
disease.
In many patients, respiratory acidosis may be multifactorial. A child
with bronchopulmonary dysplasia, an intrinsic lung disease, may
worsen because of respiratory muscle dysfunction caused by severe
hypokalemia resulting from long-­term diuretic therapy. Conversely, a
child with muscular dystrophy, a muscle disease, may worsen because
of aspiration pneumonia.
For a patient with respiratory acidosis, calculation of the gradient
between the alveolar oxygen concentration and the arterial oxygen
concentration, the A-­a O2 gradient, is useful for distinguishing between
poor respiratory effort and intrinsic lung disease. The A-­a O2 gradient
is increased if the hypoxemia is caused by intrinsic lung disease (see
Chapter 421).

Treatment

Respiratory acidosis is best managed by treatment of the underlying etiology. In some patients, the response is very rapid, such as
after the administration of naloxone to a patient with a narcotic
overdose. In contrast, in the child with pneumonia, a number of
days of antibiotic therapy may be required before the respiratory
status improves. In many children with a chronic respiratory acidosis, there is no curative therapy, although an acute respiratory
illness superimposed on a chronic respiratory condition is usually
reversible.
All patients with an acute respiratory acidosis are hypoxic and
therefore need to receive supplemental oxygen. Mechanical ventilation is necessary in some children with respiratory acidosis. Children
with significant respiratory acidosis caused by CNS disease usually

require mechanical ventilation because such a disorder is unlikely to
respond quickly to therapy. In addition, hypercarbia causes cerebral
vasodilation, and the increase in ICP can be dangerous in a child
with an underlying CNS disease. Readily reversible CNS depression,
as from a narcotic overdose, may not require mechanical ventilation.
Decisions on mechanical ventilation for other patients depend on a
number of factors. Patients with severe hypercarbia (Pco2 >75 mm
Hg) usually require mechanical ventilation (see Chapter 86.1). The
threshold for intubation is lower if there is concomitant metabolic
acidosis, a slowly responsive underlying disease, or hypoxia that
responds poorly to oxygen, or if the patient appears to be tiring and
respiratory arrest seems likely.
In patients with a chronic respiratory acidosis, the respiratory drive
is often less responsive to hypercarbia and more responsive to hypoxia.
Thus, with chronic respiratory acidosis, excessive use of oxygen can
blunt the respiratory drive and therefore increase the Pco2. In these
patients, oxygen must be used cautiously.
When possible, it is best to avoid mechanical ventilation in a patient
with chronic respiratory acidosis because extubation is often difficult.
However, an acute illness may necessitate mechanical ventilation in a
child with a chronic respiratory acidosis. When intubation is necessary,
the Pco2 should be lowered only to the patient’s normal baseline, and
this should be done gradually. These patients normally have an elevated
serum [HCO3−] as a result of metabolic compensation for their respiratory acidosis. A rapid lowering of the Pco2 can cause a severe metabolic alkalosis, potentially leading to complications, including cardiac
arrhythmias, decreased cardiac output, and decreased cerebral blood
flow. In addition, prolonged mechanical ventilation at a normal Pco2
causes the metabolic compensation to resolve. When the patient is subsequently extubated, the patient will no longer benefit from metabolic
compensation, causing a more severe acidemia because of the respiratory acidosis.

RESPIRATORY ALKALOSIS

A respiratory alkalosis is an inappropriate reduction in the blood CO2
concentration. This is usually secondary to hyperventilation, initially
causing removal of CO2 to surpass production. Eventually, a new
steady state is achieved, with removal equaling production, although
at a lower CO2 tension (Pco2). A respiratory alkalosis that is not the
result of hyperventilation may occur in children receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, with CO2 lost directly from the blood in
the extracorporeal circuit.
With a simple respiratory alkalosis, the pH increases, but there is
a normal metabolic response that attenuates some of the change in
the blood pH. A metabolic response to an acute respiratory alkalosis
occurs within minutes, mediated by hydrogen ion release from nonbicarbonate buffers. The metabolic response to an acute respiratory alkalosis is predictable: Plasma bicarbonate falls by 2 for each 10 mm Hg
decrease in the Pco2 (acute compensation).
A chronic respiratory alkalosis leads to more significant metabolic
compensation because of the actions of the kidneys, which decrease
acid secretion, producing a decrease in the serum [HCO3−]. Both the
proximal and distal tubules decrease acid secretion. Metabolic compensation for a respiratory alkalosis develops gradually and takes 2-­3
days to produce the full effect: Plasma bicarbonate falls by 4 for each 10
mm Hg decrease in the Pco2 (chronic compensation).
A chronic respiratory alkalosis is the only acid-­base disturbance in
which appropriate compensation may normalize the pH, although >7.4.
A mixed disorder is present if the metabolic compensation is inappropriate. A higher than expected HCO3− level occurs in the setting of
a concurrent metabolic alkalosis, and a lower than expected HCO3−
level occurs in the setting of a concurrent metabolic acidosis. Evaluating whether compensation is appropriate during a respiratory alkalosis
requires clinical knowledge of the acuity of the process, because the
expected compensation differs according to whether the process is
acute or chronic.
A low Pco2 value does not always indicate a respiratory alkalosis.
The Pco2 also decreases as part of the appropriate respiratory compensation for a metabolic acidosis; this is not a respiratory alkalosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

524 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Table 73.16  Causes of Respiratory Alkalosis
HYPOXEMIA OR TISSUE HYPOXIA
Pneumonia
Pulmonary edema
Cyanotic heart disease
Congestive heart failure
Asthma
Severe anemia
High altitude
Laryngospasm
Aspiration
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Pulmonary embolism
Interstitial lung disease
Hypotension
LUNG RECEPTOR STIMULATION
Pneumonia
Pulmonary edema
Asthma
Pulmonary embolism
Hemothorax
Pneumothorax
Respiratory distress syndrome (adult or infant)
CENTRAL STIMULATION
Central nervous system disease
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Encephalitis or meningitis
Trauma
Brain tumor
Stroke
Fever
Pain
Anxiety (panic attack)
Psychogenic hyperventilation or anxiety
Liver failure
Sepsis
Pregnancy
Mechanical ventilation
Hyperammonemia
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation or hemodialysis
Medications
Salicylate intoxication
Theophylline
Progesterone
Exogenous catecholamines
Caffeine

A metabolic acidosis is the dominant acid-­base disturbance in a
patient with acidemia and a low Pco2, even though there could still
be a concurrent respiratory alkalosis. In contrast, a respiratory alkalosis is always present in a patient with alkalemia and a low Pco2.
Even a normal Pco2 value may be consistent with a respiratory alkalosis in a patient with a metabolic alkalosis, because an elevated Pco2
is expected as part of appropriate respiratory compensation for the
metabolic alkalosis.

Etiology and Pathophysiology

A variety of stimuli can increase the ventilatory drive and cause a respiratory alkalosis (Table 73.16). Arterial hypoxemia or tissue hypoxia
stimulates peripheral chemoreceptors to signal the central respiratory
center in the medulla to increase ventilation. The resultant greater
respiratory effort increases the oxygen content of the blood (Po2) but
depresses the Pco2. The effect of hypoxemia on ventilation begins
when the arterial oxygen saturation (Sao2) decreases to approximately
90% (Po2 = 60 mm Hg), and hyperventilation increases as hypoxemia
worsens. Acute hypoxia is a more potent stimulus for hyperventilation

than chronic hypoxia; thus chronic hypoxia, as occurs in cyanotic heart
disease, causes a much less severe respiratory alkalosis than an equivalent degree of acute hypoxia. The many causes of hypoxemia or tissue
hypoxia include primary lung disease, severe anemia, and carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning.
The lungs contain chemoreceptors and mechanoreceptors that
respond to irritants and stretching and send signals to the respiratory
center to increase ventilation. Aspiration or pneumonia may stimulate
the chemoreceptors, whereas pulmonary edema may stimulate the
mechanoreceptors. Most of the diseases that activate these receptors
may also cause hypoxemia and can therefore potentially lead to hyperventilation by two mechanisms. Patients with primary lung disease
may initially have a respiratory alkalosis, but worsening of the disease,
combined with respiratory muscle fatigue, often causes respiratory failure and the development of a respiratory acidosis.
Hyperventilation in the absence of lung disease occurs with direct
stimulation of the central respiratory center. This occurs with CNS diseases such as meningitis, hemorrhage, and trauma. Central hyperventilation caused by lesions, such as infarcts or tumors near the central
respiratory center in the midbrain, increases the rate and depth of the
respiratory effort. This respiratory pattern portends a poor prognosis
because these midbrain lesions are frequently fatal. Systemic processes
may cause centrally mediated hyperventilation. Although the exact
mechanisms are not clear, liver disease causes a respiratory alkalosis
that is usually proportional to the degree of liver failure. Pregnancy
causes a chronic respiratory alkalosis, probably mediated by progesterone acting on the respiratory centers. Salicylates, although often causing a concurrent metabolic acidosis, directly stimulate the respiratory
center to produce a respiratory alkalosis. The respiratory alkalosis during sepsis is probably caused by cytokine release.
Hyperventilation may be secondary to an underlying disease that
causes pain, stress, or anxiety. In psychogenic hyperventilation or in
panic attacks, there is no disease process accounting for the hyperventilation. This disorder may occur in a child who has had an emotionally
stressful experience. Alternatively, it may be part of a panic disorder,
especially if there are repeated episodes of hyperventilation. In such a
patient, the symptoms of acute alkalemia increase anxiety, potentially
perpetuating the hyperventilation.
A respiratory alkalosis is quite common in children receiving
mechanical ventilation because the respiratory center is not controlling
ventilation. In addition, these children may have a decreased metabolic
rate and thus less CO2 production because of sedation and paralytic
medications. Normally, decreased CO2 production and the resultant
hypocapnia decrease ventilation, but this physiologic response cannot
occur in a child who cannot reduce ventilatory effort.

Clinical Manifestations

The disease process causing the respiratory alkalosis is usually more
concerning than the clinical manifestations. Chronic respiratory
alkalosis is usually asymptomatic because metabolic compensation
decreases the magnitude of the alkalemia.
Acute respiratory alkalosis may cause chest tightness, palpitations, lightheadedness, circumoral numbness, and paresthesias of the
extremities. Less common manifestations include tetany, seizures,
muscle cramps, and syncope. The lightheadedness and syncope probably result from the reduction in cerebral blood flow caused by hypocapnia. The reduction in cerebral blood flow is the rationale for using
hyperventilation to treat children with increased intracranial pressure
(ICP). The paresthesias, tetany, and seizures may be partially related
to the reduction in ionized calcium that occurs because alkalemia
causes more calcium to bind to albumin. A respiratory alkalosis also
causes a mild reduction in the serum potassium level. Patients with
psychogenic hyperventilation tend to be symptomatic because of the
respiratory alkalosis, and these symptoms, along with a sensation of
breathlessness, exacerbate the hyperventilation.

Diagnosis

In many patients, hyperventilation producing a respiratory alkalosis is
not clinically detectable, even with careful observation of the patient’s

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 74 u Maintenance and Replacement Therapy
respiratory effort. Metabolic compensation for a respiratory alkalosis
causes a low serum [HCO3−]. When hyperventilation is not appreciated and only serum electrolytes are evaluated, there is often a presumptive diagnosis of a metabolic acidosis. If a respiratory alkalosis is
suspected, only ABG determination can make the diagnosis.
Hyperventilation does not always indicate a primary respiratory disorder. In some patients, the hyperventilation is appropriate respiratory
compensation for a metabolic acidosis. With a primary metabolic acidosis, acidemia is present, and the serum HCO3− level is usually quite
low if there is clinically detectable hyperventilation. In contrast, the
serum HCO3− level never goes below 17 mEq/L as part of the metabolic
compensation for acute respiratory alkalosis, and simple acute respiratory alkalosis causes alkalemia.
The etiology of a respiratory alkalosis is often apparent from the
physical examination or history, and it may consist of lung disease,
neurologic disease, or cyanotic heart disease. Hypoxemia is a common
cause of hyperventilation, and it is important to diagnose because it
suggests a significant underlying disease that requires expeditious treatment. Hypoxemia may be detected on physical examination (cyanosis)
or by pulse oximetry. However, normal pulse oximetry values do not
eliminate hypoxemia as the etiology of the hyperventilation. There are
two reasons why pulse oximetry is not adequate for eliminating hypoxemia as a cause of a respiratory alkalosis. First, pulse oximetry is not
very sensitive at detecting a mildly low arterial Po2 (Pao2). Second, the
hyperventilation during a respiratory alkalosis causes Pao2 to increase,
possibly to a level that is not identified as abnormal by pulse oximetry.
Only ABG measurement can eliminate hypoxia as an explanation for
a respiratory alkalosis. Along with hypoxemia, it is important to consider processes that cause tissue hypoxia without necessarily causing
hypoxemia. Examples are CO or cyanide poisoning, severe anemia,
and heart failure.
Lung disease without hypoxemia may cause hyperventilation.
Although lung disease is often apparent by history or physical examination, a chest radiograph may detect more subtle disease. The patient
with a pulmonary embolism may have benign chest radiograph findings, normal Pao2, and isolated respiratory alkalosis, although hypoxia
may eventually occur. Diagnosis of a pulmonary embolism requires a
high index of suspicion and should be considered in children without
another explanation for respiratory alkalosis, especially if risk factors
are present, such as prolonged bed rest and a hypercoagulable state
(e.g., nephrotic syndrome, lupus anticoagulant).

Treatment

There is seldom a need for specific treatment of respiratory alkalosis.
Rather, treatment focuses on the underlying disease. Mechanical ventilator settings are adjusted to correct iatrogenic respiratory alkalosis,
unless the hyperventilation has a therapeutic purpose (e.g., treatment
of increased ICP).
For the patient with hyperventilation secondary to anxiety, efforts
should be undertaken to reassure the child, usually enlisting the parents. Along with reassurance, patients with psychogenic hyperventilation may benefit from benzodiazepines. During an acute episode of
psychogenic hyperventilation, rebreathing into a paper bag increases
the patient’s Pco2. Using a paper bag instead of a plastic bag allows
adequate oxygenation but permits [CO2] in the bag to increase. The
resultant increase in the patient’s Pco2 decreases the symptoms of
the respiratory alkalosis that tend to perpetuate the hyperventilation.
Rebreathing should be performed only when other causes of hyperventilation have been eliminated; pulse oximetry during the rebreathing
is prudent.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

525

Chapter 74

Maintenance and
Replacement Therapy
Larry A. Greenbaum
Maintenance intravenous (IV) fluids are used in a child who cannot be
fed enterally. Along with maintenance fluids, children may require concurrent replacement fluids if they have continued excessive losses, as may
occur with drainage from a nasogastric (NG) tube or with high urine output because of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. If dehydration is present,
the patient also needs to receive deficit replacement (see Chapter 75). A
child awaiting surgery may need only maintenance fluids, whereas a child
with diarrheal dehydration needs maintenance and deficit therapy and
also may require replacement fluids if significant diarrhea continues.

MAINTENANCE THERAPY

Children normally have large variations in their daily intake of water and
electrolytes. The only exceptions are patients who receive fixed dietary regimens orally, via a gastric tube, or as IV total parenteral nutrition (TPN).
Healthy children can tolerate significant variations in intake because of the
many homeostatic mechanisms that can adjust absorption and excretion
of water and electrolytes (see Chapter 73). The calculated water and electrolyte need that form the basis of maintenance therapy are not absolute
requirements. Rather, these calculations provide reasonable guidelines for
a starting point to estimate IV therapy. Children do not need to be started
on IV fluids simply because their intake is being monitored in a hospital
and they are not taking “maintenance fluids” orally, unless there is a pathologic process present that necessitates high fluid intake.
Maintenance fluids are most often necessary in preoperative and
postoperative surgical patients; many nonsurgical patients also require
maintenance fluids. It is important to recognize when it is necessary
to begin maintenance fluids. A normal teenager who is given nothing
by mouth (NPO) overnight for a morning procedure does not require
maintenance fluids because a healthy adolescent can easily tolerate 12-­
18 hours without oral intake. In contrast, a 6-­month-­old child waiting
for surgery should begin receiving IV fluids within 8 hours of the last
feeding. Infants become dehydrated more quickly than older patients. A
child with obligatory high urine output from nephrogenic diabetes insipidus should begin receiving IV fluids soon after being classified as NPO.
Maintenance fluids are composed of a solution of water, glucose, sodium
(Na+), and potassium (K+). This solution has the advantages of simplicity,
long shelf life, low cost, and compatibility with peripheral IV administration.
Such a solution accomplishes the major objectives of maintenance fluids
(Table 74.1). Patients lose water, Na+, and K+ in their urine and stool; water
is also lost from the skin and lungs. Maintenance fluids replace these losses,
thereby avoiding the development of dehydration and Na+ or K+ deficiency.
Table 74.1  Goals of Maintenance Fluids
• Prevent dehydration
• Prevent electrolyte disorders
• Prevent ketoacidosis
• Prevent protein degradation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

526 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
The glucose in maintenance fluids provides approximately 20% of
the normal caloric needs of the patient, prevents the development of
starvation ketoacidosis, and diminishes the protein degradation that
would occur if the patient received no calories. Maintenance fluids do
not provide adequate calories, protein, fat, minerals, or vitamins. This
fact is typically not problematic for a patient receiving IV fluids for a
few days. A patient receiving maintenance IV fluids is receiving inadequate calories and will lose 0.5–1% of weight each day. It is imperative that patients not remain on maintenance therapy indefinitely; TPN
should be used for children who cannot be fed enterally for more than a
few days, especially patients with underlying malnutrition.
Prototypical maintenance fluid therapy does not provide electrolytes such as calcium, phosphorus, magnesium, and bicarbonate. For most patients, this lack is not problematic for a few days,
although there are patients who will not tolerate this omission, usually because of excessive losses. A child with proximal renal tubular acidosis wastes bicarbonate in urine. Such a patient will rapidly
become acidemic unless bicarbonate (or another base) is added to
the maintenance fluids. It is important to remember the limitations
of maintenance fluid therapy.

MAINTENANCE WATER

Water is a crucial component of maintenance fluid therapy because
of the obligatory daily water losses. These losses are both measurable
(urine, stool) and not measurable (insensible losses from the skin and
lungs). Failure to replace these losses leads to a child who is thirsty,
uncomfortable, and ultimately dehydrated.
The goal of maintenance water is to provide enough water to
replace these losses. Although urinary losses are approximately 60%
of the total, the normal kidney can greatly modify water losses, with
daily urine volume potentially varying by more than a factor of 20.
Maintenance water is designed to provide enough water so that the
kidney does not need to significantly dilute or concentrate the urine.
It also provides a margin of safety so that normal homeostatic mechanisms can adjust urinary water losses to prevent overhydration and
dehydration. This adaptability obviates the need for absolute precision in determining water requirements. This fact is important, given
the absence of absolute accuracy in the formulas for calculation of
water needs.
Table 74.2 provides a system for calculating maintenance water
on the basis of the patient’s weight and emphasizes the high water
needs of smaller, less mature patients. This approach is reliable,
although calculations based on weight do overestimate the water
needs of an overweight child, in whom it is better to base the calculations on the lean body weight, which can be estimated by using
the 50th percentile of body weight for the child’s height. It is also
important to remember that there is an upper limit of 2.4 L/24 hr

Table 74.2  Body Weight Method for Calculating Daily
Maintenance Fluid Volume
BODY WEIGHT

FLUID PER DAY

0-­10 kg

100 mL/kg

11-­20 kg

1,000 mL + 50 mL/kg for each kg >10 kg

>20 kg

1,500 mL + 20 mL/kg for each kg >20 kg*

*The maximum total fluid per day is normally 2,400 mL.

Table 74.3  Hourly Maintenance Water Rate
For body weight 0-­10 kg: 4 mL/kg/hr
For body weight 10-­20 kg: 40 mL/hr + 2 mL/kg/hr × (wt − 10 kg)
For body weight >20 kg: 60 mL/hr + 1 mL/kg/hr × (wt − 20 kg)*
*The maximum fluid rate is normally 100 mL/hr.

in adult-­sized patients. IV fluids are written as an hourly rate. The
formulas in Table 74.3 enable rapid calculation of the rate of maintenance fluids.

INTRAVENOUS SOLUTIONS

The components of available solutions are shown in Table 74.4. These
solutions are available with 5% dextrose (D5), 10% dextrose (D10), or
without dextrose. Except for Ringer lactate (lactated Ringer, LR), they
are also available with added potassium (10 or 20 mEq/L). A balanced
IV fluid contains a base (lactate or acetate), a more physiologic chloride
concentration than normal saline (NS), and additional physiologic concentrations of electrolytes such as potassium, calcium, and magnesium.
Examples include LR and Plasma-­Lyte, and there is evidence suggesting benefit versus NS in some but not all clinical situations. A hospital pharmacy can also prepare custom-­made solutions with different
concentrations of sodium or potassium. In addition, other electrolytes,
such as calcium, magnesium, phosphate, acetate, and bicarbonate, can
be added to IV solutions. Custom-­made solutions take time to prepare
and are much more expensive than commercial solutions. The use of
custom-­made solutions is necessary only for patients who have underlying disorders that cause significant electrolyte imbalances. The use of
commercial solutions saves time and expense.
A normal plasma osmolality is 285-­295 mOsm/kg. Infusing an IV
solution peripherally with a much lower osmolality can cause water to
move into red blood cells, leading to hemolysis. Thus IV fluids are generally designed to have an osmolality that is either close to 285 or greater
(fluids with moderately higher osmolality do not cause problems).
Thus 0.2NS (osmolality = 68) should not be administered peripherally,
but D5 0.2NS (osmolality = 346) or D5 1/2NS + 20 mEq/L potassium
chloride (KCl) with an osmolality of 472 can be administered.
Hypotonic fluids seem more physiologic given the low Na+ content
of breast milk and formula (∼7 mEq/L). However, hospitalized children often have impaired water excretion because of volume depletion
or nonosmotic stimuli for antidiuretic hormone (ADH) production,
such as respiratory disease, central nervous system disease, stress, pain,
nausea, and medications (e.g., narcotics). Hypotonic fluids increase the
risk of hyponatremia, which may have serious sequelae; hence, isotonic
fluids with D5 are recommended as standard maintenance fluid except
in neonates <28 days of age.

GLUCOSE

Maintenance fluids usually contain D5, which provides 17 calories/100
mL and nearly 20% of the daily caloric needs. This level is enough to
prevent ketone production and helps minimize protein degradation,
but the child will lose weight on this regimen. Maintenance fluids are
also lacking in such crucial nutrients as protein, fat, vitamins, and minerals. Hence, a patient needs to be started on TPN after a few days of
maintenance fluids if enteral feedings are still not possible.

SELECTION OF MAINTENANCE FLUIDS

An isotonic fluid (NS, LR, Plasma-­Lyte) with D5 and KCl (10-­20
mEq/L is usually added to NS) is recommended for maintenance IV
fluids. Surgical patients typically receive isotonic fluids (NS, LR) during surgery and in the recovery room for 6-­8 hours postoperatively; the
rate is typically approximately two thirds the calculated maintenance
rate, with dextrose added if clinically indicated. Subsequent maintenance fluids have the addition of D5 and 10-­20 mEq/L KCl based on
the serum K+ and the clinical setting. Electrolytes should be measured
at least daily in all children receiving >50% of maintenance fluids intravenously unless the child is receiving prolonged IV fluids (TPN).
These guidelines assume that no disease process is present that
would require an adjustment in either the volume or the electrolyte
composition of maintenance fluids. Neonates, and especially premature infants, are outside the scope of these guidelines given their unique
physiology. Children with renal insufficiency may be hyperkalemic or
unable to excrete K+ and may not tolerate 10 or 20 mEq/L of potassium.
Patients with persistent ADH production because of an underlying
disease process (syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion, congestive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, liver disease) should receive less

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 74 u Maintenance and Replacement Therapy

527

Table 74.4  Composition of Intravenous Solutions*
FLUID

[NA+]

[CL−]

[K+]

[CA2+]

[LACTATE−]

Normal saline
(0.9% NaCl)

154

154

—

—

—

Half-­normal saline
(0.45% NaCl)

77

77

—

—

—

0.2 normal saline
(0.2% NaCl)

34

34

—

—

—

Ringer lactate

130

109

4

3

28

*Electrolyte concentrations in mEq/L.

than maintenance fluids. Children with meningitis are fluid restricted
unless intravascular volume depletion is present (see Chapter 643.1).
Treatment is individualized, and careful monitoring is critical.
In children with complicated pathophysiologic derangements, it
may be necessary to adjust empirically the electrolyte composition
and rate of maintenance fluids on the basis of electrolyte measurements and assessment of fluid balance. In all children it is critical to
monitor weight, urine output, and electrolytes carefully to identify
overhydration or underhydration, hyponatremia, and other electrolyte
disturbances, and then adjust the rate or composition of the IV solution accordingly.

VARIATIONS IN MAINTENANCE WATER AND
ELECTROLYTES

The calculation of maintenance water is based on standard assumptions
regarding water losses. In some patients, however, these assumptions
are incorrect. To identify such situations, it is helpful to understand the
source and magnitude of normal water losses. Table 74.5 lists the three
sources of normal water loss.
Urine is the most important contributor to normal water loss. Insensible losses represent approximately one third of total maintenance
water (40% in infants; 25% in adolescents and adults). Insensible losses
are composed of evaporative losses from the skin and lungs that cannot be quantitated. The evaporative losses from the skin do not include
sweat, which would be considered an additional (sensible) source of
water loss. Stool normally represents a minor source of water loss.
Maintenance water and electrolyte needs may be increased or
decreased, depending on the clinical situation. This may be obvious, as
in the infant with profuse diarrhea, or subtle, as in the patient who has
decreased insensible losses while receiving mechanical ventilation. It is
helpful to consider the sources of normal water and electrolyte losses
and to determine whether any of these sources is being modified in a
specific patient. It is then necessary to adjust maintenance water and
electrolyte calculations.
Table 74.6 lists a variety of clinical situations that modify normal
water and electrolyte losses. The skin can be a source of very significant
water loss, particularly in neonates, especially premature infants, who
are under radiant warmers or are receiving phototherapy. Very low
birthweight infants can have insensible losses of 100-­200 mL/kg/24 hr.
Burns can result in massive losses of water and electrolytes, and there
are specific guidelines for fluid management in children with burns
(see Chapter 89). Sweat losses of water and electrolytes, especially in a
warm climate, can also be significant. Children with cystic fibrosis and
some children with pseudohypoaldosteronism have increased sodium
losses from the skin.
Fever increases evaporative losses from the skin. These losses are
somewhat predictable, leading to a 10–15% increase in maintenance
water needs for each 1°C (1.8°F) increase in temperature above 38°C
(100.4°F). These guidelines are for a patient with a persistent fever; a
1-­hour fever spike does not cause an appreciable increase in water needs.
Tachypnea or a tracheostomy increases evaporative losses from the
lungs. A humidified system (nasal cannula, mask, ventilator) causes
a decrease in insensible losses from the lungs and can even lead to
water absorption via the lungs; a ventilated patient has a decrease in

Table 74.5  Sources of Water Loss
• Urine: 60%
• Insensible losses: ≈35% (skin and lungs)
• Stool: 5%

maintenance water requirements. It may be difficult to quantify the
changes that take place in the individual patient in these situations.

REPLACEMENT FLUIDS

The gastrointestinal (GI) tract is potentially a source of considerable
water loss. GI water losses are accompanied by electrolytes and thus
may cause disturbances in intravascular volume and electrolyte concentrations. GI losses are often associated with loss of potassium, leading to hypokalemia. Because of the high bicarbonate concentration in
stool, children with diarrhea usually have a metabolic acidosis, which
may be accentuated if volume depletion causes hypoperfusion and a
concurrent lactic acidosis. Emesis or losses from an NG tube can cause
a metabolic alkalosis (see Chapter 73).
In the absence of vomiting, diarrhea, or NG drainage, GI losses of
water and electrolytes are usually quite small. All GI losses are considered excessive, and the increase in the water requirement is equal to the
volume of fluid losses. Because GI water and electrolyte losses can be
precisely measured, an appropriate replacement solution can be used.
It is impossible to predict the losses for the next 24 hours; it is better
to replace excessive GI losses as they occur. The child should receive an
appropriate maintenance fluid that does not consider the GI losses. The
losses should then be replaced after they occur, with use of a solution
with a similar electrolyte concentration as the GI fluid. The losses are
usually replaced every 1-­6 hours, depending on the rate of loss, with
very rapid losses being replaced more frequently.
Diarrhea is a common cause of fluid loss in children and can result in
dehydration and electrolyte disorders. In the unusual patient with significant diarrhea and a limited ability to take oral fluid, it is important to have
a plan for replacing excessive stool losses. The volume of stool should be
measured, and an equal volume of replacement solution should be given.
Data are available on the average electrolyte composition of diarrhea in
children (see Table 74.7). With this information, an appropriate replacement solution can be designed. The solution shown in Table 74.7 replaces
stool losses of Na+, K+, chloride (Cl−), and bicarbonate. Each 1 mL of
stool should be replaced by 1 mL of this solution. The average electrolyte
composition of diarrhea is just an average, and there may be considerable
variation. It is therefore advisable to consider measuring the electrolyte
composition of a patient’s diarrhea if the amount is especially excessive or
if the patient’s serum electrolyte levels are problematic.
Loss of gastric fluid, through emesis or NG suction, is also likely
to cause dehydration, in that most patients with either condition have
impaired oral intake of fluids. Electrolyte disturbances, particularly
hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis, are also common. These complications can be avoided by judicious use of a replacement solution. The
composition of gastric fluid shown in Table 74.8 is the basis for designing a replacement solution.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

528 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Table 74.6  Adjustments in Maintenance Water
SOURCE

CAUSES OF INCREASED WATER NEEDS

Skin

Radiant warmer

CAUSES OF DECREASED WATER NEEDS
Incubator (premature infant)

Phototherapy
Fever
Sweat
Burns
Lungs

Tachypnea
Tracheostomy

Gastrointestinal tract

Diarrhea

Humidified system (nasal cannula, mask,
ventilator)
—

Emesis
Nasogastric suction
Renal

Polyuria

Oliguria/anuria

Miscellaneous

Surgical drain

—

Third spacing

Table 74.7  Replacement Fluid for Diarrhea
AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF DIARRHEA
Sodium: 55 mEq/L

Table 74.9  Adjusting Fluid Therapy for Altered Renal
Output

Potassium: 25 mEq/L

OLIGURIA/ANURIA
Replacement of insensible fluid losses (25–40% of maintenance) with
D5 1/2NS

Bicarbonate: 15 mEq/L

Replace urine output mL/mL with D5 1/2NS ± KCl

APPROACH TO REPLACEMENT OF ONGOING LOSSES
Solution: D5 1/2NS + 30 mEq/L sodium bicarbonate + 20 mEq/L KCl
Replace stool mL/mL every 1-­6 hr

POLYURIA
Replacement of insensible fluid losses (25–40% of maintenance) with
D5 1/2NS ± KCl

D5, 5% dextrose; NS, normal saline.

Measure urine electrolytes
Replace urine output mL/mL with solution based on measured urine
electrolytes

Table 74.8  Replacement Fluid for Emesis or Nasogastric
Losses

D5, 5% dextrose; NS, normal saline.

AVERAGE COMPOSITION OF GASTRIC FLUID
Sodium: 60 mEq/L

when urine output is excessive. The electrolyte losses in patients with
polyuria are variable. In diabetes insipidus, the urine electrolyte concentration is usually low, whereas children with diseases such as juvenile nephronophthisis and obstructive uropathy usually have increased
losses of both water and sodium.
The approach to decreased or increased urine output is similar
(Table 74.9). The patient receives fluids at a rate to replace insensible
losses. This is accomplished by a rate of fluid administration that is
25–40% of the normal maintenance rate, depending on the patient’s
age. Replacing insensible losses in the anuric child will theoretically
maintain an even fluid balance, with the caveat that 25–40% of the normal maintenance rate is only an estimate of insensible losses. In the
individual patient, this rate is adjusted on the basis of monitoring of the
patient’s weight and volume status. Most children with renal insufficiency receive little or no potassium because the kidney is the principal
site of K+ excretion.
For the oliguric child, it is important to add a urine replacement
solution to prevent dehydration. This issue is especially important in
the patient with acute kidney injury, in whom output may increase,
potentially leading to volume depletion and worsening of kidney injury
if the patient remains on only insensible fluids. A replacement solution
of D5 1/2NS is usually appropriate initially, although its composition
may have to be adjusted if urine output increases significantly.
Most children with polyuria (except in diabetes mellitus; see Chapter 629) should be started on replacement of insensible fluid plus urine
losses. This approach avoids the need to attempt to calculate the volume of urine output that is “normal” so that the patient can be given

Potassium: 10 mEq/L
Chloride: 90 mEq/L
APPROACH TO REPLACEMENT OF ONGOING LOSSES
Solution: normal saline + 10 mEq/L KCl
Replace output mL/mL every 1-­6 hr

Patients with gastric losses frequently have hypokalemia, although
the K+ concentration of gastric fluid is relatively low. The associated
urinary K+ loss is an important cause of hypokalemia in this situation
(see Chapter 73). These patients may need additional potassium either
in their maintenance fluids or in their replacement fluids to compensate for prior or ongoing urinary losses. Restoration of the patient’s
intravascular volume, by decreasing aldosterone synthesis, lessens the
urinary K+ losses.
Urine output is normally the largest cause of water loss. Diseases
such as renal failure and syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion can
lead to a decrease in urine volume. The patient with oliguria or anuria
has a decreased need for water and electrolytes; continuation of maintenance fluids produces fluid overload. In contrast, postobstructive
diuresis, the polyuric phase of acute tubular necrosis, diabetes mellitus,
and diabetes insipidus increase urine production. To prevent dehydration, the patient must receive more than standard maintenance fluids

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 75 u Deficit Therapy
replacement fluid for the excess. In these patients, urine output is, by
definition, excessive, and it is often helpful to measure Na+ and K+ concentrations of the urine to help in formulating the urine replacement
solution.
Surgical drains and chest tubes can produce measurable fluid output. These fluid losses should be replaced when they are significant.
They can be measured and replaced with an appropriate solution.
Third space losses, which manifest as edema and ascites, are caused by
a shift of fluid from the intravascular space into the interstitial space.
Although these losses cannot be quantitated easily, third space losses
can be large and may lead to intravascular volume depletion, despite
the patient’s weight gain. Replacement of third space fluid is empirical
but should be anticipated in patients who are at risk, such as children
who have burns or abdominal surgery. Third space losses and chest
tube output are isotonic, so they usually require replacement with an
isotonic fluid, such as NS or LR. Adjustments in the amount of replacement fluid for third space losses are based on continuing assessment of
the patient’s intravascular volume status. Protein losses from chest tube
drainage can be significant, occasionally necessitating that 5% albumin
be used as a replacement solution.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 75

Deficit Therapy
Larry A. Greenbaum
Dehydration, most often caused by gastroenteritis, is a common problem in children. Most cases can be managed with oral rehydration (see
Chapter 387). Even children with mild to moderate hyponatremic or
hypernatremic dehydration can be managed with oral rehydration.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The first step in caring for the child with dehydration is to assess the
degree of dehydration (Table 75.1), which dictates both the urgency of
the situation and the volume of fluid needed for rehydration. The infant
with mild dehydration (3–5% of body weight dehydrated) has few clinical signs or symptoms. The infant may be thirsty; the alert parent may
notice a decline in urine output. The history is most helpful. The infant
with moderate dehydration has clear physical signs and symptoms.
Intravascular volume depletion is evident from an increased heart rate
and reduced urine output. This patient needs fairly prompt intervention. The infant with severe dehydration is gravely ill. The decrease in
blood pressure indicates that vital organs may be receiving inadequate

Table 75.1  Clinical Evaluation of Dehydration
Mild dehydration (<5% in an infant; <3% in an older child or adult):
Normal or increased pulse; decreased urine output; thirsty; normal
physical findings
Moderate dehydration (5–10% in an infant; 3–6% in an older child
or adult): Tachycardia; little or no urine output; irritable/lethargic;
sunken eyes and fontanel; decreased tears; dry mucous
membranes; mild delay in elasticity (skin turgor); delayed capillary
refill (>1.5 sec); cool and pale
Severe dehydration (>10% in an infant; >6% in an older child or
adult): Peripheral pulses either rapid and weak or absent; decreased
blood pressure; no urine output; very sunken eyes and fontanel; no
tears; parched mucous membranes; delayed elasticity (poor skin
turgor); very delayed capillary refill (>3 sec); cold and mottled; limp,
depressed consciousness

529

perfusion. Immediate and aggressive intervention is necessary. If possible, the child with severe dehydration should initially receive intravenous (IV) therapy. For older children and adults, mild, moderate, or
severe dehydration represents a lower percentage of body weight lost.
This difference occurs because water accounts for a higher percentage
of body weight in infants (see Chapter 73).
Clinical assessment of dehydration is only an estimate; thus the
patient must be continually reevaluated during therapy. The degree of
dehydration is underestimated in hypernatremic dehydration because
the movement of water from the intracellular space (ICS) to the extracellular space (ECS) helps preserve the intravascular volume.
The history usually suggests the etiology of the dehydration and may
predict whether the patient will have a normal sodium concentration
(isotonic dehydration), hyponatremic dehydration, or hypernatremic
dehydration. The neonate with dehydration caused by poor intake of
breast milk often has hypernatremic dehydration. Hypernatremic
dehydration is likely in any child with losses of hypotonic fluid and
poor water intake, as may occur with diarrhea, and poor oral intake
because of anorexia or emesis. Hyponatremic dehydration occurs
in the child with diarrhea who is taking in large quantities of low-­salt
fluid, such as water or formula.
Some children with dehydration are appropriately thirsty, but in others the lack of intake is part of the pathophysiology of the dehydration.
Even though decreased urine output is present in most children with
dehydration, good urine output may be deceptively present if a child
has an underlying renal defect, such as diabetes insipidus or a salt-­
wasting nephropathy, or in infants with hypernatremic dehydration.
Physical examination findings are usually proportional to the
degree of dehydration. Parents may be helpful in assessment of the
child for the presence of sunken eyes, because this finding may be
subtle. Pinching and gently twisting the skin of the abdominal or
thoracic wall detects tenting of the skin (turgor, elasticity). Tented
skin remains in a pinched position rather than springing quickly
back to normal. It is difficult to properly assess tenting of the skin
in premature infants or severely malnourished children. Activation
of the sympathetic nervous system causes tachycardia in children
with intravascular volume depletion; diaphoresis may also be present.
Postural changes in blood pressure are often helpful for evaluating
and assessing the response to therapy in children with dehydration.
Tachypnea in children with dehydration may be present secondary to
a metabolic acidosis from stool losses of bicarbonate or lactic acidosis
from shock (see Chapter 85).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Several laboratory findings are useful for evaluating the child with dehydration. The serum sodium concentration determines the type of dehydration. Metabolic acidosis may be a result of stool bicarbonate losses
in children with diarrhea, secondary acute kidney injury (see Chapter
572.1), or lactic acidosis from shock. The anion gap is useful for differentiating among the various causes of a metabolic acidosis (see Chapter
73). Emesis or nasogastric losses usually cause a metabolic alkalosis. The
serum potassium (K+) concentration may be low as a result of diarrheal
losses. In children with dehydration as a result of emesis, gastric K+ losses,
metabolic alkalosis, and urinary K+ losses all contribute to hypokalemia.
Metabolic acidosis, which causes a shift of K+ out of cells, and acute kidney
injury may lead to hyperkalemia. A combination of mechanisms may be
present; thus it may be difficult to predict the child’s acid-­base status or
serum K+ level from the history alone.
The blood urea nitrogen (BUN) value and serum creatinine concentration are useful in assessing the child with dehydration. Volume
depletion without parenchymal kidney injury may cause a disproportionate increase in the BUN with little or no change in the creatinine
concentration. This condition is secondary to increased passive resorption of urea in the proximal tubule as a result of appropriate renal conservation of sodium and water. The increase in the BUN with moderate
or severe dehydration may be absent or blunted in the child with poor
protein intake, because urea production depends on protein degradation. The BUN may be disproportionately increased in the child with
increased urea production, as occurs with a gastrointestinal bleed or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

530 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
with the use of glucocorticoids, which increase catabolism. A significant elevation of the creatinine concentration suggests acute kidney
injury, although a small, transient increase can occur with dehydration.
Decreased kidney perfusion is the most common etiology of acute kidney injury in a child with volume depletion, but occasionally the child
may have previously undetected chronic kidney disease or an alternative explanation for the acute kidney injury. Renal vein thrombosis is
a well-­described sequela of severe dehydration in infants; findings may
include thrombocytopenia and hematuria (see Chapter 562.2).
Hemoconcentration from dehydration causes increases in hematocrit, hemoglobin, and serum proteins. These values normalize with
rehydration. A normal hemoglobin concentration during acute dehydration may mask an underlying anemia. A decreased albumin level in
a dehydrated patient suggests a chronic disease, such as malnutrition,
nephrotic syndrome, or liver disease, or an acute process, such as capillary leak. An acute or chronic protein-­losing enteropathy may also
cause a low serum albumin concentration.

CALCULATION OF THE FLUID DEFICIT

Determining the fluid deficit necessitates clinical determination of the
percentage of dehydration and multiplication of this percentage by the
patient’s weight; a child who weighs 10 kg and is 10% dehydrated has a
fluid deficit of 1 L.

APPROACH TO SEVERE DEHYDRATION

The child with dehydration needs acute intervention to ensure that there is
adequate tissue perfusion. This resuscitation phase requires rapid restoration of the circulating intravascular volume and treatment of shock with
an isotonic solution, such as normal saline (NS), Ringer lactate (lactated
Ringer solution, LR), or Plasma-­Lyte (see Chapter 85). The child is given
a fluid bolus, usually 20 mL/kg of the isotonic fluid, over approximately
20 minutes. The child with severe dehydration may require multiple fluid
boluses and may need to receive the boluses as fast as possible. In a child
with a known or probable metabolic alkalosis (e.g., child with isolated vomiting), LR or Plasma-­Lyte should not be used because the lactate or acetate
would worsen the alkalosis. However, LR or Plasma-­Lyte may be preferable to NS in shock since it is a balanced solution (see Chapters 74 and 85);
NS may cause a hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis.
Colloids, such as blood, 5% albumin, and plasma, are rarely
needed for fluid boluses. A crystalloid solution (NS or LR) is satisfactory, with both lower risk of infection and lower cost. Blood is
obviously indicated in the child with significant anemia or acute
blood loss. Plasma is useful for children with a coagulopathy.
The child with hypoalbuminemia may benefit from 5% albumin,
although there is evidence that albumin infusions increase mortality in adults. The volume and the infusion rate for colloids are generally modified compared with crystalloids (see Chapter 522).
The initial resuscitation and rehydration phase is complete when the
child has an adequate intravascular volume. Typically, the child shows
clinical improvement, including a lower heart rate, normalization of blood
pressure, improved perfusion, better urine output, and a more alert affect.
With adequate intravascular volume, it is appropriate to plan
the fluid therapy for the next 24 hours. A general approach is outlined in Table 75.2, with the caveat that there are many different

approaches to correcting dehydration. A balanced solution can be
substituted for NS. In isonatremic or hyponatremic dehydration, the
entire fluid deficit is corrected over 24 hours; a slower approach is
used for hypernatremic dehydration (discussed later). The volume
of isotonic fluids that the patient has received is subtracted from
this total. The remaining fluid volume is then administered over
24 hours. The potassium concentration may need to be decreased
or, less frequently, increased, depending on the clinical situation.
Potassium is not usually included in the IV fluids until the patient
voids and normal renal function is documented by measurement of
BUN and creatinine. Children with significant ongoing losses need
to receive an appropriate replacement solution (see Chapter 74).

MONITORING AND ADJUSTING THERAPY

The formulation of a plan for correcting a child’s dehydration is
only the beginning of management. All calculations in fluid therapy
are only approximations. This statement is especially true for the
assessment of percentage dehydration. It is equally important to
monitor the patient during treatment and to modify therapy on the
basis of the clinical situation. Table 75.3 lists the cornerstones of
patient monitoring. The patient’s vital signs are useful indicators of
intravascular volume status. The child with decreased blood pressure and an increased heart rate will probably benefit from a fluid
bolus.
The patient’s intake and output are critically important in the
dehydrated child. The child who, after 8 hours of therapy, has
more output than input because of continuing diarrhea needs to
be started on a replacement solution. See the guidelines in Chapter
74 for selecting an appropriate replacement solution. Urine output
is useful for evaluating the success of therapy. Good urine output
indicates that rehydration has been successful.
Signs of dehydration on physical examination suggest the need
for continued rehydration. Signs of fluid overload, such as edema
and pulmonary congestion, are present in the child who is overhydrated. An accurate daily weight measurement is critical for the
management of the dehydrated child. There should be a gain in
weight during successful therapy.
Measurement of serum electrolyte levels at least daily is appropriate for any child who is receiving IV rehydration. Such a child is
at risk for sodium, potassium, and acid-­base disorders. It is always
important to look at trends. For example, a sodium concentration
([Na+]) of 144 mEq/L is normal; but if the [Na+] was 136 mEq/L 12
hours earlier, there is a distinct risk that the child will be hypernatremic in 12 or 24 hours. It is advisable to be proactive in adjusting
fluid therapy.
Both hypokalemia and hyperkalemia are potentially serious (see
Chapter 73). Because dehydration can be associated with acute kidney
injury and hyperkalemia, potassium is withheld from IV fluids until
the patient has voided. The potassium concentration in the patient’s
IV fluids is not rigidly prescribed. Rather, the patient’s serum K+ level
and underlying kidney function are used to modify potassium delivery.
The patient with an elevated creatinine value and K+ level of 5 mEq/L
does not receive any potassium until the serum K+ level decreases.

Table 75.3  Monitoring Therapy
Table 75.2  Fluid Management of Dehydration
1.	Restore intravascular volume
Isotonic fluid (NS or LR): 20 mL/kg over 20 min
Repeat as needed
2.	Calculate 24 hr fluid needs: maintenance + deficit volume
3.	Subtract isotonic fluid already administered from 24 hr fluid needs
4.	Administer remaining volume over 24 hr using 5% dextrose NS +
20 mEq/L KCl
5.	Replace ongoing losses as they occur
LR, Ringer lactate; NS, normal saline.

Vital signs
Pulse
Blood pressure
Intake and output
Fluid balance
Urine output
Physical examination
Weight
Clinical signs of depletion or overload
Electrolytes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 75 u Deficit Therapy
Conversely, the patient with a K+ level of 2.5 mEq/L may require additional potassium.
Metabolic acidosis can be quite severe in dehydrated children.
Although normal kidneys eventually correct this problem, a child
with renal dysfunction may be unable to correct a metabolic acidosis, and a portion of the patient’s IV sodium chloride may have to
be replaced with sodium bicarbonate, sodium lactate (as in LR), or
sodium acetate.
The serum K+ level is modified by the patient’s acid-­base status.
Acidosis increases serum K+ by causing intracellular K+ to move into
the ECS. Thus, as acidosis is corrected, the serum potassium concentration ([K+]) decreases. Again, it is best to anticipate this problem
and to monitor the serum [K+] and adjust potassium administration
appropriately.

HYPONATREMIC DEHYDRATION

The pathogenesis of hyponatremic dehydration usually involves
a combination of sodium and water loss and water retention to
compensate for the volume depletion. The patient has a pathologic
increase in fluid loss, and the lost fluid contains sodium. Most fluid
that is lost has a lower sodium concentration, so patients with only
fluid loss would have hypernatremia. Diarrhea has, on average, a
sodium concentration of 50 mEq/L. Replacing diarrheal fluid with
water, which has almost no sodium, causes a reduction in the serum
[Na+] (see Chapter 74). The volume depletion stimulates synthesis
of antidiuretic hormone, resulting in reduced renal water excretion.
Therefore the body’s usual mechanism for preventing hyponatremia, renal water excretion, is blocked. The risk of hyponatremia is
further increased if the volume depletion is a result of loss of fluid
with a higher sodium concentration, as may occur with renal salt
wasting, third space losses, or diarrhea with high sodium content
(cholera).
The initial goal in treating hyponatremia is correction of intravascular volume depletion with isotonic fluid. An overly rapid (>8-­
10 mEq/L over the first 24 hours) or overcorrection in the serum
[Na+] (>135 mEq/L) is associated with an increased risk of osmotic
demyelination syndrome (formerly central pontine myelinolysis)
(see Chapter 73). Most patients with hyponatremic dehydration
do well with the same basic strategy outlined in Table 75.2. Again,
K+ delivery is adjusted according to the initial serum K+ level and
the patient’s renal function. Potassium is not given until the patient
voids.
The patient’s [Na+] is monitored closely to ensure appropriate correction, and the sodium concentration of the fluid is adjusted accordingly.
Patients with ongoing losses require an appropriate replacement solution (see Chapter 74). Patients with neurologic symptoms (seizures) as
a result of hyponatremia need to receive an acute infusion of hypertonic (3%) saline to increase the serum [Na+] rapidly (see Chapter 73).

HYPERNATREMIC DEHYDRATION

Hypernatremic dehydration is the most dangerous form of dehydration because of complications of hypernatremia itself and of
its therapy. Hypernatremia can cause serious neurologic damage,
including central nervous system hemorrhages and thrombosis.
This damage appears to be secondary to the movement of water
from the brain cells into the hypertonic extracellular fluid (ECF),
causing brain cell shrinkage and tearing blood vessels within the
brain (see Chapter 73).
The movement of water from the ICS to the ECS during hypernatremic dehydration partially protects the intravascular volume. Unfortunately, because the initial manifestations are milder, children with
hypernatremic dehydration are often brought for medical attention
with more profound dehydration.
Children with hypernatremic dehydration are often lethargic,
and they may be irritable when touched. Hypernatremia may cause
fever, hypertonicity, and hyperreflexia. More severe neurologic
symptoms may develop if cerebral bleeding or thrombosis occurs.

531

Overly rapid treatment of hypernatremic dehydration may cause
significant morbidity and mortality. Idiogenic osmoles are generated within the brain during the development of hypernatremia;
they increase the osmolality within the cells of the brain, providing
protection against brain cell shrinkage caused by movement of water
out of the cells and into the hypertonic ECF. Idiogenic osmoles dissipate slowly during the correction of hypernatremia. With overly
rapid lowering of the extracellular osmolality during the correction
of hypernatremia, an osmotic gradient may be created that causes
water movement from the ECS into the cells of the brain, producing cerebral edema. Symptoms of the resultant cerebral edema can
range from seizures to brain herniation and death.
To minimize the risk of cerebral edema during the correction of
hypernatremic dehydration, the serum sodium concentration should
not decrease by >10 mEq/L every 24 hours. The deficits in severe
hypernatremic dehydration may need to be corrected over 2-­4 days
(Fig. 75.1).
The initial resuscitation of hypernatremic dehydration requires
restoration of the intravascular volume with NS. LR should not be
used because it is more hypotonic than NS and may cause too rapid
a decrease in the serum [Na+], especially if multiple fluid boluses are
necessary.
To avoid cerebral edema during correction of hypernatremic
dehydration, the fluid deficit is corrected slowly. The rate of correction depends on the initial sodium concentration (see Fig.
75.1). There is no general agreement on the choice or the rate of
fluid administration for correcting hypernatremic dehydration;
these factors are not nearly as important as vigilant monitoring of
the serum [Na+] and adjustment of the therapy according to the
result. The rate of decrease of the serum [Na+] is roughly related to
the “free water” delivery, although there is considerable variation
between patients. Free water is water without sodium. NS contains
no free water, half-­normal saline (½ NS) is 50% free water, and water
is 100% free water. Smaller patients, to achieve the same decrease
in the sodium concentration, tend to need higher amounts of free
water delivery per kilogram because of higher insensible fluid
losses. Five percent dextrose (D5) with ½ NS is usually an appropriate starting solution for correction of a patient with hypernatremic
dehydration. Some patients, especially infants with ongoing high
insensible water losses, may rarely need to receive D5 0.2NS, which
should be used with great caution and constant monitoring. Others
require D5 NS. A child with dehydration as a result of pure free
water loss, as usually occurs with diabetes insipidus, usually needs
a more hypotonic fluid than a child with depletion of both sodium
and water from diarrhea.
Adjustment in the sodium concentration of the IV fluid is the
most common approach to modify the rate of decrease in the serum
concentration (see Fig. 75.1). For difficult-­to-­manage patients with
severe hypernatremia, having two IV solutions (e.g., D5 ½ NS and
D5 NS, both with the same concentration of potassium) at the bedside can facilitate this approach by allowing for rapid adjustments of
the rates of the two fluids. If the serum [Na+] decreases too rapidly,
the rate of D5 NS can be increased and the rate of D5 ½ NS can be
decreased by the same amount. Adjustment in the total rate of fluid
delivery is another approach to modifying free water delivery. For
example, if the serum [Na+] is decreasing too slowly, the rate of a
hypotonic IV fluid can be increased, thereby increasing the delivery
of free water. There is limited flexibility in modifying the rate of the
IV fluid because patients generally should receive 1.25-­1.5 times the
normal maintenance fluid rate. Nevertheless, in some situations, it
can be a helpful adjustment.
Because increasing the rate of the IV fluid increases the rate of
decline of the sodium concentration, signs of volume depletion are
treated with additional isotonic fluid boluses. The serum [K+] and
the level of renal function dictate the potassium concentration of
the IV fluid; potassium is withheld until the patient voids. Patients
with hypernatremic dehydration need an appropriate replacement
solution if they have ongoing, excessive losses (see Chapter 74).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

532 Part VI u Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
Restore intravascular volume:
Normal saline: 20 mL/kg over 20 min
(repeat until intravascular volume restored)

Determine time for correction based on initial
sodium concentration
[Na] 145-157 mEq/L: 24 hr
[Na] 158-170 mEq/L: 48 hr
[Na] 171-183 mEq/L: 72 hr
[Na] 184-196 mEq/L: 84 hr

Administer fluid at a constant rate over the
time for correction
Typical fluid: D5 1/2 normal saline (with 20
mEq/L KCI unless contraindicated)
Typical rate: 1.25-1.5 times maintenance

Follow serum sodium concentration and
adjust fluid based on clinical status and serum
sodium concentration

Signs of volume
depletion

Administer normal
saline (20 mL/kg)

Sodium decreases
too rapidly

Sodium decreases
too slowly

Increase sodium
concentration of
IV fluid or
decrease rate of IV
fluid

Decrease sodium
concentration of
IV fluid or increase
rate of IV fluid

Replace excessive
ongoing losses as
they occur

Fig. 75.1 Algorithm for the treatment of hypernatremic dehydration. (From Londeree JT, Greenbaum LA. Dehydration and replacement therapy.
In: Marcdante KJ, Kliegman RM, Schuh AM, eds. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2023. Fig 33.1.)

Seizures and a depressed level of consciousness are the most common manifestations of cerebral edema from an overly rapid decrease
of the serum [Na+] during correction of hypernatremic dehydration.
Signs of increased intracranial pressure or impending herniation may
develop quite rapidly (see Chapter 82). Acutely, increasing the serum
[Na+] through an infusion of 3% sodium chloride can reverse the cerebral edema. Each 1 mL/kg of 3% NaCl increases the serum [Na+] by
approximately 1 mEq/L. An infusion of 4 mL/kg often results in resolution of the symptoms. This strategy is similar to that used for treating
symptomatic hyponatremia (see Chapter 73).
Many patients with mild to moderate hypernatremic dehydration as
a result of gastroenteritis can be managed with oral rehydration (see

Chapter 387). In patients with severe hypernatremia, oral fluids must
be used cautiously. Infant formula, because of its low sodium concentration, has a high free water content, and especially if added to IV
therapy, it may contribute to a rapid decrease in the serum [Na+]. Less
hypotonic fluid, such as an oral rehydration solution, may be more
appropriate initially. If oral intake is allowed, its contribution to free
water delivery must be taken into account, and adjustment in the IV
fluid is usually appropriate. Judicious monitoring of the serum [Na+]
is critical.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 76 u Fluid and Electrolyte Treatment of Specific Disorders

Chapter 76

Fluid and Electrolyte
Treatment of Specific
Disorders
ACUTE DIARRHEA
See Chapter 387.

PYLORIC STENOSIS
See Chapter 375.1.

PERIOPERATIVE FLUIDS
See Chapter 91.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

533

