Growth, Development, and
Behavior
Chapter 19

Developmental and
Behavioral Theories
Margo Candelaria and Susan Feigelman
The field of pediatrics is dedicated to optimizing the growth and
development of each child. Pediatricians require knowledge of normal growth, development, and behavior to effectively monitor children’s progress, identify delays or abnormalities in development, help
obtain needed services, and counsel parents and caretakers. To alter
factors that increase or decrease risk and resilience, pediatricians need
to understand how biologic and social forces interact within the parent–child relationship, within the family, and between the family and
the larger society. Growth is an indicator of overall well-­being, status of
chronic disease, and interpersonal and psychologic stress. By monitoring children and families over time, pediatricians are uniquely situated
to observe the interrelationships between physical growth and cognitive, motor, and emotional development. Observation is enhanced by
familiarity with developmental and behavioral theories that inform
one about typical patterns of development and provide guidance for
prevention or intervention for behavior problems. Familiarity with
theories of health behavior may assist clinicians in guiding patients and
families in disease management and wellness care.

BIOPSYCHOSOCIAL MODEL AND
­ECOBIODEVELOPMENTAL FRAMEWORK:
MODELS OF DEVELOPMENT

The medical model presumes that a patient presents with signs and
symptoms and a physician focuses on diagnosing and treating diseases
of the body. This model neglects the social and psychologic aspect of a
person who exists in the larger realm of the family and society. In the
biopsychosocial model, societal and community systems are simultaneously considered along with more proximal systems that make up
the person and the person’s environment (Fig. 19.1). A patient’s symptoms are examined and explained in the context of the patient’s existence. This multidimensional model can be used to understand health
and both acute and chronic disease, and this model has been increasingly used to develop care models over the past few decades.
With the advances in neurology, genomics (including epigenetics),
molecular biology, and the social sciences, a broader model, the ecobiodevelopmental framework, has emerged. This framework emphasizes how the ecology of childhood (social and physical environments)
interacts with biologic processes to determine outcomes and life trajectories. Early influences, particularly those producing toxic levels of
stress, affect the individual through their impact on the body’s stress
response systems, brain development, and modification of gene expression. Epigenetic changes, such as DNA methylation and histone acetylation, may be influenced by early life experiences (the environment) and
impact gene expression without changing the DNA sequence. These
changes can produce long-­lasting effects on the health and well-­being
of the individual and may be passed on to future generations (Fig. 19.2).
Critical to learning and remembering (and therefore development)
is neuronal plasticity, which permits the central nervous system to
reorganize neuronal networks in response to environmental stimulation, both positive and negative. An overproduction of neuronal precursors eventually leads to about 100 billion neurons in the adult brain.

PART

II

Each neuron develops on average 15,000 synapses by 3 years of age. During early childhood, synapses in frequently used pathways are preserved,
whereas less-­used ones atrophy, a process termed pruning. Changes in the
strength and number of synapses and reorganization of neuronal circuits
also play important roles in brain plasticity. Increases or decreases in synaptic activity result in persistent increases or decreases in synaptic strength.
Thus experience (environment) has a direct effect on the physical and
therefore functional properties of the brain. Children with different talents
and temperaments (already a combination of genetics and environment)
further elicit different stimuli from their varying environments.
Periods of rapid development generally correlate with periods
of great changes in synaptic numbers in relevant areas of the brain.
Accordingly, sensory deprivation during the time when synaptic
changes should be occurring has profound effects. The effects of strabismus leading to amblyopia occur quickly during early childhood;
patching the eye with good vision to reverse amblyopia is less effective
in late childhood (see Chapter 663). Early experience is particularly
important because learning proceeds more efficiently along established
synaptic pathways. However, some plasticity of the brain continues into
adolescence, with further development of the prefrontal cortex, which
is important in decision-­making, future planning, and emotional control; neurogenesis persists in adulthood in certain areas of the brain.
Early traumatic experiences modify the expression of stress mediators (in particular the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­adrenal axis) and neurotransmitters, leading to changes in brain connectivity and function.
These effects may be persistent, leading to alterations and dysfunction in the stress response throughout life. Chronic stress has negative
effects on cognitive functions, including memory and emotional regulation. Positive and negative experiences do not determine the ultimate
outcome but shift the probabilities by influencing the child’s ability to
respond adaptively to future stimuli.
There is increasing evidence that positive experiences and relationships can buffer the impact of negative or traumatic experience and
toxic stress. In fact, there is a recent call for pediatrics to recognize and
promote relational health as a protective factor. By promoting positive
relationships, labeled safe, stable, and nurturing relationships (SSNRs)
within primary care, healthcare providers can work with families to
build relational health, thereby combatting the deleterious effects of
toxic stress and promoting resilience. Pediatric care can do this by
employing a public health approach, partnering with families and communities, to build healthy relationships by connecting to and integrating with primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention programs. This
can include embedding interventions within primary care and creating
robust referral networks to connect families to needed services.

Biologic Influences

Biologic influences on development include genetics, in utero exposure
to teratogens, the long-­term negative effects of low birthweight (neonatal
morbidities plus increased rates of subsequent adult-­onset obesity, coronary heart disease, stroke, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes), postnatal
illnesses, exposure to hazardous substances, and maturation. Adoption
and twin studies consistently show that heredity accounts for approximately 40% of the variance in IQ and in other personality traits, such as
sociability and desire for novelty, whereas shared environment accounts
for another 50%. The negative effects on development of prenatal exposure to teratogens, such as mercury and alcohol, and of postnatal insults,
such as meningitis and traumatic brain injury, have been extensively studied (see Chapters 117, 122, and 146). Any chronic illness can affect growth
and development, either directly or through changes in factors such as
nutrition, parenting, school attendance, peer interactions, or self-­esteem.
Most children follow similar motor developmental sequences
despite great variability in child-­rearing practices. The attainment of
skills such as the use of complex sentences is less tightly bound to a

136
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 19 u Developmental and Behavioral Theories
Biosphere
Society-Nation
Culture-Subculture
Community
Family
Two person
Person
Nervous system
Organ/Organ systems
Tissue
Cell
Organelle
Molecule

Fig. 19.1 Continuum and hierarchy of natural systems in the biopsychosocial model. (From Engel GL. The clinical application of the biopsychosocial model. Am J Psychiatry. 1980;137:535–544.)

maturational schedule. Maturational changes also generate behavioral
challenges at predictable times. Decrements in growth rate and sleep
requirements around 2 years of age often generate concern about poor
appetite and refusal to nap. Although it is possible to accelerate many
developmental milestones (toilet training a 12 month old or teaching a
3 year old to read), the long-­term benefits of such precocious accomplishments are questionable.
In addition to physical changes in size, body proportions, and
strength, maturation brings about hormonal changes. Sexual differentiation, both somatic and neurologic, begins in utero. Both stress and
reproductive hormones affect brain development as well as behavior
throughout development. Steroid production by the fetal gonads leads
to differences in brain structures between males and females.
Temperament describes the stable, early-­appearing individual variations in behavioral dimensions, including emotionality (crying, laughing, sulking), activity level, attention, sociability, and persistence. The
classic theory proposes nine dimensions of temperament (Table 19.1).
These characteristics lead to three common constellations: (1) the easy,
highly adaptable child, who has regular biologic cycles; (2) the difficult
child, who is inflexible, moody, and easily frustrated; and (3) the slow-­
to-­warm-­up child, who needs extra time to adapt to new circumstances.
Various combinations of these clusters also occur. Temperament has long
been described as biologic or “inherited.” Monozygotic twins are rated by
their parents as temperamentally similar more often than are dizygotic
twins. Estimates of heritability suggest that genetic differences account
for 20–60% of the variability of temperament within a population. The
remainder of the variance is attributed to the child’s environment. Maternal prenatal stress and anxiety is associated with child temperament,
possibly through stress hormones. However, certain polymorphisms of
specific genes moderate the influence of maternal stress on infant temperament. Children who are easily frustrated, fearful, or irritable may elicit
negative parental reactions, making these children even more susceptible
to negative parenting behaviors and to poor adjustment to adversity. Longitudinal twin studies of adult personality indicate that changes in personality over time largely result from dissimilar environmental influences,
whereas stability of temperament appears to result from genetic factors.
The concept of temperament can help parents understand and accept
the characteristics of their children without feeling responsible for having caused them. Children who have difficulty adjusting to change

137

may have behavior problems when a new baby arrives or at the time
of school entry. In addition, pointing out the child’s temperament may
allow for adjustment in parenting styles. Behavioral and emotional
problems may develop when the temperamental characteristics of children and parents are in conflict. If parents who keep an irregular schedule have a child who is not readily adaptable, behavioral difficulties are
more likely than if the child has parents who have predictable routines.

Psychologic Influences: Attachment and Contingency

The influence of the child-­rearing environment dominates most current
models of development. Infants in hospitals and orphanages, devoid
of opportunities for attachment, have severe developmental deficits.
Attachment refers to a biologically determined tendency of a young
child to seek proximity to the parent during times of stress and to the
relationship that allows securely attached children to use their parents
to reestablish a sense of well-­being after a stressful experience. Insecure
attachment may be predictive of later behavioral and learning problems.
At all stages of development, children progress optimally when they
have adult caregivers who pay attention to their verbal and nonverbal cues
and respond accordingly. In early infancy, such contingent responsiveness
to signs of overarousal or underarousal helps maintain infants in a state of
quiet alertness and fosters autonomic self-­regulation. Consistent contingent responses (reinforcement depending on the behavior of the other)
to nonverbal gestures create the groundwork for the shared attention and
reciprocity that are critical for later language and social development.

Social Factors: Family Systems and the Ecologic
Model

Contemporary models of child development recognize the critical importance of influences outside the mother–child dyad. Fathers play critical
roles, both in their direct relationships with their children and in supporting mothers. As traditional nuclear families become less dominant,
the influence of other family members and caregivers (grandparents,
foster and adoptive parents, same-­sex partners) becomes increasingly
important. Furthermore, the presence of nurturing and stable caregivers,
in or out of the nuclear family, can help to buffer the impact of a parent
who may struggle with mental illness, substance use, or other afflictions.
As children grow within their larger ecosystem, it is important to recognize and include all relevant caregivers in the child’s care.
Families function as systems, with internal and external boundaries, subsystems, roles, and rules for interaction. In families with
rigidly defined parental subsystems, children may be denied any
decision-­
making, exacerbating rebelliousness. In families with
poorly defined parent–child boundaries, children may be required
to take on responsibilities beyond their years or may be recruited to
play a spousal role.
Family systems theory recognizes that individuals within systems
adopt implicit roles. Although birth order does not have long-­term
effects on personality development, within families the members take
on different roles. One child may be the troublemaker, whereas another
is the negotiator and another is quiet. Changes in one person’s behavior affects every other member of the system; roles shift until a new
equilibrium is found. The birth of a new child, attainment of developmental milestones such as independent walking, the onset of nighttime
fears, diagnosis of a chronic illness, or death of a family member are all
changes that require renegotiation of roles within the family and have
the potential for healthy adaptation or dysfunction.
The family system, in turn, functions within the larger systems of
extended family, subculture, culture, and society. Bronfenbrenner’s
ecologic model depicts these relationships as concentric circles, with
the parent–child dyad at the center (with associated risks and protective factors) and the larger society at the periphery. Changes at any level
are reflected in the levels above and below. Furthermore, these systems
and their interactions change over time, with some influences being
persistent and chronic and others being temporary. The shift from an
industrial economy to one based on service and information and the
influence of systemic racism are examples of how society has profound
effects on families and children. Understanding the child’s greater ecosystem is important to understand their family and the context of their

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

138 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
An Ecobiodevelopmental Framework
for Early Childhood Policies and Programs

Policy and Program
Levers for Innovation

Caregiver and
Community Capacities

Foundations of
Healthy Development

Primary health care
Public health

Time and commitment

Childcare and early education
Child welfare

Financial, psychologic, and
institutional resources

Early intervention

Skills and knowledge

Stable, responsive
relationships

Biology of Health
and Development
Cumulative
over time

Geneenvironment
interaction

Safe, supportive
environments

Health-related
behaviors
Physiologic
adaptations or
disruptions

Appropriate
nutrition

Family economic stability
Community development
Private sector actions

Ecology

Outcomes in
Lifelong
Well-Being

Educational
achievement
and economic
productivity

Embedded during
sensitive periods

Physical and
mental health

Biology

Health and
development

Fig. 19.2 Ecobiodevelopmental framework for early childhood policies and programs. (Adapted from Center on the Developing Child. The foundations of lifelong health are built in early childhood. 2010; Available at: http://www.developingchild.harvard.edu.)

Table 19.1  Temperamental Characteristics: Descriptions and Examples
CHARACTERISTIC

DESCRIPTION

EXAMPLES*

Activity level

Amount of gross motor movement

“She’s constantly on the move.” “He would rather sit still than run
around.”

Rhythmicity

Regularity of biologic cycles

“He’s never hungry at the same time each day.” “You could set a
watch by her nap.”

Approach and withdrawal

Initial response to new stimuli

“She rejects every new food at first.” “He sleeps well in any
place.”

Adaptability

Ease of adaptation to novel stimulus

“Changes upset him.” “She adjusts to new people quickly.”

Threshold of responsiveness

Intensity of stimuli needed to evoke a
response (e.g., touch, sound, light)

“He notices all the lumps in his food and objects to them.” “She
will eat anything, wear anything, do anything.”

Intensity of reaction

Energy level of response

“She shouts when she is happy and wails when she is sad.” “He
never cries much.”

Quality of mood

Usual disposition (e.g., pleasant, glum)

“He does not laugh much.” “It seems like she is always happy.”

Distractibility

How easily diverted from ongoing
activity

“She is distracted at mealtime when other children are nearby.”
“He doesn’t even hear me when he is playing.”

Attention span and persistence

How long a child pays attention and
sticks with difficult tasks

“He goes from toy to toy every minute.” “She will keep at a puzzle
until she has mastered it.”

*Typical statements of parents, reflecting the range for each characteristic from very little to very much.
Based on data from Chess S, Thomas A. Temperament in Clinical Practice. New York: Guilford; 1986.

growth. Factors such as poverty, systemic racism, access to education,
transportation, food, housing, parental employment, and local support
systems are influential factors in a child’s well-­being. Whenever possible, identifying community supports and assets for families can help
promote health and development.

Unifying Concepts: The Transactional Model, Risk,
and Resilience

The transactional model proposes that a child’s status at any point
in time is a function of the interaction between biologic and social
influences. The influences are bidirectional: biologic factors, such

as temperament and health status, affect the child-­rearing environment and are affected by it. A premature infant may cry little and
sleep for long periods; the infant’s depressed parent may welcome
this behavior, setting up a cycle that leads to poor nutrition and
inadequate growth. The child’s failure to thrive may reinforce the
parent’s sense of failure as a parent. At a later stage, impulsivity
and inattention associated with early, prolonged undernutrition
may lead to aggressive behavior. The cause of the aggression in
this case is not the prematurity, the undernutrition, or the maternal depression, but the interaction of all these factors (Fig. 19.3).
Conversely, children with biologic risk factors may nevertheless do

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 19 u Developmental and Behavioral Theories

139

Biologic Mechanisms
Genetics, in utero influences
on fetal development

Maternal
Depression

Psychosocial Mechanisms
Attachment, child discipline,
modeling, family functioning

Child Adjustment
Problems

Fig. 19.3 Theoretical model of mutual influences on

maternal depression and child adjustment. (From Elgar
FJ, McGrath PJ, Waschbusch DA, et al. Mutual influences on maternal depression and child adjustment problems, Clin Psychol Rev 2004;24:441–459.)

well developmentally if the child-­rearing environment is supportive. Premature infants with electroencephalographic evidence of
neurologic immaturity may be at increased risk for cognitive delay.
When parent–child interactions are optimal, risk of developmental
disability is reduced.
An estimate of developmental risk can begin with risk factors, such
as low income, low literacy, and lack of neighborhood resources.
Stress and anxiety in pregnancy are associated with cognitive, behavioral, and emotional problems in the child. Early stress may have
effects on aging mediated by shortening of telomere length, a link
to health disparities. Risk for negative outcomes over time increases
exponentially as a result of declining plasticity and accumulation of
risk factors (both behavioral and environmental). Interventions are
most effective in young children; over time, risk increases as the ability to change decreases.
Children growing up in poverty experience multiple levels of
developmental risk: increased exposure to biologic risk factors,
such as environmental lead and inadequate nutrition; lack of stimulation in the home; and decreased access to interventional education and therapeutic experiences. As they respond by withdrawal or
acting out, they further discourage positive stimulation from those
around them. Children of adolescent mothers are also at risk. When
early intervention programs provide timely, intensive, comprehensive, and prolonged services, at-­risk children show marked and
sustained upswings in their developmental trajectory. Early identification of children at developmental risk, along with early intervention to support parenting, is critically important (see Chapter
20). Promoting relational health and identifying supportive community resources and interventions can buffer the negative impact
of environmental risk factors.
Children can have appropriate developmental trajectories despite
childhood trauma. Resilience is the ability to withstand, adapt to, and
recover from adversities. There are several modifiable resilience factors: a positive appraisal or outlook and good executive functioning
(see Chapter 49); nurturing parenting; good maternal mental health,
self-­care skills, and consistent household routines; and an understanding of trauma. The personal histories of children who overcome
poverty often include at least one trusted adult (parent, grandparent,
teacher) with whom the child has a special, supportive, close relationship. Pediatric providers are positioned to target and bolster resilience in their patients and families.

Developmental Domains and Theories of Emotion
and Cognition

Child development can also be tracked by the child’s developmental
progress in particular domains, such as gross motor, fine motor, social,
emotional, language, and cognition. Within each of these categories are developmental sequences of changes leading up to particular
attainments. Development in the gross motor domain, from rolling

Social Capital
Income, social resources

to creeping to independent walking, are clear. Others, such as the line
leading to the development of conscience, are subtler.
The concept of a developmental line implies that a child passes
through successive stages. Several developmental theories are based on
stages as qualitatively different epochs in the development of emotion
and cognition (Table 19.2). In contrast, behavioral theories rely less on
qualitative change and more on the gradual modification of behavior
and accumulation of competence.

Psychoanalytic Theories

At the core of Freudian theory is the idea of body-­centered (or
broadly, “sexual”) drives; the emotional health of both the child and
the adult depends on adequate resolution of conflicts brought about
by these drives. Although Freudian ideas have been challenged,
they opened the door to subsequent theories of development.
Erikson recast Freud’s stages in terms of the emerging personality (see Table 19.2). The child’s sense of basic trust develops through
the successful negotiation of infantile needs. As children progress
through these psychosocial stages, different issues become salient.
It is predictable that a toddler will be preoccupied with establishing
a sense of autonomy, whereas a late adolescent may be more focused
on establishing meaningful relationships and an occupational
identity. Erikson recognized that these stages arise in the context
of Western European societal expectations; in other cultures, the
salient issues may be quite different.
Erikson’s work calls attention to the intrapersonal challenges facing children at different ages in a way that facilitates professional
intervention. Knowing that the salient issue for school-­age children
is industry vs inferiority, pediatricians inquire about a child’s experiences of mastery and failure and (if necessary) suggest ways to
ensure adequate successes.

Cognitive Theories

Cognitive development is best understood through the work of
Piaget. A central tenet of Piaget’s work is that cognition changes in
quality, not just quantity (see Table 19.2). During the sensorimotor stage, an infant’s thinking is tied to immediate sensations and a
child’s ability to manipulate objects. The concept of “in” is embodied in a child’s act of putting a block into a cup. With the arrival
of language, the nature of thinking changes dramatically; symbols
increasingly take the place of objects and actions. Piaget described
how children actively construct knowledge for themselves through
the linked processes of assimilation (taking in new experiences
according to existing schemata) and accommodation (creating
new patterns of understanding to adapt to new information). In
this way, children are continually and actively reorganizing cognitive processes.
There have been challenges to some of the Piaget’s basic concepts. Children may reach the stages at variable ages. Of undeniable

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

140 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 19.2  Classic Developmental Stage Theories
INFANCY
(0-­1 YR)

TODDLERHOOD
(2-­3 YR)

PRESCHOOL
(3-­6 YR)

SCHOOL AGE
(6-­12 YR)

ADOLESCENCE
(12-­20 YR)

Freud:
psychosexual

Oral

Anal

Phallic/oedipal

Latency

Genital

Erikson:
psychosocial

Basic trust vs
mistrust

Autonomy vs shame and
doubt

Initiative vs guilt

Industry vs inferiority

Identity vs role diffusion

Piaget: cognitive

Sensorimotor

Sensorimotor

Preoperational

Concrete operations

Formal operations

Kohlberg: moral

—

Preconventional: avoid
punishment/obtain
rewards (stages 1 and 2)

Conventional:
conformity (stage 3)

Conventional: law and
order (stage 4)

Postconventional: moral
principles

importance is Piaget’s focus on cognition as a subject of empirical study, the universality of the progression of cognitive stages,
and the image of a child as actively and creatively interpreting the
world. Piaget’s work is of special importance to pediatricians for
three reasons: (1) Piaget’s observations provide insight into many
puzzling behaviors of infancy, such as the common exacerbation
of sleep problems at 9 and 18 months of age; (2) Piaget’s observations often lend themselves to quick replication in the office, with
little special equipment; and (3) open-­ended questioning, based on
Piaget’s work, can provide insights into children’s understanding of
illness and hospitalization.
However, other studies have found that even young children and
infants are “natural scientists” and able to integrate new information through experimentation. Young children’s learning is highly
similar to the scientific thought process, including inductive reasoning, making predictions, and hypothesis testing. Hypotheses
and conclusions about the world are constantly being revised based
on the child’s experience. When children are faced with evidence
that conflicts with expected outcomes (expectancy violation), they
are motivated to explore and resolve ambiguities. Children can alter
their beliefs when given new evidence. That children utilize probabilistic models and exploration to resolve unexpected outcomes has
strong implications for the advancement of educational theory.
Based on cognitive development, Kohlberg developed a theory
of moral development in six stages, from early childhood through
adulthood. Preschoolers’ earliest sense of right and wrong is egocentric, motivated by externally applied controls. In later stages,
children perceive equality, fairness, and reciprocity in their understanding of interpersonal interactions through perspective taking.
Most youth will reach stage 4, conventional morality, by mid-to late
adolescence. The basic theory has been modified to distinguish
morality from social conventions. Whereas moral thinking considers interpersonal interactions, justice, and human welfare, social
conventions are the agreed-­on standards of behavior particular to a
social or cultural group. Within each stage of development, children
are guided by the basic precepts of moral behavior, but they also
may take into account local standards, such as dress code, classroom behavior, and dating expectations. There is a broader understanding of moral development of even young infants and children
theorizing an innate capacity to relate to others. Moral development
can be found in very young infants, toddlers, and preschoolers who
have a concept of self in relation to others, empathy and caring for
others, and may incorporate their cultural context in a way that
influences how and when moral development occurs.

implied; children, adults, and indeed animals all respond in the
same way. In its simplest form, the behaviorist orientation asserts
that behaviors that are reinforced occur more frequently; behaviors
that are punished or ignored occur less frequently. Reinforcement
may be further divided into positive reinforcement, when a reward
or attention increases the chance of a behavior occurring, and negative reinforcement, when removal of an aversive stimulus increases
the frequency of the behavior. A teacher who allows students who
complete the homework Monday through Thursday not to have an
assignment on Friday is using negative reinforcement to motivate
homework completion during the week.
The strengths of behavioral theory are its simplicity, wide applicability, and conduciveness to scientific verification. A behavioral approach
lends itself to interventions for various common problems, such as temper
tantrums, aggressive preschool behavior, and eating disorders, in which
behaviors are broken down into discrete units. In cognitively limited children and children with autism spectrum disorder, behavioral interventions
using applied behavior analysis approaches have demonstrated the ability to teach new, complex behaviors. Applied behavior analysis has been
particularly useful in the treatment of early-­diagnosed autism spectrum
disorder (see Chapter 58). However, when misbehavior is symptomatic
of an underlying emotional, perceptual, or family problem, an exclusive
reliance on behavior therapy risks leaving the cause untreated. Behavioral
approaches can be taught to parents for application at home.

Behavioral Theory

Statistics Used in Describing Growth and
Development

This theoretical perspective distinguishes itself by its lack of concern with a child’s inner experience. Its focus is on observable
behaviors and measurable factors that either increase or decrease
the frequency with which these behaviors occur. No stages are

Theories Used in Behavioral Interventions

An increasing number of programs or interventions (within and
outside the physician’s office) are designed to influence health
behaviors; some of these models are based on behavioral or cognitive theory or may have attributes of both. The most commonly
employed models are the Health Belief Model, Theory of Reasoned
Action, Theory of Planned Behavior, Social Cognitive Theory, and
Transtheoretical Model, also known as Stages of Change Theory
(see Chapter 18). Pediatricians should be aware of these models and
their similarities and differences (Table 19.3). Interventions based
on these theories have been designed for children and adolescents
in community, clinic, and hospital-­based settings.
Motivational interviewing (MI) is a technique often used in clinical
settings to bring about behavior change (Chapter 18). Briefly, the goal
is to enhance an individual’s motivation to change behavior by exploring and overcoming ambivalence. The therapist is a partner rather
than an authority figure and recognizes that, ultimately, the patient has
control over his or her choices. Pediatric providers can learn brief MI
techniques.

See Chapter 27.
In everyday use, the term normal is synonymous with healthy.
In a statistical sense, normal means that a set of values generates a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 19 u Developmental and Behavioral Theories

141

Table 19.3   Similar or Identical Elements Within Six Theories of Health Behavior
GENERAL TENET
OF “ENGAGING IN
THE BEHAVIOR IS
LIKELY IF...”

CONCEPT

HEALTH
BELIEF
MODEL

THEORY OF
REASONED
ACTION

THEORY OF
PLANNED
BEHAVIOR

SOCIAL
COGNITIVE
THEORY

TRANS‑
THEORETICAL
MODEL
(STAGES OF
CHANGE)

SOCIAL
NORMS
THEORY

ATTITUDINAL BELIEFS
Appraisal of
positive/
negative
aspects of
the behavior
and expected
outcome

Positive aspects
outweigh negative
aspects

Benefits vs.
Behavioral beliefs and
barriers; health evaluation of those
motive
beliefs (attitudes)

SELF-EFFICACY/BELIEF ABOUT CONTROL OVER THE BEHAVIOR
Belief in one’s
Belief that one
Self-efficacy
—
ability to
can perform the
perform the
behavior
behavior;
confidence

Perceived
behavioral
control

NORMATIVE AND NORM-RELATED BELIEFS AND ACTIVITIES
Belief that
Belief that others
Cues from
Normative beliefs and
others are
support the
media,
motivation to comply
supportive of
behavior change
friends
(subjective norms)
the behavior

Outcome
expectation;
expectancies

Pros, cons
(decision
balance)

Perceptions of
peer attitudes
and behaviors

Self-efficacy

Self-efficacy/
temptation

—

Social support

Helping
relationships
(process of
change)

Misperceptions
of actual vs.
perceived
norms
Misperceptions
of actual vs.
perceived
norms

Belief that
others are
engaging in
the behavior

Other people are
engaging in the
behavior

—

—

—

Social
environment;
modeling

Social
liberation
(process of
change)

Responses that
increase or
decrease the
likelihood of
engaging in
the behavior;
reminders

Receives positive
reinforcement

Cues to
action

—

—

Reinforcement

Reinforcement Change in
management/
perceptions
stimulus
through media;
control
social
messaging

—

Emotional coping
responses/
expectancies
about
environmental
cues

Dramatic relief
(process of
change)

Self-control/
self-regulation

Contemplation/ Understanding
preparation/;
actual norms
self-liberation
leads to change
(process of
change)

RISK-RELATED BELIEFS AND EMOTIONAL RESPONSES
Belief that one
Belief that one is at
Perceived
—
is at risk if not
risk for negative
susceptibility/
engaging in
outcome or disease
severity
the behavior;
(perceived
consequences
threat)
may be severe
INTENTION/COMMITMENT/PLANNING
Intending or
Forms strong
—
planning to
intentions to
perform the
engage in the
behavior/
behavior/makes a
setting goals
commitment

Behavioral intentions

—

Adapted from Noar SM, Zimmerman RS. Health behavior theory and cumulative knowledge regarding health behaviors: are we moving in the right direction? Health Educ Res. 2005;
20:275-290, Table 1.

Table 19.4  Relationship Between Standard Deviation (SD) and Normal Range for Normally Distributed Quantities
OBSERVATIONS INCLUDED IN THE NORMAL RANGE

PROBABILITY OF A “NORMAL” MEASUREMENT DEVIATING
FROM THE MEAN BY THIS AMOUNT

SD

%

SD

%

±1

68.3

≥1

16.0

±2

95.4

≥2

2.3

±3

99.7

≥3

0.13

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

142 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Growth Chart

95
50
5

Height
(cm)
95
50
5

94.9 102.0
50 95

Positive Parenting and
Support
Rebecca A. Baum and Samantha Schilling

3

Height (cm) 89
Percentile 5

Chapter 20

4
Age (yr)

5

Frequency distribution for 3 yr olds

Fig. 19.4 Relationship between percentile lines on the growth curve
and frequency distributions of height at different ages.

normal (bell-­shaped or gaussian) distribution. This is the case with
anthropometric quantities, such as height and weight, and with
many developmental measures, such as IQ. For a normally distributed measurement, a histogram with the quantity (height, age) on
the x axis and the frequency (the number of children of that height,
or the number who stand on their own at that age) on the y axis generates a bell-­shaped curve. In an ideal bell-­shaped curve, the peak
corresponds to the arithmetic mean (average) of the sample, as
well as to the median and the mode. The median is the value above
and below which 50% of the observations lie; the mode is the value
with the highest number of observations. Distributions are termed
skewed if the mean, median, and mode are not the same number.
The extent to which observed values cluster near the mean determines the width of the bell and can be described mathematically by
the standard deviation (SD). In the ideal normal curve, a range of
values extending from 1 SD below the mean to 1 SD above the mean
includes approximately 68% of the values, and each “tail” above and
below that range contains 16% of the values. A range encompassing ±2 SD includes 95% of the values (with the upper and lower
tails each comprising approximately 2.5% of the values), and ±3 SD
encompasses 99.7% of the values (Table 19.4 and Fig. 19.4).
For any single measurement, its distance away from the mean can
be expressed in terms of the number of SDs (also called a z score);
one can then consult a table of the normal distribution to find out
what percentage of measurements fall within that distance from
the mean. Software to convert anthropometric data into z scores
for epidemiologic purposes is available. A measurement that falls
“outside the normal range” (arbitrarily defined as 2, or sometimes
3, SDs on either side of the mean) is atypical, but not necessarily
indicative of illness. The further a measurement (height, weight,
IQ) falls from the mean, the greater is the probability that it represents not simply normal variation, but rather a different, potentially
pathologic condition.
Another way of relating an individual to a group uses percentiles.
The percentile is the percentage of individuals in the group who have
achieved a certain measured quantity (e.g., height of 95 cm) or a developmental milestone (e.g., walking independently). For anthropometric
data, the percentile cutoffs can be calculated from the mean and SD.
The 5th, 10th, and 25th percentiles correspond to −1.65 SD, −1.3 SD,
and −0.7 SD, respectively. Figure 19.4 demonstrates how frequency distributions of a particular parameter (height) at different ages relate to
the percentile lines on the growth curve.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

No single force may be more important to a child’s development than
the environment in which they are raised. Many factors, both positive and negative, contribute to this environment. Parenting practices
provide a foundation to promote healthy child development, protect
against adverse outcomes, and foster resilience. The term positive parenting describes an approach to parenting that achieves these goals.

THE IMPORTANCE OF PARENTING

Interactions between parents and their children provide stimulation
that promotes the development of language, early cognitive skills, and
school readiness. Less frequent participation in interactive parenting
practices, such as reading aloud to children, eating family meals, and
participating in family outings, predicts an increased risk of developmental delay in low-­income families. Interventions that increase parents’ reading to children promote positive developmental outcomes
such as early language and literacy development.
The affective nature of the parent–child interaction is important for
both cognitive and social emotional development. Persistent maternal
depression has been linked to decreases in child IQ scores at school
entry. Early exposure to positive parenting has been associated with
lower rates of childhood depression, risky behavior, delinquency, injuries, behavior problems, and bullying, and with increased likelihood of
empathy and prosocial behavior. The beneficial effects of early maternal sensitivity on social competence have been found to persist into
adulthood, contributing to the growing evidence that early parent–
child interactions have a long-­term impact.
Positive parenting practices, such as using a warm, supportive
approach during conflict, and negative practices, such as maternal
aggression, have been associated with MRI changes in adolescent
brain development in males. Animal models have been used to demonstrate the detrimental effects of stressful early life experiences.
Offspring raised in these environments were more likely to exhibit
fearful behavior and had differences in brain architecture and in
epigenetic changes that alter gene expression. Importantly in these
animal models, increased maternal nurturing could protect against
these changes.

THE ROLE OF THE FAMILY

Parenting occurs in the context of the family, and yet a “one size fits
all” approach to understanding families does not suffice. To understand
the influence of the family environment on parenting practices, it is
important to appreciate the evolving diversity among U.S. families with
respect to culture, race/ethnicity, and family makeup. The U.S. population continues to become more racially/ethnically diverse (61.1% in
2020 vs 54.9% in 2010). Over the last several decades, the percentage of
children raised in single-­parent homes has continued to grow to nearly
25% in 2020, up from 9% in 1960. It is also important to appreciate that
many families face disparities in health and developmental outcomes
related to racism and other forms of discrimination that may occur
on the basis of religion, sexuality/gender, disability, and socioeconomic
status among other factors. For many children these factors interact
to further increase risk for disparities in outcomes. Children living in
single-­parent homes experience poverty at a higher rate than those living in two-­parent homes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 20 u Positive Parenting and Support

143

Chronic stress and adverse experiences in childhood can have far-­
reaching consequences that negatively affect health and developmental
outcomes (see Chapters 1 and 2). However, parenting—in the form of
safe, stable, and nurturing relationships (SSNRs)—has been suggested
as one of a number of strategies that can promote resilience and buffer
adversity and turn potentially toxic stress responses into tolerable or
positive responses.

respond positively to responsive and sensitive parenting. Moreover,
childhood traits such as low adaptability, impulsivity, and low frustration tolerance may lead some parents to engage in more negative
parenting practices. These findings illustrate the interactive nature
between parent and child, with parental behavior shaping child
behavior, and vice versa.

PARENTING STYLES

Emotional and behavioral problems are common in childhood.
Early behavioral problems impact at least one in five children under
age 5 in the United States and are associated with impairments in
multiple domains, including family, academic, and social functioning, which often continue into adulthood. Emotional and behavioral problems have been associated with single-­parent households
and poverty. Children in underserved populations experience
life circumstances and structural barriers to care that place them
at greater risk of behavior problems and unmet needs. High rates
of socioeconomic disadvantage, inadequate social infrastructure,
neighborhood exposure to violence, repetitive experiences of discrimination, and chronic exposure to racism among minoritized
children can have significant adverse effects on children’s physical
and mental health. Although negative parenting may contribute to
and exacerbate such problems, positive parenting practices have
been shown to buffer against poor outcome for children growing
up in such adversity.
Other risk factors for the development of challenging behavior
include trauma and developmental problems. Adverse childhood
experiences (ACEs), defined as abuse and neglect, caregiver substance use, caregiver mental health problems, and domestic violence
or criminality, are often present during childhood (see Chapter 1).
In the National Survey of Child and Adolescent Well-­B eing there
was a cumulative relationship between emotional and behavioral
problems and ACE exposure, with children exposed to four or more
ACEs being almost five times more likely to have internalizing problems than children not exposed to ACEs. A similar relationship was
found for externalizing problems. Studies involving children with
developmental disabilities suggest emotional and behavioral problems occur more frequently in this group than in typically developing children. These children may have delays in self-­regulation
and communication skills as well as increased family stress, which
contribute to the increased likelihood of behavioral challenges.

Parenting practices are significantly influenced by culture, defined as
a pattern of social norms, values, language, and behavior shared by
a group of individuals. Approaches to self-­regulation, for example,
vary across cultures with respect to promoting attention, compliance, delayed gratification, executive function, and effortful control.
In examining parent practices, it is important to recognize the role of
structural racism and bias on the design and interpretation of parenting research.
Three styles of parenting have been described: authoritative,
authoritarian, and permissive. Each style has varying approaches
to parental control and responsiveness. A fourth style, neglectful parenting, has also been suggested. Authoritative parenting
describes a parenting style that is warm, responsive, and accepting
but that also sets expectations for behavior and achievement. Differences are approached with reasoning and discussion rather than
by exerting control. Authoritarian parenting is characterized by
a high degree of parental control in which obedience is expected.
Punishment is often employed to foster compliance rather than verbal discussion. Permissive parenting refers to an approach characterized by warmth and acceptance with the child’s autonomy being
highly valued, but with few rules or expectations. This contrasts
with neglectful parenting, similarly characterized by few rules or
expectations but also by limited parental warmth or responsiveness.
An authoritative parenting style is most likely to be associated with
positive child outcomes across multiple domains, including educational achievement and social-­emotional competence. Parental supervision, consistency, and open communication reduce risky behaviors
in adolescents. Harsh, inconsistent, and coercive discipline and physical punishment have been associated with increases in emotional and
behavioral problems. Child physical abuse is often preceded by corporal punishment. In addition to a higher rate of aggression and behavioral problems, children who have experienced physical punishment
have been found to have lower IQs and smaller prefrontal cortexes
compared to those who have not. Much of the initial research on parenting styles was based on select U.S. populations (White middle-­class
families).

CHILD TEMPERAMENT

As evidenced by the effects of family structure, culture/ethnicity,
and economics, parenting does not occur in isolation. The child
also brings to the parent–child relationship their own personality,
or temperament, a collection of traits that stay relatively constant
over time (see Chapter 19). The initial temperament research identified nine traits: activity level, predictability of behavior, reaction
to new environments, adaptability, intensity, mood, distractibility,
persistence, and sensitivity. Most infants (65%) fit into one of three
groups, easy (40%), difficult (10%), and slow to warm up (15%), and
these patterns are relatively stable over time. Although variations
in temperament traits are part of normal human variations, certain
behavioral difficulties have been associated with certain temperament types. For example, a difficult temperament has been associated with the development of externalizing behavior (e.g., acting
out, disruptive, and aggressive behavior) and, not surprisingly, a
slow-­to-­warm-­up temperament with internalizing behavior (e.g.,
anxious and moody behavior).
Temperament traits are relatively stable, but how the child functions is affected by the environment, especially by parenting and
the “goodness of fit” between the parent and child. Children with
difficult temperament characteristics respond more negatively
to neglectful parenting, and children of all temperament groups

CHILD BEHAVIORAL PROBLEMS

DEFINING POSITIVE PARENTING

The precise definition of the components of positive parenting is
lacking. Positive parenting must ensure the child’s safety, health,
and nutrition as well as developmental promotion. Common attributes of positive parenting include caring, leading, providing,
teaching, and communicating with the child in a consistent and
unconditional manner. To account for the long-­term goals of successful parenting in promoting optimal emotional, behavioral, and
developmental outcomes, some suggest the term purposeful parenting and related characteristics (Table 20.1). The characterization
of an ideal approach to parenting will evolve with ever-­changing
societal norms, but key components such as those in Table 20.1 will
likely remain fundamental.

PARENTING AS AN INTERVENTION

The influence of parenting practices on child behavior, development,
and overall adjustment has led to efforts to teach parenting as a method
of primary prevention. The Video Interaction Project (VIP) uses a
coaching and education model with recorded parent–child interactions to foster positive parenting behavior. These parenting behaviors
range from reading aloud to encouraging interactive play. In an urban,
low-­income, primary care setting, parent and child outcomes for the
VIP group were compared to those from a lower-­intensity intervention
(parent mailings encouraging positive parenting behaviors) and a control group. VIP produced the most robust impacts on socioemotional
outcomes, including decreased distress with separation, hyperactivity,
and externalizing behavior in toddlers.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

144 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 20.1  	

Components of Purposeful Parenting

Table 20.2

Parent Training Program Components

ATTRIBUTE

DEFINING ACTIONS

COMPONENT

ACTIVITIES

Protective

Ensure the child’s emotional, developmental, and
physiologic needs are met.
Provide a safe environment.
Balance the need for safety with the child’s need for
exploration and independence.

Knowledge about
child development
and behavior

Providing developmentally appropriate
environment
Learning about child development
Promoting positive emotional development

Personal

Show unconditional love and acceptance.
Be kind and gentle.
Avoid name-­calling and harsh language.
Label emotions and behaviors to help children
­understand their feelings.
Teach and model helpful behavior rather than just
saying “no.”

Positive parent–child
interactions

Learning the importance of positive,
non–discipline-­focused interactions
Using skills that promote positive interactions
Providing frequent positive attention

Responsiveness and
warmth

Responding sensitively to the child’s
­emotional needs
Providing appropriate physical contact and
affection

Emotional
communication

Using active listening to foster communication
Helping children identify and express emotion

Disciplinary
communication

Setting clear, appropriate, and consistent
expectations
Establishing limits and rules
Choosing and following through with
­appropriate consequences

Discipline and
behavior
management

Understanding child misbehavior
Understanding appropriate discipline
strategies
Using safe and appropriate monitoring and
supervision practices
Using reinforcement techniques
Using problem solving for challenging
behavior
Being consistent

Progressive

Positive

Adapt parenting skills and discipline to meet the
child’s developmental needs.
Learn about child development to know what to
expect.
Notice and praise new skills and desirable behaviors.
Be warm, supportive, and optimistic, even during
times of misbehavior.
Avoid harsh or physical punishments.
Provide encouragement and reward effort, not just a
positive result.

Playful

Enjoy child-­led time together to encourage
­exploration, foster creativity, and learn new skills.
Read together.

Purposeful

Take care of your needs as a parent.
Keep the long-­term goals of parenting in mind.
Preferentially use teaching instead of punishment to
encourage desirable behavior.
Be consistent with routines and expectations.
Try to understand the reason behind the child’s
behavior.

Promoting children’s
social skills and
prosocial behavior

Teaching children to share, cooperate, and
get along with others
Using good manners

Adapted from the work of Andrew Garner and the Ohio Chapter, American Academy
of Pediatrics. http://ohioaap.org/wp-­content/uploads/2013/07/BPoM_PurposefulPare
nting.pdf.

Promoting children’s
cognitive or
academic skills

Fostering language and literacy development
Promoting school readiness

Adapted from U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Parent training
­programs: insight for practitioners, Atlanta, CDC;2009.

Positive parenting as a public health intervention has resulted in
decreased rates of substantiated child maltreatment cases, out-­of-­
home placements, and child maltreatment injuries. Other effective
public health approaches include home-­visiting programs, which
have been deployed to at-­risk families in an effort to improve maternal and child outcomes. The Maternal, Infant and Early Childhood
Home Visiting Program, authorized as part of the Affordable Care
Act of 2010 and again in 2015, is part of the Medicare Access and
Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) Reauthorization Act.
A key component of home-­visiting programs is the promotion of
positive parenting behavior to foster child developmental and
school readiness. Group parenting programs have been deployed
as primary prevention to promote emotional and behavioral adjustment in young children. There is moderate-­quality evidence that
group-­based parenting programs may improve parent–child interactions. These programs typically employ praise, encouragement,
and affection and have been associated with improved self-­esteem
and social and academic competence.
Parenting behaviors have also been employed as an intervention
to treat emotional and behavioral problems in young children. Parenting interventions such as Incredible Years, Triple P Positive Parenting Program, New Forrest Parenting Program, and Child Adult
Relationship Enhancement in Primary Care are effective for at
least short-­term improvements in child conduct problems, parental
mental health, and parenting practices. Also called parent training
programs, most teach the importance of play, rewards, praise, and
consistent discipline and allow parents to practice new skills. This
active-­learning component distinguishes parent training programs

from educational programs, which have been shown to be less
effective.
Teaching emotional communication skills and positive parent–
child interaction skills are associated with parent training programs
that demonstrate a greater increase in parenting skills (Table 20.2).
Several components are associated with programs that show greater
improvements in child externalizing behavior including teaching
parents to interact positively and respond consistently to their children as well as to use time-­out correctly. All successful programs
require parents to practice parenting skills during the program.
Parents have been found to benefit from participation in parenting
programs. Before their participation, parents experienced a loss of control, self-­blame, social isolation, and difficulty dealing with their child’s
emotional and behavioral problems, all of which improved after participation. The few studies that have assessed the long-­term efficacy of
parent-­training programs suggest overall positive child outcomes but
also periods of relapse during which the use of positive parenting skills
decreased. Use of social supports is associated with positive child outcomes and may be an important program component when considering long-­term success.

THE ROLE OF THE PEDIATRICIAN

Pediatricians and other pediatric practitioners have a primary responsibility to support the needs of parents and their children. Numerous
programs and interventions have been developed to be delivered effectively and efficiently in the primary care setting.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 20 u Positive Parenting and Support
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) publishes Bright Futures
and the associated Guidelines for Preventive Care to standardize
child health promotion and prevention in primary care. A substantial
amount of the content in Bright Futures maps to the positive-­parenting
domains of safety, feeding, developmental promotion, and protection.
Implementing Bright Futures guidelines in health supervision visits is
an important way for pediatric practitioners to support the promotion
of positive parenting in practice. The AAP’s policy statement titled Preventing Childhood Toxic Stress: Partnering with Families and Communities to Promote Relational Health describes the importance of
the parent–child relationship in building the foundation for healthy
child development as well as buffering the effects of more significant
stressors.
Reading aloud to children is a powerful strategy to promote
language development, early literacy, and positive parent–child
interaction. The Reach Out and Read program is a primary care–
based intervention that trains practitioners to encourage parents to
read with their child and provides books to at-­risk families. In the
absence of a formal partnership with Reach Out and Read, practitioners should promote the benefits of reading aloud to children
and support parents in their efforts to develop habits that incorporate reading into daily routines.
In addition to VIP described earlier, other primary care models to promote parenting have been studied. The Healthy Steps for
Young Children program is a strengths-­based approach delivered
in the primary care setting from infancy to age 3 years. Healthy
Steps promotes changes in parents’ knowledge, beliefs, and psychologic health and changes in parenting behaviors using a variety
of methods delivered in the office setting by the practitioner and
Healthy Steps specialists and through home visits. Extensive evaluations have shown improvements in parental well-­being, parenting
practices, and parent–child attachment and decreased child behavior problems. Another promising approach uses community health
workers and nurses to provide parenting education and allow mothers to practice parenting skills outside the office setting.
If participation in a formal parenting program is not possible, pediatric practitioners can still implement a systematic approach to support the needs of parents and their children. Practitioners can take
advantage of materials in the public domain from national organizations devoted to child and family health, such as ZERO TO THREE
(https://www.zerotothree.org/) and AAP (https://www.aap.org/). The
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) also provides
evidenced-­
based parenting resources (https://www.cdc.gov/parents/
essentials/index.html). Additional components include early identification of parents’ concerns, addressing concerns in a supportive and
nonjudgmental way, and providing linkage to treatment services when
appropriate.
Parents want more information about child development, but
parents of children with behavior problems often feel stigmatized
and isolated. Practitioners are encouraged to be supportive and
optimistic in their interactions with families and to develop a partnership aimed at promoting parent and child health (see Chapter
18). Practitioners may also encourage parents to practice new skills
briefly in the office setting before trying a new skill at home. Active
modeling by the practitioner using “teachable moments” may also
be effective.

DISCIPLINE/PUNISHMENT

Discipline is meant to teach children to learn good behavior and
thus enhance child development. There are many positive parenting
approaches to discipline that help avoid confrontations and to also
correct behavior without conflict or physical punishment (Tables
20.3 and 20.4) (see Chapters 25 and 26). In addition, parents should
teach by example; rather than prompting a child to say thank you,

Table 20.3

145

UNICEF Approach to Positive Discipline

• Create one-­on-­one times for engagement
• Praise good behavior
• Set clear and realistic expectations
• Distract to a more positive activity
• Calm (not shouting) realistic consequences (if/then)
Data from United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). How to discipline your child the
smart and healthy way. https://www.unicef.org/parenting/child-­care/how-­discipline-­
your-­child-­smart-­and-­healthy-­way.

Table 20.4

CDC Time-­Out Steps

1. Identify behavior and give warning
2. Explain why time-­out
3. Go to time-­out space
• No talking
• No playing
• No lecturing
• No scolding
• No excuses from child
• Ignore protesting or promise to be good
• Time for both parent and child to calm down
4. End time-­out
5. Explain why there was a time-­out
6. Praise next positive behavior
Time-­out duration rule is ∼1 minute per child age in years
Adapted from U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Using discipline
and consequences. https://www.cdc.gov/parents/essentials/consequences/index.html.
Accessed 14 March 2022.

the parents saying thank you is a behavior that an imitating child
will follow. Furthermore, when possible, give the child a choice
between positive activities, thus enhancing autonomy and preventing conflict. In verbal children, it is helpful to engage the child in
problem solving by asking “how can we make this better?”
Corporal (physical) punishment is viewed as a violation of the
child’s right of protection by the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Children. It is viewed by the CDC as a form of child abuse.
Corporal punishment is the use of force to produce harm, pain, or
discomfort in a dependent child for the purpose of correcting behavior or showing disapproval. It may be manifest by hitting, striking,
smacking, slapping, whupping, pinching, kicking, shaking, burning/
scalding, pulling hair, washing the mouth with soap or other harmful
substances, forcing the child to assume a painful or prolonged posture/position, or using an object to inflict harm. Parents who use corporal punishment may have experienced this punishment as a child.
Use of corporal punishment is also associated with adults who misuse
drugs, are depressed, or experience intimate partner violence.
The consequences of corporal punishment to the child include worsening behavioral problems including aggression and adverse effects on
cognitive development and mental health (anxiety, depression). In
addition, corporal punishment does not correct the behavior. Furthermore, there may be a dose-­response relationship between the frequency
of corporal punishment and adverse child behaviors and development.
For age-­related approaches to discipline see Chapters 24, 25, and 26.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

146 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

Chapter 21

Assessment of Fetal
Growth and Development
Alexander S. Whitaker and Susan Feigelman
The developing fetus is affected by social and environmental influences, including maternal nutritional status, substance use (both legal
and illicit), and psychologic trauma. Correspondingly, the psychologic
alterations experienced by the parents during the gestation profoundly
impact the lives of all members of the family. The complex interplay
among these forces and the somatic and neurologic transformations
occurring in the fetus influence growth and behavior at birth, through
infancy, and potentially throughout the individual’s life.

SOMATIC DEVELOPMENT
Embryonic Period

Table 21.1 lists milestones of prenatal development. By 6 days postconception age, as implantation begins, the embryo consists of a
spherical mass of cells with a central cavity (the blastocyst). By 2 weeks,
implantation is complete and the uteroplacental circulation has begun;
the embryo has two distinct layers, endoderm and ectoderm, and the
amnion has started to form. By 3 weeks, the third primary germ layer
(mesoderm) has appeared, along with a primitive neural tube and blood
vessels. Paired heart tubes have begun to pump.
During weeks 4-­8, lateral folding of the embryologic plate, followed
by growth at the cranial and caudal ends and the budding of arms and
legs, produces a human-­like shape. Precursors of skeletal muscle and
vertebrae (somites) appear, along with the branchial arches that will
form the mandible, maxilla, palate, external ear, and other head and
neck structures. Lens placodes appear, marking the site of future eyes;
the brain grows rapidly. By the end of week 8, as the embryonic period
closes, the rudiments of all major organ systems have developed; the
crown-­rump length is 3 cm.

Fetal Period

From the ninth week on (fetal period), somatic changes consist of
rapid body growth as well as differentiation of tissues, organs, and
organ systems. Figure 21.1 depicts changes in body proportion. By
week 10, the face is recognizably human. The midgut returns to the
abdomen from the umbilical cord, rotating counterclockwise to bring
the stomach, small intestine, and large intestine into their normal
positions. By week 12, the gender of the external genitals becomes
clearly distinguishable. Lung development proceeds, with the budding of bronchi, bronchioles, and successively smaller divisions. By
weeks 20-­24, primitive alveoli have formed and surfactant production has begun; before that time, the absence of alveoli renders the
lungs useless as organs of gas exchange.
During the third trimester, weight triples and length doubles as body
stores of protein, fat, iron, and calcium increase.

NEUROLOGIC DEVELOPMENT

During the third week, a neural plate appears on the ectodermal
surface of the trilaminar embryo. Infolding produces a neural tube
that will become the central nervous system and a neural crest that
will become the peripheral nervous system. Neuroectodermal cells
differentiate into neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and ependymal cells, whereas microglial cells are derived from mesoderm.
By the fifth week, the three main subdivisions of forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain are evident. The dorsal and ventral horns of
the spinal cord have begun to form, along with the peripheral motor
and sensory nerves. Myelination begins at midgestation and continues for years.

By the end of the embryonic period (week 8), the gross structure of
the nervous system has been established. On a cellular level, neurons
migrate outward to form the six cortical layers. Migration is complete
by the sixth month, but differentiation continues. Axons and dendrites
form synaptic connections at a rapid pace, making the central nervous
system vulnerable to teratogenic or hypoxic influences throughout gestation. Figure 21.2 shows rates of increase in DNA (a marker of cell
number), overall brain weight, and cholesterol (a marker of myelinization). Epigenetic modifications are made in the presence of fetal
gonadal steroids, directing masculinization of the male brain. The
prenatal and postnatal peaks of DNA probably represent rapid growth
of neurons and glia, respectively. The glial cells are important in shaping the brain and neuronal circuits. The various types of glial cells are
needed for the formation of axonal myelin sheaths, a range of functions
in the formation and maintenance of neural pathways, and removal of
waste (the brain has no lymphoid system for this task).
By the time of birth, the structure of the brain is complete. However,
many cells will undergo apoptosis (cell death). Synapses will be pruned
back substantially, and new connections will be made, largely as a
result of experience. Many psychiatric and developmental disorders
are thought to result at least in part from disruptions in the functional
connectivity of brain networks. Disorders of connectivity may begin
during fetal life; MRI studies provide a developmental timetable for
such connections that lend support to the possible role of disruptions
in the establishment of such connections.

BEHAVIORAL DEVELOPMENT

No behavioral evidence of neural function is detectable until the third
month. Reflexive responses to tactile stimulation develop in a craniocaudal sequence. By weeks 13-­14, breathing and swallowing motions
appear. The grasp reflex appears at 17 weeks and is well developed by 27
weeks. Eye opening occurs around 26-­28 weeks. By midgestation, the
full range of neonatal movements can be observed.
During the third trimester, fetuses respond to external stimuli with
heart rate elevation and body movements, which can be observed with
ultrasound (see Chapter 117). Reactivity to auditory (vibroacoustic)
and visual (bright light) stimuli vary, depending on their behavioral
state, which can be characterized as quiet sleep, active sleep, or awake.
Individual differences in the level of fetal activity are usually noted by
mothers. Fetuses will preferentially turn to light patterns in the configuration of the human face. Fetal movement is affected by maternal
medications and diet, increasing after ingestion of caffeine. Behavior
may be entrained to the mother’s diurnal rhythms: asleep during the
day, active at night. Abnormal fetal movement patterns are found in
neonates with subsequent muscular or neurologic abnormalities.
Fetal movement increases in response to a sudden auditory tone
but decreases after several repetitions. This demonstrates habituation, a basic form of learning in which repeated stimulation results
in a response decrement. If the tone changes in pitch, the movement
increases again, which is evidence that the fetus distinguishes between
a familiar, repeated tone and a novel tone. Habituation improves in
older fetuses and decreases in neurologically impaired or physically
stressed fetuses. Similar responses to visual and tactile stimuli have
been observed.

PSYCHOLOGIC CHANGES IN PARENTS

Many psychologic changes occur during pregnancy. An unplanned
pregnancy may be met with anger, denial, or depression. Ambivalent
feelings are common, whether or not the pregnancy was planned. Elation at the thought of producing a baby and the wish to be the perfect
parent compete with fears of inadequacy and of the lifestyle changes
that parenting will impose. Parents of an existing child may feel protective of the child, worried that the child may feel less valued. Old conflicts may resurface as a woman psychologically identifies with her own
mother and with herself as a child. The father-­to-­be faces similar mixed
feelings, and problems in the parental relationship may intensify.
Tangible evidence that a fetus exists as a separate being, whether
as a result of ultrasonic visualization or awareness of fetal movements known as quickening (at 16-­20 weeks), often heightens a

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 21 u Assessment of Fetal Growth and Development
woman’s feelings. Parents worry about the fetus’s healthy development and mentally rehearse what they will do if the child is
malformed, including their response to evidence of abnormality
through ultrasound, amniocentesis, or other fetal laboratory tests.
Toward the end of pregnancy, a woman becomes aware of patterns
of fetal activity and reactivity and begins to ascribe to her fetus
an individual personality and an ability to survive independently.
Appreciation of the psychologic vulnerability of the expectant parents and of the powerful contribution of fetal behavior facilitates
supportive clinical intervention.

Table 21.1  Milestones of Prenatal Development
WK

DEVELOPMENTAL EVENTS

1

Fertilization and implantation; beginning of embryonic
period

2

Endoderm and ectoderm appear (bilaminar embryo)

3

First missed menstrual period; mesoderm appears (trilaminar
embryo); somites begin to form

4

Neural folds fuse; folding of embryo into human-­like shape;
arm and leg buds appear; crown-­rump length 4-­5 mm

5

Lens placodes, primitive mouth, digital rays on hands

6

Primitive nose, philtrum, primary palate

7

Eyelids begin; crown-­rump length 2 cm

8

Ovaries and testes distinguishable

9

Fetal period begins; crown-­rump length 5 cm; weight 8 g

12

External genitals distinguishable

20

Usual lower limit of viability; weight 460 g; length 19 cm

25

Third trimester begins; weight 900 g; length 24 cm

28

Eyes open; fetus turns head down; weight 1,000-­1,300 g

38

Term

147

THREATS TO FETAL DEVELOPMENT

Mortality and morbidity are highest during the prenatal period (see
Chapter 114). An estimated 50% of all pregnancies end in spontaneous
abortion, including 10–15% of all clinically recognized pregnancies.
The majority occur in the first trimester. Many spontaneous abortions occur as a result of chromosomal abnormalities, most commonly
aneuploidies.
Teratogens associated with gross physical and mental abnormalities
include various infectious agents (e.g., toxoplasmosis, rubella, syphilis,
Zika virus), chemical agents (e.g., mercury, thalidomide, antiepileptic
medications, retinoids, ethanol), high temperature, and radiation (see
Chapters 117 and 758).
Teratogenic effects may also result in decreased growth and cognitive or behavioral deficits that only become apparent later in life.
Nicotine has vasoconstrictor properties and may disrupt dopaminergic and serotonergic pathways. Prenatal exposure to cigarette smoke
is associated with lower birthweight, stunting, and smaller head circumference. It is also associated with changes in neonatal neurodevelopmental assessments; later, these children are at increased risk for
learning problems, attention and behavior disorders, and other long-­
term health effects. Alcohol is a common teratogen affecting physical development, cognition, and behavior (see Chapter 146). Prenatal
exposure to opiates can result in neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS)
characterized by irritability, poor feeding, tremors and temperature
instability in newborn infants. Affected infants may require treatment
with low-­dose opiates to abate the symptoms. School-­age children with
a history of NAS are significantly more likely to have educational disabilities, even when controlling for external factors such as maternal
educational attainment and gestational age.
The effects of prenatal exposure to cocaine, also occurring through
alternations in placental blood flow and in direct toxic effects to the
developing brain, have been followed in several cohorts and are less
dramatic than previously believed. Exposed adolescents show small
but significant effects in behavior and functioning but may not show
cognitive impairment. Associated risk factors including alcohol and
tobacco use, and postnatal environments frequently characterized by
toxic stress, may explain some of the observed negative developmental
outcomes. (see Chapters 1, 15, and 17).
The association between an inadequate nutrient supply to the fetus
and low birthweight has been recognized for decades; this adaptation

Fig. 21.1 Changes in body proportions. Approximate changes in body proportions from fetal life through adulthood. (From Leifer G. Introduction
to Maternity & Pediatric Nursing. Philadelphia: WB Saunders;2011: pp 347–385, Fig. 15-­2.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Increments percent adult/five weeks

148 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
10

Chapter 22

7.5

The Newborn
Elisa Hampton and John M. Olsson

5

2.5

0
0

20

40

Weeks

Birth

6

12

18

24

Months

Fig. 21.2 Velocity curves of the various components of human brain

growth. Blue line, DNA; red line, brain weight; green line, cholesterol.
From Brasel JA, Gruen RK. In Falkner F, Tanner JM, eds: Human Growth:
a comprehensive treatise. New York: Plenum Press; 1986: pp 78–95.

on the part of the fetus presumably increases the likelihood that the
fetus will survive until birth. For any potential fetal insult, the extent
and nature of its effects are determined by characteristics of the host
as well as the dose and timing of the exposure. Inherited differences in
the metabolism of ethanol, timing of exposure, and the mother’s diet
may explain the variability in fetal alcohol effects. Organ systems are
most vulnerable during periods of maximum growth and differentiation, generally during the first trimester (organogenesis) (http://www
.epa.gov/children/children-­are-­not-­little-­adults details critical periods
and specific developmental abnormalities).
Fetal adaptations or responses to an adverse situation in utero,
termed fetal programming or developmental plasticity, have lifelong implications. Fetal programming may prepare the fetus for
an environment that matches that experienced in utero. Fetal programming in response to some environmental and nutritional signals in utero increases the risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes,
and obesity in later life. These adverse long-­term effects appear to
represent a mismatch between environmental conditions faced by a
fetus or neonate and the conditions that the individual will confront
later in life. A fetus deprived of adequate calories may or may not
face famine as a child or adolescent. One proposed mechanism for
fetal programming is epigenetic imprinting, in which one of two
alleles is turned off through environmentally induced epigenetic
modification (see Chapter 97). Many environmental factors have
been found to play a role in producing epigenetic modifications that
are both transgenerational (direct effect on the developing fetus)
and intergenerational (changes in the germ cells that will affect
future generations).
Just as the fetal adaptations to the in utero environment may increase
the likelihood of later metabolic conditions, the fetus adapts to the
mother’s psychologic distress. In response to the stressful environment,
physiologic changes involving the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­adrenal axis
and the autonomic nervous system occur. Dysregulation of these systems may explain the associations observed in some but not all studies
between maternal distress and negative infant outcomes. These negative outcomes include low birthweight, spontaneous abortion, prematurity, and decreased head circumference. In addition, children born
to mothers experiencing high stress levels have been found to have
higher rates of inattention, impulsivity, conduct disorders, and negative cognitive changes. Although these changes may have been adaptive
in primitive cultures, they are maladaptive in modern societies, leading
to psychopathology. Genetic variability, timing of stress during sensitive periods, and the quality of postnatal parenting can attenuate or
exacerbate these associations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

See also Chapter 115.
Regardless of gestational age, the newborn (neonatal) period
begins at birth and includes the first month of life. During this time,
marked physiologic transitions occur in all organ systems, and the
infant learns to respond to many forms of external stimuli. Because
infants thrive physically and psychologically only in the context of
their social relationships, any description of the newborn’s developmental status has to include consideration of the parents’ role as
well.

PARENTAL ROLE IN PARENT–INFANT ATTACHMENT

Parenting a newborn infant requires dedication because a newborn’s
needs are urgent, continuous, and often unclear. Parents must attend
to an infant’s signals and respond empathically. Many factors influence
parents’ ability to assume this role.

Prenatal Factors

Pregnancy is a period of psychologic preparation for the profound
demands of parenting. Expectant parents may experience ambivalence, particularly (but not exclusively) if the pregnancy was
unplanned. Financial concerns, physical illness, prior miscarriages
or stillbirths, or other crises may interfere with future bonding.
For adolescent parents, the demand that they relinquish their own
developmental agenda, such as an active social life, may be especially burdensome.
The transition to parenthood is a unique developmental phase,
and a stressful one. Lifetime experiences of parents, particularly
traumatic ones, may affect their approaches to developing a nurturing relationship with their infant (Table 22.1). It has been shown
that an increasing number of adverse childhood experiences
(ACEs) may be associated with increased parental stress, a more
authoritarian style of parenting, increased risk for child abuse, and
greater insecurity in parent–child attachment (bonding). Identifying parental ACEs and addressing them with community resources,
including parenting classes, parent aides, and parent support groups
may help provide parents with the resilience to mitigate the effects
of ACEs.

Table 22.1  Prenatal Risk Factors for Attachment
Recent death of a loved one
Previous loss of or serious illness in another child
Prior removal of a child
History of depression or serious mental illness
History of infertility or pregnancy loss
Troubled relationship with parents
Financial stress or job loss
Marital discord or poor relationship with the other parent
Recent move or no community ties
No friends or social network
Unwanted pregnancy
No good parenting model
Experience of poor parenting
Drug and/or alcohol use
Extreme immaturity
From Dixon SD, Stein MT. Encounters With Children: Pediatric Behavior and
Development. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006. p 131.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Increments percent adult/five weeks

148 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
10

Chapter 22

7.5

The Newborn
Elisa Hampton and John M. Olsson

5

2.5

0
0

20

40

Weeks

Birth

6

12

18

24

Months

Fig. 21.2 Velocity curves of the various components of human brain

growth. Blue line, DNA; red line, brain weight; green line, cholesterol.
From Brasel JA, Gruen RK. In Falkner F, Tanner JM, eds: Human Growth:
a comprehensive treatise. New York: Plenum Press; 1986: pp 78–95.

on the part of the fetus presumably increases the likelihood that the
fetus will survive until birth. For any potential fetal insult, the extent
and nature of its effects are determined by characteristics of the host
as well as the dose and timing of the exposure. Inherited differences in
the metabolism of ethanol, timing of exposure, and the mother’s diet
may explain the variability in fetal alcohol effects. Organ systems are
most vulnerable during periods of maximum growth and differentiation, generally during the first trimester (organogenesis) (http://www
.epa.gov/children/children-­are-­not-­little-­adults details critical periods
and specific developmental abnormalities).
Fetal adaptations or responses to an adverse situation in utero,
termed fetal programming or developmental plasticity, have lifelong implications. Fetal programming may prepare the fetus for
an environment that matches that experienced in utero. Fetal programming in response to some environmental and nutritional signals in utero increases the risk of cardiovascular disease, diabetes,
and obesity in later life. These adverse long-­term effects appear to
represent a mismatch between environmental conditions faced by a
fetus or neonate and the conditions that the individual will confront
later in life. A fetus deprived of adequate calories may or may not
face famine as a child or adolescent. One proposed mechanism for
fetal programming is epigenetic imprinting, in which one of two
alleles is turned off through environmentally induced epigenetic
modification (see Chapter 97). Many environmental factors have
been found to play a role in producing epigenetic modifications that
are both transgenerational (direct effect on the developing fetus)
and intergenerational (changes in the germ cells that will affect
future generations).
Just as the fetal adaptations to the in utero environment may increase
the likelihood of later metabolic conditions, the fetus adapts to the
mother’s psychologic distress. In response to the stressful environment,
physiologic changes involving the hypothalamic-­pituitary-­adrenal axis
and the autonomic nervous system occur. Dysregulation of these systems may explain the associations observed in some but not all studies
between maternal distress and negative infant outcomes. These negative outcomes include low birthweight, spontaneous abortion, prematurity, and decreased head circumference. In addition, children born
to mothers experiencing high stress levels have been found to have
higher rates of inattention, impulsivity, conduct disorders, and negative cognitive changes. Although these changes may have been adaptive
in primitive cultures, they are maladaptive in modern societies, leading
to psychopathology. Genetic variability, timing of stress during sensitive periods, and the quality of postnatal parenting can attenuate or
exacerbate these associations.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

See also Chapter 115.
Regardless of gestational age, the newborn (neonatal) period
begins at birth and includes the first month of life. During this time,
marked physiologic transitions occur in all organ systems, and the
infant learns to respond to many forms of external stimuli. Because
infants thrive physically and psychologically only in the context of
their social relationships, any description of the newborn’s developmental status has to include consideration of the parents’ role as
well.

PARENTAL ROLE IN PARENT–INFANT ATTACHMENT

Parenting a newborn infant requires dedication because a newborn’s
needs are urgent, continuous, and often unclear. Parents must attend
to an infant’s signals and respond empathically. Many factors influence
parents’ ability to assume this role.

Prenatal Factors

Pregnancy is a period of psychologic preparation for the profound
demands of parenting. Expectant parents may experience ambivalence, particularly (but not exclusively) if the pregnancy was
unplanned. Financial concerns, physical illness, prior miscarriages
or stillbirths, or other crises may interfere with future bonding.
For adolescent parents, the demand that they relinquish their own
developmental agenda, such as an active social life, may be especially burdensome.
The transition to parenthood is a unique developmental phase,
and a stressful one. Lifetime experiences of parents, particularly
traumatic ones, may affect their approaches to developing a nurturing relationship with their infant (Table 22.1). It has been shown
that an increasing number of adverse childhood experiences
(ACEs) may be associated with increased parental stress, a more
authoritarian style of parenting, increased risk for child abuse, and
greater insecurity in parent–child attachment (bonding). Identifying parental ACEs and addressing them with community resources,
including parenting classes, parent aides, and parent support groups
may help provide parents with the resilience to mitigate the effects
of ACEs.

Table 22.1  Prenatal Risk Factors for Attachment
Recent death of a loved one
Previous loss of or serious illness in another child
Prior removal of a child
History of depression or serious mental illness
History of infertility or pregnancy loss
Troubled relationship with parents
Financial stress or job loss
Marital discord or poor relationship with the other parent
Recent move or no community ties
No friends or social network
Unwanted pregnancy
No good parenting model
Experience of poor parenting
Drug and/or alcohol use
Extreme immaturity
From Dixon SD, Stein MT. Encounters With Children: Pediatric Behavior and
Development. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2006. p 131.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 22 u The Newborn
Social support during pregnancy, particularly support from the
partner and close family members, is also important. Family support
can promote resilience in the face of ACEs as described earlier.
Many decisions have to be made by parents in anticipation of the
birth of their child. One important choice is how the infant will be
nourished. Among the important benefits of breastfeeding is its promotion of bonding. Providing breastfeeding education for the parents
during prenatal pediatric or obstetric care can increase maternal confidence in breastfeeding after delivery, reduce stress during the newborn
period, and promote increased breastfeeding rates and duration (see
Chapter 61).

Peripartum and Postpartum Influences

The continuous presence of a support person during labor results
in shorter labor and fewer obstetric complications (including cesarean section). These beneficial effects may be even more pronounced
when the support person is specially trained and present solely for
the purpose of continuous support (a doula). Early skin-­to-­skin
contact between mothers and infants immediately after birth is associated with an increased rate and longer duration of breastfeeding.
Most new parents value even a brief period of uninterrupted time in
which to get to know their new infant, and increased mother–infant
contact over the first days of life may improve long-­term mother–
child interactions. Nonetheless, early separation, although predictably very stressful, does not inevitably impair a mother’s ability to
bond with her infant.
Postpartum mood and anxiety disorder (PMAD) may occur in
the first week or up to 6 months after delivery and can adversely
affect neonatal growth and development. Screening tools, such as
the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS), are available
for use during neonatal and infant visits to the pediatric provider.
Screening mothers for PMAD is recommended at the 1, 2, 4, and 6
month well child visit. PMAD is also seen in partners of postpartum
women, but peaks later at 3-­6 months. Pediatric providers should
consider screening partners at the 6 month well child visit using the
EPDS. A score of 10 or higher, or a positive response to question 10
(suicidal thoughts), in either postpartum women or their partners
warrants referral for evaluation (Table 22.2).

THE INFANT’S ROLE IN PARENT–INFANT
ATTACHMENT

The in utero environment contributes greatly but not completely to
the future growth and development of the fetus. Abnormalities in
maternal-­fetal placental circulation and maternal glucose metabolism or the presence of maternal infection can result in abnormal
fetal growth. Infants may be small or large for gestational age as
a result. These abnormal growth patterns not only predispose
infants to an increased requirement for medical intervention, but
they also may affect their ability to respond behaviorally to their
parents.

Physical Examination

Examination of the newborn should include an evaluation of
growth (see Chapter 21) and an observation of behavior. The average term newborn weighs approximately 3.4 kg (7.5 lb); boys are
slightly heavier than girls. The average length and head circumference are about 50 cm (20 in) and 35 cm (14 in), respectively, in term
infants. Each newborn’s growth parameters should be plotted on
growth curves specific for that infant’s gestational age to determine
the appropriateness of size. Specific growth charts for conditions
associated with variations in growth patterns have also been developed. It is important to note that in the United States, significant
disparities exist in low birthweight (<2,500 g) rates with higher
rates in low socioeconomic status (SES) groups and in minoritized
populations.
The infant’s response to being examined may be useful in assessing its vigor, alertness, and tone. Observing how the parents handle

149

their infant, their comfort, and affection is also important. The
order of the physical examination should be from the least to the
most intrusive maneuvers. Assessing visual tracking and response
to sound and noting changes of tone with level of activity and alertness are very helpful. Performing this examination and sharing
impressions with parents is an important opportunity to facilitate
bonding (see Chapter 115).

Interactional Abilities

Soon after birth, neonates are alert and ready to interact and nurse.
This first alert-­awake period may be affected by maternal analgesics
and anesthetics or fetal hypoxia. Neonates are nearsighted, having
a fixed focal length of 8-­12 inches, approximately the distance from
the breast to the mother’s face, as well as an inborn visual preference for faces. Hearing is well developed, and infants preferentially
turn toward a female voice. These innate abilities and predilections
increase the likelihood that when a mother gazes at her newborn, the
baby will gaze back. The initial period of social interaction, usually
lasting about 40 minutes, is followed by a period of somnolence. After
that, briefer periods of alertness or excitation alternate with sleep.
If a mother misses her baby’s first alert-­awake period, she may not
experience as long a period of social interaction for several days. The
hypothalamic-­midbrain-­limbic-­paralimbic-­cortical circuits of the
parent’s brain together support responses to the infant that are critical
for effective parenting (e.g., emotion, attention, motivation, empathy,
decision-­making).

Modulation of Arousal

Adaptation to extrauterine life requires rapid and profound physiologic changes, including aeration of the lungs, rerouting of the
circulation, and activation of the intestinal tract. The necessary
behavioral changes are no less profound. To obtain nourishment, to
avoid hypo-­and hyperthermia, and to ensure safety, neonates must
react appropriately to an expanded range of sensory stimuli. Infants
must become aroused in response to stimulation, but not so overaroused that their behavior becomes disorganized. Underaroused
infants are not able to feed and interact; overaroused infants show
signs of autonomic instability, including flushing or mottling, perioral pallor, hiccupping, vomiting, uncontrolled limb movements, and
inconsolable crying.

Behavioral States

The organization of infant behavior into discrete behavioral states
may reflect an infant’s inborn ability to regulate arousal. Six states
have been described: quiet sleep, active sleep, drowsy, alert, fussy,
and crying. In the alert state, infants visually fixate on objects or
faces and follow them horizontally and (within a month) vertically;
they also reliably turn toward a novel sound, as if searching for its
source. When overstimulated, they may calm themselves by looking
away, yawning, or sucking on their lips or hands, thereby increasing parasympathetic activity and reducing sympathetic nervous
system activity. The behavioral state determines an infant’s muscle
tone, spontaneous movement, electroencephalogram pattern, and
response to stimuli. In active sleep, an infant may show progressively less reaction to a repeated heelstick (habituation), whereas in
the drowsy state, the same stimulus may push a child into fussing
or crying.

Mutual Regulation

Parents actively participate in an infant’s state regulation, alternately
stimulating and soothing. In turn, they are regulated by the infant’s
signals, responding to cries of hunger with a letdown of milk (or
with a bottle). Such interactions constitute a system directed toward
furthering the infant’s physiologic homeostasis and physical growth.
At the same time, they form the basis for the emerging psychologic
relationship between parent and child. Infants come to associate the
presence of the parent with the pleasurable reduction of tension (as

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 22.2  Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USERS
1.	The mother is asked to underline the response that comes closest to how she has been feeling in the previous 7 days.
2.	All 10 items must be completed.
3.	Care should be taken to avoid the possibility of the mother discussing her answers with others.
4.	The mother should complete the scale herself, unless she has limited English or has difficulty with reading.
5.	The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale may be used at 6-­8 wk to screen postnatal women. The child health clinic, a postnatal checkup, or a
home visit may provide a suitable opportunity for its completion.
EDINBURGH POSTNATAL DEPRESSION SCALE
Name:
Address:
Baby’s age:
Because you have recently had a baby, we would like to know how you are feeling. Please underline the answer that comes closest to how you
have felt in the past 7 days, not just how you feel today.
Here is an example, already completed.
I have felt happy:
Yes, all the time
Yes, most of the time
No, not very often
No, not at all
This would mean: “I have felt happy most of the time” during the past week. Please complete the other questions in the same way.
In the past 7 days:
1.	I have been able to laugh and see the funny side of things
• As much as I always could
• Not quite so much now
• Definitely not so much now
• Not at all
2.	I have looked forward with enjoyment to things
• As much as I ever did
• Rather less than I used to
• Definitely less than I used to
• Hardly at all
*3.	I have blamed myself unnecessarily when things went wrong
• Yes, most of the time
• Yes, some of the time
• Not very often
• No, never
4.	I have been anxious or worried for no good reason
• No, not at all
• Hardly ever
• Yes, sometimes
• Yes, very often
*5.	I have felt scared or panicky for no very good reason
• Yes, quite a lot
• Yes, sometimes
• No, not much
• No, not at all
*6.	Things have been getting on top of me
• Yes, most of the time I haven’t been able to cope at all
• Yes, sometimes I haven’t been coping as well as usual
• No, most of the time I have coped quite well
• No, I have been coping as well as ever
*7.	I have been so unhappy that I have had difficulty sleeping
• Yes, most of the time
• Yes, sometimes
• Not very often
• No, not at all
*8.	I have felt sad or miserable
• Yes, most of the time
• Yes, quite often
• Not very often
• No, not at all
*9.	I have been so unhappy that I have been crying
• Yes, most of the time
• Yes, quite often
• Only occasionally
• No, never
*10.	The thought of harming myself has occurred to me
• Yes, quite often
• Sometimes
• Hardly ever
• Never
Response categories are scored 0, 1, 2, and 3 according to increased severity of the symptom. Items marked with an asterisk (*) are reverse-­scored (i.e., 3, 2, 1, and 0). The total score
is calculated by adding the scores for each of the 10 items. Users may reproduce the scale without further permission provided they respect copyright (which remains with the
British Journal of Psychiatry) by quoting the names of the authors, the title, and the source of the paper in all reproduced copies.
Adapted from Cox JL, Holden JM, Sagovsky R. Detection of postnatal depression. Development of the 10-­item Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale. Br J Psychiatry. 1987;150:782–
786; reproduced from Currie ML, Rademacher R. The pediatrician’s role in recognizing and intervening in postpartum depression. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2004;51(3):785–xi.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 23 u The First Year
in feeding) and show this preference by calming more quickly for
their parent than for a stranger. This response in turn strengthens a
parent’s sense of efficacy and their connection with their baby.

IMPLICATIONS FOR THE PEDIATRICIAN

The pediatrician can support healthy newborn development in several
ways.

Optimal Practices

A prenatal pediatric visit allows pediatricians to assess both the
strengths of the expectant parents and any needs they may have in
anticipation of the birth of their infant. This should include assessment of social determinants of health and may consist of addressing
needs such as baby supplies, financial assistance, and parental mental health support. Supportive hospital policies include the use of
birthing rooms rather than operating suites and delivery rooms;
encouraging the partner or a trusted relative or friend to remain with
the mother during labor or the provision of a professional doula; the
practice of giving the newborn infant to the mother immediately
after drying and a brief assessment; keeping the newborn with the
mother rather than in a central nursery; and avoiding in-­hospital
distribution of infant formula. Such policies (“Baby Friendly Hospital”) have been shown to significantly increase breastfeeding rates
(see Chapter 115.3). After discharge, home visits by nurses and
lactation counselors can reduce early feeding problems and identify emerging medical conditions in either mother or baby. Infants
requiring transport to another hospital should be brought to see the
mother first, if at all possible. Timing of hospital discharge should
be individualized for each maternal–infant dyad based on the mode
of delivery, presence or absence of specific risk factors, and any
problems identified during the birth hospitalization. Some healthy
term newborns may be discharged before 48 hours of life, and these
newborns should be evaluated with a follow up visit by 3-­5 days
after birth and within 48-­72 hours after discharge. The timing of
the first visit for newborns with a longer initial hospital stay will
depend on the newborn’s specific issues and identified needs.

Assessing Parent–Infant Interactions

During a feeding or when infants are alert and face-­to-­face with
their parents, it is normal for the dyad to appear absorbed in one
another. Infants who become overstimulated by the parent’s voice
or activity may turn away or close their eyes, leading to a premature
termination of the encounter. Alternatively, the infant may be ready
to interact, but the parent may appear preoccupied. Asking a new
mother about her own emotional state, and inquiring specifically
about a history of depression, facilitates referral for therapy, which
may provide long-­term benefits to the child.

Teaching About Individual Competencies

The Newborn Behavior Assessment Scale (NBAS) provides a
formal measure of an infant’s neurodevelopmental competencies,
including state control, autonomic reactivity, reflexes, habituation,
and orientation toward auditory and visual stimuli. This examination can also be used to demonstrate to parents an infant’s capabilities and vulnerabilities. Parents might learn that they need to
undress their infant to increase the level of arousal or to swaddle the
infant to reduce overstimulation by containing random arm movements. The NBAS can be used to support the development of positive early parent–infant relationships. Demonstration of the NBAS
to parents in the first week of life has been shown to correlate with
improvements in the caretaking environment months later.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

151

Chapter 23

The First Year
Mutiat T. Onigbanjo and Susan Feigelman
The prenatal period and the first year of life provide the platform for
remarkable growth and development, setting the trajectory for a child’s
life. Neural plasticity, the ability of the brain to be shaped by experience, both positive and negative, is at its peak. Total brain volume
doubles in the first year of life and increases by an additional 15% over
the second year. Total brain volume at age 1 month is approximately
36% of adult volume but by age 1 year is approximately 72% (83% by
2 years) (Fig. 23.1).
The acquisition of seemingly “simple” skills, such as swallowing, reflects a series of intricate and highly coordinated processes
involving multiple levels of neural control distributed among several physiologic systems whose nature and relationships mature
throughout the first year of life. Substantial learning of the basic
tools of language (phonology, word segmentation) occurs during
infancy. Speech processing in older individuals requires defined
and precise neuronal networks; the infant brain possesses a structural and functional organization similar to that of adults, suggesting that structural neurologic processing of speech may guide
infants to discover the properties of their native language. Myelination of the cortex begins at 7-­8 months’ gestation and continues into
adolescence and young adulthood. It proceeds posterior to anterior, allowing progressive maturation of sensory, motor, and finally
associative pathways. Given the importance of iron, cholesterol, and
other nutrients in myelination, adequate stores throughout infancy
are critical (see Chapter 61). Insufficient interactions with caregivers or the wider environment may alter experience-­dependent processes that are critical to brain structure development and function
during infancy. Although for some processes, subsequent stimulation may allow catch-­up; as the periods of plasticity close during
the rapid developmental changes occurring in infancy, more permanent deficits may result.
The infant acquires new competences in all developmental domains.
The concept of developmental trajectories recognizes that complex skills
build on simpler ones; it is also important to realize how development in
each domain affects functioning in all the others. All growth parameters
should be plotted using the World Health Organization charts, which
show how children from birth through 72 months “should” grow under
optimal circumstances (see Figs. 24.1 and 24.2). Table 23.1 presents
an overview of key milestones by domain; Table 23.2 presents similar
information arranged by age. Table 23.3 presents age at time of x-­ray
appearance of centers of ossification. Parents often seek information
about “normal development” during this period and should be directed
to reliable sources, including the American Academy of Pediatrics website (www.healthychildren.org) or the Center for Disease Control website
(www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/milestones/index.html).

AGE 0-­2 MONTHS

In the full-­term infant, myelination is present by the time of birth in the
dorsal brainstem, cerebellar peduncles, and posterior limb of the internal capsule. The cerebellar white matter acquires myelin by 1 month of
age and is well myelinated by 3 months. The subcortical white matter of
the parietal, posterior frontal, temporal, and calcarine cortex is partially
myelinated by 3 months of age. In this period the infant experiences tremendous growth. Physiologic changes allow the establishment of effective feeding routines and a predictable sleep–wake cycle. The social
interactions that occur as parents and infants accomplish these tasks lay
the foundation for cognitive and emotional development.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

152 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Volume of the Cortical Hemispheres
1250000

1000000

1000000
Volume in mm3

Volume in mm3

Total Brain Volume
1250000

750000
500000
250000

750000
500000
250000

0

0
0

A

12

24

0

B

Age in months

12

24

Age in months

Cerebellum

Subcortical and Brainstem

1500000

1000000

Volume in mm3

Volume in mm3

750000
100000

50000

500000

250000

0

0
0

C

12

24

Age in months

0

D

12

24

Age in months

Fig. 23.1 Scatterplots showing brain growth in the first 2 years of life. A, Total brain volume by age at scan. B, Cortical hemispheres. C, Cerebellum.
D, Subcortical region and brainstem. (From Knickmeyer RC, Gouttard S, Kang C, et al. A structural MRI study of human brain development from birth
to 2 years. J Neurosci. 2008;28:12176–12182.)

Physical Development

A newborn’s weight may initially decrease 10% (vaginal delivery) to 12%
(cesarean section) below birthweight in the first week as a result of excretion of excess extravascular fluid and limited nutritional intake. Nutrition improves as colostrum is replaced by higher-­fat content breast milk,
infants learn to latch on and suck more efficiently, and mothers become
more comfortable with feeding techniques. Infants regain or exceed
birthweight by 2 weeks of age and should grow at approximately 30 g (1
oz) per day during the first month (see Table 27.1). This is the period of
fastest postnatal growth. Arms are held to the sides. Limb movements
consist largely of uncontrolled writhing, with apparently purposeless
opening and closing of the hands. Smiling occurs involuntarily. Eye gaze,
head turning, and sucking are under better control and thus can be used
to demonstrate infant perception and cognition. An infant’s preferential
turning toward the mother’s voice is evidence of recognition memory.
Six behavioral states have been described (see Chapter 22). Initially,
sleep and wakefulness are evenly distributed throughout the 24 hour
day (Fig. 23.2). Neurologic maturation accounts for the consolidation
of sleep into blocks of 5 or 6 hours at night, with brief awake, feeding
periods. Learning also occurs; infants whose parents are consistently
more interactive and stimulating during the day learn to concentrate
their sleeping during the night.

Cognitive Development

Infants can differentiate among patterns, colors, and consonants. They
can recognize facial expressions (smiles) as similar, even when they
appear on different faces. They also can match abstract properties of
stimuli, such as contour, intensity, or temporal pattern, across sensory

modalities. Infants at 2 months of age can discriminate rhythmic patterns in native vs nonnative language. Infants appear to seek stimuli
actively, as though satisfying an innate need to make sense of the world.
These phenomena point to the integration of sensory inputs in the central nervous system. Caretaking activities provide visual, tactile, olfactory, and auditory stimuli, all of which support the development of
cognition. Infants habituate to the familiar, attending less to repeated
stimuli and increasing their attention to novel stimuli.

Emotional Development

The infant is dependent on the environment to meet its needs. The consistent availability of a trusted adult to meet the infant’s urgent needs
creates the conditions for secure attachment. Basic trust vs mistrust,
the first of Erikson’s psychosocial stages (see Chapter 19), depends on
attachment and reciprocal maternal bonding. Crying occurs in response
to stimuli that may be obvious (a soiled diaper) but are often obscure
(see Chapter 23.1). Infants who are consistently picked up and held in
response to distress cry less at 1 year and show less aggressive behavior
at 2 years. Infants of adolescent mothers who are trained to carry their
babies demonstrate secure attachment. Infants cry in response to the cry
of another infant, which has been interpreted as an early sign of empathy.

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

Success or failure in establishing feeding and sleep cycles influences
parents’ feelings of competence. When things go well, the parents’
anxiety and ambivalence, as well as the exhaustion of the early weeks,
decrease. Infant issues (e.g., colic) or familial conflict may prevent this
from occurring. With physical recovery from delivery and hormonal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 23 u The First Year
Table 23.1

153

Developmental Milestones in First 2 Years of Life
AVERAGE AGE OF
ATTAINMENT (MO)

MILESTONE

DEVELOPMENTAL IMPLICATIONS

GROSS MOTOR
Holds head steady while sitting
Pulls to sit, with no head lag
Brings hands together in midline
Asymmetric tonic neck reflex gone
Sits without support
Rolls back to stomach
Walks alone
Runs

2
3
3
4
6
6.5
12
16

Allows more visual interaction
Muscle tone
Self-­discovery of hands
Can inspect hands in midline
Increasing exploration
Truncal flexion, risk of falls
Exploration, control of proximity to parents
Supervision more difficult

FINE MOTOR
Grasps rattle
Reaches for objects
Palmar grasp gone
Transfers object hand to hand
Thumb-­finger grasp
Turns pages of book
Scribbles
Builds tower of two cubes
Builds tower of six cubes

3.5
4
4
5.5
8
12
13
15
22

Object use
Visuomotor coordination
Voluntary release
Comparison of objects
Able to explore small objects
Increasing autonomy during book time
Visuomotor coordination
Uses objects in combination
Requires visual, gross, and fine motor coordination

COMMUNICATION AND LANGUAGE
Smiles in response to face, voice
Monosyllabic babble
Inhibits to “no”
Follows one-­step command with gesture
Follows one-­step command without gesture
Says “mama” or “dada”
Points to objects
Speaks first real word
Speaks 4-­6 words
Speaks 10-­15 words
Speaks two-­word sentences (e.g., “Mommy shoe”)

1.5
6
7
7
10
10
10
12
15
18
19

More active social participant
Experimentation with sound, tactile sense
Response to tone (nonverbal)
Nonverbal communication
Verbal receptive language (e.g., “Give it to me”)
Expressive language
Interactive communication
Beginning of labeling
Acquisition of object and personal names
Acquisition of object and personal names
Beginning grammatization, corresponds with 50-­word
vocabulary

2
4
8
8
12

Lack of object permanence (out of sight, out of mind;
e.g., yarn ball dropped)
Self-­discovery, cause and effect
Active comparison of objects
Object permanence
Beginning symbolic thought

17
17

Able to link actions to solve problems
Symbolic thought

COGNITIVE
Stares momentarily at spot where object
disappeared
Stares at own hand
Bangs two cubes
Uncovers toy (after seeing it hidden)
Egocentric symbolic play (e.g., pretends to drink
from cup)
Uses stick to reach toy
Pretend play with doll (e.g., gives doll bottle)

normalization, the mild postpartum “blues” that affects many mothers
passes. If the mother continues to feel sad, overwhelmed, or anxiety,
the possibility of moderate to severe postpartum depression or anxiety, found in 20–25% of postpartum women, needs to be considered.
Major depression that arises during pregnancy or in the postpartum
period threatens the mother–child relationship and is a risk factor for
later cognitive and behavioral problems. Postpartum depression is
often reported in mothers and can also occur in fathers. It can present over the course of a year with symptoms of depression or irritability. The pediatrician may be the first professional to encounter the
depressed parent and should be instrumental in assisting the parent in
seeking treatment (see Chapter 22).

AGE 2–­6 MONTHS

At about age 2 months, the emergence of voluntary (social) smiles and
increasing eye contact mark a change in the parent–child relationship,
heightening the parents’ sense of being loved reciprocally. During the
next months, an infant’s range of motor and social control and cognitive
engagement increases dramatically. Mutual regulation takes the form of

complex social interchanges, resulting in strong mutual attachment and
enjoyment. Routines are established. Parents are less fatigued.

Physical Development

Between 3 and 4 months of age, the rate of growth slows to approximately 20 g/day (see Table 27.1 and Figs. 24.1 and 24.2). By age 4
months, birthweight is doubled. Early reflexes that limited voluntary
movement recede (e.g., primitive reflexes; see Chapter 630). Disappearance of the asymmetric tonic neck reflex means that infants can
begin to examine objects in the midline and manipulate them with
both hands. Waning of the early grasp reflex allows infants both to
hold objects and to let them go voluntarily. A novel object may elicit
purposeful, although inefficient, reaching. The quality of spontaneous
movements also changes, from larger (proximal) writhing to smaller,
circular (distal) movements that have been described as “fidgety.”
Abnormal or absent fidgety movements may constitute a risk factor for
later neurologic abnormalities.
Increasing control of truncal flexion makes intentional rolling possible. Once infants can hold their heads steady while sitting, they can

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

154 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 23.2  Emerging Patterns of Behavior During the First Year of Life*
NEONATAL PERIOD (0-4 WK)
Prone:
Lies in flexed attitude; turns head from side to side; head sags on ventral suspension
Supine:
Generally flexed and a little stiff
Visual:
May fixate face on light in line of vision; doll’s eye movement (oculocephalic reflex) of eyes on turning of the body
Reflex:
Moro response active; stepping and placing reflexes; grasp reflex active
Social:
Visual preference for human face
AT 1 MO
Prone:
Supine:
Visual:
Social:

Legs more extended; holds chin up; turns head; head lifted momentarily to plane of body on ventral suspension
Tonic neck posture predominates; supple and relaxed; head lags when pulled to sitting position
Watches person; follows moving object
Body movements in cadence with voice of other in social contact; beginning to smile

AT 2 MO
Prone:
Supine:
Visual:
Social:

Raises head slightly farther; head sustained in plane of body on ventral suspension
Tonic neck posture predominates; head lags when pulled to sitting position
Follows moving object 180 degrees
Smiles on social contact; listens to voice and coos

AT 3 MO
Prone:
Supine:
Sitting:
Reflex:
Social:

Lifts head and chest with arms extended; head above plane of body on ventral suspension
Tonic neck posture predominates; reaches toward and misses objects; waves at toy
Head lag partially compensated when pulled to sitting position; early head control with bobbing motion; back rounded
Typical Moro response has not persisted; makes defensive movements or selective withdrawal reactions
Sustained social contact; listens to music; says “aah, ngah”

AT 4 MO
Prone:
Supine:
Sitting:
Standing:
Adaptive:
Social:

Lifts head and chest, with head in approximately vertical axis; legs extended
Symmetric posture predominates, hands in midline; reaches and grasps objects and brings them to mouth
No head lag when pulled to sitting position; head steady, tipped forward; enjoys sitting with full truncal support
When held erect, pushes with feet
Sees raisin, but makes no move to reach for it
Laughs out loud; may show displeasure if social contact is broken; excited at sight of food

AT 7 MO
Prone:
Supine:
Sitting:
Standing:
Adaptive:
Language:
Social:

Rolls over; pivots; crawls or creep-­crawls (Knobloch)
Lifts head; rolls over; squirms
Sits briefly, with support of pelvis; leans forward on hands; back rounded
May support most of weight; bounces actively
Reaches out for and grasps large object; transfers objects from hand to hand; grasp uses radial palm; rakes at raisin
Forms polysyllabic vowel sounds
Prefers mother; babbles; enjoys mirror; responds to changes in emotional content of social contact

AT 10 MO
Sitting:
Standing:
Motor:
Adaptive:
Language:
Social:

Sits up alone and indefinitely without support, with back straight
Pulls to standing position; “cruises” or walks holding on to furniture
Creeps or crawls
Grasps objects with thumb and forefinger; pokes at things with forefinger; picks up pellet with assisted pincer movement; uncovers
hidden toy; attempts to retrieve dropped object; releases object grasped by other person
Repetitive consonant sounds (“mama,” “dada”)
Responds to sound of name; plays peek-­a-­boo or pat-­a-­cake; waves bye-­bye

AT 1 YR
Motor:
Adaptive:
Language:
Social:

Walks with one hand held; rises independently, takes several steps (Knobloch)
Picks up raisin with unassisted pincer movement of forefinger and thumb; releases object to other person on request or gesture
Says a few words besides “mama,” “dada”
Plays simple ball game; makes postural adjustment to dressing

*Data are derived from those of Gesell (as revised by Knobloch), Shirley, Provence, Wolf, Bailey, and others.
Data from Knobloch H, Stevens F, Malone AF. Manual of Developmental Diagnosis. Hagerstown, MD: Harper & Row;1980.

gaze across at things rather than merely looking up at them, opening up a
new visual range. They can begin taking food from a spoon. At the same
time, maturation of the visual system allows greater depth perception.
In this period, infants achieve stable state regulation and regular sleep–
wake cycles. Total sleep requirements are approximately 14-­16 hours per
24 hours, with about 9-­10 hours concentrated at night and 2 naps per day.
Approximately 70% of infants sleep for a 6-­8 hour stretch by age 6 months
(see Fig. 23.2). By 4-­6 months, the sleep electroencephalogram shows a
mature pattern, with demarcation of rapid eye movement and three stages
of non–rapid eye movement sleep. The sleep cycle remains shorter than in

adults (50-­60 minutes vs approximately 90 minutes). As a result, infants
arouse to light sleep or wake frequently during the night, setting the stage
for behavioral sleep problems (see Chapter 31).

Cognitive Development

The overall effect of these developments is a qualitative change. At 4
months of age, infants are described as “hatching” socially, becoming
interested in a wider world. During feeding, infants no longer focus
exclusively on the mother, but become distracted. In the mother’s arms,
the infant may literally turn around, preferring to face outward.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 23 u The First Year
Table 23.3  Time of Radiographic Appearance of Centers
of Ossification in Infancy and Childhood
MALES:
AGE AT
APPEARANCE*

BONES AND EPIPHYSEAL
CENTERS

HUMERUS, HEAD
3 wk
CARPAL BONES
2 mo ± 2 mo
3 mo ± 2 mo
30 mo ± 16 mo
42 mo ± 19 mo
67 mo ± 19 mo
69 mo ± 15 mo
66 mo ± 15 mo
No standards
available

FEMALES:
AGE AT
APPEARANCE*
3 wk

Capitate
Hamate
Triangular†
Lunate†
Trapezium†
Trapezoid†
Scaphoid†
Pisiform†

2 mo ± 2 mo
2 mo ± 2 mo
21 mo ± 14 mo
34 mo ± 13 mo
47 mo ± 14 mo
49 mo ± 12 mo
51 mo ± 12 mo
No standards
available

II
III
IV
V
I

12 mo ± 3 mo
13 mo ± 3 mo
15 mo ± 4 mo
16 mo ± 5 mo
18 mo ± 5 mo

METACARPAL BONES
18 mo ± 5 mo
20 mo ± 5 mo
23 mo ± 6 mo
26 mo ± 7 mo
32 mo ± 9 mo

FINGERS (EPIPHYSES)
16 mo ± 4 mo
Proximal phalanx, 3rd finger
16 mo ± 4 mo
Proximal phalanx, 2nd finger
17 mo ± 5 mo
Proximal phalanx, 4th finger
19 mo ± 7 mo
Distal phalanx, 1st finger
21 mo ± 5 mo
Proximal phalanx, 5th finger
24 mo ± 6 mo
Middle phalanx, 3rd finger
24 mo ± 6 mo
Middle phalanx, 4th finger
26 mo ± 6 mo
Middle phalanx, 2nd finger
28 mo ± 6 mo
Distal phalanx, 3rd finger
28 mo ± 6 mo
Distal phalanx, 4th finger
32 mo ± 7 mo
Proximal phalanx, 1st finger
37 mo ± 9 mo
Distal phalanx, 5th finger
37 mo ± 8 mo
Distal phalanx, 2nd finger
39 mo ± 10 mo
Middle phalanx, 5th finger
152 mo ± 18 mo
Sesamoid (adductor pollicis)

10 mo ± 3 mo
11 mo ± 3 mo
11 mo ± 3 mo
12 mo ± 4 mo
14 mo ± 4 mo
15 mo ± 5 mo
15 mo ± 5 mo
16 mo ± 5 mo
18 mo ± 4 mo
18 mo ± 5 mo
20 mo ± 5 mo
23 mo ± 6 mo
23 mo ± 6 mo
22 mo ± 7 mo
121 mo ± 13 mo

HIP AND KNEE
Usually present
at birth
Usually present
at birth
4 mo ± 2 mo
46 mo ± 11 mo

Usually present at
birth
Usually present at
birth
4 mo ± 2 mo
29 mo ± 7 mo

Femur, distal
Tibia, proximal
Femur, head
Patella

FOOT AND ANKLE‡
*To nearest month.
†Except for the capitate and hamate bones, the variability of carpal centers is too great

to make them very useful clinically.
‡Standards for the foot are available, but normal variation is wide, including some

familial variants, so this area is of little clinical use.
Values represent mean ± standard deviation, when applicable.
The norms present a composite of published data from the Fels Research Institute, Yellow
Springs, OH (Pyle SI, Sontag L. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 1943, 49:102), and unpublished
data from the Brush Foundation, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, and
the Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA. Compiled by Lieb, Buehl, and Pyle.

Infants at this age also explore their own bodies, staring intently
at their hands; vocalizing; blowing bubbles; and touching their ears,
cheeks, and genitals. These explorations represent an early stage in the
understanding of cause and effect as infants learn that voluntary muscle
movements generate predictable tactile and visual sensations. Learning and memory involving the hippocampus can be demonstrated
at 3 months. These activities have a role in the emergence of a sense
of self, separate from the parents. This is the first stage of personality

Age

2

4

Hours of sleep
6
8 10 12

1 wk
1 mo
3 mo
6 mo
9 mo
12 mo
18 mo
2 yr
3 yr
4 yr
5 yr
6 yr
7 yr
8 yr
9 yr
10 yr
11 yr
12 yr
13 yr
14 yr
15 yr
16 yr
17 yr
18 yr

14

16 Total hours
of sleep

Nighttime
sleep
Daytime
sleep*
*Divided into typical
number of naps per
day. Length of naps
may be quite variable.

2

4

6

155

16.5
15.5
15
14.25
14
13.75
13.5
13
12
11.50
11
10.75
10.50
10.25
10
9.75
9.50
9.25
9.25
9
8.75
8.50
8.25
8.25

8

Fig. 23.2 Typical sleep requirements in children. (From Ferber R.
Solve Your Child’s Sleep Problems, New York: Simon & Schuster; 1985.)

development. Infants come to associate certain sensations through frequent repetition. The proprioceptive feeling of holding up the hand and
wiggling the fingers always accompanies the sight of the fingers moving. Such “self ” sensations are consistently linked and reproducible at
will. In contrast, sensations that are associated with “other” occur with
less regularity and in varying combinations. The sound, smell, and feel
of the parent sometimes appear promptly in response to crying, but
sometimes do not. The satisfaction that the mother or another loving
adult provides continues the process of attachment.

Emotional Development and Communication

Babies interact with increasing sophistication and range. They have an
innate ability for facial expressions that, over time, become the functional expressions of emotion (anger, joy, interest, fear, disgust, and
surprise). Infants can discriminate and imitate facial expressions, when
paired with vocalizations, of adults as well as other infants. Initiating
games (singing, hand games) increases social development. Such face-­
to-­face behavior reveals the infant’s ability to share emotional states, the
first step in the development of communication. Infants of depressed
parents show a different pattern, spending less time in coordinated
movement with their parents and making fewer efforts to reengage.
Rather than anger, they show sadness and a loss of energy when the
parents continue to be unavailable.

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

Motor and sensory maturation makes infants at 3-­6 months exciting and
interactive. Some parents experience their 4-­month-­old child’s outward
turning as a rejection, secretly fearing that their infants no longer love
them. For most parents, this is a happy period and they may excitedly
report that they can hold conversations with their infants, taking turns
vocalizing and listening. Pediatricians share in the enjoyment, as the
baby coos, makes eye contact, and moves rhythmically. Infants who do
not show this reciprocal language and movements are at risk for autism
spectrum disorder or other developmental disabilities (see Chapters 56
and 58). If this visit does not feel joyful and relaxed, causes such as social

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

156 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
stress, family dysfunction, parental mental illness, or problems in the
infant–parent relationship should be considered. Parents can be reassured that responding to an infant’s emotional needs cannot spoil the
infant. Giving vaccines and drawing blood while the child is seated on
the parent’s lap or nursing at the breast increases pain tolerance.

AGE 6–­12 MONTHS

With achievement of the sitting position, increased mobility, and new
skills to explore the world around them, 6-­12 month old infants show
advances in cognitive understanding and communication, and new
tensions arise in regard to attachment and separation. Infants develop
will and intentions, characteristics that most parents welcome but still
find challenging to manage.

Physical Development

Growth slows more (see Table 27.1 and Figs. 24.1 and 24.2). By the
first birthday, birthweight has tripled, length has increased by 50%,
and head circumference has increased by 10 cm (4 in). The ability to
sit unsupported (6-­7 months) and to pivot while sitting (around 9-­10
months) provides increasing opportunities to manipulate several
objects at a time and to experiment with novel combinations of objects.
These explorations are aided by the emergence of a thumb-­finger grasp
(8-­9 months) and a neat pincer grasp by 12 months. Voluntary release
emerges at 9 months. Many infants begin crawling and pulling to stand
around 8 months, followed by cruising. Some walk by 1 year. Motor
achievements correlate with increasing myelinization and cerebellar
growth. These gross motor skills expand infants’ exploratory range
and create new physical dangers, as well as opportunities for learning.
Tooth eruption occurs, usually starting with the mandibular central
incisors. Tooth development (see Table 353.1) reflects skeletal maturation and bone age, although there is wide individual variation.

Cognitive Development

The 6-­month-­old infant has discovered his hands and will soon learn to
manipulate objects. At first, everything is mouthed. In time, novel objects
are picked up, inspected, passed from hand to hand, banged, dropped,
and then mouthed. Each action represents a nonverbal idea about what
things are for (in Piagetian terms, a schema; see Chapter 19). The complexity of an infant’s play, how many different schemata are brought to
bear, is a useful index of cognitive development at this age. The pleasure,
persistence, and energy with which infants tackle these challenges suggest the existence of an intrinsic drive or mastery motivation. Mastery
behavior occurs when infants feel secure; those with less secure attachments show limited experimentation and less competence.
A major milestone is the achievement by 9 months of object permanence (constancy), the understanding that objects continue to exist,
even when not seen. At 4-­7 months of age, infants look down for a
yarn ball that has been dropped but quickly give up if it is not seen.
With object constancy, older infants persist in searching. They will find
objects hidden under a cloth or behind the examiner’s back. Peek-­a-­boo
brings unlimited pleasure as the child magically brings back the other
player. Events seem to occur as a result of the child’s own activities.

Emotional Development

The advent of object permanence corresponds with qualitative changes
in social and communicative development. Infants look back and forth
between an approaching stranger and a parent and may cling or cry
anxiously, demonstrating stranger anxiety. Separations often become
more difficult. Infants who have been sleeping through the night for
months begin to awaken regularly and cry, as though remembering
that the parents are nearby or in the next room (see Chapter 31).
A new demand for autonomy also emerges. Poor weight gain at
this age often reflects a struggle between an infant’s emerging independence and parent’s control of the feeding situation. Use of the two-­
spoon method of feeding (one for the child and one for the parent),
finger foods, and a high chair with tray table can avert potential problems. Tantrums make their first appearance as the drives for autonomy
and mastery come in conflict with parental controls and the infant’s
still-­limited abilities.

Communication

Infants at 7 months of age are adept at nonverbal communication,
expressing a range of emotions and responding to vocal tone and
facial expressions. At about 9 months of age infants become aware
that emotions can be shared between people; they show parents toys
as a way of sharing their happy feelings. Between 8 and 10 months of
age, babbling takes on a new complexity, with multisyllabic sounds
(“ba-­da-­ma”) called canonical babbling. Babies can discriminate
between languages. Infants in bilingual homes learn the characteristics and rules that govern two different languages. Social interaction
(attentive adults taking turns vocalizing with the infant) profoundly
influences the acquisition and production of new sounds. The first
true word (i.e., a sound used consistently to refer to a specific object
or person) appears in concert with an infant’s discovery of object
permanence. Picture books now provide an ideal context for verbal language acquisition. With a familiar book as a shared focus of
attention, a parent and child engage in repeated cycles of pointing
and labeling, with elaboration and feedback by the parent. Often
infants learn a gesture to communicate before the can say the word
(e.g., waving bye-­bye before saying “bye-­bye”), and there is limited
evidence that the addition of sign language may support infant
development while enhancing parent–infant communication.

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

With the developmental reorganization that occurs around 9 months of
age, previously resolved issues of feeding and sleeping reemerge. Pediatricians can prepare parents at the 6 month visit so that these problems
can be understood as the result of developmental progress and not
regression. Parents should be encouraged to plan ahead for necessary,
and inevitable, separations (e.g., babysitter, daycare). Routine preparations may make these separations easier. Dual parent employment has
not been consistently found to be harmful or beneficial for long-­term
cognitive or social-­emotional outcomes. Introduction of a transitional
object may allow the infant to self-­comfort in the parents’ absence. The
object cannot have any potential for asphyxiation or strangulation.
Infants’ wariness of strangers often makes the 9 month examination difficult, particularly if the infant is temperamentally prone to react negatively
to unfamiliar situations. Initially, the pediatrician should avoid direct eye
contact with the child. Time spent talking with the parent and introducing
the child to a small, washable toy will be rewarded with more cooperation. The examination can be continued on the parent’s lap when feasible.
Encourage parents to read, play, and communicate with their infant.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

23.1 Infant Crying and Colic
Mutiat T. Onigbanjo and Susan Feigelman
Crying or fussiness is present in all babies but reaches medical attention in about 20% of infants younger than 2 months. Although usually
a transient and normal infant behavior, crying is often associated with
parental concern and distress. On average, babies cry 2 hours per day,
peaking at 6 weeks of age. Premature infants will have peak crying at 6
weeks corrected age (Fig. 23.3). Small-­for-­gestational-­age and premature babies may be at higher risk. The peak period of infant crying usually occurs in the evenings and early part of the night. Excessive crying
or fussiness persisting longer than 3-­5 months may be associated with
behavioral problems in an older child (anxiety, aggression, hyperactivity), decreased duration of breastfeeding, or postnatal depression, but
it is uncertain which is the cause or effect. Most infants with crying/
fussiness do not have gastroesophageal reflux, lactose intolerance, constipation, or cow’s milk protein allergy.
Acute-­onset uncontrollable crying could be caused by a medical
condition. Potentially overlooked conditions to consider include corneal abrasion, tourniquet effect of a hair wrapped around a digit or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 23 u The First Year
180

Minutes/day distress

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

w1 w2 w3 w4 w5 w6 w7 w8 w9 w10 w11 w12

Recording week

Fig. 23.3 Crying amounts and patterns from three North American

studies illustrating similarities in crying pattern. (From Barr RG, Trent
RB, Cross J. Age-­related incidence curve of hospitalized shaken baby
syndrome cases: convergent evidence for crying as a trigger to shaking.
Child Abuse Negl. 2006;30:7–16.)

penis, occult fracture, urinary tract infection, acute abdomen including
inguinal hernia, or anomalous coronary artery. Breastfeeding mothers
should be asked about medications, drugs, and diet. Gastrointestinal
distress can result from a maternal diet high in cruciferous vegetables.
Most of the time, the etiology of a serious problem can be discovered
with a careful history and physical examination.
Crying is a normal part of neurobehavioral development. Infants have
various signals for their needs and for getting attention from a caregiver.
These behaviors progressively increase in intensity in many infants, from
changes in breathing and color, to postural and movement changes, and
then to calm vocalizations. These precry cues, if not attended to, will
eventually lead to active crying. Some infants may go directly to crying,
perhaps based on temperament; these infants may be less easily consolable, more intense, or more responsive to sensory stimuli. Management
of crying/fussiness should include teaching caregivers about precry cues
and responding to the signal for feeding in a calm, relaxed manner. If sensory overstimulation is a factor, creating a nondistracting, calm environment may help, as well as swaddling. When lack of sensory stimulation is
present, parent–infant skin-­to-­skin contact and carrying the infant may
be beneficial. In all situations, reassurance that this is both normal and
transient, with only 5% of infants persisting beyond 3 months of age,
helps the family cope. Teaching families about expectations for normal
crying behavior can reduce emergency department visits.
The emotional significance of any experience depends on both the
individual child’s temperament and the parent’s responses (see Table
19.1); differing feeding schedules produce differing reactions. Hunger
generates increasing tension; as the urgency peaks, the infant cries, the
parent offers the breast or bottle, and the tension dissipates. Infants
fed “on demand” consistently experience this link among their distress,
the arrival of the parent, and relief from hunger. Most infants fed on a
fixed schedule quickly adapt their hunger cycle to the schedule. Those
who cannot adapt, because they are temperamentally prone to irregular biologic rhythms, experience periods of unrelieved hunger as well
as unwanted feedings when they already feel full. Similarly, infants
who are fed at the parents’ convenience, with neither attention to the
infant’s hunger cues nor a fixed schedule, may not consistently experience feeding as the pleasurable reduction of tension. Infants with early
dysregulation often show increased irritability and physiologic instability (spitting, diarrhea, poor weight gain) as well as later behavioral
problems. Infants with excess crying after 4-­6 months may have neurobehavioral dysregulation and may be at higher risk of other behavior
problems (sleep, behavior, feeding).
Colic is characterized by the “rule of 3.” It occurs in a healthy, thriving
infant beginning in the second or third week of life with crying that lasts at

157

least 3 hours per day, occurs at least 3 days per week, lasts for more than 3
weeks, and resolves by 3 or 4 months of age. It is equally common in breastfed and bottle-­fed infants, although prevalence is variable (up to 20%).
There is no racial, socioeconomic status, or gender risk for colic. Colic is
a diagnosis of exclusion following a careful history and physical examination. Few cases will be found to have an organic etiology. Although all
babies have crying episodes, colicky babies cry excessively and are difficult
to settle. The fussiness is not associated with hunger or any other form
of discomfort. Colicky babies may be more reactive to the same stimulus
and may cry louder than other babies. Although crying periods are a normal developmental phenomenon, babies with colic can cause parents to
become anxious, distraught, frustrated, and sleep deprived. Mothers are
at higher risk for postpartum depression if they report inconsolable crying
episodes lasting more than 20 minutes. Depression may lead to cessation
of breastfeeding. The risk of abuse increases as frustrated parents may use
aggressive means in an attempt to quiet the child, resulting in the shaken
baby syndrome.
There is no specific treatment for colic, but practitioners should provide advice and reassurance to parents. Parents must be counseled about
the problem, the importance of implementing a series of calm, systematic
steps to soothe the infant, and having a plan for stress relief, such as time-­
out for parents and substitute caregivers. Parents can be advised that colic
is self-­limited with no adverse effects on the child. Public health programs,
such as the Period of PURPLE Crying (http://purplecrying.info/) and
Take 5 Safety Plan for Crying, are invaluable tools for parents. These programs inform parents that all babies go through periods of crying, deflecting parental guilt and self-­recrimination. Most importantly, parents are
reminded that it is better to allow the baby to cry than engage in shaking
that leads to head trauma. Although babies with colic will have inconsolable periods when there is no relief, parents can try some simple steps.
Predictable daily schedules may help, ensuring the baby has adequate
sleep. Parents should provide appropriate stimulation throughout the day
when baby is in an alert/awake period. The sleep environment should be
free of stimulation. Swaddling, rocking, white noise, and movement (e.g.,
stroller, car ride) help some babies settle. Infants who are carried by a parent show different physiologic changes than when held in a sitting position, although there is no evidence that continuous carrying is effective in
colic management. A study in a hunter-­gatherer society showed that children who are continuously carried by their mothers display similar crying
periods as those in Western societies.
Some studies have found differences in fecal microflora (dysbiosis) between babies with excess crying and controls. Results include
fewer bifidobacteria and lactobacilli and more coliform bacteria such
as Escherichia coli. None has been conclusive, however, and each study
was found to have limitations such as lack of precise inclusion criteria,
lack of blinded observers, and variability in outcome measurements.
If the child appears to have gastrointestinal symptoms, breastfeeding
mothers may try elimination of milk, beans, and cruciferous vegetables
from their diets. In allergic families, mothers may try a stricter elimination of food allergens (milk, egg, wheat, nuts, soy, and fish), although
nutritional status should be monitored. For formula-­fed infants, changing
from milk-­based to soy-­based or other lactose-­free formulas had no effect
in most studies. A protein hydrolysate formula may moderately improve
symptoms.
The cause of colic in not known, and no medical intervention has been
consistently effective. Colic has been described as a “functional gastrointestinal disorder” and has been associated with maternal migraines,
as well as later development of migraine in the child. Simethicone has
not been shown to be better than placebo. Anticholinergic medications
should not be used in infants younger than 6 months. Early studies of
probiotics look promising, but evidence is insufficient to recommend
their routine use. Among various complementary therapies, certain
herbal teas, sugar solutions, Gripe water (containing herbal supplements), chamomile and fennel extract may have benefit, but the evidence
is weak. Baby massage may be helpful, but chiropractic manipulation
should not be performed in young children. Acupuncture was effective
in one trial and singing while in utero may produce babies who cry less.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

158 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

The Second Year

“give me.” By 15 months, the average child points to major body parts
and uses four to six words spontaneously and correctly. Toddlers also
enjoy polysyllabic jargoning (see Tables 23.1 and 24.1) and do not seem
upset that no one understands. Most communication of wants and ideas
continues to be nonverbal (e.g., by pointing, facial expressions).

Rebecca G. Carter and Susan Feigelman

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

Chapter 24

The second year of life is a time of rapid growth and development, particularly in the realms of social-­emotional and cognitive skills as well as
motor development. The toddler’s newly found ability to walk allows
separation and independence; however, the toddler continues to need
secure attachment to the parents. At approximately 18 months of age, the
emergence of symbolic thought and language causes a reorganization of
behavior, with implications across many developmental domains.

AGE 12–­18 MONTHS
Physical Development

Although overall rate of growth continues to decline, the toddler continues
to experience considerable brain growth and myelination in the second
year of life, resulting in an increase in head circumference of 2 cm over
the year (Figs. 24.1 and 24.2). Toddlers have relatively short legs and long
torsos, with exaggerated lumbar lordosis and protruding abdomens.
Most children begin to walk independently at about 12-­15 months of
age. Early walking is not associated with advanced development in other
domains. Infants initially toddle with a wide-­based gait, with the knees
bent and the arms flexed at the elbow; the entire torso rotates with each
stride; the toes may point in or out, and the feet strike the floor flat. The
appearance is that of genu varum (bowleg). Subsequent refinement leads
to greater steadiness and energy efficiency. After several months of practice, the center of gravity shifts back and the torso stabilizes, while the
knees extend and the arms swing at the sides for balance. The feet are held
in better alignment, and the child is able to stop, pivot, and stoop without
toppling over (see Chapters 713 and 714).

Cognitive Development

Exploration of the environment increases in parallel with improved
dexterity (reaching, grasping, releasing) and mobility. Learning follows
the precepts of Piaget’s sensorimotor stage (see Chapter 19). Toddlers
manipulate objects in novel ways to create interesting effects, such as
stacking blocks or filling and dumping buckets. Playthings are also
more likely to be used for their intended purposes (combs for hair, cups
for drinking). Imitation of parents and older siblings or other children
is an important mode of learning. Make-­believe play (symbolic play)
centers on the child’s own body, such as pretending to drink from an
empty cup (Table 24.1; see also Table 23.1).

Emotional Development

Infants who are approaching the developmental milestone of taking their
first steps may be irritable. Once they start walking, their predominant
mood changes markedly. Toddlers are often elated with their new ability
and with the power to control the distance between themselves and their
parents. Exploring toddlers will orbit around their trusted adults, moving
away and then returning for a reassuring touch before moving away again.
A child with secure attachment will use the trusted adult as a secure base
from which to explore independently. Proud of their accomplishments,
the child illustrates Erikson’s stage of autonomy and separation (see
Chapter 19). The toddler who is overly controlled and discouraged from
active exploration may feel doubt, shame, anger, and insecurity. All children will experience tantrums, reflecting their inability to delay gratification, suppress or displace anger, or verbally communicate their emotional
states. Children may form secure attachments with parents as well as other
trusted adults, thereby reinforcing the value of quality childcare if parents
are employed out of the home.

Linguistic Development

Receptive language precedes expressive language. By the time infants
speak their first words around 12 months of age, they already respond
appropriately to several simple statements, such as “no,” “bye-­bye,” and

Parents who cannot recall any other milestone tend to remember when
their child began to walk, perhaps because of the symbolic significance
of walking as an act of independence and because of the new demands
that the ambulating toddler places on the parent. All toddlers should be
encouraged to explore their environment; however, a child’s ability to wander out of sight also increases the risks of injury and the need for supervision, making recommendations regarding childproofing an integral focus
of physician visits.
Parents must understand the importance of exploration. Rather than
limiting movement, parents should place toddlers in safe environments
or substitute one activity for another. In the office setting, many toddlers
are comfortable exploring the examination room, but cling to the parents under the stress of the examination. Children who become more,
not less, distressed in their parents’ arms or who avoid their parents at
times of stress may be insecurely attached. Young children who, when
distressed, turn to strangers rather than parents for comfort are particularly worrisome. Children raised in environments with extreme and/or
chronic levels of stress (toxic stress) have increased vulnerability to disease that continues into adulthood (see Chapter 1). These effects can be
mediated by fostering elements of resiliency including introduction of
a supportive or encouraging trusted adult. The conflicts between independence and security manifest in issues of discipline, temper tantrums,
toilet training, and changing feeding behaviors. Parents should be counseled on these matters within the framework of normal development.
Parents may express concern about poor food intake as growth
slows. The growth chart should provide reassurance. Many children
still take two daytime naps, although the duration steadily decreases
and may start to condense to one longer nap (see Fig. 23.2).

AGE 18–24 MONTHS
Physical Development

Motor development during this period is reflected in improvements in
balance and agility and the emergence of running and stair climbing.
Height and weight increase at a steady rate during this year, with a gain
of 5 in and 5 lb. By 24 months, children are about half their ultimate
adult height. Head growth slows slightly, with 85% of adult head circumference achieved by age 2 years, leaving only an additional 5 cm (2
in) gain over the next few years (see Fig. 24.1 and Table 27.1).

Cognitive Development

At approximately 18 mo of age, several cognitive changes coalesce, marking the conclusion of the sensorimotor period. These can be observed
during self-­initiated play. Object permanence, which was first demonstrated around 9 months of age (see Chapter 23), is now firmly established; toddlers anticipate where an object will end up, even though the
object was not visible while it was being moved. Cause and effect are better understood, and toddlers demonstrate flexibility in problem solving
(e.g., using a stick to obtain a toy that is out of reach, figuring out how to
wind a mechanical toy). Symbolic transformations in play are no longer
tied to the toddler’s own body; thus a doll can be “fed” from an empty
plate. As with the reorganization that occurs at 9 months (see Chapter
23), the cognitive changes at 18 months correlate with important changes
in the emotional and linguistic domains (see Table 24.1).

Emotional Development

The relative independence of the preceding half-­year often gives way to
increased clinginess at about 18 months. This stage, described as “rapprochement,” may be a reaction to growing awareness of the possibility
of separation. Many parents report that they cannot go anywhere without
having a small child attached to them. Separation anxiety will manifest
at bedtime. Many children use a special blanket or stuffed toy as a transitional object, which functions as a symbol of the absent parent. The transitional object remains important until the transition to symbolic thought

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 24 u The Second Year

159

A
Fig. 24.1 World Health Organization growth charts. A, Weight for length and head circumference for age for boys, birth to 24 months. B, Weight

for length and head circumference for age for girls, birth to 24 months. (Courtesy World Health Organization: WHO Child Growth Standards, 2021.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

160 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

%LUWK WR  PRQWKV *LUOV
+HDG FLUFXPIHUHQFHIRUDJH DQG
:HLJKWIRUOHQJWK SHUFHQWLOHV
LQ

+
(
$
'
&
,
5
&
8
0
)
(
5
(
1
&
(



5(&25' 

%LUWK
FP

FP
















LQ
































:
(
,
*
+
7

1$0(








































































































OE












NJ





NJ
FP         

/(1*7+




OE

                   FP
LQ
                 
'DWH

$JH

:HLJKW

/HQJWK

+HDG &LUF

&
,
5
&
8
0
)
(
5
(
1
&
(











+
(
$
'

&RPPHQW

LQ       
3XEOLVKHGE\WKH&HQWHUVIRU'LVHDVH&RQWURODQG3UHYHQWLRQ1RYHPEHU
6285&(:+2&KLOG*URZWK6WDQGDUGV KWWSZZZZKRLQWFKLOGJURZWKHQ

B
Fig. 24.1, cont’d

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

:
(
,
*
+
7

Chapter 24 u The Second Year

161

A
Fig. 24.2 World Health Organization growth charts. A, Length for age and weight for age for boys, birth to 24 months. B, Length for age and
weight for age for girls, birth to 24 months. (Courtesy World Health Organization: WHO Child Growth Standards, 2021.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

162 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

Birth to 24 months: Girls
Length-for-age and Weight-for-age percentiles

98
95
90
75
50
25
10
5
2

98
95
90
75
50
25
10
5
2

Published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, November 1, 2009
SOURCE: WHO Child Growth Standards (http://www.who.int/childgrowth/en)

B
Fig. 24.2, cont’d

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 24 u The Second Year
Table 24.1  Emerging Patterns of Behavior from 1-­5 Years
of Age
15 MO
Motor:
Adaptive:
Language:
Social:
18 MO
Motor:
Adaptive:
Language:
Social:
24 MO
Motor:
Adaptive:
Language:
Social:

30 MO
Motor:
Adaptive:
Language:
Social:
36 MO
Motor:
Adaptive:
Language:
Social:

48 MO
Motor:
Adaptive:

Language:
Social:
60 MO
Motor:
Adaptive:
Language:
Social:

Walks alone; crawls up stairs
Makes tower of 3 cubes; makes a line with crayon;
inserts raisin in bottle
Jargon; follows simple commands; may name a
familiar object (e.g., ball); responds to his/her name
Indicates some desires or needs by pointing; hugs
parents
Runs stiffly; sits on small chair; walks up stairs with 1
hand held; explores drawers and wastebaskets
Makes tower of 4 cubes; imitates scribbling; imitates
vertical stroke; dumps raisin from bottle
10 words (average); names pictures; identifies 1 or
more parts of body
Feeds self; seeks help when in trouble; may complain
when wet or soiled; kisses parent with pucker
Runs well, walks up and down stairs, 1 step at a time;
opens doors; climbs on furniture; jumps
Makes tower of 7 cubes (6 at 21 mo); scribbles in
circular pattern; imitates horizontal stroke; folds
paper once imitatively
Puts 3 words together (subject, verb, object)
Handles spoon well; often tells about immediate
experiences; helps to undress; listens to stories
when shown pictures
Goes up stairs alternating feet
Makes tower of 9 cubes; makes vertical and horizontal
strokes, but generally will not join them to make
cross; imitates circular stroke, forming closed figure
Refers to self by pronoun “I”; knows full name
Helps put things away; pretends in play
Rides tricycle; stands momentarily on 1 foot
Makes tower of 10 cubes; imitates construction of
“bridge” of 3 cubes; copies circle; imitates cross
Knows age and gender; counts 3 objects correctly;
repeats 3 numbers or a sentence of 6 syllables; most
of speech intelligible to strangers
Plays simple games (in “parallel” with other children);
helps in dressing (unbuttons clothing and puts on
shoes); washes hands
Hops on 1 foot; throws ball overhand; uses scissors to
cut out pictures; climbs well
Copies bridge from model; imitates construction of
“gate” of 5 cubes; copies cross and square; draws
man with 2-­4 parts besides head; identifies longer
of 2 lines
Counts 4 pennies accurately; tells story
Plays with several children, with beginning of social
interaction and role-­playing; goes to toilet alone
Skips
Draws triangle from copy; names heavier of 2 weights
Names 4 colors; repeats sentence of 10 syllables;
counts 10 pennies correctly
Dresses and undresses; asks questions about meaning
of words; engages in domestic role-­playing

Data derived from those of Gesell (as revised by Knobloch), Shirley, Provence, Wolf,
Bailey, and others. After 6 yr, the Wechsler Intelligence Scales for Children (WISC-­IV)
and other scales offer the most precise estimates of cognitive development. To have
their greatest value, they should be administered only by an experienced and qualified
person.

163

has been completed and the symbolic presence of the parent fully internalized. Despite the attachment to the parent, the child’s use of “no” is a way of
declaring independence. Individual differences in temperament, in both
the child and the parents, play a critical role in determining the balance of
conflict vs cooperation in the parent–child relationship. As effective language emerges, conflicts often become less frequent.
Self-­conscious awareness and internalized standards of behavior first
appear at this age. Toddlers looking in a mirror will, for the first time, reach
for their own face rather than the mirror image if they notice something
unusual on their nose. They begin to recognize when toys are broken
and may hand them to their parents to fix. Language becomes a means
of impulse control, early reasoning, and connection between ideas. When
tempted to touch a forbidden object, they may tell themselves “no, no.”
This is the very beginning of the formation of a conscience. The fact that
they often go on to touch the object anyway demonstrates the relative
weakness of internalized inhibitions at this stage.

Linguistic Development

Perhaps the most dramatic developments in this period are linguistic.
Labeling of objects coincides with the advent of symbolic thought. After
the realization occurs that words can stand for objects or ideas, a child’s
vocabulary grows from 10-­15 words at 18 months to between 50 and 100
at 2 years. After acquiring a vocabulary of about 50 words, toddlers begin
to combine them to make simple sentences, marking the beginning of
grammar. At this stage, toddlers understand two-­step commands, such
as “Give me the ball and then get your shoes.” Language also gives the toddler a sense of control over the surroundings, as in “night-­night” or “bye-­
bye.” The emergence of verbal language marks the end of the sensorimotor
period. As toddlers learn to use symbols to express ideas and solve problems, the need for cognition based on direct sensation and motor manipulation wanes.

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

With children’s increasing mobility, physical limits on their explorations
become less effective; words become increasingly important for behavior
control as well as cognition. Children with delayed language acquisition
often have greater behavior problems and frustrations due to problems
with communication. Language development is facilitated when parents
and caregivers use clear, simple sentences; ask questions; pause to allow
time to process and generate verbal responses and respond to children’s
incomplete sentences and gestural communication with the appropriate
words. Television and distracted screen-­time viewing, as well as television
as background noise, decreases parent–child verbal interactions, whereas
looking at picture books and engaging the child in two-­way conversations stimulates language development. In the world of constant access to
tablets, phones, and screens, parents and children have more distractions
from direct language engagement. Even educational programing needs to
be limited on screens to reinforce face-­to-­face contact with caregivers during language acquisition; solo media use should be avoided in this age. As
an introduction to this topic, the provider can ask “What are your child’s
favorite activities?” and “What activities do you like to do with your child?”
Performing most of the physical examination in the parent’s lap
may help allay fears of separation and stranger anxiety. Avoid direct
eye contact initially and introduce all tools used during the exam
such as the otoscope for the patient to explore before use. Save the
more invasive portions of the exam to the end (i.e., ears, throat, etc.).
Pediatricians can help parents understand the resurgence of problems with separation and the appearance of a transitional object as
developmental phenomenon. Methods of discipline should be discussed; effective alternatives to corporal punishment will usually be
appreciated (see Chapter 20 and Tables 20.3 and 20.4). Helping parents to understand and adapt to their children’s different temperamental styles can constitute an important intervention (see Table
19.1). Developing daily routines is helpful to all children at this age.
Rigidity in those routines reflects a need for mastery over a changing
environment. Parents should also institute systems to help prepare
their child during times of transition from one activity or setting to
another to help foster a sense of trust and communication.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

164 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

Chapter 25

The Preschool Years
Rebecca G. Carter and Susan Feigelman
The emergence of language and exposure of children to an expanding social sphere represent the critical milestones for children age 2-­5
years. As toddlers, children learn to walk away and come back to the
secure adult. As preschoolers, they explore emotional separation, alternating between stubborn opposition and cheerful compliance, between
bold exploration and clinging dependence. Increasing time spent in
classrooms and playgrounds strengthens a child’s ability to adapt to
new rules and relationships. Emboldened by their growing array of
new skills and accomplishments, preschool children also are increasingly cognizant of the constraints imposed on them by the adult world
and their own limited abilities.

STRUCTURAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE BRAIN

The preschool brain experiences dramatic changes in its anatomic and
physiologic characteristics, with increases in cortical area, decreases in
cortical thickness, and changing cortical volume. These changes are not
uniform across the brain and vary by region. Gray and white matter tissue properties change dramatically, including diffusion properties in the
major cerebral fiber tracts. Dramatic increases occur in brain metabolic
demands. In general, more brain regions are required in younger than
in older children to complete the same cognitive task. This duplication has been interpreted as a form of “scaffolding,” which is discarded
with increasing age. The preschool brain is characterized by growth and
expansion of synapses that will be followed in later years by “pruning.”

PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT

Somatic and brain growth slows by the end of the second year of life,
with corresponding decreases in nutritional requirements and appetite,
and the emergence of “picky” eating habits (see Table 27.1). Increases
of approximately 2 kg (4-­5 lb) in weight and 7-­8 cm (2-­3 in) in height
per year are expected. Birthweight quadruples by 2.5 years of age. An
average 4 year old weighs 40 lb and is 40 in tall. The head will grow
only an additional 5-­6 cm between ages 3 and 18 years. Current growth
charts, with growth parameters, can be found on the U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention website (http://www.cdc.gov/growt
hcharts/) and in Chapter 27. Children with early adiposity rebound
(increase in body mass index) are at increased risk for adult obesity.
The preschooler has genu valgum (knock-­knees) and mild pes planus (flatfoot). The torso slims as the legs lengthen. Growth of sexual
organs is commensurate with somatic growth. Physical energy peaks,
and the need for sleep declines to 11-­13 hours per 24 hours, with the
child eventually dropping the nap (see Fig. 23.2). Visual acuity reaches
20/30 by age 4 years and 20/20 by school age. All 20 primary teeth have
erupted by 3 years of age (see Chapter 353).
Most children walk with a mature gait and run steadily before the
end of their third year (see Table 24.1). Beyond this basic level, there
is wide variation in ability as the range of motor activities expands
to include throwing, catching, and kicking balls; riding on bicycles;
climbing on playground structures; dancing; and other complex pattern behaviors. Stylistic features of gross motor activity, such as tempo,
intensity, and cautiousness, also vary significantly. Although toddlers
may walk with different styles, toe walking should not persist.
The effects of such individual differences on cognitive and emotional
development depend in part on the demands of the social environment
and alignment with their caregivers’ temperaments. Energetic, coordinated children may thrive emotionally with parents or teachers who
encourage physical activity; lower-­energy, more cerebral children may
thrive with adults who value quiet play.
Handedness is usually established by the third year. Frustration
may result from inability to properly teach skills based on child’s hand

preference. Variations in fine motor development reflect both individual proclivities and different opportunities for learning. Children
who are restricted from drawing with crayons, for example, develop a
mature pencil grasp later.
Bowel and bladder control emerge during this period, with “readiness” for toileting having large individual and cultural variation.
Females tend to potty “train” faster and earlier than males. Bed-­wetting
is common up to age 5 years (see Chapter 580). Many children master
toileting with ease, particularly once they are able to verbalize their
bodily needs. For others, toilet training can involve a protracted power
struggle. Refusal to defecate in the toilet or potty is relatively common,
associated with constipation, and can lead to parental frustration.
Defusing the issue with a temporary cessation of training (and a return
to diapers) often allows toilet mastery to proceed. Parents should focus
on positive reinforcement and avoid negative reactions during the toilet training process.

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

The normal decrease in appetite at this age may cause parental concern
about nutrition; growth charts should reassure parents that the child’s
intake is adequate. Children normally modulate their food intake to
match their somatic needs according to feelings of hunger and satiety. Daily intake fluctuates, at times widely, but intake over a week is
relatively stable. Parents should provide a predictable eating schedule,
with three meals and two snacks per day, allowing the child to choose
how much to eat. This will avoid power struggles and allows the child
to respond to satiety cues. However, it is important to obtain thorough
diet histories for children at this age to advise parents about healthy
choices and encourage physical activity to decrease long-­term obesity
risks and improve learning and cognitive development.
Highly active children face increased risks of injury, and parents
should be counseled about safety precautions. Parental concerns
about possible hyperactivity may reflect inappropriate expectations,
heightened fears, or true overactivity. Children who engage in ongoing
impulsive activity with no apparent regard for personal safety or those
harming others on a regular basis should be evaluated further.
Assessment of motor skills must take into account a child’s exposure history. Before diagnosing a motor delay based on screening tools,
pediatricians should explore any limitations to a child’s exposure and
encourage parents to seek opportunities to work on these skills. Children should be followed closely at this age; referral to therapies should
be pursued when true delays are identified given the proven benefits of
early intervention.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND PLAY

These three domains all involve symbolic function, a mode of dealing
with the world that emerges during the preschool period.

Language

Our understanding of the acquisition of language is evolving. Preschool
children command significant computational skills and understanding
of statistical patterns that allow them to learn about both language and
causation. The 2-­and 3-­year-­old child employs frequency distributions
to identify phonetic units distinguishing words in his or her native language from other languages.
Language development occurs most rapidly between 2 and 5 years
of age. Vocabulary increases from 50-­100 words to more than 2,000.
Sentence structure advances from telegraphic phrases (“baby cry”)
to sentences incorporating all the major grammatical components
(see Chapter 53). As a rule of thumb, between ages 2 and 5 years,
the number of words the child puts in a typical sentence should, at a
minimum, equal the child’s age (2 by age 2 years, 3 by age 3 years, and
so on). By 21-­24 months, most children are using possessives (“my
ball”), progressives (the “-­ing” construction, as in “I playing”), questions, and negatives. By age 4 years, most children can count to 4 and
use the past tense; by age 5 years, they can use the future tense. Young
children do not use figurative speech; they will comprehend only the
literal meaning of words. Referring to an object as “light as a feather”
may produce a quizzical look on a child.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 25 u The Preschool Years
It is important to distinguish between speech (the production of
intelligible sounds) and language, which refers to the underlying mental act. Language includes both expressive and receptive functions.
Receptive language (understanding) varies less in its rate of acquisition than does expressive language; therefore it has greater prognostic
importance (see Chapters 28 and 53).
Language acquisition depends critically on environmental input.
Key determinants include the amount and variety of speech directed
toward children and the frequency with which adults ask questions
and encourage verbalization. Children raised in poverty typically perform lower on measures of language development than children from
economically advantaged families, who tend to be exposed to many
more words in the preschool period. Interventions aimed at increasing
access to books in the home can temper these differences and improve
language and pre-­reading skills in the preschool child.
Although experience influences the rate of language development,
many linguists believe that the basic mechanism for language learning is “hard-­wired” in the brain. Children do not simply imitate adult
speech; they abstract the complex rules of grammar from the ambient
language, generating implicit hypotheses. Evidence for the existence of
such implicit rules comes from analysis of grammatical errors, such as
the overgeneralized use of “-­s” to signify the plural and “-­ed” to signify
the past (“We seed lots of mouses.”).
Language is linked to both cognitive and emotional development.
Language delays may be the first indication of an intellectual disability,
autism spectrum disorder, or child neglect or maltreatment. Language
plays a critical part in the regulation of behavior through internalized “private speech” in which a child repeats adult prohibitions, first
audibly and then mentally. Language also allows children to express
feelings, such as anger or frustration, without acting them out; consequently, language-­delayed children may show higher rates of tantrums
and other externalizing behaviors.
Preschool language development lays the foundation for later success in school. Approximately 35% of U.S. children may enter school
lacking the language skills that are the prerequisites for acquiring literacy. Children from socially and economically disadvantaged backgrounds have an increased risk of school problems, making early
detection, along with referral and enrichment in programs such as
Head Start, highly crucial for later development. Although children
typically learn to read and write in elementary school, critical foundations for literacy are established during the preschool years. Through
repeated early exposure to written words, children learn about the uses
of writing (telling stories or sending messages) and about its form (left
to right, top to bottom). Early errors in writing, like errors in speaking, reveal that literacy acquisition is an active process involving the
generation and revision of hypotheses. Bilingual children may initially
appear to lag behind their monolingual peers in acquiring language.
They learn the differing rules governing both languages, and generally
have the same number of total words between the languages. Bilingual
children do not follow the same course of language development as
monolingual children, but rather create a different system of language
cues. Several cognitive advantages have been repeatedly demonstrated
among bilingual compared to monolingual children.
Picture books have a special role in familiarizing young children
with the printed word and in the development of verbal language.
Children’s vocabulary and receptive language improve when their
parents or caregivers consistently read to them. Reading aloud with
a young child is an interactive process in which a parent repeatedly
focuses the child’s attention on a particular picture, asks questions,
and then gives the child feedback (dialogic reading). The elements of
shared attention, active participation, immediate feedback, repetition,
and graduated difficulty make such routines ideal for language learning. Programs in which physicians provide books to preschool children
have shown improvement in language skills among the children (e.g.,
Reach Out and Read).
The period of rapid language acquisition is also when developmental
dysfluency and stuttering are most likely to emerge (see Chapter 53.1);
these can be traced to activation of the cortical motor, sensory, and
cerebellar areas. Common difficulties include pauses and repetitions of

165

initial sounds. Stress or excitement exacerbates these difficulties, which
generally resolve on their own. Although 5% of preschool children will
stutter, it will resolve in 80% of those children by age 8 years. Children with stuttering should be referred for evaluation if it is severe,
persistent, or associated with anxiety, or if parental concern is elicited.
Treatment includes guidance to parents to reduce pressures associated
with speaking.

Cognition

The preschool period corresponds to Piaget’s preoperational (prelogical) stage, characterized by magical thinking, egocentrism, and
thinking that is dominated by perception, not abstraction (see Table
19.2). Magical thinking includes confusing coincidence with causality, animism (attributing motivations to inanimate objects and events),
and unrealistic beliefs about the power of wishes. A child might believe
that people cause it to rain by carrying umbrellas, that the sun goes
down because it is tired, or that feeling resentment toward a sibling can
actually make that sibling sick. Egocentrism refers to a child’s inability to take another’s point of view and does not connote selfishness.
A child might try to comfort an adult who is upset by bringing the
adult a favorite stuffed animal. After 2 years of age, the child develops
a concept of herself or himself as an individual and senses the need to
feel “whole.”
Piaget demonstrated the dominance of perception over logic. In
one experiment, water is poured back and forth between a tall, thin
vase and a low, wide dish, and children are asked which container
has more water. Typically, preschool-­age children choose the one that
looks larger (usually the tall vase), even when the examiner points out
that no water has been added or taken away. Such misunderstandings
reflect young children’s developing hypotheses about the nature of the
world, as well as their difficulty in attending simultaneously to multiple
aspects of a situation. Preschool children also are able to understand
causal relationships; this adds to our understanding of the ability of
preschool children to engage in abstract thinking (see Chapter 19).
Imitation, central to the learning experience of preschool children,
is a complex act because of differences in the size of the operators (the
adult and the child), different levels of dexterity, and even different outcomes. A child who watches an adult unsuccessfully attempt a simple
act (unscrew a lid) will imitate the action, but often with the intended
outcome and not the demonstrated (failed) outcome. Thus “imitation”
goes beyond the mere repetition of observed movements.
By age 3 years, children have self-­identified their sex and are actively
seeking understanding of the meaning of gender identification. There
is a developmental progression from rigidity (males and female have
strict gender roles) in the early preschool years to a more flexible realistic understanding (males and females can have a variety of interests
that are not gender specific). Parents can facilitate this flexibility by
eliminating gender-­based expectations and expanding play options.

Play

Play involves learning, physical activity, socialization with peers, and
practicing adult roles. Play increases in complexity and imagination,
from simple imitation of common experiences, such as shopping and
putting baby to bed (2 or 3 years of age), to more extended scenarios
involving singular events, such as going to the zoo or going on a trip
(3 or 4 years of age), to the creation of scenarios that have only been
imagined, such as flying to the moon (4 or 5 years of age). By age 3
years, cooperative play is seen in activities such as building a tower of
blocks together; later, more structured role-­play activity, as in playing
house, is seen. Play also becomes increasingly governed by rules, from
early rules about asking (rather than taking) and sharing (2 or 3 years
of age), to rules that change from moment to moment, according to
the desires of the players (4 and 5 years of age), to the beginning of the
recognition of rules as relatively immutable (5 years of age). Electronic
forms of play (games) are best if interactive and educational and should
remain limited in duration.
Play also allows for resolution of conflicts and anxiety and for creative outlets. Children can vent anger safely (reprimanding a doll), take
on superpowers (dinosaur and superhero play), and obtain things that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

166 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
are denied in real life (an imaginary friend or stuffed animal). Creativity is particularly apparent in drawing, painting, and other artistic
activities. Themes and emotions that emerge in a child’s drawings often
reflect the emotional issues of greatest importance for the child.
Difficulty distinguishing fantasy from reality colors a child’s perception of what the child views in the media, through programming and
advertising. Twenty-­five percent of young children have a television
set or tablet in their bedroom; screen time in the bedroom is associated with more hours of watching. The number of hours that most
preschoolers watch screens exceeds guidelines (1 hr/day for 2-­5 year
olds). Interactive quality educational programming in which children
develop social relationships with the characters can increase learning
if paired with adult interaction around the storyline. Exposure to commercial programming with violent content is associated with behavior
problems, and because children younger than 8 years are not able to
comprehend the concept of persuasive intent, they are more vulnerable
to advertising.

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

The significance of language as a target for assessment and intervention
cannot be overestimated, because of its central role as an indicator of
cognitive and emotional development and a key factor in behavioral
regulation and later school success. As language emerges, parents can
support emotional development by using words that describe the child’s
feeling states (“You sound angry right now”) and urging the child to
use words to express rather than act out feelings. Active imaginations
will come into play when children offer explanations for misbehavior.
A parent’s best way of dealing with untruths is to address the event, not
the child, and have the child participate in “making things right.”
Parents should have a regular time each day for reading or looking
at books with their children. Programs such as Reach Out and Read,
in which clinicians give out picture books along with appropriate guidance during primary care visits, have been effective in increasing reading aloud and thereby promoting language development, particularly
in lower-­income families. TV and similar media should be limited to 1
hr/day of quality programming for children age 2-­5 years, and parents
should be watching the programs with their children and debriefing
their young children afterward. At-­risk children, particularly those living in poverty, can better meet future school challenges if they have
early high-­quality child care and learning experiences (e.g., Head Start).
Preoperational thinking constrains how children understand experiences of illness and treatment. Children begin to understand that
bodies have “insides” and “outsides.” Children should be given simple,
concrete explanations for medical procedures and given some control
over procedures if possible. Children should be reassured that they are
not to blame when receiving a vaccine or venipuncture, and parents
should be discouraged from making threats about needles if their child
is not cooperating with the exam. An adhesive bandage will help to
make the body “whole” again in a child’s mind.
The active imagination that fuels play and the magical, animist
thinking characteristic of preoperational cognition can also generate intense fears. More than 80% of parents report at least one fear in
their preschool children. Refusal to take baths or to sit on the toilet
may arise from the fear of being washed or flushed away, reflecting a
child’s immature appreciation of relative size. Attempts to demonstrate
rationally that there are no monsters in the closet often fail, inasmuch
as the fear arises from preoperational thinking. However, this same
thinking allows parents to be endowed with magical powers that can
banish the monsters with “monster spray” or a night-­light. Parents
should acknowledge the fears, offer reassurance and a sense of security,
and give the child some sense of control over the situation. Use of the
Draw-­a-­Person, in which a child is asked to draw the best person the
child can, may help elucidate a child’s viewpoint.

Emotional and Moral Development

Emotional challenges facing preschool children include accepting limits while maintaining a sense of self-­direction, reigning in aggressive
and sexual impulses, and interacting with a widening circle of adults
and peers. At 2 years of age, behavioral limits are predominantly

external; by 5 years of age, these controls need to be internalized if a
child is to function in a typical classroom. Success in achieving this
goal relies on prior emotional development, particularly the ability to
use internalized images of trusted adults to provide a secure environment in times of stress. The love a child feels for important adults is the
main incentive for the development of self-­control.
Children learn what behaviors are acceptable and how much power
they wield vis-­à-­vis important adults by testing limits. Limit testing
increases when it elicits attention, even though that attention is often
negative, and when limits are inconsistent. Testing often arouses parental anger or inappropriate solicitude as a child struggles to separate, and
it gives rise to a corresponding parental challenge: letting go. Excessively tight limits can undermine a child’s sense of initiative, whereas
overly loose limits can provoke anxiety in a child who feels that no one
is in control.
Control is a central issue. Young children cannot control many
aspects of their lives, including where they go, how long they stay, and
what they take home from the store. They are also prone to lose internal
control, that is, to have temper tantrums. Fear, overtiredness, hunger,
inconsistent expectations, or physical discomfort can also evoke tantrums. Tantrums normally appear toward the end of the first year of life
and peak in prevalence between 2 and 4 years of age. Tantrums lasting
more than 15 minutes or regularly occurring more than three times
per day may reflect underlying medical, emotional, developmental, or
social problems. Parents likely will not be able to reason or teach in the
context of an active tantrum, and should offer emotional support during these times, sticking to short and concise explanations (“I can’t let
you hit”). Lessons about their behavior or discussions about strategies
for future challenges should be delayed until the child is calm and able
to engage.
Preschool children normally experience complicated feelings toward
their parents that can include strong attachment and possessiveness
toward the parent of the opposite sex, jealousy and resentment of the other
parent, and fear that these negative feelings might lead to abandonment.
These emotions, most of which are beyond a child’s ability to comprehend
or verbalize, often find expression in highly labile moods. The resolution
of complicated feelings (a process extending over years) involves a child’s
unspoken decision to identify with the parents rather than compete with
them. Play and language foster the development of emotional controls by
allowing children to express emotions and role-­play.
Curiosity about genitals and adult sexual organs is normal, as is
masturbation. Excessive masturbation interfering with normal activity, acting out sexual intercourse, extreme modesty, or mimicry of
adult seductive behavior all suggest the possibility of sexual abuse or
inappropriate exposure (see Chapter 17.1). Modesty appears gradually
between 4 and 6 years of age, with wide variations among cultures and
families. Parents should begin to teach children about “private” body
areas before school entry.
Moral thinking is constrained by a child’s cognitive level and language
abilities but develops as the child builds their identity with trusted adults.
Beginning before the second birthday, the child’s sense of right and
wrong stems from the desire to earn adult approval and avoid negative
consequences. The child’s impulses are tempered by external forces; the
child has not yet internalized societal rules or a sense of justice and fairness. Over time, as the child internalizes parental admonitions, words are
substituted for aggressive behaviors. Finally, the child accepts personal
responsibility. Actions will be viewed by damage caused, not by intent.
Empathic responses to others’ distress arise during the second year of
life, but the ability to consider another child’s point of view remains limited throughout this period. In keeping with a child’s inability to focus on
more than one aspect of a situation at a time, fairness is taken to mean
equal treatment, regardless of circumstance. A 4 year old will acknowledge the importance of taking turns but will complain if he or she “didn’t
get enough time.” Rules tend to be absolute, with guilt assigned for bad
outcomes, regardless of intentions.

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

The importance of the preschooler’s sense of control over his or her
body and surroundings have implications for practice. Preparing the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 26 u Middle Childhood

167

patient by letting the child know how the visit will proceed is reassuring. Tell the child what will happen, but do not ask permission unless
you are willing to deal with a “no” answer. A brief introduction to “private parts” is warranted before the genital examination.
The visit of the 4 or 5 year old should be entertaining, because of the
child’s ability to communicate, as well as the child’s natural curiosity. Physicians should realize that all children are occasionally difficult. Guidance emphasizing appropriate expectations for behavioral and emotional
development and acknowledging normal parental feelings of anger, guilt,
and confusion should be part of all visits at this time. Parents should
be queried about daily routines and their expectations of child behavior.
Providing children with acceptable choices (all options being acceptable to the parent) and encouraging independence in self-­care activities
(feeding, dressing, and bathing) will reduce conflicts.
Although some cultures condone the use of physical punishment for
disciplining of young children, it is not a consistently effective means
of behavioral control (Chapter 20). As children habituate to repeated
spanking, parents have to spank ever harder to achieve the desired
response, increasing the risk of serious injury. Sufficiently harsh punishment may acutely inhibit undesired behaviors, but at great long-­
term psychologic cost. Children may mimic the physical punishment
that they receive; children who are spanked will have more aggressive
behaviors later. Whereas spanking is the use of force, externally applied,
to produce behavior change, discipline is the process that allows the
child to internalize controls on behavior. Alternative discipline strategies should be offered, such as the “countdown” for transitions along
with consistent limit setting, “time-­outs” and “time-­ins” (fun activities
with caregiver present and interacting), clear communication of rules,
and frequent approval with positive reinforcement of productive play
and behavior (see Chapter 20 and Tables 20.3 and 20.4). Punishment
should be immediate, specific to the behavior, and time limited. Time-­
out for approximately 1 minute per year of age is very effective if children
are getting sufficient time in. A kitchen timer or digital phone alarm
allows the parent to step back from the situation; the child is free when
the timer rings. Although one strategy might not work for all children
uniformly, consistency is integral to healthy learning and growth.

Growth of the midface and lower face occurs gradually. Loss of deciduous (baby) teeth is a more dramatic sign of maturation, beginning
around 6 years of age. Replacement with adult teeth occurs at a rate of
about four per year, so that by age 9 years, children will have eight permanent incisors and four permanent molars. Premolars erupt by 11-­12
years of age (see Chapter 353). Lymphoid tissues hypertrophy and reach
maximal size, often giving rise to impressive tonsils and adenoids.
Muscular strength, coordination, and stamina increase progressively,
as does the ability to perform complex movements, such as dancing or
shooting baskets. Such higher-­order motor skills are the result of both
maturation and training; the degree of accomplishment reflects wide
variability in innate skill, interest, and opportunity.
Physical fitness has declined among school-­age children. Sedentary
habits at this age are associated with increased lifetime risk of obesity,
cardiovascular disease, lower academic achievement, and lower self-­
esteem. The number of overweight children and the degree of overweight have been increasing (see Chapter 65). Only 15% of middle and
junior high schools require physical education classes at least three
days per week. One quarter of youth do not engage in any free-­time
physical activity, despite the recommendation for at least 1 hour of
physical activity per day.
Perceptions of body image develop early during this period; children as young as 5 and 6 years may express dissatisfaction with their
body image; by ages 8 and 9 years many of these youth report trying
to diet, often using ill-­advised regimens. Loss-­of-­control (binge) eating
occurs among approximately 6% of children at this age.
Before puberty the sensitivity of the hypothalamus and pituitary
changes, leading to increased gonadotropin synthesis. Interest in
gender differences and sexual behavior increases progressively until
puberty. Although this is a period when sexual drives are limited, masturbation is common, and children may be interested in differences
between genders. Rates of maturation differ by geography, ethnicity,
and country. Sexual maturity occurs earlier for both sexes in the United
States. Differences in maturation rates have implications for differing
expectations of others based on sexual maturation.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Middle childhood is generally a time of excellent health. However,
children have variable sizes, shapes, and abilities. Children of this age
compare themselves with others, eliciting feelings about their physical
attributes and abilities. Fears of being “abnormal” can lead to avoidance
of situations in which physical differences might be revealed, such as
gym class or medical examinations. However, all children, including
those with disabilities, should participate in gym classes. Those with
physical disabilities may face special stresses; medical, social, and psychologic risks tend to occur together.
Children should be asked about risk factors for obesity. Participation in physical activity, including organized sports or other organized
activities, can foster skill, teamwork, and fitness as well as a sense of
accomplishment, but pressure to compete when the activity is no longer enjoyable has negative effects. Counseling on establishing healthy
eating habits and limited screen time should be given to all families.
Prepubertal children should not engage in high-­stress, high-­impact
sports, such as power lifting or tackle football, because skeletal immaturity increases the risk of injury and concussions may have long-­term
sequelae (see Chapter 729).

Chapter 26

Middle Childhood
Mutiat T. Onigbanjo and Susan Feigelman
Middle childhood (6-­11 years of age) is the period in which children
increasingly separate from parents and seek acceptance from teachers,
other adults, and peers. Children begin to feel under pressure to conform to the style and ideals of the peer group. Self-­esteem becomes a
central issue, as children develop the cognitive ability to consider their
own self-­evaluations and their perception of how others see them. For
the first time, they are judged according to their ability to produce
socially valued outputs, such as getting good grades, playing a musical
instrument, or hitting home runs.

PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT

Growth occurs discontinuously, in three to six irregularly timed spurts
each year, but varies both within and among individuals. Growth during
the period averages 3-­3.5 kg (6.6-­7.7 lb) and 6-­7 cm (2.4-­2.8 in) per year
(Fig. 26.1). The head grows only 2 cm in circumference throughout the
entire period, reflecting a slowing of brain growth. Myelination continues into adolescence, with peak gray matter at 12-­14 years. Body habitus
is more erect than previously, with long legs compared with the torso.

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

COGNITIVE DEVELOPMENT

The thinking of early elementary school-­age children differs qualitatively from that of preschool children. In place of the magical, egocentric, and perception-­
bound cognition of preschool children,
school-­age children increasingly apply rules based on observable phenomena, factor in multiple dimensions and points of view, and interpret their perceptions using physical laws. Piaget documented this shift
from preoperational to concrete (logical) operations (see Chapter 19).
When 5 year olds watch a ball of clay being rolled into a snake, they
might insist that the snake has “more” because it is longer. In contrast,
7 year olds typically reply that the ball and the snake must weigh the
same because nothing has been added or taken away or because the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

168 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

 WR  \HDUV %R\V
6WDWXUHIRUDJH DQG :HLJKWIRUDJH SHUFHQWLOHV
0RWKHU¶V 6WDWXUH
'DWH

)DWKHU¶V 6WDWXUH
$JH

:HLJKW

6WDWXUH

%0,

1$0(
5(&25' 

        
FP
$*( <($56






LQ

6
7
$
7
8
5
(



















:
(
,
*
+
7






OE

A

FP















 























LQ








6
7
$
7
8
5
(







 



 






























 
 










 :
  (
 
 



 



 
 






















NJ


$*( <($56
NJ
          

















,
*
+
7








OE

3XEOLVKHG 0D\   PRGLILHG  
6285&( 'HYHORSHG E\ WKH 1DWLRQDO &HQWHU IRU +HDOWK 6WDWLVWLFV LQ FROODERUDWLRQ ZLWK
WKH 1DWLRQDO &HQWHU IRU &KURQLF 'LVHDVH 3UHYHQWLRQ DQG +HDOWK 3URPRWLRQ  
KWWSZZZFGFJRYJURZWKFKDUWV

Fig. 26.1 A, Stature (height) for age and weight for boys, age 2-­20 years. B, Stature (height) for age and weight for girls, age 2-­20 years.

(Courtesy National Center for Health Statistics, in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
2000. http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 26 u Middle Childhood

 WR  \HDUV *LUOV
6WDWXUHIRUDJH DQG :HLJKWIRUDJH SHUFHQWLOHV
0RWKHU¶V 6WDWXUH
'DWH

)DWKHU¶V 6WDWXUH
$JH

:HLJKW

6WDWXUH

%0,

1$0(
5(&25' 

        
FP
$*( <($56






LQ




6
7
$
7
8
5
(
















:
(
,
*
+
7






OE

B

FP















169

 





















LQ








6
7
$
7
8
5
(







 



 




 
 




































 
 
 















NJ


$*( <($56
NJ
          













Fig. 26.1, cont’d
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.



 







 







 :
  (



3XEOLVKHG 0D\   PRGLILHG  
6285&( 'HYHORSHG E\ WKH 1DWLRQDO &HQWHU IRU +HDOWK 6WDWLVWLFV LQ FROODERUDWLRQ ZLWK
WKH 1DWLRQDO &HQWHU IRU &KURQLF 'LVHDVH 3UHYHQWLRQ DQG +HDOWK 3URPRWLRQ  
KWWSZZZFGFJRYJURZWKFKDUWV










OE

,
*
+
7

170 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 26.1  Selected Perceptual, Cognitive, and Language Processes Required for Elementary School Success
PROCESS

DESCRIPTION

ASSOCIATED PROBLEMS

Ability to break a complex figure into components and
understand their spatial relationships

Persistent letter confusion (e.g., between b, d, and g);
difficulty with basic reading and writing and limited
“sight” vocabulary

Proprioception and motor
control

Ability to obtain information about body position by feel
and unconsciously program complex movements

Poor handwriting, requiring inordinate effort, often with
overly tight pencil grasp; special difficulty with timed
tasks

Phonologic processing

Ability to perceive differences between similar-­sounding
words and to break down words into constituent
sounds

Delayed receptive language and reading skill;
attention and behavior problems secondary to not
understanding directions; delayed acquisition of
letter-­sound correlations (phonetics)

Ability to acquire skills that are “automatic”
(i.e., accessible without conscious thought)

Delayed mastery of the alphabet (reading and writing
letters); slow handwriting; inability to progress beyond
basic mathematics

Selective attention

Ability to attend to important stimuli and ignore
distractions

Difficulty following multistep instructions, completing
assignments, and behaving well; problems with peer
interaction

Sequencing

Ability to remember things in order; facility with time
concepts

Difficulty organizing assignments, planning, spelling,
and telling time

Ability to comprehend complex constructions, function
words (e.g., if, when, only, except), nuances of speech,
and extended blocks of language (e.g., paragraphs)

Difficulty following directions; wandering attention
during lessons and stories; problems with reading
comprehension; problems with peer relationships

Ability to recall required words effortlessly (word
finding), control meanings by varying position and
word endings, and construct meaningful paragraphs
and stories

Difficulty expressing feelings and using words for self-­
defense, with resulting frustration and physical acting
out; struggling during “circle time” and in language-­
based subjects (e.g., English)

PERCEPTUAL
Visual analysis

COGNITIVE
Long-­term memory, both
storage and recall

LANGUAGE
Receptive language

Expressive language

snake is both longer and thinner. This cognitive reorganization occurs
at different rates in different contexts. In the context of social interactions with siblings, young children often demonstrate an ability to
understand alternate points of view long before they demonstrate that
ability in their thinking about the physical world. Understanding time
and space constructs occurs in the later part of this period.
The concept of school readiness has evolved. The American Academy
of Pediatrics recommends following an “interactional relational” model in
which the focus is on the child, the environment, and the resulting interactions. This model explicitly asserts that all children can learn and that the
educational process is reciprocal between the child and the school. It is
developmentally based, recognizing the importance of early experiences
for later development. Rather than delaying school entry, high-­quality
early-­education programs may be the key to ultimate school success.
School makes increasing cognitive demands on the child. Mastery
of the elementary curriculum requires that many perceptual, cognitive, and language processes work efficiently (Table 26.1), and children
are expected to attend to many inputs at once. The first 2-­3 years of
elementary school are devoted to acquiring the fundamentals: reading,
writing, and basic mathematics skills. By third grade, children need to
be able to sustain attention through a 45-­minute period, and the curriculum requires more complex tasks. The goal of reading a paragraph
is no longer to decode the words, but to understand the content; the
goal of writing is no longer spelling or penmanship, but composition.
The volume of work increases along with the complexity.
Cognitive abilities interact with a wide array of attitudinal and emotional factors in determining classroom performance. These factors
include external rewards (eagerness to please adults and approval from
peers) and internal rewards (competitiveness, willingness to work for a
delayed reward, belief in one’s abilities, and ability to risk trying when
success is not ensured). Success predisposes to success, whereas failure impacts self-­esteem and reduces self-­efficacy, diminishing a child’s
willingness to take future risks.

Children’s intellectual activity extends beyond the classroom. Beginning
in the third or fourth grade, children increasingly enjoy strategy games and
wordplay (puns and insults) that exercise their growing cognitive and linguistic mastery. Many become experts on subjects of their own choosing,
such as sports trivia, or develop hobbies, such as special card collections.
Others become avid readers or take on artistic pursuits. Whereas board
and card games were once the usual leisure-­time activity of youth, video,
computer, and other electronic games currently fill this need.

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

Pediatricians have an important role in preparing their patients for
school entrance by promoting health through immunizations, adequate
nutrition, appropriate recreation, and screening for physical, developmental, and cognitive disorders. The American Academy of Pediatrics
recommends that pediatric providers promote the “5 Rs” of early education: (1) reading as a daily family activity; (2) rhyming, playing, and
cuddling together; (3) routines and regular times for meals, play, and
sleep; (4) reward through praise for successes; and (5) reciprocal nurturing relationships.
Concrete operations allow children to understand simple explanations for illnesses and necessary treatments, although they may revert
to prelogical thinking when under stress. A child with pneumonia may
be able to explain about white cells fighting the “germs” in the lungs
but may still secretly harbor the belief that the sickness is a punishment
for disobedience.
As children are faced with more abstract concepts, academic and
classroom behavior problems emerge and come to the pediatrician’s
attention. Referrals may be made to the school for remediation or to
community resources (medical or psychologic) when appropriate.
The causes may be one or more of the following: deficits in perception (vision and hearing); specific learning disabilities (see Chapters
51 and 52); global cognitive delay (intellectual disability; Chapter
56); deficits in attention and executive function (Chapters 49 and 50);

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 26 u Middle Childhood
and attention deficits secondary to family dysfunction, depression,
anxiety, or chronic illness. Children whose learning style does not fit
the classroom culture may have academic difficulties and need assessment before failure sets in. Simply having a child repeat a failed grade
rarely has any beneficial effect and often seriously undercuts the child’s
self-­esteem. In addition to finding the problem areas, identifying each
child’s strengths is important. Educational approaches that value a wide
range of talents (“multiple intelligences”) beyond the traditional reading, writing, and mathematics may allow more children to succeed.
The change in cognition allows the child to understand “if/when”
clauses. Increased responsibilities and expectations accompany
increased rights and privileges. Discipline strategies should move
toward negotiation and a clear understanding of consequences, including removal of privileges for infringements.

SOCIAL, EMOTIONAL, AND MORAL
DEVELOPMENT
Social and Emotional Development

In middle childhood, energy is directed toward creativity and productivity. Changes occur in three spheres: the home, the school, and
the neighborhood. Of these, the home and family remain the most
influential. Increasing independence is marked by the first sleepover
at a friend’s house and the first time at overnight camp. Parents should
make demands for effort in school and extracurricular activities, celebrate successes, and offer unconditional acceptance when failures
occur. Regular chores, associated with an allowance, provide an opportunity for children to contribute to family functioning and learn the
value of money. These responsibilities may be a testing ground for psychologic separation, leading to conflict. Siblings have critical roles as
competitors, loyal supporters, and role models.
The beginning of school coincides with a child’s further separation
from the family and the increasing importance of teacher and peer relationships. Social groups tend to be same-­sex, with frequent changing
of membership, contributing to a child’s growing social development
and competence. Popularity, a central ingredient of self-­esteem, may
be won through possessions (having the latest electronic gadgets or the
right clothes), as well as through personal attractiveness, accomplishments, and actual social skills. Children are aware of racial differences
and are beginning to form opinions about racial groups that impact
their relationships. Gender identification, which began in early childhood, continues to evolve and can have significant implications for
peer relationships and self-­awareness.
Some children conform readily to the peer norms and enjoy easy
social success. Those who adopt individualistic styles or have visible
differences may be teased or bullied. Children with deficits in social
skills may go to extreme lengths to win acceptance, only to meet with
repeated failure. Attributions conferred by peers, such as funny, stupid, bad, or fat, may become incorporated into a child’s self-­image and
affect the child’s personality, as well as school performance. Parents
may have their greatest effect indirectly, through actions that change
the peer group (changing the child’s school or encouraging involvement in structured after-­school activities). Children who identify with
a gender different from their sex of birth, or whose manner and dress
reflect those more typically seen as “opposite” their birth sex, may be
subject to teasing or bullying (Chapter 153). This can magnify the confusion for these children, who are formulating their own concept of
“self.”
In the neighborhood, real dangers, such as busy streets, bullies,
violence, and strangers, tax school-­age children’s common sense and
resourcefulness (see Chapter 15). Interactions with peers without close
adult supervision call on increasing conflict resolution skills. Media
exposure to adult materialism, sexuality, substance use, and violence
may be frightening, reinforcing children’s feeling of powerlessness in
the larger world. Compensatory fantasies of being powerful may fuel
the fascination with heroes and superheroes. A balance between fantasy and an appropriate ability to negotiate real-­world challenges indicates healthy emotional development.

171

Moral Development

Although by age 6 years most children will have a conscience (internalized rules of society), they vary greatly in their level of moral development. For younger children, many still subscribe to the notion that
rules are established and enforced by an authority figure (parent or
teacher), and decision-­making is guided by self-­interest (avoidance
of negative and receipt of positive consequences). The needs of others
are not strongly considered in decision-­making. As they grow older,
most will recognize not only their own needs and desires but also
those of others, although personal consequences are still the primary
driver of behavior. Social behaviors that are socially undesirable are
considered wrong. By age 10-­11 years, the combination of peer pressure, a desire to please authority figures, and an understanding of
reciprocity (treat others as you wish to be treated) shapes the child’s
behavior.

Implications for Parents and Pediatricians

Children need unconditional support as well as realistic demands
as they venture into a world that is often frightening. A daily query
from parents over the dinner table or at bedtime about the good and
bad things that happened during the child’s day may uncover problems early. Parents may have difficulty allowing the child independence or may exert excessive pressure on their children to achieve
academic or competitive success. Children who struggle to meet
such expectations may have behavior problems or psychosomatic
complaints.
Many children face stressors that exceed the normal challenges of
separation and success in school and the neighborhood. Approximately 50% of all marriages in the United States end in divorce.
In addition, domestic violence, parental substance abuse, and other
adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) may also impair a child’s
ability to use home as a secure base for refueling emotional energies. In many neighborhoods, random violence makes the normal
development of independence extremely dangerous. Older children
may join gangs as a means of self-­protection and a way to attain
recognition and to belong to a cohesive group. Children who bully
others and those who are victims of bullying should be evaluated,
because bullying is associated with mood disorders, family problems, and school adjustment problems. Parents should reduce exposure to hazards where possible. Because of the risk of unintentional
firearm injuries to children, parents should be encouraged to ask
parents of playmates whether a gun is kept in their home and, if so,
how it is secured.
Pediatrician visits are infrequent in this period; therefore each
visit is an opportunity to assess children’s functioning in all contexts (home, school, neighborhood). Maladaptive behaviors, both
internalizing and externalizing, occur when children do not have
safe, secure attachments to adults and stress in any of these environments overwhelms the child’s coping responses, becoming “toxic
stress.” Because of continuous exposure and the strong influence of
media (programming and advertisements) on children’s beliefs and
attitudes, parents must be alert to exposures from television and
internet. Youth 8-­12 years of age spend over 6 hr/day with a variety of media; half have a TV in their bedroom. Parents should be
advised to remove the TV from their children’s rooms, limit viewing to 2 hr/day, and monitor what programs children watch. Nearly
all children have exposure to mobile technology. Some computer
screen time may be necessary for schoolwork and virtual learning.
However, the widespread use of social media may have detrimental effects including risky health behaviors, cyberbullying, targeted
advertisements, and low self-­esteem. The Draw-­a-­Person (for ages
3-­10 years, with instructions to “draw a complete person”) and
Kinetic Family Drawing (beginning at age 5 years, with instructions to “draw a picture of everyone in your family doing something”) are useful office tools to assess a child’s functioning.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

172 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

Chapter 27

Assessment of Growth
Vaneeta Bamba and Andrea Kelly
Growth can be considered a vital sign in children, and aberrant growth
may be the first sign of an underlying pathologic condition. The most
powerful tool in growth assessment is the growth chart (Figs. 24.1,
24.2, 26.1, and 27.1), used in combination with accurate measurements
of height, weight, head circumference, and calculation of the body
mass index (BMI).

TECHNIQUES TO MEASURE GROWTH

Growth assessment requires accurate and precise measurements. For
infants and toddlers age <2 years, weight, length, and head circumference are obtained. Head circumference is measured with a flexible
tape measure starting at the supraorbital ridge around to the occipital
prominence in the back of the head, locating the maximal circumference. Height and weight measures should be performed with the
infant naked, and ideally, repeated measures will be performed on the
same equipment. Recumbent length is most accurately measured by
two examiners (one to position the child). Hair ornaments and hairstyles that interfere with measurements and positioning should be
removed. The child’s head is positioned against an inflexible measuring
board in the Frankfurt plane, in which the outer canthi of the eyes
are in line with the external auditory meatus and are perpendicular
to the long axis of the trunk. Legs should be fully extended, and feet
are maintained perpendicular to the plane of the supine infant. For
older children (>2 years) who can stand unassisted, standing heights
should be obtained without shoes, using a stadiometer with the head
in the Frankfurt plane, and the back of the head, thoracic spine, buttocks, and heels approximating the vertical axis of one another and the
stadiometer.
Measurements obtained using alternative means, such as marking
examination paper at the foot and head of a supine infant or using a
tape measure or wall growth chart with a book or ruler on the head can
lead to inaccuracy and render the measurement useless.
Measurements for height and weight should be plotted on the age-­
appropriate growth curve. Comparing measurements with previous
growth trends, repeating measures that are inconsistent, and plotting
results longitudinally are essential for monitoring growth. Calculation
of interim linear height velocity, such as centimeters per year (cm/yr),
allows more precise comparison of growth rate to the norm (Table 27.1).
If a child is growing faster or more slowly than expected, measurement of body proportions, which follow a predictable sequence of
changes with development, are useful. The head and trunk are relatively
large at birth, with progressive lengthening of the limbs throughout
development, particularly during puberty. The upper-­to-­lower body
segment ratio (U/L ratio) provides an assessment of truncal growth
relative to limb growth. The lower-­body segment is defined as the
length from the top of the symphysis pubis to the floor, and the upper-­
body segment is the total height minus the lower-­body segment. The
U/L ratio equals approximately 1.7 at birth, 1.3 at 3 years, and 1.0 after
7 years. Higher U/L ratios are characteristic of short-­limb dwarfism, as
occurs with Turner syndrome or bone disorders, whereas lower ratios
suggest hypogonadism or Marfan syndrome.
Arm span also provides assessment of proportionality and is measured as the distance between the tips of the middle fingers while the
patient stands with the back against the wall with arms outstretched
horizontally at a 90-­degree angle to the trunk. This span should be
close to height, although the proportion changes with age.

GROWTH CURVES

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend use of the

2006 World Health Organization (WHO) growth curves for children
age 0-­24 months and the 2000 CDC growth curves for children age
2-­19 years (https://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts). There are five standard gender-­specific charts: (1) weight for age, (2) height (length and
stature) for age, (3) head circumference for age, (4) weight for height
(length and stature) for infants, and (5) BMI for age (see Fig. 27.1;
see also Figs. 24.1, 24.2, and 26.1). Clinicians should confirm that the
correct CDC and WHO growth charts are used in electronic medical
records to ensure accurate characterization of growth.
The WHO curves describe growth differently than the CDC curves
(Fig. 27.2). The WHO curves are growth standards that describe how
children grow under optimal conditions, whereas the CDC curves are
growth references that describe how children grew in a specific time
and place. The WHO growth curves are based on longitudinal growth
studies in which cohorts of newborns were chosen from six countries
(Brazil, Ghana, India, Norway, Oman, United States) using specific
inclusion and exclusion criteria; all infants were breastfed for at least
12 months and were predominantly breastfed for the first 4 months
of life. They were measured regularly from birth to 23 months during
1997–2003. In contrast, the CDC curves are based on cross-­sectional
data from different studies during different time points. Growth curves
for children age 2-­59 months were based on the National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), which included a cross section of the U.S. population. These data were supplemented with additional participants in a separate nutrition surveillance study.
Several deficiencies of the older charts have been corrected, such as
the overrepresentation of bottle-­fed infants and the reliance on a local
dataset for the infant charts. The disjunction between length and height
when transitioning from the infant curves to those for older children
is improved.
Each chart is composed of percentile curves, which indicate the
percentage of children at a given age on the x axis whose measured
value falls below the corresponding value on the y axis. The 2006 WHO
growth curves include values that are 2 standard deviations (SD) above
and below median (2nd and 98th percentiles), whereas the 2000 CDC
growth curves include 3rd and 97th percentiles. On the WHO weight
chart for boys ages 0-­24 months (see Fig. 24.2A), the 9 month age line
intersects the 25th percentile curve at 8.3 kg, indicating that 25% of
9-­month-­old males in the WHO cohorts weigh less than 8.3 kg (75%
weigh more). Similarly, a 9-­month-­old male weighing more than 11 kg
is heavier than 98% of his peers. The median or 50th percentile is also
termed the standard value, in the sense that the standard length for a
7-­month-­old female is 67.3 cm (see Fig. 24.2B). The weight-­for-­length
charts (see Fig. 24.1) are constructed in an analogous fashion, with
length or stature in place of age on the x axis; the median or standard
weight for a female measuring 100 cm is 15 kg.
Extremes of height or weight can also be expressed in terms of
the age for which they would represent the standard or median. For
instance, an 18-­month-­old female who is 74.9 cm (2nd percentile) is
at the 50th percentile for a 13 month old. Thus the height age is 13
months. Weight age can similarly be expressed.
In assessing adolescents, caution must be used in applying cross-­
sectional charts. Growth during adolescence is linked temporally to the
onset of puberty, which varies widely. Normal variations in the timing of the growth spurt can lead to misdiagnosis of growth abnormalities. By using cross-­sectional data based on chronologic age, the charts
combine youth who are at different stages of maturation. Data for
12-­year-­old males include both earlier-­maturing males who are at the
peak of their growth spurts and later-­maturing ones who are still growing at their prepubertal rate. The net results are an artificially blunted
growth peak, and the appearance that adolescents grow more gradually
and for a longer duration than in actuality.
When additional insight is necessary, growth charts derived from
longitudinal data, such as the height velocity charts of Tanner and
colleagues, are recommended. The longitudinal component of these
velocity curves is based on British children from the 1950s and 1960s,
and cross-­sectional data from U.S. children were superimposed. Height
velocity curves based on longitudinal data from a multiethnic study
conducted at five U.S. sites included SD scores for height velocity for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 27 u Assessment of Growth

 WR  \HDUV %R\V
%RG\ PDVV LQGH[IRUDJH SHUFHQWLOHV
'DWH

$JH

:HLJKW

6WDWXUH

1$0(
5(&25' 
&RPPHQWV

%0,

%0,












%0,









































































NJP

$*( <($56

























NJP















3XEOLVKHG 0D\   PRGLILHG  
6285&( 'HYHORSHG E\ WKH 1DWLRQDO &HQWHU IRU +HDOWK 6WDWLVWLFV LQ FROODERUDWLRQ ZLWK
WKH 1DWLRQDO &HQWHU IRU &KURQLF 'LVHDVH 3UHYHQWLRQ DQG +HDOWK 3URPRWLRQ  
A
KWWSZZZFGFJRYJURZWKFKDUWV

Fig. 27.1 A, Body mass index (BMI) percentiles for boys, age 2-­20 years.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.





173

174 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

 WR  \HDUV *LUOV
%RG\ PDVV LQGH[IRUDJH SHUFHQWLOHV
'DWH

$JH

:HLJKW

6WDWXUH

1$0(
5(&25' 
&RPPHQWV

%0,

%0,










%0,













































































NJP

$*( <($56

























NJP



















3XEOLVKHG 0D\   PRGLILHG  
6285&( 'HYHORSHG E\ WKH 1DWLRQDO &HQWHU IRU +HDOWK 6WDWLVWLFV LQ FROODERUDWLRQ ZLWK
WKH 1DWLRQDO &HQWHU IRU &KURQLF 'LVHDVH 3UHYHQWLRQ DQG +HDOWK 3URPRWLRQ  
KWWSZZZFGFJRYJURZWKFKDUWV
B

Fig. 27.1 Cont’d B, BMI percentiles for girls, age 2-­20 years. Official Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] growth charts, as de-

scribed in this chapter.) The 85th to 95th percentile is at risk for overweight; >95th percentile is overweight; <5th percentile is underweight. Technical
information and interpretation and management guides are available at www.cdc.gov/nchs. Developed by the National Center for Health Statistics
in collaboration with the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2000 (http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts).
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 27 u Assessment of Growth

175

16
High weight for length†

14

CDC
WHO

Prevalence (%)

12

Low weight for age*

10
8

Low length for age*

6
4
2
0

0–5

6–11 12–17 18–23

0–5

6–11 12–17 18–23

0–5

6–11 12–17 18–23

Age (mo)
Fig. 27.2 Comparison of World Health Organization (WHO) and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) growth chart prevalence of
low length for age, low weight for age, and high weight for length among children age <24 months, United States, 1999–2004. *, ≤5th percentile
on the CDC charts; ≤2.3rd percentile on the WHO charts. †, ≥95th percentile on the CDC charts; ≥97.7th percentile on the WHO charts. (Data
from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999–2004; from Grummer-­Strawn LM, Reinold C, Krebs NF: Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention: Use of World Health Organization and CDC growth charts for children ages 0-­59 months in the United States, MMWR
Recomm Rep 2010;59[RR-­9]:1–15.)

Table 27.1  Growth Velocity and Other Growth Characteristics by Age
INFANCY
Birth-­12 mo: 24 cm/yr
12-­24 mo: 10 cm/yr
24-­36 mo: 8 cm/yr

CHILDHOOD

ADOLESCENCE

6 cm/yr
Slowly decelerates before pubertal onset
Height typically does not cross percentile lines

Sigmoid-­shaped growth
Adolescent growth spurt accounts for about
15% of adult height
Peak height velocity
Girls: 8 cm/yr
Boys: 10 cm/yr

earlier-­and later-­maturing adolescents to facilitate the identification of
poor or accelerated linear growth.
Specialized growth charts have been developed for U.S. children
with various conditions, including very low birthweight (VLBW),
small for gestational age, trisomy 21, Turner syndrome, and achondroplasia, and should be used when appropriate.
Facilitating identification of obesity, the charts include curves for
plotting BMI for ages 2-­20 years rather than weight for height (see Fig.
27.1). Methodologic steps have ensured that the increase in the prevalence of obesity has not unduly raised the upper limits of normal. BMI
can be calculated as weight in kilograms/(height in meters)2 or weight
in pounds/(height in inches)2 × 703, with fractions of pounds and
inches expressed as decimals. Because of variable weight and height
gains during childhood, BMI must be interpreted relative to age and
sex; the BMI percentile provides a more standardized comparison. For
example, a 6-­year-­old girl with a BMI of 19.7 kg/m2 (97th percentile)
is obese, whereas a 15-­year-­old female with BMI of 19.7 kg/m2 (50th
percentile) is normal weight.

Normal Growth

Height is highly correlated with genetics, specifically parental height.
Calculation of sex-­adjusted midparental height is important when
assessing growth in a child to avoid misclassification of abnormal
growth. The average difference in stature between males and females
is 5 inches (13 cm); therefore 5 inches (13 cm) is subtracted from
the father’s height before averaging with mother’s height in a female,
whereas 5 inches (13 cm) is added to the mother’s height before averaging with the father’s height in a male:
• Males: [(Maternal height + 5 inches) + Paternal height]/2
• Females: [Maternal height + (Paternal height − 5 inches)]/2

Furthermore, generally 4 inches (2 SD) is applied above and below
this value to provide a genetic target height range. For example, if the
mother is 63 inches tall and the father 70 inches tall, the daughter’s
sex-­adjusted midparental height is 64 inches ± 4 inches, for a target
height range of 60-­68 inches. The son of these same parents would
have a sex-­adjusted midparental height of 69 inches, with a range
of 65-­73 inches. Note that these general guidelines do not address
extreme differences between parental heights that may affect individual target height range.
Growth can be divided into four major phases: fetal, infantile,
childhood, and adolescence. Growth rate varies by age (see Table
27.1). Different factors are of different importance in each phase,
and the various contributors to poor growth may feature more in one
phase than another. Long-­term height may be permanently compromised if one entire phase is characterized by poor growth. Therefore
early detection and prevention are critical. Fetal growth is the fastest growth phase, with maternal, placental, fetal, and environmental
factors playing key roles. Birthweight does not necessarily correlate
with adult height, although factors that inhibit fetal growth may have
long-­lasting effects, as seen in children with intrauterine growth
retardation. Infantile growth is particularly sensitive to nutrition
as well as congenital conditions. Genetic height gradually becomes
influential; indeed, crossing of percentiles in the first 2 years of life
is common as children begin to approach their genetic potential.
Childhood growth is often the most steady and predictable. During this phase the height percentile is fairly consistent in otherwise
healthy children.
Adolescent growth is associated with a decrease in growth velocity before the onset of puberty; this deceleration tends to be more
pronounced in males. During pubertal development, sex hormones

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

176 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
2 

mean

Height

2 

Postnatal onset
pathologic short stature
Constitutional
growth delay
Familial short
stature
Prenatal onset
pathologic short stature

3

6

9

12

15

18

21

24

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

Infants (mo)
Children (yr)
Fig. 27.3 Height-­for-­age growth curves of the four general causes of proportional short stature: postnatal onset pathologic short stature, constitutional growth delay, familial short stature, and prenatal onset short stature. (From Mahoney CP: Evaluating the child with short stature, Pediatr
Clin North Am 1987;34:825.)

(testosterone and estrogen) are the primary drivers of growth and
enhance growth hormone secretion, thereby facilitating pubertal
growth acceleration. Females typically experience growth acceleration
during Tanner stage 3 for breast development, whereas this acceleration occurs during Tanner stage 4 for pubic hair development in males.
Males not only achieve greater height velocities than females during
puberty, but also grow approximately 2 years longer than females, both
of which contribute to the taller average height of adult males compared with adult females.

Abnormal Growth

Growth is a dynamic process. A child measured at the 5th percentile
for stature may be growing normally, may be failing to grow, or may
be recovering from growth failure, depending on the trajectory of the
growth curve (Fig. 27.3). Growth failure must be distinguished from
short stature. Growth failure is defined as achievement of height velocity that is less than expected for a child’s age and sex (and pubertal
development if relevant) or a downward crossing of more than 2 percentile lines for height on the growth chart. Short stature is defined
as growing either below expected genetic potential or growing below
−2 SD for age and sex. For some children, however, growth parameters ≤2 SD may be normal, and differentiating appropriately small
vs. pathologically small is crucial. Midparental height, ethnicity, and
other factors that may be inherent in the child’s genetic height potential are important considerations in the assessment of growth. For
children with particularly tall or short parents, overdiagnosing and
underdiagnosing growth disorders are risks if parental heights are not
considered. In the setting of familial short stature or tall stature, more
specialized charts can help determine whether a child is even shorter
or taller than expected for parental heights, to prevent misdiagnosis of
growth disorders.
For premature infants, overdiagnosis of growth failure can be
avoided by using growth charts developed specifically for this population. A cruder method, subtracting the weeks of prematurity from
the postnatal age when plotting growth parameters, does not capture
the variability in growth velocity that VLBW infants demonstrate.
Although VLBW infants may continue to show catch-­up growth
through early school age, most achieve weight catch-­up during the

second year and height catch-­up by 3-­4 years, barring medical complications (see Chapter 119).
Abnormal growth may be caused by a variety of factors, including
congenital conditions, systemic disease, endocrine disorders, nutritional deficiency (see Chapter 62), psychosocial conditions, constitutional delay, or familial disorders (Tables 27.2 and 27.3). In congenital
pathologic short stature, an infant may or may not be born small, but
growth gradually tapers throughout infancy (see Fig. 27.3). Causes
include chromosome or genetic abnormalities (Turner syndrome,
skeletal dysplasia, trisomy 21; see Chapters 57 and 99), perinatal infection, extreme prematurity, and teratogens (phenytoin, alcohol) (see
Chapters 117.4 and 146). Linear growth deceleration with or without
changes in weight can occur at the onset or as a result of a systemic
illness or chronic inflammation. Medications such as high-­dose glucocorticoids may also impact growth. Analysis of growth patterns
requires consideration of weight status. Poor linear growth in the setting of decreasing BMI suggests a nutritional or gastrointestinal issue,
whereas poor linear growth in the context of good or robust BMI may
suggest a hormonal condition (hypothyroidism, growth hormone deficiency, cortisol excess).
Not all decreased growth is abnormal; variations of growth include
constitutional growth (and pubertal) delay and familial short stature. In
constitutional growth delay, weight and height decrease near the end
of infancy, parallel the norm through middle childhood, and accelerate
toward the end of adolescence with achievement of normal adult height.
In familial short stature, both the infant/child and the parent(s) are
small; growth runs parallel to and just below the normal curves.
Although tall or accelerated growth may be a variation of normal,
unexpected increase in growth may also signal an underlying condition (see Table 27.3). Typically, obese individuals grow more quickly
than their peers because of peripheral aromatization of estrogen and
effects on bone maturation. Despite early taller stature, obese children
are not ultimately taller than anticipated for genetic height. Early onset
of puberty, growth hormone excess, and sex steroid exposure can also
lead to accelerated growth. Several of these conditions may ultimately
lead to short stature in adulthood. Genetic conditions associated with
tall stature and overgrowth include Sotos, Klinefelter, and Marfan syndromes (see Chapter 598 and 598.1).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 27 u Assessment of Growth
Table 27.2  Common Causes of Decreased Growth and
Short Stature
Variation of normal
Familial short stature
Constitutional delay
Delayed puberty
Nutrition and gastrointestinal conditions
Malnutrition
Celiac disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Genetic conditions
Turner syndrome
Prader-­Willi syndrome
22q deletion syndrome
Trisomy 21
Skeletal dysplasias: achondroplasia, SHOX haploinsufficiency,
osteogenesis imperfecta
Endocrine conditions
Hypothyroidism
Growth hormone deficiency
Poorly controlled diabetes mellitus
Poorly controlled diabetes insipidus
Metabolic bone disease: rickets, hypophosphatasia
Glucocorticoid excess
Psychosocial causes
Renal conditions
Renal tubular acidosis
Nephrotic syndrome
Medications
Glucocorticoids
Inappropriate sex steroid exposure
Antiepileptic medications

Table 27.3  Common Causes of Increased Growth and Tall
Stature
Variation of normal
Constitutional tall stature
Familial tall stature
Endocrine conditions
Growth hormone excess
Precocious puberty (ultimate height may be decreased)
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Obesity
Genetic conditions
Marfan syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
Sotos syndrome

Evaluation of Abnormal Growth

Evaluation of abnormal growth should include confirmation that the
data are accurate and plotted correctly. Comparisons should be made
with previous measurements. If poor or rapid growth or short or tall
stature is a concern, a radiograph of the left hand and wrist to show the
bone age can provide information about skeletal maturation. Skeletal
development represents physiologic rather than chronologic age. Reference standards for bone maturation facilitate estimation of bone age
(see Table 23.3). A delayed bone age (skeletal age younger than chronologic age) suggests catch-­up potential for linear growth. Advanced bone
age suggests a rapid maturation of the skeleton that may lead to earlier
cessation of growth. Bone age should be interpreted with the guidance
of a pediatric endocrinologist. Skeletal age correlates well with stage of
pubertal development and may be helpful in predicting adult height in

177

early-­or late-­maturing adolescents. In familial short stature the bone
age is normal (comparable to chronologic age), whereas constitutional
delay, endocrinologic short stature, and undernutrition may be associated with delay in bone age comparable to the height age.
Laboratory testing is also useful in assessment of growth and
may be tailored to suspected etiology based on the patient history
and physical examination. Initial assessment includes comprehensive metabolic panel, complete blood count, sedimentation rate,
C-­reactive protein, thyroid-­stimulating hormone, thyroxine, celiac
panel, and insulin-­like growth factor (IGF)-­I and IGF-­BP3, which
are surrogate markers for growth hormone secretion (see Chapter
595). A karyotype to exclude Turner syndrome is an essential component of the evaluation of short stature in females and should be
performed even in the absence of characteristic physical features (see
Chapter 626.1). If there is concern for abnormal timing of puberty
contributing to growth pattern, gonadotropins (luteinizing hormone,
follicle-­stimulating hormone), and estradiol or testosterone may also
be assessed. A urinalysis can provide additional information about
renal function. Evaluation by a pediatric nutritionist for caloric needs
assessment may be useful in patients with malnutrition, underweight
status, or slow weight gain. Additional testing and referral to specialists should be performed as indicated.

OTHER GROWTH CONSIDERATIONS
Obesity

Obesity affects large numbers of children (see Chapter 65). The CDC
defines obesity as BMI ≥95th percentile for age and sex, and overweight
as BMI 85th to <95th percentile for age and sex. Although widely
accepted as the best clinical measure of underweight and overweight,
BMI may not provide an accurate index of adiposity because it does
not differentiate lean tissue and bone from fat. In otherwise healthy
individuals, lean body mass is largely represented by BMI at lower
percentiles. BMI >80–85% largely reflects increased body fat with a
nonlinear relationship between BMI and adiposity. In the setting of
chronic illness, increased body fat may be present at low BMI, whereas
in athletes, high BMI may reflect increased muscle mass. Measurement of the triceps, subscapular, and suprailiac skinfold thickness have
been used to estimate adiposity. Other methods of measuring fat, such
as hydrodensitometry, bioelectrical impedance, and total body water
measurement, are used in research, but not in clinical evaluation, but
whole body dual-­energy x-­ray absorptiometry (DXA) is beginning to
emerge as a tool for measuring body fat and lean body mass.

Dental Development

Dental development includes mineralization, eruption, and exfoliation
(Table 27.4). Initial mineralization begins as early as the second trimester (mean age for central incisors, 14 weeks) and continues through 3
years of age for the primary (deciduous) teeth and 25 years of age for
the secondary (permanent) teeth. Mineralization begins at the crown
and progresses toward the root. Eruption begins with the central incisors and progresses laterally. Exfoliation begins at about 6 years of age
and continues through 12 years. Eruption of the permanent teeth may
follow exfoliation immediately or may lag by 4-­5 months. The timing
of dental development is poorly correlated with other processes of
growth and maturation. Delayed eruption is usually considered when
no teeth have erupted by approximately 13 months of age (mean ± 3
SD). Common causes include congenital or genetic disorders, endocrine disorders (e.g., hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism), familial
conditions, and (the most common) idiopathic conditions. Individual
teeth may fail to erupt because of mechanical blockage (crowding, gum
fibrosis). Causes of early exfoliation include hypophosphatasia, histiocytosis X, cyclic neutropenia, leukemia, trauma, and idiopathic factors.
Nutritional and metabolic disturbances, prolonged illness, and certain
medications (tetracycline) frequently result in discoloration or malformations of the dental enamel. A discrete line of pitting on the enamel
suggests a time-­limited insult.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

178 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 27.4  Chronology of Human Dentition of Primary (Deciduous) and Secondary (Permanent) Teeth
CALCIFICATION
BEGINS AT
PRIMARY TEETH
Central incisors
Lateral incisors
Cuspids (canines)
First molars
Second molars
SECONDARY TEETH
Central incisors
Lateral incisors
Cuspids (canines)
First premolars (bicuspids)
Second premolars (bicuspids)
First molars
Second molars
Third molars

AGE AT ERUPTION

COMPLETE AT

MAXILLARY

MANDIBULAR

5th fetal mo
5th fetal mo
6th fetal mo
5th fetal mo
6th fetal mo

18-­24 mo
18-­24 mo
30-­36 mo
24-­30 mo
36 mo

6-­8 mo
8-­11 mo
16-­20 mo
10-­16 mo
20-­30 mo

5-­7 mo
7-­10 mo
16-­20 mo
10-­16 mo
20-­30 mo

3-­4 mo
Max, 10-­12 mo
Mand, 3-­4 mo
4-­5 mo
18-­21 mo
24-­30 mo
Birth
30-­36 mo
Max, 7-­9 yr
Mand, 8-­10 yr

9-­10 yr
10-­11 yr

7-­8 yr
8-­9 yr

6-­7 yr
7-­8 yr

12-­15 yr
12-­13 yr
12-­14 yr
9-­10 yr
14-­16 yr
18-­25 yr

11-­12 yr
10-­11 yr
10-­12 yr
6-­7 yr
12-­13 yr
17-­22 yr

9-­11 yr
10-­12 yr
11-­13 yr
6-­7 yr
12-­13 yr
17-­22 yr

AGE AT SHEDDING
MAXILLARY
7-­8 yr
8-­9 yr
11-­12 yr
10-­12 yr
10-­12 yr

MANDIBULAR
6-­7 yr
7-­8 yr
9-­11 yr
10-­12 yr
11-­13 yr

Mand, Mandibular; max, maxillary.
Adapted from a chart prepared by P.K. Losch, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, who provided the data for this table.

Chapter 28

Developmental and
Behavioral Surveillance
and Screening
Eliza Gordon-­Lipkin and Paul H. Lipkin
In healthy development, a child will acquire new skills beginning prenatally and extending into at least young adulthood. The roots of this
acquisition of skills lie in the development of the nervous system, with
additional influences from the health status of other organ systems
and the physical and social environment in which the development
occurs. Development and its milestones are divided into the “streams”
of gross motor, fine motor, language (expressive and receptive), social
language, and self-­help. Behavior can be categorized into observable,
spontaneous, and responsive behaviors in the settings of home, school,
and community.
Although typical development is associated with wide variability in
the age of skill acquisition in each of these streams, specific developmental and behavioral disorders are seen in approximately 1 of 6 children and may affect the health, function, and well-­being of the child
and family for a lifetime. These disorders include relatively less common conditions that often cause severe impairments, such as cerebral
palsy and autism, and relatively common conditions such as attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, speech language disorders, and behavioral and emotional disorders that affect as many as 25% of children.
The more common conditions are generally perceived as “less severe,”
but these too can have major short-­term and long-­term impact on the
child’s health and daily functioning in the home, school, and community and can affect lifelong well-­being. Because of their high prevalence
in children; their impact on health, social, and economic status; and
their effect on the child, the home, and the community, these disorders
require the attention of the pediatrician throughout childhood. In addition, both the child and the family benefit from the early identification

and treatment of many of these conditions, including the most severe. It
is therefore incumbent on the primary care clinician to conduct regular
developmental surveillance and periodic developmental screening at
health supervision visits aimed at early identification and treatment.
Among the many types of developmental or behavioral conditions,
the most common include language problems, affecting at least 10% of
children (see Chapter 53); behavior or emotional disorders, affecting up
to 25% of children, with 6% considered serious; attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder, affecting 10% of children (Chapter 50); and learning
disabilities, affecting up to 10% (Chapters 51 and 52). Less common
and more disabling are the intellectual disabilities (1–2%; Chapter
56); autism spectrum disorders (1 in 36 children; Chapter 58); cerebral palsy and related motor impairments (0.3%, or 1 in 345 children;
Chapter 638.1); hearing impairment, also referred to as deafness, hard-­
of-­hearing, or hearing loss (0.12%; Chapters 55 and 677); and nonrefractive vision impairment (0.8%; Chapter 661).

DEVELOPMENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL
SURVEILLANCE

General health surveillance is a critical responsibility of the primary
care clinician and is a key component of health supervision visits. Regular developmental and behavioral surveillance should be performed
at every health supervision visit from infancy through young adulthood. Surveillance of a child’s development and behavior includes both
obtaining historical information on the child and family and making
observations at the office visit (Tables 28.1 and 28.2).
Key historical elements include (1) eliciting and attending to the
parents’ or caregivers’ concerns around the child’s development or
behavior; (2) obtaining a history of the child’s developmental skills and
behavior at home, with peers, in school, and in the community; and (3)
identifying the risks, strengths, and protective factors for development
and behavior in the child and family, including the social determinants of health. During the office visit, the clinician should make and
document direct observations of the child’s developmental skills and
behavioral interactions. Skills in all streams of development should be
considered along with observations of related neurologic functioning
made on physical examination.
With this history and observation, the clinician should create and
maintain a longitudinal record of the child’s development and behavior
for tracking the child across visits. It is often helpful to obtain information from and share information with other professionals involved

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 28 u Developmental and Behavioral Surveillance and Screening

179

Table 28.1  Key Components of Developmental and
Behavioral Surveillance

Table 28.2  Red Flags in Developmental Screening and
Surveillance

HISTORY
1.	Parental developmental concerns
2.	Developmental history
a.	Streams of developmental milestone achievement
i.	Gross motor
ii.	Fine motor
iii.	Verbal speech and language
(1)	Expressive
(2)	Receptive
iv.	Social language and self-­help
b.	Patterns of abnormality
i.	Delay
ii.	Dissociation
iii.	Deviation or deviant development
iv.	Regression
3.	Behavior history
a.	Interactions
i.	Familiar settings (e.g., home, school): parents, siblings,
other familiar people, peers, other children
ii.	Interaction in unfamiliar settings (e.g., community):
unfamiliar adults and children
b.	Patterns of abnormality
i.	Noncompliance, disruption (including tantrums), aggression,
impulsivity, increased activity, decreased attention span,
decreased social engagement, decreased auditory or visual
attention
ii.	Deviation or atypical behaviors
(1)	Repetitive play, rituals, perseverative thought or action,
self-­injury
4.	Risk factor identification: medical, family, and social history
(including social determinants of health)
5.	Protective factor identification (also including social determinants)

These indicators suggest that development is significantly
delayed or disordered and that the child should be referred to a
developmental pediatrician or pediatric neurologist. Any delay in
achieving a milestone at the 75th percentile may be considered
a red flag and merits further evaluation, vigilant surveillance, or
repeat screening.

DEVELOPMENTAL OBSERVATION
1.	Movement: gross and fine motor skills
2.	Verbal communication: expressive speech and language,
language understanding
3.	Social engagement and response
4.	Behavior: spontaneous and responsive with caregiver and with
staff
5.	Related neurologic function on physical examination

with the child, including childcare professionals, home visitors, teachers, after-­school providers, and developmental therapists. This provides
a complete picture of the child’s development and behavior and allows
collaborative tracking of the child’s progress.

The Developmental and Behavioral Histories

Developmental surveillance includes tracking a child’s achievement
of milestones, which represent key readily recognizable skills that usually occur in a predictable sequence and at predictable age ranges during childhood. The developmental skill areas can be divided into gross
motor, fine motor, speech and language (expressive and receptive),
social language, and self-­help. Tracking milestones will reveal that
most children achieve the milestones in a typical pattern and within
typical age ranges. However, the pediatrician or the parent may recognize concerning patterns of development, such as delay, dissociation,
deviation, or regression.
Developmental delay occurs when development is occurring in its
usual sequence but at a slower rate, with milestones achieved later than
the normal range (see Chapter 56). Delay can occur in a single area of
development or across several streams and can be expressed as a developmental quotient (DQ). The DQ is calculated by dividing the age at
which the child is functioning developmentally (developmental age; DA)
by chronologic age (CA) and multiplying by 100 (DQ = DA/CA × 100).

POSITIVE INDICATORS
Presence of any of the following:
Loss of developmental skills at any age
Parental or professional concerns about vision, fixing, or following an
object or a confirmed visual impairment at any age (simultaneous
referral to pediatric ophthalmology)
Hearing loss at any age (simultaneous referral for expert audiologic
or ear, nose, and throat assessment)
Persistently low muscle tone or floppiness (check creatine kinase)
No speech by 15 mo, especially if the child does not try to
communicate by other means, such as gestures (simultaneous
referral for urgent hearing test)
Asymmetry of movements or other features suggestive of cerebral
palsy, such as increased muscle tone
Persistent toe walking
Multiple organ involvement
Head circumference above the 99.6th centile or below 0.4th centile;
also, if circumference has crossed 2 centiles (up or down) on the
appropriate chart or is disproportionate to parental head
circumference
NEGATIVE INDICATORS
Activities that the child cannot do:
Sit unsupported by 12 mo
Walk by 18 mo (check creatine kinase)
Walk other than on tiptoes
Run by 24 mo
Hold object placed in hand by 4 mo (corrected for gestation)
Reach for objects by 6 mo (corrected for gestation)
Points to show you something interesting by 18 months
Adapted from Horridge KA. Assessment and investigation of the child with disordered
development. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed. 2011;96:9–20; Zubler JM, Wiggins LD,
Macias MM, et al. Evidence-informed milestones for developmental surveillance tools.
Pediatrics. 2022;149(3):e2021052138.

A DQ of 100 indicates that the child is developing at the mean or average rate, whereas a DQ below 70 is associated with delays of 2 or more
standard deviations from the mean and suggests a significant delay that
requires further evaluation.
Developmental dissociation indicates delay in a single stream with
typical development in other streams. A child with autism may have
delays in verbal or social language but normal motor skills. Deviation
or deviant development is defined by development occurring out of
sequence, as when a child stands before sitting (as in diplegic cerebral
palsy) or has better expressive vocabulary than receptive understanding of words (language and autism spectrum disorders). Regression
refers to a loss of skills. It may also be identified earlier or more subtly
by a slowing or lack of advancement in skills. Although regression is
uncommon in most developmental disabilities, regression is described
in as many as 25% of children with autism and is also seen in rarer
neurologic disorders, such as Rett syndrome and Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.
Behavioral surveillance is conducted by obtaining a history of a
child’s behavior and interactions across settings, including home, daycare, school, and community, and in situations such as eating, sleeping,
and play. In addition, interactions may differ based on who the child is
with (parent or guardian, sibling, peers, teachers, strangers). Concerns
may include limited engagement or socializing, compliance, tantrums,
aggression, destruction, impulsivity, high activity level, decreased
auditory or visual attention, and short attention span. Deviations from

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

180 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 28.3  Standardized Tools for General Developmental Screening
AGE RANGE

ITEMS (NO.)

ADMIN TIME (MIN)

Ages & Stages Questionnaires-­3
(ASQ3)1

SCREENING TEST*

2-­66 mo

30

10-­15

Paul H. Brookes Publishing
www.agesandstages.com

PUBLICATION INFORMATION

Parents’ Evaluation of Developmental
Status (PEDS)2

0-­8 yr

10

2-­10

Ellsworth & Vandermeer Press
877-­296-­9972
www.pedstest.com

Parents’ Evaluation of Developmental
Status: Developmental Milestones
(PEDS:DM) Screening Version2

0-­8 yr

6-­8 items at each
age level

4-­6

Ellsworth & Vandermeer Press
877-­296-­9972
www.pedstest.com

Survey of Well-­Being of Young Children
(SWYC)3-­6

Dev:
1-­65 mo
Autism:
16-­35 mo

Dev: 10
Autism: 7

Dev: <5
Autism: <5

www.theswyc.org

*Key reference sources:
1Squires J, Potter L, Bricker D. The ASQ User’s Guide, 3rd ed, Baltimore, MD, Paul H. Brookes Publishing, 2009.
2Glascoe FP, Marks KP, Poon JK, et al. (eds). Identifying and addressing developmental-­behavioral problems: a practical guide for medical and non-­medical professionals, trainees,
researchers and advocates. Nolensville, TN: PEDStest.com, 2013.
3Sheldrick RC, Perrin EC. Evidence-­based milestones for surveillance of cognitive, language, and motor development. Acad Pediatr. 2013, 13(6):577–556.
4Smith N, Sheldrick R, Perrin E. An abbreviated screening instrument for autism spectrum disorders. Infant Ment Health J. 2012;34(2):149–155.
5Salisbury LA, Nyce JD, Hannum CD, et al. Sensitivity and specificity of 2 autism screeners among referred children between 16 and 48 months of age. J Dev Behav Pediatr.
2018;39(3):254–258.
6Publications and user’s manual available at www.theswyc.org.

usual behavior may also occur, including repetitive play, ritualistic
behaviors, perseverative thoughts or actions, and self-­injury.

Observation

Observations of the child’s developmental skills and behavioral interactions should be made in the examining room, with documentation
in the medical record, and combined with the examination of other
neurologic functioning, such as muscle tone, reflexes, and posture.
Developmental observations may include a child’s gross and fine
motor movements, both on the floor and on the examination table.
Spoken language and response to others’ communications, as well as
interactions and engagement with the parent or guardian, should be
noted. If siblings are in the room, the interaction between the child
and a sibling may also be informative. Impulsivity, attention problems, tantrums, noncompliance, oppositionality, and aggression may
be observed along with interactions with the clinician, but one should
inquire about whether these behaviors are seen in other settings, given
the possible unfamiliarity or discomfort of the child with the healthcare professional or in healthcare settings.
If inquiring about and observing the child’s development and behavior suggests normal or typical patterns of development and behavior,
discussions can be held about future milestones and usual behavior
management strategies employable at home. If problems or concerns
are identified by the parent or clinician, however, formal developmental screening, evaluation, or management should be considered, along
with early follow-­up and review.

DEVELOPMENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCREENING

Periodic episodic screening for developmental and behavioral conditions should be conducted on every child, as done for other health
conditions such as anemia, lead poisoning, hearing, and congenital
metabolic disorders. Developmental and behavioral screenings are
centered on administration of low-­cost, brief, and standardized tests
in the primary care setting. These tests can be implemented by health
assistants at age-­determined visits, with interpretation of the results
and referral or treatment initiation by the primary care clinician as
indicated.
The American Academy of Pediatrics provides recommendations and guidelines on age-­specific developmental screening for
implementation in the primary care medical home. Developmental
screening using a formal, validated, and standardized test is recommended during health supervision visits at 9, 18, and 30 months.
Tests recommended at these ages screen development across all the

streams. In addition, an autism screening test is recommended at
the 18 and 24 month visits. Tables 28.3 and 28.4 provide recommended screening tests for general development and for autism. It
is also recommended that a child have a screening test administered
any time that a parent, guardian, or child health or early childhood
professional has concerns identified during developmental surveillance, or through screening performed at early childhood programs. Although routine formal screening before the child’s entry
into elementary school is not included in current guidelines, the
primary care clinician should be vigilant about surveillance regarding development at the 4 or 5 year old visit and perform formal
screening if concerns are identified, because of the potential impact
on learning and school services.
Each of the screening visits offers special opportunities to identify
specific developmental conditions. At the 9 month screening, critical
areas of development are vision, hearing, gross motor, fine motor, and
receptive language. It is at this age that disabilities may be identified in
vision or hearing, as well as cerebral palsy and other neuromotor disorders. At 18 months, expressive language and social language development are particularly important areas. Conditions identified at this age
may include those considered at 9 months, although in milder forms,
as well as autism spectrum, language, and intellectual disorders. By the
30 month visit, the child’s behavioral interactions become an additional
area of focus, with problems emerging tied to attention and disruptive
behavior disorders. Although universal screening is not recommended
at later ages, developmental surveillance may identify children in need
of screening or evaluation for problems in learning, attention, and
behavior.
Additional screening for behavioral conditions should be considered,
although there is currently no recommended consensus on the ages
at which behavioral screening should occur. One possibility would be
to provide behavioral screening at the 30 month, 4 or 5 year, and 8
year visits to identify problems emerging in the toddler, preschool, and
early elementary years. For older children, visits during preadolescent
or adolescent ages also offer an opportunity for surveillance and possible screening for behavioral and emotional problems meriting professional assistance or intervention. Table 28.5 provides recommended
behavior screening tools.

Evidence-­Based Tools

Tables 28.3, 28.4, and 28.5 show a range of measures useful for
early identification of developmental and behavioral problems.
Because well-­child visits are brief and with broad agendas (health

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 28 u Developmental and Behavioral Surveillance and Screening

181

Table 28.4  Standardized Tools for Language and Autism Screening
SCREENING TEST*

AGE RANGE

ITEMS (NO.)

ADMIN TIME (MIN)

Communication and Symbolic Behavior
Scales: Developmental Profile (CSBS-­DP):
Infant Toddler Checklist1

6 mo-­6 years (for
language function
6-­24 mo)

24

5-­10

Paul H. Brookes Publishing
800-­638-­3775
www.brookespublishing.com

Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers,
Revised with Follow-­up (M-­CHAT-­R/F)2

16-­48 mo

20 plus follow-­
up interview

5-­10

www.mchatscreen.com

Screening Tool for Autism in Toddlers and
Young Children (STAT)3,4

24-­35 mo

12 (avg)

20-­30

https://stat.vueinnovations.com

4+ yr

40 (avg)

5-­10

Western Psychological Services
www.wpspublish.com

Social Communication Questionnaire
(SCQ)5,6

PUBLICATION INFORMATION

*Key reference sources:

1Wetherby AM, Prizant BM. Communication and Symbolic Behavior Scales: developmental profile. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing, 2002.
2Robins DL, Casagrande K, Barton M, et al. Validation of the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers, Revised with Follow-­up (M-­CHAT-­R/F). Pediatrics. 2014;133(1):37–45.
3Stone WL, Coonrod EE, Ousley O. Brief report: screening tool for autism in 2-­year-­olds (STAT): development and preliminary data. J Autism Dev Disord. 2000;30:607–612
4Stone WL, Coonrod EE, Turner LM, Pozdol SL. Psychometric properties of the STAT for early autism screening. J Autism Dev Disord. 2004;34:691–701.
5Rutter M, Bailey A, Lord C: The Social Communication Questionnaire (SCQ) Manual. Los Angeles; Western Psychological Services, 2003.
6Corsello C, Hus V, Pickles A, et al. Between a ROC and a hard place: decision making and making decisions about using the SCQ. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2007;48(9):932–940.

Table 28.5  Standardized Tools for General Behavioral Screening
SCREENING TEST*

AGE RANGE

ITEMS (NO.)

ADMIN TIME (MIN)

Ages & Stages Questionnaire:
Social-­Emotional-­2 (ASQ:SE-­2)
(2015)1,2

2-­72 mo

9 age-­specific
forms with
19-­33 items

10

Paul H. Brookes Publishing
800-­638-­3775
www.agesandstages.com

PUBLICATION INFORMATION

Brief Infant Toddler Social
Emotional Assessment
(BITSEA)3

12-­36 mo

42

7-­10

Mapi Research Trust
https://eprovide.mapi-­trust.org/

Pediatric Symptom Checklist–17
items (PSC-­17b)4

4-­16 yr
PSC-­35 Youth self-­report:
≥11 yr

17

<5

Massachusetts General Hospital
https://www.massgeneral.org/psychiatry/
treatments-­and-­services/pediatric-­
symptom-­checklist

Strengths and Difficulties
Questionnaire (SDQ)5

4-­17 yr
3-­4 yr old version available
Youth self-­report 11-­16 yr

25; 22 for 3-­4 yr
olds

5-­10

www.sdqinfo.org

*Key reference sources:

1Squires J, Bricker DD, Twombly E. Ages & Stages Questionnaires: Social-­Emotional-­2 (ASQ:SE-­2): a parent-­completed, child-­monitoring system for social-­emotional behaviors.

Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Publishing, 2016.
2Briggs RD, Stettler EM, Johnson Silver E, et al. Social-­emotional screening for infants and toddlers in primary care. Pediatrics. 2012;129(2):1–8.
3Briggs-­Gowan MJ, Carter AS, McCarthy K, et al. Clinical validity of a brief measure of early childhood social–emotional/behavioral problems. J Pediatr Psychol. 2013;38(5):557–587.
4Murphy JM, Stepanian S, Riobueno-­Naylor A, et al. Implementation of an electronic approach to psychosocial screening in a network of pediatric practices. Acad Pediatr.

2021;21(4):702–709.
5Stone LL, Otten R, Engels RC, et al. Psychometric properties of the parent and teacher versions of the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire for 4-­to 12-­year-­olds: a review. Clin

Child Fam Psychol Rev. 2010;13(3):254–274.

surveillance and screening, physical examination, immunization,
anticipatory guidance, safety and injury prevention, and developmental promotion), tools relying on parent completion with office
staff administration and scoring are well suited for primary care
settings. Such tests may be completed in advance of appointments,
either online or in writing, whether at home or while waiting for
the pediatric visit to begin. If a test is scored in advance of the visit,
the pediatric clinician can enter the room with results in hand for
review and discussion, including a description of the child’s development and behavior compared with peers, general information
on child development and behavior, any areas of concern, referrals needed, and information to share with the child’s daycare, preschool, or other community providers, when applicable.

children with typical development. These norms allow comparison of
an individual child’s performance on the test with that of the large sample of typically developing children. In addition, the tests demonstrate
accepted standards of reliability, or the ability to produce consistent
results; predictive validity, or the ability to predict later test performance or development; sensitivity, or accuracy in the identification of
delayed development or disability; and specificity, or accuracy in the
identification of children who are not delayed. Some of the screening
tests are general, evaluating multiple areas of development or behavior
(sometimes referred to as “broad band”). Others are domain specific,
evaluating one area of development (e.g., language), or disorder specific, aimed at identifying a specific developmental disorder (sometimes referred to as “narrow band”).

Screening Test Properties

BEYOND SURVEILLANCE AND SCREENING
Comprehensive Evaluation

Each of the tests provided in Tables 28.3 to 28.5 meets accepted psychometric test criteria. The test has standardized questions or milestones
with norms based on administration to parents of a large sample of

When a developmental or behavioral concern is identified through
surveillance or screening, the primary care clinician’s role is to

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

182 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
ensure that the child receives an appropriate diagnostic evaluation,
related medical testing, and indicated developmental interventions and medical treatment. When a concern is identified, a full
diagnostic evaluation should be performed by a professional with
appropriate training and experience. In the case of developmental
concerns, this may be a pediatric specialist, such as a neurodevelopmental pediatrician/neurologist or a developmental-­behavioral
pediatrician, or a related developmental professional, depending on
resources in the local community. Related professionals may include
early childhood educators, psychologists, speech/language pathologists, audiologists, physical therapists, and occupational therapists,
many of whom are available through the local early intervention
system. Such an evaluation would typically include more detailed
standardized developmental testing. The primary care physician
should ensure that hearing and vision assessments are completed.
For the child with motor concerns, the physician should pay particular attention to the motor and neurologic evaluation. Children
with language delays should have hearing, speech, language, and
learning skills (e.g., reading, phonics) evaluated.
The primary care clinician should also perform a comprehensive
medical evaluation of the child to identify any related health conditions. Physical examination including head circumference should
be reviewed to identify growth abnormalities and dysmorphic
features. For the child with motor delay and decreased or normal
muscle tone, serum creatine kinase and thyroid function testing
are recommended to rule out muscular dystrophy and thyroid disease, respectively. When there is increased tone, MRI or referral to
a neurologist should be considered. For the child with suspected
autism or intellectual disability (or global developmental delay),
chromosomal microarray and fragile X testing are recommended
(see Chapter 56).

Referral and Intervention

Children with significant developmental delays or an identified
developmental disability are entitled to and usually benefit from early
intervention with therapy services directed at delayed or atypical
development. The U.S. Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA) entitles any child with a disability or developmental delay
to receive local education and related services, including therapy,
from as early as birth, for known or high-­risk conditions that lead
to such delay or disability, through age 21 years. These interventions
enhance the child’s development through early intervention and family support as well as individualized public education with the goal
of improving long-­term functional outcomes and reducing public
costs. The pediatric provider should therefore refer every child with
developmental concerns to the local early intervention program or
agency (ages 0-­3 years), public school program (≥ 3 years), and/or
local therapy providers. Typical service needs include special education for the child with intellectual or learning concerns, physical or
occupational therapy for children with motor delays, speech language
therapy for the child with language or social communication difficulties, and behavioral therapy services for the child with social engagement or other behavior problems.
Likewise, the child with specific behavior concerns should be
referred to an appropriate pediatric or behavioral health professional
who can perform a thorough evaluation and assist the family to alleviate the problems or concerns. Such professionals may include those
trained in developmental-­
behavioral pediatrics, neurodevelopmental disabilities, adolescent medicine, child and adolescent psychiatry,
pediatric psychology, psychiatric advanced practice nursing, and social
work. Such an evaluation is similar to developmental evaluation in
its aim of determining a diagnosis, as well as developing a treatment
program that may include psychotherapeutic and medication management. Associated medical or developmental disorders should be considered and further evaluated as needed.

Ongoing Management

Children with developmental or behavioral disorders should be identified as children with special healthcare needs in the medical home,
with a program of chronic condition management initiated by the
clinical program staff, including its medical and nonmedical staff. In
doing so, the clinician and family should work together to outline
the child’s short-­and long-­term goals and management plan. This
includes a program of regular monitoring and follow-­up of the child’s
development and behavior, referrals, treatment, and surveillance for
identification and treatment of related medical, developmental, or
behavioral comorbidities that may arise. Some children and families
may warrant assignment of a case manager or care navigator either
within the medical home or in a related local agency. The pediatric clinician or other medical home staff should participate in care
coordination activities as needed and assist the family and other professionals in decision-­making on medical care, therapies, and educational services.
The family can be further assisted during the screening and referral phases or later with ongoing care by referral to support service
programs, such as respite care, parent-­to-­parent programs, and
advocacy organizations. Some children may qualify for additional
state or federal benefit programs, including insurance, supplemental security income, and state programs for children with special
healthcare needs. Families often seek out information, support, or
connection to other families with similarly affected children and
find benefit in local or national networks (e.g., Family Voices, Family to Family Health Information centers) and condition-­specific
associations.

Implementation

The principles and professional guidelines for developmental-­
behavioral surveillance and screening have been solidified to identify children with developmental disabilities, including the specific
conditions of intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder,
motor disorders, and behavioral-­emotional problems. Specific algorithms are included in these guidelines to assist the clinician with
implementation. However, primary care clinicians have reported
difficulties in putting these into practice, with obstacles and barriers identified and policy changes made to ensure that screening and
referral can be implemented. (See Bibliography online for specific
guidelines.)
Implementation projects have identified key factors for successful incorporation of developmental surveillance and screening
into practice. Successful office-­based screening requires development of a comprehensive office-­based system that extends from
the child’s home to the front office and into the clinic visit, rather
than solely centered on the time in the clinic room. This requires
utilizing office and medical support staff for scheduling, advance
test distribution, and initiation of the surveillance and screening
procedures before the health supervision visit. The practice must
choose screening tests that are not only valid for screening of the
specific condition at the recommended ages, but also appropriate to
the population being served (including reading level and language).
The tests chosen should be able to be completed by the caregiver in
a short time and at low cost. Staff training on billing and coding for
these procedures ensures appropriate payment.
Practice systems should also be developed for referral and tracking of children who have problems identified through screening. This
should include systems for referral to early intervention, community
therapy, developmental professionals, and medical consultants. Office
representatives or the clinician should establish working relationships
with local community programs and resources to assist the child and
family.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 29 u Child Care

Chapter 29

Child Care
Laura Stout Sosinsky and Walter S. Gilliam
Child care impacts the health and development of children and the
economic stability of families. For too many young children and their
families, affordable high-­quality child care is not accessible. Pediatricians have a role in helping children receive safe, enriching care in
high-­quality early childhood education (ECE) settings that allows parents to be able to work.
As an environment in which children learn, grow, and play, child
care is a component of the social determinants of health. The majority of young children regularly spend time in at least one nonparental
child care arrangement. Routine exposure to high-­quality child care
provides an opportunity for early education in language, early literacy, math, and social skills, as well as for teaching children health-­
promoting behaviors and for identifying early signs of delays or special
needs. Inadequate child care supply and poor availability block these
opportunities for many children, disproportionately those from low-­
resourced families. Instead, many young children are exposed to a
patchwork of child care arrangements that are unstable, unaffordable,
and often poorly resourced, adding stress that harms child and family
well-­being.
Child care provision is affected by many factors, derived from family demand, child care supply, and child/family policy. With increasing
movement of mothers into the workplace across the globe, the prime
reason most families use child care is to support employment of both
parents. After childbirth, unpaid maternity leave is the typical situation among U.S. mothers. The U.S. federal leave program allows for 12
weeks of unpaid job-­protected leave during pregnancy or after childbirth, but only covers approximately 50% of the workforce because
companies with <50 employees, with part-­time employees, and those
working in informal labor markets are exempt. Several states and cities
have passed paid family leave laws.
In part because of the financial burden of an unpaid maternity leave,
many mothers return to work, and their children may begin child care
in the first few weeks after birth. In a 2000 Family and Medical Leave
Act survey, only 10% of respondents reported taking more than 60 days
for maternity leave. Approximately 44% of mothers in 2005–2007 were
working by the time their first child was 3-­4 months of age, and approximately 63% of mothers were working by the time their first child was
12 months. Some mothers face work requirements if they are receiving
public benefits because of the reforms to welfare passed by the U.S.
Congress in 1996. Many mothers feel strong financial motivation or
even pressure to work, especially in single-­parent households, or have
strong incentive to work for short-­and long-­term financial security.
Employment is not the only factor driving child care use; young children of unemployed mothers spend on average 21 hours per week in
child care. Many parents want their children to have child care experiences for the potential benefits that early learning environments can
give to their children. Given these realities, child care quality is of great
concern, yet the quality of child care and early education environments varies widely, and the supply of high-­quality child care is largely
deemed inadequate.
The COVID-­19 pandemic revealed the fragility of America’s child
care system. Relative to adults, young children have been far less likely
to suffer severe medical complications from coronavirus infection,
and rates of transmission in child care facilities that followed mitigation protocols have been low. However, the downstream effects of the
pandemic on young children have been acute. Burdensome child care
cost and access barriers became exaggerated. Parents of young children report significant concerns about their children’s safety and education during the pandemic and describe significant disruptions and
impacts on families’ well-­being. Estimates indicate that 1 in every 500

183

U.S. children have experienced COVID-­19 orphanhood or the loss of a
caregiving grandparent, further highlighting a crisis in early childhood
caregiving.

QUALITY, PROVISION, REGULATION, AND ACCESS
Child Care Quality

High-­quality child care is characterized by warm, responsive, and
stimulating interactions between children and child care providers.
These caregivers express positive feelings toward the children; are emotionally involved, engaged, and aware of the child’s needs and sensitive
and responsive to their initiations; speak directly with children in a
manner that is elaborative and stimulating while being age-­appropriate;
and ask questions and encourage children’s ideas and verbalizations.
Structural quality features of the setting, including ratio of children to
adults, group size, and caregiver education and training, act indirectly
on child outcomes by facilitating high-­quality interactions. It would
be highly unlikely, if not impossible, for even the most sensitive and
stimulating provider to engage in high-­quality interactions with each
child, if, for example, the provider was the sole caregiver of 10 toddlers.
Poor-­quality child care settings and unsafe environments that do
not meet children’s basic physical and emotional needs can result in
developmental delays tied to lack of healthy relationships with adults or
developmentally inappropriate activities, toxic stress, neglect, or injury
or death from fire, building hazards, disease, and inadequate staff oversight. State regulations put a “floor” on structural quality and basic staff
indicators to mitigate risks and safeguard health and safety. Although
structural indicators are more easily monitored in licensing, some but
not all research suggests only modest relationships of structural indicators with child outcomes. When it comes to process quality, a body
of studies demonstrates small-­to-­modest associations with short-­term
child development and some evidence of long-­term impacts.
The early childhood field is focusing increasingly on effective practices, evidence-­based curricula, and programs that are reported to have
moderate-­to-­large effects on child outcomes. Some specific teacher
practices are related to gains in academic and social-­emotional skills
among preschool students. Evidence-­informed and evaluated ECE
curricula with aligned professional development can have substantial
impacts on child outcomes across several developmental domains.
Primary caregiving, the practice in infant and toddler classrooms
of assigning one teacher the primary responsibility for the care of a
small group of children and developing relationships with their families, is consistent with research showing that infants who experience
stable, consistent, sensitive and responsive care develop more secure
attachment relationships and more positive developmental outcomes.
Family engagement, in which early educators partner with families to
share their unique knowledge of each child to build positive and goal-­
oriented relationships, relates to gains in preschool children’s social and
early academic skills and reduced problem behaviors.

Integration of Health and Safety Within Quality
Practices

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the American Public Health
Association, and the National Resource Center for Health and Safety in
Child Care and Early Education provide health and safety guidelines in
Caring for Our Children (CFOC): National Health and Safety Performance
Standards; Guidelines for Early Care and Education Programs, 4th ed.
(https://nrckids.org/CFOC; 2019). These national standards represent
the best evidence on quality practices and address health and safety as an
integrated component of early care and education. The intent is for the
guidelines to serve as a resource for states and other entities to improve
health and safety standards in licensing and quality rating improvement
systems. An additional objective is for the various monitoring agencies
and mechanisms to work together to collaboratively safeguard children
and minimize or eliminate the duplication and burden of complicated
and sometimes conflicting procedures and requirements.
The current guidelines include sections in 10 areas (Table 29.1).
The National Resource Center also provides updated online resources:
(1) up-­
to-­
date CFOC Standards Online Database (https://nrckids.
org/CFOC and (2) a crosswalk of COVID-­19 questions with CFOC

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

184 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 29.1

Caring for Our Children Performance
­Standards: Chapters and Topics

 

1.	Staffing: Child-­staff ratio, group size, minimum age; background
checks (criminal history, sex offender registry, and child abuse
and neglect registry checks), qualifications, professional
development, training
2.	Program Activities for Healthy Development: Developmental
activities (general and by age), supervision and discipline,
parent/guardian relationships, health education
3.	Health Promotion and Protection: Health promotion in child
care (health checks and supervision, physical activity, limiting
screen time, safe sleep, oral health); hygiene (diapering, hand
hygiene, exposure to bodily fluids); cleaning, sanitizing, and
disinfecting; tobacco and drug use; animals; emergency
procedures; child abuse and neglect; sun safety and insect
repellent; strangulation hazards; management of illness
4.	Nutrition and Food Service: General and by age, meal service,
seating, and supervision, nutrition learning experiences for
children and for parents/guardians, food safety, and more
5.	Facilities, Supplies, Equipment, and Environmental Health:
Space per child, exits, ventilation, lighting, noise, furnishings,
equipment, and more
6.	Play Areas/Playgrounds and Transportation: Playground
equipment, water play areas, toys
7.	Infectious Diseases: Immunizations, respiratory tract infections,
enteric (diarrheal) infections and hepatitis A virus, skin and
mucous membrane infections, blood-­borne infections, herpes
viruses, interaction with state or local health departments,
judicious use of antibiotics
8.	Children with Special Healthcare Needs and Disabilities:
Inclusion, service plans, coordination and documentation,
periodic reevaluation, assessment of facilities for children with
special needs, additional standards
9.	Administration: Governance, policies, human resources, records
10.	Licensing and Community Action: Regulatory policy, licensing
agency, facility licensing, health department responsibilities
and role, caregiver/teacher support, public policy issues and
resource development
From the American Academy of Pediatrics, American Public Health Association,
National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care and Early Education.
Caring for Our Children: National Health and Safety Performance Standards; Guidelines
for Early Care and Education Programs. 4th ed., Itasca, IL: American Academy of
Pediatrics; 2019. (https://nrckids.org/CFOC/TOC).

standards (https://nrckids.org/files/CFOC.Crosswalk.pdf) to help
child care health consultants and providers learn how the CFOC standards address provision of safe and healthy early care and education
environments during the COVID-­19 pandemic.

Child Care Settings and Use

Public early education programs (such as Head Start and targeted state-­
funded prekindergarten programs) have historically been designed as
policy mechanisms to close the school readiness gap among children with
fewer resources, whereas child care has been seen as necessary when parents (usually mothers) work while their children are young. Despite these
historical “silos,” all early care and education settings serve both purposes:
they are early learning environments for children and necessary supports
for working parents.
Quality of care matters for all child care settings, but there are key
differences in the structure and provision of care that influence organizational and business operations, regulatory mandates, and accessibility and affordability for families.
Child care settings vary widely and fall into four broad categories
from the least to the most formal:
1.	Relative or friend cares for a child in the relative’s or friend’s home or
in the child’s home

2.	Nonrelative care who comes to the child’s home, such as nannies,
babysitters, or au pairs
3.	Home-­based child care in which an individual runs a child care business
in their own home and cares for a few or several children, often including children of mixed ages, siblings, or the provider’s own children
4.	Center-­based care, provided in nonresidential facilities for children
grouped by age, including preschools, prekindergarten programs,
Head Start centers, and child care centers.
Child care centers and early education programs are administered by a
wide array of businesses and organizations, including for-­profit providers
or companies, religious organizations, public and private schools including early childhood special education programs, nonprofits and other
community organizations, cooperatives, employer-­based child care, and
public agencies. Increasingly, publicly funded prekindergarten programs
contract with existing community-­based centers and home-­based providers for program delivery. With a few exceptions (such as faith-­affiliated
child care), center-­based child care programs must satisfy state licensing
laws for safety practices. For other child care options, governmental oversight for health and safety is rarer; many home-­based child care programs
are licensed, whereas many others are unknown to regulatory agencies,
and family, friend, and nanny care are almost never regulated. Child care
licensing and regulation is described in the next section.
Approximately 59% of children 5 years and younger and not
yet in kindergarten were in at least 1 weekly nonparental child
care arrangement, as reported by their parents in the U.S. Census
Bureau’s 2019 National Household Education Surveys Program.
Forty-­two percent of children less than 1 year of age, 55% of 1-­2
year olds, and 74% of 3-­5 year olds were in nonparental care. Nearly
60% of those in at least one child care arrangement were in a center-­
based arrangement, 38% were in relative care, and 20% were in nonrelative care in a private home; children may have been in more
than one type of arrangement. Center-­based arrangements were
most common among preschoolers, whereas relative care arrangements were most common among infants.

Child Care Closures

The COVID-­19 pandemic accelerated a worsening trend of child care
closures. In 2012, there were approximately 129,000 center-­based programs serving 6.98 million children from birth through age 5. Between
2014 and 2017, the number of licensed child care programs of all types
in the United States decreased to approximately 109,000 centers. The
number of listed home-­based providers (which includes licensed or
otherwise regulated providers) decreased by about 25% between 2012
and 2019.
In response to COVID-­19, by April 2020 new state public health
requirements resulted in closing 70% of U.S. child care centers; more
than 35% of child care workers became unemployed. Reasons for this
include COVID-­19 outbreaks and preventative health protocols such
as social distancing with limits in group sizes and child:staff ratios. As
the pandemic continued, reasons for new or even permanent closures
included staffing shortages as well as business models that cannot support a program’s financial survival at low enrollment rates. However,
child masking within the first year of the pandemic was associated with
a 13-14% reduction in child care closure rates.

Licensing, Regulation, Monitoring, and Accreditation

State and territory licensing agencies enumerate which providers are
subject to licensing to legally operate and monitor those providers’
compliance with foundational, mandated regulations to protect children’s safety, health, and well-­being. Many states and territories also
offer systems of child care monitoring that are usually voluntary in
nature, such as quality rating and improvement systems (QRIS), and
various professional organizations offer voluntary accreditation systems to assess whether providers meet higher-­quality standards, often
(but not always) requiring licensure as a prerequisite to participation.

Licensing

Licensing and regulatory requirements establish the minimum
requirements necessary to protect the health and safety of children in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 29 u Child Care
child care. Typically, these include basic health and safety standards
such as sanitary practices, child and provider vaccinations, access to
a healthcare professional, and facilities and equipment hazards and
safety, as well as basic structural and caregiver characteristics such
as background checks, the ratio of children to staff, group sizes, and
minimum caregiver education and training requirements. Most child
care centers and preschools and many family child care providers are
subject to state licensing and regulation. All states regulate child care
centers, as does the District of Columbia, and most states regulate family child care providers.
Pediatricians are encouraged to learn about their own state’s child
care licensing rules. Large differences between states mean large differences in allowable levels of quality. The most common child:staff ratios
are 4:1 for infants, 6:1 for toddlers, and 10:1 for preschoolers. However,
some states permit ratios that are 5:1 or 6:1 for infants 9 months of age
or younger.
State and territory child care licensing regulations are maintained
in a searchable National Database of Child Care Licensing Regulations
(https://childcareta.acf.hhs.gov/licensing) by the National Center on
Early Childhood Quality Assurance (NCECQA). The site provides a
tool for searching state and territory licensing regulations and agency
contact information. Licensing requirements are frequently updated.
Unlicensed settings and even licensed providers in states with low
licensing and regulatory standards may be providing care at quality levels below professional recommendations. Moreover, various types of
programs may be exempt from licensure, such as faith-­affiliated child
care programs, and exemptions are specific to each state; as many as
one third of child care centers are legally exempt in some states. Centers are often exempted if care is offered by other organizations such
as school districts that provide external oversight. The smallest homes
(three or four children in care) are often license-­exempt, encompassing
relative, friend, and neighbor caregivers as well as babysitters, nannies,
and au pairs. Some of these providers and the families who use them
may not even think of themselves as providing “child care.” The Child
Care Development Block Grant (CCDBG) reauthorization in 2014
required states and territories to expand their monitoring of legally
exempt providers to protect the health and safety of children receiving
subsidized child care. Most states require exempt centers and family
child care homes to meet some licensure requirements such as background checks and to receive an annual inspection to receive child care
subsidy payments.

Other Quality Monitoring Systems

Several voluntary public and private initiatives require that child care
settings meet their own sets of guidelines and regulations in areas
considered critical to effective practice and child outcomes to receive
either state or federal funding. These diverse initiatives include those
that focus on nutrition (the Child and Adult Care Food Program
[CACFP]), inclusion (the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
[IDEA]), and financial assistance to low-­
income working parents
(child care subsidies through the CCDBG). Most states have quality
initiatives called QRIS. Publicly funded early education programs,
including the federal Head Start and Early Head Start program as well
as state and local public prekindergarten have their own program performance standards.
Participating providers benefit in ways that may include technical
assistance supports, professional development, and additional funding
often tied to the numbers of children served under the program. About
75% of early care and education centers report receiving funds from
multiple sources. Providers may also value earning a public-­facing “seal
of approval” to help families learn about higher-­quality programs.
These programs all monitor eligibility and compliance with program
standards. For example, Head Start and most of the state prekindergarten programs that restrict enrollment to low-­income families require
verification of family eligibility (although some states’ and cities’ prekindergarten programs are universally available to all preschool-­age
children regardless of family income). Other eligibility standards
include verification of parental employment for child care subsidies or
verification of nutritious food for low-­income families for receipt of

185

CACFP funds. Other monitoring may cover staffing, meals and snacks,
curricula and teaching, and other areas of service delivery. QRIS systems work within the infrastructure of the early care and education
system to assess, incentivize, and support higher levels of quality.
Examples of incentives and supports include tiered subsidy reimbursement systems in which participating providers who achieve levels of
quality beyond basic licensing requirements are entitled to higher subsidy payments, public funding to facilitate accreditation, professional
development systems and coaching, and program assessments and
technical assistance.

Accreditation

A smaller portion of providers become accredited by National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC), National
Association for Family Child Care (NAFCC), or other organizations
by voluntarily meeting high-­
quality, developmentally appropriate,
professionally recommended standards. The accreditation process
goes beyond health and safety practices and structural and caregiver
characteristics to examine the quality of child–caregiver interactions.
Evidence indicates that child care programs that complete voluntary
accreditation through NAEYC provide an environment that better
facilitates children’s overall development, but few providers are accredited. This is partly the result of a lack of knowledge, resources, and
incentives for providers to improve quality, but it may also be partly
because of expenses providers incur in becoming accredited.

Child Care Access

As one social determinant of health, access to affordable high-­quality
child care that supports child development and meets family needs
is critical.
Access to child care goes beyond simple “supply” (numbers of available slots) and “demand” (numbers of young children needing extra-­
familial care). Barriers to access include aspects of affordability, hours
of operation, location, transportation, and culturally or linguistically
appropriate care. Barriers to access to high-­quality child care are pervasive among families in which caregivers work irregular, fluctuating,
or nontraditional work schedules, families with infants and toddlers,
families for whom English is not the primary language spoken at home,
and families with children with disabilities or special needs.
Two thirds of children 5 years of age and younger have both parents
in the workforce or in school or training programs. Nearly 30% of low-­
income mothers of children under 6 years of age work nonstandard
hours, but child care supply during nonstandard or irregular hours is
extremely limited. Over 30% of parents with children in weekly care
report that the arrangement does not cover the hours needed for work
very well. Many more report that they are not in the workforce or
school, or not working the hours or shifts that they need or want, due
to lack of affordable accessible child care.

SCREENING AND SUPPORT FOR CHILD
­DEVELOPMENT AND HEALTH
Child Care and Child Behavior

Before the COVID-­19 pandemic, about 192,000 U.S. young children
were being expelled or suspended from child care programs annually
for concerns rising from developmentally typical crying and temper
tantrums to physical aggression to violations of various “zero tolerance policies,” such as bringing a water gun to child care. In fact, young
children are expelled from child care and preschool programs at a rate
more than 3 times that for kindergarten through 12th graders. Young
children experiencing any number of adverse childhood events are at
significantly increased odds of preschool expulsion, such as exposure to
domestic or community violence, family mental illness and substance
abuse, poverty, parental divorce, and parental incarceration. These
disciplinary exclusions are disproportionately applied to young males
and to children of color; implicit biases account for at least some of
these disproportionalities. These early disciplinary exclusions predict
later negative school attitudes, academic failure and grade retention,
and later expulsions and suspensions, as well as a 10-­fold increase in
high-­school dropout rates and an 8-fold increase in later incarceration.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

186 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
State efforts to reduce early childhood exclusionary discipline
include early childhood mental health consultation (ECMHC) models
to support child care providers, who are often not well trained in managing child behavior, as well as build capacity to raise child care quality
for all children. ECMHC links a mental health professional with an
early education and care provider in an ongoing problem-­solving and
capacity-­building relationship. ECMHC has been shown to be effective in statewide randomized controlled trials, and now exist in several states and cities. Because this is a rapidly evolving area of support,
clinicians wishing to provide guidance to parents of young children
at risk of early disciplinary exclusion should consider inquiring about
the existence of an ECMHC system within their state or locality by
contacting their state early childhood department and/or state/local
child care resource and referral agency. Local regulations may limit or
prohibit the exclusion of children in response to behaviors that may be
a symptomatic expression of a diagnosed disability or special education
need, providing a potential method for safeguarding a child’s ability to
receive early care and education, as described in the next section.

Children with Special Needs

Children with cognitive, physical, or emotional disabilities who require
special care and instruction often require particular attention when it
comes to their participation in most child care settings. Guiding principles of services for children with disabilities advocate supporting children in natural environments, including child care. Furthermore, the
Americans with Disabilities Act and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 prohibit discrimination against children and adults with
disabilities by requiring equal access to offered programs and services.
Child care can be, and often is, utilized for delivery of support services to children with special needs and/or for linking families to services such as early intervention. Furthermore, clinicians can draw on
child care providers for important evaluative data regarding a child’s
well-­being, as these providers have extensive daily contact with the
child and may have broad, professional understanding of normative
child development. Child care providers often conduct screenings for
developmental milestones and delays using standardized instruments.
A child care provider may be the first to identify a child’s potential
language delay. Child care providers are also necessary and valuable
partners in the development and administration of early intervention
service plans. However, many child care providers and settings are
unprepared to identify or administer services for children with special
needs.
Children with special needs may be eligible for special educational
services under IDEA. The purpose of this law is to provide “free appropriate public education,” regardless of disability or chronic illness, to
all eligible children, birth to 21 years of age, in a natural and/or least-­
restrictive environment. Eligible children include those with mental,
physical, or emotional disabilities who, because of their disability or
chronic illness, require special instruction to learn. As a part of these
services, a formal plan of intervention is to be developed by the service providers, families, and the children’s healthcare providers. Federal funds are available to implement a collaborative early intervention
system of services for eligible infants and toddlers between the ages
of birth and 3 years and their families. These services include screening, assessment, service coordination, and collaborative development
of an individualized family service plan (IFSP). The IFSP describes
early intervention services for the child’s health, therapeutic, and educational needs and supports needed by the family. An understanding
of the child’s routines and real-­life opportunities and activities, such as
eating, playing, interacting with others, and working on developmental
skills, is crucial to enhancing a child’s ability to achieve the functional
goals of the IFSP. Therefore it is critical that child care providers be
involved in IFSP development or revision, with parental consent. Child
care providers should also become familiar with the child’s IFSP and
understand the providers’ role and the resources available to support
the family and child care provider. Additionally, IDEA provides support for eligible children 3 years of age and older to receive services
through the local school district. This includes development of a written individualized education program (IEP), with implementation

being the responsibility of the local education agency in either a public
or private preschool setting. As with IFSPs, child care providers should
become familiar with the preschooler’s special needs as identified in
the IEP and may become involved, with parental consent, in IEP development and review meetings. In cases where children may have or be
at risk of developmental delays, a diagnosis is important for obtaining
and coordinating services and further evaluation. To this end, clinicians can partner with child care providers to screen and monitor children’s behavior and development. Even if a young child is not being
provided special educational services, special accommodations may be
requested for any child whose access to child care is being adversely
impacted by a diagnosable developmental or behavioral disability
through Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.

Sick Children and Control of Infectious Disease

When children are ill, they may be excluded from out-­of-­home child
care and under state licensure child care programs are required to
exclude children with certain conditions. Children in child care are
of an age that places them at increased risk for acquiring infectious
diseases. Participation in group settings elevates exposure, leading to
increased infections, especially during the first year of child care exposure and especially with infants. Children enrolled in such settings have
a higher incidence of illness (upper respiratory tract infections, otitis
media, diarrhea, hepatitis A infections, skin conditions, and asthma)
than those cared for at home, especially in the preschool years; these illnesses have no long-­term adverse consequences. Child care providers
that follow child care licensure guidelines for handwashing, diapering,
and food handling, and manage child illness appropriately, can reduce
communicable illnesses.
CFOC (2019) and its up-­to-­date online supplement and the AAP
(Table 29.2) offer guidelines and recommendations regarding the conditions under which sick children should and should not be excluded
from group programs. State laws typically mirror these guidelines but
may be stricter in some states. Although exclusion from child care due
to mild illness is often unnecessary, their summary of guidelines states
that a child should be excluded temporarily from care if the signs or
symptoms of the illness does any of the following:
u Prevents the child from participating in daycare activities
u Results in a level of care that is greater than the staff can provide
u Poses a contagion risk of serious diseases to other children and staff
For COVID-­
19 exposure or symptoms or recovery go to
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-­nCoV/index.html
Health checks should be performed on each child every day. If symptoms develop during child care but do not require exclusion, written
or verbal communication after the daycare is appropriate. Emergencies must be addressed with 911 calls and immediate notification of
the family. If nonemergent but requiring exclusion, the parents should
be notified to take the child home. Parents should have a backup plan
when exclusions occur. Return to child care is usually permissible without a primary healthcare visit.
CFOC also provides guidelines for control of infectious disease outbreaks and for exclusion of any child or staff member who is suspected
of contributing to transmission of the illness, who is not adequately
immunized when there is an outbreak of a vaccine-­preventable disease, or when the circulating pathogen poses an increased risk to the
individual.
During the first 3 months of the COVID-­19 pandemic in the United
States, exposure to child care was not associated with an elevated risk of
COVID-­19 transmission to adult child care providers within the context of the considerable efforts that were employed to reduce transmission. Although enhanced hand hygiene and surface disinfecting were
the most common transmission mitigation methods, many child care
programs also engaged in daily symptom screening and temperature
checks, social distancing efforts, and cohorting (i.e., keeping groups of
children separate to help control the speed of transmission). Despite
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidance, masking of adults and children were rarely employed; federal guidance and
requirements in several states, child care provider COVID-­19 vaccination rates in June 2021 were only 78.2%. COVID-­19 modifications and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 29.2  Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care
SIGN OR
SYMPTOM

COMMON CAUSES

COMPLAINTS OR WHAT
MIGHT BE SEEN

NOTIFY
HEALTH
CONSULTANT

NOTIFY
PARENT

TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE?

IF EXCLUDED,
READMIT WHEN

⦁	Coughing
⦁	Runny or stuffy nose
⦁	Scratchy throat
⦁	Sneezing
⦁	Fever
⦁	Watery eyes

Not necessary
unless
epidemics
occur (i.e., RSV
or vaccine-­
preventable
disease like
measles or
varicella
[chickenpox])

Yes

No, unless
⦁	Fever accompanied by behavior
change.
⦁	Child looks or acts very ill.
⦁	Child has difficulty breathing.
⦁	Child has blood-­red or purple rash
not associated with injury.
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.

Exclusion criteria are resolved.

Cough (cough
is a body
response to
something
that is
irritating
tissues in
the airway
anywhere
from the
nose to the
lungs)

⦁	Common cold
⦁	Lower respiratory
infection (e.g.,
pneumonia,
bronchiolitis)
⦁	Croup
⦁	Asthma
⦁	Sinus infection
⦁	Bronchitis
⦁	Pertussis
⦁	Noninfectious causes
like allergies

⦁	Dry or wet cough
⦁	Runny nose (clear, white, or
yellow-­green)
⦁	Sore throat
⦁	Throat irritation
⦁	Hoarse voice, barking cough
⦁	Coughing fits

Not necessary
unless the
cough is due
to a vaccine-­
preventable
disease, such as
pertussis

Yes

No, unless
⦁	Severe cough.
⦁	Rapid or difficult breathing.
⦁	Wheezing if not already evaluated
and treated.
⦁	Cyanosis (i.e., blue color of skin or
mucous membranes).
⦁	Pertussis is diagnosed and not yet
treated.
⦁	Fever with behavior change.
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.

Exclusion criteria are resolved.

Diaper rash

⦁	Irritation by rubbing of
diaper material against
skin wet with urine or
stool
⦁	Infection with yeast or
bacteria

⦁	Redness
⦁	Scaling
⦁	Red bumps
⦁	Sores
⦁	Cracking of skin in diaper region

Not necessary

Yes

No, unless
⦁	Oozing sores that leak body fluids
outside the diaper.
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.

Exclusion criteria are resolved.

Diarrhea

⦁	Usually viral, less
commonly bacterial or
parasitic
⦁	Noninfectious causes
such as dietary (drinking
too much juice),
medications,
inflammatory bowel
disease, or cystic fibrosis

⦁	Frequent loose or watery stools
compared with child’s normal
pattern. (Note that exclusively
breastfed infants normally have
frequent unformed and
somewhat watery stools or
may have several days with no
stools.)
⦁	Abdominal cramps
⦁	Fever
⦁	Generally not feeling well
⦁	Vomiting occasionally present

Yes, if one or more
cases of bloody
diarrhea or two
or more children
in same group
with diarrhea
within a week

Yes

Yes, if
⦁	Directed by the local health
department as part of outbreak
management.
⦁	Stool is not contained in
the diaper for diapered children.
⦁	Diarrhea is causing “accidents” for
toilet-­trained children.
⦁	Stool frequency exceeds 2 stools
above normal during the time the
child is in the program because
this may cause too much work for
teachers/care­givers and make it
difficult to maintain good
sanitation.
⦁	Blood/mucus in stool.
⦁	Black stools.
⦁	No urine output in 8 hours.
⦁	Jaundice (i.e., yellow skin or eyes).
⦁	Fever with behavior change.
⦁	Looks or acts very ill.
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.

⦁	Cleared to return by
healthcare provider for all
cases of bloody diarrhea and
diarrhea caused by Shiga
toxin-­producing Escherichia
coli, Shigella, or Salmonella
serotype Typhi until negative
stool culture
requirement has been met.
⦁	Diapered children have their
stool contained by the diaper
(even if the stools remain
loose) and toilet-­trained
children do not have toileting
accidents.
⦁	Stool frequency is no more
than 2 stools above normal
during the time the child is
in the program, or what has
become normal for that child
when the child seems
otherwise well.
⦁	Exclusion criteria are resolved.
Continued

187

Viruses (early stage of
many viruses)
⦁	Adenovirus
⦁	Coronavirus
⦁	Enterovirus
⦁	Influenza virus
⦁	Parainfluenza virus
⦁	Respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV)
⦁	Rhinovirus
Bacteria
⦁	Mycoplasma
⦁	Pertussis

Chapter 29 u Child Care

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Cold
symptoms

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

SIGN OR
SYMPTOM

COMMON CAUSES

COMPLAINTS OR WHAT
MIGHT BE SEEN

NOTIFY
HEALTH
CONSULTANT

NOTIFY
PARENT

TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE?

IF EXCLUDED, READMIT
WHEN

Difficult or
noisy
breathing

⦁	Common cold
⦁	Croup
⦁	Epiglottitis
⦁	Bronchiolitis
⦁	Asthma
⦁	Pneumonia
⦁	Object stuck in airway
⦁	Exposed to a known
trigger of asthma
symptoms (e.g., animal
dander, pollen)

⦁	Common cold: stuffy/runny
Not necessary
nose, sore throat, cough, or
except for
mild fever
epiglottitis
⦁	Croup: barking cough,
hoarseness, fever, possible
chest discomfort (symptoms
worse at night), or very noisy
breathing, especially when
breathing in
⦁	Epiglottitis: gasping noisily for
breath with mouth wide open,
chin pulled down, high fever, or
bluish (cyanotic) nails and skin;
drooling, unwilling to lie down
⦁	Bronchiolitis and asthma: child
is working hard to breathe; rapid
breathing; space between
ribs looks like it is sucked in
with each breath (retractions);
wheezing; whistling sound with
breathing; cold/cough; irritable
and unwell. Takes longer to
breathe out than to breathe in.
⦁	Pneumonia: deep cough, fever,
rapid breathing, or space between
ribs looks like it is sucked in with
each breath (retractions)
⦁	Object stuck in airway:
symptoms similar to croup
(listed previously)
⦁	Exposed to a known trigger of
asthma symptoms: a known
trigger and breathing that
sounds or looks different from
what is normal for that child

Yes

Yes, if
⦁	Fever with behavior change.
⦁	Child looks or acts very ill.
⦁	Child has difficulty breathing.
⦁	Rapid or difficult breathing.
⦁	Wheezing if not already evaluated
and treated.
⦁	Cyanosis (i.e., blue color of skin or
mucous membranes).
⦁	Cough interferes with activities.
⦁	Breath sounds can be heard when
the child is at rest.
⦁	Child has blood-­red or purple
rash not associated with injury.
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.

Exclusion criteria are resolved.

Earache

⦁	Bacteria
⦁	Often occurs in context
of common cold virus

⦁	Fever
⦁	Pain or irritability
⦁	Difficulty hearing
⦁	“Blocked ears”
⦁	Drainage
⦁	Swelling around ear

Yes

No, unless child meets routine
exclusion criteria.

Exclusion criteria are resolved.

Not necessary

188 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

Table 29.2  Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care—cont’d

Table 29.2  Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care—cont’d
SIGN OR
SYMPTOM

COMMON CAUSES

COMPLAINTS OR WHAT MIGHT
BE SEEN

NOTIFY
HEALTH
CONSULTANT

NOTIFY
PARENT

IF EXCLUDED, READMIT
WHEN

TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE?

⦁	Bacterial infection of the ⦁	Bacterial infection: pink color of
membrane covering one
the “whites” of eyes and thick
or both eyes and eyelids
yellow/green discharge. Eyelid
(bacterial conjunctivitis)
may be irritated, swollen, or
⦁	Viral infection of the
crusted.
membrane covering one ⦁	Viral infection: pinkish/red
or both eyes
color of the whites of the eye;
and eyelids (viral
irritated, swollen eyelids; watery
conjunctivitis)
discharge with or without some
⦁	Allergic irritation of the
crusting around the eyelids; may
membrane
have associated cold symptoms.
covering one or both
⦁	Allergic and chemical irritation:
eyes and eyelids
red, tearing, itchy, puffy eyelids;
(allergic
runny nose, sneezing; watery/
conjunctivitis)
stringy discharge with or
⦁	Chemical irritation of
without some crusting around
the membrane
the eyelids.
covering the eye and
eyelid (irritant
conjunctivitis) (e.g.,
swimming in heavily
chlorinated water,
air pollution, smoke
exposure)

Yes, if two or more
children have
red eyes with
watery discharge

Yes

For bacterial conjunctivitis
No. Exclusion is no longer required
for this condition. Healthcare
providers may vary on whether to
treat this condition with antibiotic
medication. The role of antibiotics
in treatment and preventing spread
is unclear. Most children with
pinkeye get better after 5 or 6 days
without antibiotics.
For other eye problems
No, unless child meets other
exclusion criteria.
Note: One type of viral conjunctivitis
spreads rapidly and requires
exclusion. If two or more children
in the group have watery red
eyes without any known chemical
irritant exposure, exclusion
may be required and health
authorities should be notified to
determine whether the situation
involves the uncommon epidemic
conjunctivitis caused by a specific
type of adenovirus. Herpes
simplex conjunctivitis (red eyes
with blistering/vesicles on eyelid)
occurs rarely and would also require
exclusion if there is eye watering.

Fever

⦁	Any viral, bacterial, or
parasitic infection
⦁	Vigorous exercise
⦁	Reaction to
medication or vaccine
⦁	Other noninfectious
illnesses (e.g.,
rheumatoid arthritis,
malignancy)

Not necessary

Yes

No, unless
Exclusion criteria are resolved.
⦁	Behavior change or other signs of
illness in addition to fever or child
meets other routine exclusion
criteria.
⦁	Unable to participate.
⦁	Care would compromise staff’s
ability to care for other children.
Note: A temperature considered
meaningfully elevated above normal,
although not necessarily an indication
of a significant health problem, for
infants and children older than 2 mo
is above 101°F (38.3°C) from any site
(axillary, oral, or rectal).
Get medical attention when infants
younger than 4 mo have unexplained
fever. In any infant younger than 2
mo, a temperature above 100.4°F
(38.0°C) is considered meaningfully
elevated and requires that the child
get medical attention immediately,
within an hour if possible. The fever
is not harmful; however, the illness
causing it may be serious in this age
group.

189

Continued

Chapter 29 u Child Care

Flushing, tired, irritable, decreased
activity
Notes:
⦁	Fever alone is not harmful. When
a child has an infection, raising
the body temperature is part
of the body’s normal defense
against germs.
⦁	Rapid elevation of body
temperature sometimes triggers
a febrile seizure in young children;
this usually is outgrown by age 6
yr. The first time a febrile seizure
happens, the child requires medical
evaluation. These seizures are
frightening but are usually brief
(less than 15 minutes) and do not
cause the child any long-­term
harm. Parents should inform their
child’s healthcare provider every
time the child has a seizure, even
if the child is known to have febrile
seizures.
Warning: Do not give aspirin. It has
been linked to an increased risk of
Reye syndrome (a rare and serious
disease affecting the brain and liver).

⦁ For bacterial conjunctivitis,
once parent has discussed
with healthcare provider.
Antibiotics may or may not be
prescribed.
⦁	Exclusion criteria are resolved.
	

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Eye irritation,
pinkeye

SIGN OR
SYMPTOM

COMMON CAUSES

COMPLAINTS OR WHAT MIGHT
BE SEEN

NOTIFY
HEALTH
CONSULTANT

NOTIFY
PARENT

TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE?

IF EXCLUDED, READMIT
WHEN

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Headache

⦁	Any bacterial/viral
infection
⦁	Other noninfectious
causes

⦁	Tired and irritable
⦁	Can occur with or without other
symptoms

Not necessary

Yes

No, unless child meets routine
exclusion criteria.
Note: Notify healthcare provider in
case of sudden, severe headache
with vomiting or stiff neck that
might signal meningitis. It would be
concerning if the back of the neck
is painful or the child cannot look at
his or her belly button (putting chin
to chest)—different from soreness
in the side of the neck.

Exclusion criteria are resolved.

Itching

⦁	Ringworm
⦁	Chickenpox
⦁	Pinworm
⦁	Head lice
⦁	Scabies
⦁	Allergic or irritant
reaction (e.g., poison
ivy)
⦁	Dry skin or eczema
⦁	Impetigo

⦁	Ringworm: itchy ring-­shaped
patches on skin or bald patches
on scalp.
⦁	Chickenpox: blister-­like spots
surrounded by red halos on scalp,
face, and body; fever; irritable.
⦁	Pinworm: anal itching.
⦁	Head lice: small insects or white
egg sheaths that look like grains
of sand (nits) in hair.
⦁	Scabies: severely itchy red bumps
on warm areas of body, especially
between fingers or toes.
⦁	Allergic or irritant reaction:
raised, circular, mobile rash;
reddening of the skin; blisters
occur with local reactions
(poison ivy, contact reaction).
⦁	Dry skin or eczema: dry areas
on body. More often worse on
cheeks, in front of elbows, and
behind knees. In infants, may be
dry areas on face and anywhere
on body but not usually in the
diaper area. If swollen, red, or
oozing, think about infection.
⦁	Impetigo: areas of crusted
yellow, oozing sores. Often
around mouth or nasal openings
or areas of broken skin (insect
bites, scrapes).

Yes, for
infestations
such as lice
and scabies; if
more than one
child in group
has impetigo or
ringworm; for
chickenpox

Yes

For chickenpox:
Yes, until lesions are fully crusted
For ringworm, impetigo, scabies, and
head lice:
Yes, at the end of the day
Children should be referred to a
healthcare provider at the end of
the day for treatment.
For pinworm, allergic or irritant
reactions like hives, and eczema:
No, unless appears infected as a
weeping or crusty sore
Note: Although exclusion for these
conditions is not necessary, families
should seek advice from the child’s
health professional for how to care
for these health problems.
For any other itching:
No, unless the child meets routine
exclusion criteria.

⦁ Exclusion criteria are resolved.
⦁ On medication or treated as
recommended by a
healthcare provider if
treatment is indicated for
the condition. For conditions
that require application of
antibiotics to lesions or taking
antibiotics by mouth, the period
of treatment to reduce risk of
spread to others is usually 24
hours. For most children with
insect infestations or parasites,
readmission as soon as the
treatment has been given is
acceptable.

Mouth sores

⦁	Oral thrush (yeast
infection)
⦁	Herpes or coxsackie­
virus infection
⦁	Canker sores

⦁	Oral thrush: white patches on
tongue, gums, and along inner
cheeks
⦁	Herpes or coxsackievirus
infection: pain on swallowing;
fever; painful, white/red spots in
mouth; swollen neck glands;
fever blister, cold sore;
reddened, swollen, painful lips
⦁	Canker sores: painful ulcers
inside cheeks or on gums

Not necessary

Yes

No, unless
⦁	Drooling steadily related to mouth
sores.
⦁	Fever with behavior change.
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.

Exclusion criteria are resolved.

190 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

Table 29.2  Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care—cont’d

Table 29.2  Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care—cont’d
SIGN OR
SYMPTOM

COMMON CAUSES

COMPLAINTS OR WHAT MIGHT
BE SEEN

NOTIFY
HEALTH
CONSULTANT

NOTIFY
PARENT

TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE?

IF EXCLUDED, READMIT
WHEN

Many causes
⦁	Viral: roseola infantum,
fifth disease, chickenpox,
herpesvirus,
molluscum contagiosum,
warts, cold sores,
shingles (herpes zoster),
and others
⦁	Skin infections and
infestations: ringworm
(fungus), scabies
(parasite), impetigo,
abscesses, and
cellulitis (bacteria)
⦁	Scarlet fever (strep
infection)
⦁	Severe bacterial
infections:
meningococcus,
pneumococcus,
Staphylococcus
(methicillin-­susceptible
S. aureus;
methicillin-­resistant
S. aureus), Streptococcus
⦁	Noninfectious causes:
allergy (hives), eczema,
contact (irritant)
dermatitis, medication
related, poison ivy

⦁	Skin may show similar findings
with many different causes.
Determining cause of rash
requires a competent
healthcare provider evaluation
that takes into account
information other than just how
rash looks. However, if the child
appears well other than the rash,
a healthcare provider visit is not
necessary.
⦁	Viral: usually signs of general
illness such as runny nose, cough,
and fever (except not for warts
or molluscum). Some viral rashes
have a distinctive appearance.
⦁	Minor skin infections and
infestations: see Itching.
⦁	More serious skin infections:
redness, pain, fever, pus.
⦁	Severe bacterial infections: rare.
These children usually have fever
with a rapidly spreading
blood-­red rash and may be very
ill.
⦁	Allergy may be associated with
a raised, itchy, pink rash with
bumps that can be as small as
a pinpoint or large welts known
as hives. See also Itching for
what might be seen for allergy
or contact (irritant) dermatitis or
eczema.

For outbreaks,
such as multiple
children with
impetigo within
a group

Yes

No, unless
⦁	Rash with behavior change or
fever.
⦁	Has oozing/open wound.
⦁	Has bruising not associated with
injury.
⦁	Has joint pain and rash.
⦁	Rapidly spreading blood-­red rash.
⦁	Tender, red area of skin, especially
if it is increasing in size or
tenderness.
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.
⦁	Diagnosed with a vaccine-­
preventable condition, such as
chickenpox.

⦁	On antibiotic medication for
required period (if indicated).
⦁	Infestations (lice and scabies)
and ringworm can be treated
at the end of the day with
immediate return the following
day.
⦁	Exclusion criteria are resolved.

Sore throat
(pharyngitis)

⦁	Viral: common cold
viruses that cause
upper respiratory
infections
⦁	Strep throat

⦁	Viral: verbal children will
complain of sore throat;
younger children may be
irritable with decreased
appetite and increased drooling
(refusal to swallow). Often see
symptoms associated with upper
respiratory illness, such as runny
nose, cough, and congestion.
⦁	Strep throat: signs of the body’s
fight against infection include red
tissue with white patches on sides
of throat, at back of tongue (tonsil
area), and at back wall of throat.
Unlike viral pharyngitis, strep
throat infections are not
accompanied with cough or runny
nose in children older than 3 yr.
⦁	Tonsils may be large, even
touching each other. Swollen
lymph nodes (sometimes called
“swollen glands”) occur as body
fights off the infection.

Not necessary

Yes

No, unless
⦁	Inability to swallow.
⦁	Excessive drooling with breathing
difficulty.
⦁	Fever with behavior change.
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.
Note: Most children with red back
of throat or tonsils, pus on tonsils,
or swollen lymph nodes have viral
infections. If strep is present, 12 hours
of antibiotics is required before return
to care. However, tests for strep
infection are not often necessary for
children younger than 3 yr because
these children do not develop
rheumatic heart disease, which is the
primary reason for treatment of strep
throat.

⦁	Able to swallow.
⦁	On medication at least 12
hours (if strep).
⦁	Exclusion criteria are resolved.

Chapter 29 u Child Care

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Rash

191
Continued

SIGN OR
SYMPTOM

COMMON CAUSES

COMPLAINTS OR WHAT MIGHT
BE SEEN

NOTIFY
HEALTH
CONSULTANT

NOTIFY
PARENT

TEMPORARILY EXCLUDE?

IF EXCLUDED, READMIT
WHEN

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Stomachache

⦁	Viral gastroenteritis or
strep throat
⦁	Problems with internal
organs of the abdomen
such as intestine,
colon, liver, bladder
⦁	Nonspecific,
behavioral, and dietary
causes
⦁	If combined with hives,
may be associated
with a severe allergic
reaction

⦁	Viral gastroenteritis or strep
throat: Vomiting and diarrhea
or cramping are signs of a
viral infection of the stomach
or intestine. Strep throat may
cause stomachache with sore
throat, headache, and possible
fever. In children older than
3 yr, if cough or runny nose is
present, strep is very unlikely.
⦁	Problems with internal organs of
the abdomen: persistent severe
pain in abdomen.
⦁	Nonspecific stomachache:
vague complaints without
vomiting/diarrhea or much
change in activity.

If multiple cases
in same group
within 1 week

Yes

No, unless
⦁	Severe pain causing child to
double over or scream.
⦁	Abdominal pain after injury.
⦁	Bloody/black stools.
⦁	No urine output for 8 hours.
⦁	Diarrhea (see Diarrhea).
⦁	Vomiting (see Vomiting).
⦁	Yellow skin/eyes.
⦁	Fever with behavior change.
⦁	Looks or acts very ill.
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.

⦁	Pain resolves.
⦁	Able to participate.
⦁	Exclusion criteria are resolved.

Swollen
glands
(properly
called
swollen
lymph
nodes)

⦁	Normal body defense
response to viral or
bacterial infection in
the area where lymph
nodes are located
(i.e., in the neck for
any upper respiratory
infection)
⦁	Bacterial infection of
lymph nodes that is
more than the normal
response to infection
near where the lymph
nodes are located

⦁	Normal lymph node response:
swelling at front, sides, and
back of the neck and ear; in the
armpit or groin; or anywhere
else near an area of an infection.
Usually, these nodes are less
than 1 inch across.
⦁	Bacterial infection of lymph
nodes: swollen, warm lymph
nodes with overlying pink skin,
tender to the touch, usually
located near an area of the
body that has been infected.
Usually these nodes are larger
than 1 inch across.

Not necessary

Yes

No, unless
⦁	Difficulty breathing or swallowing.
⦁	Red, tender, warm glands.
⦁	Fever with behavior change.
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.

⦁	Child is on antibiotics (if
indicated).
⦁	Exclusion criteria are resolved.

Vomiting

⦁	Viral infection of the
stomach or intestine
(gastroenteritis)
⦁	Coughing strongly
⦁	Other viral illness with
fever
⦁	Noninfectious causes:
food allergy (vomiting,
sometimes with hives),
trauma, dietary and
medication related,
headache

Diarrhea, vomiting, or cramping for
viral gastroenteritis

For outbreak

Yes

Yes, if
⦁	Vomited more than 2 times in 24
hours
⦁	Vomiting and fever
⦁	Vomiting with hives
⦁	Vomit that appears green/bloody
⦁	No urine output in 8 hours
⦁	Recent history of head injury
⦁	Looks or acts very ill
⦁	Child meets routine exclusion
criteria.

⦁	Vomiting ends.
⦁	Able to participate.
⦁	Exclusion criteria are resolved.

From Aronson SS, Shope TR, (eds). Managing Infectious Diseases in Child Care and Schools: a quick reference guide. 4th ed. Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017.

192 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

Table 29.2  Signs and Symptoms for Consideration of Exclusion or Inclusion in Child Care—cont’d

Chapter 29 u Child Care
considerations are itemized in the Crosswalk (https://nrckids.org/files
/CFOC.Crosswalk.pdf) and include, for example, discussion of daily
symptom checks for children as well as daily screening procedures and
exclusion criteria for staff.
Most families need to arrange to keep sick children at home necessitating staying home from work or having backup plans with an alternative caregiver. Alternative care arrangements outside the home for
sick children are relatively rare but may include either (1) care in the
child’s own center, if it offers special provisions designed for the care of
ill children (sometimes called the infirmary model or sick daycare), or
(2) care in a center that serves only children with illness or temporary
conditions. Although it is important that such arrangements emphasize preventing further spread of disease, one study found no occurrence of additional transmission of communicable disease in children
attending a sick center.

Protection and Promotion of Child Health

Child care has a role in protecting and promoting child health and
well-­being. Child care providers are often the first to notice signs of
child abuse and neglect and are a major source of child welfare referrals. Findings of increased health-­related issues in the first year of child
care are likely a testament to early detection benefits provided by child
care providers.

Sudden Infant Death Syndrome

A disproportionate number of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
deaths occur in child care centers or family-­based child care homes.
Infants who are back-­sleepers at home but are put to sleep on their
front in child care settings have a higher risk of SIDS. Providers and
parents should be made aware of the importance of placing infants on
their backs to sleep.

Asthma and Respiratory Illness

Children enrolled in prekindergarten may have a greater risk of asthma
diagnosis during prekindergarten but a lower risk in the years following
prekindergarten, when compared with children who were not exposed
to prekindergarten. Enrollment in prekindergarten may increase the
early detection of asthma symptoms.
A 10-­year follow-­up of a birth cohort has found no association
between child care attendance and respiratory infections, asthma,
allergic rhinitis, or skin-­prick test reactivity. Another study found
that in the first year of elementary school, children who had attended
child care had fewer absences from school, half as many episodes of
asthma, and less acute respiratory illness than their peers who had
never attended child care. These results are perhaps related to protection against respiratory illness through early exposure or a shift in the
age-­related peak of illness, although selection of illness-­prone children into homecare may play a role. Other factors include children
in child care potentially being less exposed to passive smoking than
children at home.

Vision and Hearing Problems

Children enrolled in a citywide universal prekindergarten program
had higher probability of diagnosis of vision problems, receipt of treatment for hearing or vision problems, and receiving an immunization.
These effects were not offset by lower rates in the kindergarten year,
suggesting that identification and treatment of these conditions was
accelerated by enrollment in universal prekindergarten. As hearing
and vision problems could potentially delay learning and cause behavioral problems, early detection and treatment is beneficial for future
health and school readiness.

Obesity and Promotion of Healthy Behaviors

There is insufficient research on longitudinal associations between child
care, diet, and physical activity behaviors. Some limited research suggests a negative or mixed association between child care exposure and
healthy behaviors, but the strength of these associations, and whether
any causal implications exist, are difficult to tease apart. Other research
suggests that child care center-­based interventions are generally found

193

to be effective in improving physical activity and may be effective at
improving dietary behaviors.
The CDC identifies child care settings as one of the best places to
reach young children with obesity prevention efforts. Through their
Spectrum of Opportunities framework (https://www.cdc.gov/obesity/
strategies/childcareece.html), they outline how a state’s early care and
education system can embed recommended standards and support for
obesity prevention, including nutrition, infant feeding, physical activity, and screen time.

ROLE OF PEDIATRIC PROVIDERS
Consultation, Referrals, and Screening to Improve
Access

Many parents are first-­time purchasers of child care with little experience and very immediate needs; they may select care in a market that
does little to provide them with useful information about child care
arrangements. To inform their child care decisions, parents may turn
to their child’s healthcare provider as the only professional with expertise in child development with whom they have regular and convenient
contact. Primary care clinicians should screen for child care just as
they do for other social determinants of health, asking about child care
arrangements and offering information about resources to help find
and pay for child care to reinforce the importance of child care and
increase the chances that children are enrolled in high-­quality settings.
It is difficult for many parents to find high-­quality child care that
they can accept and afford. Many parents also worry how their child
will fare in child care (e.g., they may worry that their child will feel distressed by the group settings, suffer from separation from the parents,
or even be subjected to neglect or abuse). Practical concerns of transportation, scheduling to cover their work or school hours, and reliability are also common. The reliability of the arrangement is often rated
as a “very important” selection factor by a higher proportion of parents
than any other factor, followed by availability and staff qualifications.
Among those who reported difficulty finding child care, cost was most
often the primary reason, followed by lack of open slots, quality, then
location or other reasons. Worries about finding quality child care are
especially likely among parents with greater barriers to child care access
and fewer personally accessible family and community resources. With
the coronavirus pandemic, parents may be worried about the transmission of COVID-­19 and about sporadic disruptions in service caused
by quarantines or temporary closures, and unfounded fears about the
safety of vaccines or facial masks.
Primary care practices can share information with parents about
publicly available sources of information to help them find or pay for
child care (Table 29.3). For example, they can
u Refer low-­income parents to Head Start, which serves 3-­4 year old
children, or Early Head Start programs, which serves low-­income
expecting families and their children until their child’s third birthday
u Refer low-­income working parents to apply for child care subsidies
and financial assistance in their state or county
u Refer parents to their local child care resource and referral agency
for help finding and selecting child care; these can be located via the
national association, Child Care Aware of America (www.childcarea
ware.org/families)
Some parents may think of child care only as babysitting focusing
mainly on whether the child is safe and warm and may not fully appreciate the potential consequences of unenriched care for their child’s cognitive, linguistic, and social development. These parents may be less likely
to select a high-­quality child care arrangement. Healthcare providers can
help parents understand the importance for their child’s development
of selecting high-­quality care by describing how it looks and providing
referrals and tips on how to find and select high-­quality child care. Families facing socioeconomic challenges accessing high-quality care should
be referred to available resources listed previously and in Table 29.3.
When a healthcare provider talks with a parent about a child care
arrangement, it also is important to consider the individual child’s
health concerns, dispositions, and physiologic responses to the environment. Like all environments, child care is experienced differently

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

194 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 29.3  Child Care Information Resources
ORGANIZATION

SPONSOR

All Our Kin

WEBSITE AND CONTACT INFORMATION
https://allourkin.org/

Caring for Our Children: National Resource
Center for Health and Safety in Child Care
and Early Education (NRC)

American Academy of Pediatrics, the
American Public Health Association, and the
National Resource Center for Health and
Safety in Child Care and Early Education

Child Care Aware of America

Caring for Our Children, National Health and
Safety Performance Standards https://nrckid
s.org/CFOC
http://www.childcareaware.org

Healthy Child Care America

American Academy of Pediatrics

http://www.healthychildcare.org

HealthySteps

Zero to Three

https://www.healthysteps.org/

National Association for the Education of
Young Children (NAEYC)

http://www.naeyc.org

National Association for Family Child Care

https://nafcc.org/

National Black Child Development Institute

https://www.nbcdi.org/

National Database of Child Care Licensing
Regulations

National Center on Early Childhood Quality
Assurance (NCECQA) funded by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services,
Administration for Children and Families.

National Indian Child Care Association

https://childcareta.acf.hhs.gov/licensing

https://www.nicca.us/

Office of Child Care (OCC)

U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Administration for Children &
Families

http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/occ

Office of Child Care Technical Assistance
Network (CCTAN)

U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Administration for Children &
Families, Office of Child Care

https://childcareta.acf.hhs.gov/

UnidosUS

https://www.unidosus.org/

Zero to Three

https://www.zerotothree.org/

by different children. When an environment lacks adequate support
for a child’s unique needs, healthy development can be compromised.
Some children may be more vulnerable to low-­quality child care (or
particularly responsive to high-­quality child care), such as children
with difficult or fearful temperaments, especially if their home environments are characterized by more risk factors, such as poverty or high
conflict with a parent. Clinicians can help parents determine how to
adjust child care arrangements to best meet their child’s specific needs
(e.g., allergies, eating and sleeping habits, temperament, and stress-­
regulation capacities).

Children Who Are Expelled from Child Care

A provider may tell a parent that they will not continue to serve a
child because of the child’s behaviors. Such expulsions are prohibited
in some regulated child care settings, such as Head Start and many
state-­funded prekindergarten programs. In addition to complete termination of a child’s child care arrangement (expulsion), children are
sometimes told that they cannot attend for a certain number of days
(suspension) or have their hours of care reduced, sent home from care
early, or excluded in other ways. Regardless of the form of the exclusion
or its stated reason, the result is often extremely stressful for the child
and family, and often the child care provider too. Indeed, parents may
lose their jobs due to the resulting lack of reliable child care or resort
to dangerous alternatives, such as leaving the child unattended or in
an unsafe arrangement. Healthcare providers should play an important role during child care expulsions by supporting families’ efforts to
find alternative care, perhaps through a referral to their local child care
resource and referral agency, assessing for any potentially contributory
underlying developmental or behavioral concerns, and asking parents
about the safety of any alternative care arrangements. (See Standard
2.2.0.8 [Preventing Expulsions, Suspensions, and Other Limitations in
Services] of Caring for Our Children, as well as the most recent policy
statement on this issue by the AAP.)

Supporting Parents Regarding Children’s Health

Parents frequently may ask primary care clinicians about sick children,
exposure to and prevention of risks in child care, and support for children with special needs in child care. When children are ill, parents
should be advised to follow guidelines for inclusion and temporary
exclusion (see CFOF, CDC, and state guidelines) (see Table 29.2). Parents may disagree with child care staff about whether a child meets or
does not meet the exclusion criteria, as a substantial amount of work
absenteeism is due to a child illness, showing the impact of lost child
care on parental employment. However, professional guidelines in
CFOC state that if the reason for exclusion relates to the child’s ability to participate or the caregiver’s ability to provide care for the other
children, the caregiver should not be required to accept responsibility
for the care of the child.
Primary care clinicians should emphasize that parents of infants
ensure that child care providers put infants on their backs to sleep to
prevent SIDS and follow vaccination schedules, including COVID-­19
vaccination as it is available to children of younger ages. Most states
require compliance with scheduled vaccinations for children to participate in licensed group child care settings. As of October 2021, only
three states (Connecticut, Illinois, New Jersey, and Washington) plus
the District of Columbia required child care providers to be vaccinated
against COVID-­19 and/or participate in regular testing.

Helping Families of Children with Special Needs

Healthcare providers should work with parents and communicate with
other service providers and early intervention staff to identify problems, remove access barriers, and coordinate service delivery for children with special needs. They should also encourage involvement of
parents and child care providers in developing special education plans
such as IEPs and IFSPs. Federal law emphasizes the central role of the
family in the development of these plans, and the team writing this plan
must consist of the parent or legal guardian and other professionals

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 30 u Loss, Separation, and Bereavement
that may be involved in the provision of these services, including child
care providers. Healthcare providers have an important role to play on
these IFSP teams and may attend meetings at the request of the family.
Many children with developmental or other special needs that would
qualify them for early childhood special education services will present
with health concerns, making the healthcare professionals an essential part of adequate early education planning. Additionally, healthcare
professionals may support a child’s civil rights to access public services
such as preschool when their access or ability to participate fully in the
program are at risk of limitation due to a diagnosable disability, health,
or mental health condition. Often this may require writing a letter stating the nature of the medical condition and the types of accommodations that may improve the child’s ability to participate more fully in
the range of activities offered by the program. By supporting a child’s
civil rights under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, clinicians can and should play
an integral role for safeguarding the rights of their patients.

Consulting and Partnering with Child Care Providers

Most state regulations mandate that licensed programs have a formal
relationship with a healthcare provider. They can provide consultation
to child care providers about measures to protect and maintain the
health and safety of children and staff. This may include consultation
regarding promoting practices to prevent SIDS; preventing and reducing the spread of communicable disease; reducing allergen, toxin, and
parasite exposure; ensuring vaccinations for children and staff; removing environmental hazards; and preventing injuries. In some cases
pediatricians have provided ongoing health and mental health consultation to child care programs, such through highly successful programs
like HealthySteps (https://www.healthysteps.org/) and “Docs for Tots”
(https://docsfortots.org/).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

include poor appetite, behavior issues such as acting against caregiver
requests, reluctance to go to bed, sleep problems, or regressive behavior, such as requesting a bottle or bed-­wetting. School-­age children
may experience impaired cognitive functioning and poor performance
in school. Some children may repeatedly ask for the absent parent and
question when the absent parent will return. The child may go to the
window or door or out into the neighborhood to look for the absent
parent; a few may even leave home or their place of temporary placement to search for their parents. Other children may not refer to the
parental absence at all.
A child’s response to reunion may surprise or alarm an unprepared
parent. A parent who joyfully returns to the family may be met by wary
or cautious children. After a brief interchange of affection, children
may seem indifferent to the parent’s return. This response may indicate
anger at being left or wariness that the event will happen again, or the
young child may feel, as a result of magical thinking (see Chapter 25),
as if the child caused the parent’s departure. For example, if the parent
who frequently says “Stop it, or you’ll give me a headache” is hospitalized, the child may feel at fault and guilty. Because of these feelings,
children may seem more closely attached to the present parent than
to the absent one, or even to the grandparent or babysitter who cared
for them during their parent’s absence. Some children, particularly
younger ones, may become more clinging and dependent than they
were before the separation, while continuing any regressive behavior
that occurred during the separation. Such behavior may engage the
returned parent more closely and help to reestablish the bond that the
child felt was broken. Such reactions are usually transient, and within
1-­2 weeks, children will have recovered their usual behavior and equilibrium. Recurrent separations may tend to make children wary and
guarded about reestablishing the relationship with the repeatedly
absent parent, and these traits may affect other personal relationships.
Parents should be advised not to try to modify a child’s behavior by
threatening to leave.

DIVORCE

Chapter 30

Loss, Separation, and
Bereavement
Megan E. McCabe and Janet R. Serwint
All children will experience involuntary separations, whether from
illness, death, or other causes, from loved ones at some time in their
lives. Relatively brief separations of children from their parents usually
produce minor transient effects, but more enduring and frequent separation may cause sequelae. The potential impact of each event must be
considered in light of the age, stage of development, and experiences
of the child; the particular relationship with the absent person; and the
nature of the situation.

SEPARATION AND LOSS

Separations may be from temporary causes, such as vacations, parental
job requirements, natural disasters or civil unrest, or parental or sibling
illness requiring hospitalization. More long-­term separations occur as
a result of divorce, placement in foster care, or immigration, whereas
permanent separation may occur because of death. The initial reaction of young children to separation of any duration may involve crying, such as a tantrum type, protesting type, and a quieter, sadder type.
Children’s behavior may appear subdued, withdrawn, fussy, or moody,
or they may demonstrate resistance to authority. Specific problems may

195

More sustained experiences of loss, such as divorce or placement in
foster care, can give rise to the same kinds of reactions noted earlier,
but they are more intense and possibly more lasting. Currently in the
United States, approximately 40% of first marriages end in divorce.
Divorce has been found to be associated with negative parent functioning, such as parental depression and feelings of incompetence; negative child behavior, such as noncompliance and whining; and negative
parent–child interaction, such as inconsistent discipline, decreased
communication, and decreased affection. Greater childhood distress is
associated with greater parental distress. Continued parental conflict
and loss of contact with the noncustodial parent is common.
Two of the most important factors that contribute to morbidity of the
children in a divorce include parental psychopathology and disrupted
parenting before the separation. The year after the divorce is the period
when problems are most apparent; these problems tend to dissipate
over the next 2 years. Depression may be present up to 5 years later,
and educational or occupational decline may occur even 10 years later.
It is difficult to sort out all confounding factors. Children may suffer
when exposed to parental conflict that continues after divorce and that
in some cases may escalate. The degree of interparental conflict may be
the most important factor associated with child morbidity. A continued relationship with the noncustodial parent when there is minimal
interparental conflict is associated with more positive outcomes.
School-­age children may become depressed, may seem indifferent,
or may be extremely angry. Other children appear to deny or avoid
the issue, behaviorally or verbally. Most children cling to the hope that
the actual placement or separation is not real and only temporary. The
child may experience guilt by feeling that the loss, separation, or placement represents rejection and perhaps punishment for misbehavior.
Children may protect a parent and assume guilt, believing that their
own “badness” caused the parent to depart. Children who feel that their
misbehavior caused their parents to separate may have the fantasy that
their own trivial or recurrent behavioral patterns caused their parents
to become angry at each other. A child might perceive that outwardly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

196 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
blaming parents is emotionally risky; parents who discover that a child
harbors resentment might punish the child further for these thoughts
or feelings. Some children have behavioral or psychosomatic symptoms and unwittingly adopt a “sick” role as a strategy they hope will
reunite their parents.
In response to divorce of parents and the subsequent separation and
loss, older children and adolescents usually show intense anger. Five
years after the breakup, approximately 30% of children report intense
unhappiness and dissatisfaction with their life and their reconfigured
family; another 30% show clear evidence of a satisfactory adjustment;
and the remaining children demonstrate a mixed picture, with good
achievement in some areas and faltering achievement in others. After
10 years, approximately 45% do well, but 40% may have academic,
social, or emotional problems. As adults, some are reluctant to form
intimate relationships, fearful of repeating their parents’ experience.
Parental divorce has a moderate long-­term negative impact on the
adult mental health status of children, even after controlling for changes
in economic status and problems before divorce. Good adjustment of
children after a divorce is related to ongoing involvement with two psychologically healthy parents who minimize conflict and to the siblings
and other relatives who provide a positive support system. Divorcing
parents should be encouraged to avoid adversarial processes and to use
a trained mediator to resolve disputes if needed. Joint-­custody arrangements may reduce ongoing parental conflict, but children in joint custody may feel overburdened by the demands of maintaining a strong
presence in two homes.
When the primary care provider is asked about the effects of divorce,
parents should be informed that different children may have different
reactions, but that the parents’ behavior and the way they interact will
have a major and long-­term effect on the child’s adjustment. The continued presence of both parents in the child’s life, with minimal interparental conflict, is most beneficial to the child.

MOVE/FAMILY RELOCATION

A significant proportion of the U.S. population changes residence
each year. The effects of this movement on children and families are
frequently overlooked. For children, the move is essentially involuntary and out of their control. When changes in family structure such
as divorce or death precipitate moves, children face the stresses created by both the precipitating events and the move itself. Parental sadness surrounding the move may transmit unhappiness to the children.
Children who move lose their old friends, the comfort of a familiar
bedroom and house, and their ties to school and community. They
not only must sever old relationships but also are faced with developing new ones in new neighborhoods and new schools. Children may
enter neighborhoods with different customs and values, and because
academic standards and curricula vary among communities, children
who have performed well in one school may find themselves struggling
in a new one. Frequent moves during the school years are likely to have
adverse consequences on social and academic performance.
Migrant children and children who emigrate from other countries
present with special circumstances. These children not only need to
adjust to a new house, school, and community, but also need to adjust
to a new culture and in many cases a new language. Because children have faster language acquisition than adults, they may function
as translators for the adults in their families. This powerful position
may lead to role reversal and potential conflict within the family. In the
evaluation of migrant children and families, it is important to ask about
the circumstances of the migration, including legal status, violence or
threat of violence, conflict of loyalties, and moral, ethical, and religious
differences.
Parents should prepare children well in advance of any move and
allow them to express any unhappy feelings or misgivings. Parents
should acknowledge their own mixed feelings and agree that they
will miss their old home while looking forward to a new one. Visits
to the new home in advance are often useful preludes to the actual
move. Transient periods of regressive behavior may be noted in preschool children after moving, and these should be understood and
accepted. Parents should assist the entry of their children into the new

community, and whenever possible, exchanges of letters and visits with
old friends should be encouraged.

SEPARATION BECAUSE OF HOSPITALIZATION

Potential challenges for hospitalized children include coping with separation; adapting to the new hospital environment; adjusting to multiple
caregivers; seeing very sick children; and sometimes experiencing the
disorientation of intensive care, anesthesia, and surgery. To help mitigate potential problems, a preadmission visit to the hospital can help
by allowing the child to meet the people who will be offering care and
ask questions about what will happen. Parents of children <5-­6 years
old should room with the child if feasible. Older children may also benefit from parents or other family members staying with them while in
the hospital, depending on the severity of their illness. Creative and
active recreational or socialization programs with child life specialists,
chances to act out feared procedures in play with dolls or mannequins,
and liberal visiting hours, including visits from siblings, are all helpful. Sensitive, sympathetic, and accepting attitudes toward children and
parents by the hospital staff are very important. Healthcare providers
need to remember that parents have the best interest of their children
at heart and know their children the best. Whenever possible, school
assignments and tutoring for hospitalized children should be available
to engage them intellectually and prevent them from falling behind in
their scholastic achievements.
The psychologic aspects of illness should be evaluated from the outset, and physicians should act as a model for parents and children by
showing interest in a child’s feelings, allowing them a venue for expression, and demonstrating that it is possible and appropriate to communicate about discomfort. Continuity of medical personnel may be
reassuring to the child and family.

MILITARY FAMILIES

More than 2 million children live in military families in the United
States, and approximately 50% of them obtain medical care in the community rather than at a military medical facility. Children whose parents are serving in the military may experience loss and separation in
multiple ways. These include frequent relocations, relocation to foreign
countries, and duty-­related separation from parents. The most impactful experiences have been repeated wartime deployments of parents
and the death of parents during military service. All branches of the
military have increased their focus on preparing and supporting military families for a service member’s deployment to improve family coping. Military families composed of young parents and young children
are at risk for child maltreatment in the context of repeated or prolonged deployments.

PARENTAL/SIBLING DEATH

Approximately 5–8% of U.S. children will experience parental death;
rates are much higher in parts of the world more directly affected by
war, AIDS, and natural disasters. Anticipated deaths from chronic illness may place a significant strain on a family, with frequent bouts of
illness, hospitalization, disruption of normal home life, absence of the
ill parent, and perhaps more responsibilities placed on the child. Additional strains include changes in daily routines, financial pressures, and
the need to cope with aggressive treatment options.
Children can and should continue to be involved with the sick parent or sibling, but they need to be prepared for what they will see in the
home or hospital setting. The stresses that a child will face include visualizing the physical deterioration of the family member, helplessness,
and emotional lability. Forewarning the child that the family member
may demonstrate physical changes, such as appearing thinner or losing hair, will help the child to adjust. These warnings combined with
simple yet specific explanations of the need for equipment, such as a
nasogastric tube for nutrition, an oxygen mask, or a ventilator, will help
lessen the child’s fear. Children should be honestly informed of what is
happening, in language they can understand, allowing them choices,
but with parental involvement in decision-­making. They should be
encouraged, but not forced, to see their ill family member. Parents who
are caring for a dying spouse or child may be too emotionally depleted

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 30 u Loss, Separation, and Bereavement
to be able to tend to their healthy child’s needs or to continue regular
routines. Children of a dying parent may suffer the loss of security and
belief in the world as a safe place, and the surviving parent may be
inclined to impose his or her own need for support and comfort onto
the child. However, the well parent and caring relatives must keep in
mind that children need to be allowed to remain children, with appropriate support and attention. Sudden, unexpected deaths lead to more
anxiety and fear because there is no time for preparation, and explanations for the death can cause uncertainty. Examples of this may be
death of a parent due to a motor vehicle crash, homicide or suicide,
sudden health-­related issue such as a myocardial infarction or stroke,
or from infection such as the recent COVID pandemic. Providing support to the child is paramount to allow him or her to express sorrow
and grief and to have stability in the child’s remaining relationships.

GRIEF AND BEREAVEMENT

Grief is a personal, emotional state of bereavement or an anticipated
response to loss, such as a death. Common reactions include sadness,
anger, guilt, fear, and at times, relief. The normality of these reactions
needs to be emphasized. Most bereaved families remain socially connected and expect that life will return to some new, albeit different,
sense of normalcy. The pain and suffering imposed by grief should
never be automatically deemed “normal” and thus neglected or
ignored. In uncomplicated grief reactions, the steadfast concern of
the pediatrician can help promote the family’s sense of well-­being. In
more distressing reactions, as seen in traumatic grief of sudden death,
the pediatrician may be a major, first-­line force in helping children and
families address their loss.
Participation in the care of a child with a life-­threatening or terminal
illness is a profound experience. Parents experience much anxiety and
worry during the final stages of their child’s life. In one study, 45% of
children dying from cancer died in the pediatric intensive care unit,
and parents report that 89% of their children suffered “a lot” or “a great
deal” during the last month of life. Physicians consistently underreport
children’s symptoms compared with parents’ reports. Better ways are
needed to provide care for dying children. Providers need to maintain
honest and open communication, provide appropriate pain management, and meet the families’ wishes as to the preferred location of the
child’s death, in some cases in their own home. Inclusion of multiple
disciplines, such as hospice, clergy, nursing, pain service, child life specialists, social work, and pet therapy, often helps to support patients
and families fully during this difficult experience.
The practice of withholding information from children and parents
regarding a child’s diagnosis and prognosis has generally been abandoned, because physicians have learned that protecting parents and
patients from the seriousness of their child’s condition does not alleviate concerns and anxieties. Even very young children may have a real
understanding of their illness. Children who have serious diseases and
are undergoing aggressive treatment and medication regimens, but
who are told by their parents that they are okay, are not reassured. These
children understand that something serious is happening to them, and
they are often forced to suffer in silence and isolation because the message they have been given by their parents is to not discuss it and to
maintain a cheerful demeanor. Children have the right to know their
diagnosis and should be informed early in their treatment. The content
and depth of the discussion needs to be tailored to the child’s personality and developmental level of understanding. Parents have choices as
to how to orchestrate the disclosure. Parents may want to be the ones
to inform the child themselves, may choose for the pediatric healthcare
provider to do so, or may do it in partnership with the pediatrician.
A death, especially the death of a family member, is the most difficult loss for a child. Many changes in normal patterns of functioning
may occur, including loss of love and support from the deceased family
member, a change in income, the possible need to relocate, less emotional support from surviving family members, altering of routines,
and a possible change in status from sibling to only child. Relationships
between family members may become strained, and children may
blame themselves or other family members for the death of a parent or
sibling. Bereaved children may exhibit many of the emotions discussed

197

Table 30.1  Example Items from the Three Grief
Measurement Tools Assessed Through
Cognitive Interviewing
CORE BEREAVEMENT ITEMS (CBI)
Do you experience images of the events surrounding your loved one’s
death? Do thoughts of your loved one make you feel distressed?
Do you find yourself pining for/yearning for your loved one?
Do reminders of your loved one such as photos, situations, music,
places, etc., cause you to feel loneliness?
Do reminders of your loved one such as photos, situations, music,
places, etc. cause you to cry about your loved one?
Response options: A lot of the time; Quite a bit of the time; A little
bit of the time; Never
GRIEF COGNITIONS QUESTIONNAIRE FOR CHILDREN (GCQ-­C)
Since my loved one died, I think of myself as a weak person.
I should have seen to it that he/she would not have died.
I blame myself for not having cared for him/her better than I did. It is
not nice toward him/her, when I will begin to feel less sad. My life is
worthless since he/she died.
Response options: Hardly ever; Sometimes; Always
INTRUSIVE GRIEF THOUGHTS SCALE (IGTS)
(During the past 4 wk) How often did you think about the death of
your loved one?
How often did you find yourself thinking how unfair it is that your
loved one died, even though you didn’t want to think about it?
How often did you have trouble falling asleep because you were
thinking about your loved one’s death? How often have you had
bad dreams related to your loved one’s death?
How often did you have trouble doing things you like because you
were worrying about how you and your family will get along?
Response options: Several times a day; About once a day; Once or
twice a week; Less than once a week; Not at all
From Taylor TM, Thurman TR, Nogela L. Every time that month comes, I remember:
using cognitive interviews to adapt grief measures for use with bereaved adolescents in
South Africa. J Child Adolesc Mental Health. 2016;28(2):163–174, Table 1, p 166.

earlier as a result of the loss, in addition to behaviors of withdrawal into
their own world, sleep disturbances, nightmares, and symptoms such
as headache, abdominal pains, or possibly symptoms similar to those
of the family member who has died. Children 3-­5 years of age who have
experienced a family bereavement may show regressive behaviors such
as bed-­wetting and thumb sucking. School-­age children may exhibit
nonspecific symptoms, such as headache, abdominal pain, chest pain,
fatigue, and lack of energy. Children and adolescents may also demonstrate enhanced anxiety if these symptoms resemble those of the
family member who died. Bereavement may be measured by various
published scales (Table 30.1). Behavioral patterns of persistent complex
bereavement disorder are noted in Table 30.2.
The presence of secure and stable adults who can meet the child’s
needs and who permit discussion about the loss is most important
in helping a child to grieve. The pediatrician should help the family understand this necessary presence and encourage the protective
functioning of the family unit (Table 30.3). More frequent visits to the
healthcare professional may be necessary to address these symptoms
and provide reassurance when appropriate. Suggested availability of
clergy or mental health providers can provide additional support and
strategies to facilitate the transitions after the death.
Death, separation, and loss as a result of natural catastrophes and
human-­made disasters have become increasingly common events in children’s lives. Exposure to such disasters occurs either directly or indirectly,
where the event is experienced through the media. Examples of indirect
exposure include scenes of earthquakes, hurricanes, tsunamis, tornadoes,
and terrorist attacks. Children who experience personal loss in disasters
tend to watch more media coverage than children who do not. Children
without a personal loss watch as a way of participating in the event and
may thus experience repetitive exposure to traumatic scenes and stories.
The loss and devastation for a child who personally lives through a disaster are significant; the effect of the simultaneous occurrence of disaster

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

198 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 30.2  Developmental Manifestations of Persistent Complex Bereavement Disorder in Children and Adolescents:
Developmental Considerations and Symptom Manifestation in Youth
CHILD HAS EXPERIENCED THE DEATH OF A LOVED ONE

CRITERION A
CRITERION B
B1: Expression of persistent yearning or
longing for the deceased

Children have an evolving understanding of the permanence of death, particularly among young
children; behavioral expressions of separation distress from surviving caregivers are common, as are
reunification fantasies (i.e., wanting to die to be reunited with the parent in the afterlife)

B2: Intense sorrow or emotional pain

Children focus on the more salient immediate physical environment rather than their own internal
state; young children often have difficulties expressing inner mood; overt expressions of emotional
pain might be interspersed within seemingly normal mood, which can lead to others incorrectly
assuming they are not grieving

B3: Preoccupation with the person who
died

Children might become distressed when separated from the deceased parent’s belongings; it is
common for youth to seek out physical connections to their parent, including sleeping in the parent’s
bed, or wearing their clothing or jewelry

B4: Preoccupation with the
circumstances of the death

Young children might reenact the death through play, sometimes with alternate (i.e., counterfactual)
actions that depict what children feel they or others could have done to prevent the death;
reenacting might also take the form of drawing disturbing scenes or aspects of the death

CRITERION C
C3: Difficulties related to positive
reminiscing about the deceased

Children’s ability to reminisce matures with development and is often facilitated by surviving caregivers

C4: Bitterness or anger related to the
loss

Youth might show overall irritability, oppositional behavior, and problem behavior in the context of
bereavement; externalizing behaviors are often precipitated by changes to the youth’s daily routine
that are a result of the parent’s absence (including others assuming the deceased parent’s roles)

C5: Maladaptive self-­appraisals in
relation to the deceased or the death

Youth, particularly adolescents, might become preoccupied by a perceived accountability (e.g.,
blaming others or oneself for their parent’s death); in young children, this might manifest as magical
thinking that their own thoughts or actions caused their parents to die

C6: Excessive avoidance of reminders
of the loss

Avoidance might not always be under a child’s control (e.g., a parent might choose not to bring the
child to the gravesite, which prevents the child from confronting that reminder)

C7: Desire not to live so that they can
be with the deceased

Children and adolescents often experience suicidal ideation as a means of reunification fantasies, and
their reduced understanding of the complexities of death might exacerbate this mindset among
young children; suicidal ideation associated with reunification fantasies might not be accompanied
by intent or planning; adolescents might engage in risk-­taking behaviors (e.g., substance use,
reckless driving)

C8: Difficulty trusting other people
since the death

Children might have difficulty establishing relationships with new caregivers, which is often reflective of
difficulty with new life circumstances, rather than lack of trust; youth might also display overt anger or
oppositional and defiant behaviors toward the surviving or new caregiver

C9: Feeling alone or detached from
others since the death

Youth often report feelings of alienation from other peers who have not experienced a similar loss,
particularly when reminders of this difference are salient (e.g., seeing other classmates’ parents
coming to a school event); children and adolescents might conceal their own grief reactions to
protect their caregivers from additional distress

C10: Feeling that life is meaningless
or empty without the deceased or
the belief that they cannot function
without the deceased

Developmental regressions (e.g., regression in toileting or language among young children; loss
of study skills or emotion regulation in adolescents) are common, as are disruptions to sleep and
appetite patterns; adolescents can show a lack of engagement in preparations for adulthood (e.g.,
applying to jobs)

C11: Confusion about their role in life
or a diminished sense of their identity

Youth can express sadness over lost opportunities they were planning to experience with their
deceased caregiver (e.g., riding a bicycle, walking down the aisle at their wedding); adolescents
might show disorganization, lack of direction, or both

The letters and numbers refer to the symptom within each diagnostic criterion (e.g., criterion B, 4th symptom). Persistent complex bereavement
disorder symptom criteria and descriptions have been adapted to the context of parental death.
From Kentor RA, Kaplow JB. Supporting children and adolescents following parental bereavement: guidance for health-­care professionals. Lancet Child Adolesc. 2020;4:889–898, p 891.

and personal loss complicates the bereavement process as grief reactions
become interwoven with posttraumatic stress symptoms (see Chapter 38).
After a death resulting from aggressive or traumatic circumstances, access
to expert help may be required. Under conditions of threat and fear, children seek proximity to safe, stable, protective figures.
It is important for parents to grieve with their children. Some parents want to protect their children from their grief, so they put on an
outwardly brave front or do not talk about the deceased family member
or traumatic event. Instead of the desired protective effect, the child
receives the message that demonstrating grief or talking about death
is wrong, leading the child to feel isolated, grieve privately, or delay
grieving. The child may also conclude that the parents did not really

care about the deceased because they seem to have forgotten the person
so easily or demonstrate no emotion. The parents’ efforts to avoid talking about the death may cause the parents to isolate themselves from
their children at a time when the children most need them. Children
need to know that their parents love them and will continue to protect
them. Children need opportunities to talk about their relative’s death
and associated memories. A surviving sibling may feel guilty simply
because he or she survived, especially if the death was the result of an
accident that involved both children. Siblings’ grief, especially when
compounded by feelings of guilt, may manifest as regressive behavior
or anger. Parents should be informed of this possibility and encouraged
to discuss it with their children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 30 u Loss, Separation, and Bereavement
Table 30.3  Recommendations for Healthcare Professionals
for Helping Children After Bereavement
•	Help children and families recognize that there is no correct way
to grieve and that every child grieves differently

•	Help caregivers recognize that child grief is not the same as adult
grief, and children express their grief reactions in very different
ways

•	Help caregivers understand that the circumstances of the death
can play a major role in children’s grief reactions, and deaths
by homicide or suicide might be especially difficult for children
(therefore could require more intensive mental healthcare)

•	Empower caregivers by explaining they can be instrumental in

facilitating adaptive grief in their children by providing empathy,
reassurance, and a listening ear, and talking openly about the
deceased person with their child

•	Help caregivers to use language accessible to children when

talking about the death, meaning that they should use simple
and straightforward language that is appropriate for the child’s
developmental stage, and let the child ask questions as opposed
to providing a lot of detailed information

•	Provide accurate information to children about the cause of

death; children can become preoccupied with thoughts about
contagion (e.g., “will I catch cancer too?”) or worries about the
caregiver’s level of suffering (e.g., “did it hurt when my dad had a
stroke?”), and healthcare professionals can help children
understand the circumstances of the death and assist in
alleviating some of these concerns

•	Never underestimate the importance of simply bearing witness

to a child’s grief; our society often sends children messages that
it is not okay to talk about their own grief, and in allowing them
the space to do that, healthcare professionals can help to both
normalize and validate their reactions.

From Kentor RA, Kaplow JB. Supporting children and adolescents following parental
bereavement: guidance for health-­care professionals. Lancet Child Adolesc.
2020;4:889–898, p 896.

DEVELOPMENTAL PERSPECTIVE

Children’s responses to death reflect the family’s current culture, their
past heritage, their experiences, and the sociopolitical environment.
Personal experience with terminal illness and dying may also facilitate children’s comprehension of death and familiarity with mourning.
Developmental differences exist in children’s efforts to make sense of
and master the concept and reality of death and profoundly influence
their grief reactions.
Children younger than 3 years have little or no understanding of
the concept of death. Despair, separation anxiety, and detachment may
occur at the withdrawal of nurturing caretakers. Young children may
respond in reaction to observing distress in others, such as a parent or
sibling who is crying, withdrawn, or angry. Young children also express
signs and symptoms of grief in their emotional states, such as irritability or lethargy, and in severe cases, mutism. If the reaction is severe,
failure to thrive may occur.
Preschool children are in the preoperational cognitive stage, in
which communication takes place through play and fantasy (see
Chapter 25). They do not show well-­established cause-­and-­effect
reasoning. They may feel that death is reversible, analogous to
someone going away. In attempts to master the finality and permanence of death, preschoolers frequently ask unrelenting, repeated
questions about when the person who died will be returning. This
makes it difficult for parents, who may become frustrated because
they do not understand why the child keeps asking and do not like
the constant reminders of the person’s death. The primary care provider has a very important role in helping families understand the
child’s struggle to comprehend death. Preschool children typically

199

express magical explanations of death events, sometimes resulting
in guilt and self-­blame (“He died because I wouldn’t play with him”;
“She died because I was mad at her”). Some children have these
thoughts but do not express them verbally because of embarrassment or guilt. Parents and primary care providers need to be aware
of magical thinking and must reassure preschool children that their
thoughts had nothing to do with the outcome. Children of this age
are often frightened by prolonged, powerful expressions of grief by
others. Children conceptualize events in the context of their own
experiential reality, and therefore consider death in terms of sleep,
separation, and injury. Young children express grief intermittently
and show marked affective shifts over brief periods.
Younger school-­age children think concretely, recognize that
death is irreversible, but believe it will not happen to them or affect
them, and begin to understand biologic processes of the human
body (“You’ll die if your body stops working”). Information gathered from the media, peers, and parents forms lasting impressions.
Consequently, they may ask candid questions about death that
adults will have difficulty addressing (“He must have been blown
to pieces, huh?”).
Children approximately 9 years and older do understand that death
is irreversible and that it may involve them or their families. These children tend to experience more anxiety, overt symptoms of depression,
and somatic complaints than do younger children. School-­age children
are often left with anger focused on the loved one, those who could
not save the deceased, or those presumed responsible for the death.
Contact with the primary care clinician may provide great reassurance,
especially for the child with somatic symptoms, and particularly when
the death followed a medical illness. School and learning problems may
also occur, often linked to difficulty concentrating or preoccupation
with the death. Close collaboration with the child’s school may provide
important diagnostic information and offer opportunities to mobilize
intervention or support.
At 12-­14 years of age, children begin to use symbolic thinking,
reason abstractly, and analyze hypothetical, or “what if,” scenarios
systematically. Death and the end of life become concepts rather
than events. Teenagers are often ambivalent about dependence
and independence and may withdraw emotionally from surviving
family members, only to mourn in isolation. Adolescents begin to
understand complex physiologic systems in relationship to death.
Because they are often egocentric, they may be more concerned
about the impact of the death on themselves than about the deceased
or other family members. Fascination with dramatic, sensational,
or romantic death sometimes occurs and may find expression in
copycat behavior, such as cluster suicides, as well as competitive
behavior, to forge emotional links to the deceased person (“He was
my best friend”). Somatic expression of grief may revolve around
highly complex syndromes such as eating disorders (see Chapter
41) or conversion reactions (Chapter 35), as well as symptoms limited to the more immediate perceptions (stomachaches). Quality
of life takes on meaning, and the teenager develops a focus on the
future. Depression, resentment, mood swings, rage, and risk-­taking
behaviors can emerge as the adolescent seeks answers to questions
of values, safety, evil, and fairness. Alternately, adolescents may seek
philosophic or spiritual explanations (“being at peace”) to ease their
sense of loss. The death of a peer may be especially traumatic.
Families often struggle with how to inform their children of the
death of a family member. The answer depends on the child’s developmental level. It is best to avoid misleading euphemisms and metaphor. A child who is told that the relative who died “went to sleep”
may become frightened of falling asleep, resulting in sleep problems
or nightmares. Children can be told that the person is “no longer living” or “no longer moving or feeling.” Using examples of pets that
have died sometimes can help children gain a more realistic idea of
the meaning of death. Parents who have religious beliefs may comfort their children with explanations, such as, “Your sister’s soul is in
heaven,” or “Grandfather is now with God,” provided those beliefs are
honestly held. If these are not religious beliefs that the parents share,
children will sense the insincerity and experience anxiety rather than

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

200 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
the hoped-­for reassurance. Children’s books about death can provide
an important source of information, and when read together, these
books may help the parent to find the right words while addressing
the child’s needs.

ROLE OF THE PEDIATRIC HEALTHCARE PROVIDER
IN GRIEF

The pediatric healthcare provider who has had a longitudinal relationship with the family will be an important source of support in
the disclosure of bad news and in critical decision-­making, during
both the dying process and the bereavement period (see Table 30.3).
The involvement of the healthcare provider may include being present at the time the diagnosis is disclosed, at the hospital or home
at the time of death, being available to the family by phone during
the bereavement period, sending a sympathy card, attending the
funeral, and scheduling a follow-­up visit. Attendance at the funeral
sends a strong message that the family and their child are important, respected by the healthcare provider, and can also help the
pediatric healthcare provider to grieve and reach personal closure
about the death. A family meeting 1-­3 months later may be helpful because parents may not be able to formulate their questions
at the time of death. This meeting allows the family time to ask
questions, share concerns, and review autopsy findings (if one was
performed), and allows the healthcare provider to determine how
the parents and family are adjusting to the death.
Instead of leaving the family feeling abandoned by a healthcare system that they have counted on, this visit allows them to have continued
support. This is even more important when the healthcare provider
will be continuing to provide care for surviving siblings. The visit can
be used to determine how the mourning process is progressing, detect
evidence of marital discord, and evaluate how well surviving siblings
are coping. This is also an opportunity to evaluate whether referrals to
support groups or mental health providers may be of benefit. Continuing to recognize the child who has died is important. Families appreciate the receipt of a card on their child’s birthday, around holidays, or
the anniversary of their child’s death.
The healthcare provider needs to be an educator about disease,
death, and grief. The pediatrician can offer a safe environment for
the family to talk about painful emotions, express fears, and share
memories. By giving families permission to talk and modeling how
to address children’s concerns, the clinician demystifies death. Parents often request practical help. The healthcare provider can offer
families resources, such as literature (both fiction and nonfiction),
referrals to therapeutic services, and tools to help them learn about
illness, loss, and grief. In this way the physician reinforces the sense
that other people understand what they are going through and helps
to normalize their distressing emotions. The healthcare provider
can also facilitate and demystify the grief process by sharing basic
tenets of grief therapy. There is no single right or wrong way to
grieve. Everyone grieves differently; mothers may grieve differently
than fathers, and children mourn differently than adults. Helping
family members to respect these differences and reach out to support each other is critical. Grief is not something to “get over,” but a
lifelong process of adapting, readjusting, and reconnecting.
Parents may need help in knowing what constitutes normal grieving. Hearing, seeing, or feeling their child’s presence may be a normal
response. Vivid memories or dreams may occur. The healthcare provider can help parents to learn that, although their pain and sadness
may seem intolerable, other parents have survived similar experiences,
and their pain will lessen over time.
Healthcare providers are often asked whether children should attend
the funeral of a parent or sibling. These rituals allow the family to
begin their mourning process. Children >4 years old should be given
a choice. If the child chooses to attend, the child should have a designated, trusted adult who is not part of the immediate family and who
will stay with the child, offer comfort, and be willing to leave with the
child if the experience proves to be overwhelming. If the child chooses
not to attend, the child should be offered additional opportunities to
share in a ritual, go to the cemetery to view the grave, tell stories about

the deceased, or obtain a keepsake object from the deceased family
member as a remembrance.
In the era of regionalized tertiary care medicine, the primary care
provider and medical home staff may not be informed when one of
their patients dies in the hospital. Yet, this communication is critically important. Families assume their primary care provider has
been notified and often feel hurt when they do not receive some
symbol of condolence. Because of their longitudinal relationship
with the family, primary care providers may offer much needed
support. There are practical issues, such as the need to cancel previously made appointments and to alert office and nursing staff so
that they are prepared should the family return for a follow-­up visit
or for ongoing health maintenance care with the surviving siblings.
Even minor illnesses in the surviving siblings may frighten children. Parents may contribute to this anxiety because their inability to protect the child who has died may leave them with a sense
of guilt or helplessness. They may seek medical attention sooner
or may be hypervigilant in the care of the siblings because of guilt
over the other child’s death, concern about their judgment, or the
need for continued reassurance. A primary care visit can do much
to allay their fears.
Clinicians must remain vigilant for risk factors in each family member and in the family unit as a whole. Primary care providers, who care
for families over time, know bereft patients’ premorbid functioning
and can identify those at current or future risk for physical and psychiatric morbidity. Providers must focus on symptoms that interfere
with a patient’s normal activities and compromise a child’s attainment
of developmental tasks. Symptom duration, intensity, and severity, in
context with the family’s culture, can help identify complicated grief
reactions in need of therapeutic attention (see Table 30.2). Descriptive words such as “unrelenting,” “intense,” “intrusive,” or “prolonged”
should raise concern. Total absence of signs of mourning, specifically
an inability to discuss the loss or express sadness, also suggests potential problems.
No specific sign, symptom, or cluster of behaviors identifies the
child or family in need of help. Further assessment is indicated if
the following occur: (1) persistent somatic or psychosomatic complaints of undetermined origin (headache, stomachache, eating and
sleeping disorders, conversion symptoms, symptoms related to the
deceased’s condition, hypochondriasis); (2) unusual circumstances
of death or loss (sudden, violent, or traumatic death; inexplicable,
unbelievable, or particularly senseless death; prolonged, complicated illness; unexpected separation); (3) school or work difficulties
(declining grades or school performance, social withdrawal, aggression); (4) changes in home or family functioning (multiple family
stresses, lack of social support, unavailable or ineffective functioning of caretakers, multiple disruptions in routines, lack of safety);
and (5) concerning psychologic factors (persistent guilt or blame,
desire to die or talk of suicide, severe separation distress, disturbing hallucinations, self-­abuse, risk-­taking behaviors, symptoms of
trauma such as hyperarousal or severe flashbacks, grief from previous or multiple deaths). Children who are intellectually impaired
may require additional support.

TREATMENT

Suggesting interventions outside the natural support network of family and friends can often prove useful to grieving families. Bereavement counseling should be readily offered if needed or requested by
the family. Interventions that enhance or promote attachments and
security, as well as give the family a means of expressing and understanding death, help to reduce the likelihood of future or prolonged
disturbance, especially in children. Collaboration between pediatric
and mental health professionals can help determine the timing and
appropriateness of services.
Interventions for children and families who are struggling to
cope with a loss in the community include gestures such as sending
a card or offering food to the relatives of the deceased and teaching
children the etiquette of behaviors and rituals around bereavement
and mutual support. Performing community service or joining

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 31 u Sleep Medicine
charitable organizations, such as fund-­raising in memory of the
deceased, may be useful. In the wake of a disaster, parents and older
siblings can give blood or volunteer in search and recovery efforts.
When a loss does not involve an actual death (e.g., parental divorce,
geographic relocation), empowering the child to join or start a
“divorced kids’ club” in school or planning a “new kids in town”
party may help. Participating in a constructive activity moves the
family away from a sense of helplessness and hopelessness and helps
them find meaning in their loss.
Psychotherapeutic services may benefit the entire family or
individual members. Many support or self-­help groups focus on
specific types of losses (sudden infant death syndrome, suicide,
widow/widowers, AIDS) and provide an opportunity to talk with
other people who have experienced similar losses. Family, couple,
sibling, or individual counseling may be useful, depending on the
nature of the residual coping issues. Combinations of approaches
may work well for children or parents with evolving needs. A child
may participate in family therapy to deal with the loss of a sibling
and use individual treatment to address issues of personal ambivalence and guilt related to the death.
The question of pharmacologic intervention for grief reactions
often arises. Explaining that medication does not cure grief and
often does not reduce the intensity of some symptoms (separation
distress) can help. Although medication can blunt reactions, the psychologic work of grieving still must occur. The physician must consider the patient’s premorbid psychiatric vulnerability, current level
of functioning, other available supports, and the use of additional
therapeutic interventions. Medication as a first line of defense rarely
proves useful in normal or uncomplicated grief reactions. In certain
situations (severe sleep disruption, incapacitating anxiety, intense
hyperarousal), an anxiolytic or antidepressant may help to achieve
symptom relief and provide the patient with the emotional energy
to mourn. Medication used in conjunction with some form of psychotherapy, and in consultation with a psychopharmacologist, has
optimal results.
Children who are refugees and may have experienced war, violence, or personal torture, while often resilient, may experience posttraumatic stress disorder if exposures were severe or repeated (see
Chapters 15.3 and 38). Sequelae such as depression, anxiety, and
grief need to be addressed, and mental health therapy is indicated.
Cognitive-­
behavioral therapy, use of journaling and narratives
to bear witness to the experiences, and use of translators may be
essential.

SPIRITUAL ISSUES

Responding to patients’ and families’ spiritual beliefs can help in
comforting them during family tragedies. Offering to call members of pastoral care teams or their own spiritual leader can provide needed support and can aid in decision-­making. Families have
found it important to have their beliefs and their need for hope
acknowledged in end-­of-­life care. The majority of patients report
welcoming discussions on spirituality, which may help individual
patients cope with illness, disease, dying, and death. In addressing
spirituality, physicians need to follow certain guidelines, including
maintaining respect for the patient’s beliefs, following the patient’s
lead in exploring how spirituality affects the patient’s decision-­
making, acknowledging the limits of their own expertise and role
in spirituality, and maintaining their own integrity by not saying or
doing anything that violates their own spiritual or religious views.
Healthcare providers should not impose their own religious or nonreligious beliefs on patients, but rather should listen respectfully to
their patients. By responding to spiritual needs, clinicians may better aid their patients and families in end-­of-­life care and bereavement and take on the role of healers.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

201

Chapter 31

Sleep Medicine
Judith A. Owens and Seyni Gueye-­Ndiaye
BASICS OF SLEEP AND CHRONOBIOLOGY

Sleep and wakefulness are a highly complex and intricately regulated
neurobiologic system that both influences and is influenced by all physiologic systems in the body, as well as by the environment and sociocultural practices. The concept of sleep regulation is based on what
is usually referred to as the “two-­process model” because it requires
the simultaneous operation of two basic, highly coupled processes that
govern sleep and wakefulness. The homeostatic process (“Process S”),
regulates the length and depth of sleep and is thought to be related to
the accumulation of adenosine and other sleep-­promoting chemicals
(“somnogens”), such as cytokines, during prolonged periods of wakefulness. This sleep pressure appears to build more quickly in infants
and young children, thus limiting the duration that wakefulness can
be sustained during the day and necessitating periods of daytime sleep
(i.e., naps). The endogenous circadian rhythms (“Process C”) influence the internal organization of sleep and the timing and duration of
daily sleep–wake cycles and govern predictable patterns of alertness
throughout the 24-­hour day.
The “master circadian clock” or “circadian pacemaker” that controls
sleep–wake patterns, of which melatonin secretion is the principal biomarker, is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the anterior hypothalamus. In addition, “circadian clocks” are present in virtually every
cell in the body, which in turn govern the timing of multiple other
physiologic systems (e.g., cardiovascular reactivity, hormone levels,
renal and pulmonary functions). Because the human circadian clock
is slightly longer than 24 hours, intrinsic circadian rhythms must be
synchronized or “entrained” to the 24 hour-­day cycle by environmental
cues called zeitgebers. The dark-­light cycle is the most powerful of the
zeitgebers; light signals are transmitted to the suprachiasmatic nucleus
via the circadian photoreceptor system within the retina (functionally
and anatomically separate from the visual system), which switch the
pineal gland’s production of the hormone melatonin off (light) or on
(dark). Circadian rhythms are also synchronized by other external time
cues, such as timing of meals and clock time.
Sleep propensity, the relative level of sleepiness or alertness experienced at any given time during a 24-­hour period, is partially determined
by the homeostatic sleep drive, which in turn depends on the duration
and quality of previous sleep and the amount of time awake since the
last sleep period. Interacting with this sleep homeostat is the 24-­hour
cyclic pattern or rhythm characterized by clock-­dependent periods of
maximum sleepiness and maximum alertness. There are two periods
of maximum sleepiness, one in the late afternoon (approximately 3:00-­
5:00 pm) and one toward the end of the night (around 3:00-­5:00 am),
and two periods of maximum alertness, one in mid-­morning and one
in the evening just before the onset of natural sleep, the so-­called forbidden zone or second-­wind phenomenon, which allows for the maintenance of wakefulness in the face of an accumulated sleep drive.
There are significant health, safety, and performance consequences
of failure to meet basic sleep needs, termed insufficient/inadequate sleep
or sleep loss. Sufficient sleep is a biologic imperative, necessary for
optimal brain and body functioning. Slow-­wave sleep (SWS) (i.e., N3,
delta, or deep sleep) appears to be the most restorative form of sleep;
it is entered relatively quickly after sleep onset, is preserved in the face
of reduced total sleep time and increases (rebounds) after a night of
restricted sleep. These restorative properties of sleep may be linked to
the “glymphatic system,” which increases clearance of metabolic waste

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

202 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior

DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN SLEEP

Sleep disturbances, as well as many characteristics of sleep itself, have
some distinctly different features in children from sleep and sleep disorders in adults. Changes in sleep architecture and the evolution of
sleep patterns and behaviors reflect the physiologic/chronobiologic,
developmental, and social/environmental changes that are occurring
across childhood. These trends may be summarized as the gradual
assumption of more adult sleep patterns as children mature (Figs. 31.1
and 31.2):
1.	Sleep is the primary activity of the brain during early development;
for example, by age 2 years, the average child has spent 9,500 hours
(approximately 13 months) asleep vs 8,000 hours awake, and between 2 and 5 years, the time asleep is equal to the time awake.
2.	There is a gradual decline in the average 24-­hour sleep duration from
infancy through adolescence, which involves a decrease in both diurnal and nocturnal sleep amounts. The decline in daytime sleep
(scheduled napping) results in termination of naps typically by age
5 years, although there is clearly considerable variability in the age

8.0
7.0
Daytime sleep (hr)

products, including β-­amyloid, produced by neural activity in the
awake brain. Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep (stage R or “dream”
sleep) appears to be involved in numerous important brain processes,
including completion of vital cognitive functions (e.g., consolidation
of memory), promoting the plasticity of the central nervous system
(CNS), and protecting the brain from injury. Sufficient amounts of
these sleep stages are necessary for optimal cognitive functioning and
emotional and behavioral self-­regulation.
Partial sleep loss (i.e., sleep restriction) on a chronic basis accumulates in a sleep debt and over several days produces deficits equivalent
to those seen under conditions of one night of total sleep deprivation.
If the sleep debt becomes large enough and is not voluntarily repaid by
obtaining sufficient recovery sleep, the body may respond by overriding voluntary control of wakefulness. This results in periods of decreased
alertness, dozing off, and unplanned napping, recognized as excessive
daytime sleepiness (EDS). The sleep-­restricted individual may also experience very brief (several seconds) repeated daytime microsleeps, of
which the individual may be completely unaware, but which nonetheless
may result in significant lapses in attention and vigilance. There is also a
relationship between the amount of sleep restriction and performance
on cognitive tasks, particularly those requiring sustained attention and
higher-­level cognitive skills (executive functions; see Chapter 49), with a
decay in performance correlating with declines in sleep amounts.
It has also been recognized that what may be globally described
as “deficient” sleep involves alterations in both amount and timing of
sleep. Misalignment of intrinsic circadian rhythms with extrinsic societal demands, such a shift work and early school start times, is associated with deficits in cognitive function and self-­regulation, increased
emotional and behavioral problems and risk-­taking behaviors, and
negative impacts on health, such as increased risk of cardiovascular
disease, obesity, and metabolic dysfunction.
Insufficient quantity of sleep, mistimed sleep, and poor-­quality sleep
frequently result in EDS and decreased daytime alertness levels. Sleepiness in children may be recognizable as drowsiness, yawning, and other
classic “sleepy behaviors” as well as resumption of napping in older
children and extending sleep when given the opportunity such as on
weekends. If a child can sleep more, they need more sleep. EDS can also
manifest as mood disturbance, including irritability, emotional lability,
low frustration tolerance and depressed or negative mood; fatigue and
daytime lethargy, including increased somatic complaints (headaches,
gastrointestinal disturbances); cognitive impairment, including problems with memory, attention, concentration, decision-­making, and
problem solving; daytime behavior problems, including hyperactivity,
impulsivity, and noncompliance; and academic problems, including
chronic tardiness related to insufficient sleep and school failure. While
sleepiness and fatigue may overlap in their clinical presentation, sleepiness is characterized by the propensity to fall asleep, particularly under
conditions of low stimulation (e.g., riding in the car), while fatigue is
often described as a state of low energy, decreased motivation, and
“exhaustion.”

6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
2

4

6
Avg

8

10
–1SD

12
14
Age (mo)
+1SD

16

18
–2SD

20

22

24

+2SD

Fig. 31.1 Daytime sleep duration in infants ages 3-­24 mo. SD, Stand-

ard deviation. (From Paavonen EJ, Saarenpää-­
Heikkilä O, Morales-­
Munoz, I, et al. Normal sleep development in infants: findings from two
large birth cohorts. Sleep Med. 2020;69:145–154. Fig. 2, p 149.)

at which children cease napping. There is also a gradual continued
decrease in nocturnal sleep amounts into late adolescence; however,
adolescents still require 8-­10 hours of sleep per night.
3.	There is also a decline in the relative percentage of REM sleep from
birth (50% of sleep) through early childhood into adulthood (25–
30%), and a similar initial predominance of SWS that peaks in early
childhood, drops off abruptly after puberty (40–60% decline), and
then further decreases over the life span. This SWS preponderance
in early life has clinical significance; for example, the high prevalence
of partial arousal parasomnias (sleepwalking and sleep terrors) in
preschool- and early school–age children is related to the relative
increased percentage of SWS in this age-­group.
4.	The within-­sleep ultradian cycle lengthens from about 50 minutes
in the term infant to 90-­110 minutes in the school-­age child. This
has clinical significance in that typically a brief arousal or awakening occurs during the night at the termination of each ultradian
cycle. As the length of the cycles increase, there is a concomitant
decrease in the number of these end-­of-­cycle arousals (night wakings).
5.	A gradual shift in the circadian sleep–wake rhythm to a delayed
(later) sleep onset and offset time, linked to pubertal stage rather
than chronologic age, begins with pubertal onset in middle childhood and accelerates in early to mid-­adolescence. This biologic phenomenon often coincides with environmental factors, which further
delay bedtime and advance wake time and result in insufficient sleep
duration, including exposure to electronic “screens” in the evening,
social networking, academic and extracurricular demands, and early
(before 8:30 am) high school start times. In addition, the accumulation of the homeostatic sleep drive across the day slows and both
sensitivity and exposure to evening light increases (especially blue
spectrum light from electronic devices) during adolescence, conspiring to further delay sleep onset.
6.	Increasing irregularity of sleep–wake patterns is typically observed
across childhood into adolescence; this is characterized by increasingly larger discrepancies between school night and non–school
night bedtimes and wake times, and increased “weekend oversleep”
in an attempt to compensate for chronic weekday sleep insufficiency.
This phenomenon, often referred to as “social jet lag,” not only fails
to adequately address performance deficits associated with insufficient sleep on school nights but further exacerbates the normal
adolescent phase delay and results in additional circadian disruption
(analogous to that experienced by shift workers).
Table 31.1 lists normal developmental changes in children’s sleep.

COMMON SLEEP DISORDERS

Childhood sleep problems may be conceptualized as resulting from
(1) inadequate duration of sleep for age and sleep needs (insufficient
sleep quantity); (2) disruption and fragmentation of sleep (poor

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 31 u Sleep Medicine

203

13.0

Nighttime sleep (hr)

12.0
11.0
10.0
9.0
8.0
7.0

Fig. 31.2 Nighttime sleep duration in infants ages 3-­24 mo. SD, Stand-

ard deviation. (From Paavonen EJ, Saarenpää-­
Heikkilä O, Morales-­
Munoz, I, et al. Normal sleep development in infants: findings from two
large birth cohorts. Sleep Med. 2020;69:145–154. Fig. 3, p 149.)

sleep quality) as a result of frequent, repetitive, and brief arousals
during sleep; (3) misalignment of sleep–wake timing with circadian
rhythms; or (4) CNS-­mediated hypersomnia (EDS and increased
sleep needs). Insufficient sleep is usually the result of difficulty initiating (delayed sleep onset) or maintaining sleep (prolonged night
wakings) but, especially in older children and adolescents, may also
represent a conscious lifestyle decision to sacrifice sleep in favor of
competing priorities, such as homework and social activities. The
underlying causes of delayed sleep onset/prolonged night wakings or
sleep fragmentation may in turn be related to primarily behavioral
factors (e.g., bedtime resistance resulting in shortened sleep duration) or medical causes (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea [OSA] causing
frequent, brief arousals).
Certain pediatric populations are relatively more vulnerable
to acute or chronic sleep problems. These include children with
chronic illnesses or pain conditions (e.g., cystic fibrosis, asthma,
idiopathic juvenile arthritis) and acute illnesses (e.g., otitis media);
children taking stimulants (e.g., psychostimulants, caffeine), sleep-­
disrupting medications (e.g., corticosteroids), or daytime-­sedating
medications (some anticonvulsants, α-­agonists); hospitalized children; and children with a variety of psychiatric disorders, including
attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), depression, bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorders. Children with neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism, intellectual disability, blindness,
and some chromosomal syndromes (e.g., Smith-­Magenis, fragile X)
have especially high rates of sleep disturbances for a wide variety
of reasons. They may have comorbid medical issues or may be taking sleep-­disrupting medications, may be more prone to nocturnal
seizures, may be less easily entrained by environmental cues and
thus more vulnerable to circadian disruption, and are more likely
to have psychiatric and behavioral comorbidities that further predispose them to disrupted sleep. Children from low socioeconomic
households or minoritized racial and ethnic groups, as well as children in alternative care such as foster placement, are more likely
to experience, are less likely to be diagnosed and treated, and are
more vulnerable to the negative impact of sleep disorders resulting
in significant sleep health disparities.

Insomnia of Childhood

Insomnia is defined as difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep
that occurs despite age-­appropriate time and opportunity for sleep
and results in some degree of impairment in daytime functioning
for the child and/or family (ranging from fatigue, irritability, lack of
energy, and mild cognitive impairment to effects on mood, school
performance, and quality of life). Insomnia may be of a short-­term
and transient nature (usually related to an acute event) or may be
characterized as long-­term and chronic. Insomnia is a set of symptoms with many possible etiologies (e.g., pain, medication, medical/

6.0
2

4

6
Avg

8

10

12
14
Age (mo)

–1SD

+1SD

16

18
–2SD

20

22

24

+2SD

psychiatric conditions, learned behaviors). As with many behavioral
issues in children, insomnia is often primarily defined by parental
concerns rather than by objective criteria and therefore should be
viewed in the context of family (maternal depression, stress), child
(temperament, developmental level), and environmental (cultural
practices, sleeping space) considerations.
While current terminology (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders, 5th edition, 2015; International Classification
of Sleep Disorders, 3rd edition, 2014) groups most types of insomnia in both children and adults under a single category of Chronic
Insomnia Disorder, the descriptor of Behavioral Insomnia of Childhood and its subtypes (Sleep Onset Association and Limit Setting)
remains a useful construct in clinical practice, particularly for
young children (0-­5 years). One of the most common presentations
of insomnia found in infants and toddlers is the sleep-­onset association type. In this situation the child learns to fall asleep only under
certain conditions or associations, which typically require parental
presence, such as being rocked or fed, and does not develop the
ability to self-­soothe. During the night, when the child experiences
the type of brief arousal that normally occurs at the end of an ultradian sleep cycle or awakens for other reasons, the child is not able
to get back to sleep without those same associations being present. The infant then “signals” the parent by crying (or coming into
the parents’ bedroom if the child is ambulatory) until the necessary
associations are provided. The presenting complaint is typically one
of prolonged night waking requiring caregiver intervention and
resulting in insufficient sleep (for both child and caregiver).
Management of night wakings should include establishment of
a set sleep schedule and bedtime routine and implementation of
a behavioral program. The treatment approach typically involves
a program of rapid withdrawal (extinction) or more gradual withdrawal (graduated extinction) of parental assistance at sleep onset
and during the night. Extinction (“cry it out”) involves putting the
child to bed at a designated bedtime, “drowsy but awake,” to maximize sleep propensity and then systematically ignoring any protests
by the child until a set time the next morning. Although it has considerable empirical support, extinction is often not an acceptable
choice for families. Graduated extinction (aka “check-­ins,” “Ferber method,” “sleep training”) involves gradually weaning the child
from dependence on parental presence; typically, the parent leaves
the room at “lights out” and then returns or “checks” periodically at
fixed or successively longer intervals during the sleep–wake transition to provide brief reassurance until the child falls asleep. The
exact interval between checks is generally determined by the parents’ tolerance for crying and the child’s temperament; the goal is
to allow enough time between checks for the child to fall asleep
independently while avoiding extended time intervals that result
in continued escalation of protest behaviors such as screaming and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

204 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 31.1  Normal Developmental Changes in Children’s Sleep
AGE CATEGORY

SLEEP DURATION* AND
SLEEP PATTERNS

ADDITIONAL SLEEP ISSUES

SLEEP DISORDERS

Newborn (0-­2 mo)

⦁	Total sleep: 10-­19 hr per 24 hr
(average, 13-­14.5 hr), may be
higher in premature babies.
⦁	Bottle-­fed babies
generally sleep for longer
periods (2-­5 hr bouts) than
breastfed babies (1-­3 hr).
⦁	Sleep periods are separated
by 1-­2 hr awake.
⦁	No established
nocturnal-­diurnal pattern in
first few wk; sleep is evenly
distributed throughout the
day and night, averaging 8.5
hr at night and 5.75 hr during
day.

⦁	American Academy of Pediatrics issued a
revised recommendation in 2016 advocating
against bed-­sharing in the first year of life,
instead encouraging proximate but separate
sleeping surfaces for mother and infant for at
least the first 6 mo and preferably first year of
life.
⦁	Safe sleep practices for infants:
⦁	Place baby on his or her back to sleep at
night and during nap times.
⦁	Place baby on a firm mattress with
well-­fitting sheet in safety-­approved crib.
⦁	Do not use pillows or comforters.
⦁	Standards require crib bars to be no farther
apart than 2 3/8 in.
⦁	Make sure baby’s face and head stay
uncovered and clear of blankets and other
coverings during sleep.

⦁	Most sleep issues perceived
as problematic at this stage
represent a discrepancy
between parental expectations
and developmentally
appropriate sleep behaviors.
⦁	Newborns who are extremely
fussy and persistently difficult
to console, as noted by
parents, are more likely to
have underlying medical issues
such as colic, gastroesophageal
reflux, and formula intolerance.

Infant (2-­12 mo)

⦁	Recommended sleep duration
(4-­12 mo) is 12-­16 hr (note that
there is great individual
variability in sleep times
during infancy).

⦁	Sleep regulation or self-­soothing involves the
infant’s ability to negotiate the sleep–wake
transition, both at sleep onset and following
normal awakenings throughout the night. The
capacity to self-­soothe begins to develop in
the first 12 wk of life and is a reflection of both
neurodevelopmental maturation and learning.
⦁	Sleep consolidation, or “sleeping through
the night,” is usually defined by parents as a
continuous sleep episode without the need for
parental intervention (e.g., feeding, soothing)
from the child’s bedtime through the early
morning. Infants develop the ability to
consolidate sleep between 6 wk and 3 mo.

⦁	Behavioral insomnia of
childhood; sleep-­onset
association type
⦁	Sleep-­related rhythmic
movements (head banging,
body rocking)

Toddler (1-­2 yr)

⦁	Recommended sleep amount
is 11-­14 hr (including naps).
⦁	Naps decrease from two to
one nap at average age of 18
mo.

⦁	Cognitive, motor, social, and language
developmental issues impact sleep.
⦁	Nighttime fears develop; transitional objects
and bedtime routines are important.

⦁	Behavioral insomnia of
childhood, sleep-­onset
association type
⦁	Behavioral insomnia of
childhood, limit-­setting type

Preschool (3-­5 yr)

⦁	Recommended sleep amount
is 10-­13 hr (including naps).
⦁	Overall, 26% of 4 yr olds and
just 15% of 5 yr olds nap.

⦁	Persistent cosleeping tends to be highly
associated with sleep problems in this age-­
group.
⦁	Sleep problems may become chronic.

⦁	Behavioral insomnia of
childhood, limit-­setting type
⦁	Sleepwalking, sleep terrors,
nighttime fears/nightmares,
obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome

Middle childhood
(6-­12 yr)

⦁	Recommended sleep amount
is 9-­12 hr.

⦁	School and behavior problems may be related
to sleep problems.
⦁	Media and electronics, such as television,
computer, video games, and the internet,
increasingly compete for sleep time.
⦁	Irregularity of sleep–wake schedules reflects
increasing discrepancy between school and
non–school night bedtimes and wake times.

⦁	Nightmares
⦁	Obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome
⦁	Insufficient sleep

Adolescence
(13-­18 yr)

⦁	Recommended sleep amount
is 8-­10 hr.
⦁	Later bedtimes; increased
discrepancy between sleep
patterns on weekdays and
weekends

⦁	Puberty-­mediated phase delay (later sleep
onset and wake times), relative to sleep–wake
cycles in middle childhood
⦁	Earlier required wake times
⦁	Environmental competing priorities for sleep

⦁	Insufficient sleep
⦁	Delayed sleep–wake phase
disorder
⦁	Narcolepsy
⦁	Restless legs syndrome/
periodic limb movement
disorder

*All recommended sleep amounts from Paruthi S, Brooks LJ, D’Ambrosio C, et al. Recommended amount of sleep for pediatric populations: a consensus statement of the American
Academy of Sleep Medicine. J Clin Sleep Med. 2016;12:785–786.

gagging/vomiting. This allows the infant or child to develop the
skills necessary for self-­soothing at bedtime and also during the
night. Sleep training is typically not instituted until about 6 months
of age, but the practice of putting the infant to sleep “drowsy but

awake” starting at 3-­4 months to encourage self-­soothing may avoid
the need for later intervention. In older infants and young children, the introduction of more appropriate sleep associations that
will be readily available to the child during the night (transitional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 31 u Sleep Medicine
objects, such as a blanket or toy), in addition to positive reinforcement (stickers for remaining in bed), is often beneficial. As healthy,
normally growing full-­term infants no longer need night feedings
from a nutritional standpoint, if the child has become habituated
to awaken for nighttime feedings (learned hunger), these feedings
should be eliminated (either “cold turkey” or by gradually decreasing volume and the milk:water ratio). Parents must be consistent in
applying behavioral interventions to avoid inadvertent, intermittent
reinforcement of night wakings. They should also be forewarned
that crying behavior often temporarily escalates at the beginning of
treatment (postextinction burst).
Bedtime problems, including stalling and refusing to go to bed,
are more common in preschool-­age and older children. This type of
insomnia is frequently related to inadequate limit setting at bedtime
such as an inability or unwillingness to set consistent bedtime rules,
and enforce a regular bedtime. In some cases, caregivers have adopted
an inconsistent approach to night wakings that involves intermittently
allowing the child to share their bed. This type of sleep problem may
be associated with parental difficulty in setting limits or managing
behavior in general and may be exacerbated by a child’s tendency to
engage in oppositional behavior. In some cases, the child’s resistance at
bedtime is the result of an underlying problem in falling asleep that is
caused by other factors (medical conditions such as asthma or medication use; a sleep disorder such as restless legs syndrome; anxiety) or a
mismatch between the child’s intrinsic circadian rhythm (“night owl”)
and parental expectations regarding an “appropriate” bedtime.
Successful treatment of limit-­
setting sleep problems generally
involves a combination of parent education regarding appropriate limit
setting, decreased parental attention for bedtime-­delaying behavior,
establishment of bedtime routines, and positive reinforcement (sticker
charts) for appropriate behavior at bedtime and during the night. For
problematic night wakings, it is essential for caregivers to have a consistent response (e.g., returning the child to their bedroom after every
night waking). Other behavioral management strategies that have
empirical support include bedtime fading, or temporarily setting
the bedtime closer to the actual sleep-­onset time and then gradually
advancing the bedtime to an earlier target bedtime. Older children may
benefit from being taught relaxation techniques to help themselves fall
asleep or back to sleep more readily. Following the principles of healthy
sleep practices for children is essential (Table 31.2).
A third type of childhood insomnia is related to a mismatch between
parental expectations regarding time in bed and the child’s intrinsic
sleep needs. If, as illustrated in Figure 31.3, a child’s typical sleep time
is 10 hours but the “sleep window” is set for 12 hours (7 pm to 7 am),
the result is likely to be a prolonged sleep onset of 2 hours, an extended
period of wakefulness during the night, or early morning waking (or
a combination); these periods are usually characterized by “normal”
wakefulness in the child that is not accompanied by excessive distress.
This situation is important to recognize because the solution (reducing
the time in bed to actual sleep time) is typically simple and effective.
Another form of insomnia that is more common in older children and adolescents has often been referred to as psychophysiologic,
primary, or learned insomnia. Primary insomnia occurs mainly in
adolescents and is characterized by a combination of learned sleep-­
preventing associations and heightened physiologic arousal resulting
in a complaint of sleeplessness and decreased daytime functioning. A
hallmark of primary insomnia is excessive worry about sleep and an
exaggerated concern of the potential daytime consequences. The physiologic arousal can be in the form of cognitive hypervigilance, such
as “racing” thoughts; in many individuals with insomnia, an increased
baseline level of arousal is further intensified by this secondary anxiety about sleeplessness. Treatment usually involves educating the adolescent about the principles of healthy sleep practices (Table 31.3),
institution of a consistent sleep–wake schedule, avoidance of daytime
napping, instructions to use the bed for sleep only and to get out of bed
if unable to fall asleep (stimulus control), restricting time in bed to the
actual time asleep (sleep restriction), addressing maladaptive cognitions
about sleep, and teaching relaxation techniques to reduce anxiety (cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia [CBT-­I]).

205

Table 31.2  Basic Principles of Healthy Sleep for Children
1.	Have a set bedtime and bedtime routine for your child.
2.	Bedtime and wake-­up time should be about the same time on
school nights and non–school nights. There should not be more
than about 1 hr difference from one day to another.
3.	Make the hour before bed shared quiet time. Avoid high-­energy
activities, such as rough play, and stimulating activities, such as
watching television or playing computer games, just before bed.
4.	Don’t send your child to bed hungry. A light snack (e.g., milk
and cookies) before bed is a good idea. Heavy meals within 1 hr
or 2 of bedtime, however, may interfere with sleep.
5.	Avoid products containing caffeine for at least several hours
before bedtime. These include caffeinated sodas, coffee, tea,
and chocolate.
6.	Make sure your child spends time outside every day, whenever
possible, and is involved in regular exercise.
7.	Keep your child’s bedroom quiet and dark. A low-­level night
light is acceptable for children who find completely dark rooms
frightening.
8.	Keep your child’s bedroom at a comfortable temperature during
the night (<24°C [75°F]).
9.	Don’t use your child’s bedroom for time-­out or punishment.
10.	Keep the television out of your child’s bedroom. Children can
easily develop the bad habit of “needing” the television to fall
asleep. It is also much more difficult to control your child’s viewing
if the set is in the bedroom.

Time in bed (12 hours)
AWAKE

ASLEEP

Bedtime = 1900
ASLEEP

Wake time = 0700
AWAKE

ASLEEP

ASLEEP

AWAKE

Sleep need (10 hours)

Fig. 31.3 Mismatch between sleep needs/duration and time in bed,
resulting in insomnia.

The keys to successful behavioral sleep interventions involve forming an alliance with the family, negotiating tailored solutions that are
more likely to be effective if families can be successful in implementing
them, and setting appropriate agreed-­on treatment goals with planned
follow-­up. Behavioral treatments for insomnia, even in young children,
appear to be highly effective and well tolerated. Several studies have
failed to demonstrate long-­term negative effects of behavioral strategies
such as “sleep training” on parent–child relationships and attachment,
psychosocial-­emotional functioning, and chronic stress. It should also
be emphasized that, as in adults, behavioral interventions are the first-­
line treatment for insomnia in children, and in general, hypnotic medications or supplements such as melatonin are infrequently needed and
should only be used as an adjunct to behavioral therapy to treat insomnia in typically developing and healthy children. If cognitive behavior therapy and sleep hygiene practices are ineffective in children with
autism spectrum disorders or ADHD, melatonin may be an additional
effective therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

206 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 31.3  Basic Principles of Healthy Sleep for
Adolescents
1.	Wake up and go to bed at about the same time every night.
Bedtime and wake-­up time should not differ from school to
non–school nights by more than approximately 1 hr.
2.	Avoid sleeping in on weekends to “catch up” on sleep. This
makes it more likely that you will have problems falling asleep.
3.	If you take naps, they should be short (no more than 1 hr) and
scheduled in the early to mid-­afternoon. However, if you have
a problem with falling asleep at night, napping during the day
may make it worse and should be avoided.
4.	Spend time outside every day. Exposure to sunlight helps to
keep your body’s internal clock on track.
5.	Exercise regularly. Exercise may help you fall asleep and sleep
more deeply.
6.	Use your bed for sleeping only. Don’t study, read, listen to
music, or watch television on your bed.
7.	Make the 30-­60 min before bedtime a quiet or wind-­down
time. Relaxing, calm, enjoyable activities, such as reading a book
or listening to calm music, help your body and mind slow down
enough to let you get to sleep. Don’t study, watch exciting/scary
movies, exercise, or get involved in “energizing” activities just
before bed.
8.	Eat regular meals, and don’t go to bed hungry. A light snack
before bed is a good idea; eating a full meal within 1 hr before
bed is not.
9.	Avoid eating or drinking products containing caffeine from
dinnertime to bedtime. These include caffeinated sodas, coffee,
tea, and chocolate.
10.	Do not use alcohol. Alcohol disrupts sleep and may cause you
to awaken throughout the night.
11.	Smoking (e.g., cigarettes) disturbs sleep. Although you should
not smoke at all, if you do, do not smoke at least 2 hr before
bed.
12.	Do not use sleeping pills, melatonin, or other nonprescription
sleep aids to help you sleep unless specifically recommended by
your doctor. These can be dangerous, and the sleep problems
often return when you stop taking the medicine.

Obstructive Sleep Apnea

Sleep disordered breathing (SDB) in children encompasses a broad
spectrum of respiratory disorders that occur exclusively in sleep or that
are exacerbated by sleep, including primary snoring and upper airway resistance syndrome, as well as apnea of prematurity (see Chapter
125) and central apnea (see Chapter 468.2). OSA, the most important
clinical entity within the SDB spectrum, is characterized by repeated
episodes of prolonged upper airway obstruction during sleep despite
continued or increased respiratory effort, resulting in complete (apnea)
or partial (hypopnea; ≥30% reduction in airflow accompanied by ≥3%
O2 desaturation and/or arousal) cessation of airflow at the nose and/
or mouth, as well as disrupted sleep. Both intermittent hypoxia and
the multiple arousals resulting from these obstructive events likely contribute to significant metabolic, cardiovascular, and neurocognitive-­
neurobehavioral morbidity.
Primary snoring is defined as snoring without associated ventilatory abnormalities on overnight polysomnogram (PSG) (e.g., no
apneas or hypopneas, hypoxemia, hypercapnia) or respiratory-­related
arousals and is a manifestation of the vibrations of the oropharyngeal
soft tissue walls that occur when an individual attempts to breathe
against increased upper airway resistance during sleep. Although generally considered nonpathologic, primary snoring in children may still
be associated with subtle breathing abnormalities during sleep, including evidence of increased respiratory effort, which in turn may be associated with adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes that may be similar
to those associated with OSA.

Etiology

OSA results from an anatomically or functionally narrowed upper
airway; this typically involves some combination of decreased upper

Table 31.4  Anatomic Factors That Predispose to
­Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome and
­Hypoventilation in Children
NOSE
Anterior nasal stenosis
Choanal stenosis/atresia
Deviated nasal septum
Seasonal or perennial rhinitis
Nasal polyps, foreign body, hematoma, mass lesion
NASOPHARYNGEAL AND OROPHARYNGEAL
Adenotonsillar hypertrophy
Macroglossia
Cystic hygroma
Velopharyngeal flap repair
Cleft palate repair
Pharyngeal mass lesion
CRANIOFACIAL
Micrognathia/retrognathia
Midface hypoplasia (e.g., trisomy 21, Crouzon disease, Apert syndrome)
Mandibular hypoplasia (Pierre Robin, Treacher Collins, Cornelia de
Lange syndromes)
Craniofacial trauma
Skeletal and storage diseases
Achondroplasia
Storage diseases (e.g., glycogen; Hunter, Hurler syndromes)

airway patency (upper airway obstruction and/or decreased upper airway diameter), increased upper airway collapsibility (reduced pharyngeal muscle tone), and decreased drive to breathe in the face of reduced
upper airway patency (reduced central ventilatory drive) (Table 31.4).
Upper airway obstruction varies in degree and level (i.e., nose, nasopharynx/oropharynx, hypopharynx) and is most frequently caused by
adenotonsillar hypertrophy, although tonsillar size does not necessarily
correlate with degree of obstruction, especially in older children. Other
causes of airway obstruction include allergies associated with chronic
rhinitis or nasal obstruction; craniofacial abnormalities, including
hypoplasia or displacement of the maxilla and mandible; gastroesophageal reflux with resulting pharyngeal reactive edema (see Chapter 369);
nasal septal deviation (Chapter 425); and velopharyngeal flap cleft palate repair. Reduced upper airway tone may result from neuromuscular
diseases, including hypotonic cerebral palsy and muscular dystrophies
(see Chapter 649), or hypothyroidism (Chapter 603). Reduced central
ventilatory drive may be present in some children with Arnold-­Chiari
malformation (see Chapter 631.09); rapid-­onset obesity with hypothalamic dysfunction, hypoventilation, and autonomic dysregulation
(Chapter 65); and meningomyelocele (Chapter 631.04). In other situations, the etiology is mixed; individuals with Down syndrome (see
Chapter 57), because of their facial anatomy, hypotonia, macroglossia,
and central adiposity, as well as the increased incidence of hypothyroidism, are at particularly high risk for OSA, with some estimates of
prevalence as high as 70%.
Although children with OSA may be of normal weight, a large
percentage are overweight or obese, and many of these children are
school-­
age or younger. There is a significant correlation between
weight and SDB (e.g., habitual snoring, OSA, sleep-­related hypoventilation). Although adenotonsillar hypertrophy also plays an important
etiologic role in overweight/obese children with OSA, mechanical factors related to an increase in the amount of adipose tissue in the throat
(pharyngeal fat pads), neck (increased neck circumference), and chest
wall and abdomen can increase upper airway resistance, worsen gas
exchange, and increase the work of breathing, particularly in the supine
position and during REM sleep. A component of blunted central ventilatory drive in response to hypoxia/hypercapnia and hypoventilation
may occur as well (see Chapter 468.2), particularly in children with
morbid or syndrome-­based (e.g., Prader-­Willi) obesity. Overweight
and obese children and adolescents are at particularly high risk for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 31 u Sleep Medicine
metabolic and cardiovascular complications of SDB, such as insulin
resistance and systemic hypertension. Morbidly obese children are also
at increased risk for postoperative complications as well as residual
OSA after adenotonsillectomy.

Epidemiology

Overall prevalence of parent-­reported snoring in the pediatric population is approximately 8%; “always” snoring is reported in 1.5–6%, and
“often” snoring in 3–15%. When defined by parent-­reported symptoms,
the prevalence of OSA is 4–11%. The prevalence of pediatric OSA as
documented by overnight sleep studies using ventilatory monitoring procedures (e.g., in-­lab polysomnography, home studies) is 1–4%
overall, with a reported range of 0.1–13%. Prevalence is also affected
by the demographic characteristics such as age (increased prevalence
between 2 and 8 years), gender (more common in males, especially
after puberty), ethnicity (increased prevalence in African American
and Asian children), history of prematurity, and family history of OSA.

Pathogenesis

The upregulation of inflammatory pathways, as indicated by an
increase in peripheral markers of inflammation (e.g., C-­reactive protein, interleukins), appears to be linked to metabolic dysfunction (e.g.,
insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, alterations in neurohormone levels
such as leptin) in both obese and nonobese children with OSA. Systemic inflammation and arousal-­mediated increases in sympathetic
autonomic nervous system activity with altered vasomotor tone may
be key contributors to increased cardiovascular risk due to alterations
in vascular endothelium in both adults and children with OSA. Other
potential mechanisms that may mediate cardiovascular sequelae in
adults and children with OSA include elevated systemic blood pressure and ventricular dysfunction. Mechanical stress on the upper airway induced by chronic snoring may also result in both local mucosal
inflammation of adenotonsillar tissues and subsequent upregulation of
inflammatory molecules, most notably leukotrienes.
One of the primary mechanisms by which OSA is believed to exert
negative influences on cognitive function appears to involve repeated
episodic arousals from sleep leading to sleep fragmentation and sleepiness. Equally important, intermittent hypoxia may lead directly to
systemic inflammatory vascular changes in the brain. Levels of inflammatory markers such as C-­
reactive protein and interleukin-­
6 are
elevated in children with OSA and are also associated with cognitive
dysfunction.

Clinical Manifestations

The clinical manifestations of OSA may be divided into sleep-­related
and daytime symptoms. The most common nocturnal manifestations
of OSA in children and adolescents are loud, frequent, and disruptive
snoring; breathing pauses; choking or gasping arousals; restless sleep;
and nocturnal diaphoresis. Many children who snore do not have OSA,
but few children with OSA do not snore (caregivers may not be aware
of snoring in older children and adolescents). Children, like adults,
tend to have more frequent and more severe obstructive events in REM
sleep and when sleeping in the supine position. Children with OSA
may adopt unusual sleeping positions, keeping their necks hyperextended to maintain airway patency. Frequent arousals associated with
obstruction may result in nocturnal awakenings but are more likely to
cause fragmented sleep.
Daytime symptoms of OSA include mouth breathing and dry
mouth, chronic nasal congestion or rhinorrhea, hyponasal speech,
morning headaches, difficulty swallowing, and poor appetite. Children
with OSA may have secondary enuresis, postulated to result from the
disruption of the normal nocturnal pattern of atrial natriuretic peptide secretion by changes in intrathoracic pressure associated with
OSA. Partial arousal parasomnias (sleepwalking and sleep terrors) may
occur more frequently in children with OSA, related to the frequent
associated arousals and an increased percentage of SWS.
One of the most important but frequently overlooked sequelae of
OSA in children is the effect on mood, behavior, learning, and academic functioning. The neurobehavioral consequences of OSA in

207

children include daytime sleepiness with drowsiness, difficulty in
morning waking, and unplanned napping or dozing off during activities, although evidence of frank hypersomnolence tends to be less
common in children compared to adults with OSA (except in very
obese children or those with severe disease). Mood changes include
increased irritability, mood instability and emotional dysregulation,
low frustration tolerance, and depression or anxiety. Behavioral issues
include both “internalizing” (i.e., increased somatic complaints and
social withdrawal) and “externalizing” behaviors, including aggression,
impulsivity, hyperactivity, oppositional behavior, and conduct problems. There is substantial overlap between the clinical impairments
associated with OSA and the diagnostic criteria for ADHD, including
inattention, poor concentration, and distractibility (see Chapter 50).
Many of the studies that have looked at changes in behavior and
neuropsychologic functioning in children after treatment (usually adenotonsillectomy) for OSA have found significant improvement in outcomes, both short term and long term, including daytime sleepiness,
mood, behavior, academics, and quality of life. However, most studies
failed to find a dose-­dependent relationship between OSA in children
and specific neurobehavioral-­neurocognitive deficits, suggesting that
other factors may influence neurocognitive outcomes, including individual genetic susceptibility, racial/ethnic background, environmental
influences (e.g., passive smoking exposure), and comorbid conditions,
such as obesity, shortened sleep duration, and other sleep disorders.

Diagnosis

The 2012 revised American Academy of Pediatrics clinical practice
guidelines provide excellent information for the evaluation and management of uncomplicated childhood OSA (Table 31.5). No physical
examination findings are truly pathognomonic for OSA, and most
healthy children with OSA appear normal; however, certain physical
examination findings may suggest OSA. Growth parameters may be
abnormal (obesity, or less frequently, failure to thrive), and there may
be evidence of chronic nasal obstruction (hyponasal speech, mouth
breathing, septal deviation) and signs of atopic disease (i.e., “allergic
shiners”). Oropharyngeal examination may reveal enlarged tonsils,
excess soft tissue in the posterior pharynx, and a narrowed posterior
pharyngeal space, as well as craniofacial features associated with an
increased risk of obstruction including “adenoidal facies” with open
mouth posture and long/asymmetric face, midface hypoplasia, retrognathia and micrognathia, forward head posture (best appreciated by
inspection of the frontal and lateral facial profile), and teeth crowding,
narrow arched palate, and tongue tie (short frenulum). In severe cases
the child may have evidence of pulmonary hypertension, right-­sided
heart failure, and cor pulmonale; systemic hypertension may occur,
especially in obese children.
Because no combination of clinical history and physical findings
can accurately predict which children with snoring have OSA, the gold
standard for diagnosing OSA remains an in-­lab overnight PSG. Overnight PSG is a technician-­supervised, monitored study that documents
physiologic variables during sleep; sleep staging, arousal measurement,
cardiovascular parameters, and body movements (electroencephalography [EEG], electrooculography, chin and leg electromyography
[EMG], electrocardiogram, body position sensors, and video recording), and a combination of breathing monitors (oronasal thermal sensor and nasal air pressure transducer for airflow), chest/abdominal
monitors (e.g., inductance plethysmography for respiratory effort,
pulse oximeter for O2 saturation, end-­tidal or transcutaneous CO2 for
CO2 retention, snore microphone). The PSG parameter most often used
in evaluating for sleep-­disordered breathing is the apnea-­hypopnea
index (AHI), which indicates the number of apneic and hypopneic
(both obstructive and central) events per hour of sleep. There are no
universally accepted PSG normal reference values or parameters for
diagnosing OSA in children, and it is still unclear which parameters
best predict morbidity. Normal preschool- and school-­age children
generally have a total AHI <1.5 (obstructive AHI <1), and this is the
most widely used cutoff value for OSA in children ≤12 years old; in
older adolescents the adult cutoff of an AHI ≥5 is generally used. When
AHI is between one and five obstructive events per hour, assessment of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

208 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Table 31.5  American Academy of Pediatrics Clinical Practice Guideline: Diagnosis and Management of Childhood
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome
Key Action Statement 1: Screening for OSA
As part of routine health maintenance visits, clinicians should inquire whether the child or adolescent snores. If the answer is affirmative or if a
child or adolescent presents with signs or symptoms of OSA, clinicians should perform a more focused evaluation. (Evidence Quality: Grade B;
Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.)
Key Action Statement 2A: Polysomnography
If a child or adolescent snores on a regular basis and has any of the complaints or findings of OSA, clinicians should either (1) obtain a polysomnogram
(Evidence Quality: Grade A; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation) or (2) refer the patient to a sleep specialist or otolaryngologist for a
more extensive evaluation. (Evidence Quality: Grade D; Recommendation Strength: Option.)
Key Action Statement 2B: Alternative Testing
If polysomnography is not available, clinicians may order alternative diagnostic tests, such as nocturnal video recording, nocturnal oximetry,
daytime nap polysomnography, or ambulatory polysomnography. (Evidence Quality: Grade C; Recommendation Strength: Option.)
Key Action Statement 3: Adenotonsillectomy
If a child is determined to have OSA, has a clinical examination consistent with adenotonsillar hypertrophy, and does not have a contraindication
to surgery, the clinician should recommend adenotonsillectomy as the first line of treatment. If the child has OSA but does not have adenotonsillar
hypertrophy, other treatment should be considered (see Key Action Statement 6). Clinical judgment is required to determine the benefits of
adenotonsillectomy compared with other treatments in obese children with varying degrees of adenotonsillar hypertrophy. (Evidence Quality:
Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.)
Key Action Statement 4: High-­Risk Patients Undergoing Adenotonsillectomy
Clinicians should monitor high-­risk patients undergoing adenotonsillectomy as inpatients postoperatively. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation
Strength: Recommendation.)
Key Action Statement 5: Reevaluation
Clinicians should clinically reassess all patients with OSA for persisting signs and symptoms after therapy to determine whether further treatment
is required. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.)
Key Action Statement 5B: Reevaluation of High-­Risk Patients
Clinicians should reevaluate high-­risk patients for persistent OSA after adenotonsillectomy, including those who had a significantly abnormal
baseline polysomnogram, have sequelae of OSA, are obese, or remain symptomatic after treatment, with an objective test (see Key Action
Statement 2), or refer such patients to a sleep specialist. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.)
Key Action Statement 6: CPAP
Clinicians should refer patients for CPAP management if symptoms/signs or objective evidence of OSA persists after adenotonsillectomy or if
adenotonsillectomy is not performed. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.)
Key Action Statement 7: Weight Loss
Clinicians should recommend weight loss in addition to other therapy if a child/adolescent with OSA is overweight or obese. (Evidence Quality:
Grade C; Recommendation Strength: Recommendation.)
Key Action Statement 8: Intranasal Corticosteroids
Clinicians may prescribe topical intranasal corticosteroids for children with mild OSA in whom adenotonsillectomy is contraindicated or for children
with mild postoperative OSA. (Evidence Quality: Grade B; Recommendation Strength: Option.)
CPAP, Continuous Positive Airway Pressure; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea.
Adapted from Marcus CL, Brooks LJ, Draper KA, et al. Diagnosis and management of childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Pediatrics. 2012;130:576–584.

additional PSG parameters (e.g., elevated CO2 indicating obstructive
hypoventilation, O2 desaturation, respiratory-­related arousals), clinical judgment regarding risk factors for SDB, presence and severity of
clinical symptoms, and evidence of daytime sequelae should determine
further management.

Treatment

No universally accepted guidelines exist regarding the indications for
treatment of pediatric SDB, including primary snoring and OSA. Recommendations largely emphasize weighing what is known about the
potential cardiovascular, metabolic, and neurocognitive sequelae of
SDB in children in combination with the individual healthcare professional’s clinical judgment. The decision of whether and how to treat
OSA specifically in children depends on several parameters, including
severity (nocturnal symptoms, daytime sequelae, sleep study results),
duration of disease, and individual patient variables such as age,
comorbid conditions, and underlying etiologic factors. In the case of
moderate (AHI 5-­10) to severe (AHI >10) disease, the decision to treat
is usually straightforward, and most pediatric sleep experts recommend that any child with AHI >5 should be treated. However, a large
randomized trial of early adenotonsillectomy vs watchful waiting with
supportive care demonstrated that 46% of the control group children
normalized on PSG (vs 79% of early adenotonsillectomy group) during
the 7 month observation period. In addition, it is worth emphasizing
that the child with habitual snoring (≥3×/week) but without polysomnographic evidence of OSA may also experience adverse neurobehavioral and neurocognitive outcomes; ongoing studies are examining

whether these children may benefit from more aggressive treatment
such as adenotonsillectomy.
In the majority of cases of pediatric OSA, adenotonsillectomy is the
first-­line treatment in any child with significant adenotonsillar hypertrophy, even in the presence of additional risk factors such as obesity.
Adenotonsillectomy (or adenotonsillotomy, which is considered a less
invasive procedure and may be indicated in some children) in uncomplicated cases generally (70–90% of children) results in complete resolution of symptoms; regrowth of adenoidal tissue after surgical removal
occurs in some cases. Groups considered at high risk include young
children (<3 years) as well as those with severe OSA documented by
PSG, significant clinical sequelae of OSA (e.g., failure to thrive), or
associated medical conditions, such as craniofacial syndromes, morbid
obesity, and hypotonia. All patients should be reevaluated postoperatively to determine whether additional evaluation, a repeat PSG, and
treatment are required. The American Academy of Sleep Medicine recommends that in high-­risk groups (children with obesity, craniofacial
anomalies, Down syndrome, or moderate-­severe OSA) or in children
with continued symptoms of OSA, a follow-­up sleep study about 6
weeks after adenotonsillectomy is indicated. Also, a number of studies
have suggested that children who are underweight, normal weight, or
overweight/obese at baseline all tend to gain weight after adenotonsillectomy, and thus clinical vigilance is required during follow-­up.
It should be noted that in cases of residual OSA postadenotonsillectomy, additional diagnostic evaluation to identify other sites of
obstruction may be necessary to more specifically tailor treatment. An
example of this type of advanced diagnostic tool is drug-­induced sleep

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 31 u Sleep Medicine
endoscopy (DISE), a powerful method for studying the airway in a
sleeping patient in real time. DISE provides direct visualization of the
spontaneously breathing airway under light anesthesia and facilitates
identification of obstructive lesions. Site of obstruction with potential
surgical corrections include lingual (resection) tonsils, tongue base
(reductions), turbinate (reduction), and supraglottoplasty.
Additional treatment measures that may be appropriate include
weight loss, positional therapy (attaching a firm object, such as a
tennis ball, to the back of a sleep garment to prevent the child from
sleeping in the supine position), and aggressive treatment of additional
risk factors when present, such as asthma, seasonal allergies, and gastroesophageal reflux. Evidence suggests that intranasal corticosteroids
and leukotriene inhibitors may be helpful in reducing upper airway
inflammation in mild OSA. Other surgical procedures (e.g., uvulopharyngopalatoplasty) and maxillofacial surgery (e.g., mandibular distraction osteogenesis) are seldom performed in children. Oral appliances,
such as mandibular advancing devices and palatal expanders, may be
considered in select cases, particularly in those children with craniofacial risk factors as mentioned earlier, and consultation with a pediatric
dentist or orthodontist is recommended. Neuromuscular reeducation
or repatterning of the oral and facial muscles with exercises to address
abnormal tongue position and low upper airway tone (i.e., myofunctional therapy) have been shown to be beneficial in addressing pediatric OSA as well as alleviating chewing and swallowing problems in
children able to cooperate with the behavioral program.
Continuous or bilevel positive airway pressure (CPAP or BiPAP)
is the most common treatment for OSA in adults and can be used successfully in children and adolescents. Positive airway pressure (PAP)
may be recommended if removing the adenoids and tonsils is not indicated, if there is residual disease following adenotonsillectomy, or if
there are major risk factors not amenable to surgery (obesity, hypotonia). PAP delivers humidified, warmed air through an interface (mask,
nasal pillows) that, under pressure, effectively “splints” the upper
airway open. Optimal pressure settings (that abolish or significantly
reduce obstructive respiratory events without increasing arousals or
central apneas) are determined in the sleep lab during a full-­night PAP
titration. Careful attention should be paid to education of the child and
family, and desensitization protocols should usually be implemented
to increase the likelihood of adherence. Efficacy studies at the current pressure and retitrations should be conducted periodically with

209

long-­term use (at least annually) or in association with significant
weight changes or resurgence of SDB symptoms. High-­flow nasal cannula therapy may be another approach. A novel treatment for OSA in
adults is hypoglossal nerve stimulation; case series suggest this may be
an effective treatment in selected pediatric cases, especially in children
with Down syndrome.

Parasomnias

Parasomnias are episodic nocturnal behaviors that often involve cognitive disorientation and autonomic and skeletal muscle disturbance.
Parasomnias may be further characterized as occurring primarily during non-­REM sleep (partial arousal parasomnias) or in association
with REM sleep, including nightmares, hypnogogic hallucinations, and
sleep paralysis; other common parasomnias include sleep-­talking and
hypnic jerks or “sleep starts.”

Etiology

Partial arousal parasomnias represent a dissociated sleep–wake state,
the neurobiology of which remains unclear, although genetic factors
and an intrinsic oscillation of subcortical-­cortical arousal with sleep
have been proposed. These episodic events, which include sleepwalking, sleep terrors, and confusional arousals, are more common in
preschool- and school-­age children because of the relatively higher
percentage of SWS in younger children. Partial arousal parasomnias
typically occur when SWS predominates, in the first third of the night.
In contrast, nightmares, which are much more common than partial
arousal parasomnias but are often confused with them, tend to be concentrated in the last third of the night, when REM sleep is most prominent. Any factor associated with an increase in the relative percentage
of SWS (certain medications, previous sleep restriction) may increase
the frequency of events in a predisposed child. There appears to be a
genetic predisposition for both sleepwalking and sleep terrors. Partial
arousal parasomnias may also be difficult to distinguish from nocturnal seizures. Table 31.6 summarizes similarities and differences among
these nocturnal arousal events.

Epidemiology

Many children sleepwalk on at least one occasion; the lifetime
prevalence by age 10 years is 13%. Sleepwalking (somnambulism) may persist into adulthood, with the prevalence in adults of

Table 31.6  Key Similarities and Differentiating Features Between Non-REM and REM Parasomnias as Well as Nocturnal
Seizures
CONFUSIONAL
AROUSALS

SLEEP TERRORS

SLEEPWALKING

NIGHTMARES

NOCTURNAL
­SEIZURES

Time

Early

Early

Early-­mid

Late

Any

Sleep stage

SWA

SWA

SWA

REM

Any

EEG discharges

–

–

–

–

+

Scream

–

++++

–

++

+

Autonomic activation

+

++++

+

+

+

Motor activity

–

+

+++

+

++++

Awakens

–

–

–

+

+

Duration (min)

0.5-­10; more gradual
offset

1-­10; more gradual
offset

2-­30; more gradual
offset

3-­20

5-­15; abrupt onset
and offset

Postevent confusion

+

+

+

–

+

Age

Child

Child

Child

Child, young adult

Adolescent, young
adult

Genetics

+

+

+

–

±

Organic CNS lesion

–

–

–

–

++++

CNS, Central nervous system; EEG, electroencephalogram; REM, rapid eye movement; SWA, slow-­wave arousal.
From Avidan A, Kaplish N. The parasomnias: epidemiology, clinical features and diagnostic approach. Clin Chest Med. 2010;31:353–370.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

210 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
approximately 4%. The prevalence is approximately 10 times greater
in children with a family history of sleepwalking. The peak prevalence of sleep terrors (or night terrors) is 34% at age 1-­5 years,
decreasing to 10% by age 7; the age at onset is usually between 4
and 12 years. Because of the common genetic predisposition, the
likelihood of developing sleepwalking after age 5 is almost twofold
higher in children with a history of sleep terrors. Although sleep
terrors can occur at any age from infancy through adulthood, most
individuals outgrow sleep terrors by adolescence. Confusional
arousals may be accompanied by (and often precede in onset) episodes sleepwalking and sleep terrors; prevalence rates have been
estimated at >15% in children age 3-­13 years.

Clinical Manifestations

The partial arousal parasomnias have several features in common.
Because they typically occur at the transition out of “deep” sleep or
SWS, partial arousal parasomnias have clinical features of both the
awake (ambulation, vocalizations) and the sleeping (high arousal
threshold, unresponsiveness to environment) states, usually with
amnesia for the events. External (noise) or internal (obstruction)
factors may trigger events in some individuals. The duration is typically a few minutes (sleep terrors) up to 30-­40 minutes (confusional
arousals). Sleep terrors are sudden in onset and characteristically
involve a high degree of autonomic arousal (tachycardia, diaphoresis, dilated pupils). Confusional arousals typically arise more
gradually from sleep, may involve thrashing around, mumbling,
and other vocalizations, but usually not displacement from bed,
and are often accompanied by slow mentation, disorientation, and
confusion on forced arousal from SWS or on waking in the morning. Sleepwalking may be associated with safety concerns (e.g., falling out of windows, wandering outside). The child’s avoidance of,
or increased agitation with, comforting by parents or prolongation
of events by attempts at awakening are also common to all partial
arousal parasomnias.

Treatment

Management of partial arousal parasomnias involves some combination of parental education and reassurance, healthy sleep practices, and avoidance of exacerbating factors such as sleep restriction
and caffeine. Particularly in the case of sleepwalking, it is important
to institute safety precautions such as use of gates in doorways and
at the top of staircases, locking of outside doors and windows, and
installation of parent notification systems such as bedroom door
alarms. Scheduled awakening is a behavioral intervention that
involves having the parent wake the child 15-­30 minutes before the
time of night that the first parasomnia episode typically occurs and
is most likely to be successful in situations where partial arousal episodes occur on a nightly basis. Pharmacotherapy is rarely necessary
but may be indicated in cases of frequent or severe episodes despite
nonpharmacologic interventions and absence of treatable underlying sleep disorders exacerbating partial arousal parasomnias such
as OSA or periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD), high risk
of injury, violent behavior, or serious disruption to the family. The
primary pharmacologic agents used are potent SWS suppressants,
primarily benzodiazepines and tricyclic antidepressants.

Sleep-­Related Movement Disorders: Restless Legs
Syndrome/Periodic Limb Movement Disorder,
Restless Sleep Disorder, and Rhythmic Movement
Disorder

Although some of these sleep disorders share common features (e.g.,
movements of specific body parts such as extremities vs whole body
movements) and pathogenesis (e.g., iron deficiency), each has a distinctive set of diagnostic criteria, epidemiology and clinical management, and may differ in the degree of disruption to sleep quality and
quantity and related daytime consequences.
Although most of these sleep-­related movement disorders do not
require overnight polysomnographic evaluation for diagnosis (PLMD
is a notable exception), a videotaped episode by caregivers in the home

setting can prove very valuable in helping to differentiate sleep-­related
movements from nocturnal seizures. Such sleep-­related seizures usually arise from the frontal and/or temporal lobes. Ambulatory EEG,
in-­patient video-­EEG monitoring and overnight video PSG with chin
and leg EMG recording may be necessary to establish a diagnosis of a
sleep-­related movement disorder.

Restless Legs Syndrome/Periodic Limb Movement
Disorder

Restless legs syndrome (RLS), also termed Willis-­Ekbom disease, is
a primary disorder of the CNS sensorimotor network characterized
by an almost irresistible urge to move the legs, often accompanied by
uncomfortable sensations in the lower extremities. Both the urge to
move and the sensations are usually worse at rest and in the evening
and are at least partially relieved by movement, including walking,
stretching, and rubbing, but only if the motion continues. RLS is a
clinical diagnosis that is based on the presence of these key symptoms
(Table 31.7).
PLMD is characterized by periodic, repetitive, brief (0.5-­
10
seconds), and highly stereotyped limb jerks typically occurring at
20-­40 second intervals. These movements occur primarily during
sleep, usually occur in the legs, and frequently consist of rhythmic
extension of the big toe and dorsiflexion at the ankle. Although
there may be clinical complaints of kicking movements in sleep or
restless sleep, the diagnosis of periodic limb movements (PLMs)
requires overnight PSG to document the characteristic limb movements with anterior tibialis EMG leads. However, like adults, children also show considerable individual night-­to-­night variability
of PLMs, and a single-­night PSG may not always reflect the true
severity.

Etiology

RLS has a clear genetic component, with a sixfold to sevenfold
increase in prevalence in first-­degree relatives of RLS patients. The
mode of inheritance is complex, and several genetic loci have been
identified (MEIS1, BTBD9, MAP2K5). Low serum iron levels (even
without anemia) in both adults and children may be an important
etiologic factor for the presence and severity of both RLS symptoms
and PLMs. As a marker of decreased iron stores, serum ferritin levels
in both children and adults with RLS are frequently low (<50 μg/mL).
The postulated underlying mechanism is related to the role of iron as
a cofactor in tyrosine hydroxylation, a rate-­limiting step in dopamine

Table 31.7  Diagnostic Criteria for Restless Legs Syndrome
A.	An urge to move legs, usually accompanied by or in response to
uncomfortable and unpleasant sensations in the legs, characterized
by the following:
1.	The urge to move the legs begins or worsens during periods
of rest or inactivity.
2.	The urge to move the legs is partially or totally relieved by
movement.
3.	The urge to move the legs is worse in the evening or at night
than during the day, or occurs only in the evening or at night.
B.	The symptoms in Criterion A occur at least 3 times per week and
have persisted for at least 3 mo.
C.	The symptoms in Criterion A are accompanied by significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, educational,
academic, behavioral, or other important areas of functioning.
D.	The symptoms in Criterion A are not attributable to another
mental disorder or medical condition (e.g., arthritis, leg edema,
peripheral ischemia, leg cramps) and are not better explained by
a behavioral condition (e.g., positional discomfort, habitual foot
tapping).
E.	The symptoms are not attributable to the physiologic effects of a
drug or abuse or medication (e.g., akathisia).
From American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders. 5th ed, Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2013. p 410.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 31 u Sleep Medicine
synthesis; in turn, dopaminergic dysfunction has been implicated,
particularly in the genesis of the sensory component of RLS, as well
as in PLMD. Certain medical conditions, including diabetes mellitus, end-­stage renal disease, cancer, idiopathic juvenile arthritis,
hypothyroidism, and pregnancy, may also be associated with RLS/
PLMD, as are specific medications (e.g., antidepressants, including
tricyclic antidepressants, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs), such as fluoxetine, first-­generation sedating antihistamines,
and dopamine receptor antagonists, such as Compazine and metoclopramide), as well as caffeine.

Epidemiology

Survey studies estimate the prevalence rates of RLS in the pediatric population as between 1 and 6%; approximately 2% of 8-­17 year
olds meet the criteria for “definite” RLS. Prevalence rates of PLMs >5
per hour in clinical populations of children referred for sleep studies range from 5–27%; in survey studies of PLM symptoms, rates are
8–12%. About 40% of adults with RLS have symptoms before age 20
years; 20% report symptoms before age 10. Familial cases usually
have a younger age of onset. Several studies in referral populations
have found that PLMs occur in as many as 25% of children diagnosed
with ADHD.

Clinical Manifestations

In addition to the urge to move the legs and the sensory component
(paresthesia-­like, tingling, burning, itching, crawling), most RLS
episodes are initiated or exacerbated by rest or inactivity, such as
lying in bed to fall asleep or riding in a car for prolonged periods.
Children may describe the sensory symptoms as a funny feeling,
tickling, hurting, or pain or bugs, spiders, ants, or goosebumps in
the legs. Sometimes, the child may draw pins, needles, tiny sand
particles, and bugs over his or her legs when asked to depict the
symptoms. An “informal” suggested clinical immobilization test
(SCIT) (i.e., “If I asked you to lie perfectly still sitting on your bed
at bedtime, would you be able to do it?”) can be helpful in eliciting RLS complaints. A unique feature of RLS is that the timing of
symptoms also appears to have a circadian component, in that they
often peak in the evening hours. Some children may complain of
“growing pains,” although this is considered a nonspecific feature.
Because RLS symptoms are usually worse in the evening, bedtime
struggles and difficulty falling asleep are two of the most common
presenting complaints. In contrast to patients with RLS, individuals
with PLMs are usually unaware of these movements, but children
may complain of morning muscle pain or fatigue; these movements
may result in arousals during sleep and consequent significant sleep
disruption. Parents of children with RLS/PLMD may report that
their child is a restless sleeper and kicks a bed partner.
The differential diagnosis includes growing pains, leg cramps, neuropathy, arthritis, myalgias, nerve compression (“leg fell asleep”), and
dopamine antagonist–associated akathisia.

Treatment

Because of the frequent co-­occurrence and overlap in underlying
pathophysiology and risk factors for RLS and PLMD, management
strategies for both disorders are similar. The clinical decision to treat
RLS and PLMs is based on the severity of symptoms, sleep disturbances, and effect on daytime functioning. An acronym that summarizes the management approach for RLS/PLMD in children is AIMS.
This includes the following:
u Avoidance of drugs/substances which may exacerbate RLS/PLMD
(including caffeine, nicotine, alcohol)
u Iron supplementation
u Muscles: increased physical activity, massage, application of heat/
cold, muscle relaxation and biofeedback
u Sleep: regular and adequate sleep
Treatment with iron supplementation is indicated if serum ferritin is <50 ng/mL. Administration of oral supplements for ferritin
levels >75-­100 μg/L, at least in adults, are likely ineffective because
of low absorption. It should be kept in mind that ferritin is an








211

acute-­phase reactant and thus may be falsely elevated (i.e., normal)
in the setting of a concomitant illness. In addition, the ferritin level
should be drawn, if possible, in the early morning after avoiding a
dinner with a high iron content (e.g., red meat) on the previous evening. A typical iron regimen is ferrous fumarate or sulfate as an oral
tablet or liquid: 3-­6 mg/kg of elemental iron/day × 3 months with
200 mg vitamin C on an empty stomach while avoiding calcium-­
containing foods that may slow absorption. Ferritin levels should be
repeated after 3 months to assess response and avoid iron overload.
If ferritin levels are very low or levels fail to improve after treatment
with iron, these children may require referral to hematology for evaluation of their iron deficiency (e.g., occult blood loss, malabsorption).
Although pediatric data regarding IV iron for RLS/PLMD are largely
lacking, there are studies examining the role of IV iron therapy (e.g.,
ferric carboxymaltose, iron dextran) in the treatment of severe iron
deficiency or with iron malabsorption in adults. Potential advantages
of IV therapy include rapid response and avoidance of malabsorption/
tolerance/compliance issues.
Treatment with pharmacologic agents may be indicated in children
with moderate-­severe RLS symptoms and PLMD, who did not respond
to the previously mentioned measures. Currently, there are no Food
and Drug Administration (FDA)-­approved pharmacologic agents for
RLS/PLMD in children. Dopaminergic medication is considered the
first line of treatment for RLS in adults. Other classes of medications
used to treat PLS/PLMD include α-­agonists, opiates, benzodiazepines,
and bupropion.

Restless Sleep Disorder

Restless sleep disorder (RSD) has both clinical and PSG features
distinct from RLS and PLMD. Clinical descriptors include a complaint of “restless sleep” typically reported by a parent, caregiver,
or bedpartner; the visible body movements, involving large muscle
groups of the whole body, all four limbs, arms, legs, or head during
sleep, may be characterized further as frequent repositioning disruption of the bedsheets, falling out of bed and being found in a
completely different position compared to the position in which
they fell asleep. Diagnostic criteria also include objective documentation on videography of increased levels of nocturnal activity and
gross body movements with a total movement index during sleep
that exceeds five per hour of sleep. RSD has also been found to be
associated with low serum iron levels with symptomatic improvement following iron supplementation.
Sleep-­related rhythmic movements, including head banging, body
rocking, and head rolling, are characterized by repetitive, stereotyped,
and rhythmic movements or behaviors that involve large muscle
groups. These behaviors typically occur with the transition to sleep at
bedtime, but also at nap times and after nighttime arousals. Children
are thought to engage in these behaviors as a means of soothing themselves to (or back to) sleep. These behaviors are very common, with
about two thirds of all infants having some type, typically beginning
before 12 months and usually disappearing by preschool age. In most
cases, rhythmic movement behaviors are benign, because sleep is not
significantly disrupted, and associated significant injury is rare; however, these behaviors can potentially affect the sleep of a family member
room-­sharing and/or caregivers in nearby sleeping spaces. In addition,
caregivers are often concerned about these behaviors as potentially
being harmful to the child or possibly indicative of an underlying neurologic or neurodevelopmental disorder (e.g., autism). However, these
behaviors typically occur in normally developing children and in the
majority of cases do not indicate some underlying neurologic or psychologic problem. Usually, the most important aspect in management
of sleep-­related rhythmic movements is reassurance to the family that
this behavior is normal, common, benign, and self-­limited. Safety may
be an important concern, and appropriate measures such as tightening of crib bolts and guardrails on the bed should be taken to prevent
injury; noise dampening measures such as moving the bed away from
adjoining walls may be helpful. If there are concerns about an associated sleep disorder, seizure disorder, or risk of injury referral to a sleep
specialist may be considered.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

212 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Central Disorders of Hypersomnolence: Narcolepsy
type 1, Narcolepsy type 2, Idiopathic Hypersomnia

Hypersomnia is a clinical term that is used to describe a group of disorders characterized by recurrent episodes of EDS, reduced baseline
alertness, and/or prolonged nighttime sleep periods that interfere with
normal daily functioning (Table 31.8). The many potential causes of
EDS can be broadly grouped as “extrinsic” (e.g., secondary to insufficient and/or fragmented sleep) or “intrinsic” (e.g., resulting from an
increased need for sleep).
Table 31.8  Diagnostic Criteria for Narcolepsy
A.	Recurrent periods of an irrepressible need to sleep, lapsing into
sleep, or napping occurring within the same day. These must have
been occurring at least 3 times per week over the past 3 mo.
B.	The presence of at least one of the following:
1.	Episodes of cataplexy, defined as either (a) or (b), occurring at
least a few times per month:
a.	In individuals with long-­standing disease, brief (seconds to
minutes) episodes of sudden bilateral loss of muscle tone
with maintained consciousness that are precipitated by
laughter or joking.
b.	In children or individuals within 6 mo of onset, spontaneous
grimaces or jaw-­opening episodes with tongue thrusting or
a global hypotonia, without any obvious emotional
triggers.
2.	Hypocretin deficiency, as measured using CSF hypocretin-­1
immunoreactivity values (less than or equal to one third of values
obtained in healthy subjects tested using the same assay, or
≤110 pg/mL). Low CSF levels of hypocretin-­1 must not be
observed in the context of acute brain injury, inflammation, or
infection.
3.	Nocturnal sleep polysomnography showing REM sleep
latency ≤15 min, or a multiple sleep latency test showing a
mean sleep latency ≤ 8 min and two or more sleep-­onset
REM periods.
Specify whether:
Narcolepsy without cataplexy but with hypocretin deficiency:
Criterion B requirements of low CSF hypocretin-­1 levels and positive
polysomnography/multiple sleep latency test are met, but no
cataplexy is present (Criterion B1 not met).
Narcolepsy with cataplexy but without hypocretin deficiency: In this
rare subtype (<5% of narcolepsy cases), Criterion B requirements
of cataplexy and positive polysomnography/multiple sleep latency
test are met, but CSF hypocretin-­1 levels are normal (Criterion B2
not met).
Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia, deafness, and
narcolepsy: This subtype is caused by exon 21 DNA (cytosine-­
5)-­methyltransferase-­1 mutations and is characterized by late-­
onset (age 30-­40 yr) narcolepsy (with low or intermediate CSF
hypocretin-­1 levels), deafness, cerebellar ataxia, and eventually
dementia.
Autosomal dominant narcolepsy, obesity, and type 2 diabetes:
Narcolepsy, obesity, and type 2 diabetes are low; CSF hypocretin-­1
levels have been described in rare cases and are associated with a
mutation in the myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein gene.
Narcolepsy without cataplexy but with hypocretin deficiency:
This subtype is for narcolepsy that develops secondary to
medical conditions that cause infectious (e.g., Whipple disease,
sarcoidosis), traumatic, or tumoral destruction of hypocretin
neurons.
Severity:
Mild: Infrequent cataplexy (less than once per week), need for naps
only once or twice per day, and less disturbed nocturnal sleep.
Moderate: Cataplexy once daily or every few days, disturbed nocturnal
sleep and need for multiple naps daily.
Severe: Drug-­resistant cataplexy with multiple attacks daily,
nearly constant sleepiness, and disturbed nocturnal sleep (i.e.,
movements, insomnia, and vivid dreaming).
CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; REM, rapid eye movement.
From American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 5th ed, Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2013. pp 372–373.

Narcolepsy

Narcolepsy is a chronic, lifelong CNS disorder, typically presenting in
adolescence and early adulthood, characterized by profound daytime
sleepiness resulting in significant functional impairment. More than
half of patients with narcolepsy also present with cataplexy (type 1
narcolepsy), defined as the sudden, brief, partial, or complete loss
of skeletal muscle tone, typically triggered by strong emotion (e.g.,
laughter, surprise, anger), with retained consciousness. Other symptoms frequently associated with narcolepsy, including hypnogogic/
hypnopompic (immediately before falling asleep/awakening) visual,
auditory, or perceptual hallucinations, and sleep paralysis, may be
conceptualized as representing the “intrusion” of REM-­related phenomena (dream mentation, loss of motor tone) into the waking state.
Other REM-­related features include observance of eye movements
and twitches at sleep onset and vivid dreams. Somewhat paradoxically, increased sleep fragmentation is a common feature. Rapid
weight gain, especially near symptom onset, may be observed, and
young children with narcolepsy have been reported to develop precocious puberty.

Etiology

The genesis of narcolepsy with cataplexy (type 1) is thought to be
related to a specific deficit in the hypothalamic orexin/hypocretin neurotransmitter system involving the selective loss of cells that secrete
hypocretin/orexin in the lateral hypothalamus. Hypocretin neurons
stimulate a range of wake-­promoting neurons in the brainstem, hypothalamus, and cortex and basal forebrain that produce neurochemicals
to sustain the wake state and prevent lapses into sleep.
The development of narcolepsy may involve autoimmune mechanisms, possibly triggered by streptococcal, influenza virus, H1N1, and
other viral infections, likely in combination with a genetic predisposition
and environmental factors. A 12-­13–fold increase in narcolepsy type 1
cases, especially in children, was reported in parts of Europe in 2009–
2010 following immunization with the AS03 adjuvanted H1N1 influenza
vaccine. Human leukocyte antigen testing also shows a strong association with narcolepsy; the majority of individuals with this antigen (∼25%
of the general population) do not have narcolepsy, but most (>90%)
patients with narcolepsy with cataplexy are HLA-­DQB1*0602–positive.
Patients with narcolepsy without cataplexy (type 2) are increasingly
thought to have a significantly different underlying pathophysiology;
they are much less likely to be HLA-­DQB1*0602–positive (4–50%), and
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypocretin levels are normal in most patients.
Although most cases of narcolepsy are considered idiopathic (autoimmune), secondary narcolepsy can be caused by lesions to the posterior hypothalamus induced by traumatic brain injury, tumor, stroke,
and neuroinflammatory processes such as poststreptococcal pediatric
autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorder associated with streptococcal infection (PANDAS; see Chapter 229), as well as by neurogenetic
diseases such as Prader-­Willi syndrome (Chapter 99.7), Niemann-­
Pick type C (Chapter 106.4), myotonic dystrophy (Chapter 649.6),
Angelman syndrome, autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia-­deafness-­
narcolepsy (ADCA-­DN), Moebius syndrome, and Norrie disease.

Epidemiology

Narcolepsy is a rare disorder with a prevalence of approximately 1
in 2000 with equal sex distribution; however, specific countries (e.g.,
Japan) appear to have relatively higher prevalence rates. The risk of
developing narcolepsy with cataplexy in a first-­degree relative of a narcoleptic patient is estimated at 1–2%. This represents an increase of 10-­
40–fold compared to the general population, but the risk remains very
low, reinforcing the likely role for other etiologic factors.

Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis

The typical onset of symptoms of narcolepsy is in adolescence and early
adulthood, although symptoms may initially present in school-­age and
even younger children. The early manifestations of narcolepsy are often
ignored, misinterpreted, or misdiagnosed as other medical, neurologic,
or psychiatric conditions, and the appropriate diagnosis is frequently
delayed for years. The onset may be abrupt or slowly progressive.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 31 u Sleep Medicine
The most prominent clinical manifestation of narcolepsy is profound daytime sleepiness, characterized by both an increased baseline
level of daytime drowsiness and the repeated occurrence of sudden and
unpredictable sleep episodes. These “sleep attacks” are often described
as “irresistible,” in that the child or adolescent is unable to stay awake
despite considerable effort and occur even in the context of normally
stimulating activities (e.g., during meals, in conversation). Very brief
(several seconds) sleep attacks may also occur in which the individual may “stare off,” appear unresponsive, or continue to engage in an
ongoing activity (automatic behavior). EDS may also be manifested by
increased nighttime sleep needs and extreme difficulty waking in the
morning or after a nap.
Cataplexy is considered virtually pathognomonic for narcolepsy but
can develop several years after the onset of EDS. Manifestations are triggered by strong positive (laughing, joy) or negative (fright, anger, frustration) emotions and predominantly include facial slackening, head
nodding, jaw dropping, and less often, knees buckling or complete collapse with falling to the ground. The cataplectic attacks are typically brief
(seconds to minutes), the patient is awake and aware, and episodes are
fully reversible, with complete recovery of normal tone when the episode ends. A form of cataplexy unique to children known as cataplectic facies is characterized by prolonged tongue protrusion, ptosis, slack
jaw, slurred speech, grimacing, and gait instability. Additionally, children
may have positive motor phenomenon similar to dyskinesias or motor
tics, with repetitive grimacing and tongue thrusting. The cataplectic
attacks are typically brief (seconds to minutes) but in children may last
for hours or days (status cataplecticus). The differential diagnosis of
cataplexy includes syncope, seizures, cataplexy-­like episodes in KCNA1
pathologic variants (ataxia-­myokymia syndrome), hyperekplexia, hypo
and hyperkalemic periodic paralysis syndromes, and pseudocataplexy.
Hypnogogic/hypnopompic hallucinations usually involve vivid
visual but also auditory and sometimes tactile sensory experiences
during transitions between sleep and wakefulness, either at sleep offset (hypnopompic) or sleep onset (hypnogogic). Sleep paralysis is the
inability to move or speak for a few seconds or minutes at sleep onset
or offset and often accompanies the hallucinations. Other symptoms
associated with narcolepsy include disrupted nocturnal sleep, impaired
cognition, inattention and ADHD-­like symptoms, and behavioral and
mood dysregulation.
Several pediatric screening questionnaires for EDS, including the
modified Epworth Sleepiness Scale, help to guide the need for further
evaluation in clinical practice when faced with the presenting complaint of daytime sleepiness. Physical examination should include a
detailed neurologic assessment. Overnight PSG and a multiple sleep
latency test (MSLT) are strongly recommended components in the
evaluation of a patient with profound unexplained daytime sleepiness
or suspected narcolepsy. The purpose of the overnight PSG is to evaluate for primary sleep disorders (e.g., OSA) that may cause EDS. The
MSLT involves a series of five opportunities to nap (20 min long), during which patients with narcolepsy demonstrate a pathologically shortened mean sleep-­onset latency (≤8 minutes, typically <5 minutes) as
well as at least two periods of REM sleep occurring immediately after
sleep onset. Alternatively, a diagnosis of type 1 narcolepsy can be made
by findings of low CSF hypocretin-­1 concentration (typically ≤110 pg/
mL) with a standardized assay.

Treatment

In general, the management of pediatric narcolepsy is best done in conjunction with a pediatric sleep specialist. An individualized narcolepsy
treatment plan usually involves education, good sleep hygiene, behavioral changes, and medication. Scheduled naps during the day are often
helpful. Wake-­promoting medications such as modafinil or armodafinil
may be prescribed to control the EDS, although these are not approved
for use in children by the U.S. FDA, and potential side effects include
rare reports of Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome and reduced efficacy of
hormone-­
based contraceptives. Psychostimulants are approved for
ADHD in children and can be used for EDS; side effects include appetite
suppression, mood lability, and cardiovascular effects. Antidepressants
(serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, venlafaxine)

213

may be used to reduce cataplexy. Sodium oxybate, which is approved
for use in children, is a unique drug that appears to have a positive
impact on daytime sleepiness, cataplexy, and nocturnal sleep disruption;
reported side effects include dizziness, weight loss, enuresis, exacerbation of OSA, depression, and risk of respiratory depression, especially
when combined with CNS depressants, including alcohol. Pitolisant has
a novel mechanism as a histamine (H3) receptor agonist and has been
shown to improve cataplexy and EDS in adult patients with narcolepsy.
Preliminary results in children have been encouraging. Solriamfetol,
a norepinephrine-­dopamine reuptake inhibitor, is another alertness-­
enhancing drug recently approved in adults. The goal for the child
should be to allow the fullest possible return of normal functioning in
school, at home, and in social situations.

Idiopathic Hypersomnia

Idiopathic hypersomnia (IH) is a central sleep disorder, presenting
in adolescence and young adults, characterized by chronic and EDS,
but without cataplexy or REM sleep intrusions. Patients typically
present with prolonged nocturnal sleep duration and severe sleep
inertia, making it difficult to arouse from nocturnal sleep or daytime naps. Patients often report transient periods of confusion and
“sleep drunkenness” on awakening, sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic
hallucinations. Unlike patients with narcolepsy, daytime naps tend to
be long (more than 1 hour) and unrefreshing. The prevalence in the
general population is not known because of challenges with diagnostic evaluation, but is estimated to be approximately 20-­50 cases per
million. The pathogenesis also is not well understood; however, some
cases were documented to be precipitated by viral illnesses, suggesting a possible autoimmune process. A diagnosis of IH requires daily
periods of irrepressible need to sleep or daytime lapses into sleep for
at least 3 months, absence of cataplexy, and exclusion of other causes
including insufficient sleep. Diagnosis is made by PSG followed by an
MSLT showing mean sleep latency of <8 minutes and less than two
sleep-­onset REM periods (SOREMPs) on MSLT or no SOREMPs if
the REM sleep latency preceding PSG is 15 minutes or less. When
the mean sleep latency on the MSLT is >8 minutes, a 24-hour PSG or
2-week actigraphy to ensure a total 24-hour sleep time ≥660 minutes
is needed. Treatment is mostly derived from experience with medications to treat EDS in narcolepsy. Wakeful promoting medications
such as modafinil, armodafinil, methylphenidate, amphetamines, and
oxybate are treatment options. Behavior modifications such as scheduled naps are not generally helpful.
Kleine-­Levin syndrome (KLS) may mimic IH and manifests with
recurrent episodes of hypersomnia (Table 31.9). KLS may resolve overtime; some reports support the use of parenteral steroids during an
episode.
Table 31.9  Diagnostic Criteria for Kleine-­Levin Syndrome
CRITERIA A–E MUST BE MET
A.	The patient experiences at least two recurrent episodes of
excessive sleepiness and sleep duration, each persisting for
2 days to 5 weeks.
B.	Episodes recur usually more than once a year and at least once
every 18 months.
C.	The patient has normal alertness, cognitive function, behavior,
and mood between episodes.
D.	The patient must demonstrate at least one of the following during
episodes:
E.	Cognitive dysfunction.
F.	Altered perception.
G.	Eating disorder (anorexia or hyperphagia).
H.	Disinhibited behavior (such as hypersexuality).
I.	The hypersomnolence and related symptoms are not better
explained by another sleep disorder, other medical, neurologic,
or psychiatric disorder (especially bipolar disorder), or use of
drugs or medications.

From Afolabi-­Brown O, Mason II TBA. Kleine-­Levin syndrome. Pediatr Respir Rev.
2018;25:9–13, Table 1, p 10.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

214 Part II u Growth, Development, and Behavior
Delayed Sleep–Wake Phase Disorder

Delayed sleep–wake phase disorder (DSWPD), a circadian rhythm
disorder, involves a significant, persistent, and intractable phase shift
in sleep–wake schedule (later sleep onset and wake time) that conflicts with the individual’s normal school, work, and lifestyle demands.
DSWPD may occur at any age but is most common in adolescents and
young adults.

Etiology

Individuals with DSPD may start out as “night owls”; that is, they
have an underlying biologic predisposition/circadian-­based “eveningness” chronotype that results in a propensity for staying up
relatively late at night and sleeping until late in the morning or early
afternoon, and in extreme cases, a complete “day-­night reversal.”
Although these patients struggle to get up in time for school or
work, they usually revert to their preferred sleep schedule on weekends, holidays, and summer vacations. The underlying pathophysiology of DSWPD is still unknown, although some theorize that it
involves an intrinsic abnormality in the circadian oscillators that
govern the timing of the sleep period.

Epidemiology

Studies indicate that the prevalence of DSWPD may be as high as
7–16% in adolescents and young adults.

Clinical Manifestations

The most common clinical presentation of DSWPD is sleep-­
initiation insomnia when the individual attempts to fall asleep
at a “socially acceptable” desired bedtime and experiences very
delayed sleep onset (often after 1-­2 am), accompanied by daytime
sleepiness. Patients may also report extreme difficulty arising in the
morning even for desired activities, with pronounced confusion on
waking (sleep inertia), and caregivers often complain of the need
for multiple reminders or even the complete failure to awaken the
adolescent in time to attend school. Sleep maintenance is generally not problematic, and no sleep-­onset insomnia is experienced if
bedtime coincides with the preferred sleep-­onset time. Patients may
also develop “secondary” psychophysiologic insomnia as a result of
spending prolonged time in bed attempting to fall asleep. School
tardiness and frequent absenteeism with a decline in academic
performance often occur, and there may be school-­related disciplinary action (i.e., suspension, truancy label) or a need to justify
home-­based schooling/tutoring that motivate families to seek help.
It is important to recognize that there may also be issues related
to family dynamics and comorbid anxiety, depression, or learning
disabilities that provide a motivation to avoid attending school and
perpetuate the sleep schedule problems, as well as reducing adherence to interventions.

Treatment

The treatment of DSWPD usually has three components, all directed
toward the goals of shifting the sleep–wake schedule to an earlier,
more desirable time and maintaining the new schedule. The initial
step involves shifting the sleep–wake schedule to the desired earlier
times, usually with gradual (i.e., in 15-­30 minute increments every
few days) alternating advancement of rise time in the morning and
bedtime in the evening. More significant phase delays (i.e., larger
difference between current sleep onset and desired bedtime) may
require chronotherapy, which involves delaying bedtime and wake
time by 2-­3 hours every 24 hours “forward around the clock” until
the target bedtime is reached. Because melatonin secretion is highly
sensitive to light, exposure to light in the morning (either natural light or a “light box,” which typically produces light at around
10,000 lux) and avoidance of evening light exposure (especially
from screens emitting predominantly blue light, such as computers
and laptops) are often beneficial. Exogenous oral melatonin supplementation may also be used; larger, mildly sedating doses (5 mg) are
typically given 30 minutes before bedtime, but some studies have

suggested that physiologic doses of oral melatonin (0.3-­0.5 mg)
administered in the afternoon or early evening (5-­7 hours before
the habitual sleep-­onset time or 2 hours before the desired bedtime)
may be more effective in advancing the sleep phase.

SLEEP HEALTH SUPERVISION

It is especially important for pediatricians to screen for and recognize sleep disorders in children and adolescents during routine
healthcare encounters. The well-­child visit is an opportunity to educate parents about normal sleep and to teach strategies to prevent
sleep problems from developing (primary prevention) or becoming
chronic, if problems already exist (secondary prevention). Developmentally appropriate screening for sleep disturbances should take
place in the context of every well-­child visit and should include a
range of potential sleep problems; Table 31.10 outlines a simple sleep
screening algorithm called the “BEARS.” Because parents may not
always be aware of sleep problems, especially in older children and
adolescents, it is also important to question the child directly about
sleep concerns. The recognition and evaluation of sleep problems in
children require both an understanding of the association between
sleep disturbances and daytime consequences (e.g., irritability, inattention, poor impulse control) knowledge of risk factors for the
wide variety of sleep disorders (e.g., obesity, positive family history,
medications), and familiarity with the developmentally appropriate
differential diagnoses of common presenting sleep complaints (difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep, episodic nocturnal events).
An assessment of sleep patterns and possible sleep problems should
be part of the initial evaluation of every child presenting with
behavioral or academic problems, especially ADHD.
Effective preventive measures include educating parents of newborns
about normal sleep amounts and patterns. The ability to regulate sleep
begins to develop in the first 8-­12 weeks of life. Thus it is important to
recommend that parents put their 2-­4 month old infants to bed “drowsy
but awake” if they want to avoid dependence on parental presence at sleep
onset and foster the infant’s ability to self-­soothe. Other important sleep
issues include discussing the importance of regular bedtimes, bedtime
routines, and transitional objects for toddlers, and providing parents and
children with basic information about healthy sleep practices, recommended sleep amounts at different ages, and signs that a child is not getting sufficient sleep.
The cultural and family context within which sleep problems in
children occur should be considered. For example, bed-­sharing of
infants and parents is a common and accepted practice in many
racial/ethnic groups, and these families may not share the goal of
independent self-­soothing in young infants. Anticipatory guidance
needs to balance cultural awareness with the critical importance of
“safe sleep” conditions in sudden infant death syndrome prevention (i.e., sleeping in the supine position, avoidance of bed-­sharing
but encouragement of room-­sharing in the first year of life) (see
Chapter 423). On the other hand, the institution of cosleeping by
parents as an attempt to address a child’s underlying sleep problem
(so-­called reactive cosleeping), rather than as a conscious family
decision, is likely to yield only a temporary respite from the problem and may set the stage for more significant sleep issues.

EVALUATION OF PEDIATRIC SLEEP PROBLEMS

The clinical evaluation of a child presenting with a sleep problem
involves obtaining a careful medical history to assess for potential
medical causes of sleep disturbances, such as allergies, concomitant
medications, and acute or chronic pain conditions. A developmental
history is important because of the increased risk of sleep problems
in children with neurodevelopmental disorders. Assessment of the
child’s current level of functioning (school, home) is a key part of
evaluating possible mood, behavioral, and neurocognitive sequelae
of sleep problems. Current sleep patterns, including the usual sleep
duration and sleep–wake schedule, are often best assessed with a
sleep diary, in which a parent (or adolescent) records daily sleep
behaviors for an extended period (1-­2 weeks). A review of sleep
habits, such as bedtime routines, daily caffeine intake, and the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 31 u Sleep Medicine

215

Table 31.10  BEARS Sleep Screening Algorithm
The BEARS instrument is divided into five major sleep domains, providing a comprehensive screen for the major sleep disorders affecting
children 2-­18 yr old. Each sleep domain has a set of age-­appropriate “trigger questions” for use in the clinical interview.
B = Bedtime problems
E = Excessive daytime sleepiness
A = Awakenings during the night
R = Regularity and duration of sleep
S = Snoring
DEVELOPMENTALLY APPROPRIATE TRIGGER QUESTIONS
TODDLER, PRESCHOOL (2-­5 YR)

SCHOOL-­AGE (6-­12 YR)

ADOLESCENT (13-­18 YR)

1.	Bedtime problems

Does your child have any problems
going to bed? Falling asleep?

Does your child have any problems at
bedtime? (P)
Do you any problems going to bed? (C)

Do you have any problems falling
asleep at bedtime? (C)

2.	Excessive daytime
sleepiness

Does your child seem overtired or
sleepy a lot during the day? Does
your child still take naps?

Does your child have difficulty waking in the
morning, seem sleepy during the day, or
take naps? (P)
Do you feel tired a lot? (C)

Do you feel sleepy a lot during the
day? In school? While driving?
(C)

3.	Awakenings during
the night

Does your child wake up a lot at
night?

Does your child seem to wake up a lot at
night? Any sleepwalking or nightmares? (P)
Do you wake up a lot at night? Do you have
trouble getting back to sleep? (C)

Do you wake up a lot at night? Do
you have trouble getting back to
sleep? (C)

4.	Regularity and
duration of sleep

Does your child have a regular
bedtime and wake time? What
are they?

What time does your child go to bed and
get up on school days? Weekends? Do you
think your child is getting enough sleep? (P)

What time do you usually go
to bed on school nights?
Weekends? How much sleep do
you usually get? (C)

5.	Snoring

Does your child snore a lot or have
difficulty breathing at night?

Does your child have loud or nightly snoring
or any breathing difficulties at night? (P)

Does your teenager snore loudly
or nightly? (P)

C, Child; P, parent.

sleeping environment (e.g., temperature, noise level), may reveal
environmental factors that contribute to the sleep problems. Nocturnal symptoms that may be indicative of a medically based sleep
disorder, such as OSA (loud snoring, choking or gasping, sweating)
or PLMs (restless sleep, repetitive kicking movements), should be
elicited. Home video recording may be helpful in the evaluation of
potential parasomnia episodes and the assessment of snoring and

increased work of breathing in children with OSA. An overnight
sleep study (PSG) is not routinely warranted in the evaluation of
a child with sleep problems unless there are symptoms suggestive
of OSA or PLMs, unusual features of episodic nocturnal events, or
unexplained daytime sleepiness.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

