Gynecologic Problems of
Childhood
Chapter 585

Gynecologic History and
Physical Examination
Kathryn C. Stambough and
Alla Vash-­Margita
HISTORY

For the young patient, developmentally appropriate social questions
directed to the patient can put them at ease and help to develop cooperation and rapport that will facilitate a subsequent examination. Specific
patient, caregiver, or provider concerns about vaginal discharge or bleeding, pruritus, external genital lesions, or abnormalities should direct a
problem-­focused history. In a patient presenting with vaginal bleeding,
questions should focus on recent growth and development, signs of
pubertal progression, trauma, vaginal discharge, medication exposure,
and any history of foreign objects in the vagina. For complaints of vulvovaginal irritation, pruritus, or discharge, questions should concentrate
on perineal hygiene, the onset and duration of symptoms, the presence
and quality of discharge, exposure to skin irritants, recent antibiotic use,
travel, presence of medical comorbidities or infections in the patient
and their family members, and other systemic symptoms of illness or
skin conditions. Throughout the history, the patient should be encouraged to ask their own questions. Occasionally, the child is brought to
the clinician because they or their parents have concerns about anatomic
findings, developmental changes, or congenital anomalies. It helps to
understand the family’s concerns and if a specific reason, event, or family
history raised the need for a gynecologic consultation.

GYNECOLOGIC EXAMINATION

The physical examination of the patient should be tailored to the child’s
age, complaint, and any other concerns elicited in the history. The date
of onset of the last menstrual period should be included with an assessment of other vital signs as age appropriate.

Neonates

At the time of delivery, a brief examination of the external genitalia of
female infants to visually confirm the patency of the vagina and assess the
presence of any obvious genital anomalies should be performed. The newborn examination should note any abnormal findings, such as ambiguous
genitalia, imperforate hymen, urogenital abnormalities, abdominal mass,
or inguinal hernia, that might herald a gynecologic problem.
Placing the infant in the supine position with thighs flexed against the
abdomen allows visualization of the neonate’s external genitalia. Estrogenic effects commonly notable in neonates include prominence of the
labia majora and a white vaginal discharge. The labia minora and hymen
may protrude slightly from the vestibule. A small amount of neonatal
vaginal bleeding from endometrial sloughing after maternal hormone
withdrawal might occur. Bleeding that is excessive or persistent beyond
the first month of life requires further evaluation. Breast buds may be
palpable at the time of the neonatal examination but should regress in
the first 3 months of life; occasionally, nipple discharge occurs.
The vaginal orifice may be difficult to see. Gentle lateral traction on the
labia majora usually allows complete visualization of the hymen and vaginal orifice. The hymen should be evaluated for patency. Most hymenal
variations—imperforate, microperforate, septate—do not require

PART

XXIII

treatment during the neonatal period (Fig. 585.1). Variations should be
noted and readdressed in subsequent visits. The hymen originates from
the urogenital sinus. The uterus and upper vagina originate from the
Müllerian ducts. The concomitant renal malformations seen with Müllerian anomalies are not associated with hymenal anomalies because
of different embryologic origin of the two structures. Similarly, uterine
anomalies are typically not observed with hymenal anomalies (see Chapter 591). Hymenal polyps seen in newborns typically regress in size as the
maternal estrogen effects subside. Cervicovaginal mucus secretions can
accumulate behind the blocked outflow tract of an imperforate hymen
and manifest as a mucocolpos. In this instance and if urinary obstruction
occurs, correction of the imperforate hymen in the neonatal period is indicated. In the absence of any concern for urinary obstruction, the imperforate hymen and associated mucocolpos can be observed for resolution,
and the imperforate hymen is ideally repaired surgically after onset of
puberty, specifically thelarche. This allows for improved healing of tissue
in the presence of endogenous estrogen production.
The clitoris may appear large in proportion to the other genital structures, especially in premature infants. If the clitoris appears
enlarged, the clitoral width and length should be measured; width values >6 mm or length values >6.5 mm in a newborn indicate a need for
further evaluation. If clitoromegaly and ambiguous genitalia are present, the provider should immediately obtain expert (endocrine) consultation for evaluation of the infant and to counsel the parents. Congenital
adrenal hyperplasia is the most common cause of ambiguous genitalia
(accounting for >90% of cases), and the salt-­wasting forms can lead
to rapid dehydration with subsequent fluid and electrolyte imbalance
(see Chapter 616). Delay in the diagnosis and treatment of congenital
adrenal hyperplasia may be life-­threatening.
In the neonate, the ovaries are <1 cm in diameter and average 1 cm3 in
volume. Antenatal or postnatal abdominopelvic ultrasound might reveal
small simple ovarian cysts, which represent normal follicles. Because of
the abdominal location of ovaries in the neonate, ovarian enlargement
can manifest as a palpable abdominal mass. Large cysts (>4-­5 cm) or
those of a complex nature pose the risk of ovarian torsion, hemorrhage
into the cyst, or, uncommonly, an ovarian tumor. A nonresolving or
enlarging neonatal ovarian cyst warrants pediatric surgery or pediatric gynecology consultation. Percutaneous decompression has been
described in cases where benign nature can be reliably ascertained. Cyst
aspiration can provide temporary relief but is not recommended if cystectomy can safely be performed because the aspirated fluid may not be
reliable for diagnosis and may reaccumulate. If a cystectomy is done for
appropriate clinical indications, the cyst wall should be surgically excised
to prevent reaccumulation of fluid and to provide a pathologic diagnosis,
the remaining ovarian tissue should be left in situ, and the contralateral
ovary should be inspected. Preservation of normal ovarian tissue is recommended for all benign lesions, and salpingo-­oophorectomy should
not be performed unless clinically indicated.

Infants and Prepubertal Girls

When the maternal estrogen effect subsides, the genitalia of the female
infant change in appearance. The labia begin to flatten. The hymenal
membrane loses its redundancy and becomes translucent. The hypoestrogenic prepubertal vaginal epithelium appears thin, red, and sensitive to the
touch. The vaginal mucosa of young children can have longitudinal ridges
running along the axis of the vagina at 3 o’clock, 6 o’clock, and 9 o’clock,
which can cause small protrusions on the hymen at these locations. The
cervix usually appears flat and flush with the vaginal vault. During infancy,
the uterus regresses in size and does not return to its birth size until the
child is 5-­6 years old. The prepubertal cervix:fundus ratio is 2:1.
When puberty approaches, the child experiences increasing
endocrine activity of the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, adrenal

3317
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3318 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

Urethra

Membranous
cover
opening

A

C

B

E

D

G

F

Fig. 585.1 Types of hymens. A, Crescentic. B, Annular. C, Redundant. D, Microperforate. E, Septated. F, Imperforate. G, Hymeneal tags. (A–F
from Perlman SE, Nakajima ST, Hertweck SP, eds: Clinical Protocols in Pediatric Adolescent Gynecology. Parthenon Publishing Group, 2004; G, from
McCann JJ, Kerns DL [eds]: The Child Abuse Atlas. St Louis: Evidentia Learning, 2021, www.childabuseatlas.com.)

A

B

C

D

Fig. 585.2 Different exam positions for performing a gynecologic exam on a child. A, Frog-­leg position. B, Knee-­chest position. C, Prone position.
D, Sitting on caregiver’s lap. (A from McCann JJ, Kerns DL, eds : The Child Abuse Atlas. St Louis: Evidentia Learning, 2021, www.childabuseatlas
.com; B–D from Finkel MA, Giardino AP [eds]: Medical Examination of Child Sexual Abuse: A Practical Guide. Elk Grove Village, Illinois: American
Academy of Pediatrics Publications, 2009;46–64.)

gland, and ovaries (see Chapter 599). The labia majora begin to
fill out, and the labia minora thicken and elongate as a result of
increased estrogen levels. The hymen thickens and becomes more
redundant. Clear or white physiologic secretions may be present.
Breast buds begin to appear, either bilateral or initially unilateral
with subsequent development of the contralateral breast. Pubic hair
begins to appear.

Indications for Genital Examination

Genitourinary complaints or suspected genitourinary pathology warrants assessment of the external and internal genitalia of pediatric
patients, specifically in cases of vaginal bleeding, vaginal discharge,
vulvar trauma, presence of a foreign body, perineal or pelvic masses,
vulvovaginal ulcerative or inflammatory lesions, congenital anomalies,
or suspected sexual abuse.

Preparation

An examination of the external genitalia in prepubertal females
requires a gentle, patient approach to maximize cooperation and
minimize fear and embarrassment. A clear, simple explanation of

what the examination involves can facilitate the child’s comfort and
cooperation. The presence of a parent or caregiver during the entire
examination provides reassurance for most children. For the older
prepubertal patient, the physician may discuss whether the patient
wishes to have a family member present during the examination.
Even in the presence of the caregiver, the examiner should speak
directly to the child. Before initiating any part of the examination,
the provider should explicitly verify with both the patient and their
caregiver that the caregiver has given permission for the examination. This provides an opportunity to explain to the child the privacy of body parts and who may examine or touch those areas. It is
useful to educate the patient and caregiver about the basic anatomy
and hygiene of the external genital area. Before each step of the
examination, the physician should explain what will occur. Allowing an older child the option of watching their examination with a
handheld mirror may contribute to their comfort and understanding. Forcible restraint is never indicated; if optimal evaluation is
not possible, the clinician must assess the acuity of the complaint
and pathology and determine the potential need for multiple visits
to complete the examination or an examination under anesthesia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 585 u Gynecologic History and Physical Examination
Positioning

A variety of techniques and positions can facilitate the genital examination in prepubertal patients. Children younger than 4 years of age can
be placed on the parent or caregiver’s lap with the child’s legs straddling the caregiver’s thighs (Fig. 585.2). If the child permits, they may
be positioned on the table in the supine position with the hips fully
abducted and the feet together in the frog-­leg (diamond or butterfly)
position. Older children may prefer to use the stirrups. The head of the
examination table should be raised so that eye contact can be maintained with the patient throughout the examination. When the child
is supine, grasping the labia majora along the inferior portion between
the thumb and index finger and gently pulling outward and posteriorly
(labial traction) allows visualization of the vaginal introitus. Alternatively, the child may be placed in the knee-­chest position with elevation of the buttocks and hips (see Fig. 585.2). This position provides
exposure of the inferior portion of the hymen, the lower vagina, and
possibly the upper vagina and cervix but has the disadvantage of having the child face away from the examiner.
Some extremely cooperative children tolerate a vaginoscopic examination in an outpatient office setting for better intravaginal assessment.
The endoscope (either a cystoscope or a hysteroscope) is placed in the
vagina, and the labia are gently opposed, allowing the vagina to distend
with water. This technique permits visualization of the vagina and cervix, allowing for the evaluation of an injury, lesion, and anatomic variant or for the presence of a foreign body. Application of 2% lidocaine
gel at the introitus makes the insertion easier and less irritating for the
patient. If a more complete examination is indicated or if the child is
too young, frightened, or unable to cooperate, an examination under
anesthesia is recommended.

Documentation

Clinicians should thoroughly and accurately document the genital examination findings in the medical record, reserving conclusions and diagnostic terms for the impression and plan portion of the documentation rather
than in the description of exam findings. Each structure visualized should
be noted (e.g., clitoris, labia majora, labia minora, urethra, vestibule, and
rectum) with attention to describing normal appearance and any anatomic
variations (e.g., the configuration of the hymen as annular, crescentic, and
so forth). Describing any findings or lesions using a clock-­face method
provides a consistent reference point; a sketch or magnified photograph
may also be helpful. Future examiners will rely on this documentation as
a record with which they compare their findings and note any variances.
Changes should be noted in any follow-­up examinations.

Adolescents

Some teens prefer to initially meet and discuss the reason for their
visit with the provider without their parent or guardian present, and
this request should be honored (see Chapter 151). Obtaining a history from an adolescent usually begins with meeting the patient and
parent or caregiver together to review their history and the reason
for the visit and to explain the concepts of confidentiality and privacy. Care should be taken to ask the patient their preferred name
and pronouns when addressing them. Familiarity with local laws
governing limitations to confidential services should guide the protection of the adolescent and their parents’ rights to information
access and privacy. The Guttmacher Institute provides an up-­
to-­
date listing of state and federal laws in the United States affecting
access to medical care (https://www.guttmacher.org/geography/
united-­states). Brief discussions of normal pubertal development and
menstruation can reassure both patients and their parents or guardians and provide valuable education on appropriate menstrual flow,
menstrual hygiene, and the duration and frequency of bleeding. Introducing the menstrual diary as an invaluable tool for the teen can help
patients, parents, and clinicians identify abnormal bleeding patterns
that might require further evaluation. Many applications are available
for tracking menstrual periods on a smart phone or computer.
After the initial interview with the teen and their parent or caregiver,
the confidential and sensitive portion of the history, particularly sexual

3319

history and alcohol, tobacco, and drug use, is taken with the teen alone.
Such a request could be phrased as follows: “I would like to give your
child an opportunity to ask any questions they might have privately,
so would you mind stepping out of the room for a moment?” After
obtaining the teen’s assent for the confidential interview, questions
regarding gender identity, sexual orientation, mental health, safety, and
use of illicit substances should be asked. Any concerns regarding parent or caregiver access to personal electronic health records should be
addressed. Concerns for the presence of vaginal discharge, the potential for sexually transmitted infections, pregnancy, or menstrual aberration should be explored. Teens and their parents should be informed
of the proper use and accessibility of condoms, all contraceptive methods, and emergency contraception.
Resources for educating adolescents regarding their first pelvic
examination and in-­depth sexual history and psychosocial screening tools are available. These include the North American Society for
Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology (http://www.naspag.org), the
American Academy of Pediatrics (http://www.aap.org), the Society for
Adolescent Health and Medicine (http://www.adolescenthealth.org),
and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (http://
acog.org/Patients).

Individuals with Special Needs

Special care should be taken in the approach to individuals with both
physical and cognitive disabilities (see Chapter 592). The assistance of
Child Life services can be beneficial in decreasing patient anxiety.

Pelvic Examination

Table 585.1 presents the indications for the first pelvic examination in adolescents. If an adolescent does not meet one of the criteria listed in Table 585.1, the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends that the first gynecologic
encounter occur between the ages of 13-­15 years (Table 585.2), with
attention toward anticipatory guidance focusing on normal pubertal development and menstruation. All sexually active patients age
Table 585.1  Suggested Indications for Pelvic Examination
in Adolescents
Age 21 yr of age for initial Papanicolaou test (Pap smear)
Unexplained menstrual irregularities, including pubertal aberrations
(especially delayed puberty)
Severe dysmenorrhea
Unexplained abdominal or pelvic pain
Unexplained dysuria
Abnormal vaginal discharge
Concern for pelvic inflammatory disease
Placement of intrauterine device
Removal of foreign body
Inability to place tampons
Data from American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Committee on Adolescent Health Care. The initial reproductive health visit: ACOG Committee Opinion,
Number 811. Obstet Gynecol. 2020;136: e70–e80.

Table 585.2  Recommendations for First Gynecologic
Evaluation
Occurs between 13 and 15 yr of age
Focuses on patient education
Increases comfort with issues regarding adolescent sexuality
Ensures opportunity for adolescent to speak 1-­on-­1 with the provider
Makes the adolescent aware of limitations of confidentiality (including issues related to mandatory reporting, insurance billing, electronic health record notifications, and legal requirements)
Pelvic examination with Papanicolaou test (Pap smear) is generally
not indicated until 21 yr of age, unless otherwise indicated by
Table 585.1
Data from American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Committee on Adolescent Health Care. The initial reproductive health visit: ACOG Committee Opinion,
Number 811. Obstet Gynecol. 2020;136: e70–e80.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3320 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
<25 years should undergo annual screening for sexually transmitted infections (STIs). This testing can also be obtained 3 months
after treatment of a positive screening, with new symptoms, or with
each new sexual partner. With the availability of urine and vaginal
swab nucleic acid amplification testing for chlamydia, gonorrhea,
and trichomoniasis, STI screening does not necessitate a speculum
exam. Extragenital (rectal or pharyngeal) chlamydia and gonorrhea
testing can be considered for patients based on self-­reported sexual
behaviors through shared clinical decision-­making between the
patient and the provider. Expedited partner treatment may be used
according to the state law.
Before the initiation of a physical examination, all patients
should be offered the choice of having a medical attendant, family member, or friend present during their examination. Presence
of the chaperone is advised based on the laws of the state and the
policies of the institution. At the initial gynecologic exam, the
physician should explain the process in understandable terms. A
thorough evaluation begins with an assessment of body mass index,
blood pressure, menstruation status, thyroid, lymph nodes, breast
development, abdominal exam, and skin. The external genitalia
should be examined with the patient in the dorsal lithotomy position while communication is maintained between the physician and
patient. Elevating the head of the examination table allows the teen
and their examiner to maintain eye contact. The teen can hold a
mirror to follow along with the examination, and they should be
encouraged to ask questions. Inspection of the vulva is followed by
inspection of the Bartholin, urethral, and Skene glands. The clitoris,
normally 2-­4 mm in width, is then assessed; a clitoris wider than 10
mm, especially in the presence of other signs of virilization, suggests a need for further evaluation. The hymenal anatomy should
also be evaluated. Throughout the examination, the proper nomenclature for genital anatomy should be emphasized with the teen to
empower them to use proper wordage with the avoidance of slang
when referring to their body.
Because the initial Papanicolaou (Pap) test is deferred until 21
years of age except in certain immunocompromised patients and
cultures for STIs can be obtained from urine or vaginal swabs, the
need for a speculum exam is decreasing in this age group. If a speculum exam is indicated, use an appropriately sized speculum, such
as the Huffman (½ in wide × 4 in long) or Pedersen (⅞ in wide
× 4 in long) speculum. Shorter speculums will not allow visualization of the entire vaginal canal. The adolescent patient should
be reassured that the exam may be uncomfortable but should not
be painful and that their request to stop or wait will be honored.
Encouraging the patient to watch with a handheld mirror facilitates
patient education and can be empowering. They may be told before
the insertion of the speculum that they will experience a pressure
sensation. Before touching the introitus, it may be useful to touch
the inner thigh with the speculum. Compression of the urethra
anteriorly should be avoided. Gentle pressure with a finger for displacement of the fourchette posteriorly further facilitates proper
speculum placement. After visualization of the vagina and cervix,
specimens should be obtained as indicated. A bimanual examination, sometimes with a single digit, allows palpation of the vaginal
walls and cervix and bimanual assessment of the uterus and adnexa.
Reassurance of normal findings throughout the examination
should be provided, and normal variants to anatomy should be
pointed out to the teen as they are encountered (e.g., asymmetric
labia minora).
After the examination, it is appropriate to review the exam findings with the teen (and parents or caregivers as appropriate) and
initiate a collaborative discussion of the management plan. Encouraging the adolescent to participate in decision-­making empowers
them to undertake responsibility for their health, may strengthen
compliance with the medical plan, and will acknowledge them as a
unique individual.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 586

Vulvovaginitis
Helen M. Oquendo Del Toro and
Holly R. Hoefgen
Vulvovaginitis is the most common gynecologic-­based problem for
prepubertal children, with a reported incidence of 17–50%. It is most
typically caused by either inadequate or excessive hygiene or chemical
irritants. The age of presentation peaks at 4-­8 years of age. The condition is usually improved by hygiene measures and education of the
caregivers and child.

ETIOLOGY

Vulvitis refers to external genital pruritus, burning, redness, or rash.
Vaginitis denotes inflammation of the vagina, which can manifest as
a discharge with or without an odor or bleeding. If these occur simultaneously, the term vulvovaginitis is used. When a child presents with
vulvovaginitis, the history should include questions on hygiene (wiping from front to back) and information about possible exposure to
chemical irritants (bath soaps, bubble bath, bath bombs, laundry
detergents, swimming pools, or hot tubs). A detailed history of recent
diarrhea, perianal itching, or nighttime itching is important. The possibility of foreign objects being placed into the vagina should also be
asked, although the young child is unlikely to recall. Approximately
75% of cases of vulvovaginitis in children are nonspecific for a variety
of reasons, including their lack of vaginal estrogenization and resulting
atrophy and alkalinic pH, poor perianal hygiene, and the proximity of
the anus to the vagina, which is without geographic barriers given the
flattened labia and lack of pubic hair. Table 586.1 lists other vulvovaginal disorders commonly seen in children.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Infectious vulvovaginitis, where a specific pathogen is isolated as the
cause of symptoms, is commonly associated with fecal or respiratory
pathogens, and cultures may reveal Escherichia coli (see Chapter 246),
Streptococcus pyogenes (Chapter 229), Staphylococcus aureus (see Chapter 227), Haemophilus influenzae (see Chapter 240), Enterobius vermicularis (see Chapter 340), and, rarely, Candida spp. (see Chapter 280).
These organisms may be transmitted by the child using improper toilet
hygiene or manually from the nasopharynx to the vagina. Typical presentation includes perianal redness, introital inflammation, and often
a yellow-­green or mildly bloody discharge. Children may be observed
to be grabbing their genital area or “digging” in their underwear, which
is usually stained with yellow-­brown discharge. Attempts to treat these
bacterial etiologies with antifungal medication will fail, and often the
antifungal product will lead to more irritation. Table 586.2 gives specific treatment recommendations based on the bacteria identified.
Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia trachomatis are also causes of
specific infectious vulvovaginitis (see Chapter 163). If acquired after
the neonatal period, some diseases (e.g., gonorrhea, syphilis, and chlamydia) are virtually 100% indicative of sexual contact. Management
of prepubertal children who have sexually transmitted infections
requires close cooperation between clinicians and child-­protection
authorities. Official investigations for sexual abuse, when indicated,
should be initiated promptly (see Chapter 17). For some diseases (e.g.,
human papillomavirus infection and herpes simplex virus), the association with sexual contact is not as clear. Presumptive treatment for
prepubertal children who have been sexually assaulted or abused is not
recommended, because (1) the incidence of most sexually transmitted
infections in children is low after abuse/assault, (2) prepubertal females
appear to be at lower risk for ascending infection than adolescent or
adult women, and (3) regular follow-­up of children usually can be
ensured. Although Trichomonas vaginalis can be transmitted vertically

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 586 u Vulvovaginitis

3321

Table 586.1  Specific Vulvar Disorders in Children
CONDITION

PRESENTATION

Molluscum
contagiosum
(Fig. 586.8)

1-­to 5-­mm discrete,
skin-­colored, dome-­shaped,
umbilicated lesions with a
central cheesy plug

Diagnosis usually
made by visual
inspection

DIAGNOSIS

• Disease is generally self-­limited and the lesions can resolve
spontaneously.
• Treatment choices in children may include cryosurgery,
laser, application of topical anesthetic and curettage,
podophyllotoxin, and topical silver nitrate.
• Use of topical 5% imiquimod cream and 10% potassium
hydroxide has been reported with similar effects.

Condyloma
acuminata

Skin-­colored papules, some
with a shaggy, cauliflower-­like
appearance

• Diagnosis is usually
made by visual
inspection.
• Biopsy should be
reserved for when
the diagnosis is in
question.
• Human papillomavirus DNA testing is
not helpful.

• Many lesions in children resolve spontaneously, with “wait and
see” often used in children (60 days).
• Topical treatment with imiquimod cream (3 times/wk at
bedtime × 16 wk, wash 6-­10 hr after application) and
podophyllotoxin (bid × 3 days followed by 4 day break; typical
treatment duration is 4 wk) is the most studied.
• General anesthesia is usually required for surgical/ablative
procedures (cryotherapy, laser therapy, electrocautery); reserve
for symptomatic or large lesions.
• Other treatments have been used in adults, including
trichloroacetic acid, 5-­fluorouracil, sine catechins, topical
cidofovir, and cimetidine.
• The efficacy and safety of these treatments in children has not
been established.

Herpes simplex

Blisters that break, leaving
tender ulcers

Visual inspection
confirmed by culture
from lesion

• Infants: Acyclovir 20 mg/kg body weight IV q8 hr × 21 days for
disseminated and central nervous system disease or × 14 days
for disease limited to the skin and mucous membranes.
• Genital/mucocutaneous disease:
• Age 3 mo-­2 yr: 15 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h × 5-­7 days.
• Age 2-­12 yr (first episode): Same as above or 40-­80 mg/kg/day
PO divided tid-­qid × 7-­10 days (max 1,000-­1,200 mg/day).
• Age 2-­12 yr (recurrence): 1,000 mg/day PO in 5 divided doses
× 5 days or 1,600 mg/day PO divided bid × 5 days or 2400 mg
PO divided q8 × 2 days.

Labial
adhesions
(see Fig. 586.1)

May be asymptomatic or
can cause vulvitis, urinary
dribbling, urinary tract
infection, or urethritis

Diagnosis made by
visual inspection of
the adherent labia,
often with a central
semitranslucent line.

• Does not require treatment if the patient is asymptomatic.
• Symptomatic patients: Topical estrogen cream or
betamethasone ointment applied alone or in combination
daily for 6 wk directly to the line of adhesion, using a cotton
swab while applying gentle labial traction.
• Estrogen should be interrupted if breast budding occurs.
• Mechanical or surgical separation of the adhesions is rarely
indicated.
• The adhesions usually resolve in 6-­12 wk; unless good hygiene
measures are followed, recurrence is common.
• To decrease the risk of recurrence, an emollient (petroleum
jelly, A and D ointment) should be applied to the inner labia
for 1 mo or longer at bedtime.

Lichen sclerosus
(see Fig. 586.4)

A sclerotic, atrophic, parchment-­
like plaque with an hourglass or
keyhole appearance of vulvar,
perianal, or perineal skin;
subepithelial hemorrhages
may be misinterpreted as
sexual abuse or trauma.
The patient can experience
perineal itching, soreness, or
dysuria.

Diagnosis usually
is made by visual
inspection.
Biopsy should be
reserved for when
the diagnosis is in
question.

• Ultrapotent topical corticosteroids are the first-­line therapy
(clobetasol propionate ointment 0.05%) once or twice a day
for 4-­8 wk.
• Once symptoms are under control, the patient should be
tapered off the drug unless therapy is required for a flare-­up.
• In many females, the condition resolves with puberty; however, this
is not always the case and patients may require long-­term follow-­up.
• Immunomodulators can be used: tacrolimus 1% (applied once
daily) and pimecrolimus 1% (applied twice daily for 3 mo, then
every other day).

Psoriasis

Children are more likely than
Diagnosis may be
adults to have vulvar psoriasis
confirmed by
noted as pruritic, well-­
locating other
demarcated, nonscaly, brightly
affected areas on the
erythematous, symmetric
scalp or in nasolabial
plaques. The classic extragenital
folds or behind the
lesions are similar but with a
ears.
silver scaly appearance.

Vulvar lesions may be treated with low-­to medium-­potency
topical corticosteroids, increasing strength as necessary.

Atopic dermatitis

Chronic cases can result in
crusty, weepy lesions that
are accompanied by intense
pruritus and erythema.
Scratching often results in
excoriation of the lesions
and secondary bacterial or
candidal infection.

Children with this condition should avoid common irritants and
use topical corticosteroids (such as 1% hydrocortisone) for
flare-­ups.
If dry skin is present, lotion or bath oil can be used to seal in
moisture after bathing.

May be seen in vulvar
area but characteristically affects the
face, neck, chest, and
extremities

TREATMENT

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3322 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Table 586.1  Specific Vulvar Disorders in Children—cont’d
CONDITION

PRESENTATION

DIAGNOSIS

Contact
dermatitis

Erythematous, edematous,
or weepy vulvar vesicles
or pustules can result, but
more often the skin appears
inflamed

Associated with
exposure to an
irritant, such as
perfumed soaps,
bubble bath, talcum
powder, lotions,
elastic bands of
undergarments, or
disposable diaper
components

Avoidance of irritant; topical corticosteroids for flare-­ups

TREATMENT

Seborrheic
dermatitis

Erythematous and greasy,
yellowish scaling on vulva and
labial crural folds associated
with greasy dandruff-­type rash
of scalp, behind ears and face

Diagnosis usually
made by visual
inspection

Gentle cleaning, topical clotrimazole with 1% hydrocortisone
added

Vitiligo (see Fig.
586.6)

Sharply demarcated hypopigmented patches, often
symmetric in vaginal and anal
regions; may be present in
periphery at body orifices and
extensor surfaces

Clinical. Test for
associated illness if
clinically warranted
(thyroid disease,
Addison disease,
pernicious anemia,
diabetes mellitus).

If desired, treat limited lesions with low-­potency corticosteroids
or tacrolimus. See dermatologist for extensive lesions.

Table 586.2  Antibiotic Recommendations for Specific Vulvovaginal Infections
ETIOLOGY

TREATMENT

Streptococcus pyogenes
Streptococcus
pneumoniae

• Penicillin V, 250 mg PO bid-­tid for children < 27 kg, and 500 mg bid-­tid for children > 27 kg × 10 days
• Amoxicillin, 50 mg/kg/day (max: 500 mg/dose) PO divided tid × 10 days
• Erythromycin ethyl succinate, 30-­50 mg/kg/day (max: 400 mg/dose) PO divided qid
• TMP-­SMX, 6-­10 mg/kg/day (TMP component) PO divided bid × 10 days
• Clarithromycin, 7.5 mg/kg bid (max: 1 g/day) PO × 5-­10 days
• Recurrence most likely from asymptomatic pharyngeal carriage in child or family member; however, failure of
penicillin regimens can occur
• For penicillin resistance: Rifampin 10 mg/kg PO every 12 hr × 2 days

Staphylococcus aureus

• Topical mupirocin 2% tid to the affected skin area
• If systemic therapy required: Amoxicillin-­clavulanate, 45 mg/kg/day (amoxicillin) PO divided bid-­tid × 7 days
(first-­line treatment because of high penicillin resistance)
• Extensive resistance to common antibiotics noted; recommend susceptibility testing for further antibiotic use
• MRSA: TMP-­SMX double-­strength 8-­10 mg/kg/day; culture abscesses, incision and drainage

Haemophilus influenzae

• Amoxicillin, 40 mg/kg/day PO divided tid × 7 days
• For cases of treatment failure or nonencapsulated H. influenzae, amoxicillin–clavulanate is recommended.

Yersinia

• TMP-­SMX 6 mg/kg (TMP component) daily for 3 days

Shigella

• TMP-­SMX 10/50 mg/kg/day (max: 160/600) PO divided bid × 5 days
• Ampicillin 50-­100 mg/kg/day PO divided qid (adult max: 4 g/day) × 5 days
• Azithromycin 12 mg/kg (max: 500) PO × 1 day, then 6 mg/kg/day (max: 250 mg) × 4 days (in areas of high
resistance to above regimens or when sensitivities are unknown)
• For resistant organisms: Ceftriaxone 50-­75 mg/kg/day IV or IM divided into 1 or 2 doses (max: 2 g/day) × 2-­5 days

Chlamydia trachomatis

• Children weighing < 45 kg: Erythromycin base or ethylsuccinate 50 mg/kg/day PO divided qid × 14 days
• Children weighing > 45 kg but age younger than 8 yr: Azithromycin 1 g PO in a single dose
• Children age older than 8 yr: Azithromycin 1 g PO in a single dose or Doxycycline 100 mg PO bid × 7 days
• Adolescents and Adults:
• P
 referred: Doxycycline 100 mg PO bid × 7 days
• Alternative: Azithromycin 1 g PO in single dose or Levofloxacin 500 mg PO once daily × 7 days

Neisseria gonorrhoeae

• Children weighing < 45 kg: Ceftriaxone, 25-­50 mg/kg body weight IV or IM in a single dose (max 250 mg IM)
• Children weighing ≥ 45 kg: Treat with adult regimen of 500 mg IM in a single dose; add azithromycin 1 g PO in a
single dose if chlamydia has not been excluded. In persons > 150 kg, provide 1 g ceftriaxone.

Trichomonas

• Metronidazole, 15-­30 mg/kg/day PO bid (max: 500 mg/dose) × 7 days or Tinidazole 50 mg/kg (max 2 g) PO as a
single dose for children older than 3 yr

Pinworms (Enterobius
vermicularis)

• Mebendazole, 100 mg chewable tablet once, repeated in 2 wk
or
Albendazole, 200 mg PO for child younger than age 2 yr or 400 mg PO for older child once, repeated in 2 wk
• Pyrantel pamoate 11 mg/kg PO once (max 1 g), repeated in 2 wk

MRSA, Methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus; TMP-­SMX, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 586 u Vulvovaginitis

3323

and can be seen in children up to 1 year of age, it is an uncommon
cause of specific infectious vulvovaginitis in the unestrogenized prepubertal female.
Other causes of specific infectious vulvovaginitis include Shigella
(see Chapter 245), which often manifests with a blood-­tinged purulent
discharge, and Yersinia enterocolitica (see Chapter 249). Candida infections (yeast) commonly cause diaper rash (diaper dermatitis), but they
are unlikely to cause vaginitis in children because the alkaline pH of
the prepubertal vagina does not support fungal infections. Diabetic or
immunocompromised children and children taking prolonged antibiotics may be at increased risk for fungal vaginitis. Pinworms are the
most common helminthic infestation in the United States, with the
highest rates in school-­age and preschool children. Perianal itching can
lead to excoriation and, rarely, bleeding.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Diaper Dermatitis

Fig. 586.1 Labial adhesions. (Photo courtesy Diane F. Merritt, MD.)

Diaper dermatitis is the most common dermatologic problem in
infancy and occurs in half of all diaper-­wearing infants and children.
The moisture and contact with urine and feces irritates the skin, and
colonization with Candida spp. increases the severity of the dermatitis.
First-­line treatment includes hygiene measures such as increasing the
frequency of diaper changes, allowing the infant to be diaper free, frequent bathing, and application of water-­repellant barriers such as zinc
oxide. If diaper dermatitis persists after these conservative measures,
or if the classic satellite lesions of Candida are present, treatment with
a topical antifungal can decrease the inflammation.

Physiologic Leukorrhea

Neonates and peripubertal children can present with a white, clear,
or mucus discharge, which is physiologic in nature and secondary to
exposure to estrogen. Some patients may complain of the moisture and
mucus. Hygiene measures, including plain warm water baths, may help
decrease symptomatology, but education should also be provided to
reassure the patient and their parents.

Labial Agglutination

Labial agglutination (labial adhesions) are described most frequently
in infants and young children (Fig. 586.1). This phenomenon is thought
to be secondary to an inflammatory response in the labia minora in
combination with a hypoestrogenic state. Diagnosis is made on routine
genital examination. Asymptomatic patients usually require no intervention. Most common symptoms include urinary frequency, vaginitis, and postvoidal dribbling; labial adhesions also increase a patient’s
susceptibility to urinary tract infections. First-­line therapy in symptomatic patients includes topical estrogen (estradiol cream 0.01%) or a
topical steroid (betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% ointment) applied
twice daily to the midline raphe under gentle traction. Surgical correction is rarely necessary, but recurrence is common until the age of
puberty. Liberal use of bland emollients for 6-­12 months after resolution of adhesions can limit recurrences.

Genital Ulcers

Acute genital ulceration of the vulva (Fig. 586.2) is described in young
adolescents who are not sexually active and can occur in association
with oral aphthous ulcers. Although linked to infectious causes such as
Epstein-­Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, mycoplasma, mumps, and influenza A, these ulcers may also be idiopathic vulvar aphthoses. Other
potential etiologies include Crohn disease, Behçet disease, pemphigoid, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, fixed drug eruption, or mouth and
genital ulcers with inflamed cartilage (MAGIC) syndrome, which has
combined features of relapsing polychondritis and Behçet disease.
These lesions usually appear on the mucosal surfaces of the introitus as painful red or white lesions that evolve into sharply demarcated,
red-­rimmed ulcers with a necrotic or eschar-­like base. The time course
is generally 10-­14 days until remission occurs. The lesions are painful; dysuria and vulvar pain are common complaints as well. Patients
with acute genital ulcers show a fairly consistent picture of flulike prodromal symptoms, including fever, nausea, and abdominal pain. One

A

B

Fig. 586.2 Aphthous ulcers. (Photo courtesy Diane F. Merritt, MD.)

third of patients present with a history of or develop oral ulcerations.
Evaluation includes culture or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test
for herpes simplex virus to exclude this etiology. Special testing for
systemic disease depends on the history. Biopsies are usually nondiagnostic because they yield acute and chronic inflammatory changes.
Figure 586.3 outlines the suggested evaluation and management of initial and recurrent disease. Evaluation for Behçet disease (see Chapter
202) using the International Study Group diagnostic guidelines should
be considered with recurrent or severe cases (see Table 586.1 for other
common etiologies). Treatment of acute genital ulcers should include
topical lidocaine 2% jelly, sitz baths, good hygiene, and acetaminophen.
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug avoidance is suggested because
of a possible causative link. Hospitalization may be required for pain
management not controlled with oral narcotics or urinary retention
requiring Foley catheterization, or for whirlpool debridement should
hygiene become difficult. Antibiotic treatment is not required, unless
evidence of bacterial superinfection exists or the patient is immunocompromised. Insufficient evidence exists to recommend whether oral
steroid treatment is effective, but this may be helpful in the setting of
recurrent outbreaks and extensive disease. Ultrapotent topical steroids
(clobetasol 0.05% ointment) are beneficial in oral aphthous ulcers and
may prove helpful in acute genital ulcers as well.

Dermatoses

Dermatologic conditions often affect the vulvar area in children; it is
important to determine if the child presenting with vulvar irritation
has a skin condition elsewhere on the body. Lichen sclerosus is commonly seen in the anogenital region and has a characteristic appearance of thinning and whitened skin changes associated with areas of
erosion, ulceration, and petechiae. This disease can cause severe discomfort and most commonly presents with vulvar or perianal pruritus, dysuria, and constipation. Patients may also present without any
symptoms, which may lead to underrecognition and undertreatment.
If untreated, lichen sclerosus can lead to destruction and scarring of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3324 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
AGU without history of sexual activity*

*HSV already ruled out with
negative genital HSV culture
or PCR

First episode?

Yes

No

Associated signs/
symptoms?

H/o joint, GI, ocular, or
dermatologic symptoms?

No

Fig. 586.3 Algorithm for evaluation

and management of acute genital
ulcers in non–sexually active young
girls. AGU, Acute genital ulcer; CMV,
cytomegalovirus; EBV, Epstein-­
Barr
virus; GI, gastrointestinal; HSV, herpes
simplex virus; PCR, polymerase chain
reaction. (From Rosman IS, Berk DR,
Bayliss SJ, et al. Acute genital ulcers
in nonsexually active young girls:
Case series, review of the literature,
and evaluation and management
recommendations. Pediatr Dermatol.
2012;29[2];147-­153.)

Severe
• Persistent fever
• Lymphadenopathy
• Pharyngitis
• Persistent fatigue

Consider infectious
workup:
• EBV, CMV, influenza
• Mycoplasma
• Lesional viral cultures
Consider specialist
consultation based on
symptoms

Non-specific
prodromal

None

Yes

Referral to rheumatology,
ophthalmology, gastroenterology,
or dermatology to rule out
associated condition

Idiopathic vulvar aphthosis

Treatment:
• Pain control: topical agents, acetaminophen
± narcotics (parenteral if needed)
• Local care: sitz bath, whirlpool debridement
• Topical steroids (clobetasol ointment)
• Consider oral steroids
• Bladder drainage for urinary retention
Follow-up with gynecology or dermatology

Fig. 586.4 Lichen sclerosus. (Photo courtesy Diane F. Merritt, MD.)
normal genital architecture, including labial resorption, obliteration of
the clitoris, narrowing of the introitus, and painful fissures that may
become secondarily infected. Once thought to resolve with puberty,
this theory is now controversial, and many postmenarchal adolescents still suffer from disease (Fig. 586.4). Lichen sclerosus may be
treated with potent topical steroids, such as clobetasol propionate
0.05% applied once or twice daily until the symptoms resolve, and then
tapered down through lower-­dose topical steroids. Topical calcineurin
inhibitors such as tacrolimus and pimecrolimus have been used in the
treatment of lichen sclerosus. Patients should be followed every 6-­12
months to evaluate for recurrence (Fig. 586.5).

Vitiligo is an acquired skin depigmentation resulting from an
autoimmune process directed at epidermal melanocytes. Lesions
appear as sharply demarcated patches of pigment loss, often symmetrically located around the vagina and anal area. Similar lesions
of hypopigmentation can be found surrounding body orifices and
extensor surfaces (Fig. 586.6). Although the diagnosis is clinical,
there is an association with other autoimmune or endocrine disorders (hypothyroidism, Graves disease, Addison disease, pernicious
anemia, insulin-­
dependent diabetes mellitus), and the workup
should include evaluation for thyroid dysfunction. Mild topical
corticosteroid cream or ointment may be prescribed for children.
Dermatologists may offer immunomodulators (tacrolimus) and
phototherapy.
Vulvar psoriasis presents as pruritic, well-­demarcated, erythematous, symmetric plaques that involve the vulva, perineum, and/or
gluteal folds. Lesions on the mons pubis may have the more characteristic scaly appearance. The classic signs of psoriasis may also
be appreciated with pitting nailbeds, posterior auricular erythema,
or a silvery scaling rash found elsewhere on the body. Many of the
treatments used in adults may not be appropriate in children. Psoriasis may be treated with moisturizers, topical steroids, and light
therapy. Teens may be treated with coal tar, retinoids, tacrolimus,
and calcipotriene, which is a derivative of vitamin D3.

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Children with symptoms of vulvovaginitis often have had previous
evaluations and treatment failures. Cultures with sensitivities to test
for specific pathogens may be obtained with cotton swabs or urethral (Calgiswab) swabs moistened with nonbacteriostatic saline.
Use of a swab can cause discomfort or, rarely, minimal bleeding. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 586 u Vulvovaginitis

3325

Exam findings consistent with
lichen sclerosus

lnduction therapy with UPTC for 4
weeks

No response or
intolerance to
steroid

Treat with topical calcineurin inhibitor

No response

Disease
improvement

Disease
improvement

Maintenance therapy, 6-month followup, treat relapse with induction therapy,
continue maintenance 2 years

Long-term follow-up at least annually
with treatment for recurrence

Referral to pediatric dermatology or
consider biopsy

Fig. 586.5 Management algorithm for lichen sclerosus. UPTC, Ultrapotent topical corticosteroids. (From Simms-­Cendan J, Hoover K, Marathe K,
Tyler K. NASPAG clinical opinion: Diagnosis and management of lichen sclerosis in pediatric and adolescent patients. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol.
2022;35[2]:112-­120; Fig. 6.)

premoistened swab can be placed vertically between the labia minora
to collect secretions, as it is not necessary to place the swab into the
vagina. Testing for gonorrhea and chlamydia may be done by culture
or by nucleic acid amplification testing, depending on institutional
or state and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines.
Tests for Shigella and H. influenzae might require special media and
collection procedures.
If pinworms (see Chapter 340) are suspected, transparent adhesive
tape or an anal swab should be applied to the anal region in the morning before defecation or bathing and then placed on a slide. Eggs seen
on microscopic examination confirm the diagnosis, and sometimes the
pinworms can be seen at the anal verge. Clinical history is often more
indicative of disease than physical examination, and a negative tape test
does not rule out this pathogen as a cause.
If the vaginal discharge is serosanguineous, if a foul odor is present, or
if the discharge fails to respond to hygiene measures, presence of a vaginal foreign body (Fig. 586.7) should be considered. If inspection suggests
the presence of a foreign body, the vagina can be irrigated, or an examination under anesthesia may reveal the foreign body. Vaginal irrigation
may occasionally lead to expulsion of the foreign body; in cases where
this does not occur, vaginoscopy is an excellent diagnostic tool and can
be performed in an unsedated cooperative patient in an outpatient setting, or under general anesthesia if necessary. Using a cystoscope with
saline or water irrigation to gravity, insert the endoscopic device into the
vagina and gently oppose the labia; the vagina will distend, and the entire
vaginal cavity and cervix may be easily assessed.

TREATMENT AND PREVENTION
Fig. 586.6 Vitiligo. (Photo courtesy Diane F. Merritt, MD.)

The treatment of specific vulvovaginitis should be directed at the
disorder or organism causing the symptoms (see Tables 586.1 and
586.2). Treatment of nonspecific vulvovaginitis includes sitz baths

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3326 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

Chapter 587

Vaginal Bleeding in the
Prepubertal Child
Kathryn C. Stambough and
Christina Davis-­Kankanamge

Fig. 586.7 Vaginal foreign body as seen through vaginoscope. (Photo
courtesy Diane F. Merritt, MD.)

Fig. 586.8 Molluscum contagiosum. (Photo courtesy Diane F. Merritt,
MD.)

and avoidance of irritating or harsh soaps and chemicals and tight
clothing that abrades the perineum. External application of bland
emollient barriers such as nonprescription diaper rash medications
and petroleum jelly may be helpful. Proper perineal hygiene is critical for long-­term improvement. Younger children need supervised
perineal hygiene, and caregivers should be advised to wipe the genital area from front to back. Use of a warm moistened washcloth or
diaper wipe is helpful after initially wiping with toilet tissue. Children should wear cotton underwear and limit time spent in tights,
leotards, leggings, tight jeans, and wet swimsuits. Soaking in warm
clean bathwater for 15-­minute intervals (no shampoo or bubble
bath) is soothing and helps with cleaning the area. Parents should
be counseled to avoid all scented, antiseptic, and deodorant-­based
soaps, and to eliminate the use of fabric softeners or dryer sheets
when laundering undergarments.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Newborn females may experience physiologic bleeding (neonatal
withdrawal bleeding) in the first week of life secondary to diminished
circulating maternal estrogen and stimulation of endometrial sloughing; this bleeding resolves in 3-­4 days. Vaginal bleeding in infants
lasting longer than a few days and all other vaginal bleeding in prepubescent children should be promptly evaluated because there are
many pathologic etiologies that require expeditious workup. Common
causes include vulvovaginitis, dermatologic conditions, vaginal foreign
bodies, and urethral prolapse; less common are the effects of endogenous or exogenous estrogen; and the least common but most worrisome sources include neoplasms and trauma.
Although many cases of pediatric vaginal bleeding are idiopathic,
many can be attributed to vulvovaginitis (see Chapter 586) stemming
from transmission of respiratory, oral, fecal, or sexually communicated pathogens. Vulvovaginitis may present with serosanguineous
vaginal drainage (e.g., Streptococcus, Shigella) or vulvar irritation. Age-­
appropriate anatomic and physiologic factors put prepubertal females at
higher risk of developing vulvovaginitis. The protective barrier of fully
developed labia is absent, leaving the vaginal introitus exposed to the
external environment. The hypo-­estrogenized vagina is marked by an
alkaline milieu prone to infection because of lack of the protective acidic
pH afforded by the lactobacilli colonization that occurs with puberty.
Routine handwashing, improved perineal hygiene (e.g., wiping from
front to back, use of wet wipes after bowel movements, proper cleansing
of genitalia during baths), and avoidance of topical irritants, chemicals,
and perfumed or deodorant soaps and bubble baths reduces nonspecific
vulvovaginitis. Topical application of bland emollient barriers (e.g., over-­
the-­counter diaper rash ointments, petroleum jelly) may be protective
against and mitigate symptoms of external irritation. Antibiotics should
be employed in the event of recurrent or persistent infections where a
specific pathogen has been identified (see Table 586.2).
Vulvar dermatoses may initially present with bleeding. Lichen
sclerosus (see Table 586.1 and Fig. 586.4) is characterized by chronic
inflammation, intense pruritus, loss of normal architecture, and thinning and whitening of vulvar and perianal skin, often in a butterfly
or keyhole distribution. Petechiae or blood blisters can complicate
the classic clinical picture, leading to a mistaken assumption of sexual trauma. A tissue biopsy can provide a definitive diagnosis but is
not usually necessary in prepubertal children and, if needed, is most
appropriately performed under anesthesia. The first-­line treatment is
ultrapotent topical steroids (e.g., clobetasol propionate 0.05%). Appropriate timing and duration of application is practitioner dependent,
but guidelines suggest treating children similarly to adults by starting
with once or twice daily application for 4 weeks. Tapering of topical
corticosteroid use can then occur with symptom control and include a
decrease in the frequency of corticosteroid application, potency of the
corticosteroid used, or both. Follow-­up evaluations for response should
start at 1 month after initiation of treatment. In the event of flare-­ups,
long-­term maintenance therapy with a lower potency steroid may be
initiated with appropriate counseling because side effects are rare.
Vaginal foreign bodies are a common finding in children presenting with blood-­
tinged and foul-­
smelling discharge. Quick
identification and removal of the foreign body avoids potential complications, including recurrent urinary tract infections, dermatologic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 587 u Vaginal Bleeding in the Prepubertal Child
abnormalities, vaginal perforation, or fistula formation. The most common object found in the prepubertal vagina is retained toilet paper. If
physical exam in knee-­chest or frog-­leg position reveals the object, an
attempt at removal in the office can be made using warm water flushes
through a small feeding tube. If the object is not visible, irrigation is
unlikely to remove it, and examination under anesthesia and vaginoscopy are often required. Direct visualization via vaginoscopy facilitates
extraction of an object, as well as evaluation for potential sites of injury
or unrelated sources of bleeding. In-­office vaginoscopy may also be a
possibility in the appropriate patient (see Chapter 585).
Several urologic conditions may have a mixed clinical picture suspicious for vaginal bleeding, including gross hematuria (see Chapter 558)
and urethral prolapse (see Chapter 581) (Fig. 587.1). Prolapse involves
protrusion of urethral mucosa through the external meatus, resulting
in a friable hemorrhagic mass that often obscures the adjacent vaginal
introitus. Predisposing factors include hypoestrogenic state, neuromuscular diseases, urethral anomalies, fascial defects, trauma, and chronic
increases in intra­abdominal pressure (e.g., recurrent Valsalva related to
constipation or forceful coughing). Treatment of prolapse is conservative, involving twice-­daily sitz baths followed by topical application of
estrogen cream (e.g., Estradiol 0.01%) at the affected area for 2 weeks. If
on reevaluation the prolapse remains, application should be continued
until complete resolution is achieved. Surgical excision is rarely necessary and reserved primarily for management of necrotic tissue.
Vaginal bleeding may be a presenting sign of precocious puberty
(see Chapter 600), defined as premature pubertal development occurring 2.0-­2.5 standard deviations earlier than the average age in the
general population. A formal evaluation should be conducted if pubic
hair or breast development occurs rapidly or initiates before age 8
years in a female child. The most common source of premature development is gonadotropin-­dependent or central precocious puberty
(see Chapter 600.1), resulting in early enhancement of pulsatile release
of hypothalamic gonadotropic-­releasing hormone (GnRH) that stimulates ovarian follicular growth and subsequent estrogen production.
Gonadotropin-­independent or peripheral precocious puberty
occurs less commonly and in the absence of hypothalamic influence, with estrogen being a product of ovarian or adrenal tumors, or
McCune-­Albright syndrome (see Chapter 600.6). In both instances,

Fig. 587.1 Prepubertal urethral prolapse with high crescent-­shaped
hymen. (From Lara-­Torre E, Valea FA. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology: Gynecologic examination, infections, trauma, pelvic mass, precocious puberty. In Lobo RA, Gershenson DM, Lentz GM, Valea FA [eds]:
Comprehensive Gynecology. Elsevier, 2022: 227; Fig. 12.6.)

3327

elevated estrogen levels lead to a thickened endometrium capable of
shedding as in menses.
Evaluation of precocious puberty starts by examining for secondary sex characteristics and documenting the Tanner stage of breast
and pubic hair development using the Sexual Maturation Index (see
Chapter 150). Plotting height and weight on a growth chart may assist
in identifying accelerated growth velocity. Supportive laboratory findings include elevated serum luteinizing hormone levels, but the gold
standard remains measurement of gonadotropin levels after stimulation with GnRH or a GnRH receptor agonist. Estradiol levels greater
than 100 pg/mL can indicate either the presence of premature ovarian
follicles or a peripheral tumor (e.g., ovarian germ cell tumor). A pelvic
ultrasound should be used to evaluate for ovarian or adrenal pathology,
as well as uterine maturation in response to estrogen. However, premature ovarian follicles typically produce estrogen for a very short period,
in quantities just sufficient to stimulate growth and shedding of the
endometrium. Follicular involution and return of estrogen to prepubertal levels may occur before an ultrasound can be obtained. An x-­ray
for bone maturity is simple and noninvasive. Other supportive radiologic findings include a brain MRI demonstrating a mass in the context
of central precocious puberty. If indicated, central precocious puberty
can be suppressed with GnRH agonist therapy. Peripheral tumors (i.e.,
ovarian germ cell tumors) are treated by surgical excision with staging
and chemotherapy as indicated by oncologic protocols.
Differential diagnoses of vaginal bleeding attributed to premature estrogenization must also include exposure to exogenous estrogens, including
hormonal contraceptives, certain foods (soy), beauty products (lavender,
tea tree oil), and plastics with endocrine disruptors. Ingesting large quantities of Bisphenol A (BPA), a product that may leach into the contents of
plastic cups and bottles, is known to convey an estrogenic effect, although
the impact remains unknown. Treatment involves elimination of any
problematic sources of estrogen from the patient’s daily use.
Juvenile hypothyroidism (see Chapter 603) commonly causes
pubertal delay, but severe cases may present with premature breast
development, vaginal bleeding, and abdominal distention secondary
to ovarian enlargement and ascites. The mechanism for this condition
is unclear, but it has been proposed that elevated levels of thyroid-­
stimulating hormone cross-­react with follicle-­stimulating hormone
receptors, resulting in follicle maturation and estradiol production.
Treatment with thyroid hormone replacement (e.g., levothyroxine)
results in improvement and ultimately reversal of symptoms.
Neoplasms of the vulva and vagina (see Chapter 590) are rare causes
of bleeding in the pediatric patient. Infantile hemangiomas are the most
common benign vascular neoplasm of infancy, affecting up to 5% of all
infants. Most lesions initially proliferate before resolving spontaneously
and seldom require intervention. However, on identifying a perineal
hemangioma, a neurologic assessment should be performed due to an
association with spinal dysraphism. If a persistent lesion is superficial,
application of topical β blockers (e.g., Timolol 0.5%) 2-­3 times daily for
6-­12 months has demonstrated good response rates. Oral β blocker use
and intralesional corticosteroids may be used as well. If conservative
therapies fail, laser therapy and surgical excision may be beneficial. Vaginal polyps may result in bleeding, and vaginoscopy for evaluation of any
upper vaginal or cervical etiologies for bleeding with expedient excision
and pathologic evaluation is recommended.
Malignant gynecologic neoplasms (see Chapter 590) are a source
of pediatric genital bleeding that requires scrupulous evaluation and
timely management. Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common soft
tissue sarcoma of childhood; 3% arise from the uterus or vagina. The
embryonal variant is responsible for uterine sarcomas, whereas the
embryonal subvariant sarcoma botryoides is found in the vagina.
Primary endodermal sinus (i.e., yolk sac) tumors of the vagina are
exceedingly rare, but early diagnosis is imperative given the malignancy’s aggressive nature and poor prognosis. Both sarcomatous and
endodermal sinus tumors arise primarily in the first 3 years of life,
presenting on examination with a cystic or polypoid mass, bloody
discharge, and occasionally urinary retention. Treatment consists of a
multimodal approach, including surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy
per oncologic guidelines.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3328 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Vulvovaginal trauma is an especially concerning cause of pediatric
genital bleeding. Most traumatic injuries are accidental, but physical
and sexual abuse must be ruled out (see Chapter 17.1). Straddle injuries are commonly seen after falls at home, particularly after slipping
on a wet surface in the bathroom; they may result in bruising, hematomas, or lacerations (Fig. 587.2). Accidental trauma usually spares the
hymen and vagina, instead affecting the external impact-­absorbing tissue of the mons and labia. However, a physical finding consistent with
external injuries does not exclude the need to rule out involvement of
internal genital structures. If there are no eyewitnesses to the injury, if
the history does not clarify or support the clinical findings, and especially if there is a hymenal laceration, abuse must be considered in the
differential diagnosis and a forensic interview of the patient and family
conducted. If after initial inspection a penetrative injury is suspected,
further examination and imaging are necessary to assess for potential
damage to the urethra, bladder, anus, or intraabdominal structures. An
examination under anesthesia may be needed to fully assess and repair
extensive injuries, while minor lacerations in a cooperative child may
potentially be repaired using local anesthesia and/or conscious sedation. If the patient can void spontaneously, nonexpanding hematomas
can be observed and treated with ice, pressure, and pain medications.
Large expanding hematomas may require drainage, ligation of bleeding
vessels, and placement of a closed suction drain if the overlying skin
is showing signs of necrosis. A Foley catheter should be placed in all
children who are having difficulty with voiding secondary to the injury.
Vaginal bleeding in the infant or prepubertal female is distressing
to the patient and their family and can result from a wide spectrum of
pathologic conditions or traumatic incidents. A detailed history and
thorough physical examination must be done to identify the source of
bleeding and for a management plan to be established efficiently. Presentations suspicious for trauma or abuse should involve the appropriate healthcare staff and authorities from an early stage, with findings
meticulously documented. If an intervention is indicated to manage
bleeding, regardless of its source, the risks and benefits of any therapy
should be reviewed carefully with the family before initiation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 587.2 Vulvar hematoma in an adolescent female as a result of
a straddle injury. (From Mok-­Lin EY, Laufer MR. Management of vulvar
hematomas: Use of a Word catheter. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2009;
22:e156-­e158.)

Chapter 588

Breast Health
Marcene R. McVay-­Gillam and
Amy D. DiVasta
Breast complaints in pediatric patients typically include concerns
about breast appearance or development, pain, nipple discharge, or
a lump/mass. Although the development of breast cancer is very rare
during childhood and adolescence, this patient population should be
evaluated by practitioners who have experience with the immature and
developing breast to avoid overtreatment with unnecessary diagnostic
or invasive procedures.

BREAST DEVELOPMENT

Prenatal breast development begins around the fifth week of gestation, when the ectoderm on the anterior body wall thickens into two
mammary ridges. These ridges extend from the axilla to the region
of the inguinal canal (Fig. 588.1). The ridge above and below the area
of the pectoralis muscle recedes in utero, leaving the mammary primordium, which is the origin of the lactiferous ducts. The lactiferous
ducts form between weeks 10 and 20 and become interspersed through
the developing mesenchyme, which develops into the fibrous and fatty
portions of the breast. The breast bud, under the stimulation of maternal estrogen, becomes palpable at week 34 of gestation. This breast bud
regresses within the first month of life once estrogen stimulation is no
longer present. The areola appears at 5 months of gestation, and the
nipple is seen shortly after birth. It is initially depressed or inverted,
and later becomes elevated.
Thelarche, the onset of pubertal breast development, is hormonally
mediated. It occurs when the hypothalamus releases gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone (GnRH), which stimulates the pituitary gland to
produce follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone
(LH) (see Chapter 599). FSH and LH then stimulate the ovaries to
produce estradiol, which leads to breast development. Thelarche typically occurs between ages 8 and 13 years. Age at thelarche is affected by
familial predisposition and varies by ethnicity.

Fig. 588.1 Milk lines or mammary ridges. (From Gao Y, Saksena MA,

Brachtel EF, terMeulen DC, Rafferty EA. How to approach breast lesions
in children and adolescents. Eur J Radiol. 2015;84:1350-­1364; Fig. 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 588 u Breast Health 3329
Breast development continues over a 2-­4 year period after thelarche
and is classified by the Sexual Maturity Rating (SMR) system (also
known as Tanner staging) into five stages (see Chapter 150). Lack of
breast development (amastia) by age 13 years is considered delayed
and warrants evaluation. Menarche (onset of menses) usually occurs
2-­3 years after thelarche.

BREAST EXAMINATION

Breast examination should be included in the routine healthcare maintenance examinations of all children and adolescents. Assessment of
the newborn includes breast size, nipple position, presence of accessory
nipples, and nipple discharge. Assessment of the prepubertal female
includes inspection and palpation of the chest wall for masses, pain,
nipple discharge, and signs of premature thelarche. Examination of the
adolescent is performed with the patient in the supine position; the arm
ipsilateral to the breast that is being examined should be placed next to
the patient’s head. The breast tissue is examined with the flat pads of the
middle fingers, and the examiner should palpate all of the breast tissue in
a uniform manner. The SMR should be noted and the axillary, supraclavicular, and infraclavicular nodes evaluated for lymphadenopathy. The
areola should be gently compressed to assess for nipple discharge.

Fig. 588.2 Preoperative frontal view of a patient with left breast hypoplasia secondary to Poland syndrome. (From Laberge LC, Bortoluzzi PA.
Correction of breast asymmetry in teenagers. In: Hall-­Findlay EJ, Evans
GRD, eds. Aesthetic and Reconstructive Surgery of the Breast. London:
Elsevier, 2010. Fig 39.14.)

BREAST SELF-­AWARENESS

Controversy exists as to the utility of breast self-­examination in the adolescent population. Experts believe that it might be ill-­advised to encourage breast self-­examination in the adolescent because of a potential for
unnecessary anxiety and possible unwarranted treatment in a population that is at low risk for malignant disease. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) endorses breast self-­awareness,
which is defined as a female’s awareness of the normal appearance and feel
of their breasts. Breast self-­awareness may increase an adolescent’s understanding of their body, increase their comfort with exams, and provide
opportunities for questions or discussion. Instruction in self-­exam techniques should be considered for high-­risk patients, such as those with a
family history of conditions that may increase breast cancer risk or those
at risk of secondary tumors. Adolescents should be educated to report any
changes in their breasts or concerns to their healthcare providers.

Neonatal Breast Hypertrophy

Breast bud enlargement is a common condition in term newborns of
either gender. It occurs as a result of elevated circulating maternal steroid hormones in late gestation. As maternal estrogen levels fall, prolactin levels can increase, and the breasts may produce a clear or cloudy
(milk like) nipple discharge (“witch’s milk”) in male and female infants.
Repeated manipulation of the breast can exacerbate the condition and
should be discouraged.

ABNORMAL DEVELOPMENT
Premature Thelarche

Premature thelarche is defined as isolated unilateral or bilateral breast
development in a female child under age 8 years without other signs of
puberty; this is commonly seen in children under 3 years of age. Patient
assessment includes a careful review of medications (including creams,
ointments), home exposures to potential estrogens, review of growth
charts, and x-­ray for determination of bone age. Treatment consists of
reassurance and follow-­up to confirm that thelarche remains benign.
Serial examinations, with particular emphasis on growth velocity, secondary sex characteristics such as pubic hair, pigmentation of the labia
or areola, or vaginal bleeding, are imperative. Occasionally, patients
with premature thelarche eventually develop true central precocious
puberty (see Chapter 600.1). If puberty progresses, further workup
should be performed to exclude central nervous system disorders or
possible adrenal or gonadal neoplasm.

Amastia and Athelia

Complete absence of the breast, or amastia, is rare and is thought
to occur from lack of formation of or obliteration of the mammary
ridge. Amastia is usually unilateral and can be congenital or associated with systemic disorders (e.g., ectodermal dysplasia), endocrine

Fig. 588.3 Accessory nipple located inferior to the right breast. (From
Swartz MH. Textbook of Physical Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2014; Fig 13-­5.)

disorders (e.g., congenital adrenal hyperplasia, gonadal dysgenesis,
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism), or novel pathogenic gene variants. It can be associated with anomalies of the underlying mesoderm, such as the absence or hypoplasia of the pectoralis muscles
seen in Poland syndrome (aplasia of the pectoralis muscles, rib
deformities, webbed fingers, and radial nerve aplasia) (Fig. 588.2).
Amastia or hypomastia can also be iatrogenic, resulting from injuries sustained during thoracotomy, chest tube placement, radiotherapy, severe burns, or incisional/excisional procedures on the
breast bud. Surgical correction is individualized to the patient and
the etiology. Athelia, the absence of a nipple either unilaterally or
bilaterally, is rare and can be familial. It is also associated with exposure to endogenous androgens during pregnancy.

Polymastia and Polythelia

Accessory breast tissue (polymastia) or accessory nipples (polythelia) occur in approximately 1–6% of the population (Fig. 588.3).
The abnormally placed tissue can be seen anywhere along the mammary ridges (“milk lines”) as a result of incomplete involution but
is usually noted on the chest, axilla, or just inferior to the normally
positioned breast. Polythelia has been reported in association with
congenital malformations, particularly renal anomalies; it is therefore reasonable to perform a genitourinary ultrasound in an infant
with supernumerary nipples. Surgical excision of the accessory
breast or nipple is usually performed for pain (mastodynia), nipple
discharge, or cosmesis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3330 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Breast Hypoplasia and Asymmetry

Breast hypoplasia varies in degree from a near-­total absence of breast
tissue to well-­formed breasts that are considered by the patient to be
too small. Poor or absent breast development may simply be a delay in
the development of normal secondary sex characteristics; the breasts
develop slowly but are normal in all other respects. Family history
may reveal other family members with a similar pattern. Other causes
include ovarian dysfunction, hypothyroidism, eating disorders, chest
wall irradiation, or surgery. Hypoplastic breast tissue can also be associated with a tuberous breast anomaly. Tuberous breasts are characterized by hypoplasia, a narrow breast base, and the appearance of
herniation of the glandular tissue through enlarged areolae (Fig. 588.4).
More commonly, patients complain of breast asymmetry. Some
degree of breast asymmetry is normal; it may be more pronounced
during puberty while the breasts are developing. In asymmetry, the
goals of evaluation are twofold. First, it is essential to exclude a neoplasm as the cause of the larger breast. Other etiologies may include a
solitary large fibroadenoma, multiple fibroadenomas, or a parenchymal abscess. Alternatively, the possibility of tuberous breast development or Poland syndrome should be considered when evaluating the
smaller side. Treatment depends on the underlying cause. Patients with
mild asymmetry and no other associated pathology should be reassured. If a child has marked breast asymmetry, they may be initially
offered cosmetic options, such as use of bra inserts or prostheses for the
underdeveloped breast. Surgical correction may be pursued after breast
development is complete. The American Society of Plastic Surgeons
generally recommends that uncommon chest deformities or congenital
breast asymmetry are the only cases in which a board-­certified plastic surgeon should deem breast augmentation appropriate for a teenager. It is important that patients undergoing surgery have a realistic
understanding of the potential results as well as the possible need for
additional surgery. Saline-­filled implants are the only type of implant
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for females <22
years; saline-­filled implants typically have a life span of about 10 years.

regarding indications and timing of surgical intervention and referral
should be provided. Assessment of the adolescent’s physical and emotional maturity level must be performed, as well as screening for body
dysmorphic disorder.
Juvenile hypertrophy, or spontaneous massive growth of one or
both breasts, is rare and should be distinguished from simple adolescent macromastia. This rapid growth of breast tissue may occur
any time after thelarche but more commonly occurs abruptly over a
several month period, after a preceding sustained period of normal
breast development. Circulating estradiol levels are normal. Juvenile
hypertrophy can cause extreme mastalgia, skin hyperemia or necrosis,
and even damage to normal breast parenchyma due to compromised
vascular supply. It can be unilateral or bilateral (Fig. 588.5). The etiology has not been elucidated; therefore treatment options include both
pharmacologic and surgical interventions. The key to management is
prompt recognition and intervention before the development of complications. Reduction mammoplasty is often the treatment of choice,
with pharmacologic treatment (e.g., tamoxifen) or even mastectomy
reserved for recurrence following surgery.

Infections

Mastitis is the most common infection of the breast and can occur any
time from the neonatal period through adolescence and into adulthood.
Neonatal mastitis is an infection that usually occurs in the first 2 months
after delivery in term or near-­term infants. Breast infections in adolescents occur most commonly with lactation. Adolescents can also develop
nonlactational mastitis or a breast abscess as a result of irritation of
the skin (e.g., acne lesions of the chest, shaving, or nipple stimulation),
trauma, a foreign body (e.g., piercing), or ductal abnormality (such as
ductal ectasia). Staphylococcus aureus is the cause of nearly all breast
infections, but anaerobic bacilli (Bacteroides) may also be involved in the
adolescent population. Methicillin-­resistant S. aureus (MRSA) coverage should be considered in communities where the prevalence is high,

Macromastia

Adolescents may develop very large breasts (macromastia), leading
to both physical and psychologic symptoms. Common complaints
include back pain, postural kyphosis, breast pain, intertrigo, limitation
of physical activities, unwanted negative attention, diminished self-­
esteem, and eating disordered behaviors. Strong emotional support
should be provided because macromastia can affect an adolescent’s
self-­esteem at a vulnerable time in their psychologic development. The
differential diagnosis for macromastia includes obesity, pregnancy,
fibrocystic disease, end organ hormonal hypersensitivity, or lesions
described in the previous paragraphs. Options for treatment of simple
macromastia include surgical and nonsurgical interventions. Bras that
provide maximal support can help correct symptoms. Alternatively,
breast reduction mammoplasty may be desired. When adolescents
are seeking breast surgery, ACOG first recommends education and
reassurance regarding normal variations in anatomy, growth, and
development for the patient and her family. Nonsurgical alternatives
for comfort and appearance should be emphasized, and knowledge

Fig. 588.5 Juvenile hypertrophy in a 12-­year-­old female. (From Al-­
Saif AA, Al-­Yahya GM, Al-­Qattan MM. Juvenile mammary hypertrophy:
is reduction mammaplasty always feasible? J Plast Reconstr Aesthet
Surg. 2009;62:1470-­1472; Fig. 1.)

Fig. 588.4 Bilateral tuberous breast anomaly. (Adapted from Pacifico MD, Kang NV. The tuberous breast revisited. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg.
2007;60:455-­464; Fig. 5.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 588 u Breast Health 3331
especially for infants. Mastitis may be initially treated with warm compresses, analgesics, and oral antibiotics for 7-­10 days. Antibiotic options
include dicloxacillin, clindamycin, trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole, or
amoxicillin-­clavulanic acid. If symptoms fail to resolve after a course of
antibiotics, ultrasonography may reveal an abscess and can be used to
guide needle aspiration. Incision and drainage should be reserved for
failure of aspiration, and a periareolar incision is most cosmetic. Follow­up ultrasonography should be considered in adolescents to ensure that
there is no remaining parenchymal lesion (e.g., cyst).

as bromocriptine or cabergoline. Surgical intervention, usually transsphenoidal hypophysectomy, is rarely required.
Bloody discharge may be due to chronic nipple irritation (such as
from jogger’s nipple), ductal ectasia, phyllodes tumor, or intraductal
papilloma (a rare, benign proliferative tumor). Unless the etiology of
the bloody discharge is superficial (i.e., from obvious skin breakdown
related to jogger’s nipple), cytologic assessment of bloody discharge
should be performed. Breast ultrasound may also be obtained to determine whether a mass or cyst is present.

Trauma and Inflammation

Mastalgia

Nipple Discharge

Table 588.2

Breast trauma is common in adolescent girls participating in contact
sports. The trauma usually takes the form of contusion or hematoma and
can resolve spontaneously or may be associated with late cystic changes in
the breast, fat necrosis with calcium deposition over time, or fibrosis with
retraction of the skin or the nipple over the injured area. When diagnosed
with a hematoma, or when a palpable mass is present at the area of injury,
serial follow-­up by ultrasound is recommended until complete resolution. Persistent calcifications lasting more than 18 months after injury may
require additional investigation by advanced imaging or biopsy.
Nipple discharge must be carefully evaluated and characterized. Discharge
may be milky and white (galactorrhea), bloody, purulent, or serous
(Table 588.1). A careful history and physical examination will help the
practitioner determine the etiology. Examination of the discharge assists
in diagnosis. Infection is usually associated with a purulent discharge;
ductal ectasia (dilated subareolar ducts and periductal inflammation)
may present with sticky, green or brown, or serosanguineous discharge.
Discharge from the ducts of Montgomery (coming from the areola itself
rather than through the nipple) may appear clear or brownish.
Galactorrhea is a specific type of nipple discharge that appears milky
and is usually bilateral. Causes of galactorrhea are listed in Table 588.2.
Cytologic evaluation of milky nipple discharge is not recommended. Laboratory evaluation should include a pregnancy test, prolactin, estradiol,
and thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH); these measures are obtained
to rule out pregnancy, a pituitary prolactinoma, and/or the presence of
a thyroid abnormality. If the prolactin level is elevated, visual field studies and a brain MRI might reveal the presence of a pituitary adenoma
(see Chapter 598). Treatment is directed by results of the history, physical exam, and lab and imaging studies. Patients should be instructed
to avoid nipple stimulation and stop any offending drugs, if appropriate to do so. Hypothyroidism should be treated and prolactin-­releasing
tumors managed with appropriate medical or surgical care. Medical
treatment of galactorrhea consists primarily of dopamine agonists such
Table 588.1

Common Causes of Nipple Discharge

DISCHARGE CHARACTERISTICS
Milky (galactorrhea)

POTENTIAL ETIOLOGY
Pregnancy or postpartum
Medication use/drug use
Herbal supplements
Hypothyroidism
Prolactinoma
Chest wall trauma

Serous, serosanguineous

Ductal ectasia
Intraductal papilloma

Sticky

Ductal ectasia
Fibrocystic changes

Purulent

Mastitis
Abscess

Bloody

Intraductal papilloma
Phyllodes tumor
Ductal ectasia
Trauma (“jogger’s nipple”)

Episodic, clear to brown

Montgomery tubercles

Mastalgia, or breast tenderness, is common in reproductive-­age females.
Mastalgia may be due to exercise, medications, early pregnancy, or benign
breast changes (fibrocystic changes). Physiologic swelling and tenderness can occur on a cyclic basis, most commonly during the premenstrual
phase, and are secondary to hormonal stimulation and resulting proliferative changes. Hormonal imbalance can cause exaggerated responses in
the breast tissue, especially in the upper and outer quadrants. Evaluation
should include a pregnancy test and a breast examination. Nodularity,
Etiologies of Hyperprolactinemia

PITUITARY DISEASE
Prolactinomas
Acromegaly
Empty sella syndrome
Lymphocytic hypophysitis
Cushing disease
HYPOTHALAMIC DISEASE
Craniopharyngiomas
Meningiomas
Dysgerminomas
Nonsecreting pituitary adenomas
Other tumors/metastatic disease
Sarcoidosis
Eosinophilic granuloma
Chiari-­Frommel syndrome
Encephalitis
Pituitary stalk section or compression
MEDICATIONS
Anesthetics, including cocaine
Opiates
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
Phenothiazines
Benzodiazepines
Protease inhibitors
Prostaglandins
Tricyclic antidepressants
Atypical antipsychotics
α-­Methyldopa
Reserpine
Metoclopramide
Marijuana
Herbal supplements (fennel, anise, fenugreek)
NEUROGENIC DISORDERS
Chest wall lesions/surgery
Spinal cord lesions
Breast stimulation
OTHER CAUSES
Pregnancy, postpartum, and postabortion
Hypothyroidism
ROHHAD
Chronic renal failure
Cirrhosis
Stress
Idiopathic disorders
ROHHAD, rapid-onset obesity, hypothalamic dysregulation, hypoventilation, and
autonomic dysregulation.
Modified from Chanson P, Maiter D. Prolactinoma. In Melmed S (ed). The Pituitary. 4th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017; 467-­514.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3332 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
poorly localized tenderness, and soreness radiating to the axilla and arm
are usual accompanying findings. Treatments for mastalgia include utilization of a firm, supportive sports-­type bra, heat, and analgesics (oral or
topical). Low-­dose combined estrogen/progestin oral contraceptives often
improve the breast pain. A course of NSAIDs is also typically effective.
The effect of caffeine and chocolate on mastalgia is controversial, but if
pain is worsened with increased intake, they should be avoided. Evening
primrose oil, vitamin E, and chamomile extract are popular but unproven
treatments.

BREAST MASSES
Peripubertal Masses

Initial breast development at the onset of thelarche can be unilateral and
asymmetric, with the developing breast bud being mistaken for a “mass.”
Such asynchronous thelarche should be recognized to avoid unnecessary
biopsy and potential injury to the maturing breast. If there is any question
as to the etiology of the lump, ultrasound can be used to evaluate for a
mass.

Adolescent Breast Masses

The differential diagnosis for breast masses in the adolescent patient
is broad (Table 588.3). The patient should be questioned about variations associated with the menstrual cycle, associated symptoms such as
nipple discharge, recent trauma to the breast, family history of breast
masses or cancer, and personal history of chest radiation or malignancy. Physical examination should characterize the mass location,
size, and firmness and determine whether tenderness, skin changes,
nipple discharge, or lymphadenopathy is present. Because breast cancer in the adolescent is extremely rare (3.2 cases per million person-­
years for women <25 years), masses in this population can often be
expectantly managed for extended periods of time.
Fibroadenomas are the most common solid mass found in the
adolescent breast. Fibroadenomas are slow-­
growing, hormonal
dependent masses most often located in the upper, outer quadrant
of the breast. The average size at diagnosis is 2-­3 cm; 10–25% of
patients have multiple lesions. On examination, these lesions are
well circumscribed, rubbery, mobile, and not tender. Given the
slow-­growing nature and lack of malignant potential, conservative

Table 588.3

Breast Masses in the Adolescent Female

Developmental

Unilateral thelarche
Macromastia, simple
Juvenile hypertrophy or gigantomastia
Intramammary lymph node

Infectious

Mastitis
Abscess

Traumatic

Fat necrosis
Hematoma

Cystic

Fibrocystic change
Vascular malformation (hemangioma, lymphatic
malformation)
Galactocele

Benign tumors

Fibroadenoma (simple or juvenile/giant)
Lipoma
Hamartoma
Intraductal papilloma
Juvenile papillomatosis

Malignant
tumors

Cystosarcoma phyllodes
Breast carcinoma (secretory or ductal)
Metastatic disease (lymphoma, neuroblastoma,
sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, acute leukemia)

management is recommended for most patients. If expectant management is chosen, serial exams and/or ultrasounds every 6-­12
months may be done to prove lack of progression or rapid growth.
Fibroadenomas have defined sonographic characteristics; biopsy
is not required to make the diagnosis. A subset of fibroadenomas
behave differently and can be distinguished from their routine
counterparts by rapidity of growth and excisional biopsy alone.
Juvenile fibroadenomas (or giant fibroadenomas) grow rapidly
over 3-­6 months to >5 cm and can replace the breast tissue or cause
skin necrosis. The distinction between these and phyllodes tumor
on core needle biopsy is difficult, so excisional biopsy is the recommended intervention. The only true histologic difference between
juvenile and routine fibroadenomas is hypercellularity. Surgical
excision of fibroadenomas is recommended when a mass has complex ultrasonographic signs, is >5 cm or rapidly growing, or causes
anxiety to the patient or their family. The presence of five or more
fibroadenomas in an adolescent should prompt a genetic evaluation
for PTEN pathogenic variant.
Breast cysts are common, often arising from ductal ectasia, glands
of Montgomery, or lymphatic malformations. Ultrasound is used for
diagnosis and surveillance. Simple cysts are usually self-­limited. If a
simple cyst persists, it may be aspirated with a needle. Aspirated fluid
that is clear may be discarded. Bloody fluid and other aspirated material should be sent for cytologic examination. Cysts that resolve with
aspiration should be reevaluated in 3 months by ultrasound. If they
recur, biopsy or excision should be considered.

Malignant Masses

Phyllodes tumors are classified as sarcomas and are the most
common nonepithelial tumor of the breast. They are classified as
benign, borderline, or malignant based on histopathology and are
characterized by asymmetric breast enlargement in association with
a firm, mobile, circumscribed mass. The tumor often grows rapidly
and can become quite large, mimicking a giant or juvenile fibroadenoma. The majority of these tumors have a favorable prognosis,
but malignant phyllodes can recur locally or with metastases. Excision with 1 cm margins is the preferred initial therapy in adolescent
patients, regardless of the histologic classification of the lesion. Survival at 10 years approaches 90% after complete excision.
Juvenile papillomatosis is a rare proliferative tumor that often
presents as a discrete mass. It is a marker for increased breast cancer
risk in family members, and in patients with this condition, up to 15%
may have a juvenile secretory carcinoma. Treatment of juvenile papillomatosis is total resection of the lesion with preservation of the breast.
Family members of these patients should be screened.
Primary breast carcinoma is extremely rare in adolescents. Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data from 2015–
2019 established an age-­specific rate for female invasive breast
cancer of 0.1/100,000 for ages <20 years. Although malignancy is
rare, suspicion may be raised if a lesion is enlarging, hard, immobile, and poorly circumscribed. Biopsy of lesions with suspicious
imaging findings (e.g., irregular shape or microlobulated/spiculated
margins) or progressive growth is imperative. Contrary to adults
with primary ductal carcinoma, 10-­year survival is only slightly better than 50% in adolescents.
Rather than primary breast cancer, secondary cancers or metastatic
tumors are more prevalent. Adolescents with previous therapeutic radiation to the chest or with malignancies with the potential to metastasize
to the breast should be monitored more closely for breast masses. Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common to metastasize to the breast. Other
malignancies with risk of breast metastases include neuroblastoma, melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, and Ewing sarcoma. Breast tumors also may
be the first manifestation of relapse (extramedullary) in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Those with previous radiation therapy have increased risk
of developing breast cancer at a young age and require careful ongoing
surveillance.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 588 u Breast Health 3333
Palpable breast mass, age ≤ 18
Ultrasound

Low risk1

High risk1

Symptomatic2

Asymptomatic

Surgery

OR
Observation3

Needle biopsy4

+/–
Pain control

No growth
OR
Resolution

Rapid
growth5
OR
Persistent

Continue
observation

Indeterminate
OR
Phyllodes
tumor
OR
Malignant

Benign
findings

1

Risk stratification should be
based on personal and family
cancer history, as well as
provider’s clinical judgment.
2
Symptomatology include,
but not limited to, pain,
discharge, and/or anxiety.
3
Initial 3–6 month follow-up
with repeat ultrasound.
4
Fine needle aspiration and
core needle biopsy acceptable,
per provider and institutional
experience.
5
Doubling of size or > 2 cm
increase in largest diameter
in 3–6 month period.

Surgery

Fig. 588.6 Suggested clinical care algorithm for children presenting with a palpable breast mass. (From McLaughlin CM, Gonzalez-­Hernandez J,
Bennett M, Piper HG. Pediatric breast masses: An argument for observation. J Surg Res. 2018;228:247-­252; Fig 3.)

Imaging of Breast Masses

Ultrasonography is the imaging modality of choice for palpable
abnormalities in the pediatric and adolescent breast, given the diagnostic specificity and lack of ionizing radiation. MRI may be useful in
select disease processes, but its use should be guided by a surgeon or
oncologist. Because of the dense breast tissue in this patient population, there is no role for mammography.

MANAGEMENT OF BREAST MASSES

Figure 588.6 represents management algorithms for pediatric patients
undergoing imaging for an identified breast mass. Core needle biopsy
as a diagnostic tool is very sensitive but lacks specificity in distinguishing the hypercellular stroma of a juvenile fibroadenoma from a phyllodes tumor. Core needle biopsy should be recommended only for
indeterminate masses, and based on co-decision-making between the
patient, family, and clinician. Generally, observation and ultrasound
surveillance should be the initial management for masses under 4 cm
in size and excisional biopsy considered for those >4-­5 cm.

Recommendations for Daughters of Women with
Breast Cancer
Risk Reduction

There are a limited number of things that young people can do to lower
their risk of breast cancer. The American Cancer Society recommends

regular physical activity, limiting alcohol, eliminating cigarette smoking,
and maintaining a healthy weight. Some studies have shown that breastfeeding for at least 1 year may slightly lower the breast cancer risk.

Screening Procedures

Screening mammography and/or ultrasound are not currently recommended in adolescents, regardless of family history. Routine testing
of children and adolescents for the BRCA1 and BRCA2 pathogenic
variants in families with a known history is also not typically recommended, because there are no guidelines for additional screening or
treatment at this age, and children are very unlikely to develop a cancer
related to an inherited BRCA variant.
Even in high-­risk families, development of breast cancer below the
age of 18 years is extremely rare. The American Cancer Society recommends a breast-­screening regimen including mammography and
MRI beginning at age 30 years for females with a known BRCA pathogenic variant or history of chest radiation between the ages of 10 and
30 years. Patients with an identified familial predisposition for malignancy should be referred for genetic evaluation to determine whether
and/or when screening tests should occur. Any adolescent patient with
a known primary breast malignancy should also be referred to a geneticist to be screened for pathogenic variants such as Li-­Fraumeni (p53)
or Cowden syndrome (PTEN).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3334 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

Chapter 589

Polycystic Ovary
Syndrome and Hirsutism
Heather G. Huddleston, Molly M. Quinn,
and Mark Gibson
POLYCYSTIC OVARY SYNDROME
Etiology and Definition

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common disorder of reproductive hormone function. The most widely accepted approach to
the diagnosis of PCOS in adult females is the Rotterdam criteria,
which require two out of three of the following features: oligomenorrhea, clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism, and ovaries with
a polycystic morphology on ultrasound examination (≥20 follicles
in one ovary and/or ovarian volume >10 mm3). Increased levels of
antimüllarian hormone may be a marker of ovarian dysfunction and
antral follicle count. Alternative criteria, such as the Androgen Excess
Society and National Institutes of Health, place a greater emphasis
on requiring hyperandrogenism be present (Table 589.1). The disorder, affecting 5–10% of females of reproductive age, depending on the
diagnostic criteria used, typically emerges in adolescence when a normal menstrual pattern is not established and there is clinical evidence
of androgen excess. Although not part of the diagnostic schemes,
PCOS is often accompanied by cardiovascular disease risk factors,
including insulin resistance, obesity, and dyslipidemia. Depression
and anxiety have also been found to be more prevalent in females
with PCOS.

Pathology, Pathogenesis, and Genetics

PCOS has a high concordance rate in twins, and in some studies either
epigenetic or dominant inheritance patterns are observed. Nonetheless, a consistent hereditary pattern has not been identified.
Gonadotropic dysregulation with increased luteinizing hormone
(LH) pulsatility and abnormally high ratios of circulating LH to
follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH) are found in many patients with
PCOS. Increased ovarian production of androgen in response to LH
and impaired folliculogenesis owing to lower FSH are attributed to this
gonadotropic pattern (Fig. 589.1). An increased ratio of circulating levels of LH:FSH is not a diagnostic criterion for PCOS.
Alterations in activities of steroidogenic enzymes that would explain
ovarian androgenic hyperfunction are seen in PCOS subjects, but they
are not consistently present in all patients, and it is unclear whether
these alterations are a cause of PCOS or are a consequence of ovarian
dysregulation. The size of ovarian stromal cells responsible for androgen production is increased; surgery that reduces this ovarian component (ovarian wedge resection or laparoscopic ablative procedures)
reduces circulating androgen levels and often restores ovarian cyclicity.
Patients with hyperandrogenic congenital or adult-­onset adrenal hyperplasia exhibit PCOS-­like ovarian dysfunction that can be reversed by
reducing the adrenal-­derived androgens with glucocorticoid therapy. A

primary role for androgen excess in the pathophysiology of all instances
of PCOS seems unlikely; many patients have minimal hyperandrogenism, and elimination of androgen excess (with gonadotropin-­releasing
hormone agonists) does not affect associated insulin resistance.
Measures of insulin resistance are greater and more prevalent
among females with PCOS than controls even when accounting for
body mass index (BMI). Insulin enhances ovarian androgen production directly and contributes to elevation of free testosterone levels
through its suppression of hepatic production of sex steroid–binding
globulin. Treatment with insulin sensitivity–enhancing agents that can
reduce insulin levels is associated with modest reductions in measures
of androgen excess and, in some patients, restoration of regular ovulation. The association of insulin resistance with weight might explain
the appearance of features of PCOS among some females who gain
weight, as well as the resolution of PCOS among affected females who
lose weight.

Clinical Manifestations

PCOS, a lifelong disorder, commonly manifests as puberty progresses,
but its onset can occur later, in young adulthood. Clinical hallmarks
are menstrual abnormalities and manifestations of hyperandrogenism,
but the severity of the disorder is variable (Table 589.2). Ovulation is
typically irregular or absent, and menses are consequently irregular
or absent. When menstrual bleeding does occur, it may be anovulatory bleeding, which is often heavy and/or protracted, resulting from
an extended period of unopposed endometrial growth. Alternatively,
bleeding can be relatively normal in character as a consequence of a
preceding ovulation. Protracted spells of anovulation, with accompanying unopposed estrogen, are a risk factor for endometrial hyperplasia, and more severe premalignant and frankly malignant changes may
eventuate. Hyperandrogenism is most commonly manifest as hirsutism, which is graded by the extent and locations of excessive male pattern hair growth (Fig. 589.2).
Obesity is common among individuals with PCOS. In some patients,
the expression of features of PCOS is conditional on elevation of
BMI and is reversible with weight loss. However, there is a subset of
patients who present with a lean PCOS phenotype, and thus normal
or low weight should not preclude consideration of the PCOS diagnosis. PCOS is associated with an increased prevalence of insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes independent of the tendency for many
affected patients to have an elevated BMI. Additionally, PCOS confers
a substantial and specific increase in risk for metabolic syndrome
(hyperlipidemia, insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes) in adults as well as
adolescent females after accounting for BMI.

Laboratory Findings, Diagnosis, and Differential
Diagnosis

The diagnosis of PCOS requires exclusion of disorders that would
otherwise account for hyperandrogenism and anovulation. Serum
17-­
hydroxyprogesterone should be measured when there is clear
androgen excess to screen for adult-­onset 21-­hydroxylase deficiency
(see Chapter 616). In the adolescent with amenorrhea but minimal
hyperandrogenic findings, consideration should be given to functional
hypothalamic suppression as a result of excessive exercise and/or dieting, and a careful history taken to rule out such behavioral patterns.
All patients should be clinically evaluated for Cushing syndrome, and
biochemical evaluation is indicated when clinical findings, including

Table 589.1  Diagnostic Criteria for Polycystic Ovary Syndrome in Adult Females*
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
CRITERIA
Oligoovulation or anovulation
and
Clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism

ROTTERDAM CRITERIA**
Two of three of the following:

• O
 ligoovulation or anovulation
• Polycystic ovaries on ultrasonography (20 or more
follicles in a single ovary or ovarian volume
of > 10 mm3 in one ovary)
• Clinical and/or biochemical hyperandrogenism

ANDROGEN EXCESS SOCIETY
Clinical or biochemical hyperandrogenism
and at least one of the following:
• Polycystic ovaries
or
• Oligoovulation or anovulation

**In adolescents, diagnosis should be made when both hyperandrogenism and oligomenorrhea are present, with ultrasound criteria not required/recommended.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 589 u Polycystic Ovary Syndrome and Hirsutism
Adrenal gland

Altered sex steroid levels

IGFs
FSH Insulin

LH
DHEAS

Adipose
tissue

Abnormal GnRH
secretion
Pituitary

T

A
A

A

Aromatase

17β-HSD

E1

SHBG
IGFBP-1

Skin

Hypothalamus

Insulin resistance
Insulin
Bioavailable E2
Bioavailable T
Bioavailable IGF-I

Ovary

3335

LH

FSH

5α -red

17β-HSD
E2

DHT

Liver

Peripheral and target tissues

Fig. 589.1 Pathologic mechanisms in polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). A deficient in vivo response of the ovarian follicle to physiologic quanti-

ties of follicle-­stimulating hormone (FSH), possibly because of an impaired interaction between signaling pathways associated with FSH and insulin-­
like growth factors (IGFs) or insulin, may be an important defect responsible for anovulation in PCOS. Insulin resistance associated with increased
circulating and tissue levels of insulin and bioavailable estradiol (E2), testosterone (T), and IGF-­I gives rise to abnormal hormone production in a
number of tissues. Oversecretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and decreased output of FSH by the pituitary, decreased production of sex hormone–
binding globulin (SHBG) and IGF-­binding protein 1 (IGFBP-­1) in the liver, increased adrenal secretion of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS),
and increased ovarian secretion of androstenedione (A) all contribute to the feed-­forward cycle that maintains anovulation and androgen excess in
PCOS. Excessive amounts of E2 and T arise primarily from the conversion of A in peripheral and target tissues. T is converted to the potent steroids
estradiol or DHT (dihydrotestosterone). Reductive 17β-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17β-­HSD) enzyme activity may be conferred by protein products of several genes with overlapping functions; 5α-­reductase (5α-­red) is encoded by at least two genes, and aromatase is encoded by a single
gene. GnRH, Gonadotropin-­releasing hormone. (From Bulun SE. Physiology and pathology of the female reproductive axis. In Melmed S, Auchus
RJ, Goldfine AB, eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology, 14th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2020. Fig 17-­30.)

Table 589.2  Phenotypes for Polycystic Ovary Syndrome Based on 2003 Rotterdam Criteria
SIGNS, RISKS, AND
­PREVALENCE

SEVERE PCOS

HYPERANDROGENISM AND
CHRONIC ANOVULATION

OVULATORY PCOS

MILD PCOS

Periods

Irregular

Irregular

Normal

Irregular

Ovaries on ultrasonography

Polycystic

Normal

Polycystic

Polycystic

Androgen concentrations

High

High

High

Mildly raised

Insulin concentrations

Increased

Increased

Increased

Normal

Risks

Potential long term

Potential long term

Unknown

Unknown

Prevalence in affected females

61%

7%

16%

16%

PCOS, Polycystic ovary syndrome.
From Norman RJ, Dewailly D, Legro RS, Hickey TE. Polycystic ovary syndrome. Lancet. 2007;370(9588):685-­697.

hypertension and/or characteristic exam features, are suggestive (see
Chapter 619). The two disorders have in common a tendency for overweight and varying degrees of insulin resistance and androgen excess,
but they differ in that Cushing syndrome demonstrates muscle wasting
as a result of catabolism.
Evidence for androgen excess that is rapid in onset and/or severe,
especially if masculinizing, warrants measurement of androgens (total
testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone [DHEAS]) to exclude the possibility of an androgen-­secreting adrenal or ovarian tumor. The laboratory evaluation is completed with the exclusion of hyperprolactinemia,
premature ovarian failure, and thyroid disease as causes of anovulation
by measurement of prolactin, FSH, and thyroid-­stimulating hormone,
respectively.
The diagnosis of PCOS in reproductively mature females (at
8 years post menarche) is confirmed by the constellation of oligoovulation or anovulation, androgen excess (clinically or with

biochemical confirmation), and typical ovarian morphology on
ultrasound. Various experts weigh these three features differently
and do not, as a rule, require the presence of all (see Table 589.1).
Antimüllarian hormone levels are elevated in PCOS and may be
a marker for ovarian dysfunction and cyst formation. Other recommendations have clarified that ultrasound features need not
be assessed in adolescents, because normative values for ovarian
anatomy have not been established. Indeed, young females often
exhibit the multifollicular ovaries without any evidence of hyperandrogenism or oligomenorrhea, and not all patients with PCOS by
the criteria of hyperandrogenism and ovulatory disruption exhibit
ovarian changes typical of PCOS. Therefore in the adolescent, diagnosis should only be made when both oligomenorrhea and hyperandrogenism are present and other causes of these symptoms have been
ruled out. Findings of anovulatory cycles and hyperandrogenism,
particularly acne, may accompany the normal pubertal transition.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3336 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4
1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

4

Fig. 589.2 Gender-­neutral modified Ferriman-­Gallwey (mFG) diagram. (From Grimstad F, Moyer Q, Williams CR, Kremen J. A body-­neutral and
gender-­neutral modified Ferriman-­Gallwey diagram. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2021;S1083-­318800334-­X. Fig 2.)

For this reason, it is recommended that a formal PCOS diagnosis
not be considered until at least 2 years post menarche. Adolescents
with features of PCOS before this time can be considered “at risk”
for PCOS, and a plan can be made for reevaluation in the future.
Insulin resistance is common among females with PCOS, and
although not requisite for diagnosis, it should be considered when
PCOS is identified. Adults, as well as adolescents, with hyperandrogenemia and anovulation should be evaluated for diabetes or
impaired glucose tolerance with a 2-­hour (75-­g glucose load) glucose tolerance test.

Table 589.3  Lifelong Health Complications of Polycystic
Ovary Syndrome
PRENATAL OR
CHILDHOOD

POST­
MENOPAUSAL

Menstrual irregularity
Hirsutism
Acne
Infertility
Endometrial cancer
Miscarriage
Pregnancy complications

Delayed menopause

Obesity
Impaired glucose
tolerance
Insulin resistance
Dyslipidemia
Type 2 diabetes

Obesity
Impaired glucose
tolerance
Insulin resistance
Dyslipidemia
Type 2 diabetes

Sleep apnea
Fatty liver
Depression

Cardiovascular
disease risk factors

REPRODUCTIVE
Premature
adrenarche
Early menarche

Complications and Long-­Term Outlook

Management of the features of hyperandrogenism, assistance with fertility, prevention of endometrial cancer, and reduction in the likelihood
and severity of the common accompanying risk for the metabolic syndromes are long-­term tasks for the PCOS patient and their healthcare
providers (Table 589.3). Although there is a tendency for symptoms
to ameliorate as menopause approaches, PCOS usually requires management throughout the reproductive years. Young patients should
be counseled that modern fertility management allows most affected
females to have children without great difficulty, and they should also
know that the disorder does not confer reliable protection from unintended pregnancy. Endometrial cancer can develop as early as the third
decade in females with PCOS who are not managed with progestins or
ovulation induction; thus patients should understand the importance
of long-­term strategies for endometrial protection. Impaired glucose
tolerance, type 2 diabetes, and metabolic syndrome are more common
in females with PCOS compared to weight-­matched controls. Metabolic disturbance can manifest as early as adolescence, and the prevalence increases over time. Weight control through diet and lifestyle
measures, detection and management of impaired glucose tolerance
and diabetes, and management of abnormal lipids are targets for long-­
term management.

ADOLESCENCE,
REPRODUCTIVE YEARS

METABOLIC
Abnormal fetal
growth

OTHER

From Norman RJ, Dewailly D, Legro RS, Hickey TE. Polycystic ovary syndrome. Lancet.
2007;370(9588):685-­697.

Treatment

The management of PCOS is multifaceted and depends on the specific complaints of the patient. Primary goals include management of
menstrual abnormalities, treatment of symptoms of androgen excess,
and optimization of metabolic health. Weight loss through lifestyle

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 589 u Polycystic Ovary Syndrome and Hirsutism
change, use of hormonal contraceptive agents for menstrual regulation
as well as androgen suppression, antiandrogens as adjuncts for hirsutism treatment, and insulin-­sensitizing agents are common components
of treatment.

Lifestyle Changes

Comprehensive lifestyle programs for overweight and obese adults
with PCOS aimed at fitness and weight loss can yield restoration of
normal menstrual function in some patients. Lifestyle changes also
lead to a reduction in the free androgen index, reduction in measures
of insulin resistance, and improvement in serum lipids. Limited data
show similar benefits from such interventions for obese adolescents
with PCOS. Successful weight loss programs for adolescents with
PCOS using both psychologic and nutritional counseling may result in
improved menstrual function.

Hormonal Contraceptives

Combined (estrogen and progestin) hormonal contraceptive medications are considered first-­line therapy for patients not desiring fertility (see Chapter 160). Avoidance of hyperplastic endometrial states
resulting from unopposed estrogen and management of abnormal
uterine bleeding in anovulatory episodes can be accomplished with
the use of combined hormonal contraceptives. The progestational
component inhibits endometrial proliferation, and the schedule of
pill administration predictably regulates menstrual bleeding. The
estrogenic component of the combined oral contraceptive elevates
circulating sex hormone–binding globulin (SHBG), which reduces
free and bioavailable testosterone levels. Both of the hormonal elements in oral contraceptives combine to suppress gonadotropic (particularly LH) stimulation of ovarian androgen production. DHEAS
levels, often contributory to hyperandrogenemia in PCOS, are usually decreased by combined contraceptive use. Products with less
androgenic progestational components (drospirenone, desogestrel)
may provide better relief from androgenic symptoms.
Using hormonal contraception that is well tolerated in long-­term use
is more important than using a product with a particular progestational
component. Products with reduced frequency and duration of pill-­free
intervals can provide superior androgen suppression and a welcome
decrease in the frequency of bleeding episodes. Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate for contraception, endometrial protection, and androgen suppression may be a suitable alternative to combined hormonal
contraceptives; it provides even more profound suppression of ovarian androgen production, but it does not elevate SHBG. Low-­dose
progestin-­only regimens (oral minipills, implantable progestational
contraceptives, and progestin-­releasing intrauterine devices) also provide effective endometrial protection but would be expected to provide
only partial and/or inconsistent androgen suppression and would not
elevate SHBG.
Patients without the need for management of hyperandrogenic
symptoms or contraception are often treated with periodic use of oral
progestins to induce predictable menstrual bleeding and prevent endometrial hyperplasia and malignancy. Twelve-­day courses of medroxyprogesterone acetate 10 mg daily or norethindrone acetate 5 mg daily
are effective and safe for this purpose when taken every 1-­2 months.
Oral contraceptives also provide the added benefit of contraception. Given the relative infrequency of ovulation, fertility in females
with PCOS would be expected to be reduced relative to that of their
peers, but they are still at risk for pregnancy and should be counseled
accordingly.

Metformin

Metformin is a biguanide medication used to treat type 2 diabetes,
which is its only FDA-­approved indication. It has been used in a variety of settings and with differing objectives for patients with PCOS.
Metformin exerts its principal effect by reducing hepatic production
of glucose and limiting intestinal absorption of glucose. A subset of
females with PCOS resume regular ovulation and menses when treated

3337

with metformin, obviating the need for progestational therapy to protect endometrial health or medications to induce ovulation. For some
patients, the resulting normal reproductive function is appealing
regardless of interest in fertility.
Metformin reduces insulin resistance and the levels of androgens. Its extended use can reduce the likelihood of development
of impaired glucose tolerance or the progression of impaired glucose tolerance to type 2 diabetes; these effects are not yet proven
for patients with PCOS. It should not be used in the presence of
renal or hepatic impairment. Typical dosing is 1,500-­2,000 mg/
day, achieved through gradual increments because gastrointestinal
intolerance is common. Long-­acting preparations are helpful when
gastrointestinal intolerance is a problem. The use of metformin in
the treatment of PCOS depends on the patient’s goals and preference. For the treatment of hyperandrogenic symptoms, metformin effects may be modest compared with other available agents.
There are no empirical data supporting the theoretical benefits of
long-­term use of metformin in adolescents with PCOS and obesity
compared with the outcomes achieved with weight loss and oral
contraceptive medications. Use of metformin as a first-­line agent
is favored by some experts, in part for improvement in serum measures of intermediate outcomes, and in part because of evidence
in other populations of reduced progression of insulin resistance.
There is no evidence for a long-­term benefit for clinical outcomes
of adding metformin to treatment for patients managed primarily
with oral contraceptives. For adolescents receiving metformin as a
first-­line medication, some element of progestational management
(combined contraceptives or periodic progestins) will still be necessary for those not resuming ovulatory function, and oral contraceptives may still be an important adjunct for management of clinical
hyperandrogenism and/or contraception. Metformin side effects
include nausea, emesis, and diarrhea; more serious effects include
lactic acidosis and vitamin B12 deficiency. Glucagon-like peptide
receptor agonists are being studied as a possible add on therapy to
metformin or as a single agent to treat PCOS.

Antiandrogens

Antiandrogenic medications may be added to other therapies or
used alone for the treatment of hirsutism. These agents are usually used adjunctively with ovarian hormonal suppression, in part
because of better reduction in hirsutism when antiandrogens are
combined with ovarian suppression but also to reduce the risk of
unintended embryonic or fetal exposure. The highly active androgen antagonist and progestin, cyproterone, is available in Europe
and in Canada as a single agent for treatment of hirsutism or in
combination with ethinyl estradiol as an oral contraceptive with
enhanced antiandrogenic profile. In the United States, spironolactone is the most commonly used antiandrogen. Spironolactone
antagonizes androgens at their receptor and also impairs androgen
synthesis. Doses of 100-­200 mg daily are commonly used. Other
agents that have been studied are finasteride, a 5α-­reductase inhibitor, and flutamide, a nonsteroidal and highly specific androgen
receptor antagonist. These are rarely used because of lack of evidence of superior effectiveness, cost, and, in the case of flutamide,
the potential for hepatotoxicity.

HIRSUTISM

Hirsutism is defined as abnormally increased terminal (mature, heavy,
dark) hair growth in areas of the body where hair growth is normally
androgen dependent (see Chapter 703). Its presence is a result of the
combination of the extent of androgenic stimulation and familial
regional follicle sensitivity to androgens, which varies considerably
among ethnic groups. Patients’ cosmetic concerns generally determine
whether findings of hirsutism are a matter for clinical investigation
and treatment. Hirsutism as an isolated finding is to be distinguished
from masculinization. The latter includes alteration in muscle mass,
clitoral enlargement, and voice change, generally manifesting as a rapid

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3338 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Table 589.4  Treatment of Hirsutism
SYSTEMIC THERAPIES
Suppression of androgen production
Combined oral contraceptives (ethinyl estradiol + progestin with
low androgenic activity)
Androgen blockers
Spironolactone
Finasteride
Flutamide
Cyproterone acetate (not available in the United States)
COSMETIC STRATEGIES
Temporary measures
Shaving, bleaching, chemical depilation
Permanent measures
Electrolysis
Laser therapy

Chapter 590

Gynecologic Neoplasms
and Prevention Methods
for Human Papillomavirus
Infections in Adolescents
Joan R. Tymon-­Rosario, Levent Mutlu, and
Alla Vash-­Margita
OVERVIEW OF GYNECOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES IN
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS

evolution (over months). Masculinization mandates a search for a neoplastic source of androgen. Elevations of testosterone or DHEAS commonly indicate an ovarian or adrenal androgen source, respectively;
specific imaging and occasionally selective catheterization studies are
indicated (see Chapters 590 and 617).
Hirsutism without masculinization is common. The potential
causes to consider are PCOS (when there is hyperandrogenism
and anovulation), benign functional androgen excess (measurable hyperandrogenism without anovulation), idiopathic hirsutism
(increased hair in androgen-­dependent areas without measurable
androgen excess), and adult-­onset adrenal hyperplasia. Patients can
be primarily distinguished by evidence of an ovulatory disorder by
menstrual history, and for those with absent or irregular menses, a
diagnosis of PCOS can be made. The remainder, for whom adult-­
onset adrenal hyperplasia and PCOS have been excluded, either
have normal androgen levels with enhanced end-­organ sensitivity
owing to familial or ethnic predisposition or have a functional and
benign overproduction of ovarian androgens. Measures of androgens (testosterone, DHEAS) may be normal or mildly elevated in
the latter group. Testosterone suppresses circulating sex-­steroid
binding globulin, so states of testosterone overproduction might
not be accompanied by elevated measures of total testosterone,
although estimates of “free” or “bioavailable” testosterone reveal
hyperandrogenism. Measures of unbound testosterone distinguish
idiopathic hirsutism from mild benign hyperandrogenic states;
making this distinction contributes little to patient management
and adds cost. Idiopathic hirsutism (without evidence of androgen
excess) usually responds to antiandrogen or androgen suppression
therapy similarly to hirsutism associated with elevated androgens
and anovulation (PCOS) and benign hyperandrogenism not associated with PCOS.
If hirsutism is present, and clinical evaluation excludes neoplasm, adult-­onset adrenal hyperplasia, and Cushing syndrome,
then management for symptoms of hyperandrogenism (regardless of whether measures of circulating androgens are elevated or
not) can proceed as for patients with PCOS (Table 589.4). Estrogen and progestin suppression of ovarian function, with or without added antiandrogen treatment, is the mainstay of therapy for
these patients. Androgen suppression and/or antagonism results
in gradual regression of the size and productivity of follicles in
androgen-­s ensitive areas of the face and body, and these changes
will evolve over successive and months-­long generations of hair
growth and shedding. Patients should therefore be advised that
the effects of medical therapy accrue slowly, over many months.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Cancer is the second most common cause of death in children and adolescents, surpassed only by childhood injuries. The highest death rate is
in the 5-­to 14-­year-­old age group. Although rare, gynecologic malignancies can result in long-­term sequelae such as infertility, depression,
and a poor self-­image, which may cause significant morbidity.
In children and adolescents younger than 18 years, ovarian cancer
accounts for 87.5% of gynecologic malignancies, vaginal cancer for
4.5%, cervical cancer for 3.9%, uterine cancer for 2.5%, and vulvar cancer comprises 1.6% of all gynecologic cancers.
Ovarian cancers usually manifest as an abdominal or pelvic mass
with acute or chronic lower abdominal pain and/or menstrual irregularities. The diagnostic workup includes a physical exam and laboratory tests such as a urine pregnancy test, hormone levels, and tumor
markers. The preferred initial method of imaging is transabdominal
pelvic ultrasonography. The differential diagnosis includes gynecologic
tumors, other abdominal and pelvic organ-­based tumors, and functional, physiologic, inflammatory/infectious, or pregnancy-­
related
ovarian pathology. Although the majority of ovarian neoplasms are
benign, approximately 9–33% of all pediatric or adolescent ovarian
neoplasms are malignant. Ovarian neoplasms constitute 1.3% of all
childhood malignancies but account for 60–70% of all gynecologic
malignancies in this age group. Germ cell tumors are the most common type of neoplasm. Less often, the vagina or cervix is a site of
malignant lesions in children, with a few specific tumors having their
greatest incidence in this population. Vulvar and endometrial malignancies in children and adolescents are exceedingly rare.

IMPACT OF CANCER THERAPY ON FERTILITY

The treatment of gynecologic cancer, depending on the type and extent
of disease, may include fertility-­sparing cytoreductive surgery with
adjuvant chemotherapy, definitive surgery including bilateral salpingo-­
oophorectomy, and comprehensive surgical staging, radiation, and/
or secondary salvage surgery. Fertility-­sparing surgery is defined as
unilateral salpingo-­oophorectomy, lymph node sampling, and omentectomy, whereas maximal cytoreduction includes hysterectomy and
contralateral salpingo-­oophorectomy. For malignant ovarian germ cell
tumors, the most common adolescent gynecologic malignancy, the use
of fertility-­sparing surgery, is seen as the gold standard. This approach
achieves a good prognosis, and the majority of patients achieve normal hormonal function and future pregnancies. Importantly, it does
not seem to be associated with lower progression-­free survival, overall
survival, or mortality rates compared with radical surgery.
Platinum-­based chemotherapeutic regimens are most often used for
malignant ovarian tumors. The need for chemotherapy and radiation
therapy is associated with acute ovarian failure, premature menopause,
and infertility (Table 590.1). Risk factors include older age, abdominal or spinal radiation, and certain chemotherapeutic drugs, such as

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 590 u Gynecologic Neoplasms and Prevention Methods for Human Papillomavirus Infections

3339

Table 590.1  	 Effect of Cancer Treatment on the Development of Amenorrhea
TREATMENT

AGENT/MODALITY

IMPACT

TREATMENT FOR

Protocols containing nonalkylating agents or lower levels of
alkylating agents

ABVD, CHOP, COP, multiagent
therapies for leukemia

LOWER RISK
<20% of women develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Leukemia

Protocols containing

Multiagent therapies using vincristine

VERY LOW/NO RISK
No effect on menses

Leukemia
Lymphomas

Protocols containing

Procarbazine
MOPP and BEACOPP
3 cycles >6 cycles

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Hodgkin lymphoma

Protocols containing

Temozolomide or BCNU + cranial
radiation

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Brain tumor

Abdominal or pelvic radiation

10-­15 Gy in prepubertal females
5-­10 Gy in postpubertal females

INTERMEDIATE RISK
30–70% of women develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Brain tumor
Neuroblastoma
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Hodgkin lymphoma
Spinal tumor
Wilms tumor

Whole abdominal or pelvic
radiation

>15 Gy in prepubertal females
>10 Gy in postpubertal females
>6 Gy in adult women

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Total cyclophosphamide

5 g/m2 in women >30 yr
7.5 g/m2 in women and females <20
yr

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma

Any alkylating agent + pelvic
radiation

Busulfan, carmustine,
cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide,
lomustine, melphalan, procarbazine

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Ovarian cancer
Sarcoma

Any alkylating agent + total
body irradiation

Busulfan, carmustine, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, lomustine,
melphalan, procarbazine

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Lymphomas
Myelomas
Choriocarcinoma
Ewing sarcoma, neuroblastoma

HIGH RISK
More than 80% develop
amenorrhea posttreatment

Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-­Hodgkin lymphoma
Acute myeloid leukemia
Chronic myeloid leukemia
Myeloma
Acute lymphoid lymphoma
Chronic lymphoid lymphoma
Some solid tumors (e.g., breast,
ovarian, kidney, brain)

Any cancer requiring bone
marrow transplant/stem cell
transplant

ABVD, Doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine; CHOP, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone; COP, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone; MOPP,
mechlorethamine, vincristine, prednisone, procarbazine; BEACOPP, bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, procarbazine, prednisone; BCNU, carmustine; Gy, gray.
Adapted from Female Fertility Preservation LIVESTRONG, a registered trademark of the LIVESTRONG Foundation. https://www.livestrong.org/we-­can-­help/just-­diagnosed/female-­
fertility-­preservation.

alkylating and platinum-­based agents (cisplatin, cyclophosphamide,
busulfan). Uterine irradiation is associated with infertility, spontaneous pregnancy loss, and intrauterine growth restriction. The vagina,
bladder, ureters, urethra, and rectum can also be injured by radiation.
Vaginal shortening, vaginal stenosis, urinary tract fistulas, and diarrhea are potential side effects of pelvic irradiation.
Advancements in oncologic treatments of gynecologic and systemic
tumors have led to improvements in childhood cancer survival rates.
Unfortunately, with these advances come an increase in short-­and
long-­term adverse effects, which include gonadotoxicity and infertility. Approximately 15% of all childhood cancer survivors experience
infertility, and pregnancy outcomes appear to be influenced by prior
chemotherapy and radiation treatment (see Chapter 543). Cancer survivors have an increased rate of spontaneous abortion, premature delivery, and low birthweight infants compared with their healthy siblings.
No data support an increased incidence of congenital malformations in

offspring. Individualized risk of infertility should be discussed before
gonadotoxic therapies and options for fertility preservation should be
made available to all patients, with referrals to reproductive specialists
and mental health professionals as appropriate. Multiple recommendations specifically address the pediatric population, stating that parents/
guardians should be allowed to act for and consent in the interest of
their minor children.
Mature oocyte and embryo cryopreservation are both standard of
care preservation options available to postpubertal females with ample
time before treatment to allow for ovarian stimulation (2-­6 weeks).
Ovarian tissue cryopreservation (OTC) is the only available option for
prepubertal females. OTC is also an option for fertility preservation
for postpubertal females with time-­limiting treatment plans. The safety
and feasibility of OTC and transplantation after nonsterilizing chemotherapy and in select leukemia survivors have been favorable, and there
have been over 130 live births reported after orthotopic transplantation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3340 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
of previously cryopreserved and thawed ovarian tissue as of 2017. Laparoscopic ovarian transposition can be used before radiation therapy
where a high risk of ovarian radiation exposure in its anatomic position is expected. Hormone suppression with gonadotropin-­releasing
hormone (GnRH) analogs has been investigated as a means of fertility
preservation, but evidence is lacking as to its efficacy.
Gonadotoxicity can also lead to primary ovarian insufficiency,
which is associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular complications, osteoporosis, and difficulties with sexual function. Risks
and benefits of hormone replacement therapy should be addressed
as appropriate.

A

NEONATAL AND PEDIATRIC OVARIAN CYSTS

Normal follicles or physiologic ovarian cysts can be seen by ultrasound examination of the ovaries in healthy neonates, infants,
and prepubertal females. The true incidence of neonatal cysts is
unknown, but most are physiologic. Ovarian cysts are often detected
during prenatal imaging and should be differentiated from masses
originating from the urinary or gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Ovarian
cysts that are less than 2 cm, sonolucent, and have a simple appearance on ultrasound are most likely physiologic. Simple neonatal
ovarian cysts will resolve spontaneously and should be followed with
observation. Larger cysts may be seen; in these cases, the interval to
complete resolution is usually longer. Because of the risk of ovarian torsion and resultant autoamputation of the ovary, treatment
modalities have been developed to prevent ovarian torsion, including
ultrasound-­guided aspiration, laparoscopic cystectomy, and detorsion, with the goal of ovarian preservation. Oophorectomy should
be avoided. Treatment is usually reserved for the postnatal period
unless the cyst is large enough to prevent embryonic development.
Similarly, intervention might be necessary if the cyst is large enough
to complicate delivery or if there is concern for compromise of the
other organs because of the mass effect. If a conservative approach is
chosen, serial ultrasonographic evaluation is reasonable until resolution in the prenatal and neonatal period. In the neonatal period,
aspiration is an option for cysts that are larger than 6 cm and persistent over 4 months. Surgical exploration is generally reserved for
complex, symptomatic, or enlarging cysts, with a great deal of effort
exerted to preserve the surrounding normal ovary.
In prepubertal children, ovarian cysts are rare and, if present, usually asymptomatic and hormonally inactive. However, a careful exam
is indicated because prepubertal ovarian cysts may be associated with
peripheral precocious puberty. If symptomatic, cysts might present as
an abdomino-­pelvic mass resulting in pain, constipation, or urinary
frequency. In adolescents, ovarian cysts are common and usually represent normal follicular development.
Cysts that are simple appearing, without septations or internal
echogenicity, and less than 10 cm on transabdominal ultrasound are
almost always benign, and observation is preferred (Fig. 590.1). Careful counseling and patient education should be provided for early recognition of complications related to ovarian cysts, such as cyst rupture
and ovarian torsion. Unless associated with intractable symptoms or
intraabdominal bleeding because of cyst rupture, cysts can be managed
conservatively. Large ovarian cysts pose a risk of ovarian torsion. Ovarian torsion is a surgical emergency and can happen with ovarian cysts
of any size, although the risk increases in adnexal masses larger than
5 cm. Rarely, torsion of the adnexa can occur without presence of an
ovarian cyst, which is more common in prepubertal patients.

Functional Cysts

Over the course of several menstrual cycles, a dominant follicle forms
and increases in size. After ovulation, the dominant follicle becomes
a corpus luteum that, if it bleeds, is termed a hemorrhagic corpus
luteum. These can become symptomatic owing to size or peritoneal
irritation, and they have a characteristic complex appearance on
ultrasound. Expectant and symptomatic management for a presumed
functional or hemorrhagic cyst is appropriate. Physiologic cysts are
usually ≤5 cm and resolve over the course of 6-­8 weeks or several menstrual cycles without the need for any intervention. Monophasic oral

B
Fig. 590.1 Ovarian cyst. 14-­yr-­old female with pelvic pain. A, Trans-

verse and sagittal images from a transabdominal pelvic ultrasound
demonstrate a well-­circumscribed cystic lesion in the right adnexa with
a fluid–debris level (arrows). B, Follow-­up imaging 6 weeks later demonstrates complete resolution of the cyst. (From Walters MM, Robertson
RL. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2017:186; Fig. 6.70.)

contraceptives can be used to suppress future follicular development
and prevent formation of additional cysts. When a cyst is found on
ultrasound, a pregnancy test should be obtained because an adnexal
mass on imaging could represent either a corpus luteum cyst that physiologically supports a normal pregnancy or an abnormal pregnancy
state such as an ectopic pregnancy in the adnexa.

OVARIAN NEOPLASMS
Teratomas

Ovarian teratomas are the most common pediatric ovarian neoplasm
and account for 25% of all pediatric teratomas. Aberrant migration and
differentiation of primordial germ cells from the yolk sac to the gonadal
ridge during embryogenesis is considered to be the embryologic origin
of teratomas. Ovarian teratomas are usually asymptomatic but may
become quite large and present with abdomino-­pelvic pain and a palpable mass; ovarian torsion may be the initial presenting symptom.
Ovarian teratomas are usually unilateral, but about 10% of cases are
bilateral. Mature cystic teratomas (dermoid cysts) account for more
than 95% of all teratomas. Depending on the germ layers, teratomas
can be polydermal or monodermal and may contain mature tissue of
ectodermal (skin, hair, sebaceous glands, neuroectodermal tissue),
mesodermal (muscle, bone, cartilage, fat, teeth), and/or endodermal
(thyroid, salivary, respiratory, GI) origin (Fig. 590.2). Mature teratomas are usually benign; malignant transformation is reported in less
than 2% of the cases. Although any of the components of the mature
teratoma can undergo malignant transformation, the most common
secondary neoplasm arising from mature teratoma is squamous cell
carcinoma. Teratomas have a characteristic sonographic appearance
that includes findings such as fluid-­fluid levels, Rokitansky nodules (a
solid protuberance projecting from an ovarian cyst), echogenic sebaceous material, calcification, and hyperechoic regions. On abdominal
radiograph, calcification is often a hallmark for teratomas. Ultrasound
has a high sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing dermoid cysts with
excellent diagnostic accuracy. Monodermal teratomas are rare and
contain elements originating from a single germ cell layer. Struma
ovarii is a monodermal teratoma that is composed of mature thyroid
tissue that may result in clinically overt hyperthyroidism. Ovarian carcinoid tumors are another example of a monodermal teratoma. These
rare tumors are generally associated with a mature teratoma but can
be encountered in a pure form as a monodermal teratoma in a minority of cases. Approximately 30% of the time, clinical signs of carcinoid
syndrome such as diarrhea, flushing, abdominal pain, and wheezing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 590 u Gynecologic Neoplasms and Prevention Methods for Human Papillomavirus Infections

3341

include collection of ascites and pelvic washings, examination of peritoneal surfaces with biopsy and excision of any nodules, examination
of lymph nodes with sampling of any firm/enlarged lymph nodes,
inspection/palpation of omentum with biopsy of any abnormal areas,
and unilateral oophorectomy with preservation of the fallopian tube if
uninvolved. It should be emphasized that grossly normal lymph nodes
on palpation and normal appearing omentum may not need to be routinely removed. Stage I and grade 1 ITs can be managed with serial
monitoring of associated tumor markers and pelvic imaging after initial fertility-­sparing surgery. Grade 2-­3 or stage II-­IV IT are typically
treated with systemic treatment in the form of the BEP chemotherapy
regimen (bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatin).

Cystadenomas

Fig. 590.2 Mature teratoma. 12-­yr-­old female with increasing ab-

dominal girth. Transabdominal pelvic ultrasound image demonstrates a
large pelvic mass with cystic and solid components. There is a rounded
echogenic area in the center of the large, hypoechoic cystic portion. A
central dense echogenic focus (yellow arrow) demonstrates posterior
acoustic shadowing, consistent with calcification. Tiny linear echogenic
foci (white arrow) are also associated with the central echogenic mass,
representing hair. This constellation of findings is seen with a mature
teratoma or dermoid cyst. (From Walters MM, Robertson RL. Pediatric
Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017: 187;
Fig. 6.71.)

may be present because of vasoactive amines secreted by the carcinoid
tumors.
Benign teratomas can be observed if they are asymptomatic and
small (<5 cm). However, when they are large or symptomatic, they
should be surgically resected to prevent torsion or rupture, with preservation of the surrounding healthy ovarian parenchyma. Cystectomy is the treatment of choice, and minimally invasive techniques
are increasingly used. Rupture of the cyst should be avoided as much
as possible because of concerns for chemical peritonitis secondary to
fatty acids of a teratoma and the rare risk of inadvertent upstaging of
an occult carcinoma. During surgery, both ovaries should be evaluated for lesions. Intraoperative concern for a malignant lesion should
prompt an evaluation of both the gross specimen and frozen section by
pathology because malignant transformation of mature teratomas can
occasionally occur.
An immature teratoma (IT) of the ovary is an uncommon tumor,
accounting for <1% of ovarian teratomas. In contrast to the mature cystic teratoma, which is encountered most often during the reproductive
years but occurs at all ages, IT has a specific age incidence, occurring
most commonly in the first 2 decades of life. IT contain cells originating from three germ cell layers, but in contrast to mature teratomas,
these elements have varying degrees of maturation. IT are histologically separated into three categories based on the proportion of the
immature neural elements. Grade 3 IT have the highest percentage of
immature neural elements, which correlates with the greatest risk of
extraovarian spread. The presence of a yolk sac component also confers
a higher risk of extraovarian spread. Clinically, IT present similarly to
mature teratomas with pelvic pain or a mass. There is an association of
dermoid tumors with neural elements and anti–N-­methyl-­d-­aspartase
receptor (anti-­NMDAR) encephalitis. Patients may present with flu-­
like symptoms and progress to psychiatric and cognitive symptoms,
autonomic instability, and seizure activity (see Chapter 638). The sonographic appearance of IT is nonspecific but is typically a heterogenous,
partially solid mass with coarse calcifications.
Although the data are scant in the pediatric population, the stage
and grade of the IT ultimately determines the treatment approach. Surgical staging for germ cell tumors in the pediatric population may differ from the adult population, and surgical staging in pediatric patients

Serous, mucinous, and mixed serous/endometrioid or mucinous/
endometrioid cystadenomas are the second most common benign
ovarian tumor in adolescents, representing 10–28% of adolescent
tumors (Fig. 590.3). These tumors are usually thin walled, cystic,
and may be associated with mild elevation of tumor markers such
as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA-­125, and CA 19-­9, but high
levels of these markers should raise suspicion for malignancy. These
cystic lesions can become very large, yet, with care, these tumors can
be resected, preserving normal ovarian tissue for future reproductive
potential. Recurrence rates may be as high as 9%, and thus patients
and providers may choose to continue surveillance postoperatively
with pelvic ultrasound.

Endometriomas

Endometriosis is a syndrome defined by the presence of ectopic
endometrial tissue usually located within the pelvis and abdomen but
outside of the uterus. The principal clinical symptoms in adolescents
consist of severe menstrual pain and pelvic pain but may also include
abnormal uterine bleeding and GI, genitourinary, or constitutional
symptoms. Diagnosis is often delayed, and a high clinical suspicion
should be maintained. Although endometriosis has a variable presentation, it is associated with endometriomas in approximately 17–44% of
adolescent cases; they may be unilateral or bilateral. Endometriomas
(chocolate cysts) form when collections of old blood and hemosiderin deposit within an endometrium-­lined cyst within or on the ovary.
They have a typical homogeneous “ground glass” echogenic appearance
on ultrasound and are more common in adults than in adolescents.
Conservative management (suppressive therapy with ovulation suppression, nonsteroidal anti­inflammatory drugs, combined oral contraceptives, or progestin therapy) is recommended for adolescents.
An ovarian-­sparing cystectomy should be performed if conservative
care fails to control the symptoms or the size of the endometrioma
is concerning for torsion. Recurrence of endometriosis occurs more
commonly in adolescents than adults, and future fertility is associated
with stage of disease. Early diagnosis and initiation of menstrual suppression with estrogen-­progesterone, progesterone-­only formulations,
GnRH agonist, or GnRH antagonist may prevent progression of the
disease.

Pelvic Inflammatory Disease and Tuboovarian
Abscess

Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) complicated by a tuboovarian
abscess (TOA) should be considered in a sexually active adolescent
with an adnexal mass and pain on examination (see Chapter 163). PID
is a spectrum of upper genital tract inflammation and includes some
combination of endometritis, salpingitis, and TOA. Rarely, TOA can
occur in nonsexually active adolescents, particularly in association
with obstructive Müllerian anomalies, ruptured appendicitis, obesity,
and severe constipation. Patients with PID and TOA typically exhibit
fever with leukocytosis, cervical motion, uterine or adnexal tenderness, vaginal discharge, nausea, peritoneal signs, and abnormal vaginal
bleeding. TOAs are usually demonstrated on transvaginal ultrasound,
but pelvic CT imaging may be used for uncertain cases. Treatment
of PID with TOA consists of inpatient administration of intravenous (IV) antibiotics. After 48-­72 hours of treatment with antibiotics

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3342 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

Fig. 590.3 Serous cystadenoma and mucinous

cystadenoma. A and B, 20-­
yr-­
old female with
pelvic pain. A, Transverse ultrasound and (B)
axial T2 fat-­
saturated magnetic resonance images (MRIs) demonstrate a complex cystic mass
with septations in the left adnexa (arrows). This
was removed and found to be a serous cystadenoma. C and D, 15-­yr-­old female with pelvic
pain. C, Transverse ultrasound and (D) axial T2
fat-­
saturated MRIs demonstrate a cystic, septated mass posterior to the uterus. After surgical
resection, pathology confirmed a mucinous cystadenoma. Note that the imaging appearances
of serous and mucinous cystadenoma are similar.
A specific diagnosis is difficult to discern based
on imaging alone. (From Walters MM, Robertson
RL. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017; 188: Fig. 6.72.)

C
A

alone, patients with TOAs who do not respond or who worsen should
undergo imaging-­guided abscess drainage. Conservative management
with IV and then oral antibiotics and/or image-­guided drainage is recommended as long as the patient continues to improve. TOAs that are
large (>7-­8 cm in the largest diameter) are associated with the need for
surgical intervention and/or radiologically guided drainage. Clinical
deterioration is an indication for surgical exploration, and a familiarity with bowel surgery is important with any attempt at resection of
a pelvic abscess because of the challenges of encountering anatomic
distortion, other organ involvement, and friable tissue planes.

Adnexal Torsion

D

B

Adnexal torsion of the ovary and/or fallopian tube is the fifth most
common gynecologic emergency and occurs more often in children
and adolescents than in adults. If ovarian torsion is suspected, timely
surgical intervention is necessary to preserve ovarian function and
future fertility. About 60% of ovarian torsions are on the right side;
this is possibly because the right utero-­ovarian ligament is longer than
the left and/or due to the protective effect of the descending colon
to the left adnexa. The most common presentation is sudden-­onset
abdominal pain, which is typically intermittent and nonradiating, with
associated nausea and vomiting. Abdominal tenderness is common
on physical exam and may be accompanied by peritoneal signs. Ultrasound with Doppler is the imaging modality of choice (Fig. 590.4).
In adnexal torsion, ovarian venous flow is obstructed, and the fallopian tube and/or ovary become enlarged. Pelvic ultrasound findings
include an edematous appearance of the ovary with subsequent hyper-­
echogenicity, increase in size, “whirlpool” sign (twisted vascular pedicle of the ovary), and peripherally displaced follicles. Doppler studies
in the evaluation of torsion are limited because of low sensitivity, and
the presence of arterial flow does not rule out torsion. Therefore Doppler flow alone should not guide clinical decision-­making. Prompt
surgical intervention (i.e., diagnostic laparoscopy and laparoscopic
ovarian detorsion) is essential to preserve ovarian function. Appearance of the ovary during surgery is not a reliable indicator for ovarian
viability as even devascularized-­appearing ovaries during laparoscopy
have been reported to regain normal perfusion and function in several days. The goal of surgery should be to preserve the ovary regardless of the color and time from onset of symptoms to intervention. A

torsed ovary should not be removed in adolescents unless it is severely
necrotic and is disintegrating.
Although adnexal torsion may occur in individuals with normal
ovaries, torsion occurs more commonly in adnexa enlarged by cystic
changes or ovarian neoplasms. The rate of malignancy among premenarchal adolescents with ovarian torsion ranges from 0.4–5%. If an
ovarian cyst is easily identified at the time of detorsion, it is reasonable to proceed with concomitant cystectomy; however, it should be
noted that the concomitant cystectomy could be challenging because
of the friable edematous ovary, which can result in ovarian damage and
bleeding leading to oophorectomy. Given that most cysts are benign,
drainage of the cyst’s fluid is reasonable, and repeat ultrasound in 6-­12
weeks usually demonstrates resolution of the cyst. Another approach
may include detorsion and second-­stage surgery at delayed interval for
cystectomy. Oophoropexy is controversial, and the two most compelling reasons are the absence of a contralateral ovary and a history of
recurrent ovarian torsion. Initiation of ovarian suppression is reasonable to prevent recurrent ovarian cysts.

OVARIAN MALIGNANCIES

Ovarian cancer is very uncommon in children; only 1.3% of all ovarian cancers are diagnosed in patients < 20 years old. Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) age-­adjusted incidence rates for
2016–2020 are 1.35/100,000 for females 15–19 years; mortality rates for
this age group are 0.05/100,000.

Germ Cell Tumors

Germ cell tumors are the most common ovarian malignancy and
originate from primordial germ cells that develop into a number of
heterogeneous tumor types. Dysgerminomas are the most common
malignant germ cell tumor of the ovary and have the best prognosis
(Table 590.2). They may contain syncytiotrophoblastic cells that produce alpha-­fetoprotein (AFP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), making these serum proteins useful tumor markers for monitoring disease
activity during surveillance (Table 590.3). Because of rapid growth
and expansion, dysgerminomas may present as large abdomino-­pelvic
masses, and hemoperitoneum may result due to capsular rupture. Dysgerminomas are the most common bilateral ovarian germ cell tumor,
occurring bilaterally in 10–15% of patients. Yolk sac tumors, also

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 590 u Gynecologic Neoplasms and Prevention Methods for Human Papillomavirus Infections

A

B

3343

C

Fig. 590.4 Ovarian torsion. 15-­yr-­old female with acute-­onset pelvic pain. A, Sagittal and transverse transabdominal pelvic ultrasound images

demonstrate a rounded appearance of the right ovary, which is displaced medially and positioned posterior to the uterus. There is peripheralization
of the ovarian follicles. B, Power Doppler imaging shows no demonstrable flow within the ovarian parenchyma. C, Transverse image of the pelvis
shows marked asymmetric enlargement of the right ovary (RTO) in comparison with the normal left ovary (LTO). This patient went to surgery, and
right ovarian torsion was confirmed. UT, Uterus. (From Walters MM, Robertson RL. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier,
2017; 189: Fig. 6.74.)

Table 590.2  Malignant Ovarian Tumors in Children and
Adolescents
OVERALL 5-­YR
SURVIVAL

TUMOR

CLINICAL FEATURES

GERM CELL TUMORS
Dysgerminoma

85%

10–20% bilateral
Most common ovarian
malignancy
Gonadal dysgenesis/
androgen insensitivity
Sensitive to chemotherapy/
radiation

Immature teratoma

97–100%

Endodermal sinus
tumor

80%

Almost always large (>15 cm)
Schiller-­Duval bodies

Choriocarcinoma

30%

Rare
Can mimic ectopic
pregnancy

Embryonal carcinoma

25%

Endocrinologic symptoms
(precocious puberty)
Highly malignant

Gonadoblastoma

100%

Primary amenorrhea
Virilization
45,X or 45,X/46,XY mosaicism

SEX CORD STROMAL TUMORS
Juvenile granulosa
92%
stroma cell tumor

All three germ layers
present

Produce estrogen
Menstrual irregularities
Isosexual precious
pseudopuberty
Call-­Exner bodies rare

Sertoli-­Leydig cell
tumor

70–90%

Virilization in 40%
Produce testosterone

Lipoid cell tumors

∼80%

Rare heterogeneous group
with lipid-­filled parenchyma

Gynandroblastoma

90% or greater

Rare low-­grade mixed
tumors that produce either
estrogen or androgen

referred to as endodermal sinus tumors, clinically present similarly
to dysgerminomas with a rapidly enlarging pelvic mass and associated
abdominal pain. Schiller Duval bodies are pathognomonic on pathology and contain a central blood vessel surrounded by cuboidal tumor
cells. AFP is a useful marker for monitoring response to treatment and
for surveillance. Immature teratomas and yolk sac tumors are more
aggressive malignancies than dysgerminomas. Embryonal carcinomas

are a relatively undifferentiated product of the primordial germ cells
and are one of the most malignant germ cell tumors of the ovary. They
may secrete β-­hCG and AFP. Gonadoblastomas are almost always
associated with chromosomal abnormalities; therefore chromosomal
analysis is essential. Polyembryoma is a very aggressive ovarian malignancy and contains embryoid bodies. The treatment for stage Ia dysgerminomas and stage I immature teratomas is resection. For stage Ic
and higher, treatment is surgical excision followed by postoperative
chemotherapy. Radiotherapy may be administered for disease recurrence in dysgerminomas, but it is not included in routine treatment.
For unresectable tumors or for patients who cannot undergo surgery,
neoadjuvant chemotherapy is an option. Recurrences are treated with
chemotherapy. Germ cell tumors may recur in up to 10% of cases, and
thus yearly follow-­up ultrasound is recommended.

Sex-­Cord Stromal Tumors

Sex-­cord stromal tumors (SCSTs) originate from the stromal component of the gonads and include benign thecomas and fibromas, as well
as malignant Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumors and juvenile granulosa cell
tumors. Individuals with Peutz-­Jeghers syndrome are at increased risk
for developing SCSTs. SCSTs clinically present as an abdomino-­pelvic
mass, pain, and symptoms of excess sex steroid hormone production,
such as hirsutism, virilization, and heterosexual or isosexual precocious
puberty. When an SCST is suspected, serum levels of inhibin B, AFP,
estradiol and testosterone should be obtained. SCSTs usually present as
a unilateral solid mass on imaging, but some degree of necrosis could
lead to a heterogenous appearance (Figs 590.5 and 590.6).
Most juvenile granulosa cell tumors have an intact capsule and
therefore are associated with a good prognosis; however, in the case
of capsular rupture or invasion, they potentially have an aggressive
course. Juvenile granulosa cell tumors are usually associated with
excess estrogen and precocious puberty in prepubertal females.
Approximately 20% of the SCSTs in the pediatric population are
Sertoli-­L eydig cell tumors, which may be associated with clinical
signs and symptoms of androgen excess. The DICER1 pathogenic
variant is associated with Sertoli-­Leydig cell tumors, and the presence
of the variant increases the risk of metachronous tumor in the contralateral ovary. Karyotype and referral to genetics is recommended
for patients with SCSTs.

Epithelial Ovarian Cancers

Epithelial ovarian cancers are less common than germ cell tumors in
the pediatric and adolescent population, comprising only 12.4% of
ovarian malignancies in this group. Borderline ovarian tumors are
similarly exceedingly rare in adolescents. Individuals with BRCA1 and
BRCA2 pathogenic variants are at higher risk of developing epithelial
ovarian cancer at younger ages compared with females without BRCA
variants. Similarly, low-­grade epithelial ovarian carcinomas tend to
occur at younger ages compared with high-­grade ovarian carcinomas. Common presenting symptoms include dysmenorrhea, abdominal pain, abdominal distention, nausea and vomiting, and vaginal

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3344 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Table 590.3

Serum Tumor Markers

TUMOR

CA-­125

Epithelial tumor

+

Immature teratoma

+

AFP

β-­HCG

LDH

+

Dysgerminoma
+

Embryonal carcinoma

+

Choriocarcinoma

T

INHIBIN

MIS

VEGF

+
+

Endodermal sinus tumor

E2

+

+

DHEA
+

+

+

+

Mixed germ cell

+

Granulosa cell tumor

+

+

+

+

Sertoli-­Leydig
Gonadoblastoma

+

Theca-­fibroma

+
+

+

+

+

+

+
+

AFP, α-­Fetoprotein; CA-­125, cancer antigen 125; DHEA, dehydroepiandrostenedione; E2, estradiol; β-­hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; T, testosterone; MIS, Müllerian-­inhibiting substance; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

Fig. 590.5 Complex 13.1 × 8.1 × 10.6 cm solid mass with smaller

cystic foci, arising from the right ovary. Final pathology demonstrated
juvenile granulosa cell tumor. (Image courtesy Alla Vash-­Margita, MD.)

discharge; CA-­125 is almost always elevated. Treatment involves surgical salpingo-­oophorectomy, pelvic washings, and biopsies of suspicious
omental, peritoneal, and lymph node lesions, with adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) stage II-­IV disease. Given the young age of this population,
although this is not the standard of care for adult patients, fertility-­
sparing surgery is recommended for stage I cancer to conserve the contralateral ovary and uterus if they appear normal. Data suggest that in
patients with early-­stage disease, such an approach with appropriate
surgical staging results in optimal outcomes but is not recommended
for stage II-­IV disease due to the high rate of recurrence. The number
of term pregnancies and use of oral combined hormonal contraceptive pills decrease the risk of invasive epithelial ovarian cancer. Young
females with a family history of ovarian cancer should consider the
use of long-­term oral combined hormonal contraceptive pills for the
preventive benefits when pregnancy is not being sought.

UTERINE MALIGNANCIES

Uterine malignancies account for 2.5% of all gynecologic malignancies
of children and adolescents less than 18 years of age. The most common types are sarcomas (34%), followed by adenocarcinomas (34%)

and squamous cell carcinomas (10%). Rhabdomyosarcomas are the
most common type of soft tissue sarcoma occurring in patients <20
years of age (see Chapter 549). They can develop in any organ or tissue
in the body except bone, and roughly 3% originate from the uterus or
vagina. Of the various histologic subtypes, embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas in the female patient most often occur in the genital tract of
infants or young children. They are rapidly growing entities that can
cause the tumor to be expelled through the cervix, with subsequent
complications such as uterine inversion or large cervical polyps. Irregular vaginal bleeding may be another presenting clinical symptom.
They are defined histologically by the presence of mesenchymal cells
of skeletal muscle in various stages of differentiation intermixed with
myxoid stroma. A genetic link has been found between Li-­Fraumeni
cancer susceptibility syndrome, Beckwith-­
Wiedemann syndrome,
pleuropulmonary blastoma, Costello syndrome, Noonan syndrome,
and neurofibromatosis type I. Treatment recommendations are based
on protocols coordinated by the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study
Group and consist of a multimodal approach including radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Vincristine, Adriamycin-­D, and cyclophosphamide (VAC) with or without radiation therapy make up the first line
of treatment. Intensity-­modulated radiation therapy and proton beam
radiotherapy are used to reduce the therapy burden and long-­term toxicity. Resection rates are very low because of the risk of losing the form
and function of local tissue; chemotherapy with restrictive surgery and
adjunctive irradiation has enabled many patients to retain the uterus
while achieving excellent long-­term survival rates.
Leiomyosarcomas and leiomyomas are extremely rare, occurring in
<2 in 10 million individuals in the pediatric and adolescent age-­groups,
although their numbers are increasing among pediatric patients with
AIDS. They usually involve the spleen, lung, or GI tract, but they could
also originate from uterine smooth muscle. Epstein-­Barr virus pathogenesis has been shown in AIDS and solid-­organ transplant patient
populations (see Chapter 301). Despite treatment that demands complete surgical resection (and chemotherapy for the sarcomas), they
tend to recur frequently.
Endometrial stromal sarcoma and endometrial adenocarcinoma
of the uterine corpus are extremely rare in children and adolescents. A
comprehensive review described 19 cases of endometrial cancer (EC)
among adolescent females younger than 21 years in which five subjects (26.3%) had a genetic condition (Cowden syndrome and Turner
syndrome). This emphasizes the consideration of genetic evaluation in
very young patients with EC. In most cases, patients presented with
abnormal uterine bleeding and had associated comorbidities such as
obesity and polycystic ovary syndrome. Standard of care for treatment
of EC consists of hysterectomy, removal of both ovaries and fallopian
tubes and surgical staging, followed by adjunctive radiotherapy and/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 590 u Gynecologic Neoplasms and Prevention Methods for Human Papillomavirus Infections

A

B

D

C

or chemotherapy as indicated by final pathology and stage. In young
patients who desire childbearing, fertility-­sparing approaches with
preservation of the uterus have been increasingly utilized. Per National
Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, candidates for
this approach are patients with grade 1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma
on dilation and curettage, patients with disease confined to endometrium by MRI (preferred imaging modality) or ultrasound, absence
of metastatic disease on imaging, and no contraindications to medical therapy or pregnancy. Patients should undergo counseling that
fertility-­sparing options are not standard of care for the treatment of
endometrial carcinoma. Existing data on hormonal therapy come from
observational studies and have variable rates of outcomes. Although
there is no standard follow-­up protocol, patients with EC treated with
hormonal therapies should be reexamined with endometrial sampling
every 3-­6 months.

VAGINAL MALIGNANCIES

Vaginal tumors are rare with a variable clinical presentation that may
include abdomino-­pelvic pain, an abdominal mass, bloody vaginal
discharge, genital ulceration, or tissue protruding from the vagina.
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common vaginal malignancy followed by germ cell tumor (GCT) and clear cell
adenocarcinoma (CCA). The management of pediatric vaginal tumors
consists of neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by local control with
surgery or radiotherapy.
Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) or sarcoma botryoides typically arises in the anterior wall of the vagina or within the wall of the
bladder and presents as an edematous grapelike mass protruding from
the vagina. Overall, RMS arising in the female genital tract accounts for
less than 4% of all pediatric RMS. Approximately 90% of these sarcomas
present before age 5 years. Embryonal RMS of the vagina is managed
with multimodality treatment. A series of Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study Group (IRSG) reports demonstrated survival rates in
excess of 85% employing the use of combination chemotherapy treatment with vincristine, actinomycin-­D, and cyclophosphamide (VAC)
and wide excision with or without adjuvant radiation treatment. This
approach spares most patients from exenterative surgery. Because of
the high rates of local recurrences in patients who did not receive radiation, the Soft Tissue Sarcoma committee of the Children’s Oncology

3345

Fig. 590.6 Sertoli-­
Leydig cell tumor. 2-­yr-­old female with a palpable
pelvic mass and secondary sex characteristics. A, Transabdominal pelvic
ultrasound demonstrates a complex
cystic, septated mass, with a solid
component posteriorly (arrow). B,
Contrast-­
enhanced computed tomography shows a predominantly
cystic mass, with an enhancing mural nodule along the posterior margin (arrow). C, T2-­weighted and D,
contrast-­
enhanced magnetic resonance images in a different patient
demonstrate a T2 hyperintense lesion in the pelvis, with enhancing
internal solid components noted
after contrast administration (arrow).
(From Walters MM, Robertson RL.
Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites,
4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017;
188: Fig. 6.73.)
Group recommends local radiation treatment unless potential toxicity
is considered unacceptable.
Endodermal sinus tumors or yolk sac tumors are the most common subtype of pediatric germ cell tumor of the vagina but are still
quite rare. These tumors present almost exclusively in children under
the age of 3 years with vaginal bleeding. Typically, patients have a
markedly elevated serum AFP, which can be used to monitor treatment
effect and disease recurrence. Management involves combination of
surgery and chemotherapy (either carboplatin/etoposide/bleomycin,
BEP regimen, or VAC regimen). Unfortunately, survival rates are low
despite treatment.
There is an increased incidence of clear cell adenocarcinoma (CCA)
of the vagina in young females related to in utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) during the first 16 weeks of pregnancy. The suggested
mechanism of carcinogenesis involves the retention of nests of abnormal cells of Müllerian duct origin that, after stimulation by endogenous
hormones during puberty, are promoted into adenocarcinomas. Most
cases involve the anterior upper third of the vaginal wall. Treatment
of CCA of the vagina includes a surgery and/or radiation treatment
depending on the extent of disease. Fortunately, the incidence of CCA
of the vagina has decreased since the practice of prescribing DES during pregnancy has been eliminated.

VULVAR MALIGNANCIES

Pediatric vulvar malignancies are rare. Patients typically present with
an ulcerated or raised lesion and/or a mass. It is imperative that any
concerning vulvar lesion be biopsied and submitted for pathologic
evaluation. Vulvar malignancies that have been described in the literature include invasive squamous cell carcinomas, yolk sac tumors, Ewing
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (ES/PNET), and melanomas. Each of these entities make up approximately 10% of reported
cases. Cases of pediatric vulvar squamous cell carcinoma include those
lesions that are human papillomavirus (HPV)-­mediated and HPV-­
independent. Possible risk factors include HPV infection, immunosuppression, Fanconi anemia, and lichen sclerosis. Extragonadal germ
cell tumors involving the vulva are very uncommon, and the leading hypothesis behind their pathogenesis is possible aberrant germ
cell migration along the gubernaculum. These are aggressive tumors,
and treatment options include various combinations of excisional

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3346 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood

Negative for
intraepithelial
lesion

Not
satisfactory
for
evaluation

Repeat Pap in
3 years

Repeat Pap
after 2–4
months

ASC-US

HPV
unknown

LSIL

Repeat Pap in
12 months
HPV not
acceptable

HPV
acceptable

Negative Pap

HPV
positive

Repeat Pap in
3 years

Repeat Pap in
12 months

HSIL

HPV
negative

Negative Pap
ASC-US
or LSIL

Repeat Pap in
3 years

Repeat Pap in
12 months

Negative × 2

Routine
screening

≥ ASC

ASC-H
HSIL

AIS
AGC

Colposcopy

Colposcopy
and endo
curettage

Colposcopy

Management
per ASCCP
guideline

Expert
management
per ASCCP
guideline

Management
per ASCCP
guideline

Fig. 590.7 Algorithm for the management of Pap smear results in women between age 21-­24. AIS, adenocarcinoma in situ; AGC, atypical glan-

dular cells; ASC, atypical squamous cells; ASCCP, American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology; ASC-H, atypical squamous cells that
cannot exclude HSIL; ASC-US, atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance; LSIL, low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; HPV, human
papilloma virus; HSIL, high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (From Trotman GE, Vash-­Margita A, Kahn JA, et al. Human papillomavirus infection and cervical cancer screening and prevention in adolescents. In: Emans SJ, Laufer MR, Di Vasta DP, eds. Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2020; 330–348: Fig 20.9.)

procedures and neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy. Malignant
melanoma of the vulva represents 2.4–10% of all vulvar malignancies,
second to invasive squamous cell carcinomas in frequency. Early-­stage
melanoma treatment involves surgical excision followed by possible
radiation treatment. Treatment of advanced stage melanoma involves
systemic chemotherapy and/or targeted treatment agents such as
checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy. Rhabdomyosarcomas are the
most common vulvar sarcomas reported in pediatric patients. The second most common sarcoma of the vulva in pediatric patients is ES/
PNET. Management of both vulvar sarcomas includes surgical excision, multi-­agent chemotherapy, and radiation treatment. ES/PNET
cases often present in the advanced stage and have a poor prognosis.
Condyloma acuminata are common, raised, verrucous lesions
of the vulva that result from squamous cell proliferation associated
with HPV infection (most common genotypes HPV 6 and 11). Prevention of HPV infection and subsequent formation of condyloma
acuminata has been achieved through HPV vaccination. In young
children with condyloma acuminata, sexual abuse must be ruled out.

These lesions are benign and can spontaneously regress. If lesions
are bothersome, treatment modalities consist of topical podophyllin resin, imiquimod, trichloroacetic acid, local cryotherapy, electrocautery, excision, and laser ablation. Imiquimod is approved by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for individuals 12
years of age and above.

CERVICAL MALIGNANCIES AND THEIR
PREVENTION

In 2020, cervical cancer accounted for an estimated 604,000 new cancer cases and 342,000 deaths worldwide, making it the fourth most
common cancer in females of all ages. From 2016 to 2020, the United
States age-­adjusted incidence of cervical cancer in females under age
20 was <0.1 per 100,000. The adolescent population is at greatest risk
of HPV infection, which predisposes them to development of cervical
cancer because about half of HPV infections occur before the age of
24. Thus prevention of initial infection in the adolescent population is
critical to decreasing cervical cancer rates.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 591 u Vulvovaginal and Müllerian Anomalies
Primary prevention of HPV infection includes vaccination before
the onset of sexual activity with the HPV vaccine. The HPV vaccine
is approved for males and females ages 9-­26. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends two doses of the HPV
9-­valent vaccine for patients before age 15 years (typically between
ages 11-­12) given 6-­12 months apart (see Chapter 215). For those initiating the vaccine series at 15 years of age or older, three doses of the
HPV vaccine should be given at 0, 1-­2, and 6 months. Three doses are
also recommended for patients who are immunocompromised (i.e.,
solid organ transplant recipient, HIV infection). Children with a history of sexual abuse should start immunization at age 9. In 2018, the
FDA approved the use of the HPV 9-­valent vaccine to include adults
age 27-­45 years; while the vaccine is not routinely recommended
in this group, it may be given after shared clinical decision-making
between a patient and their healthcare provider. The HPV vaccine
can be administered despite prior infection with HPV. Cervical cancer screening via Papanicolaou (Pap) testing and HPV co-­testing
are important secondary prevention strategies. ACOG recommends
cervical cancer screening for females starting at age 21 years in
immunocompetent females regardless of onset of penetrative vaginal
intercourse or primary prevention with HPV vaccination. Separate
guidelines describe cervical cancer screening recommendations for
immunocompromised individuals. Briefly, sexually active immunocompromised adolescents (such as solid organ or hematopoietic stem
cell transplant recipients, patients with inflammatory bowel disease
on immunosuppressive therapy, and patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus) should start screening 1 year after of onset of sexual
activity and thereafter annually for 3 years. If consecutive screening
is negative, patients may follow the guidelines for immunocompetent females. HIV positive patients should start screening at age 21
regardless of sexual activity. Additionally, condom use, limiting the
number of sexual partners, and smoking cessation are recommended
to lower the risk for cervical cancer.
Because of the high prevalence of HPV infection in the adolescent
population and because HPV-­associated lesions typically regress, HPV
screening should be not done before age 21 years in immunocompetent
patients. If an inadvertent HPV test is done in adolescents, the results
should not be acted on. Guidelines on management of the abnormal
results of cervical cancer screening (Pap smear) for females age 21-­24
are shown in Figure 590.7. Overall, data shows that prevention strategies such as widespread implementation of HPV vaccine translates into
reduced incidence of cervical cancer in the future. Pediatric providers
should educate patients and caregivers about benefits of the HPV vaccine and offer it at the recommended age.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 591

Vulvovaginal and
Müllerian Anomalies

Table 591.1  Congenital Müllerian Anomalies
MÜLLERIAN ANOMALY

DESCRIPTION

Agenesis

Absence of uterus, cervix, and upper
portion of vagina

Hypoplasia

Incomplete development of uterus,
cervix, and upper portion of vagina

Unicornuate uterus

One cervix and one uterine horn, the
result of failure of one Müllerian
duct to descend

Septate uterus

Septum dividing the uterus, partially
or completely

Didelphic uterus

Two cervices, each associated with
one uterine horn

Bicornuate uterus

One cervix associated with two
uterine horns

OHVIRA (obstructed
hemivagina and ipsilateral
renal anomaly)

Double uterus with unilateral
obstructed hemivagina and
ipsilateral renal agenesis

CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED
WITH MÜLLERIAN
ANOMALIES

DESCRIPTION

Hydrocolpos

Accumulation of mucus or
nonsanguineous fluid in the vagina

Hematocolpos

Accumulation of blood in the vagina

Hematometra

Accumulation of blood in the uterus

Hydrosalpinx

Accumulation of serious fluid in the
fallopian tube, often a result of
pyosalpinx

Table 591.2  Genetic Conditions Associated with Müllerian
Anomalies
MODE OF
INHERITANCE
Autosomal
dominant

SYNDROME

ASSOCIATED
MÜLLERIAN DEFECT

Camptobrachydactyly

Longitudinal vaginal
septum

Hand-­foot-­genital

Incomplete Müllerian
fusion

Denys-­Drash

Persistent Müllerian duct
derivatives

McKusick-­Kaufman

Vaginal atresia,
transverse vaginal
septum

Johanson-­Blizzard

Longitudinal vaginal
septum

Renal-­genital-­middle
ear anomalies

Vaginal atresia

Fraser

Incomplete Müllerian
fusion

Persistent Müllerian
duct

Persistent Müllerian duct
derivatives

Urioste syndrome

Persistent Müllerian duct
derivatives

Polygenic/
multifactorial

Mayer-­Rokitansky-­
Küster-­Hauser

Müllerian aplasia

X-­linked

Persistent Müllerian
duct

Persistent Müllerian duct
derivatives

Autosomal
recessive

Laura L. Hollenbach, Emanuele Pelosi,
Miranda Margetts, and Alla Vash-­Margita
EMBRYOLOGY

The formation of a normal reproductive system occurs in the developing
embryo and early fetus and is regulated by several processes, including cellular differentiation, duct elongation, fusion, resorption, canalization, and
programmed cell death. Numerous Müllerian and/or vulvovaginal anomalies can result from interruption of the intricate sequence or functions of
any one of these processes during formation of the reproductive system
(Table 591.1). Genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors all have been
described as playing some role in these processes (Table 591.2).

3347

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3348 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Phenotypic sexual differentiation, especially during formation of
the vulvovaginal and Müllerian systems, is determined from genetic,
gonadal, and hormonal influences (see Chapter 622). Gonadal development determines the hormonal production regulating progression or
regression of the genital ducts and subsequently the external genitalia.
In 46,XY embryos, the SRY (sex-­
determining region of
Y-­chromosome) gene is one of the first regulators driving the formation of a testis from a primitive gonad and triggering the expression of a
cascade of additional factors responsible for testis development as well
as spermatogenesis. The testis begins to develop between 6-­7 weeks of
gestation, first with Sertoli cells, which produce anti-­Müllerian hormone (AMH), followed by Leydig cells, which produce testosterone
starting at approximately 8 weeks of gestation. The genital tract in both
male and female embryos initially includes both the Wolffian and the
Müllerian (or paramesonephric) ducts and begins to differentiate later
than the gonads. The differentiation of the Wolffian ducts, the primordia of the male reproductive tract, is regulated by testosterone, and the
local action of testosterone activates development of the epididymis,
vas deferens, and seminal vesicle. Concomitantly, the anti-­Müllerian
hormone (or Müllerian-­inhibiting substance) will cause regression of
the Müllerian ducts. Further male genital duct and external genital
structures depend on the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. Failure of Müllerian duct regression results in retention of Müllerian derivatives in males. One example is persistent Müllerian duct
syndrome (PMDS), which is characterized by the presence of Müllerian structures usually associated with undescended testes. The majority of PMDS cases are due to pathogenic variants in the AMH gene or
its receptor AMHR2. Other conditions featuring the presence of Müllerian derivatives in males are Denys-­Drash syndrome (characterized
by gonadal dysgenesis), nephropathy, and Wilms tumor, each caused
by pathogenic variants in the WT1 gene, and Müllerian derivatives-­
lymphangiectasia-­polydactyly syndrome (Urioste syndrome), a condition of unknown etiology.
In a 46,XX embryo, female sexual differentiation occurs about 2
weeks later than gonadal differentiation in the male. The regression
of the Wolffian ducts results from the lack of local gonadal testosterone production, and the persistence of the Müllerian ducts results
from the absence of anti-­Müllerian hormone production. The Müllerian ducts continue to differentiate into the fallopian tubes, uterus,
and upper one-­third of the vagina without interference from anti-­
Müllerian hormone. Because the ovaries develop separately from the
Müllerian ducts, females with Müllerian ductal anomalies usually have
normal ovaries and steroid hormone production. There are complex
interactions among the Wolffian, Müllerian, and metanephric ducts
(the latter giving rise to the urinary tract) early in embryonic development, and normal development of the Müllerian system depends
on such interaction. If this process is interrupted, coexisting Müllerian and renal anomalies are often discovered in the female patient
at the time of evaluation. Although most Müllerian defects seem
sporadic, familial recurrence or clustering has been observed, which
strongly supports the influence of genetic factors. The molecular processes underlying the developmental program of the female reproductive tract are extremely intricate and are regulated by numerous gene
products, including WNT4, WNT5, WNT7A, WNT9B, LIM1, HNF1B,
EMX2, PAX8, and HOX. The WNT family plays crucial roles in both
the formation and differentiation of the Müllerian ducts, providing
inductive signals for the correct patterning of the developing tract.
Homeobox genes LIM1 and HNF1B are expressed in duct epithelial
cells and are necessary for the development of the entire urogenital
tract. Similarly, EMX2 and PAX8 play fundamental roles in the initial steps of urogenital development by regulating the formation of the
Wolffian and Müllerian ducts. The family of HOXA genes is one of the
most well described and comprises regulatory molecules that encode
highly conserved transcription factors regulating the developmental
axis of the female reproductive tract. These genes display a characteristic expression pattern along the developing reproductive tract (Fig.
591.1). A role for environmental factors in Müllerian anomalies has
also been proposed. During gestation, the Müllerian ducts develop in
an estrogen-­free environment because of the presence of α-­fetoprotein

HOXA9

HOXA10

HOXA11

HOXA13

Tubes

Uterus

Cervix

Vagina

Fig. 591.1 Expression of HOXA genes in the developing Müllerian
system. (Adapted from Taylor HS. The role of HOX genes in the development and function of the female reproductive tract. Semin Reprod
Med. 2000;18:81-­89.)
peptides that sequester estrogen molecules. Therefore attention has
been turned to endocrine-­disrupting chemicals (EDCs), especially
compounds with estrogenic activity, for their potential teratogenic
role in Müllerian anomalies. A striking example is provided by diethylstilbestrol (DES), an estrogen agonist once given to pregnant patients
to prevent pregnancy-­related complications, including miscarriage.
However, DES was found to induce epigenetic modifications and cause
reproductive malformations, including a T-­shaped uterus ultimately
associated with higher spontaneous abortion rates.
By 10 weeks of gestation, the caudal portions of the Müllerian
ducts fuse together in the midline to form the uterus, cervix, and
upper vagina, in a Y-­shaped structure, with the open upper arms of
the Y forming the primordial fallopian tubes. Initially, the Müllerian
ducts are solid cords that gradually canalize as they grow along and
cross the mesonephric ducts ventrally and fuse in the midline. The
Müllerian ducts caudally open into the urogenital sinus, where proliferation of the cells at the point of contact form the Müllerian tubercle. Cells between the Müllerian tubercle and the urogenital sinus
continue to proliferate, forming the vaginal plate. At the same time of
the midline fusion of the Müllerian ducts, the medial walls—forming
the septum—begin to degenerate, forming the central cavity of the
uterovaginal canal. Uterine septal resorption is thought to occur in
a caudal to rostral direction and to be complete at approximately 20
weeks of gestation. This theory has been scrutinized because some
anomalies do not fit the standard classification system; it is possible
that septal resorption starts at some point in the middle and proceeds in both directions. At approximately 16 weeks of gestation, the
central cells of the vaginal plate desquamate, and resorption occurs,
forming the vaginal lumen. The lumen of the vagina is initially separated from the urogenital sinus by a thin hymenal membrane. The
hymenal membrane undergoes apoptosis and central resorption and
is usually perforate before birth.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Müllerian anomalies can include abnormalities in portions or all of
the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, and vagina (Fig. 591.2). True estimates of prevalence are difficult because of the varied presentations
and asymptomatic nature of some of the anomalies, use of different
diagnostic procedures, subjectivity of the diagnostic criteria, and the
inconsistent interpretation of the classification of Müllerian anomalies.
It is estimated that Müllerian anomalies are present in 6.7% of the
general female population. The prevalence of Müllerian anomalies
increases in females with a history of adverse pregnancy outcomes or
infertility: 8% of females who are infertile, 15% of females with primary amenorrhea, 16.7% of females with recurrent pregnancy loss, and
24.5% of females with both miscarriage and infertility have Müllerian
defects.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 591 u Vulvovaginal and Müllerian Anomalies

3349

ASRM MÜLLERIAN ANOMALIES CLASSIFICATION 2021
Scan QR code to view the ASRM MAC 2021 tool (page 1 of 2)
©2021 American Society for Reproductive Medicine

MÜLLERIAN AGENESIS

MÜLLERIAN AGENESIS

MÜLLERIAN AGENESIS WITH R/L
ATROPHIC UTERINE REMNANT
WITH FUNCTIONAL ENDOMETRIUM

UNICORNUATE UTERUS

CERVICAL AGENESIS

CERVICAL AGENESIS

DISTAL CERVICAL AGENESIS

R/L UNICORNUATE WITH R/L
DISTAL ATROPHIC UTERINE
REMNANT

R/L UNICORNUATE UTERUS

R/L UNICORNUATE WITH
R/L DISTAL UTERINE REMNANT WITH
FUNCTIONAL ENDOMETRIUM

R/L UNICORNUATE WITH
R/L ASSOCIATED ATROPHIC
UTERINE REMNANT

UTERUS DIDELPHYS

R/L UNICORNUATE WITH
R/L UTERINE HORN
COMMUNICATING AT LEVEL OF
CERVIX
UTERUS DIDELPHYS AND
LONGITUDINAL SEPTUM

UTERUS DIDELPHYS AND
+/- LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL
SEPTUM OF VARIABLE LENGTH

UTERUS DIDELPHYS AND
OBSTRUCTED R/L HEMIVAGINA

BICORNUATE UTERUS

Serosal indentation
>1 cm

BICORNUATE UTERUS

Serosal indentation
>1 cm

BICORNUATE UTERUS WITH
R/L COMMUNICATING TRACT

UTERUS BICORNUATE BICOLLIS

COMBINED BICORNUATE SEPTATE
UTERUS

Fig. 591.2 Classification system of Müllerian duct anomalies developed by the American Society of Reproductive Medicine. (From Pfeifer SM, Attaran M, Goldstein J, et al. ASRM Müllerian anomalies classification 2021. Fertil Steril. 2021;116:1238-­1252; Fig 1.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3350 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
SEPTATE UTERUS

Septum length >1 cm
Septum angle <90°

TRANSVERSE VAGINAL SEPTUM

/
Arcuate/Normal
length <1cm angle >90°

PARTIAL SEPTATE UTERUS

NORMAL/ARCUATE UTERUS

ROBERT’S UTERUS

MID VAGINAL SEPTUM

COMPLETE SEPTATE UTERUS
WITH DUPLICATED CERVICES AND
LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL SEPTUM

COMPLETE SEPTATE UTERUS WITH
SEPTATE CERVIX AND
LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL SEPTUM

COMPLETE SEPTATE UTERUS,
DUPLICATED CERVICES, AND
OBSTRUCTED R/L HEMIVAGINA

DISTAL VAGINAL AGENESIS

COMPLEX ANOMALIES

LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL SEPTUM

LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL
SEPTUM OF VARIABLE LENGTH

LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL
SEPTUM OF VARIABLE LENGTH
AND UTERUS DIDELPHYS

BICORNUATE UTERUS WITH
BILATERAL OBSTRUCTED
ENDOMETRIAL CAVITIES

UTERUS DIDELPHYS WITH
COMMUNICATING HEMIUTERI AND
UNILATERAL R/L CERVICO-VAGINAL
ATRESIA

OBSTRUCTED R/L HEMIVAGINA
AND UTERUS DIDELPHYS

LONGITUDINAL VAGINAL
SEPTUM OF VARIABLE LENGTH
AND COMPLETE SEPTATE
UTERUS WITH DUPLICATED CERVIX

OBSTRUCTED R/L HEMIVAGINA,
HEMIUTERUS AND SINGLE CERVIX
WITH SEPARATE CONTRALATERAL
R/L PATENT HEMIUTERUS, CERVIX
AND VAGINA

BICORNUATE UTERUS WITH
R/L COMMUNICATING TRACT AND
TRANSVERSE VAGINAL SEPTUM

OBSTRUCTED R/L HEMIVAGINA
AND COMPLETE SEPTATE UTERUS
WITH DUPLICATED CERVICES

Scan QR code to view the ASRM MAC 2021 tool (page 2 of 2)
©2021 American Society for Reproductive Medicine
UTERUS ISTHMUS AGENESIS

Fig. 591.2 cont’d

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 591 u Vulvovaginal and Müllerian Anomalies

3351

by an altered urethral angle or pressure on the sacral plexus. Urinary hesitancy and incomplete emptying symptoms may be present before abdominopelvic pain increases from the obstruction in
a patient of any age. Some menstruating adolescents may present
with increasing cyclic abdominopelvic pain with their menses due
to an obstructed hemivagina with uterine didelphys and ipsilateral
renal agenesis (OHVIRA).
B

*

Fig. 591.3 Sagittal MRI of pelvis showing large volume hematocolpos
(asterisk). B, Bladder; arrow, hematometra.

Combinations of congenital anomalies in other organ systems are
prevalent in females with Müllerian anomalies. Renal and musculoskeletal abnormalities are the most common. An estimated 29% of
females with a renal anomaly will have an associated Müllerian abnormality. Concomitant congenital malformations are also prevalent in
approximately 54.4% of females with Mayer-­Rokitansky-­Kuster-­
Hauser (MRKH) syndrome.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Vulvovaginal and Müllerian anomalies can manifest at a variety of
chronological time points during a female’s life: from infancy, through
childhood and adolescence, and during adulthood (see Table 591.1).
The majority of external genitalia malformations manifest at birth, and
often even subtle deviations from normal in either a male or female
newborn warrant evaluation. Structural reproductive tract abnormalities can be seen at birth or can cluster at menarche or any time during
a patient’s reproductive life. Some Müllerian anomalies such as arcuate
uterus are asymptomatic and have no implications clinically, whereas
others can cause gynecologic, obstetric, or fertility issues.
Clinical manifestations and treatments depend on the specific type
of Müllerian anomaly and are varied. There may be a pelvic mass,
which may or may not be associated with symptoms. A mass bulging
at the introitus or within the vagina indicates complete or partial outflow tract obstruction. A newborn can present with no evidence of
a vaginal opening. An adolescent can present with cyclic pelvic pain
either in association with primary amenorrhea or several months after
the onset of menarche. Patients also may be asymptomatic until they
present with miscarriage, pregnancy loss, or preterm delivery. When
presentation is acutely symptomatic, emergency management may be
required. Obstruction can result from a number of distinct anomalies,
including an imperforate hymen, a transverse vaginal septum, a distal vaginal agenesis, or a noncommunicating rudimentary horn. As
menstrual fluid accumulates proximal to the obstruction, the resulting
hematocolpos (Fig. 591.3) and hematometra cause cyclic pain, pelvic
mass and, occasionally, urinary dysfunction.
Prenatal or neonatal presentation of hydrometrocolpos from distal vaginal obstruction produces fluid accumulation in the vagina
and uterus and presents as a lower abdominal mass with or without
associated acute urinary tract obstruction. Hydrometrocolpos with
polydactyly may be a result of two autosomal recessive disorders:
McKusick-­Kaufman syndrome (with associated congenital heart disease) and Bardet-­Biedl syndrome (with associated obesity, learning
disabilities, retinitis pigmentosa, and renal anomalies).
Adolescent patients can present with acute obstruction of the
outflow tract because of a Müllerian anomaly, which requires
emergency evaluation and surgical treatment. A small percentage
of females can present with concomitant urinary retention caused

LABORATORY AND RADIOGRAPHIC FINDINGS

Laboratory evaluation in the setting of primary amenorrhea would
include hormonal evaluation with assessment of the beta chorionic
gonadotropin (beta-­hCG) to rule out pregnancy, follicle-­stimulating
hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), estradiol, and thyroid-­
stimulating hormone (TSH). Androgen evaluation may be done if
virilization is seen on physical examination. The patient’s karyotype
may be obtained based on clinical presentation. Other hormonal testing might be indicated in specific cases. Several radiographic studies
have been used, often in combination, to aid in diagnosis including
ultrasound, hysterosalpingogram, sonohysterography (saline-­infusion
sonography), and MRI. The least invasive initial study for a young
adolescent with cyclic pain, a pelvic mass, or amenorrhea is a transabdominal pelvic ultrasound; transvaginal pelvic ultrasound can be
used in sexually active teens. MRI is considered the gold standard of
care and best suited for complex anomalies because of its noninvasive,
high-­quality capabilities. MRI is the most sensitive and specific imaging technique used for evaluating Müllerian anomalies because it can
image nearly all reproductive structures, blood flow, external contours,
junctional zone resolution on T2-­weighted images, and associated
renal and other anomalies. MRI also has a high correlation with surgical findings because of its multiplanar capabilities and high spatial
resolution. Three-­dimensional ultrasound is another useful diagnostic tool and may be superior to traditional pelvic ultrasound and hysterosalpingogram but may not be easily accessible. Evaluation of the
external contour of the uterus is important for differentiating types
of uterine anomalies. This often requires a combination of radiologic
modalities for the uterine cavity, external contour, and possible tubal
patency. Diagnostic laparoscopy or hysteroscopy may be necessary
depending on the presentation, but it is less common with advancement of MRI and other imaging modalities.
Diagnosis of Müllerian anomalies should include a complete history,
including family history, with special attention to history of infertility
for female relatives and renal and skeletal abnormalities. A complete
physical exam including skeletal inspections for associated anomalies
should be performed in addition to the radiology studies discussed
above. Renal anomalies are noted in 30–40% and skeletal anomalies are
associated in 10–15% of patients with Müllerian anomalies. Unilateral
renal agenesis occurs in 15% of patients. The most common skeletal
anomaly is scoliosis. Patients usually have a normal female karyotype (46, XX), and most malformations are sporadic, with a polygenic
mechanism and multifactorial etiology (Table 591.2).

UTERINE ANOMALIES

Anomalous development of the uterus may be symmetric or asymmetric and/or obstructed or nonobstructed. Patients can present with primary amenorrhea or have either irregular or regular menstrual cycles.
There may be an asymptomatic pelvic mass or dysmenorrhea. In adolescents and adults, pregnancy loss can cause the first suspicion of a
uterine anomaly. Treatment is tailored to the specific anomaly.

Septate Uterus

Uterine septum (also known as a septate uterus) is the most common
Müllerian anomaly, accounting for just over half of all abnormalities,
and it is the most common structural uterine anomaly. After the two
Müllerian ducts fuse in the midline, resorption must occur to unify
the endometrial cavities; failure of this process results in some degree
of uterine septum. It can vary in length from just below the fundus to
beyond the cervix, depending on the amount of caudal resorption, but
is generally defined as >1 cm. A septate uterus has a normal external
uterine contour, which is what distinguishes it from a bicornuate or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3352 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
didelphic uterus. An MRI can help delineate between a predominantly
fibrous septum and a muscular or myometrial septum. There is insufficient evidence between an association of the uterine septum and infertility. Controversy still exists regarding whether a female should have
such surgical removal of the septum as part of infertility treatment. A
previous recommendation for surgical septum resection has been challenged by recent research, which demonstrated that septum resection
did not improve live birth rates compared with expectant management.
Limited data exist on the influence of the thickness and the length of
the septum on the choice of treatment and reproductive outcomes. Differentiating precisely between bicornuate and septate uteri is extremely
important to determine effective and safe treatment plans.

*

Bicornuate Uterus

Both Müllerian ducts develop and elongate in this anomaly, but they do
not completely fuse in the midline. The vagina and external cervix are
normal, but the extent of division of the two endometrial cavities can
vary, depending on the extent of failed fusion between the cervix and
the fundus. Bicornuate uteri are also associated with increased preterm
labor and delivery, malpresentation, and miscarriage. This anomaly
accounts for approximately 10–20% of Müllerian anomalies. Presently
there is no pregnancy outcome data to provide evidence to support
unification of a uterine duplication, and expectant management should
be encouraged.

Unicornuate Uterus and Rudimentary Horns

A unicornuate uterus results from the normal creation of a fallopian tube, functional uterus, cervix, and vagina from one Müllerian
duct. The other side fails to develop, resulting in either absence of
the contralateral Müllerian duct or a rudimentary horn. There is
a 30–40% association of renal anomalies. If a rudimentary horn is
identified, it is important to determine whether functional endometrium is present (usually with T2-­weighted MRI images). About two-­
thirds of rudimentary horns are noncommunicating, some with a
fibrous band connecting the two structures. Rudimentary horns can
also communicate with the contralateral uterus. A fertilized ovum
can implant and develop within a rudimentary horn. Pregnancies
within a rudimentary horn are incompatible with expectant management, and rupture of the horn could be life-­threatening. Rupture
tends to occur at a later gestation than with an ectopic pregnancy,
and hemorrhage is severe. Patients with rudimentary horns with
functioning endometrium can also present with pain caused by
accumulating menses. Because the contralateral uterine horn has
a normal outflow pathway, these patients present with cyclic pain
and/or a mass, not primary amenorrhea. Pregnancies that arise in a
unicornuate uterus are associated with increased preterm labor and
delivery, malpresentation, and miscarriage. The patient should be
counseled regarding these increased obstetric risks and be offered
a preconception consult with a high-­risk obstetric physician to best
manage pregnancy.

Uterus Didelphys

A uterus didelphys is the result of a complete failure of fusion and
represents 5% of Müllerian anomalies. There are two fallopian tubes,
two separate uterine cavities, two cervices, and often two vaginal
canals or two partial canals because of an associated longitudinal
vaginal septum (75% of the time). At times, the longitudinal septum attaches to one sidewall and obstructs one side of the vagina
(or hemivagina) (Fig. 591.4). Evaluation for renal anomalies should
be pursued because they are common as well. The combination of
uterine didelphys, obstructed hemivagina, and ipsilateral renal agenesis is a variant of the broad spectrum of Müllerian anomalies that is
referred to as obstructed hemivagina and ipsilateral renal anomaly
(OHVIRA) syndrome or Herlyn-­Werner-­Wunderlich syndrome.
Adolescents with this disorder usually present with abdominal pain
shortly after menarche. Although there still may be a risk of adverse
pregnancy outcomes with a uterine didelphys (preterm labor, malpresentation), overall pregnancy outcomes are good and are associated

Fig. 591.4 Coronal MRI demonstrating large volume hematocolpos

(asterisk) in a case of uterine didelphys with longitudinal vaginal septum. Black arrow, obstructed right uterus resulting in hematometra;
white arrow, unobstructed left uterus.

with less risk than in other uterine anomalies, but preconception
counseling and a consult with a high-­risk obstetric physician should
be offered.

Arcuate Uterus

An arcuate uterus is a uterine cavity that has a small midline septum
from lack of a small amount of resorption (<1 cm), and sometimes
a slight indentation of the uterine fundus. An arcuate uterus might
represent a variant of normal rather than a Müllerian anomaly.
Untoward pregnancy outcomes are rare, and surgical correction is
not warranted.

Treatment

Treatment depends on the specific diagnosis and should be determined
by a clinician with expertise in management of Müllerian anomalies.
Most treatments focus on relief of obstruction and consider a patient’s
reproductive goals and history. Hysteroscopic surgical resection of the
uterine septa was widely employed in the past, but a Cochrane systematic review shows no evidence to support surgical excision of the
septum. Each individual case should be discussed with the patient, and
a shared decision approach should be exercised based on the evidence
of the benefit of such surgery.
A noncommunicating horn with functional endometrium should be
resected to improve the quality of life or prevent future complications.
Opinions vary as to whether resection of a communicating horn or
one with no functional endometrium is warranted. Any surgical resection of a rudimentary horn requires careful surgical technique to protect the ipsilateral ovarian blood supply and the myometrium of the
remaining unicornuate uterus.
Although metroplasty (also known as the Strassman unification
method) had been employed with didelphic and bicornuate uteri in
the past, currently most clinicians feel there is not enough evidence to
support such a complicated procedure. Any obstruction to the outflow
tract must be relieved; this can necessitate creation of a vaginal window
or excision of the vaginal septum.

VAGINAL ANOMALIES
Abnormalities of the Hymen

An imperforate hymen is the most common obstructive anomaly,
and familial occurrences have been reported (see Fig. 591.1). Its
incidence is approximately 1 in 1,000. In the newborn period and
early infancy, it may be diagnosed by a bulging membrane caused
by a mucocolpos from maternal estrogen stimulation of the vaginal mucosa. This can eventually reabsorb if it is not too large or
symptomatic. More often, it is diagnosed at the time of menarche
when menstrual fluid accumulates (hematocolpos). The clinical manifestations often are a bulging blue-­black membrane, pain,
and/or primary amenorrhea in a setting of normal secondary sex

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 591 u Vulvovaginal and Müllerian Anomalies
characteristics. A mucocolpos or hematocolpos may obstruct urinary outflow. Depending on the circumstance, patients might have
cyclic abdominal pain or a pelvic mass. Other hymenal variations
can occur such as annular (most common) or crescentic configurations. In some cases, the hymenal membrane does not undergo
complete resorption or perforation, resulting in a microperforate,
cribriform, or septate-­shaped hymen. Age of recognition varies, but
hymenal variations are often discovered after menarche when it is
difficult for an adolescent to place or remove a tampon.

Congenital Absence of the Vagina and Mayer-­
Rokitansky-­Küster-­Hauser Syndrome

Vaginal agenesis or atresia results when the vaginal plate fails to
canalize. On physical exam, it appears as an extremely foreshortened vagina, sometimes referred to as a vaginal dimple. Isolated
(partial) vaginal agenesis involves an area of aplasia between the
distal vaginal portion and a normal upper vagina, cervix, and
uterus. These patients present with cryptomenorrhea and eventually have cyclic pain caused by obstructed outflow. Each subsequent
menses distends the upper vagina with menstrual blood. On initial
presentation it may be confused with a low transverse septum or
imperforate hymen, and therefore clear delineation of the anomaly with appropriate imaging is critical before attempting surgical
repair. Surgical repair and reconstruction are complicated and best
performed with consultation of specialists with expertise in managing these anomalies.
Uterine and vaginal agenesis/aplasia often occur together
because of their close association during development, when Müllerian ductal development fails early in the process. The most common
cause of uterovaginal agenesis/aplasia is Mayer-­Rokitansky-­Küster-­
Hauser (MRKH) syndrome, with an incidence reported at 1 in
5,000 female births. The etiology is believed to be multigenetic and
multifactorial. This condition is present at birth but often not diagnosed until mid-­adolescence. Females with MRKH syndrome have
normal ovarian function and undergo normal secondary sexual
development at puberty but do not have a menstrual cycle (primary
amenorrhea). The range and severity of MRKH syndrome can vary
greatly and the disorder may be type I (isolated uterovaginal anomaly) or type II, involving additional organ systems, including the
renal, skeletal, auditory, or cardiac systems. Absence of the vagina
and uterus has significant anatomic, physiologic, and psychologic
implications for the patient and family, and counseling is recommended. Although most patients with Müllerian agenesis have
small rudimentary Müllerian bulbs, approximately 2–7% of patients
can have active endometrium within these uterine structures. These
patients will often present with cyclic pelvic pain. MRI may be necessary to determine if any small uterine remnant is present (often
located on the pelvic sidewall or near the ovaries) and to clearly
delineate the anomaly. Laparoscopy is not necessary to diagnose
Müllerian agenesis but may be useful in the treatment of rudimentary uterine horns, particularly when removal of obstructed uterine
structures or associated endometriosis is indicated for pelvic pain.
Any diagnosis of Müllerian agenesis must be differentiated from
androgen insensitivity; karyotype, serum testosterone levels, and
pubic hair distribution help distinguish between the two because
testosterone levels and adrenarche will be normal in females with
MRKH syndrome.
Abnormalities involving other organ systems occur in association
with MRKH type II, or Müllerian duct aplasia, renal dysplasia, and
cervical somite anomalies (MURCS) association. The most common
are urinary tract anomalies (15–40%) primarily involving unilateral
absence of a kidney; a horseshoe or pelvic kidney; and skeletal anomalies (5–10%), which primarily involve vertebral development but can
also include cardiac anomalies and hearing impairment, and these
should be evaluated at the time of diagnosis.

Longitudinal Vaginal Septum

Longitudinal vaginal septa represent failure of complete canalization
of the vagina. These often occur in the presence of uterine anomalies.

3353

These septa can vary in length from the cervix or cervices caudally and
at times extend fully to the introitus. Patients may report menstruation
that overflows their tampon because they only have a single side of the
vagina occluded.

Transverse Vaginal Septum (Vertical Fusion Defects)

Vertical fusion defects can result in a transverse septum, which may
be imperforate and associated with hematocolpos or hematometra
in adolescents or with mucocolpos in infants. These are uncommon
anomalies, reportedly found in 1 in 80,000 females. Patients commonly present with primary amenorrhea and cyclical abdominal
pain around the time of menarche. However, patients who have a
small opening in the transverse septa might present with prolonged
vaginal drainage and mucopurulent or sanguineous discharge.
Transverse vaginal septa can vary in location (15–20% occur in the
lower third, but the majority are in the middle or upper third of the
vagina) and thickness (but are generally ≤1 cm). High locations,
thicker septa (>1 cm), and narrow vaginal orifices present challenging surgical cases.
Transverse vaginal septa may be associated with other congenital
anomalies, although this occurs less often than with Müllerian agenesis. These patients have a functional normal uterus, unlike females
with MRKH syndrome. In the majority of cases with outflow obstruction, there is also an increased incidence of endometriosis secondary
to retrograde menstruation.
Evaluation of transverse vaginal septa includes careful pelvic
examination and pelvic imaging, usually with MRI and ultrasound,
to delineate the anatomic abnormalities. MRI is especially helpful to
determine the thickness of the septum and verify the presence of a
cervix for surgical planning. Diagnosis and treatment plans should
be made as soon as possible after menarche because significant
accumulation of hematometra and/or hematosalpinx could affect
future reproductive success by negatively affecting uterine and/
or tubal function. Alternately, menstrual suppression is another
option to provide adolescent patients time to mature psychologically and participate in the treatment phase of the resection of the
transverse septum.

Treatment

An imperforate hymen requires resection to prevent or relieve the outflow tract obstruction. Many approach it with a horizontal, lunate, or
cruciate incision; excision of excess tissue; and approximation of the
mucosal edges. Repair should be done at time of diagnosis if the patient
is symptomatic, although the lesion may be repaired any time during
infancy, childhood, or adolescence. Elective surgery with general anesthesia is discouraged in the very young. Elective hymenal excision in
the prepubertal child may have improved healing if topical estrogen
is placed at the site postoperatively. Elective excision of an imperforate hymen can be performed after onset of thelarche but ideally before
menses. Variants in the hymen with microperforations or hymenal
septa may interfere with tampon use, and resection of this tissue is usually electively performed using local anesthesia or sedation according
to patient preference.
Treatment of congenital absence of the vagina is usually delayed
until the patient is mature enough to discuss and participate in the
treatment. The nonsurgical approach using vaginal dilation is the most
common first-­line therapy because it is safer, patient-­controlled, more
cost effective than surgery, and successful in 90–96% of patients. If done
correctly, it is possible to achieve a functional vaginal length (6-­8 cm),
width, and physiologic angle for intercourse in about 6-­8 months of
therapy. When the ultimate size that accommodates coitus is reached,
the patient must use the dilator or have coitus with a frequency that
maintains adequate length.
Surgical approaches require expertise and often some postoperative vaginal dilation to ensure a functional result. Controversy exists
as to when creation of a neovagina should occur. Surgery is indicated at any age if there is a medical indication such as mucocolpos
that causes urinary obstruction or any other surgical emergency.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3354 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
However, literature reports better outcomes with delaying creation
of the neovagina to when the patient is interested in sexual activity
and can participate in the decision to have surgery and in their own
postoperative recovery. There is no consensus as to the best surgical
option. Surgery should be reserved for the rare patient for whom
primary dilator therapy was unsuccessful or for those who request
surgery after a thorough informed consent. Referral to centers with
expertise should be offered.
Future options for having children should be addressed, including
adoption and gestational surrogacy. Assisted reproductive techniques
using ovum retrieval, fertilization, and implantation of embryos into
gestational carriers (surrogates) have been successful. Female offspring
usually have normal reproductive tracts. Uterine transplantation has
resulted in live births, but this procedure remains rare. Opportunities
for family building enable patients and their families to appreciate the
potential for becoming parents and help cope with the diagnosis and
its implications.
Surgical resection of transverse vaginal septa should be undertaken only by surgeons with expertise. Some surgeons advocate
waiting for one or more menstrual cycles or using preoperative
dilators from below to increase the depth and circumference of
the distal vagina and to allow menstrual blood to accumulate and
dilate the upper portion of the vagina. Complete resection of the
septum, with primary anastomosis of the upper and lower mucosal
segments, should be attempted. A vaginal stent is sometimes placed
postoperatively in the vagina to maintain patency and allow squamous epithelialization of the upper vagina and cervix. Follow-­up
dilation may be necessary after the stent is removed. Careful preoperative assessment is important because surgeons who begin a
case believing they are operating on an imperforate hymen can find
themselves in entirely different and more complex surgical planes.
Regardless of the approach, vaginoplasty is often best deferred until
the patient is mature and physically and psychologically prepared
to participate in the healing process and postoperative dilator treatments. It can be challenging to differentiate a low transverse septum
from distal vaginal agenesis. If the distal vagina cannot be palpated
close to the anal sphincter by rectal examination, the patient should
be allowed to continue to menstruate to distend the upper vagina to
within 3 cm of the anal sphincter. This enables the surgeon to dissect up to the lower vagina and perform a pull-­through procedure,
anastomosing the upper vagina to the introitus. Proper timing and
surgical execution yield excellent outcomes.
Longitudinal vaginal septa themselves do not lead to adverse reproductive outcomes but may be symptomatic in a patient, causing dyspareunia, traumatic bleeding with intercourse, difficulties with tampon
insertion, or impedance during vaginal birth. Such complaints can
warrant a resection of the vaginal septa. A carefully planned incision
and resection of the oblique septum to maintain patency of the upper
tract is performed in cases of OHVIRA (Herlyn-­Werner-­Wunderlich
syndrome).

CERVICAL ANOMALIES

Congenital atresia or complete agenesis of the uterine cervix is
extremely rare and often manifests at puberty with amenorrhea and
pelvic pain. It is associated with significant renal anomalies in 5–10%
of patients. A pelvic MRI is often warranted to completely define the
abnormality. Usually, pain and obstruction are significant, and a hysterectomy is necessary. Attempts to reconnect the uterus to the vagina
are rarely successful and are associated with significant morbidity and
reoperation rates. The ovaries usually have normal function, and future
reproduction can still occur using in vitro fertilization and a gestational carrier.

VULVAR AND OTHER ANOMALIES
Complete Vulvar Duplication

Duplication of the vulva is a rare congenital anomaly that is seen in
infancy and consists of two vulvas, two vaginas, and two bladders, a
didelphic uterus, a single rectum and anus, and two renal systems.
Treatment is individualized and requires a multidisciplinary approach
with gynecology, urology, and plastic surgery.

Labial Asymmetry and Hypertrophy

With the onset of puberty, the labia minora enlarge and grow to an
adult size. A female’s labia can vary in size and shape. Asymmetry
of the labia, where the right and left labia are different in size and
appearance, is a normal variant. Some patients are uncomfortable
with what they perceive to be their asymmetric or enlarged labia
minora and complain about self-­
consciousness and discomfort
while wearing tight clothing, exercising, or having sex. The mature
labia minora can protrude beyond the labia majora, and this normal variant can be functionally or psychologically bothersome.
Local irritation, problems of personal hygiene with bowel movements or menses, or interference with sexual intercourse or while
sitting or exercising have resulted in requests for labial reduction.
Patients may find online procedures advertised to reduce uneven or
enlarged labia minora. Education and reassurance are very important for adolescents who have concerns about the appearance of
their labia. Surgery is not recommended unless there is significant
congenital malformation or persistent symptoms directly related to
the labia. Surgical alteration of the labia that is not necessary to the
health of the adolescent less than age 18 is considered a violation
of federal law in the United States. Complications of labial surgery
include loss of sensation, keloid formation, and dyspareunia.

Clitoral Abnormalities

Agenesis of the clitoris is rare. Clitoral duplication has been reported,
often associated with cloacal and bladder exstrophy. Exposure to male
hormones will result in clitoral enlargement and is often a sign of a difference of sex development, a testosterone-­producing tumor, or use of
exogenous steroids.

Cloacal Anomalies

Cloacal anomalies are rare lesions representing a common urogenital
sinus into which the gastrointestinal, urinary, and vaginal canals all
exit. Usually there is an abnormality in all or some of the processes of
fusion of the Müllerian ducts, development of the sinovaginal bulbs, or
development of the vaginal plate. The single opening (cloaca) requires
surgical correction, which is often done very early in life, preferably by
a multidisciplinary pediatric surgical team.

Ductal Remnants

Even though the opposite duct regresses in both sexes, there can
sometimes be a small portion of either the Müllerian or Wolffian
duct that remains in either the male or female, respectively. Such
remnants can form cysts, which are what make them clinically visible during surgery, examination, or imaging. Most do not cause
pain, although torsion of some has been reported, and small asymptomatic ones usually do not require resection. The most commonly
reported are hydatid of Morgagni cysts (remnant of a Wolffian duct
arising from the fallopian tube), cysts of the broad ligament, and
Gartner’s duct cysts, which can form an ectopic ureter or be found
along the cervix or vaginal walls.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 592 u Gynecologic Care for Adolescents with Special Needs

Chapter 592

Gynecologic Care for
Adolescents with Special
Needs
Elisabeth H. Quint and Melina L. Dendrinos
Adolescence presents challenges for all children and their families but
particularly for teens with special needs and their families. The start
of menstrual periods, the mood changes associated with puberty, the
concerns about sexual activity with possible unplanned pregnancies,
and worries about safety and abuse present teens with disabilities and
their families with additional issues.

SEXUALITY AND SEXUAL EDUCATION

Adolescents with special needs can have physical and/or developmental disabilities. These young people are often seen as asexual by their
families, care providers, and society and, therefore, sexual education
might not have been provided or considered necessary, even though
physically disabled teens report being sexually active. The care provider needs to assess the teen’s knowledge of anatomy and sexuality,
gender identity, social knowledge of relationships, ability to consent
to sexual and intimate activities, and sexual orientation, as well as any
previous sexual activity. Education regarding HIV and other sexually
transmitted infections, disease prevention, and contraception, including emergency contraception, should be offered at a developmentally
appropriate level.

ABUSE

The risk for sexual abuse in teens with disabilities is difficult to estimate.
Teens with disabilities may be more at risk for isolation and depression
during adolescence, leading to vulnerability.
Teens with disabilities are just as sexually active or even more
so than their nondisabled counterparts, but more of their activity is nonvoluntary. Patients with cognitive impairment are often
taught to be cooperative, which may make them more vulnerable
to coercion. Abuse prevention education can include the No! Go!
Tell! model. For teens with limited verbal capacity or developmental
delay, abuse may be very hard to detect; thus screening for abuse
is extremely important. The care provider needs to be vigilant in
looking for signs on physical exam, such as unexplained bruises or
scratches, or changes in behavior, such as regression, which may be
indications of sexual abuse (see Chapters 17.1 and 162).

PELVIC EXAMINATION

An internal pelvic exam is rarely indicated in teens, as Papanicolaou smears are not recommended to start until age 21. An external genital exam can be performed if there are vulvovaginal issues
such as discharge, irregular bleeding, suspicion for abuse, or foreign body. The frog-­leg position is usually favored over the use of
stirrups. If the vagina or cervix needs to be clearly visualized for a
medical indication, an exam under anesthesia by a gynecologist can
be considered. Testing for sexually transmitted infections can be
accomplished by urine testing or vaginal swabs (see Chapter 163).

MENSTRUATION

Irregular menstruation is common in teenagers, especially during the first 5 years after menarche, because of immaturity of the
hypothalamic-­pituitary-­ovarian axis and subsequent anovulation

3355

(see Chapter 159). Several conditions in teens with disabilities are
associated with an even higher risk of irregular cycles. Thyroid
disease is more common in teens with Down syndrome. There
is a higher incidence of reproductive issues, including polycystic
ovarian syndrome, in teens with epilepsy or those taking certain
antiepileptic drugs. Antipsychotic medication can lead to hyperprolactinemia, which can affect menstruation.
For teens with disabilities, the main issue with menstrual cycles,
whether they are regular, irregular, or heavy, is the impact of menstruation on the patient’s life, health, and ability to perform their
normal activities. The history should focus on this aspect, and
menstrual calendars may be helpful to document the cycles, behavior, and impact of treatments. Most adolescents who self-­toilet can
learn to use menstrual hygiene products appropriately. Menstrual
underwear have been very helpful for many teens. Premenarchal
anticipatory guidance is recommended, but hormonal treatment
before menarche should be avoided.
The medical evaluation for abnormal bleeding is the same as for all
teens (see Chapter 159.2). Areas requiring particular attention for the
teen with special needs are the consideration of menstrual suppression for hygiene or cyclical behavioral issues, like crying, tantrums, or
withdrawal.

Treatment of Menstruation

If the impact of cycles, whether regular, irregular, or heavy, on the
patient’s well-­being is significant (often documented through menstrual or behavioral charting for several months), the care provider,
patient, and family may decide on menstrual intervention. Menstrual regulation or suppression is not much different from that
in the nondisabled teenager in general, although there are some
special considerations. Goals for treatment can be to decrease the
heaviness of flow, regulate cycles to predictable bleeding, relieve
pain or cyclical behavior symptoms, provide contraception, and/
or obtain amenorrhea. Menstrual suppression leading to complete
amenorrhea is usually difficult to obtain and infrequent scheduled
bleeds may be easier to manage than unpredictable spotting, a common side effect of any suppressive treatment, for certain patients.
After treatment has started, providers should continue to monitor
outcomes, ideally with continued menstrual or behavioral calendars
to assess efficacy and need for changes.

Nonhormonal Methods

If menorrhagia or dysmenorrhea (occasionally leading to cyclical
behavior changes in nonverbal teens) is the main concern, the patient
can be started on scheduled nonsteroidal anti-­inflammatory drugs.
These can decrease the flow by up to 20% in adequate doses and can be
used alone or in combination with other treatments. Use of tranexamic
acid during the first 5 days of menses can also be used to decrease
heavy bleeding.

Estrogen-­Containing Methods

All estrogen-­containing medication can be used in a cyclical fashion
with scheduled medication breaks to allow for monthly menses; in a
more extended fashion, where the active hormonal method is used for
3 months with a scheduled break; or a more flexible schedule, where
the hormones are used until bleeding starts, and a break for withdrawal
bleeding can be done at that time.

Oral Contraceptives

Cyclical oral contraceptives usually lead to regular, lighter cycles with
less cramping. Continuous daily use of active oral contraceptives can
suppress cycles, with amenorrhea rates improving with time. Some
unpredictable spotting is usually unavoidable, and often teens with
special needs prefer to have predictable cycles several times a year.
Chewable oral contraceptives are available for those with swallowing
issues.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3356 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
Contraceptive Ring

The contraceptive ring can be used in a pattern of 3 weeks in and 1
week out, but it can also be used (off-­label) in a continuous 4-­week
pattern, which leads to less bleeding. However, the contraceptive ring
may be difficult to use for a teen with dexterity problems, and help with
placement has obvious privacy issues.

Contraceptive Patch

The weekly patch can also be used in a cyclic or extended fashion. Some
teens with developmental disabilities and sensory issues may remove
their patch erratically, and placement out of reach (e.g., on buttocks or
shoulder) is advised.

Estrogen Use, Venous Thromboembolism, and Mobility Issues

Whether immobility and wheelchair use can lead to an increased
risk of venous-­thromboembolic events (VTEs) in association with
estrogen-­containing contraceptives remains controversial. The risk
of thrombosis in young females is very low overall, but the use of
combined hormonal contraceptives by adolescents who are immobile
or who have limited mobility has not been studied. Immobility per
se is not a contraindication to estrogen-­containing contraceptives;
however, it may increase the risk of VTE. There are limited data to
support the concern that higher-­dose oral estrogen and the third­and fourth-­generation progestin preparations may have a higher
risk for VTE. It is important to assess for other VTE risk factors in
the patient’s history before initiating estrogen therapy. Careful use of
lower-­dose (30 or 20 μg) ethinyl estradiol preparations after appropriate counseling may be advisable, and third-­generation progestin
combinations should only be used if second-­generation medications
have failed.

Progestin-­Only Methods
Intramuscular Medroxyprogesterone Acetate

Intramuscular depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) has
long been used for menstrual suppression. Two issues are particularly relevant to teens with disabilities. Studies documenting a
decrease in bone density associated with longer-­term use of DMPA
and a black box warning by the FDA have raised concerns about use
of these products in young females, although research indicates that
the bone density improves after the medication is stopped. For teens
with mobility issues or those with very low body weight who are
already at risk for low bone density, decreased bone density is a real
concern, although the risk of fractures is unclear. Adequate calcium
and vitamin D is recommended. The second issue for teens with
mobility issues is weight gain associated with DMPA, especially
among obese teens, which can lead to transfer and mobility issues.
The potential health risks associated with the effects of DMPA on
bone density and weight must be balanced against the need for
menstrual suppression and the likelihood of unintended pregnancy.
Weight should be monitored closely. Routine bone density scanning
(DEXA) is not recommended in adolescents.

Oral Progestins

Continuous oral progestins can also be very effective in obtaining
amenorrhea. The contraceptive progestin-­only pill (norethindrone
0.35 mg) can cause significant irregular spotting, so if full suppression is the goal, then other progestins can be used daily, such as
drospirenone 4 mg, norethindrone 2.5 or 5 mg, or micronized progesterone 200 mg.

Progesterone Intrauterine Device

The 8-­year levonorgestrel-­intrauterine device is used for many teenagers for contraception, as well as heavy menses and dysmenorrhea
(off-­label use). Teens with special needs might require anesthesia
for insertion if the exam is difficult because of discomfort, contractures, or a narrow vagina. Checking for strings in a clinic setting
may be challenging; however, the intrauterine device location can
be confirmed by sonography. There may be a significant amount of
irregular bleeding and spotting in the first several months, but there
is 20% rate of amenorrhea after insertion and up to 50% rate of
amenorrhea after 1 year of use. The bleeding profile of the smaller
and lower dose 3-5 year levonorgestrel-­intrauterine devices may not
be as helpful for menstrual suppression; the amenorrhea rates from
the initial studies by the manufacturer are 8–12% at 1 year, but more
studies are needed.

Implants

Progestin subdermal implants have relatively low amenorrhea rates
and higher rates of unscheduled bleeding; therefore they are often less
desirable for menstrual suppression for teens with special needs. They
also require significant patient cooperation for insertion.

Hormones and Antiepileptic Drugs

Certain enzyme-­
inducing seizure medications can interfere with
estrogen-­containing contraceptives, change their contraceptive effectiveness, and/or lead to intermittent bleeding. Higher estrogen dose or
shorter injection intervals for DMPA may be considered. The only antiepileptic medication that is affected by combined oral contraceptives
is lamotrigine; consequently, the dose of that medication may need to
be adjusted if used in conjunction with hormones, so discussion with
other providers is needed.

Surgical Methods

Surgical procedures, such as endometrial ablation, a procedure where
the lining of the uterus is surgically removed, and hysterectomy, are
available for treatment of abnormal and heavy bleeding in adults, but
they should only rarely be used in extreme situations for teenagers
where all other methods have failed, and the patient’s health is severely
compromised by their cycles. Endometrial ablation only leads to
amenorrhea approximately 30% of the time, has a higher failure rate in
females younger than 40 years of age, and is not recommended in the
adolescent population. Ethical considerations around these methods
leading to infertility and consent issues are complicated, and state law
varies on this topic.

CONTRACEPTION

See also Chapter 160.
The menstrual management methods discussed above can also
be used for contraception. A request for birth control, especially
coming from a caregiver and not the teen, requires an evaluation of
the teen’s ability to consent to sexual activity and the safety of their
environment. The method chosen should be the safest method for
their situation with the highest protection rate. Therefore a long-­
acting reversible contraceptive method may be advisable. Sexually
transmitted infections and condom use should be addressed with
the teen and specific guidelines on how to obtain condoms and
negotiate their use may be needed. A discussion about emergency
contraception is recommended, as well as ways to help the teen
obtain this if indicated.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 593 u Female Genital Mutilation

Chapter 593

Female Genital Mutilation
Deborah Hodes and Sarah M. Creighton
Female genital mutilation (FGM) is a worldwide human rights issue
that constitutes violence against women and children. It is defined by
the World Health Organization (WHO) as procedures that involve partial or total removal of the external female genitalia, or other injury
to the female genital organs for nonmedical reasons. In September
2015 the United Nations adopted the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), which includes the elimination of FGM by 2030. UNICEF
(United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund) estimates
that at least 200 million women and young females in 30 countries
have undergone FGM. There has been a decline in the prevalence of
FGM, but current trends suggest that actual numbers will rise because
of population growth. FGM is commonly performed in Africa, the
Middle East, and Asia, with data suggesting an estimated 40 million
young females in Indonesia have undergone FGM. According to the
UNICEF report 2020, the COVID-­19 pandemic has caused disruption
to the protection of young females from FGM leading to an estimated 2
million additional cases than would otherwise have occurred.
The migration of FGM-­practicing communities means that FGM is
a global problem, although there are scant data on the practice in high-­
income countries. Despite estimates, a British pediatric surveillance
unit study found low numbers presenting to pediatricians; there were
very few illegal cases and only one successful prosecution in the UK by
2021. FGM is almost always carried out on children, and pediatricians
must be familiar with the identification of FGM, the impact on health,
and ways to protect young females from this widespread form of child
abuse.
FGM has no health benefits and can cause lifelong damage to physical and psychologic health. The WHO has classified FGM into four
types, depending on the extent and type of genital tissue removed
(Table 593.1). The traditional practitioner performs FGM without
anesthetic or sterile conditions, and in some countries, it is done as part
of a wider ritual related to early child marriage. The child is restrained
whilst the external genitalia are removed or damaged using a knife,
scalpel, or other sharp instrument. An increasing number of procedures are performed at a younger age, and the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) estimates that around one in five young females
subjected to FGM were cut by a trained healthcare provider. Table
593.2 lists potential risks and protective factors for FGM.

COMPLICATIONS

Immediate complications of FGM include hemorrhage and infection.
Deaths have been reported, although numbers are unknown. Infections

3357

include immediate wound infection, tetanus, and gangrene. FGM has
been implicated in the transmission of blood-­borne infections because
of the use of shared and unsterile tools. Although procedure-­related
blood-­borne infection is probable, there are no good studies to confirm
this; infections such as hepatitis B and HIV are endemic in areas where
FGM is prevalent. FGM leads to obstetric, gynecologic, and psychologic consequences in adult women. Gynecologic symptoms include
painful and unsightly scarring, clitoral cysts, and recurrent urinary
infections. Menstrual difficulties and infertility are reported, although
the underlying mechanisms of these are unclear apart from type 3
FGM, where the vagina is narrowed. FGM damages sexual function
by removing sensitive sexual tissue and narrowing the vagina. Mental
health problems such as anxiety and depression have been linked to
FGM. FGM also has a detrimental impact on obstetric outcomes for
both the mother and baby, leading to increased risks of postpartum
hemorrhage, perineal trauma, and perinatal death.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT OF FGM

Most pediatricians will not see a child who is acutely unwell due to
FGM. Management of FGM in the acute situation should include
assessment for blood loss, sepsis, and urinary retention and treatment
with antibiotics, analgesia, tetanus toxoid, and urinary catheterization. Pediatricians are more likely to see a child in whom FGM has
been found during the investigation of other often vague symptoms
as well as recurrent urinary tract infections and vulvovaginitis. FGM
may also be alleged by the child or family member, or concerns may
be raised by other health and social care professionals, particularly if
the mother herself has undergone FGM and has little support from the
husband (see Table 593.2). Pediatricians may be asked to confirm FGM
on genital examination; it should be performed using a colposcope for
magnification and video documentation, which can be used for peer
review and in a court of law. The examination must be done in a sensitive and gentle manner by an appropriately trained clinician and in an
age-­appropriate setting. It is often assumed that FGM will be obvious.
However, whilst type 3 FGM, in which the vagina is sealed, is usually
easy to detect, other types of FGM can be more difficult to diagnose.
This is particularly true for type 4 FGM, which may involve a prick or
small scratch on or adjacent to the clitoris and may heal without a trace.
General assessment of the child's health should include screening for
blood-­borne viruses.
If the child has type 3 FGM, then a deinfibulation procedure will be
required at some point. Deinfibulation is a minor surgical procedure to
divide any scar tissue that obscures the vaginal introitus. If the child is
asymptomatic, this can be deferred until adolescence or before sexual
activity. Deinfibulation procedures are usually performed under a local
anesthetic in adult women, but in children a brief general anesthetic
is more appropriate. The psychologic impact of FGM on a child may
be severe, and flashbacks and nightmares have been reported. Input
from a child psychologist or psychotherapist with experience in working with children with FGM and their families should be available. If a
child is confirmed to have FGM, then other children in the family may
be at risk, and local safeguarding pathways should be activated. Pediatricians must be advocates against FGM and contribute to training

Table 593.1  	 Summary of WHO Classification of FGM
Type 1: Clitoridectomy: Partial or total removal of the clitoris (a small
sensitive and erectile part of the female genitals) and, in rare cases,
only the prepuce (the fold of skin surrounding the clitoris).
Type 2: Excision: Partial or total removal of the clitoris and labia
minora with or without removal of the labia majora (the labia are
the “lips” that surround the vagina).
Type 3: Infibulation: Narrowing of the vaginal opening through
the creation of a covering seal. The seal is formed by cutting and
repositioning the labia minora or majora with or without removal of
the clitoris.
Type 4: Other: All other harmful procedures to the genitalia for
nonmedical reasons (e.g., pricking, piercing, incision, scraping, and
cauterizing the genital area).
From the World Health Organization Female Genital Mutilation Fact Sheet.
https://www.who.int/news-­room/fact-­sheets/detail/female-­genital-­mutilation

Table 593.2  Factors That Influence Whether or Not a Child
May Have FGM
RISK FACTORS
Mother or sister cut
Isolated mother
Grandmother influential
Little information and discussion about FGM
PROTECTIVE FACTORS
Discussing with husband or friend
Knowing the law has been implemented
TV, global debate, media
Men's attitude and knowledge
Knowing an uncut person

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

3358 Part XXIII u Gynecologic Problems of Childhood
healthcare workers who may treat patients. In developed countries,
there are concerns that the emphasis on prosecution has stigmatized
and alienated communities in the diaspora who have abandoned
the practice; because of this, experts emphasize the need for a more

community-­centric approach to current and future FGM prevention
efforts.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 22, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

