Human Genetics
Chapter 95

Genetics in Pediatric
Medicine
Daryl A. Scott and Brendan Lee
Since the completion of the Human Genome Project, there has been an
unprecedented expansion in the understanding of how human health
is impacted by variations in genomic sequence and epigenetic, non-­
sequence-­based changes that affect gene expression. There has also
been the development and implementation of accurate clinical tests
that makes it easier for physicians to detect pathogenic variant changes.
In addition, there has been a dramatic increase in the availability of
information about the genetic aspects of pediatric diseases, particularly
on the internet (Table 95.1).

THE BURDEN OF GENETIC DISORDERS IN
CHILDHOOD

Medical problems associated with genetic disorders can appear at any
age, with the most obvious and serious problems typically manifesting
in childhood. It has been estimated that 53/1,000 children and young
adults can be expected to have diseases with an important genetic
component. If congenital anomalies are included, the rate increases
to 79/1,000. In 1978 just over half of admissions to pediatric hospitals
were for a genetic condition. By 1996, because of changes in healthcare

PART

VIII
delivery and a greater understanding of the genetic basis of many disorders, that percentage increased to 71% in one large pediatric hospital
in the United States, with 96% of chronic disorders leading to admission having an obvious genetic component or influenced by genetic
susceptibility.
Major categories of genetic disorders include single-­gene, genomic,
chromosomal, and multifactorial conditions.
Individually, each single-­gene disorder is rare, but collectively they
represent an important contribution to childhood disease. The hallmark of a single-­gene disorder is that the phenotype is overwhelmingly
determined by changes that affect an individual gene. The character
and severity of a phenotype associated with some single-­gene disorders can vary from one patient to another. In some cases, this may
be due to differences in the severity of the change affecting the gene.
In other cases, variability is seen in individuals who carry the same
pathogenic variant or variants. This is termed variable expressivity; the same pathogenic variants in GJB2 can cause mild, moderate,
severe, or profound sensorineural hearing loss in different individuals.
This variability may be due to differences in other genetic, epigenetic,
environmental, and/or stochastic factors. If this variability results in
some individuals being completely unaffected, we say that the disorder
shows incomplete penetrance. Some single-­gene disorders are associated with phenotypes that affect different organ systems or biologic
functions that may appear unrelated. Pendred syndrome is caused by
pathogenic variants in SLC26A4 and is characterized by both hearing
loss and thyroid enlargement (goiter). This feature of some genetic diseases is referred to as pleiotropy.
Common single-­gene disorders include sickle cell anemia and cystic
fibrosis. Some identifiable syndromes and diseases can be caused by
more than one gene. Noonan syndrome can be caused by pathogenic
variants in at least 12 different genes. In addition, pathogenic variants

Table 95.1  Useful Internet Genetic Reference Sites
RESOURCE

WEB ADDRESS

National Center for Biotechnology Information
A general reference maintained by the National Library of Medicine

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov

Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
A useful resource for clinicians containing information on all known mendelian disorders and >12,000
genes. Information focuses on the relationship between phenotype and genotype.

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim

Genetic Testing Registry
A resource that provides information on individual genes, genetic tests, clinical laboratories, and medical
conditions. This resource also provides access to GeneReviews, a collection of expert-­authored reviews
on a variety of genetic disorders.

www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gtr/

Genetics — MedlinePlus
A resource that provides consumer-­friendly information about the effects of genetic variations on human
health

http://medlineplus.gov/genetics/

National Human Genome Research Institute
A resource for information about human genetics and ethical issues

www.genome.gov

Human Gene Mutation Database
A searchable index of all described pathogenic variants in human genes with phenotypes and references

www.hgmd.cf.ac.uk

DECIPHER
A database designed to aid physicians in determining the potential consequences of chromosomal
deletions and duplications

http://decipher.sanger.ac.uk

Database of Genomic Variants
A database of chromosomal alterations seen in normal controls

http://dgv.tcag.ca/dgv/app/home

American Society of Human Genetics

www.ashg.org

American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics

www.acmg.net

726
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 95 u Genetics in Pediatric Medicine
affecting a single gene may cause more than one disorder. Variants in
SCN5A can cause Brugada syndrome type 1, long QT syndrome type
3, dilated cardiomyopathy type 1E, familial atrial fibrillation type 10,
familial ventricular fibrillation type 1, progressive heart block type 1A,
nonprogressive heart block, and sick sinus syndrome type 1.
Single-­gene disorders tend to occur when changes in a gene have a
profound effect on the quantity of the gene product produced, either
too much or too little, or the function of the gene product, either a
loss of function or a harmful gain of function. Single-­gene disorders
can be caused by de novo sequence changes that are not found in the
unaffected parents of the affected individual, or they may be caused
by inheriting the affected gene. When a single-­gene disorder is known
to be caused by changes in only one gene, or a small number of individual genes, searching for deleterious changes is classically performed
by directly sequencing that gene and, in some cases, looking for small
deletions and/or duplications in that gene. When multiple genes can
cause a particular disorder, it is sometimes more efficient and cost-­
effective to screen large numbers of disease-­causing genes using a
disease-­specific panel, which takes advantage of massively parallel or
next-­generation sequencing technology, rather than screening genes
individually. When such panels are not available, or when the diagnosis
is in question, physicians may consider screening the protein-­coding
regions of all genes by exome sequencing (ES), also termed whole
exome sequencing (WES), on a clinical basis. In many circumstances,
ES is less expensive than sequencing multiple individual genes. Whole
genome sequencing (WGS), in which an individual’s entire genome is
sequenced, is another clinical option (see Chapter 98; Table 95.2).
The risk of having a child with a particular single-­gene disorder
can vary from one population to another. This may be the result of a
founder effect, in which a specific change affecting a disease-­causing
gene becomes relatively common in a population derived from a small
number of founder individuals. This high frequency is maintained
when there is relatively little interbreeding with persons outside that
population because of social, religious, or physical barriers. This is the
case for Tay-­Sachs disease in Ashkenazi Jews and French Canadians.
Other changes may be subject to positive selection when found in the
heterozygous carrier state. In this case, individuals who carry a single
copy of a genetic change (heterozygotes) have a survival advantage
over noncarriers. This can occur even when individuals who inherit
two copies of the change (homozygotes) have severe medical problems. This type of positive selection is evident among individuals in
sub-­Saharan Africa who carry a single copy of a hemoglobin pathogenic variant that confers relative resistance to malaria but causes sickle
cell anemia in homozygotes.
Genomic disorders are a group of diseases caused by alterations in the
genome, including deletions (copy number loss), duplications (copy
number gain), inversions (altered orientation of a genomic region), and
chromosomal rearrangements (altered location of a genomic region).
Contiguous gene disorders are caused by changes that affect two or
more genes that contribute to the clinical phenotype and are located
near one an other on a chromosome. DiGeorge syndrome, which is
caused by deletions of genes located on chromosome 22q11, is a common example. Some genomic disorders are associated with distinctive
phenotypes whose patterns can be recognized clinically. Other genomic
disorders do not have a distinctive pattern of anomalies but can cause
developmental delay, cognitive impairment, structural birth defects,
abnormal growth patterns, and changes in physical appearance.
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) can provide information about the copy number and location of a specific genomic region.
Array-­based copy number detection assays, sometimes referred to as
chromosomal microarray analyses, can be used to screen for chromosomal deletions and duplications (large and small) across the genome
but do not provide information about the orientation or location of
genomic regions. A chromosome analysis (karyotype) can detect
relatively large chromosomal deletions and duplications and can
also be useful in identifying inversions and chromosomal rearrangements even when they are copy number neutral changes that do not
result in a deletion or duplication of genomic material (e.g., balanced
translocations).

727

Table 95.2  Indications for Single Gene, Gene Panel,
Exome, and Genome Sequencing
INDICATIONS
SINGLE GENE
Minimal locus heterogeneity
(only one or a small number
of genes known to cause the
condition)
Distinctive clinical findings that
clearly point to specific gene
GENE PANEL
Locus heterogeneity (multiple
genes are known to cause the
same or similar conditions)
Disorders with overlapping
phenotypes
Disorders that share one
manifestation but can have
very different presentations
Disorders associated with genes
from a common pathway or
structure
EXOME
Extreme heterogeneity and de
novo mutations common
Two or more unrelated
phenotypes in one patient
No distinctive phenotypic feature
present
Phenotype indistinct and
underlying cause not clear
GENOME
As above for Exome, plus:
Noncoding variation is
suspected as a cause
Structural variation is suspected
as a cause
Exome sequencing already
performed and was
nondiagnostic
Rapid generation of sequencing
data needed for patients who
are critically ill
Suspected mitochondrial
disorder: multisystem (heart,
brain, muscle, liver) disorder

EXAMPLES
CFTR for cystic fibrosis

PAH for phenylketonuria

Muscular dystrophy panel
Cardiomyopathy panel
Epilepsy panel
RASopathy panel

Autism, intellectual disability
Oculocutaneous albinism and
neutropenia
Kabuki syndrome
Congenital diarrhea, Zellweger
syndrome

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
DiGeorge syndrome
Undiagnosed Diseases Network
Neonates and children in
intensive care
Whole genome and/or
mitochondrial DNA (tissue)
sequencing

From Manolio TA, Rowley R, Williams MS, et al. Opportunities, resources,
and techniques for implementing genomics in clinical care. Lancet. 2019;394:511–520.
Table 2.

Deletions, duplications, and chromosomal rearrangements that
affect whole chromosomes, or large portions of a chromosome, are
typically referred to as chromosomal disorders. One of the most
common chromosomal disorders is Down syndrome, which is most
often associated with the presence of an extra copy, or trisomy, of an
entire chromosome 21. When all or part of a chromosome is missing,
the disorder is referred to as monosomy. Translocations are a type
of chromosomal rearrangement in which a genomic region from one
chromosome is transferred to a different location on the same chromosome or on a different (nonhomologous) chromosome. Translocations can be balanced, meaning that no genetic material has been lost
or gained, or they can be unbalanced, in which some genetic material
has been deleted or duplicated.
In some cases, only a portion of cells that make up a person’s body
are affected by a single-­gene defect, a genomic disorder, or a chromosomal defect. This is referred to as mosaicism and indicates that
the individual’s body is made up of two or more distinct cell populations. Through use of technologies with high sensitivity, it has become

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

728 Part VIII u Human Genetics
evident that there can be significant low-­level mosaicism in somatic
tissues.
Polygenic disorders are caused by the cumulative effects of variations in more than one gene. Multifactorial disorders are caused by
the cumulative effects of variations in multiple genes or the combined
effects of genetic, epigenetic, and/or environmental factors. Spina
bifida and isolated cleft lip or palate are common birth defects that
display multifactorial inheritance patterns. Multifactorial inheritance
is seen in many common pediatric disorders, such as asthma and diabetes mellitus. These traits can cluster in families but do not have a
mendelian pattern of inheritance (see Chapter 97). In these cases, the
genetic changes or variations that are contributing to a particular disorder are often unknown, and genetic counseling is based on empirical
data and estimates.

THE CHANGING PARADIGM OF GENETICS IN
MEDICINE

Genetic testing is increasingly available for a wide variety of both rare
and relatively common genetic disorders. Genetic testing is typically
used in pediatric medicine to resolve uncertainty regarding the underlying etiology of a child’s medical problems. Identifying a molecular
cause often provides the basis for improved genetic counseling, may
alter medical management, and may suggest that a specific therapy
should be employed. Even in cases where a specific treatment is not
available, identifying a genetic cause can aid physicians in providing
individuals and families with accurate prognostic and recurrence risk
information, can often help to relieve unfounded feelings of guilt, and
may stem the tide of misdirected blame.
Genetic tests are influencing an increasing number of medical
decisions and are becoming a seamless part of routine medical care.
Although most genetic testing is presently aimed at identifying or
confirming a diagnosis, in the future genetic testing may find wider
application as a means of determining whether an individual is predisposed to develop a particular disease. Another area in which genetic
testing could make a significant impact is on individualized drug
treatment (pharmacogenetics). It has long been known that genetic
variation in the enzymes involved in drug metabolism underlies differences in the therapeutic effect and toxicity of some drugs. When
the genetic changes that underlie these variations are identified, new
genetic tests can be developed that allow physicians to tailor treatments based on individual variations in drug metabolism, responsiveness, and susceptibility to toxicity. It is likely that the expansion of
such testing will depend, at least in part, on the extent to which such
tests can be linked to strategies to prevent disease or improve outcome
(see Chapter 98).
Long-­standing and highly successful carrier screening programs
have existed for disorders such as Tay-­Sachs disease and many other
rare, single-­gene disorders that are prevalent in specific populations.
Couples are usually offered screening for a variety of conditions based,
in part, on ancestry (Tay-­Sachs disease, hemoglobinopathies, cystic
fibrosis). Couples found to be at increased risk for such disorders can
be offered preconception or prenatal testing aimed at detecting specific
disease-­causing variants.
Prenatal screening is routinely offered for chromosomal disorders
such as trisomy 13, trisomy 18, and Down syndrome. Pregnancies
affected by these, and possibly other genetic disorders, are being recognized by noninvasive screening tests targeting fetal cell-­free DNA
in maternal blood and by fetal ultrasound. When genetic disorders
are suspected, chorionic villus sampling at 10-­12 weeks of gestation
or amniocentesis at 16-­18 weeks of gestation can provide material for
genetic testing. When a couple are at risk for a specific genetic defect,
preimplantation genetic diagnosis can sometimes be used to select
unaffected early embryos, which are then implanted as part of an
in vitro fertilization procedure.
Although prenatally obtained genetic material can be used to identify single-­
gene disorders, genomic disorders, and chromosomal
anomalies, the information obtained on any pregnancy depends on the
tests that are ordered. It is important that physicians select the most
appropriate prenatal tests and that couples understand the limitations

of these tests. No amount of genetic testing can guarantee the birth of
a healthy child.
Specific treatments are not available for most genetic disorders,
although some important exceptions exist (see Chapter 98). Inborn
errors of metabolism were the first genetic disorders to be recognized, and many are amenable to treatment by dietary manipulation
(see Chapter 104). These conditions result from genetically determined
deficiency of specific enzymes, leading to the buildup of toxic substrates and/or deficiency of critical end products.
Individual metabolic disorders tend to be very rare, but their combined impact on the pediatric population is significant. Tandem mass
spectrometry has made it relatively inexpensive to screen for a large
number of these disorders in the newborn period. Use of this technology not only dramatically increases the number of metabolic disorders
identified within a population but also allows treatment to be initiated at a much earlier stage in development. Broader screening in the
postnatal period, in the form of metabolomic screening, has increased
the potential for identifying an increasing list of rare inborn errors
of metabolism, especially when combined with exome or genome
sequencing.
Progress in genetic therapies has improved the treatment of some
lysosomal storage disorders (see Chapter 106.4). These metabolic diseases are caused by defects in lysosomal function. Lysosomes are cellular organelles that contain specific digestive enzymes. Some of these
disorders that were characterized by early lethal or intractable chronic
illness can now be treated using specially modified enzymes administered by intravenous infusion. These enzymes are taken up by cells and
incorporated into lysosomes. Conditions such as Gaucher disease and
Fabry disease are routinely treated using enzyme replacement; similar
therapies are being developed for other lysosomal disorders.
Therapeutic advances are also being made in the treatment of nonmetabolic genetic disorders. Improvements in surgical techniques and
intensive care medicine are extending the survival of children with life-­
threatening birth defects such as congenital diaphragmatic hernia and
severe cardiac defects. In many cases, the life expectancy of children
with debilitating genetic disorders is also increasing. Improvements
in nutrition and the management of chronic pulmonary disease in
patients with cystic fibrosis allow an increasing percentage of affected
patients to survive into adulthood, creating a need to transition care
from pediatric to adult providers.
Gene replacement therapies are being used in the treatment of a
variety of genetic disorders (see Chapter 98). Stem cell–based therapies have also been employed as a potential treatment for a number of
intractable disorders.

DIRECT-­TO-­CONSUMER GENETIC TESTING

In most cases, healthcare providers order genetic tests, interpret the
results, communicate these results to their patients, and then document these finding in the medical record. The costs of these tests are
often covered completely or in part by a health insurance company.
In contrast, some companies are offering direct-­to-­consumer genetic
tests in which individuals order their own tests and receive test results
directly from the company. The individual usually pays for these tests,
and the results are not recorded in their medical record unless the individual chooses to share this information with their healthcare providers. Some direct-­to-­consumer genetic tests only provide information
about common traits or information about an individual’s ancestry or
relationship to others (ancestry testing). Other direct-­to-­consumer
tests are designed to make predictions about health and/or to identify
pathogenic variants associated with specific genetic disorders. In some
cases, individuals ordering these tests may have the option of reviewing their results with a healthcare provider employed by the company
performing the test.
One of the main benefits of direct-­to-­consumer testing is that it
allows individuals to privately access their genetic information without
having to involve a healthcare provider or their insurance company.
Although this could be seen as a means of empowering individuals
with regards to their healthcare, the benefits derived from such testing
depend heavily on the appropriateness of the test ordered, the quality of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 95 u Genetics in Pediatric Medicine
the testing/reporting services, the capacity of the individual to understand the test results, and their ability to make informed choices based
on those results.

ETHICS ISSUES

Genetic testing, diagnosis, and treatment should be performed confidentially. Nothing is as personal as one’s genetic information, and all
efforts should be made to avoid any stigma for the patient. Many people worry that results of genetic testing will put them, or their child, at
risk for genetic discrimination. Genetic discrimination occurs when
people are treated unfairly because of a difference in their DNA that
suggests they have a genetic disorder or they are at an increased risk of
developing a certain disease. In the United States the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 protects individuals from genetic
discrimination at the hands of health insurers and employers but does
not extend protection against discrimination from providers of life,
disability, or long-­term care insurance.
The decisions about genetic testing should be based on a careful
evaluation of the potential benefits and risks. In the pediatric setting,
these decisions may be more difficult because physicians and parents
are often called on to make decisions for a child who cannot directly
participate in discussions about testing. Molecular diagnostic tests are
often used to diagnose malformation syndromes, cognitive delay, or
other disabilities in which there is a clear benefit to the child. In other
cases, such as genetic testing for susceptibility to adult-­onset diseases,
it is appropriate to wait until the child or adolescent is mature enough
to weigh the potential risks and benefits and make their own decisions
about genetic testing.
Policies regarding genetic testing of children have been developed
collaboratively by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the
American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG; Pediatrics 131[3]:620–622, 2013). These recommendations are outlined in
the following list.
General Recommendations
1.	Decisions about whether to offer genetic testing and screening
should be driven by the best interest of the child.
2.	Genetic testing is best offered in the context of genetic counseling. Genetic counseling can be performed by clinical geneticists, genetic counselors, or any other healthcare provider with
appropriate training and expertise. AAP and ACMG support
the expansion of educational opportunities in human genomics and genetics for medical students, residents, and practicing
pediatric primary care providers.
Diagnostic Testing
3.	In a child with symptoms of a genetic condition, the rationale
for genetic testing is similar to other medical diagnostic evaluations. Parents or guardians should be informed about the risks
and benefits of testing, and their permission should be obtained.
Ideally, and when appropriate, the assent of the child should be
obtained.
4.	When performed for therapeutic purposes, pharmacogenetic
testing of children is acceptable, with permission of parents or
guardians and, when appropriate, the child’s assent. If a pharmacogenetic test result carries implications beyond drug targeting
or dose responsiveness, the broader implications should be discussed before testing.
Newborn Screening
5.	AAP and ACMG support the mandatory offering of newborn
screening for all children. After education and counseling about
the substantial benefits of newborn screening, its remote risks,
and the next steps in the event of a positive screening result,
parents should have the option of refusing the procedure, and
an informed refusal should be respected.
Carrier Testing
6.	AAP and ACMG do not support routine carrier testing in
minors when such testing does not provide health benefits in
childhood. The AAP and ACMG advise against school-­based
testing or screening programs, because the school environment

729

is unlikely to be conducive to voluntary participation, thoughtful consent, privacy, confidentiality, or appropriate counseling
about test results.
7.	For pregnant adolescents or for adolescents considering reproduction, genetic testing and screening should be offered as clinically indicated, and the risks and benefits should be explained
clearly.
Predictive Genetic Testing
8.	Parents or guardians may authorize predictive genetic testing for
asymptomatic children at risk of childhood-­onset conditions.
Ideally, the assent of the child should be obtained.
9.	Predictive genetic testing for adult-­onset conditions generally
should be deferred unless an intervention initiated in childhood
may reduce morbidity or mortality. An exception might be
made for families for whom diagnostic uncertainty poses a significant psychosocial burden, particularly when an adolescent
and the parents concur in their interest in predictive testing.
10.	For ethical and legal reasons, healthcare providers should be
cautious about providing predictive genetic testing to minors
without the involvement of their parents or guardians, even if
a minor is mature. Results of such tests may have significant
medical, psychologic, and social implications, not only for the
minor but also for other family members.
Histocompatibility Testing
11.	Tissue compatibility testing of minors of all ages is permissible
to benefit immediate family members but should be conducted
only after thorough exploration of the psychosocial, emotional,
and physical implications of the minor serving as a potential
stem cell donor. A donor advocate or similar mechanism should
be in place from the outset to avert coercion and safeguard the
interests of the child.
Adoption
12.	The rationale for genetic testing of children in biological families
should apply for adopted children and children awaiting placement for adoption. If a child has a known genetic risk, prospective adoptive parents must be made aware of this possibility. In
rare cases, it may be in a child’s best interest to undergo predictive genetic testing for a known risk before adoption to ensure
the child’s placement with a family capable of and willing to accept the child’s potential medical and developmental challenges.
In the absence of such indications, genetic testing should not be
performed as a condition of adoption.
Disclosure
13.	At the time of genetic testing, parents or guardians should be
encouraged to inform their child of the test results at an appropriate age. Parents or guardians should be advised that, under
most circumstances, a request by a mature adolescent for test
results should be honored.
14.	Results from genetic testing of a child may have implications
for the parents and other family members. Healthcare providers
have an obligation to inform parents and the child, when appropriate, about these potential implications. Healthcare providers
should encourage patients and families to share this information
and offer to help explain the results to the extended family or
refer them for genetic counseling.
15.	Misattributed paternity, use of donor gametes, adoption, or
other questions about family relationships may be uncovered
“incidentally” whenever genetic testing is performed, particularly when testing multiple family members. This risk should be
discussed, and a plan about disclosure or nondisclosure should
be in place before testing.
Direct-­to-­Consumer Testing
16.	
AAP and ACMG strongly discourage the use of direct-­
to-­
consumer and home-­kit genetic testing of children because of
the lack of oversight on test content, accuracy, and interpretation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

730 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Chapter 96

Principles of Human
Genetics
Daryl A. Scott and Brendan Lee
THE HUMAN GENOME

The human genome has approximately 20,000 genes that encode the
wide variety of proteins found in the human body. Reproductive or
germline cells contain one copy (N) of this genetic complement and are
haploid, whereas somatic (nongermline) cells contain two complete
copies (2N) and are diploid. Genes are organized into long segments
of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), which, during cell division, are compacted into intricate structures together with proteins to form chromosomes. Each somatic cell has 46 chromosomes: 22 pairs of autosomes,
or nonsex chromosomes, and one pair of sex chromosomes (XY in a
male, XX in a female). Germ cells (ova or sperm) contain 22 autosomes
and one sex chromosome, for a total of 23. At fertilization, the full diploid chromosome complement of 46 is again realized in the embryo.
Most of the genetic material is contained in the cell’s nucleus. The
mitochondria (the cell’s energy-­producing organelles) contain their
own unique genome. The mitochondrial chromosome consists of a
double-­stranded circular piece of DNA, which contains 16,568 base
pairs (bp) of DNA and is present in multiple copies per cell. The proteins that occupy the mitochondria are produced either in the mitochondria, using information contained in the mitochondrial genome,
or are produced outside of the mitochondria, using information contained in the nuclear genome, and then transported into the organelle. Sperm do not usually contribute mitochondria to the developing
embryo, so all mitochondria are maternally derived, and a child’s mitochondrial genetic makeup derives exclusively from the child’s biologic
mother (see Chapter 108).

FUNDAMENTALS OF MOLECULAR GENETICS

DNA consists of a pair of chains of a sugar-­phosphate backbone linked
by pyrimidine and purine bases to form a double helix (Fig. 96.1). The
sugar in DNA is deoxyribose. The pyrimidines are cytosine (C) and
thymine (T), and the purines are guanine (G) and adenine (A). The
bases are linked by hydrogen bonds such that A always pairs with T
and G with C. Each strand of the double helix has polarity, with a free
phosphate at one end (5′) and an unbonded hydroxyl on the sugar at
the other end (3′). The two strands are oriented in opposite polarity in
the double helix.
The replication of DNA follows the pairing of bases in the parent
DNA strand. The original two strands unwind by breaking the hydrogen bonds between base pairs. Free nucleotides, consisting of a base
attached to a sugar-­phosphate chain, form new hydrogen bonds with
their complementary bases on the parent strand; new phosphodiester bonds are created by enzymes called DNA polymerases. Replication of chromosomes begins simultaneously at multiple sites, forming
replication bubbles that expand bidirectionally until the entire DNA
molecule (chromosome) is replicated. Errors in DNA replication, or
pathogenic variants induced by environmental mutagens such as irradiation or chemicals, are detected and potentially corrected by DNA
repair systems.
Information encoded in DNA, predominantly located in the cell’s
nucleus, is transcribed into messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA),
which is then transported to the cytoplasm, where it is translated into
protein. A prototypical gene consists of a regulatory region, segments
called exons that encode the amino acid sequence of a protein, and
intervening segments called introns (Fig. 96.2).
Transcription is initiated by attachment of ribonucleic acid (RNA)
polymerase to the promoter site upstream of the beginning of the

coding sequence. Specific proteins bind to the region to repress or
activate transcription by compacting or opening chromatin, which
is a complex of DNA and histone proteins. It is the action of these
regulatory proteins (transcription factors) that determines, in large
part, when a gene is turned on or off. Some genes are also turned on
and off by methylation of cytosine bases that are adjacent to guanine
bases (cytosine-­phosphate-­guanine bases [CpGs]). Methylation is an
example of an epigenetic change, meaning a change that can affect gene
expression, and possibly the characteristics of a cell or organism, but
that does not involve a change in the underlying genetic sequence. Gene
regulation is flexible and responsive, with genes being turned on or
off during development and in response to internal and external environmental conditions and stimuli. Another epigenetic mechanism that
controls gene expression is the biochemical modification of histone
proteins around which DNA is wound. These modifications can affect
the relative accessibility of chromatin by enzymes for transcription.
Transcription proceeds through the entire length of the gene in a 5′
to 3′ direction to form an mRNA transcript whose sequence is complementary to that of one of the DNA strands. RNA is a sugar-­phosphate
chain with pyrimidines and purines. In RNA the sugar is ribose, and
uracil replaces the thymine found in DNA. A “cap” consisting of
7-­methylguanosine is added to the 5′ end of the RNA in a 5′-­5′ bond
and, for most transcripts, several hundred adenine bases are enzymatically added to the 3′ end after transcription.
mRNA processing occurs in the nucleus and consists of excision of
the introns and splicing together of the exons. Specific sequences at the
start and end of introns mark the sites where the splicing machinery
will act on the transcript. In some cases, there may be tissue-­specific
patterns to splicing, so that the same primary transcript can produce
multiple distinct proteins.
The processed transcript is next exported to the cytoplasm, where
it binds to ribosomes, which are complexes of protein and ribosomal
RNA (rRNA). The genetic code is then read in triplets of bases, each
triplet corresponding with a specific amino acid or providing a signal
that terminates translation. The triplet codons are recognized by transfer RNAs (tRNAs) that include complementary anticodons and bind
the corresponding amino acid, delivering it to the growing peptide.
New amino acids are enzymatically, sequentially attached to the growing peptide. Each time an amino acid is added, the ribosome moves
one triplet codon step along the mRNA. Eventually a stop codon is
reached, at which point translation ends and the peptide is released.
In some proteins, there are posttranslational modifications, such as
attachment of sugars (glycosylation). The protein is then delivered to
its destination within or outside the cell by trafficking mechanisms that
recognize portions of the peptide.
Another mechanism of gene regulation is noncoding RNAs, which
are RNAs transcribed from DNA but not translated into proteins. Noncoding RNAs function in many contexts, including mediating splicing, the processing of coding RNAs in the nucleus, and the translation
of coding mRNAs in ribosomes. The roles of long noncoding RNAs
(>200 bp) and short noncoding RNAs (<200 bp) extend beyond these
processes to impact a diverse set of biologic functions, including the
regulation of gene expression. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of
small RNAs that control gene expression in the cell by directly targeting specific sets of coding RNAs by direct RNA–RNA binding. This
RNA–RNA interaction can lead to degradation of the target-­coding
RNA or inhibition of translation of the protein specified by that coding
RNA. miRNAs often target and regulate several hundred mRNAs.

GENETIC VARIATION

The process of producing protein from a gene is subject to disruption at multiple levels because of alterations in the DNA sequence
(Fig. 96.3). Changes in the regulatory region can lead to altered gene
expression, including increased or decreased rates of transcription,
failure of gene activation, or activation of the gene at inappropriate times or in inappropriate cells. Changes in the coding sequence
can lead to substitution of one amino acid for another (missense
variant or nonsynonymous variant) or creation of a stop codon in
the place of an amino acid codon (nonsense or stop-­gain variant).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 96 u Principles of Human Genetics
5'

3'

One helical tum  3.4 nm

Sugar-phosphate
backbone

Bases

Adenine
Thymine
Guanine
Cytosine
3'

5'

Fig. 96.1 DNA double helix, with sugar-­phosphate backbone and nitrogenous bases. (From Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ, et al., eds.
Medical Genetics, 2nd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 1999: p. 8.)
Non-transcribed strand

Exons:

1

Overall, missense and nonsense variants are the most common (56%
of variants); small deletions or insertions represent approximately
24% of variants (Table 96.1). Some single-­base changes do not affect
the amino acid (silent, wobble, or synonymous variants) because
there may be several triplet codons that correspond to the same single
amino acid. Amino acid substitutions can have a profound effect on
protein function if the chemical properties of the substituted amino
acid are markedly different. Other substitutions can have a subtle or
no effect on protein function, particularly if the substituted amino
acid is chemically similar to the original. Single nucleotide changes,
whether silent or missense, are termed single nucleotide variants
(SNV).
Genetic changes can also include insertions or deletions (“in-­
dels”). Insertions or deletions of a nonintegral multiple of three bases
into the coding sequence leads to a frameshift, altering the grouping
of bases into triplets. This leads to translation of an incorrect amino
acid sequence and often a premature stop to translation. Insertion or
deletion of an integral multiple of three bases into the coding sequence
will insert or delete a corresponding number of amino acids from the
protein, leading to in-­frame alterations that maintain the amino acid
sequence outside the deleted or duplicated amino acids. Larger scale
insertions or deletions can disrupt a coding sequence or result in complete deletion of an entire gene or group of genes.
Pathogenic variants usually can be classified as causing a loss of function or a gain of function. Loss-­of-­function variants lead to a reduction in the level of protein function as a result of decreased expression
or production of a protein that does not work as efficiently. In some
cases, loss of protein function from one of two alleles is sufficient to
cause disease. Haploinsufficiency describes the situation in which
maintenance of a normal phenotype requires the proteins produced
by both alleles of a gene, and a 50% decrease in gene function results
in an abnormal phenotype. Haploinsufficient phenotypes are dominantly inherited. Loss-­of-­function variants can also have a dominant

2

3

5'
3'

3'
5'

3'

Transcribed strand

5'

731

RNA

1. Transcription 5' CAP

3'
polyA addition

2. RNA processing
and splicing

5'

A A A A 3'

Nucleus
5'

3. Transport
Cytoplasm

4. Translation

A A A A 3'

Growing polypeptide
chain
5'

A A A A 3'

Ribosomes

5. Protein assembly

Completed polypeptide

Fig. 96.2 Flow of information from DNA to RNA to protein for a hypothetical gene with three exons and two introns. Within the exons, colored regions indicate
coding sequences. Steps include transcription, RNA processing and splicing, RNA transport from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, translation, and protein assembly.
(From Nussbaum RL, McInnis RR, Willard HF, Hamosh A, eds. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007: p. 31.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

732 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Promoter

Intron

Intron

Exon

Exon

Exon

Increased or decreased
level of transcription
Inclusion of intron in processed mRNA
TCC CAA ATC GTC CCT CGA GTT Wild type sequence
ser gln ile val pro arg val
TCC CAG ATC GTC CCT CGA GTT Silent variant
ser gln ile val pro arg val

Exon skip

TCC CAG ATC CTC CCT CGA GTT Conservative variant
ser gln ile leu pro arg val

Fig. 96.3 Various types of intra-

genic sequence variants. Promoter
variants alter rate of transcription
or disrupt gene regulation. Base
changes within exons can have
various effects, as shown. Variants
within introns can lead to inclusion
of some intronic sequence in the final processed mRNA, or it can lead
to exon skipping.

TCC CAG ATC CTC GCT CGA GTT Missense variant
ser gln ile leu ala arg val
TCC CAA ATC GTC CCT TGA GTT Nonsense variant
ser gln ile val pro stop
TCC CAG AAT CGT CCC TCG AGT Frameshift insertion
ser gln asn arg pro ser ser

Table 96.1  Main Classes, Groups, and Types of Sequence Variants and Their Effects on Protein Products
CLASS
Substitution

Deletion

Insertion

GROUP

TYPE

EFFECT ON PROTEIN PRODUCT

Synonymous

Silent*

Same amino acid

Nonsynonymous

Missense*

Altered amino acid—may affect protein function or stability

Nonsense or stop-­gain*

Stop codon—loss of function or expression from degradation of
mRNA

Splice site

Aberrant splicing—exon skipping or intron retention

Promoter

Altered gene expression

Multiple of three (codon)

In-­frame deletion of one or more amino acid(s)—may affect
protein function or stability

Not multiple of three

Frameshift

Likely to result in premature termination with loss of function or
expression

Large deletion

Partial gene deletion

May result in premature termination with loss of function or
expression

Whole gene deletion

Loss of expression

Multiple of three (codon)

In-­frame insertion of one or more amino acid(s)—may affect
protein function or stability

Not multiple of three

Frameshift

Likely to result in premature termination with loss of function or
expression

Large insertion

Partial gene duplication

May result in premature termination with loss of function or
expression

Whole gene duplication

May have an effect because of increased gene dosage

Dynamic pathogenic variant

Altered gene expression or altered protein stability or function

Expansion of trinucleotide
repeat

*Some have been shown to cause aberrant splicing.
From Turnpenny P, Ellard S, eds. Emery’s Elements of Medical Genetics, 14th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2012: p. 23.

negative effect when the abnormal protein product actively interferes
with the function of the normal protein product. Both situations lead
to diseases inherited in a dominant fashion. Haploinsufficiency of type
I collagen can cause relatively mild osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type I.
In contrast, heterozygous, missense glycine substitutions in type I collagen can act in a dominant negative fashion to cause severe OI type II,
III, and IV. In other cases, loss-­of-­function variants must be present in
both copies of a gene before an abnormal phenotype results. This situation typically results in diseases inherited in a recessive fashion (see

Chapter 97). Some conditions are semidominant where one affected
copy (heterozygous pathogenic variant) causes a milder phenotype
than when both copies are affected (compound heterozygous or homozygous pathogenic variants). This is seen in classical achondroplasia vs
homozygous achondroplasia
Gain-­of-­function variants typically cause dominantly inherited
diseases. These variants can result in production of a protein molecule with an increased ability to perform a normal function or can
confer a novel property on the protein. The gain-­of-­function variant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 96 u Principles of Human Genetics
in achondroplasia, the most common of the disproportionate, short-­
limbed short stature disorders, exemplifies the enhanced function of a
normal protein. Achondroplasia results from a pathogenic variant in
the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptor three gene (FGFR3), which
leads to activation of the receptor, even in the absence of FGF. In sickle
cell disease, an amino acid is substituted into the hemoglobin molecule and has little effect on the ability of the protein to transport oxygen. However, sickle hemoglobin chains have a novel property. Unlike
normal hemoglobin, sickle hemoglobin chains aggregate under conditions of deoxygenation, forming fibers that deform the red cells.
Other gain-­of-­function variants result in overexpression or inappropriate expression of a gene product. Many cancer-­causing genes
(oncogenes) are normal regulators of cellular proliferation during
development. However, expression of these genes in adult life and/or
in cells in which they usually are not expressed can result in neoplasia.
In some cases, changes in gene expression are caused by changes in
the number of copies of a gene that are present in the genome (Fig.
96.4). Although some copy number variations are common and do
not appear to cause or predispose to disease, others are clearly disease causing. Charcot-­Marie-­Tooth disease type 1A, the most common inherited form of chronic peripheral neuropathy of childhood,
is caused by duplications of the gene for peripheral myelin protein 22,
resulting in overexpression due to the existence of three active copies
of this gene (see Chapter 653.1). Deletions of this same gene, leaving
Reference DNA

Test DNA

Reference DNA

Test DNA

Labeling

Samples mixed
Hybridization to arrays

Ratio (test:reference)

Spurious signal
Combine dye-swap
experiments and calculate from one dyeswap experiment
fluorescence ratio
Duplication

Deletion

1.5
1.0
0.5
1 Mb

2 Mb

3 Mb
Genomic region

4 Mb

Fig. 96.4 Array comparative genomic hybridization. Test and refer-

ence DNA samples are differentially labeled, mixed, and passed over
a target array of probes (e.g., bacterial artificial chromosome clones
or oligonucleotides) containing DNA fragments from across the whole
human genome. The experiment is often repeated with reversal of the
test and reference dyes to detect dye effects or identify spurious signals. DNA samples hybridize with their corresponding probe, and the
ratio of fluorescence from each probe (test:reference) is used to detect
regions that vary in copy number between the test and the reference
sample (red line, original hybridization; blue line, dye-­swapped hybridization). Equal copy number for both the test and the reference DNA is
identified by equal binding, resulting in a ratio of 1:1. Duplication in a
genomic region of the test sample is identified by an increased ratio,
and a deletion is identified by a decreased ratio, but a deletion in the
test sample is indistinguishable from a duplication in the reference sample. These ratios are usually converted to log2 scale for further analysis.
Mb, megabase. (Adapted from Feuk L, Carson AR, Scherer SW. Structural variation in the human genome. Nat Rev Genet 2006;7:85–97.)

733

only one active copy, are responsible for a different disorder, hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies.
Deletions and duplications can vary in their extent and can involve
several genes, even when they are not detectable using a traditional
chromosome analysis. Such changes are commonly called microdeletions and microduplications. When deletion or duplication of two or
more genes in the same chromosomal region each play a role in the
resulting clinical features, the condition can also be referred to as a
contiguous gene disorder.
In some cases, the recognition of a specific constellation of features
leads clinicians to suspect a specific microdeletion or microduplication syndrome. Examples of such disorders include Smith-­Magenis,
DiGeorge, and Williams syndromes. In other cases, the clinician may
be alerted to this possibility by an unusually diverse array of clinical
features in one patient or the presence of unusual features in a person with a known condition. Because of the close physical proximity
of a series of genes, different deletions involving the short arm of the
X chromosome can produce individuals with various combinations of
ichthyosis, Kallmann syndrome, ocular albinism, intellectual disability,
chondrodysplasia punctata, and short stature.
DNA rearrangements can also take place in somatic cells (cells that
do not go on to produce ova or sperm). Rearrangements that occur
in lymphoid cells are required for the normal formation of functional
immunoglobulin in B cells and antigen-­recognizing receptors on T
cells. Large segments of DNA, which code for the variable and the constant regions of either immunoglobulin or the T-­cell receptor (TCR),
are physically joined at a specific stage in the development of an immunocompetent lymphocyte. These rearrangements take place during
development of the lymphoid cell lineage in humans and result in the
extensive diversity of immunoglobulin and TCR molecules. Because of
this postgermline DNA rearrangement, no two individuals, not even
identical twins, are fully identical, because mature lymphocytes from
each will have undergone random DNA rearrangements at these loci.
The human genome demonstrates that any two individuals will differ in about one base in 1,000. Some of these differences are silent;
some result in changes that explain phenotypic differences (hair or
eye color, physical appearance); and some have medical significance,
causing single-­gene disorders such as sickle cell anemia or explaining
susceptibility to common pediatric disorders such as asthma. Genetic
variants in a single gene that occur at a frequency of >1% in a population are often referred to as polymorphisms. These variations may be
silent or subtle or may have significant phenotypic effects.

GENOTYPE-­PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS IN
GENETIC DISEASE

The term genotype is used to signify the internally coded, heritable
information of an individual and can also be used to refer to which
particular alternative version (allele) of a gene is present at a specific
location (locus) on a chromosome. A phenotype is the observed
structural, biochemical, and physiologic characteristics of an individual, determined by the genotype, and can also refer to the observed
structural and functional effects of a variant allele at a specific locus.
Many sequence variants result in predictable phenotypes; physicians
can predict clinical outcomes and plan appropriate treatment strategies based on a patient’s genotype. There is also phenotypic expansion
where multiple alleles (variants) within a gene can be associated with
often diverse and distinct clinical presentations.
Long QT syndrome exemplifies a disorder with predictable associations between a patient’s genotype and his or her phenotype (see
Chapter 484.5). Long QT syndrome is genetically heterogeneous,
meaning that pathogenic variants in several different genes can cause
the same disorder. The risk for cardiac events (syncope, aborted cardiac
arrest, or sudden death) is higher in patients with long QT syndrome
involving KCNQ1 (63%) or KCNH2 (46%) than in those with pathogenic variants in SCN5A (18%). In addition, individuals with KCNQ1
variants experience most of their episodes during exercise and rarely
during rest or sleep. In contrast, individuals with pathogenic variants
in KCNH2 and SCN5A are more likely to have episodes during sleep
or rest and rarely during exercise. Therefore variants in specific genes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

734 Part VIII u Human Genetics
(genotype) are correlated with specific manifestations (phenotype) of
long QT syndrome. These types of relationships are commonly referred
to as genotype-­phenotype correlations.
Pathogenic variants in the fibrillin-­1 gene associated with Marfan syndrome represent another example of predictable genotype-­
phenotype correlations (see Chapter 743). Marfan syndrome is
characterized by the combination of skeletal, ocular, and aortic manifestations, with the most devastating outcome being aortic root dissection and sudden death. The fibrillin-­1 gene consists of 65 exons, and
pathogenic variants have been found in almost all these. The location
of the variant within the gene (genotype) might play a significant role
in determining the severity of the condition (phenotype). Neonatal
Marfan syndrome is often caused by variants in exons 24-­27 and in
exons 31 and 32, whereas milder forms are caused by variants in exons
59-­65 and in exons 37 and 41.
Genotype-­phenotype correlations have also been observed in some
complications of cystic fibrosis (CF; see Chapter 454). Although pulmonary disease is the major cause of morbidity and mortality, CF is a multisystem disorder that affects not only the epithelia of the respiratory tract
but also the exocrine pancreas, intestine, male genital tract, hepatobiliary
system, and exocrine sweat glands. CF is caused by pathogenic variants
in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. More
than 1,600 different pathogenic CFTR variants have been identified. The
most common is a deletion of three nucleotides that removes the amino
acid phenylalanine (F) at the 508th position on the protein (ΔF508 variant), which accounts for approximately 70% of all pathogenic CF variants and is associated with severe disease. The best genotype-­phenotype
correlations in CF are seen in the context of pancreatic function, with
common pathogenic variants being classified as either pancreatic sufficient or pancreatic insufficient. Persons with pancreatic sufficiency usually have either one or two pancreatic-­sufficient alleles, indicating that
pancreatic-­sufficient alleles are dominant. In contrast, the genotype-­
phenotype correlation in pulmonary disease is much weaker, and persons with identical genotypes have wide variations in the severity of their
pulmonary disease. This finding may be accounted for, in part, by genetic
modifiers or environmental factors.
In many disorders, the effects of variants on phenotype can be modified by changes in the other allele of the same gene, by changes in specific modifier genes, and/or by variations in a number of unspecified
genes (genetic background). When sickle cell anemia is co-­inherited
with the gene for hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin, the sickle
cell phenotypic expression is less severe. Modifier genes in CF can
influence the development of congenital meconium ileus, or colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Modifier genes can also affect
the manifestations of Hirschsprung disease, neurofibromatosis type 2,
craniosynostosis, and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The combination of genetic variants producing glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency and longer versions of the TATAA element in the uridine
diphosphate–glucuronosyltransferase gene promoter exacerbates neonatal physiologic hyperbilirubinemia.

HUMAN GENOME PROJECT

A rudimentary genetic map can be made using genetic linkage, which
is based on the principle that alleles at two genetic loci that are located
near each other segregate together in a family unless they are separated by genetic recombination. In contrast to linkage maps, physical
maps rely on overlapping DNA fragments to determine the location of
loci with respect to one another. Overlapping segments of the genomic
regions can be identified and used to piece together a map composed of
overlapping DNA fragments to obtain the DNA sequence of the entire
region. An alternative strategy involves breaking the entire genome into
random fragments, sequencing the fragments, and then computationally assembling them into overlapping segments. This whole genome
approach in combination with next-­generation sequencing technologies has resulted in a dramatic reduction in the cost of sequencing an
individual’s entire genome.
Analysis of the human genome has produced some surprising
results. The number of genes appears to be ∼20,000. However, the number of protein products encoded by the genome is far greater than the

Fig. 96.5 Microarray containing 36,000 oligonucleotides. The micro-

array was exposed to RNA from normal fibroblasts (labeled in red; see
arrows) and fibroblasts from a patient with Niemann-­Pick disease, type
C (labeled green). Arrows point to regions in which there was a strong
hybridization signal with either normal or disease RNA. This microarray
was used to search for genes that are highly expressed in the fibroblasts
of patients. (From Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ, White RL. Medical
Genetics, 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2006: p. 116.)

number of genes. This is a result of the presence of alternative promoter
regions, alternative splicing, and posttranslational modifications,
which can allow a single gene to encode a number of protein products.
It is also apparent that most of the human genome does not encode
protein, with <5% being transcribed and translated, although a much
larger percentage may be transcribed without translation. Many transcribed sequences are not translated but represent genes that encode
RNAs that serve regulatory roles. A large fraction of the genome consists of repeated sequences that are interspersed among the genes. Some
of these are transposable genetic elements that can move from place to
place in the genome. Others are static elements that were expanded and
dispersed in the past during human evolution. Other repeated sequences
might play a structural role. There are also regions of genomic duplications. Such duplications are substrate for evolution, allowing genetic
motifs to be copied and modified to serve new roles in the cell. Duplications can also play a role in chromosomal rearrangement, permitting
nonhomologous chromosome segments to pair during meiosis and
exchange material. This is another source of evolutionary change and a
potential source of chromosomal instability leading to congenital anomalies or cancer. Low copy repeats also play an important role in causing genomic disorders. When low copy repeats flank unique genomic
segments, these regions can be duplicated or deleted through a process
known as nonallelic homologous recombination.
Availability of the entire human genomic sequence permits the
study of large groups of genes, looking for patterns of gene expression
or genome alteration. Studies of gene expression are performed using
next-­generation sequencing techniques to obtain information about all
RNA transcripts in a tissue or single cell. The patterns of gene expression may provide signatures for particular disease states, such as cancer, or change in response to therapy (Fig. 96.5).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

735

The family history remains the most important screening tool for pediatricians in identifying a patient’s risk for developing a wide range of
diseases, from multifactorial conditions such as diabetes and attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder, to single-­gene disorders such as sickle
cell anemia and cystic fibrosis. Through a detailed family history, the
physician can often ascertain the mode of genetic transmission and the
risks to family members. Because not all familial clustering of disease
is caused by genetic factors, a family history can also identify common
environmental and behavioral factors that influence the occurrence of
disease. The main goal of the family history is to identify genetic susceptibility, and the cornerstone of the family history is a systematic and
standardized pedigree.
A pedigree provides a graphic depiction of a family’s structure and
medical history. It is important when taking a pedigree to be systematic and use standard symbols and configurations so that anyone can
read and understand the information (Figs. 97.1-­97.4). In the pediatric
setting, the proband is typically the child or adolescent who is being
evaluated. The proband is designated in the pedigree by an arrow.
A three-­to four-­generation pedigree should be obtained for every
new patient as an initial screen for genetic disorders segregating within
the family. The pedigree can provide clues to the inheritance pattern
of these disorders and can aid the clinician in determining the risk to
the proband and other family members. The closer the relationship of
the proband to the person in the family with the genetic disorder, the
greater is the shared genetic complement. First-­degree relatives, such
as a parent, full sibling, or child, share one half their genetic information on average; first cousins share one eighth. Sometimes the person
providing the family history may mention a distant relative who is
affected with a genetic disorder. In such cases a more extensive pedigree may be needed to identify the risk to other family members. For
example, a history of a distant maternally related cousin with intellectual disability caused by fragile X syndrome can still place a male proband at an elevated risk for this disorder.

trait and do not harbor a copy of the deleterious gene) do not pass the
disorder to their children. Males and females are equally affected.
Although not a characteristic per se, the finding of male-­to-­male
transmission essentially confirms autosomal dominant inheritance.
Vertical transmission can also be seen with X-­linked traits. However,
because a father passes on his Y chromosome to a son, male-­to-­male
transmission cannot be seen with an X-­linked trait. Therefore male-­to-­
male transmission eliminates X-­linked inheritance as a possible explanation. Although male-­to-­male transmission can occur with Y-­linked
genes as well, there are very few Y-­linked disorders, compared with
thousands having the autosomal dominant inheritance pattern.
Although parent-­to-­child transmission is a characteristic of autosomal dominant inheritance, many patients with an autosomal dominant disorder have no history of an affected family member, for several
possible reasons. First, the patient may have the disorder due to a de
novo (new) pathogenic variant that occurred in the DNA of the egg or
sperm that formed that individual. Second, many autosomal dominant
conditions demonstrate incomplete penetrance, meaning that not all
individuals who carry the pathogenic variant have phenotypic manifestations. In a pedigree, this can appear as a skipped generation, in
which an unaffected individual links two affected persons (Fig. 97.6).
There are many potential reasons that a disorder might exhibit incomplete penetrance including the effect of modifier genes, environmental
factors, gender, and age. Third, individuals with the same autosomal
dominant variant can manifest the disorder to different degrees. This is
termed variable expression and is a characteristic of many autosomal
dominant disorders.
Fourth, some spontaneous genetic pathogenic variants occur not in
the egg or sperm that forms a child, but rather in a cell in the developing embryo or in a tissue after birth. Such events are referred to as
somatic pathogenic variants. Because only a subset of cells in the body
are affected, the change is said to be mosaic. The phenotypes caused by
a somatic pathogenic variant can vary but are usually milder than if all
cells were affected by the pathogenic variant. Some cancers typically
arise from cells that have been affected by multiple somatic pathogenic
variants. In germline mosaicism, the pathogenic variant occurs in a
subset of cells that ultimately produce ova or sperm. An individual
who is germline mosaic for a pathogenic variant might not have any
manifestations of the associated disorder but may pass that change
on to his or her offspring by producing ova or sperm that carry the
pathogenic variant. Children whose bodies derive from those ova or
sperm will carry the pathogenic variant in all of their cells unless the
change undergoes a rare reversion of the somatic pathogenic variant.
Recurrence of a dominantly inherited condition to apparently unaffected parents can sometimes be explained by germline mosaicism for
the dominantly transmitted variant in one of the parents.

MENDELIAN INHERITANCE

Autosomal Recessive Inheritance

Chapter 97

Patterns of Genetic
Transmission
Daryl A. Scott and Brendan Lee
FAMILY HISTORY AND PEDIGREE NOTATION

There are three classic forms of genetic inheritance: autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-­linked; these are referred to as mendelian inheritance forms.

Autosomal Dominant Inheritance

Autosomal dominant inheritance is determined by the presence of one
abnormal gene on one of the autosomes (chromosomes 1-­22). Autosomal genes exist in pairs, with each parent contributing one copy. In an
autosomal dominant trait, a change in one of the paired genes affects
the phenotype of an individual, even though the other copy of the gene
is functioning correctly. A phenotype can refer to a physical manifestation, a behavioral characteristic, or a difference detectable only through
laboratory tests.
The pedigree for autosomal dominant disorders demonstrates certain characteristics. These disorders show a vertical transmission
(parent-­to-­child) pattern and can appear in multiple generations (Fig.
97.5). An affected individual has a 50% chance of passing on the deleterious gene in each pregnancy and, therefore, of having a child affected
by the disorder. This is referred to as the recurrence risk for the disorder. Unaffected individuals (family members who do not manifest the

Autosomal recessive inheritance requires deleterious variants in both
copies of a gene to cause disease. Examples include cystic fibrosis
and sickle cell disease. Autosomal recessive disorders are characterized by horizontal transmission, the observation of multiple affected
members of a kindred in the same generation, but no affected family members in other generations (Fig. 97.7). They are associated with
a recurrence risk of 25% for carrier parents who have had a previous affected child. Male and female offspring are equally likely to be
affected, although some traits exhibit differential expression between
sexes. The offspring of consanguineous parents are at increased risk for
rare, autosomal recessive traits due to the increased chance that both
parents may carry a gene affected by a deleterious variant that they
inherited from a common ancestor. Consanguinity between parents
of a child with a suspected genetic disorder implies, but certainly does
not prove, autosomal recessive inheritance. Although consanguineous
unions are uncommon in Europe and the Americas, in other parts of
the world (southern India, Japan, and the Middle East) as high as 50%
of all children may be conceived in consanguineous unions. The risk
of a genetic disorder in the offspring of a first-­cousin union (6–8%) is
about double the risk in the general population (3–4%).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

736 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Instructions:
Key should contain all information relevant to interpretation of pedigree (e.g., define fill/shading)
For clinical (non-published) pedigrees include:
a) name of proband/consultand
b) family names/initials of relatives for identification, as appropriate
c) name and title of person recording pedigree
d) historian (person relaying family history information)
e) date of intake/update
f) reason for taking pedigree (e.g., abnormal ultrasound, familial cancer, developmental delay, etc.)
g) ancestry of both sides of family
Recommended order of information placed below symbol (or to lower right)
a) age; can note year of birth (e.g., b.1978) and/or death (e.g., d. 2007)
b) evaluation (see Fig. 97.4)
c) pedigree number (e.g., I-1, I-2, I-3)
Limit identifying information to maintain confidentiality and privacy
Male

Female

Gender not
specified

1. Individual
b.1925

30 y

4 mo

2. Affected individual

Comments
Assign gender by phenotype (see text for
disorders of sex development, etc.).
Do not write age in symbol.
Key/legend used to define shading or other
fill (e.g., hatches, dots, etc.). Use only when
individual is clinically affected.

With 2 conditions, the individual’s symbol can be
partitioned accordingly, each segment shaded with a
different fill and defined in legend.
3. Multiple individuals,
number known

5

5

5

4. Multiple individuals,
number unknown or
unstated

n

n

n

5. Deceased individual
d. 35

d. 4 mo

d. 60’s

Number of siblings written inside symbol.
(Affected individuals should not be grouped.)
“n” used in place of “?”.

Indicate cause of death if known. Do not use
a cross (†) to indicate death to avoid
confusion with evaluation positive ().

6. Consultand

Individual(s) seeking genetic
counseling/testing.

7. Proband

An affected family member coming to
medical attention independent of other
family members.

P

P

8. Stillbirth (SB)

Include gestational age and karyotype,
if known.
SB
28 wk

SB
30 wk

SB
34 wk

P

P

P

LMP: 7/1/2007
47,XY,+21

20 wk
46, XX

9. Pregnancy (P)

Pregnancies not carried to term

Affected

Gestational age and karyotype below
symbol. Light shading can be used for
affected; define in key/legend.

Unaffected

10. Spontaneous abortion (SAB)
17 wks female
cystic hygroma

11. Termination of pregnancy (TOP)

10 wks

If gestational age/gender known, write below
symbol. Key/legend used to define shading.
Other abbreviations (e.g., TAB, VTOP) not
used for sake of consistency.

18 wks
47, XY,18

12. Ectopic pregnancy (ECT)

Write ECT below symbol.
ECT

Fig. 97.1 Common pedigree symbols, definitions, and abbreviations. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human
pedigree nomenclature: update and assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns.
2008;17:424–433.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission
1. Definitions

Comments

1. relationship line

If possible, male partner should be to left of female partner on
relationship line.

3. sibship line

2. line of descent

737

Siblings should be listed from left to right in birth order (oldest
to youngest).

4. individual’s line

2. Relationship line (horizontal)
a. Relationships

A break in a relationship line
indicates the relationship no
longer exists. Multiple previous
partners do not need to be
shown if they do not affect
genetic assessment.

b. Consanguinity

If degree of relationship not obvious from pedigree, it should be stated
(e.g., third cousins) above relationship line.

3. Line of descent (vertical or diagonal)
a. Genetic

- Multiple
gestation

Biologic parents shown.

Monozygotic

Dizygotic

Unknown

Trizygotic

?

- Family history
not available/
known for
individual

?

- No children
by choice
or reason
unknown

?

Indicate reason, if known.

or
tubal

vasectomy

- Infertility

Indicate reason, if known.

or
azoospermia

b. Adoption

in

The horizontal line indicating
monozygosity is placed
between the individual’s line
and not between each
symbol. An asterisk (*) can
be used if zygosity proven.

endometriosis

out

by relative

Brackets used for all
adoptions. Adoptive and
biological parents denoted
by dashed and solid lines
of descent, respectively.

Fig. 97.2 Pedigree line definitions. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human pedigree nomenclature: update and
assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns. 2008;17:424–433.)

Every individual probably carries several rare, deleterious recessive
pathogenic sequence variants. Because most pathogenic variants carried in the general population occur at a very low frequency, it does
not make economic sense to screen the entire population to identify
the small number of persons who carry these variants. These variants typically remain undetected unless an affected child is born to a
couple who both carry pathogenic variants affecting the same gene.
However, in some genetic isolates (small populations isolated by
geography, religion, culture, or language), certain rare recessive pathogenic variants are much more common than in the general population. Even though there may be no known consanguinity, couples
from these genetic isolates have a greater chance of sharing pathogenic
alleles inherited from a common ancestor. Screening programs have
been developed among some such groups to detect persons who carry
common disease-­causing variants and, therefore, are at increased risk
for having affected children.

A variety of autosomal recessive conditions are more common
among Ashkenazi Jews than in the general population. Couples of
Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry should be offered prenatal or preconception screening for Gaucher disease type one (carrier rate 1:14),
cystic fibrosis (1:25), Tay-­Sachs disease (1:25), familial dysautonomia (1:30), Canavan disease (1:40), glycogen storage disease type
1A (1:71), maple syrup urine disease (1:81), Fanconi anemia type C
(1:89), Niemann-­Pick disease type A (1:90), Bloom syndrome (1:100),
mucolipidosis IV (1:120), and possibly neonatal familial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia.
The prevalence of carriers of certain autosomal recessive variants
in some larger populations is unusually high. In such cases, heterozygote advantage is postulated. The carrier frequencies of sickle cell
disease in the African population and of cystic fibrosis in the northern European population are much higher than would be expected
from the rate of new pathogenic variants. In these populations,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

738 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Instructions:
D represents egg or sperm donor
S represents surrogate (gestational carrier)
If the woman is both the ovum donor and a surrogate, in the interest of genetic assessment, she will only be
referred to as a donor (e.g., 4 and 5); the pregnancy symbol and its line of descent are positioned below the
woman who is carrying the pregnancy
Available family history should be noted on the gamete donor and/or gestational carrier
Possible Reproductive Scenarios

Comments

1. Sperm donor

Couple in which woman is carrying
pregnancy using donor sperm. No
relationship line is shown between the
woman carrying the pregnancy and the
sperm donor.

D

D
or
P

2. Ovum donor

P

Couple in which woman is carrying
pregnancy using a donor egg and partner’s
sperm. The line of descent from the birth
mother is solid because there is a biologic
relationship that may affect the fetus (e.g.,
teratogens).

D

P

3. Surrogate only

Couple whose gametes are used to
impregnate a woman (surrogate) who
carries the pregnancy. The line of descent
from the surrogate is solid because there is
a biological relationship that may affect the
fetus (e.g., teratogens).

S

P
4. Surrogate ovum
donor

a)

b)
D

D

Couple in which male partner’s sperm is
used to inseminate (a) an unrelated woman
or (b) a sister who is carrying the pregnancy
for the couple.

or
P
5. Planned
adoption

P
D

D

Couple contracts with a woman to carry a
pregnancy using ovum of the woman
carrying the pregnancy and donor sperm.

P

Fig. 97.3 Assisted reproductive technology symbols and definitions. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human pedigree
nomenclature: update and assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns. 2008;17:424–433.)

heterozygous carriers may have had an advantage in terms of survival
and reproduction over noncarriers. In sickle cell disease, the carrier
state is thought to confer some resistance to malaria. In cystic fibrosis, the carrier state has been postulated to confer resistance to cholera or enteropathogenic Escherichia coli infections. Population-­based
carrier screening for cystic fibrosis is recommended for persons of
northern European and Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry, and population-­
based screening for sickle cell disease is recommended for persons of
African ancestry.
If the frequency of an autosomal recessive disease is known, the frequency of the heterozygote or carrier state can be calculated from the
Hardy-­Weinberg formula:
p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1

where p is the frequency of one of a pair of alleles and q is the frequency of the other. For example, if the frequency of cystic fibrosis
among White Americans is one in 2,500 (p2), then the frequency of the

heterozygote (2pq) can be calculated: If p2 = 1/2,500, then p = 1/50 and
q = 49/50; 2pq = 2 × (1/50) × (49/50) = 98/2,500, or 3.92%.

Pseudodominant Inheritance

Pseudodominant inheritance refers to the observation of apparent
dominant (parent to child) transmission of a known autosomal recessive disorder (Fig. 97.8). This occurs when a homozygous affected
individual has a partner who is a heterozygous carrier. This is most
likely to occur for relatively common recessive traits within a population, such as sickle cell anemia or nonsyndromic autosomal recessive hearing loss caused by deleterious variants in GJB2, the gene that
encodes connexin 26.

X-­Linked Inheritance

X-­linked inheritance describes the inheritance pattern of most disorders caused by deleterious changes in genes located on the X chromosome (Fig. 97.9). In X-­liked disorders, males are more commonly

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

739

Instructions:
E is used for evaluation to represent clinical and/or test information on the pedigree
a. E is to be defined in key/legend
b. If more than one evaluation, use subscript (E1, E2, E3) and define in key
c. Test results should be put in parentheses or defined in key/legend
A symbol is shaded only when an individual is clinically symptomatic
For linkage studies, haplotype information is written below the individual. The haplotype of interest
should be on left and appropriately highlighted
Repetitive sequences, trinucleotides, and expansion numbers are written with affected allele first and
placed in parentheses
If variant known, identify in parentheses
Definition

Symbol

Scenario
Woman with negative echocardiogram.

1. Documented evaluation (*)
Use only if examined/evaluated
by you or your research/clinical
team or if the outside evaluation
has been reviewed and verified.

*

*
E (echo)

2. Carrier—not likely to manifest
disease regardless of
inheritance pattern

Male carrier of Tay-Sachs disease by patient
report (* not used because results not
verified).

3. Asymptomatic/presymptomatic
carrier—clinically unaffected at
this time but could later exhibit
symptoms

Woman age 25 with negative mammogram
and positive BRCA1 DNA test.
25 y

*

E1 (mammogram)
E2 (5385insC BRCA1)

4. Uninformative study (u)

Man age 25 with normal physical exam and
uninformative DNA test for Huntington
disease (E2).

Eu

*

25 y
E1 (physical exam)
E2u (36n/18n)

Individual with cystic fibrosis and positive
variant study; only one variant has
currently been identified.
E('F508)

5. Affected individual with
positive evaluation (E+)
E+

Eu

*

E('F508/u)

10 week male fetus with a trisomy
18 karyotype.

P
10 wk *
E(CVS)
47,XY,18

Fig. 97.4 Pedigree symbols of genetic evaluation and testing information. (From Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al. Standardized human
pedigree nomenclature: update and assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Couns.
2008;17:424–433.)

I

I

1

1

III

1

2

2

3

3

4

2

2

3

4

1

2

2
II

II

1

4

5

5

1

6

6

7

Fig. 97.5 Autosomal dominant pedigree. Pedigree showing typical

inheritance of a form of achondroplasia (FGFR3) inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Black, Affected patients.

III

Fig. 97.6 Incomplete penetrance. This family segregates a familial
cancer syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis. Individual II.3 is an
obligate carrier (arrow), but there are no findings to suggest the disorder. This disorder is nonpenetrant in this individual. Black, Affected
patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

740 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Fig. 97.7 Autosomal recessive pedigree with parental consanguinity.
Central dot, Carriers; Black, affected patients.

trait or the presence of a sex chromosome abnormality (45,X or
46,XY female) but more commonly from skewed or nonrandom
X-­inactivation. X chromosome inactivation occurs early in development and involves the random and irreversible inactivation of
most genes on one X chromosome in female cells (Fig. 97.10). In
some cases, a preponderance of cells inactivates the same X chromosome, resulting in phenotypic expression of an X-­linked pathogenic variant if it resides on the active chromosome. This can occur
because of chance, selection against cells that have inactivated the
X chromosome carrying the normal gene, or an X chromosome
abnormality that results in inactivation of the X chromosome carrying the normal gene.
In some X-­linked disorders, both hemizygous males and heterozygous females who carry an affected X-­linked gene have similar phenotypic manifestations. In these cases, an affected male will
have a 50% chance of having an affected daughter and a 50% chance
of having an unaffected son in each pregnancy, whereas half the
male and female offspring of an affected mother will be affected
(Fig. 97.11). Some X-­linked conditions are lethal in a high percentage of males, such as incontinentia pigmenti. In such cases
the pedigree typically shows only affected females and an overall
female/male ratio of 2:1, with an increased number of miscarriages
(Fig. 97.12).

Y-­LINKED INHERITANCE

There are few Y-­linked traits. These demonstrate only male-­to-­male
transmission, and only males are affected (Fig. 97.13). Most Y-­linked
genes are related to male sex determination and reproduction and are
associated with infertility. Therefore it is rare to see familial transmission of a Y-­linked disorder. However, advances in assisted reproductive
technologies might make it possible to have familial transmission of
male infertility.

= GJB2 carrier

Fig. 97.8 Pseudodominant inheritance. Black, Affected (deaf); central
dot shows carrier who is asymptomatic (unaffected).

I

II

INHERITANCE ASSOCIATED WITH
PSEUDOAUTOSOMAL REGIONS

There are pseudoautosomal regions on the X and Y chromosomes.
Because these regions are made up of homologous sequences of
nucleotides, genes that are located in these regions are present in
equal numbers among both males and females. SHOX is one of the
best-­characterized disease genes located in these regions. Heterozygous SHOX pathogenic variants cause Leri-­Weil dyschondrosteosis,
a rare skeletal dysplasia that involves bilateral bowing of the forearms
with dislocations of the ulna at the wrist and generalized short stature.
Homozygous SHOX pathogenic variants cause the much more severe
Langer mesomelic dwarfism.

DIGENIC INHERITANCE
III

IV

3

2

5

3

Fig. 97.9 Pedigree demonstrating X-­linked recessive inheritance. Central
dot, Carriers; black, affected patients.

affected than females. Female carriers of these disorders are generally
unaffected, or if affected, they are affected more mildly than males.
In each pregnancy, female carriers have a 25% chance of having an
affected son, a 25% chance of having a carrier daughter, and a 50%
chance of having a child that does not inherit the mutated X-­linked
gene. Because affected males pass their X chromosome to all their
daughters and their Y chromosome to all their sons, they have a 50%
chance of having a daughter who is a carrier. Male-­to-­male transmission excludes X-­linked inheritance but is seen with autosomal dominant and Y-­linked inheritance.
A female occasionally exhibits signs of an X-­linked trait similar
to a male. This occurs rarely from homozygosity for an X-­linked

Digenic inheritance explains the occasional occurrence of retinitis
pigmentosa (RP) in children of parents who each carry a pathogenic
variant in a different RP-­associated gene (Fig. 97.14). Both parents
have normal vision, as would be expected, but their offspring who
are double heterozygotes—having inherited both variants—develop
RP. Digenic pedigrees can exhibit characteristics of both autosomal
dominant (vertical transmission) and autosomal recessive inheritance (one in four recurrence risk). A couple in which the two unaffected partners are carriers for variants in two different RP-­associated
genes that show digenic inheritance have a one in four risk of having an affected child, similar to what is seen in autosomal recessive
inheritance. However, their affected children, and affected children
in subsequent generations, have a one in four risk of transmitting
both variants to their offspring, who would be affected (vertical
transmission).

PSEUDOGENETIC INHERITANCE AND FAMILIAL
CLUSTERING

Sometimes nongenetic causes of a particular disease in multiple family members can produce a pattern that mimics genetic transmission.
These nongenetic factors can include identifiable environmental factors, teratogenic exposures, or undetermined or undefined factors.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

741

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

XmXp

Fig. 97.10 X-­inactivation. Black marks the active X chromosome. Color of the cell represents its active X chromosome is paternally (Xp, blue) or
maternally (Xm, pink) derived.

I

II

III

IV

Fig. 97.11 Pedigree pattern demonstrating X-­linked dominant inher-

itance. Black, Affected patients. Note there is no father-­to-­son transmission in this situation, and hemizygosity (i.e., X-­linked gene in a male)
is not lethal. In some X-­linked dominant conditions, X-­linked males
have a more severe phenotype and might not survive. In that case, only
females manifest the disease (see Fig. 97.12).

Fig. 97.12 Pedigree of an X-­linked dominant disorder with male
lethality, such as incontinentia pigmenti. Black, Affected patients.

Examples of identifiable factors might include multiple siblings
in a family having asthma because of exposure to cigarette smoke
from their parents or having failure to thrive, developmental delay,
and unusual facial appearance caused by exposure to alcohol during
pregnancy.
In some cases, the disease is sufficiently common in the general
population that some familial clustering occurs simply by chance.
Breast cancer affects 11% of all women, and it is possible that several
women in a family will develop breast cancer even in the absence of
a specific genetic predisposition. However, hereditary breast cancer
associated with pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 should be
suspected in any individual who has a personal history of breast cancer with onset before age 50, early-­onset breast and ovarian cancer
at any age, bilateral or multifocal breast cancer, a family history of
breast cancer or breast and ovarian cancer consistent with autosomal
dominant inheritance, or a personal or family history of male breast

Fig. 97.13 Y-­linked inheritance. Black, Affected patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

742 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Aa
BB

AA
BB

Aa
BB

AA
Bb

AA
Bb

Aa
Bb

Aa
Bb

Aa
BB

AA
BB

AA
Bb

AA
BB

Fig. 97.14 Digenic pedigree. Here, the disease alleles are a and b

and they reside on distinct genetic loci or genes. For a person to have
the disease, heterozygosity for variant alleles in both genes (A/a; B/b) is
required. Black, Affected patients.

heart, and liver (see Chapters 107.4, 409, 638.2, and 651.4; Fig. 97.16).
Common manifestations include developmental delay, seizures, cardiac dysfunction, decreased muscle strength and tone, and hearing and
vision problems.
Mitochondrial diseases can be highly variable in their clinical
manifestations. This is partly because cells can contain multiple
mitochondria, each bearing several copies of the mitochondrial
genome. Thus a cell can have a mixture of normal and abnormal
mitochondrial genomes, which is referred to as heteroplasmy. In
contrast, homoplasmy refers to a state in which all copies of the
mitochondrial genome carry the same sequence variant. Unequal
segregation of mitochondria carrying normal and abnormal
genomes and replicative advantage can result in varying degrees
of heteroplasmy in the cells of an affected individual, including
the individual ova of an affected female. Because of this, a mother
may be asymptomatic and yet have children who are severely
affected. The level of heteroplasmy at which disease symptoms
typically appear can also vary based on the type of mitochondrial
variant.
Detection of variants in the mitochondrial genome may require
sampling of the affected tissue for DNA analysis. In some tissues, such
as blood, testing for mitochondrial DNA variants may be inadequate
because the variant may be found primarily in affected tissues such as
muscle (Fig. 97.17). Growth and differentiation factor 15 (GDF-­15)
and blood lactate levels are screening tests for mitochondrial disorders.
GDF-­15 is only accurate in children ≥1 year of age and in the absence
of heart, liver, or renal disease.

Triplet Repeat Expansion Disorders

Fig. 97.15 Pedigree of a mitochondrial disorder, exhibiting maternal
inheritance. Black, Affected patients.

cancer. In other cases, clustering within a family may be caused by
undefined genetic factors or unidentified pathogenic sequence variants (nuclear or mitochondrial).

NONTRADITIONAL INHERITANCE

Some genetic disorders are inherited in a manner that does not follow classical mendelian patterns. Nontraditional inheritance is seen
in mitochondrial disorders, triplet repeat expansion diseases, and
imprinting defects.

Mitochondrial Inheritance

An individual’s mitochondrial genome is entirely derived from the
mother because sperm contain relatively few mitochondria, which
are degraded after fertilization. It follows that mitochondrial inheritance is, essentially, maternal inheritance. A female with a mitochondrially inherited genetic disorder can have affected offspring of
either sex, but an affected father cannot pass on the disease to his offspring (Fig. 97.15). Mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variants are often
deletions or point pathogenic variants. Overall, one person in 400
has a maternally inherited pathogenic mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variant (see Chapter 108). In individual families, mitochondrial
inheritance may be difficult to distinguish from autosomal dominant
or X-­linked inheritance, but in many cases, the sex of the transmitting and nontransmitting parents can suggest a mitochondrial basis
(Table 97.1).
Mitochondria are the cell’s suppliers of energy; the organs that are
most affected by the presence of abnormal mitochondria are those
that have the greatest energy requirements, such as the brain, muscle,

Triplet repeat expansion disorders are distinguished by the special
dynamic nature of the disease-­causing variant. Triplet repeat expansion disorders include fragile X syndrome, myotonic dystrophy,
Huntington disease, and spinocerebellar ataxias (Table 97.2 and
Fig. 97.18). These disorders are caused by expansion in the number of 3-­bp repeats. The fragile X gene, FMR1, normally has 5-­40
CGG triplets. An error in replication can result in expansion of that
number to a level in the gray zone between 41 and 58 repeats or to
a level referred to as a prepathogenic variant, which comprises 59-­
200 repeats. Some prepathogenic variant carriers, more often males,
develop fragile X–associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) as
adults. Female prepathogenic variant carriers are at risk for fragile X–associated primary ovarian insufficiency (FXPOI). Persons,
especially females, with a prepathogenic variant are also at risk for
having the repeat expand further in subsequent meiosis, thus crossing into the range of a full pathogenic variant (>200 repeats) in
offspring. With this number of repeats, the FMR1 gene becomes
hypermethylated, and protein production is lost.
Some triplet expansions associated with other genes can cause
disease through a mechanism other than decreased protein production. In Huntington disease, the expansion causes the gene product to have a new, toxic effect on the neurons of the basal ganglia.
For most triplet repeat disorders, there is a clinical correlation to
the size of the expansion, with a greater expansion causing more
severe symptoms and having an earlier age of disease onset. The
observation of increasing severity of disease and early age at onset
in subsequent generations is termed genetic anticipation and is a
defining characteristic of many triplet repeat expansion disorders
(Fig. 97.19).

Genetic Imprinting

The two copies of most autosomal genes are functionally equivalent.
However, in some cases, only one copy of a gene is transcribed, and
the second copy is silenced. This gene silencing is typically associated with methylation of DNA, which is an epigenetic modification; it does not change the nucleotide sequence of the DNA (Fig.
97.20). In imprinting, gene expression depends on the parent of
origin of the chromosome (see Chapter 99.7). Imprinting disorders
result from an imbalance of active copies of a given gene, which can
occur for several reasons. Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

743

Table 97.1  Representative Examples of Disorders Caused by Pathogenic Variants in Mitochondrial DNA and Their Inheritance
DISEASE

PHENOTYPE

MOST FREQUENT PATHOGENIC
VARIANT IN mtDNA MOLECULE

HOMOPLASMY vs
HETEROPLASMY

INHERITANCE

Leber hereditary
optic neuropathy

Rapid optic nerve atrophy, leading
to blindness in young adult life;
sex bias approximately 50%
males with visual loss, only 10%
females

Substitution p.Arg340His in ND1
gene of complex I of electron
transport chain; other complex
I missense pathogenic variants

Homoplasmic (usually)

Maternal

NARP, Leigh
disease

Neuropathy, ataxia, retinitis
pigmentosa, developmental
delay, intellectual disability lactic
academia

Point pathogenic variants in ATPase
subunit six gene

Heteroplasmic

Maternal

MELAS

Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy,
lactic acidosis, and strokelike
episodes; may manifest only as
diabetes mellitus or deafness

Point pathogenic variant in tRNALeu

Heteroplasmic

Maternal

MERRF

Myoclonic epilepsy, ragged red
fibers in muscle, ataxia,
sensorineural deafness

Point pathogenic variant in tRNALys

Heteroplasmic

Maternal

Deafness

Progressive sensorineural
deafness, often induced by
aminoglycoside antibiotics

m.1555A>G pathogenic variant in
12S rRNA

Homoplasmic

Maternal

Nonsyndromic sensorineural
deafness

m.7445A>G pathogenic variant in
12S rRNA

Homoplasmic

Maternal

Chronic progressive
external
ophthalmoplegia
(CPEO)

Progressive weakness of extraocular
muscles, cardiomyopathy,
ptosis, heart block, ataxia, retinal
pigmentation, diabetes

The common MELAS point
pathogenic variant in tRNALys;
large deletions similar to KSS

Heteroplasmic

Maternal if
point
pathogenic
variants

Pearson syndrome

Pancreatic insufficiency,
pancytopenia, lactic acidosis

Large deletions

Heteroplasmic

Sporadic,
somatic
pathogenic
variants

Kearns-­Sayre
syndrome (KSS)

PEO of early onset with heart
block, retinal pigmentation

5-­kb large deletion

Heteroplasmic

Sporadic,
somatic
pathogenic
variants

mtDNA, Mitochondrial DNA; rRNA, ribosomal RNA; tRNA, transfer RNA.
From Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF, eds. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001: p. 246.

two distinct disorders associated with developmental impairment,
are caused by microdeletions of chromosome 15q11-­12. The microdeletion in Prader-­Willi syndrome is always on the paternally
derived chromosome 15, whereas in Angelman syndrome it is on
the maternal copy. UBE3A is the gene responsible for Angelman
syndrome. The paternal copy of UBE3A is transcriptionally silenced
in the brain, but the maternal copy continues to be transcribed. If an
individual has a maternally derived deletion, an insufficient amount
of UBE3A protein is produced in the brain, resulting in the neurologic deficits seen in Angelman syndrome.
Uniparental disomy (UPD), the rare occurrence of a child
inheriting both copies of a chromosome from the same parent, is
another genetic mechanism that can cause Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes. Inheriting both chromosomes 15 from the mother
is functionally the same as deletion of the paternal 15q12 region
and results in Prader-­Willi syndrome. Approximately 30% of cases
of Prader-­Willi syndrome are caused by maternal UPD15, whereas
paternal UPD15 accounts for only 3% of Angelman syndrome (see
Chapter 99.7). Pathogenic variants in UBE3A account for ∼11% of
patients with Angelman syndrome and result in familial transmission. The least common cause is a pathogenic variant affecting the
imprinting center, which results in an inability to correctly imprint

UBE3A. In a mother, inability to reset the imprinting on her paternally inherited chromosome 15 imprint results in a 50% risk of
passing on an incorrectly methylated copy of UBE3A to a child, who
would then develop Angelman syndrome.
Other imprinted regions of clinical interest include the short arm
of chromosome 11, where the genes for Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome and nesidioblastosis map, and the long arm of chromosome
seven with maternal UPD of 7q being associated with some cases of
idiopathic short stature and Russell-­Silver syndrome.
Imprinting of a gene can occur during gametogenesis or early
embryonic development (reprogramming). Genes can become
inactive or active by various mechanisms including DNA methylation or demethylation or histone acetylation or deacetylation, with
different patterns of (de)methylation noted on paternal or maternal imprintable chromosome regions. Some genes demonstrate
tissue-­specific imprinting (see Fig. 97.20). There is a small but
increased incidence of imprinting disorders, specifically Beckwith-­
Wiedemann and Angelman syndrome, following assisted reproductive technologies such as in vitro fertilization and intracytoplasmic
sperm injection. The overall incidence of these disorders in children conceived using assisted reproductive technologies is likely
to be <1%.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

744 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Central nervous system
Encephalopathy
Strokelike episodes
Seizures and dementia
Psychosis and depression
Ataxia
Migraine
Cardiac
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Heart block
Pre-excitation syndrome
Renal
Renal tubular defects
Fanconi syndrome

Endocrine and diabetes
Diabetes mellitus
Hypoparathyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Gonadal failure

Eye
External ophthalmoplegia
Ptosis
Cataract
Pigmentary retinopathy
Optic atrophy
Hearing
Bilateral sensorineural deafness

Gastrointestinal
Dysphagia
Pseudo-obstruction
Constipation
Hepatic failure

Peripheral nervous system
Myopathy
Axonal sensorimotor neuropathy

Fig. 97.16 The range of affected tissues and clinical phenotypes associated with pathogenic variants in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). (Modified
from Chinnery PF, Turnbull DM. Mitochondrial DNA and disease. Lancet. 1999;345:SI17–SI21.)

MULTIFACTORIAL AND POLYGENIC INHERITANCE

Multifactorial inheritance refers to traits that are caused by a combination of inherited, environmental, and stochastic factors (Fig.
97.21). Multifactorial traits differ from polygenic inheritance, which
refers to traits that result from the additive effects of multiple genes.
Multifactorial traits segregate within families but do not exhibit
a consistent or recognizable inheritance pattern. Characteristics
include the following:
• There is a similar rate of recurrence among all first-­degree relatives
(parents, siblings, offspring of affected child). It is unusual to find a
substantial increase in risk for relatives related more distantly than
second degree to the index case.
• The risk of recurrence is related to the incidence of the disease.
• Some disorders have a sex predilection, as indicated by an unequal
male:female incidence. Pyloric stenosis, for example, is more common in males, whereas congenital dislocation of the hips is more
common in females. With an altered sex ratio, the risk is higher for
the relatives of an index case whose gender is less often affected than
relatives of an index case of the more frequently affected gender. The
risk to the son of an affected female with infantile pyloric stenosis
is 18%, compared with the 5% risk for the son of an affected male.
An affected female presumably has a greater genetic susceptibility,
which can be passed on to offspring.

• The likelihood that both identical twins will be affected with the
same malformation is <100% but much greater than the chance that
both members of a nonidentical twin pair will be affected. This contrasts with the pattern seen in mendelian inheritance, in which identical twins almost always share fully penetrant genetic disorders.
• The risk of recurrence is increased when multiple family members
are affected. A simple example is that the risk of recurrence for unilateral cleft lip and palate is 4% for a couple with one affected child
and increases to 9% with two affected children. It is sometimes difficult to distinguish between a multifactorial and mendelian etiology
in families with multiple affected individuals.
• The risk of recurrence may be greater when the disorder is more
severe. For example, an infant who has long-­segment Hirschsprung
disease has a greater chance of having an affected sibling than the
infant who has short-­segment Hirschsprung disease.
There are two types of multifactorial traits. One exhibits continuous
variation, with “normal” individuals falling within a statistical range—
often defined as having a value two standard deviations (SDs) above
and/or below the mean—and “abnormals” falling outside that range.
Examples include such traits as intelligence, blood pressure, height,
and head circumference. For many of these traits, offspring values can
be estimated based on a modified average of their parental values, with
nutritional and environmental factors playing an important role.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

745

Patients with clinical suspicion of mitochondrial RC disorders
Common mtDNA variants

positive

negative
Blood

•Determine heteroplasmy
•Family member studies

Myopathy

Leigh

•PDH
•COX assembly genes
•CI subunits
•CI assembly genes

•TK2
•ANT1

EncephaloMNGIE
Cardiomyopathy
•SCO2
•ANT1

Encephaloand/or
Hepatopathy

•DGUOK
•POLG
•MPV17
•SCO1
•BCS1L
•SUCLA2

•TP

Encephalo- PEO
Nephropathy

Intractable
Seizures

•POLG

•COX10
Muscle,
Liver, or
Skin

•POLG
•ANT1
•TWINKLE

negative

positive

muscle, liver, skin
•Family member studies

ETC

negative
•mtDNA tRNA genes
•Mito genome sequencing
•mtDNA deletions by PCR

Isolated
Complex
Deficiency

Generalized
Complex
Deficiency

Proliferated
or
Not Deficient

positive

mtDNA
content

negative

•Depletion
genes
•PDH

negative

negative
Cannot confirm
diagnosis

high or
normal
•mtDNA tRNA
genes
•Mito genome
sequencing

•Sequence
complex
subunits
•Sequence
assembly
genes

negative

•POLG
•DGUOK
•TK2
•TP
•TWINKLE
•ANT1
•MPV17
•SUCLA2

positive

positive

positive

depletion

•Family member studies

Fig. 97.17 Clinical algorithm for genetic diagnostic testing of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and nuclear DNA (nDNA) genes in patients suspected
of mitochondrial disorders (Baylor College of Medicine, Mitochondrial Diagnostics Laboratory). RC, Respiratory chain; MNGIE, mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy; PEO, progressive external ophthalmoplegia; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; CI, respiratory complex I; ETC, electron transport chain; PCR, polymerase chain reaction. (From Haas RH, Parikh S, Falk MJ, et al. The in-­depth evaluation of suspected mitochondrial
disease. Mol Genet Metab. 2008;94:16–37.)

Table 97.2  Diseases Associated with Polynucleotide Repeat Expansions

DISEASE

DESCRIPTION

REPEAT
SEQUENCE

NORMAL
RANGE

ABNORMAL
RANGE

PARENT IN WHOM
EXPANSION
USUALLY OCCURS

LOCATION OF
EXPANSION

CATEGORY 1
Huntington
disease

Loss of motor control,
dementia, affective disorder

CAG

6-­34

36-­100 or more

More often through
father

Exon

Spinal and bulbar
muscular atrophy

Adult-­onset motor-­neuron
disease associated with
androgen insensitivity

CAG

11-­34

40-­62

More often through
father

Exon

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 1

Progressive ataxia, dysarthria,
dysmetria

CAG

6-­39

41-­81

More often through
father

Exon

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 2

Progressive ataxia, dysarthria

CAG

15-­29

35-­59

—

Exon

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type three
(Machado-­Joseph
disease)

Dystonia, distal muscular
atrophy, ataxia, external
ophthalmoplegia

CAG

13-­36

68-­79

More often through
father

Exon

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

746 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 97.2  Diseases Associated with Polynucleotide Repeat Expansions—cont’d

DISEASE

DESCRIPTION

REPEAT
SEQUENCE

NORMAL
RANGE

ABNORMAL
RANGE

PARENT IN WHOM
EXPANSION
USUALLY OCCURS

LOCATION OF
EXPANSION

CATEGORY 1
Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 6

Progressive ataxia, dysarthria,
nystagmus

CAG

4-­16

21-­27

—

Exon

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 7

Progressive ataxia, dysarthria,
retinal degeneration

CAG

7-­35

38-­200

More often through
father

—

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 17

Progressive ataxia, dementia,
bradykinesia, dysmetria

CAG

29-­42

47-­55

—

Exon

Dentatorubral-­
pallidoluysian
atrophy/Haw
River syndrome

Cerebellar atrophy, ataxia,
myoclonic epilepsy,
choreoathetosis, dementia

CAG

7-­25

49-­88

More often through
father

Exon

Short stature, joint laxity,
degenerative joint disease

GAC

5

6-­7

—

Exon

Oculopharyngeal
muscular
dystrophy

Proximal limb weakness,
dysphagia, ptosis

GCG

6

7-­13

—

Exon

Cleidocranial
dysplasia

Short stature, open skull
sutures with bulging
calvaria, clavicular hypoplasia,
shortened fingers, dental
anomalies

GCG, GCT,
GCA

17

27 (expansion
observed in
one family)

—

Exon

Synpolydactyly

Polydactyly and syndactyly

GCG, GCT,
GCA

15

22-­25

—

Exon

CATEGORY 3
Myotonic
dystrophy (DM1;
chromosome 19)

Muscle loss, cardiac
arrhythmia, cataracts,
frontal balding

CTG

5-­37

100 to several
thousand

Either parent, but
expansion to
congenital form
through mother

3′ untranslated
region

Myotonic
dystrophy (DM2;
chromosome 3)

Muscle loss, cardiac
arrhythmia, cataracts,
frontal balding

CCTG

<75

75-­11,000

—

3′ untranslated
region

Friedreich ataxia

Progressive limb ataxia,
dysarthria, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, pyramidal
weakness in legs

GAA

7-­2

200-­900 or
more

Autosomal recessive
inheritance, so
disease alleles
are inherited from
both parents

Intron

Fragile X syndrome
(FRAXA)

Intellectual impairment,
large ears and jaws,
macroorchidism in males

CGG

6-­52

200-­2,000 or
more

Exclusively through
mother

5′ untranslated
region

Fragile site (FRAXE)

Mild intellectual impairment

GCC

6-­35

>200

More often through
mother

5′ untranslated
region

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 8

Adult-­onset ataxia, dysarthria,
nystagmus

CTG

16-­37

107-­127

More often through
mother

3′ untranslated
region

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 10

Ataxia and seizures

ATTCT

12-­16

800-­4,500

More often through
father

Intron

Spinocerebellar
ataxia type 12

Ataxia, eye movement
disorders; variable age at
onset

CAG

7-­28

66-­78

—

5′ untranslated
region

Progressive
myoclonic
epilepsy type 1

Juvenile-­onset seizures,
myoclonus, dementia

12-­bp repeat
motif

2-­3

30-­75

Autosomal recessive
inheritance, so
transmitted by
both parents

5′ untranslated
region

CATEGORY 2
Pseudoachondroplasia, multiple
epiphyseal
dysplasia

From Jorde LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ, White, RL. Medical Genetics, 3rd ed. St Louis: Mosby; 2006: p. 82.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 97 u Patterns of Genetic Transmission

59

stop

AUG

pre-mRNA

747

intron

59 UTR
(CGG)n

exon

intron

39 UTR

(GAA)n

(CCUG)n

(CAG)n

(CUG)n

(CCTG)n≥75
Myotonic
dystrophy 2

(CAG)n≥40
Huntington
disease

(CTG)n≥50
Myotonic
dystrophy 1

39

(CGG)n>200
Fragile X
syndrome

(CGG)n60 to 200
Fragile X
tremor/ataxia
syndrome

(GAA)n≥200
Friedreich
ataxia

Transcriptional
silencing
= loss-offunction
variant

2 to 5-fold increase
in FMR1 mRNA
= ? gain-ofRNA function

Impaired
transcriptional
elongation
= loss of
frataxin function

Expanded polyglutamine
tracts in the huntingtin
protein confer novel
properties on the protein

Expanded CUG
repeats in the
RNA confer novel
properties
on the RNA

Loss of
RNA binding
= impaired
translational
repression of
target RNAs

Neuronal
intranuclear
inclusions

Increased Fe
in mitochondria,
reduced heme
synthesis,
reduced activity
of Fe-S complex
containing proteins

Increased and/or
promiscuous protein:protein
interactions with transcription
factors → loss of their function

Expanded CUG
repeats bind increased
amounts of RNA-binding
proteins → impaired RNA
splicing of key proteins

Fig. 97.18 The locations of the trinucleotide repeat expansions and the sequence of each trinucleotide in five representative trinucleotide repeat
diseases, shown on a schematic of a generic pre–messenger RNA (mRNA). The minimal number of repeats in the DNA sequence of the affected
gene associated with the disease is also indicated, as well as the effect of the expansion on the mutant RNA or protein. (From Nussbaum RL, McInnes
RR, Willard HF, eds. Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016; based partly on an unpublished figure from
John A. Phillips III, Vanderbilt University.)

55 yr

48 yr

39 yr

37 yr

50 yr

40 yr

Fig. 97.19 Myotonic dystrophy pedigree illustrating genetic anticipation. In this case the age at onset for family members affected with an autosomal dominant disease is lower in more recent generations. Black, Affected patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

748 Part VIII u Human Genetics

T

G
C

A

T

T

G
A

T
C

T

T

T

G
C

A

T

T

G
A

Individual I

T
C

T

T

Individual II

Fig. 97.20 Tissue-­specific DNA methylation and epigenetic heterogeneity among individuals. A subset of the DNA methylation patterns within a

cell is characteristic of that cell type. Cell type–specific and tissue-­specific DNA methylation patterns are illustrated by organ-­to-­organ variations in
the clusters of methylated cytosine-­phosphate-­guanine bases (CpGs) within the same individual. Despite overall consistency in tissue-­specific DNA
methylation patterns, variations in these patterns exist among different individuals. Methylated CpGs are indicated by a filled circle and unmethylated CpGs by an open circle. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are indicated by the corresponding base. (Redrawn from Brena RM, Huang
THM, Plass C. Toward a human epigenome. Nat Genet. 2006;38:1359–1360.)

Nature vs nurture

Genetic load

Genetic dominant
fully penetrant
Incompletely
penetrant
Polygenic
Multifactorial
Environmental

Environmental effect

Fig. 97.21 The progressive decrease in the genetic load contribut-

ing to the development of a disease creates a smooth transition in
the distribution of illnesses on an etiologic diagram. In theory, no diseases are completely free from the influence of both genetic and environmental factors. (From Bomprezzi R, Kovanen PE, Martin R. New
approaches to investigating heterogeneity in complex traits. J Med
Genet. 2003;40:553–559.)

With other multifactorial traits, the distinction between normal and
abnormal is based on the qualitative presence or absence of a particular trait. Examples include pyloric stenosis, neural tube defects, congenital heart defects, and cleft lip and cleft palate. Such traits follow a
threshold model (see Fig. 97.15). A distribution of liability because of
genetic and nongenetic factors is postulated in the population. Individuals who exceed a threshold liability develop the trait, and those
below the threshold do not.
The balance between genetic and environmental factors is demonstrated by neural tube defects. Genetic factors are implicated by the
increased recurrence risk for parents of an affected child compared
with the general population, yet the recurrence risk is about 3%, less
than what would be expected if the trait was caused by a single, fully
penetrant pathogenic variant. The role of nongenetic environmental
factors is shown by the recurrence risk decreasing up to 87% if the
mother-­to-­be takes 4 mg of folic acid daily starting 3 months before
conception.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice

Chapter 98

Integration of Genetics
into Pediatric Practice
Brendan Lee and Nicola Brunetti-­Pierri
Genetic testing involves analyzing genetic material to obtain information related to a person’s health status using chromosomal (cytogenetic) analysis (see Chapter 99) and nucleic acid (primarily DNA but
also RNA)-­based testing.

DIAGNOSTIC TESTING

Diagnostic genetic testing helps to aggregate a set of signs and symptoms (phenotype) for disease diagnosis. The list of disorders for which
specific genetic tests are available is extensive and growing. The website
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gtr/ provides one database of reported
available tests.
Single-­
gene disorders can be tested by at least three different
approaches: linkage analysis (a classical approach now rarely used),
chromosome microarray (CMA), and direct pathogenic variant analysis,
usually by DNA sequencing (Table 98.1). Linkage analysis is used if the
responsible gene is mapped but not yet identified, or if it is impractical to find specific pathogenic variants, usually because of the large size
and large number of different pathogenic variants in some genes. CMA
can be used to detect large, multigene deletions or duplications (copy
number variations, or CNVs). In addition, with increasing resolution, single-­gene or smaller intragenic deletions or duplications can be
detected by CMA, although it is important to note that coverage of each
gene varies by array type used. Direct DNA pathogenic variant identification is readily available with the advent of the complete human genome
sequence next-­generation sequencing (NGS) tools. We also recognize the
relatively frequent co-­occurrence of multiple disorders, each caused by
distinct pathogenic variants, in patients with complex or “blended” features. This may include partial to minimal clinical manifestations in a
substantial percentage of individuals harboring pathogenic variants in
known disease genes that remain undiagnosed. The ability to simultaneously sequence hundreds to thousands of genes (via NGS approaches)
has provided insight into this complexity of disease pathogenesis.
Linkage testing involves tracking a genetic trait through a family
using closely linked polymorphic markers as a surrogate for the trait

749

(Fig. 98.1). It requires testing an extended family and is vulnerable to
several pitfalls, such as genetic recombination, genetic heterogeneity,
and incorrect diagnosis in the proband or family member. Genetic
recombination occurs between any pair of loci, with the frequency
being proportional to the distance between them. This problem is minimized using very closely linked markers and, if possible, using markers
that flank the specific gene. Genetic heterogeneity can be problematic
for a linkage-­based test if there are multiple distinct genomic loci that
can cause the same phenotype, resulting in the risk that the locus tested
for is not the one responsible for disease in the family. Incorrect diagnosis in the proband also leads to tracking the wrong gene. Linkage
testing remains useful for several genetic conditions, but it has been
superseded by the availability of DNA sequencing of either single gene,
panel, or exome sequencing.
CMAs can detect CNVs in a patient’s DNA (see Chapter 99). CMA
provides a level of genetic resolution between that available with DNA
sequencing (single nucleotide) and that available with chromosome
analysis (∼5 million base pairs). CMA can resolve deletions or duplications of several kilobases within one gene. In theory, this approach
can detect deletion and duplication pathogenic variants that would
be missed by either chromosome analysis or direct pathogenic variant testing by DNA sequencing. However, because the specific resolution and coverage of different CMA platforms can vary tremendously
for different gene regions, the sensitivity for detecting deletions and
duplications can vary for different diseases and laboratories. The highest resolution used is detection of a deletion or duplication at the single
exon level.
Direct DNA-­based pathogenic variant testing avoids the pitfalls
of linkage testing by detecting the specific gene pathogenic variant
(i.e., sequence change). The specific approach used is customized to
the biology of the gene being tested. In some disorders, one or a few
distinct pathogenic variants occur in all affected individuals and a specific assay for that variant could be used. This is the case in sickle cell
anemia, in which the same single-­base substitution occurs in everyone with the disorder. In other conditions, many possible pathogenic
variants may account for the disorder in different individuals. In cystic
fibrosis, for example, >1,000 distinct pathogenic variants have been
found in the CFTR gene. Pathogenic variant analysis is challenging
because no single technique can detect all possible pathogenic variants
(e.g., single nucleotide variation [SNV]), small (several nucleotide)
insertion-­deletions (“indels”), CNV (larger deletion or duplications),
complex structural variations (e.g., translocations, inversions, etc.),
DNA repeat expansions (e.g., variable repeat expansions), and epigenetic alterations (e.g., changes in DNA methylation without changing the underlying DNA sequence). However, with high-­throughput
DNA sequencing technology, the most frequently used approach is to

Table 98.1  Approaches for Genetic Testing
TYPE OF TESTING

RESOLUTION

ADVANTAGES

DISADVANTAGES

SAMPLE REQUIREMENTS

Linkage analysis

Depends on location of
polymorphic markers
near putative disease
gene

Possible when specific
disease-­causing genetic
pathogenic variant is not
identifiable or found

Can give only diagnostic
probability based on
likelihood of genetic
recombination between
presumed DNA
pathogenic variant and
polymorphic markers

Requires multiple
family members with
documented Mendelian
pattern of inheritance
within family

Chromosome
microarray (CMA)

Several hundred base
pairs to several
hundreds of kilobases

Able to detect small
deletion or duplications
within one or more genes

Can miss small deletions
or insertions depending
on the resolution of the
array used

Single patient sample
sufficient, but having sample
from biological parents can
help with interpretation

Direct DNA-­based
testing (e.g., DNA
sequencing)

Single–base-­pair
changes

High specificity if previously
described deleterious
pathogenic variant is
found

Can miss deletion or
duplication of a segment
of gene

Single patient sample
sufficient, but having
sample from biological
parents and siblings
(affected or unaffected) can
help with interpretation

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

750 Part VIII u Human Genetics

A
Disease
gene

A 2 1
B 3 2
C 1 2

3 2
2 1
4 2

B

C
fetus
1 2
2 1
2 2

1 3
2 2
2 4

Fig. 98.1 Use of linkage analysis in prenatal diagnosis of an autoso-

mal recessive disorder. Both parents are carriers, and they have one
affected son. The numbers below the symbols indicate alleles at three
polymorphic loci: A, B, and C. Locus B resides within the disease gene.
The affected son inherited the 1-­2-­2 chromosome from his father and
the 2-­1-­2 chromosome from his mother. The fetus has inherited the
same chromosome from the father but the 3-­2-­4 chromosome from the
mother and therefore is most likely to be a carrier.

directly sequence DNA segments “captured” and amplified from DNA
isolated from peripheral blood white blood cells. The limitation of this
approach is that only amplified DNA segments are sequenced and are
usually restricted to the coding exonic regions of a gene. Because pathogenic variants sometimes occur in the noncoding and intronic regions,
failure to detect a pathogenic variant does not fully exclude the diagnosis. In addition, deleted genes or regions may not be detected.
NGS tests panels of genes that target disease symptoms (e.g., epilepsy,
brain malformations, sensorineural deafness, or skeletal dysplasias) or
the majority of the exome (exome sequencing). Genome sequencing,
where both coding and noncoding sequences are sequenced, can provide even more information. However, clinical interpretation is limited
predominantly to the coding sequences of the approximately 20,000
human genes, the “digital exome,” as it is extracted electronically from
genome data. Genome sequencing, compared with exome sequencing,
also has the advantage of providing improved detection of CNV, structural variation, and repeat expansions, although this is highly dependent on the bioinformatics algorithms used in interpretation.
With NGS, the challenge is the interpretation of enormous genetic
variation within a single individual. Direct sequencing of tens to
hundreds of genes in NGS panels offers a potentially higher sensitivity because the “depth” of read is higher without complicating high
discovery rate of variants of unknown sequences (VUS) (Fig. 98.2).
Exome and genome sequencing also offer the potential for identifying
new disease-­gene associations as well as the ability to detect clinical
presentations caused by more than one altered gene (i.e., oligogenic
phenotypes).
An important ethical consideration is the reporting of incidental
findings, whether medically actionable or not medically actionable in
a patient. For example, exome and genome sequencing may identify
pathogenic variants that cause aminoglycoside-­sensitive hearing loss,
which would be medically actionable but unrelated to the primary
indication for which the test was ordered. At the same time, the discovery of apolipoprotein E variants in a child that increase Alzheimer
disease risk susceptibility would not typically be medically actionable.
Therefore counseling for patients undergoing these tests is important so
that only requested results are reported back to the patient. Guidelines
continue to evolve for reporting of incidental findings from exome and
genome sequencing by the American College of Medical Genetics and
Genomics (www.acmg.net). Practice and recommendations continue
to vary among international genetic organizations revealing incidental
findings to patients, and many strongly advocate the engagement of the
patient and family in the decision. Some groups require revealing to

the patient and/or family significant diseases (actionable) with a specific and successful treatment or prevention strategy (Table 98.2).
Genetic testing is interpreted by three factors: analytic validity, clinical validity, and clinical utility. Analytical validity is test accuracy:
Does the test correctly detect the presence or absence of pathogenic
variant? Most genetic tests have a very high analytical validity assuming
human error has not occurred. Human errors are possible, and unlike
most medical tests, a genetic test is unlikely to be repeated because it
is assumed that the result will not change over time. Therefore human
errors can go undetected for long periods of time. In addition, variants
may be reinterpreted over time as our knowledge base of disease-­causing
pathogenic variants and genes increases.
Clinical validity is the degree to which the test correctly predicts
presence or absence of disease. False-­positive and false-­negative test
results can occur. False-­positive results are more likely for predictive tests than for diagnostic tests. An important contributing factor is nonpenetrance, where an individual with an at-­risk genotype
might not clinically express the condition. Another factor is the finding of a VUS. Detection of a base sequence variation in an affected
patient does not prove that it is the cause of the patient’s disorder.
Exome sequencing of an individual may identify more than 30,000
VUS and more than 3,000,000 VUS for genome sequencing. Various
lines of evidence are used to establish pathogenicity. These include
the absence of the variant in large populations of control individuals,
finding the variant in affected individuals, demonstration or inference that the variant alters the function of the gene product, noting
that the amino acid altered by the pathogenic variant is conserved
in evolution, and segregation of the variant with disease in a family. For many variants, it is possible to be certain whether the variant is pathogenic or benign, but for others it might be impossible
to definitively assign causality or noncontribution with 100% confidence. For these reasons, they are noted as VUS. Notably, interpretation of pathogenicity for a specific VUS may change over time as our
knowledge base increases, underscoring the importance of counseling
and reinterpretation.
False-­negative results reflect an inability to detect a pathogenic
variant in an affected patient. This occurs principally in disorders
with genetic heterogeneity—allelic (different pathogenic variants
occur in one causative gene) or locus (>1 gene can cause a disease)
heterogeneity. It is often difficult to detect all possible pathogenic
variants within a gene because pathogenic variants vary, both in location within the gene and in the type of variant. Direct sequencing can
miss gene deletions or rearrangements (i.e., structural variants), and
pathogenic variants may be found within noncoding sequences such
as introns or promoter. Therefore a negative DNA test does not necessarily exclude a diagnosis.
Clinical utility is the degree to which the results of a test guide clinical management. For genetic testing, clinical utility includes establishing a diagnosis that obviates the need for additional workup or guiding
surveillance or treatment. Test results may also be used as a basis for
genetic counseling. For some disorders, genetic testing is possible, but
the test results do not add to the clinical assessment. If the diagnosis
and genetic implications are already clear, it might not be necessary to
pursue genetic testing.
Predictive genetic testing involves performing a test in a person at
risk for developing a genetic disorder (presymptomatic), usually on the
basis of family history, yet who does not manifest signs or symptoms.
This is usually done for disorders that display age-­dependent penetrance
(e.g., the likelihood of manifesting signs and symptoms increases with
age, as in cancer genetic syndromes or Huntington disease).
A major caution with predictive testing is that the presence of a
gene pathogenic variant does not necessarily mean that the disease will
develop. Many of the disorders with age-­dependent penetrance display
incomplete penetrance. A person who inherits a pathogenic variant
may never develop signs of the disorder. There is concern that a positive DNA test could result in stigmatization of the person and might
not provide information that will guide medical management. Stigmatization might include psychologic stress, but it could also include

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice
Specimen
1. Blood or other
tissue
2. Germ line or
somatic
(eg, tumor)

Nucleic
acid
extraction
DNA or RNA

Library
preparation

Next-gen
sequencing

Raw data
processing

1. Target
enrichment if
for targeted
panel
2. Fragmentation
if needed
3. End repair,
A-tailing, linker
modification
amplification

1. Fragment analysis
(single read)
2. Paired-end analysis
3. Mate-pair analysis

1. Machine formatted
base calls
2. Nucleotide formatted
base calls
3. Mapping an alignment
to a reference human
genome sequence
4. Marking of duplicate
sequencing reads
5. Base quality calibration
6. Analysis-ready reads

751

Variant calling
1. Variant calling: SNVs,
indels, CNVs, SVs
2. Date visualization
3. Variant validation
4. Annotation
5. Integrated consideration of
segregation analysis, linkage,
association testing, pathway
modeling, interaction analysis,
additional functional studies
6. Variant assigned as benign,
uncertain, or pathogenic

Fig. 98.2 Overview of the next-­generation DNA sequencing workflow. CNV, Copy number variant; Indels, insertions and deletions; SNV, single
nucleotide variant; SV, structural variant. (Adapted from Casey G, Conti D, Haile R, et al. Next generation sequencing and a new era of medicine.
Gut. 2013;62[6]:920–932.)

Table 98.2  Variants That Are Incidental Findings Are
Assigned to One of Four Categories

from which they are generated, and current population genetic data
have limitations including lack of ethnic diversity and population
stratification.

Childhood onset

Medically actionable*

PHARMACOGENETICS

Childhood onset

Not medically actionable†

Adult onset

Medically actionable*

Adult onset

Not medically actionable†

*“Medically actionable” refers to a variant in a gene in which knowledge of the
particular variant will affect medical decision-­making, such as initiation of a treatment
or family planning.
†“Not medically actionable” refers to variants that increase the individual’s risk for a
disease in which no treatment is proven to significantly change the disease natural
history.
From Bick D, Dimmock D. Whole exome and whole genome sequencing. Curr Opin
Pediatr. 2011;23:594–600.

discrimination, including denial of health, life, or disability insurance,
or employment (see Chapter 95).
It is generally agreed that predictive genetic tests should be performed for children only if the results of the test will benefit the medical
management during childhood; otherwise, the test should be deferred
until the individual understands the risks and benefits of testing and
can provide their own informed consent. Individual states offer varying degrees of protection from discrimination on the basis of genetic
testing. A major milestone in the prevention of genetic discrimination
was the passage of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act
(GINA) in 2008, which is a U.S. federal law that prohibits discrimination in health coverage or employment based on genetic information.
Of note, it does not protect against refusal of life insurance.
Predispositional genetic testing is available with the goal of predicting risk of disease. The rationale for predispositional testing is that
the results would lead to strategies aimed at risk reduction as part of a
personalized approach to healthcare maintenance. This might include
avoidance of environmental exposures that would increase risk of disease (cigarette smoking and α1-­antitrypsin deficiency), medical surveillance (familial breast cancer and mammography), or in some cases,
pharmacologic treatment (statins and hypercholesterolemia).
Common disorders are multifactorial in etiology, and many different genes may contribute to risk of any specific condition (see
Chapter 103). Most genetic variants found to correlate with risk of
a common disease add small increments of relative risk and, in most
cases, too little to guide management based on a single variant.
Statistical models for predicting risk based on a collection of DNA
variants has been integrated into approaches such as polygenic risk
scores. By combining the relative risk conferred by a group of DNA
variants, the goal is to quantify a larger proportion of risk for a specific disease. These predictions are confounded by the source of data

Polymorphisms in drug metabolism genes can result in distinctive
patterns of drug absorption, metabolism, excretion, or effectiveness. Knowledge of individual genotypes can guide pharmacologic
therapy, allowing customization drug choice and dosage to avoid
toxicity and provide a therapeutic response. Well-­
known examples include testing for polymorphisms within the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene for susceptibility of
potentially increased toxicity to methotrexate antimetabolite therapy
and thiopurine S-­methyltransferase (TPMT) to avoid adverse effects
with 6-­mercaptopurine therapy (Fig. 98.3).

Pediatric Pharmacogenomics

Pharmacogenomics is the study of how variants contribute to interindividual variability in drug response. The finding that drug responses can
be influenced by the patient’s genetic profile offers great hope for realizing individualized pharmacotherapy, in which the relationship between
genotype and phenotype (either disease and/or drug response) is predictive of drug response. In addition to genetic differences, environmental factors (e.g., diet, concomitant drug or toxic exposure), physiologic
variables (age, sex, pregnancy), and patient adherence all contribute
to variations in drug metabolism and response. Interindividual differences in children are further complicated by the changing patterns of
gene expression occurring during the developmental processes from
birth through adolescence. Combining these genetic and nongenetic
individual-­specific variables, it is expected that children will benefit from
the promise of precision medicine, e.g., identifying the right drug for the
right patient at the right time and dosing (Fig. 98.4).
Examples of pharmacogenomic traits include specific adverse drug
reactions, such as prolonged respiratory muscle paralysis due to succinylcholine, hemolysis associated with antimalarial therapy, carbamazepine-­
induced Stevens-­Johnson syndrome, isoniazid-­induced neurotoxicity,
and others (Table 98.3). The pharmacokinetic properties of a drug are
determined by genes that control drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion. Drug-­metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters
play a particularly important role in this process. One of the better recognized clinical manifestations of pharmacogenomic variability in drug
biotransformation is an increased risk of concentration-­dependent toxicity caused by reduced clearance and consequent tissue drug accumulation. Equally important is the lack of efficacy caused by variations in
metabolism of prodrugs that require biotransformation to be converted
into a pharmacologically active form. The pharmacogenomics of drug
receptors and other target proteins involved in signal transduction or
disease pathogenesis are also expected to contribute to interindividual
variability in drug disposition and response.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

752 Part VIII u Human Genetics
SH

SH
N

N
HO

N

XO

OH
N
H

N

SCH3
N

TPMT

N
H

N

N

6MP

6TU
(inactive)

N

N

N
H

MeMP
(inactive)

HPRT
SH

SCH3
N

N

Fig.

N

TPMT N

N

N

N

P

ribose

P

N

H2N

ribose

N
P P P

N
ribose

TGNs
DNA
incorporation

Inhibition of de novo
purine synthesis

Anti-leukemic effect
Myelosuppression

A
10

3000
Intracellular TGN
concentration

wt/wt

8
6
4
wt/mut

0

5

2000

1000

0
TPMT genotype: mut/mut

2 mut/
mut
0

B

N

N

TIMP

MeTIMP

Percent of population

98.3 Thiopurine S-­methyltransferase
(TPMT) polymorphism. A, 6-­Mercaptopurine
(6MP) undergoes metabolism to thioguanine
nucleotides (TGNs) to exert its cytotoxic effects. TPMT and xanthine oxidase reduce the
amount of 6MP available for the bioactivation
pathway to TGNs. TPMT can also methylate
6-­thioinosine 5′-­monophosphate (TIMP) to generate a methylated compound capable of inhibiting de novo purine synthesis. B, Distribution
of TPMT activity in humans. Of the population,
89% has high activity, whereas 11% has intermediate activity. Approximately 1 in 300 individuals homozygous for two loss-­of-­function alleles
has very low activity. C, Correlation between
the TPMT genotype and intracellular TGN concentrations. In TPMT-­poor metabolizers, more
6MP is available to go down the bioactivation
pathway to form TGNs; this situation is associated with an increased risk of myelosuppression. D, The most common variant TPMT allele
is the result of two pathogenic variants that
give rise to an unstable protein product that
undergoes proteolytic degradation. Each box
represents an exon. Non-coding sequences
are shown as white boxes and colored boxes
indicate coding sequences. 6TU, 6-­
Thiouric
acid; MeMP, 6-­
methylmercaptopurine; HPRT,
6-­thiomethylinosine 5-­monophosphate; MeTIMP, hypoxanthine-­
guanine phosphoribosyl
transferase; wt, wild type; mut, mutant; Ala, alanine; Thr, threonine; Tyr, tyrosine; Cys, cysteine.
(Modified from Relling MV, Dervieux T. Pharmacogenetics and cancer therapy. Nat Rev Cancer. 2001;11:99–108.)

SH

10 15 20
TPMT activity

25

30

C

wt/mut

Myelosuppression
↑ Risk secondary cancer

wt/wt
↓ Toxicity
↑ Risk of relapse

TPMT*1
(wild-type)

TPMT*3A

D

Individuals are classified as “fast,” “rapid,” or “extensive” metabolizers at one end and “slow” or “poor” metabolizers at the other end
of the continuum. For biotransformation, fetuses and newborns may
be phenotypically “slow” or “poor” metabolizers for certain drug-­
metabolizing pathways because of their stage of development, and
they may acquire a phenotype consistent with their genotype at some
point later in the developmental process. Moreover, not all infants
acquire drug metabolism activity at the same rate, and there is interindividual variability in the trajectory (i.e., rate and extent) of drug
biotransformation capacity (Fig. 98.5). The primary organ responsible for drug metabolism is the liver, although the kidney, intestine,
lung, adrenals, blood (phosphatases, esterases), and skin can also biotransform certain compounds. Drug biotransformation is characterized by three important features: (1) broad substrate specificity, in
which a single isozyme may metabolize a large variety of chemically
diverse compounds; (2) many different enzymes may be involved in
the biotransformation of a single drug (enzyme multiplicity); and (3)
a given drug may undergo several different types of reactions. Drug
biotransformation reactions are classified into phase I reactions that

460 GA
Ala→Thr

719 AG
Tyr→Cys

introduce or reveal (through oxidation, reduction, or hydrolysis) a
functional group within the substrate drug molecule that serves as a
site for phase II reactions. These reactions involve conjugation with
endogenous substrates (such as acetate, glucuronic acid, glutathione, glycine, and sulfate), making the compound more water soluble
to be excreted in urine. A supergene family with at least 16 primary cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes are quantitatively the most
important phase I enzymes and catalyze the metabolism of many
lipophilic endogenous (steroids, fatty acids, fat-­
soluble vitamins,
prostaglandins, leukotrienes, thromboxanes) and exogenous compounds, including a multitude of drugs and environment toxins. The
specific CYP isoforms responsible for the majority of human drug
metabolism are CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP2E1,
and CYP3A4. These enzymes are the products of genes that in some
cases are polymorphically expressed, with allelic variants producing
enzymes generally resulting in either no or reduced catalytic activity. At birth the activities of drug-­oxidizing enzymes in the liver are
reduced, which results in slow clearance (and prolonged elimination)
of several substrate drugs (e.g., phenytoin, caffeine, diazepam). Phase

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice

753

98.1 Genetic Counseling
Brendan Lee and Pilar L. Magoulas

Treatment Outcome
Failure

Treat with conventional
drug and dose

Treat with alternative
drug

Drug B

Treat with alternative
drug or dose

Treat with alternative
drug

Drug C

Excessive

Toxicity

Minimal

Success

Fig. 98.4 The promise of genomic medicine to human health and
disease. The goal of personalized medicine is to identify subgroups
of patients who will respond favorably to a given drug with minimum side effects, as well as those who will not respond or who will
show toxicity with standard doses. A further benefit of pharmaco­
genomics is to select the most appropriate alternative drug for patients who cannot be treated successfully with conventional drugs
and doses. (Adapted from Yaffe SJ, Aranda JV. Neonatal and Pediatric Pharmacology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2004.)

II enzymes include arylamine N-­acetyltransferases (NAT1, NAT2),
uridine diphospho-­glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs), epoxide hydrolase, glutathione S-­transferases (GSTs), sulfotransferases (SULTs),
and methyltransferases (catechol O-­methyltransferase, thiopurine
S-­methyltransferase, several N-­methyltransferases). Phase II enzyme
activity is decreased in the newborn and increases into childhood.
Conjugation of compounds metabolized by isoforms of UGT (e.g.,
morphine, bilirubin, chloramphenicol) is reduced at birth but can
exceed adult values by 3-­4 years of age.
Membrane transporters are involved in drug disposition and
actively transport substrate drugs between organs and tissues. They
include organic anion transporters (OATs), organic anion–transporting polypeptides (OATPs), organic cation transporters (OCTs),
and the adenosine triphosphate–binding cassette (ABC) transporters, such as P-­glycoprotein and the multidrug-­resistant proteins.
Drug transporters are expressed at numerous barriers, such as
intestinal epithelial cells, hepatocytes, renal tubular cells, and the
blood-­brain barrier (Fig. 98.6). Transporters are often determinants
of drug resistance, and many drugs work by affecting the function
of transporters. Polymorphisms in the genes encoding these transporters might affect drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
excretion.

Genetic counseling is a communication process in which the genetic
contribution to health, specific risks of transmission of a trait, and
options to manage the condition are explained to individuals and
their family members (Table 98.4). Genetic counselors are specialized
healthcare providers trained in the psychosocial aspects of counseling and the science of medical genetics who may serve as members
of medical teams in many different specialties. The genetic counselor
is expected to present information in a neutral, nondirective manner
while providing resources and psychosocial support to the individual
and family to cope with decisions that are made (see Table 98.4).
In the prenatal setting, a common indication for genetic counseling is
to assess risk of occurrence or recurrence of having a child with a genetic
condition and to discuss management or treatment options that might
be available before, during, or after the pregnancy, such as preimplantation genetic testing, noninvasive prenatal screening, prenatal diagnosis
or fetal intervention, and perinatal management. In pediatric and adult
genetics practices, the goals of genetic counseling are to help establish a
diagnosis in an individual, provide longitudinal care and psychosocial
support to the family, and discuss the genetic basis and inheritance of
the condition as it relates to immediate and distant family members.
The genetic counseling role has expanded, particularly with
advances in understanding the genetics of adult-­onset or common and
rare disease therapeutics. In the former context, genetic counseling has
a major role in risk assessment for cancer, especially breast, ovarian, or
colon cancer, for which well-­defined risk models and genetic tests are
available to assess risk to an individual. In the latter, the genetic counselor may discuss developments in rare disease therapeutics and make
appropriate referral for medical therapies.
There are several situations in which genetic counseling plays a
particularly important role. The first situation is the prenatal diagnosis of a congenital anomaly or genetic disease. The need for information is urgent because a family must often make time-­sensitive
decisions about treatment and management options, such as fetal
intervention or continuation of a pregnancy in the context of fetal
anomalies. Risks to the mother must also be considered. The second
type of situation occurs when a child is born with a life-­threatening
congenital anomaly or suspected genetic disease. Decisions must be
made immediately on how much support should be provided to the
child and whether certain types of therapy should be attempted. The
third situation arises when there are concerns about a genetic condition affecting one later in life. This may occur in an adolescent or
young adult with a family history of an adult-­onset genetic disorder
(e.g., Huntington disease, hereditary breast/ovarian cancer), in an
individual with a suspected yet undiagnosed genetic condition, or if
a couple with a personal or family history of a genetic condition (or
a carrier) is planning a family. In these situations, it is often necessary to have several meetings with a family to discuss possible testing,
screening, and management options. Urgency is not as much of an
issue as being sure that they have as much information and as many
options as are available. Last, with the advent of genomic testing in
all areas of clinical care, pretest genetic counseling before testing is
essential to provide individuals with accurate information regarding
the types of results they may receive. During this process, individuals
are also given the option of what type of results they want reported
back to them, such as medically actionable results unrelated to the
primary indication for testing and incidental findings.

GENETIC COUNSELING ELEMENTS

Components of a genetic counseling session and providing accurate
information to families requires the following:
• Taking a targeted family history and constructing a pedigree that
diagrams the patient’s relatives (including miscarriages, abortions,
stillbirths, deceased persons) with their sex, age, ethnicity, and state
of health, up to and including third-­degree relatives.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

754 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 98.3  Examples of Effects of Gene Polymorphisms on Drug Response
GENE

ENZYME/TARGET

DRUG

CLINICAL RESPONSE

BCHE

Butyrylcholinesterase

Succinylcholine

Prolonged paralysis

CYP2C9

Cytochrome P450 2C9

Warfarin

Individuals having ≥1 reduced function alleles require
lower doses of warfarin for optimal anticoagulation,
especially initial anticoagulant control.

CYP2C19

Cytochrome P450 2C19

Clopidogrel

Individuals having ≥1 loss-­of-­function alleles have
reduced capacity to form pharmacologically active
metabolite of clopidogrel and reduced antiplatelet
effect.

CYP2D6

Cytochrome P450 2D6

Codeine

Poor metabolizers (individuals with two loss-­of-­
function alleles) do not metabolize codeine to
morphine and thus experience no analgesic effect.
Ultrarapid metabolizers (individuals with ≥3 functional
alleles) may experience morphine toxicity.

G6PD

Glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase

Primaquine (others)

Hemolysis

HLA-­A*3101

Human leukocyte antigen A31

Carbamazepine

Carriers of HLA-­A*3101 allele have increased risk of
SJS and TEN from carbamazepine.

HLA-­B*1502

Human leukocyte antigen B15

Allopurinol

Han Chinese carriers of HLA-­B*1502 allele have
increased risk of SJS and TEN from carbamazepine.

HLA-­B*5701

Human leukocyte antigen B57

Abacavir
Flucloxacillin

Carriers of HLA-­B*5701 allele have increased risk
of hypersensitivity reactions to abacavir-­and
flucloxacillin-­induced liver injury.

HLA-­B*5801

Human leukocyte antigen B58

Allopurinol

Carriers of HLA-­B*5801 allele have increased risk of
severe cutaneous adverse reactions to allopurinol,
including hypersensitivity reactions, SJS, and TEN.

NAT2

N-­Acetyltransferase 2

Isoniazid, hydralazine

Individuals homozygous for “slow acetylation”
polymorphisms are more susceptible to isoniazid
toxicity, or hydralazine-­induced systemic lupus
erythematosus.

SLCO1B1

Organic anion–transporting protein (OATP)
1B1

Simvastatin

Carriers of the SLCO1B1*5 allele are at increased risk
for musculoskeletal side effects from simvastatin.

TPMT

Thiopurine S-­methyltransferase

Azathioprine
6-­Mercaptopurine

Individuals homozygous for an inactivating
pathogenic variant have severe toxicity if
treated with standard doses of azathioprine or
6-­mercaptopurine; rapid metabolism causes
undertreatment.

UGT1A1

Uridine diphospho-­glucuronosyltransferase
1A1

Irinotecan

UGT1A1*28 allele is associated with decreased
glucuronidation of SN-­38, the active metabolite of
irinotecan, and increased risk of neutropenia.

VKORC1

Vitamin K oxidoreductase complex 1

Warfarin

Individuals with a haplotype associated with reduced
expression of VKORC1 protein (therapeutic target
of warfarin) require lower doses of the drug for
stable anticoagulation.

SJS, Stevens-­Johnson syndrome; TEN, toxic epidermal necrolysis.

• Gathering information from hospital records about the affected individual and, in some cases, about other family members.
• Documenting prenatal, pregnancy, and delivery histories.
• Reviewing the latest available medical, laboratory, and genetic information concerning the disorder.
• Reviewing a careful physical examination of the affected individual
(photographs, measurements) and of apparently unaffected individuals in the family (typically performed by a physician rather than a
genetic counselor).
• Reviewing genetic testing and screening options.
• Establishing or confirming the diagnosis by the diagnostic tests
available.
• Providing psychosocial support to the individual and family
throughout the diagnostic process.
• Giving the family information about support groups and local and
national resources.
• Providing new information to the family as it becomes available (a
mechanism for updating needs to be established).

Genetic counseling sessions often include anticipatory guidance
regarding the occurrence or risk of occurrence of a specific condition,
knowledge of the diagnosis of the particular condition, natural history
of the condition, genetic aspects of the condition, risk of recurrence,
prenatal diagnosis and reproductive options, therapies and referrals,
and provision of support resources.

The Diagnostic Process

If a specific diagnosis is made and confirmed, this should be discussed
with the family and information provided in writing. Often, however,
the disorder fits into a spectrum (e.g., one of many types of arthrogryposis) or the diagnosis is clinical rather than confirmed with molecular
testing. In these situations, the family needs to understand the limits
of the diagnostic process and present knowledge, and that additional
research will probably lead to better information in the future.
Although it is not always possible to make an exact diagnosis, having
a diagnosis as accurate as possible is important. Estimates of recurrence
risk for various family members depend on an accurate diagnosis that

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice
100

60

Intestinal efflux
P-gp, MRP2, MRP1,
OCT1, OATP3,
NTCP

40

Oral intake

20

IV

Activity

80

0
Birth

5

Infant

10

15

20

Child

Brain transport
P-gp, OAT3,
MRP1, MRP5,
OATP1

80
Activity

Hepatic uptake
OATP2, OATP8, OATP-B,
OCT1, NTCP, OAT2, OAT3
Fecal
Excretion

Intestine
Vascular
space

Urinary
Excretion

Interstitial
space

100

60

Renal secretion
OAT1, OAT3, OCT1,
OCT2, OATP,
P-gp, MRP1

Fig. 98.6 Schematic diagram of important transport proteins and

40

their known locations in humans. Spheres correspond to drug molecules. (From American Pharmacists Association. Ritschel WA, Kearns
GL, eds. Handbook of Basic Pharmacokinetics Including Clinical Applications, 7th ed. Washington, DC: American Pharmacists Association,
2009. p 45.)

20
0
Birth

Biliary excretion
P-gp, MRP3, MRP2, sPGP

25
Adult

755

5

10

15

20

25

Age (yr)

Fig. 98.5 “Developmental” phenotypes. Variability in developmen-

tal changes in gene expression and functional enzyme activity are superimposed on pharmacogenetic determinants. Top, Developmental
profile of a theoretical drug-­metabolizing enzyme over a 25-­year span
in 20 individuals. Bottom, At maturity (adults), allelic variation within
the coding region of the gene gives rise to two distinct phenotypes:
high activity in 92% of the population (“extensive metabolizers”; red
circles) and low activity in 8% of the population (“poor metabolizers”;
yellow circles). However, there is also interindividual variability in the
rate at which functional activity is acquired after birth. For example,
the two phenotypes may not be readily distinguishable in newborn
infants. Furthermore, there may be discrete periods during childhood
in which the genotype-­phenotype relationship may differ from that
observed in adults (e.g., developmental stages at which enzyme activity appears to be greater in children than in adults). (Adapted from
Leeder JS. Translating pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics
into drug development for clinical pediatric and beyond. Drug Discov
Today. 2004;9:567–573.)

considers the likelihood that a particular finding is isolated, associated
with a syndrome, or nonsyndromic (e.g., isolated cleft lip and palate).
When a specific diagnosis cannot be made (as in many cases of multiple congenital anomalies), the various possibilities in the differential
diagnosis should be discussed with the family and empirical information provided. If available, specific diagnostic tests should be discussed.
Often, empirical recurrence risks can be given even without a specific
laboratory-­based diagnosis. At the same time, even negative laboratory
testing can further modify this risk.

Natural History of the Condition

It is important to discuss the natural history of the specific genetic disorder in the family. Affected persons and their families have questions
regarding the prognosis and potential management or therapy that can
be answered only with knowledge of the natural history. If there are
other possible diagnoses, their natural history may also be discussed.
If the disorder is associated with a spectrum of clinical outcomes or
complications, the range of possible outcomes and variability of the
condition, as well as treatment and referral to the appropriate specialist, should be addressed.

Genetic Aspects of the Condition and
Recurrence Risk

The genetic aspects and risk of recurrence are important because all
family members should be informed of their reproductive choices.
The genetic basis of the disorder can be explained with visual aids
(e.g., diagrams of chromosomes and inheritance patterns). It is
important to provide accurate occurrence and recurrence risks for
various members of the family, including unaffected individuals. If
a definite diagnosis cannot be made, it is necessary to use empirical recurrence risks. Genetic counseling gives patients the necessary information to understand the various options and to make
their own informed decisions regarding pregnancy, adoption, assistive reproductive technologies, prenatal diagnosis, screening, carrier detection, or termination of pregnancy. It may be necessary to
have more than one counseling session. Even if a specific molecular
diagnosis has been made and a well-­defined inheritance pattern
has been described for the condition, it is important to recognize
that the principles of incomplete penetrance, variable expressivity,
and germline/somatic mosaicism can contribute uncertainty to the
recurrence risk and severity of a potentially affected pregnancy conception or child.

Prenatal Diagnosis and Prevention

Many different methods of prenatal screening and diagnosis are
available, depending on the specific genetic disorder (see Chapter
117). The use of ultrasonography allows prenatal screening of anatomic abnormalities such as congenital heart defects. Amniocentesis
and chorionic villus sampling are used to obtain fetal tissue for analysis of chromosomal abnormalities, biochemical disorders, and DNA
studies. Maternal blood or serum sampling is used for some types of
screening, including noninvasive prenatal screening by direct analysis of cell-­free fetal DNA found in maternal blood, which is used for
screening of conditions such as trisomy 21 and other aneuploidies. In
addition, this source of cell-­free fetal DNA has also been used clinically for DNA sequencing for selected dominant de novo conditions
in the fetus that may occur with increased frequency with increasing
paternal age. Current tests of fetal DNA from maternal blood should
be considered screening tests, and invasive testing like amniocentesis
or chorionic villus sampling should be considered for confirmatory
diagnostic testing.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

756 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 98.4  Indications for Genetic Counseling
Advanced parental age
• Maternal age ≥35 years
• Paternal age ≥40 years
Previous child with or family history of:
• Congenital abnormality
• Dysmorphology
• Intellectual disability
• Isolated birth defect
• Metabolic disorder
• Chromosome abnormality
• Single-­gene disorder
Adult-­onset genetic disease (presymptomatic testing)
• Cancer
• Huntington disease
Pharmacogenomics
Consanguinity
Teratogen exposure (occupational, abuse)
Repeated pregnancy loss or infertility
Pregnancy screening abnormality
• Maternal serum α-­fetoprotein
Maternal first-­trimester screen
• Maternal triple or quad screen or variant of this test
• Fetal ultrasonography
Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT)
• Fetal karyotype
Heterozygote screening based on ethnic risk
• Sickle cell anemia
• Tay-­Sachs, Canavan, and Gaucher diseases
• Thalassemias
Universal carrier screening panels
Follow-­up to abnormal neonatal genetic testing
Prior to whole genome or exome sequencing
Prior to preimplantation genetic testing

Therapies and Referral

Some genetic disorders require the care of multiple specialists. Many
genetic conditions have diagnosis and management guidelines to aid
in the treatment and management of these complex patients. Prevention of known complications is a priority, so close follow-­up with the
necessary specialists involved in the child’s care is essential to identify
any potentially concerning issues early. The psychologic adjustment of
the family might also require specific intervention. Some challenges
may involve when to discuss the diagnosis of a chronic disease with the
patient, siblings, and other family members or friends. The decision
to do so should always involve the parents and an assessment of the
maturity and capacity of the child or adolescent.
Alternative medicines or nontraditional therapies are often brought
to attention by parents after exhaustive internet searches. Such treatments should not necessarily be dismissed since the physician and
genetic counselor should serve as an important resource for helping
parents navigate the maze of nonstandard treatments. Instead, the
relative merits of treatments should be framed in the context of cost
and benefit, scientific rationale, evidence from controlled and observational studies, the placebo effect, safety of the treatment, and the gaps
in our own scientific knowledge base.

Support Groups

A large number of community and online lay disease–specific support groups have been formed to provide information and to fund
research on specific genetic and nongenetic conditions. An important
part of genetic counseling is to give information about these groups to
patients and to suggest a contact person for the families. Many groups
have established websites and social media platforms with very helpful
information. With the rise of social media and its ability to connect

families with rare syndromes from around the world, it is important to
stress to families that their individual disease course will be unique and
significant biases of reporting occur on such platforms. This should be
balanced by the benefit of sharing potential important natural history
elements of the underlying rare disease.

Follow-­Up

Families should be encouraged to continue to ask questions and keep
up with new information about the specific disorder. New developments often influence the diagnosis and therapy of specific genetic
disorders.

Nondirective Counseling

Genetic counseling is usually nondirective; choices about reproduction
are left to the family to decide what is right for them. The role of the
counselor (physician, genetic counselor, nurse, medical geneticist) is to
provide information in understandable terms and outline the range of
options available.

98.2 Principles of Management and
Treatment of Genetic Disorders
Brendan Lee and Nicola Brunetti-­Pierri

TREATMENT OF GENETIC DISEASES

Genetic conditions are often chronic disorders. Some are amenable
to curative therapies, although there has been a rapid increase in the
number of treatable disorders. Based on ongoing preclinical and clinical investigations, new therapies for a growing number of diseases are
expected to become available in the near future. Surgical management
is available for many conditions that are associated with congenital
anomalies or predisposition to tumors. All patients and families should
be provided information about the disorder, genetic counseling, anticipatory guidance, and appropriate medical surveillance.
Resources for patients include the National Organization of Rare Disorders (www.rarediseases.org), the Genetic Alliance (www.geneticalliance.
org), the National Library of Medicine (www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/
geneticdisorders.html), and a large number of disease-­specific websites.
A current listing of federally and privately funded clinical trials, including many for genetic diseases, is available at www.ClinicalTrials.gov.
Specific medical therapies for genetic disorders can be classified into
physiologic and replacement therapies. Another approach to correct
protein misfolding induced by missense pathogenic variants is through
use of small molecules that specifically bind to mutant proteins, stabilizing their conformation, thereby preventing early degradation, and allowing proper cellular trafficking and localization. This strategy has found
successful applications for therapy of cystic fibrosis caused by specific
CFTR pathogenic variants, including the F508del (see Chapter 454).

PHYSIOLOGIC THERAPIES

Physiologic therapies attempt to ameliorate the phenotype of a genetic
disorder by modifying the physiology of the affected individual. The
underlying defect itself is not altered by treatment. Physiologic therapies
are used in the treatment of inborn errors of metabolism (see Chapter
104). These include dietary manipulations, such as reducing phenylalanine intake by persons with phenylketonuria, coenzyme supplementation for some patients with methylmalonic acidemia and mitochondrial
diseases, stimulation of alternative pathways to excrete ammonia for
those with urea cycle disorders, phototherapy to increase excretion of
neurotoxic unconjugated bilirubin in Crigler-­Najjar syndrome, bisphosphonate treatment for those with osteogenesis imperfecta to reduce bone
fractures, and avoiding cigarette smoking by persons with α1-­antitrypsin
deficiency or specific foods and drugs by persons with glucose-­
6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency or acute intermittent porphyria.
Physiologic treatments can be highly effective, but they usually need to
be maintained for a lifetime because they do not affect the underlying
genetic disorder. Many of these treatments are most effective early in life

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice
before irreversible damage has occurred. This is the rationale for comprehensive newborn screening for inborn errors of metabolism.
Many physiologic therapies use small-­
molecule pharmaceuticals
(e.g., to remove ammonia in those with urea cycle disorders). Pharmacologic treatments directly target a defective cellular pathway that
is altered by an abnormal or a missing gene product. One approach
is the inhibition of an enzyme reaction that is upstream of the deficient enzyme to prevent accumulation of the toxic metabolites, such
as the nitisinone (NTBC) for therapy of tyrosinemia type I. A similar approach focuses on partially reducing the synthesis of the substrate of the abnormal enzyme or its precursors in lysosomal storage
disorders (see Chapter 106.4). Other examples include targeting the
FGFR3 signaling pathway by the C-­type natriuretic peptide in achondroplasia, FGF23 by the monoclonal antibody burosumab in X-­linked
hypophosphatemia, or the angiopoietin-­like protein 3 (ANGPTL3)
by the monoclonal antibody evinacumab in homozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia.

REPLACEMENT THERAPIES

Replacement therapies include replacement of a missing metabolite, an
enzyme, an organ, or even a specific gene.

Enzyme Replacement

Enzyme replacement therapy is a component of the treatment of cystic fibrosis to manage intestinal malabsorption. Pancreatic enzymes
are easily administered orally, because they must be delivered to the
gastrointestinal tract. Recombinant alkaline phosphatase coupled to a
bone-­targeting motif is available for intravenous therapy of hypophosphatasia, a skeletal disorder caused by alkaline-­phosphatase deficiency.
Enzyme replacement strategies are effective for several lysosomal
storage disorders. Enzymes are targeted for the lysosome by modification with mannose-­6-­phosphate, which binds to a specific receptor. This
receptor is also present on the cell surface, so lysosomal enzymes with
exposed mannose-­6-­phosphate residues can be infused into the blood
and are taken into cells and delivered to lysosomes. Enzyme replacement
therapies are available for Gaucher disease and Fabry disease, most of the
mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS I, II, IVA, VI, VII), acid lipase deficiency,
α-­mannosidosis, neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis late infantile (CLN2),
and Pompe disease, and are being tested for MPS IIIA and IIIB, metachromatic leukodystrophy, and Niemann-­Pick disease type B. Other
examples include enzyme replacement therapy with pegylated recombinant phenylalanine ammonia lyase for phenylketonuria that is effective
at reducing blood phenylalanine concentrations in most patients, such
that most of them can come off a phenylalanine-­restricted diet.
One complication of enzyme replacement therapy is antibody
response to the infused recombinant enzyme. The magnitude of this
response is not always predictable and varies depending on the enzyme
preparation and the disease. In most cases, the patient’s antibody
response does not affect the treatment’s efficacy (e.g., Gaucher disease),
but in other situations it may be a significant hurdle (e.g., Pompe disease and phenylketonuria).

Transplantation

Cell transplantation and organ transplantation are potentially effective
approaches to replacement of a defective gene. Aside from transplantation to replace damaged tissues, transplantation of stem cells, liver, or
bone marrow is also used for several diseases, mainly inborn errors of
metabolism, and hematologic or immunologic disorders. A successful
transplant can be essentially curative, although there may be significant
risks and side effects (see Chapters 177-­181). Cell and tissue transplantation is effective in many clinical scenarios, but there is always short-­term
morbidity, often associated with either surgical (liver) or preparative
(bone marrow) regimens, and long-­term morbidity related to chronic
immunosuppression and graft failure. Bone marrow transplantation is
the best example of stem cell therapy, but much effort also is focused on
identifying, characterizing, expanding, and using other tissue stem cells
for regenerative therapies. In contrast to transplantation from a healthy
donor, the infused cells are the patient’s own cells in ex vivo gene therapy
of hematopoietic stem cells. Therefore, although it requires preparative

757

myeloablation akin to regular bone marrow transplantation from healthy
donors, engraftment of genetically modified hematopoietic stem cells is
devoid of risks of rejection or graft-­versus-­host disease. Increasingly,
this approach is combined with gene therapy after genetic correction of
autologous stem cells.

Gene Therapy

Another approach focuses on replacing or correcting a defective gene
(gene therapy). In theory, if one can target the specific tissue that has
a deficiency in the gene or gene product, this can offer a less invasive
means of achieving a cure for a genetic disorder compared to transplantations. Ultimately, gene therapy depends on the unique interaction of the disease pathophysiology, which is specific to the patient, and
the gene delivery vehicle.
Gene-­transfer vehicles include viral and nonviral vectors administered
through ex vivo or in vivo approaches. In ex vivo approaches the patient’s
cells are removed and after gene correction or replacement are infused into
the patient. An example of this is the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-­approved chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy for lymphomas and leukemias. In the in vivo approaches the gene therapy vector
is directly injected into the body by either systemic (e.g., intravenous) or
localized (e.g., intracerebral, intraocular) injections. Most human clinical
trials have used viral vectors because of their efficiency of gene delivery
to tissues. In some diseases, such as X-­linked and adenosine deaminase–
deficient severe combined immunodeficiency, chronic granulomatous disease, and Wiskott-­Aldrich syndrome, clinical gene therapy is a viable and
effective option. Ex vivo gene transfer of hematopoietic stem cells can be
considered at least as effective to allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in presymptomatic patients with X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy, metachromatic leukodystrophy and Hurler syndrome.
In vivo gene therapy is also promising for Leber congenital amaurosis
by intraocular delivery, and hemophilias and several inborn errors of liver
metabolism by systemic intravenous injection. In vivo gene therapy is
FDA approved for treatment of a specific RPE65-­deficient form of retinitis
pigmentosa using adeno-­associated virus (AAV)-­mediated expression of
the normal RPE65 gene via subretinal injections. In vivo AAV-­mediated
gene therapy is also an approved treatment that has significantly changed
the early course of the disease and improved motor function in children
with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) (see Chapter 652.2). Although
patients with SMA typically present with muscle atrophy, respiratory failure, and die before 2 years of age, treated patients have remained healthy
and attained motor milestones that are typically not achieved in any of the
untreated patients. Similar efficacy has also been achieved by intrathecal
delivery of antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) correcting SMN2 splicing.
Brain-directed gene therapy is available for aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency by intracerebral injections of an AAV-based
vector. Systemic intravenous AAV-based gene therapy vectors have been
approved for both hemophilia A and B.
Gene editing with direct correction of a disease-­causing pathogenic variant is another possible approach to genetic therapy.
Various nucleases with specific DNA-­recognition sequences are
available for genome editing; they include zinc finger nucleases
(ZFNs), transcription activator–like effector nucleases (TALENs),
and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat
(CRISPR)/CRISPR-­associated nine (Cas9). They all permit permanent gene modification of genes in cells. This is achieved by DNA
site-­specific double-­strand breaks (DSBs) induced by the endonuclease and a template encompassing the wild-­type sequence to be
used as a substrate for repair by homology-­directed repair (HDR).
Following site-­specific DSB, DNA repair is mediated by either nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) or HDR that repairs DNA in the
presence of a donor sequence (Fig. 98.7A and B). NHEJ repairs
the DSB by joining the two ends of the DSB, often introducing
small insertions or deletions (indels) at the DSB site that generally
inactivate gene function (see Fig. 98.7A). Compared with NHEJ,
HDR is less efficient and requires a donor DNA template (see Fig.
98.7C). The wild-­type copy of the mutated gene can be integrated
into the endogenous locus or into “safe harbors” that allow high
expression levels of the therapeutic gene (see Fig. 98.7A). Based on

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

758 Part VIII u Human Genetics
DNA double strand break
CRISPR/Cas9

5’
3’

DNA donor
sequence

Indel

Indel of nucleotides (e.g.,
inactivation of CCR5 or
BCL11A enhancer)

Targeted insertion (e.g., Factor IX
into the albumin locus)

A
DNA double strand break

5’
3’

DNA double strand break

Pathogenic variant

5’
3’

Mutated
DNA
deletion

Pathogenic variant

Donor sequence

Targeted deletion (e.g., exons of
dystrophin with pathogenic
variant, triplet expansion)

B

C

Fig. 98.7 A, Double-­strand breaks can be repaired by nonhomologous end-­joining (NHEJ) repair mechanisms, giving rise to small insertions and
deletions (Indel) that can disrupt gene expression (blue). B, Two double-­strand breaks can also be corrected by NHEJ and can eliminate the DNA
carrying the pathogenic variant (pink) located between the two breaks. C, Double-­strand breaks can be repaired by homology-­directed repair
mechanisms in the presence of a donor template allowing the incorporation of a donor sequence (yellow) that correct the mutated gene. CRISPR/
Cas9, Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat/CRISPR-­associated nine (Cas9).

these features, genome editing has the potential to overcome several
limitations of gene replacement therapy. First, genotoxicity due to
ectopic activation of nearby protooncogenes or knockout of tumor
suppressor genes does not occur with on-­target editing. Second,
genome editing allows physiologic regulation of the expression of
the corrected gene in contrast to gene replacement therapy. Third,
gene editing is maintained in proliferating cells, and it overcomes
the dilution effect due to cell division that is observed with gene
replacement therapy by nonintegrating vectors such as AAV vectors.
Genome editing tools have corrected the gene defect in several
preclinical murine models and are in clinical trials. ZFNs have been
used ex vivo to disrupt CCR5 expression in human T cells to induce
resistance to HIV infection. ZFNs and CRISPR/Cas9 are being used
to boost fetal hemoglobin in β-­thalassemia and sickle cell disease by
disrupting the enhancer of the BCL11A gene, which suppresses fetal
hemoglobin production. Moreover, ZFN-­mediated targeted introduction of therapeutic genes downstream of the highly active albumin
promoter in hepatocytes is currently under clinical investigation for
several diseases.

RNA-­Targeted Therapy

Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are short synthetic nucleic acids
that hybridize with cellular RNA using classic base pairing to modulate gene expression. To ensure specificity, their sequences are complementary to their target sequences (Fig. 98.8). Through binding to
pre-­mRNA or mRNA, ASOs can posttranscriptionally regulate protein

synthesis by mechanisms including modification of pre-­mRNA processing and splicing, competitive inhibition, steric blockade of translational machinery, and degradation of the target RNA. Clinical ASOs
have been developed for treatment of Duchenne muscular dystrophy
and SMA, respectively (Table 98.5). In SMA, SMN1 and SMN2 genes
are identical (99% homology), except for an 11-­nucleotide sequence
in exon seven that alters splicing (see Chapter 652.2). Splicing of the
SMN2 pre-­mRNA leads to the exclusion of exon seven, generating a
truncated, unstable protein that is rapidly degraded. Therefore SMN2
cannot compensate for SMN1 loss in SMA. The ASO designed to correct SMN2 splicing by promoting the inclusion of exon seven allows
SMN2 to compensate for the loss of expression caused by the SMN1
pathogenic variant. ASOs are also effective for treatment of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia and have been also designed to
inhibit HTT mRNA to reduce concentrations of mutant huntingtin in
Huntington disease.
Conjugation of siRNA with GalNAc to target the asialoglycoprotein
receptor is an efficient strategy to facilitate cell uptake and to increase
siRNA liver accumulation (see Fig. 98.8). A GalNAc-­siRNA targeting
the mRNA for aminolevulinate synthase 1 (ALAS1), the first enzyme in
the heme synthesis pathway, has been developed for treatment of acute
hepatic porphyria, and a similar strategy targeting glycolate oxidase is
effective at reducing oxalate levels for treatment of primary hyperoxaluria type 1.
Lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) are spherical structures with a composition very similar to cell membranes and are suitable carriers for

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 98 u Integration of Genetics into Pediatric Practice

Base

O

ter
omo

NA
ssD
olyA
AAV
e P
gen
s
n
Tra

ITR

759

O

O OH
O P O

–

Pr

O

ITR

O
O

AAV

LNP

Base
2'

OH

ASO

(GalNAc)3 carbohydrate moiety
HO

OH
O

HO

H
N

O

NHAc
HO

H
N

O

OH

HO

O

H
N

O

NHAc
HO
HO

OH

O

H
N

O

O
O

O

O

H
N

NH

NHAc

N

N
H

O
OH
O

Scaffold

O

O

O

O

O

–

O P O
O

C12 tether

GalNAc-siRNA

Fig. 98.8 Approved delivery technologies for in vivo gene therapy. Four platform technologies have been clinically approved for gene-­based

therapies of genetic diseases: adeno-­associated virus (AAV) vector containing a 4.7-­kb single-­stranded DNA with inverted terminal repeats (ITRs),
antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) therapeutics, lipid nanoparticle (LNP) containing siRNA or mRNA including key lipid components, and N-acetylgalactosamine-short-interfering RNA (GALNAc-siRNA) therapeutics made of a trivalent ligand with terminal GalNAc moieties covalently linked to
siRNA at the 3′-­end of the sense strand.

Table 98.5  Approved In Vivo Gene-­Based (DNA and RNA) Therapies for Genetic Disorders
PRODUCT

GENE TARGET

DISEASE

ROUTE OF
ADMINISTRATION

ASO
Eteplirsen

Dystrophin (exon 51)

Duchenne muscular dystrophy

Intrathecal

Golodirsen

Dystrophin (exon 53)

Duchenne muscular dystrophy

Subcutaneous

Casimersen

Dystrophin (exon 45)

Duchenne muscular dystrophy

Subcutaneous

Inotersen

Transthyretin (TTR)

TTR-­mediated amyloidosis

Subcutaneous

Nusinersen

Survival of motor neuron two (SMN2)

Spinal muscular atrophy

Intrathecal

Mipomersen

Apolipoprotein B-­100

Hypercholesterolemia

Subcutaneous

Volanesorsen

Apolipoprotein CIII

Familial chylomicronemia

Subcutaneous

GALNAc-­sIRNA CONJUGATES
Givosiran

ALAS1

Acute hepatic porphyrias

Subcutaneous

Inclisiran

PCSK9

Hypercholesterolemia

Subcutaneous

Lumasiran

Glycolate oxidase

Primary hyperoxaluria type 1

Subcutaneous

LNP-­RNA
Patisiran

TTR siRNA

TTR-­mediated amyloidosis

Intravenous

AAV VECTORS
Voretigene neparvovec-­rzyl

RPE65 (AAV2)

Leber congenital amaurosis

Subretinal

Onasemnogene abeparvovec

SMN1 (AAV9)

Spinal muscular atrophy

Intravenous

Eladocagene exuparvovec

DDC (AAV2)

AADC deficiency

Bilateral intraputaminal infusions

Valoctocogene roxaparvovec

Factor VIII (AAV5)

Hemophilia A

Intravenous

Etranacogene dezaparvovec

Factor IX (AAV5)

Hemophilia B

Intravenous

AAV, Adeno-­associated virus; AADC, aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase; ASO, antisense oligonucleotides; LNP, lipid nanoparticle.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

760 Part VIII u Human Genetics
nucleic acid delivery, such as siRNA and mRNAs (see Fig. 98.8). A
liver targeting LNP carrying an siRNA targeting transthyretin has been
effective for treatment of hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis that has
been recently approved. In various preclinical models, LNPs have been
shown to deliver mRNA molecules to hepatocytes with high efficiency.
LNPs are being used for the delivery of gene editing molecules such
as ZFNs and Cas9 mRNA together with a single guide (sg)RNA. In
addition, LNPs have been used for delivery of genome editing tools
such as ZFNs and CRISPR/Cas9 together with a viral vector carrying
a promoterless DNA sequence capable of homologous recombination
that can result in high levels of the integrated sequence and short-­term
expression of the endonucleases.

Correction of Genetic Diseases in the
Human Germline

Prevention of genetic diseases has been accomplished by preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). This procedure requires in vitro fertilization and single–embryo cell genetic testing of the known families’
pathogenic variant and is performed with polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) amplification of the affected gene. To avoid disease recurrence,
only the unaffected embryos are implanted. With the advent of efficient
genome editing by CRISPR/Cas9, editing human embryos is technically possible. The announcement of the birth of “CRISPR babies” has
led to calls for a moratorium on human germline genome editing, and
currently, germline and/or embryonic gene editing studies in humans
have not been approved. Given the limited understanding of the consequences of CRISPR/Cas9-­mediated DSBs on the germline human
genome, it is unlikely that these approaches will become available any
time soon.
In contrast, mitochondrial replacement therapies to avoid
mitochondrial DNA pathogenic variants are available. In one technique, the pathogenic variant carrier mother’s nuclear DNA is
removed from the unfertilized oocyte and transferred to an unaffected mitochondrial donor oocyte (minus that cell’s nuclear DNA).
In another approach, the pronucleus from the pathogenic variant-­
carrier mother’s fertilized oocyte is transferred to the unaffected
mitochondrial donor’s fertilized oocyte (minus the pronucleus).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 99

Chromosome Disorders

Table 99.1  Incidence of Chromosomal Abnormalities in
Newborn Surveys
TYPE OF ABNORMALITY

NUMBER

APPROXIMATE
INCIDENCE

SEX CHROMOSOME ANEUPLOIDY
Males (43,612 newborns)
47,XXY

45

1/1,000*

47,XYY

45

1/1,000

Other X or Y aneuploidy

32

1/1,350

Total

122

1/360 male births

Females (24,547 newborns)
45,X

6

1/4,000

47,XXX

27

1/900

Other X aneuploidy

9

1/2,700

Total

42

1/580 female
births

AUTOSOMAL ANEUPLOIDY (68,159 NEWBORNS)
Trisomy 21
82
1/830
Trisomy 18

9

1/7,500

Trisomy 13

3

1/22,700

Other aneuploidy

2

1/34,000

Total

96

1/700 live births

STRUCTURAL ABNORMALITIES (68,159 NEWBORNS)
Balanced Rearrangements
Robertsonian
62
1/1,100
Other

77

1/885

Unbalanced Rearrangements
Robertsonian

5

1/13,600

Other

38

1/1,800

Total

182

1/375 live births

All chromosome
abnormalities

442

1/154 live births

*Recent studies show the prevalence is currently 1:580 (Morris JK, Alberman E, Scott
C, Jacobs P. Is the prevalence of Klinefelter syndrome increasing? Eur J Hum Genet.
2008;16(2):163–170.)
Data from Hsu LYF. Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities through
amniocentesis. In: Milunsky A, ed, Genetic Disorders and the Fetus, 4th ed. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press; 1998: pp. 179–248.

Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee
99.1 Methods of Chromosome Analysis
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee
Clinical cytogenetics is the study of chromosomes, including their
structure, function, inheritance, and abnormalities. Chromosome
abnormalities are very common and occur in approximately 1–2% of
live births, 5% of stillbirths, and 50% of early fetal losses in the first
trimester of pregnancy (Table 99.1). Chromosome abnormalities are
more common among individuals with intellectual disability and play
a significant role in the development of some neoplasias.
Chromosome analyses are indicated in persons presenting with
multiple congenital anomalies, dysmorphic features, and/or intellectual disability. The specific indications for studies include prenatal testing in conceptuses of women with advanced maternal age (>35 years),
multiple abnormalities on fetal ultrasound, multiple congenital anomalies, unexplained growth restriction in the fetus, postnatal problems

in growth and development, ambiguous genitalia, unexplained intellectual disability with or without associated anatomic abnormalities,
primary amenorrhea or infertility, recurrent miscarriages (≥3) or prior
history of stillbirths and neonatal deaths, a first-­degree relative with
a known or suspected structural chromosome abnormality, clinical
findings consistent with a known anomaly, some malignancies, and
chromosome breakage syndromes (e.g., Bloom syndrome, Fanconi
anemia).
Cytogenetic studies are usually performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes, although cultured fibroblasts obtained from a skin biopsy
may also be used. Prenatal (fetal) chromosome studies are performed
with cells obtained from the amniotic fluid (amniocytes), chorionic
villus tissue, and fetal blood or, in the case of preimplantation diagnosis, by analysis of a blastomere (cleavage stage) biopsy, polar body
biopsy, or blastocyst biopsy. Cytogenetic studies of bone marrow have
an important role in tumor surveillance, particularly among patients
with leukemia. These are useful to determine induction of remission
and success of therapy, or in some cases the occurrence of relapses.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders
Chromosome anomalies include abnormalities of number and
structure and are the result of errors during cell division. There are
two types of cell division: mitosis, which occurs in most somatic cells,
and meiosis, which is limited to the germ cells. In mitosis, two genetically identical daughter cells are produced from a single parent cell.
DNA replication (duplication of DNA material) has already occurred
during interphase in the S phase of the cell cycle (DNA synthesis).
Therefore, at the beginning of mitosis, the chromosomes consist of
two double DNA strands joined together at the centromere, known
as sister chromatids. Mitosis can be divided into four stages: prophase,
metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. Prophase is characterized by
condensation of the DNA. Also during prophase, the nuclear membrane and the nucleolus disappear and the mitotic spindle forms.
In metaphase the chromosomes are maximally compacted and are
clearly visible as distinct structures. The chromosomes align at the
center of the cell, and spindle fibers connect to the centromere of each
chromosome and extend to centrioles at the two poles of the mitotic
figure. In anaphase the chromosomes divide along their longitudinal
axes to form two separate daughter chromatids, which then migrate
to opposite poles of the cell. Telophase is characterized by formation of two new nuclear membranes and nucleoli, duplication of the
centrioles, and cytoplasmic cleavage to form the two daughter cells.
Meiosis begins in the female oocyte during fetal life and is completed years to decades later. In males it begins in a spermatogonial
cell sometime between adolescence and adult life and is completed in a
few days. Meiosis is preceded by DNA replication so that at the outset,
each of the 46 chromosomes consists of two chromatids. In meiosis, a
diploid cell (2n = 46 chromosomes) divides to form four haploid cells
(n = 23 chromosomes). Meiosis consists of two major rounds of cell
division. In meiosis I, each of the homologous chromosomes pair precisely so that genetic recombination, involving exchange between two
DNA strands (crossing over), can occur. This results in reshuffling of
the genetic information for the recombined chromosomes and allows
further genetic diversity. Each daughter cell then receives one of each
of the 23 homologous chromosomes. In oogenesis, one of the daughter
cells receives most of the cytoplasm and becomes the egg, whereas the
other smaller cell becomes the first polar body. Meiosis II is similar to
a mitotic division but without a preceding round of DNA replication.
Each of the 23 chromosomes divides longitudinally, and the homologous chromatids migrate to opposite poles of the cell. This produces
four spermatogonia in males, or an egg cell and a second polar body
in females, each with a haploid (n = 23) set of chromosomes. Consequently, meiosis fulfills two crucial roles: It enables genetic recombination, and it reduces the chromosome number from diploid (46) to
haploid (23) so that on fertilization a diploid number is restored.
Two common errors of cell division may occur during meiosis or
mitosis, and either can result in an abnormal number of chromosomes. The first error is nondisjunction, in which two chromosomes
fail to separate during meiosis and thus migrate together into one of
the new cells, producing one cell with two copies of the chromosome
and another with no copy. The second error is anaphase lag, in which
a chromatid or chromosome is lost during mitosis because it fails to
move quickly enough during anaphase to become incorporated into
one of the new daughter cells (Fig. 99.1).
For chromosome analysis, cells are cultured (for varying periods
depending on cell type), with or without stimulation, and then artificially arrested in mitosis during metaphase (or prometaphase),
later subjected to a hypotonic solution to allow disruption of the
nuclear cell membrane and proper dispersion of the chromosomes
for analysis, fixed, banded, and finally stained. The most commonly
used banding and staining method is the GTG banding (G bands by
trypsin using Giemsa), also known as G banding, which produces
a unique combination of dark (G-­positive) and light (G-­negative)
bands that permits recognition of all individual 23 chromosome
pairs for analysis.
Metaphase chromosome spreads are first evaluated microscopically,
and then their images are photographed or captured by a video camera
and stored on a computer for later analysis. Humans have 46 chromosomes or 23 pairs, which are classified as autosomes for chromosomes

761

46,N

46,N

46,N

Nondisjunction
45,–21

47,+21

A

46,N

46,N

46,N/47,+21

46,XX

46,XX

46,XX
Nondisjunction

46,XX

B

46,XX

45,X

47,XXX

45,X/46,XX/47,XXX

47,+21

Anaphase
lag

46,N

C

47,+21

47,+21

47,+21

47,+21

47,+21

46,N/47,+21

Fig. 99.1 Generation of mosaicism. A, Postzygotic nondisjunction
in an initially normal conceptus. In this example, one cell line (monosomic 21) is subsequently lost, with the final karyotype 46,N/47,+21. B,
Postzygotic nondisjunction in an initially 46,XX conceptus, resulting in
45,X/46,XX/47,XXX mosaicism. C, Postzygotic anaphase lag in an initially 47,+21 conceptus. (From Gardner RJM, Sutherland GR. Chromosome Abnormalities and Genetic Counseling, 3rd ed. New York: Oxford
University Press; 2003: Fig. 43.1, p. 33.)

1-­22, and the sex chromosomes, often referred as sex complement: XX
for females and XY for males. The homologous chromosomes from a
metaphase spread can then be paired and arranged systematically to
assemble a karyotype according to well-­defined standard conventions
such as those established by International System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature (ISCN), with chromosome 1 being the largest
and 22 the smallest. According to nomenclature, the description of
the karyotype includes the total number of chromosomes followed by
the sex chromosome constitution. A normal karyotype is 46,XX for
females and 46,XY for males (Fig. 99.2). Abnormalities are noted after
the sex chromosome complement.
Although the internationally accepted system for human chromosome classification relies largely on the length and banding pattern
of each chromosome, the position of the centromere relative to the
ends of the chromosome also is a useful distinguishing feature (Fig.
99.3). The centromere divides the chromosome in two, with the short
arm designated the p arm and the long arm designated the q arm. A
plus or minus sign before the number of a chromosome indicates that
there is an extra or missing chromosome, respectively. Table 99.2 lists
some of the abbreviations used for the descriptions of chromosomes
and their abnormalities. A metaphase chromosome spread usually

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

762 Part VIII u Human Genetics

1

2

3

8

9

10

4

5

11

12

6

7

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

X

Y

Fig. 99.2 Karyotype of a normal male at the 550-­600 band level. The
longer the chromosomes are captured at metaphase or sometimes prometaphase, the more bands can be visualized.

11

13

1

Fig. 99.3 Example of different chromosome types according to the

position of the centromere. On the left is a chromosome one pair with
the centromere equidistant from the short and long arm (also known as
metacentric). In the center is a chromosome 11 pair that is submetacentric. On the right is a chromosome 13 pair that is an example of
an acrocentric chromosome. Acrocentric chromosomes contain a very
small short arm, stalks, and satellite DNA. The black arrow indicates
the position of the centromere. The blue arrow shows the long arm of
a chromosome. The red arrow shows the short arm of a chromosome.
The green arrow highlights the satellite region, which is made of DNA
repeats. The light area between the short arm and the satellite is known
as the stalk.

shows 450-­550 bands. Prophase and prometaphase chromosomes
are longer, are less condensed, and often show 550-­850 bands. High-­
resolution analysis may detect small chromosome abnormalities,
although this has been mostly replaced by chromosome microarray
analysis (CMA), also called array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH).
Molecular techniques (e.g., fluorescence in situ hybridization
[FISH], CMA) identify subtle abnormalities that are often below
the resolution of standard cytogenetic studies. FISH is used to
identify the presence, absence, or rearrangement of specific DNA
segments and is performed with gene-­ or region-­specific DNA
probes. Several FISH probes are used in the clinical setting: unique
sequence or single-­copy probes, repetitive-­s equence probes (alpha
satellites in the pericentromeric regions), and multiple-­
copy
probes (chromosome specific or painting) (Fig. 99.4A,B). FISH
involves using a unique, known DNA sequence or probe labeled
with a fluorescent dye that is complementary to the studied region
of disease interest. The labeled probe is exposed to the DNA on
a microscope slide, typically metaphase or interphase chromosomal DNA. When the probe pairs with its complementary DNA

sequence, it can then be visualized by fluorescence microscopy
(Fig. 99.5). In metaphase chromosome spreads, the exact chromosomal location of each probe copy can be documented, and
often the number of copies (deletions, duplications) of the DNA
sequence as well. When the interrogated segments (as in genomic
duplications) are close together, interphase cells can accurately
determine the presence of two or more copies or signals, because
in chromosome-­
condensed metaphase cells some duplications
might falsely appear as a single signal.
Chromosome rearrangements <5 million bp (5 Mbp) cannot be
detected by conventional cytogenetic techniques. FISH has facilitated
the clinical characterization of several microdeletion syndromes (50-­
200 kb of DNA). Some FISH probes hybridize to repetitive sequences
located in the pericentromeric regions. Pericentromeric probes are still
used for rapid identification of certain trisomies in interphase cells of
blood smears, or even in the rapid analysis of prenatal samples from
cells obtained through amniocentesis. Such probes are available for
chromosomes 13, 18, and 21 and for the sex pair X and Y (see Fig.
99.4C and D). FISH is no longer the first line of testing, and its role has
also mostly changed to the confirmation of chromosome microarray
findings. FISH is reserved for (1) confirmation studies of abnormalities
detected by CMA, (2) rapid prenatal screening on interphase amniotic
fluid cells, and (3) interphase blood smear for sex assignment of newborns who present with ambiguous genitalia.
Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is a type of chromosomal microarray (CMA) that uses a molecular-­based technique
that differentially labels the patient’s DNA with a fluorescent dye (green
fluorophore) and a normal reference DNA with a red fluorophore (Figs.
99.6 and 99.7). Oligonucleotides (short DNA segments) encompassing
the entire genome are spotted onto a slide or microarray grid. Equal
amounts of the two-­labeled DNA samples are mixed, and the green:red
fluorescence ratio is measured along each tested area. Regions of amplification of the patient’s DNA display an excess of green fluorescence,
and regions of loss show excess red fluorescence. If the patient’s and the
control DNA are equally represented, the green:red ratio is 1:1, and the
tested regions are represented as yellow (see Chapter 96 and Fig. 96.5).
Another frequently used chromosome microarray type in the
clinical setting is the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array.
SNPs are polymorphic variations between two nucleotides and, when
analyzed in massive parallel fashion, they can provide valuable clinical information. Several million SNPs normally occur in the human
genome. SNP arrays can help with the detection of uniparental disomies (i.e., genetic information derived from only one parent), as well
as consanguinity in the family. Many arrays used in clinical practice
combine the use of oligonucleotides for the detection of copy number
variations (CNVs) in conjunction with SNPs.
The detection of abnormalities by CMA is possible at the single-­exon
resolution level, depending on the configuration of the array used.
The many advantages of CMA include its ability to test for duplications or deletions in critical disease-­causing regions of the genome at
once, including single-­gene and contiguous gene deletion syndromes.
In addition, CMA does not require cell cultures to generate sufficient
DNA, which may be important in the context of pre­natal testing
because of timing. However, CMA cannot detect balanced translocations or inversions and may not detect low levels of chromosomal
mosaicism. Targeted CMAs can detect clinically known cryptic chromosomal aberrations associated with known disease phenotypes. CNV
detection can also be diagnosed by next-­generation sequencing in the
context of whole genome sequencing.
There are large numbers of deletion and duplication CNVs in the
human genome. Thus many detected genetic abnormalities, unless
associated with well-­known clinical phenotypes, may require parental investigations because a detected CNV that is inherited could
be benign or an incidental polymorphic variant often described as
variants of uncertain significance (VUS). A de novo abnormality
(i.e., one found only in the child and not the parents) is often significant if it is associated with an abnormal phenotype found only
in the child and if it involves genes with important functions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders

763

Table 99.2  Some Abbreviations Used for Description of Chromosomes and Their Abnormalities
ABBREVIATION

MEANING

EXAMPLE

CONDITION

XX

Female

46,XX

Normal female karyotype

XY

Male

46,XY

Normal male karyotype

[##]

Number [#] of cells

46,XY[12]/47,XXY[10]

Number of cells in each clone, typically inside brackets
Mosaicism in Klinefelter syndrome with 12 normal cells
and 10 cells with an extra X chromosome

cen

Centromere

del

Deletion

46,XY,del(5p)

Male with deletion of chromosome 5 short arm

der

Derivative

46,XX,der(2),t(2p12;7q13)

Female with a structurally rearranged chromosome
2 that resulted from a translocation between
chromosomes 2 (short arm) and 7 (long arm)

dup

Duplication

46,XY,dup(15)(q11-­q13)

Male with interstitial duplication in the long arm
of chromosome 15 in the Prader-­Willi/Angelman
syndrome region

ins

Insertion

46,XY,ins(3)(p13q21q26)

Male with an insertion within chromosome 3
A piece between q21 and q26 has reinserted on p13

inv

Inversion

46,XY,inv(2)(p21q31)

Male with pericentric inversion of chromosome 2 with
breakpoints at bands p21 and q31

ish

Metaphase FISH

46,XX.ish del(7)(q11.23q11.23)

Female with deletion in the Williams syndrome region
detected by in situ hybridization

nuc ish

Interphase FISH

nuc ish(DXZ1 × 3)

Interphase in situ hybridization showing three signals for
the X chromosome centromeric region

mar

Marker

47,XY,+mar

Male with extra, unidentified chromosome material

mos

Mosaic

mos 45,X[14]/46,XX[16]

Turner syndrome mosaicism (analysis of 30 cells showed
that 14 cells were 45,X and 16 cells were 46,XX)

p

Short arm

46,XY,del(5)(p12)

Male with a deletion on the short arm of chromosome 5,
band p12 (short nomenclature)

q

Long arm

46,XY,del(5)(q14)

Male with a deletion on the long arm of chromosome 5,
band 14

r

Ring chromosome

46,X,r(X)(p21q27)

Female with one normal X chromosome and a ring X
chromosome

t

Translocation

t(2;8)(q33;q24.1)

Interchange of material between chromosomes 2 and 8
with breakpoints at bands 2q33 and 8q24.1

ter

Terminal

46,XY,del(5)(p12-­pter)

Male with a deletion of chromosome 5 between p12 and
the end of the short arm (long nomenclature)

/

Slash

45,X/46,XY

Separate lines or clones
Mosaicism for monosomy X and a male cell line

+

Gain of

47,XX,+21

Female with trisomy 21

−

Loss of

45,XY,−21

Male with monosomy 21

FISH, Fluorescence in situ hybridization.

99.2 Abnormalities of Chromosome Number
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee

ANEUPLOIDY AND POLYPLOIDY

Typical human cells contain 46 chromosomes, which is a multiple of 23
chromosomes. Haploid cells contain 23 chromosomes (n=23, typically
in the ovum or sperm). If a cell’s chromosomes are an exact multiple of
23 (46, 69, 92 in humans), those cells are referred to as euploid. Polyploid cells are euploid cells with more than the normal diploid number of 46 (2n) chromosomes, such as 3n, 4n. Polyploid conceptions
are usually not viable, but the presence of mosaicism with a karyotypically normal cell line can allow survival. Mosaicism is an abnormality
defined as the presence of two or more different cell lines in a single

individual. Polyploidy is a common abnormality seen in first-­trimester
pregnancy losses.
Triploid cells are those with three haploid sets of chromosomes
(3n) and are only viable in a mosaic form. Nonmosaic triploid
infants can be liveborn but typically die shortly after birth. Triploidy is often the result of fertilization of an egg by two sperm
(dispermy). Failure of one of the meiotic divisions, resulting in a
diploid egg or sperm, can also result in triploidy. The phenotype of
a triploid conception depends on the origin of the extra chromosome set. If the extra set is of paternal origin, it results in a partial
hydatidiform mole (excessive placental growth) with poor embryonic development, but triploid conceptions that have an extra set of
maternal chromosomes result in severe embryonic restriction with
a small, fibrotic placenta (insufficient placental development) that
is typically spontaneously aborted.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

764 Part VIII u Human Genetics

21
5

5

A

B

C

D
Fig. 99.4 A, Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of interphase peripheral blood cells from a patient with Down syndrome using a

chromosome 21–specific probe. The three red signals mark the presence of three chromosomes 21. B, FISH analysis of a metaphase chromosome
spread from a clinically normal individual using a whole chromosome paint specific for chromosome 5. Both chromosome 5s are completely labeled
(yellow) along their entire length. C, FISH on metaphase cells using a unique sequence probe that hybridizes to the elastin gene on chromosome
7q11.23, inside the Williams syndrome critical region. The elastin probe is labeled in red, and a control probe on chromosome 7 is labeled in green.
The left image shows normal hybridization to chromosome 7, with two signals for the elastin region and two for the control probe. The right image
shows a normal chromosome on the right with control and elastin signals and a deleted chromosome 7 on the left, evidenced by a single signal for
the control probe. This image corresponds to a patient with a Williams syndrome region deletion. D, FISH in interphase cells using DNA probes
that hybridize to repetitive α-­satellite sequences in the pericentromeric region for the sex chromosomes. Left, interphase cells with two signals, one
labeled in red for the X chromosome and green for the Y chromosome, consistent with a normal male chromosome complement. Right, interphase
cell showing two red signals for the X chromosome, compatible with a normal female chromosome complement.
Chromosomal DNA on slide
Denaturation

Fig. 99.5 FISH involves dena-

turation of double-­
stranded DNA
as present in metaphase chromosomes or interphase nuclei on
cytogenetic slide preparations
(A) into single-­
stranded DNA (B).
The slide-­
bound (in situ) DNA is
then renatured or reannealed in
the presence of excess copies of
a single-­
stranded, fluorochrome-­
labeled DNA base-­
pair sequence
or probe (C). The probe anneals
or “hybridizes” to sites of complementary DNA sequence (D) within
the chromosomal genome. Probe
signal is visualized and imaged on
the chromosome by fluorescent
microscopy. (From Lin RL, Cherry
AM, Bangs CD, et al. FISHing for
answers: the use of molecular cytogenetic techniques in adolescent
medicine practice. In: Hyme HE,
Greydanus D, eds, Genetic Disorders in Adolescents: State of the
art reviews. Adolescent medicine.
Philadelphia: Hanley and Belfus;
2002: pp. 305–313.)

A

C
G
T
T –A
A –T
G– C
C–G
A –T
C
G
A

Chromosome with
fluorescent probe signal

D

Renaturation with
fluorochrome-labeled
DNA probe

B

C
G
T
T
A
G
C
A
C
G
A

Probe hybridization

A
T
C
G
T

C

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A
T
C
G
T

A
T
C
G
T

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders

765

normal 15

q11.2

22 der (22)

q26.1

15 der (15)

46,XY,t(15;22)(q26.1;q11.2)

A

B

crodeletion at a translocation breakpoint of an apparently balanced
translocation in a patient with developmental delay (dd) and growth
defect. A, Partial karyotype shows
t(15;22)(q26.1;q11.2). B, Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with
clones 2O19 (top arrow) and 354M14
(bottom arrow) at 15q26.1; arrows
indicate signals only present on the
normal chromosome 15, suggesting
a deletion on the der(15). C, Two-­
color array comparative genomic
hybridization (aCGH) with dye swap
with 244 K oligo probes; arrowhead
indicates a 3.3-­
Mbp deletion at
chromosome 15q26.1-­q26.2; arrow
points to the close-­up view of the deletion. (From Li MM, Andersson HC.
Clinical application of microarray-­
based molecular cytogenetics: an
emerging new era of genomic medicine. J Pediatr. 2009;155:311–317,
with permission of the authors and
publisher.)

15:85716661-96053081, 10.3 Mb

q12
q13.2
q14
q15.2

89 Mb

85 Mb

15

Fig. 99.6 Example of a cryptic mi-

der (15)

q21.1

q22.2
q22.32
q23
q24.2

92 Mb

q21.3

q25.1

q26.2

1.5

C

96 Mb

q25.3

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13 14 15

16

17

18 19 20 21 22

0.0
–0.5
–1.0

michybridization (aCGH) in a female
patient with Down syndrome. Each
black dot represents a piece of DNA
segment specific for different chromosome location. Most of the dots displayed between the 0.0 and 0.2 axis
are considered within normal range.
Exceptions are often a result of polymorphic variations. A group of dots
colored in green clusters on chromosome 21 and above 0.5. These represent a gain in copy number of DNA
segments for chromosome 21, as seen
in Down syndrome and consistent with
trisomy 21.

–1.5

Fig. 99.7 Array comparative geno­

0.5

1.0

1

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

X

Y

766 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 99.3  Chromosomal Trisomies and Their Clinical Findings*
SYNDROME

INCIDENCE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Trisomy 13, Patau
syndrome

1/10,000 births

Cleft lip often midline; flexed fingers with postaxial polydactyly; ocular hypotelorism,
bulbous nose; low-­set, malformed ears; microcephaly; cerebral malformation, especially
holoprosencephaly; microphthalmia, cardiac malformations; scalp defects; hypoplastic or
absent ribs; visceral and genital anomalies
Early lethality in most cases, with a median survival of 12 days; ∼80% die by 1 year; 10-­year
survival ∼13%; survivors have significant neurodevelopmental delay

Trisomy 18, Edwards
syndrome

1/6,000 births

Low birthweight, closed fists with index finger overlapping the third digit and the fifth digit
overlapping the fourth, narrow hips with limited abduction, short sternum, rocker-­bottom
feet, microcephaly, prominent occiput, micrognathia, cardiac and renal malformations,
intellectual disability
∼88% of children die in the first year; 10-­year survival ∼10%; survivors have significant
neurodevelopmental delay

Trisomy 8, mosaicism

1/20,000 births

Long face; high, prominent forehead; wide, upturned nose; thick, everted lower lip;
microretro­gnathia; low-­set ears; high-­arched, sometimes cleft, palate; osteoarticular anomalies
common (camptodactyly of second through fifth digits, small patella); deep plantar and
palmar creases; moderate intellectual disability

*For trisomy 21, see Chapter 57.

Abnormal cells that do not contain a multiple of haploid number
of chromosomes are termed aneuploid cells. Aneuploidy is the most
common and clinically significant type of human chromosome abnormality, occurring in at least 3–4% of all clinically recognized pregnancies. Monosomies occur when only one, instead of the normal pair
(two), of a given chromosome is present in an otherwise diploid cell.
In humans, most autosomal monosomies appear to be lethal early in
development, and survival is possible in mosaic forms or by means of
chromosome rescue (restoration of the normal number by duplication
of single monosomic chromosome, also known as monosomy rescue).
An exception to this rule is monosomy for the X chromosome (45,X),
seen in Turner syndrome; nonetheless, the majority of 45,X conceptuses are believed to be lost early in pregnancy for as yet unexplained
reasons.
The most common cause of aneuploidy is nondisjunction, the failure of chromosomes to disjoin normally during meiosis (see Fig. 99.1).
Nondisjunction can occur during meiosis I or II or during mitosis,
although maternal meiosis I is the most common nondisjunction in
aneuploidies (e.g., Down syndrome, trisomy 18). After meiotic nondisjunction, the resulting gamete either lacks a chromosome or has two
copies instead of one normal copy, resulting in a monosomic or trisomic zygote, respectively.
Trisomy is characterized by the presence of three chromosomes,
instead of the normal pair (two), of any particular chromosome. Trisomy is the most common form of aneuploidy. Trisomy can occur in
all cells, or it may be mosaic. Most individuals with a trisomy exhibit
a consistent and specific phenotype depending on the chromosome
involved.
FISH is a technique that can be used for rapid diagnosis in the
prenatal detection of common fetal aneuploidies, including chromosomes 13, 18, and 21, as well as sex chromosomes (see Fig. 99.4C and
D). Direct detection of cell-­free fetal DNA (trophoblastic or placental
origin) in maternal plasma for fetal trisomy detection is a safe and
highly effective screening test for fetal aneuploidy. The most common numerical abnormalities in liveborn children include trisomy 21
(Down syndrome) (see Chapter 57); trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome);
trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome); and sex chromosomal aneuploidies,
such as Turner syndrome (usually 45,X), Klinefelter syndrome
(47,XXY), 47,XXX, and 47,XYY. By far the most common type of
trisomy in liveborn infants is trisomy 21 (47,XX,+21 or 47,XY,+21)
(see Table 99.1). Trisomy 18 and trisomy 13 are relatively less common and are associated with a characteristic set of congenital anomalies and severe intellectual disability (Table 99.3). The occurrence

of trisomy 21 and other trisomies increases with advanced maternal
age (≥35 years). Because of this increased risk, women who are ≥35
years old at delivery should be offered genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis (including serum screening, ultrasonography, and cell-­
free DNA detection, amniocentesis, or chorionic villus sampling; see
Chapter 117).

99.3 Abnormalities of Chromosome
Structure
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee

TRANSLOCATIONS

Translocations, which involve the transfer of material from one
chromosome to another, occur with a frequency of 1 in 500 liveborn human infants. They may be inherited from a carrier parent
or appear de novo, with no other affected family member. Translocations are usually reciprocal or Robertsonian, involving two chromosomes (Fig. 99.8).
Reciprocal translocations are the result of breaks in nonhomologous chromosomes, with reciprocal exchange of the broken segments.
Carriers of a reciprocal translocation are usually phenotypically normal but are at an increased risk for miscarriage caused by transmission
of unbalanced reciprocal translocations and for bearing chromosomally abnormal offspring. Unbalanced translocations are the result of
abnormalities in the segregation or crossover of the translocation carrier chromosomes in the germ cells.
Robertsonian translocations involve two acrocentric chromosomes (chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 21, and 22) that fuse near the centromeric region with a subsequent loss of the short arms. Because
the short arms of all five pairs of acrocentric chromosomes have
multiple copies of genes encoding for ribosomal RNA, loss of the
short arms of acrocentric chromosomes has no deleterious effect.
The resulting karyotype has only 45 chromosomes, including the
translocated chromosome, which consists of the long arms of the
two fused chromosomes. Carriers of Robertsonian translocations
are usually phenotypically normal. However, they are at increased
risk for miscarriage and unbalanced translocations in phenotypically abnormal offspring.
In some rare instances, translocations can involve three or more
chromosomes, as seen in complex rearrangements. Another less

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders

q24.1

8

q33

der(8)

der(2)

A

2

767

A carrier of a deletion is monosomic for the genetic information of
the missing segment. Deletions are usually associated with intellectual
disability and malformations. The most commonly observed deletions
in routine chromosome preparations include 1p−, 4p−, 5p−, 9p−,
11p−, 13q−, 18p−, 18q−, and 21q− (Table 99.4 and Fig. 99.9), all distal
or terminal deletions of the short or the long arms of chromosomes.
Deletions may be observed in routine chromosome preparations, and
deletions and translocations larger than 5-­10 Mbp are usually visible
microscopically.
High-­resolution banding techniques, FISH, and molecular studies such as CMA can reveal deletions that are too small to be seen in
ordinary or routine chromosome spreads (see Fig. 99.7). Microdeletions involve loss of small chromosome regions, the largest of which
are detectable only with prophase chromosome studies and molecular
methods. For submicroscopic deletions, the missing piece can only be
detected using molecular methodologies such as DNA-­based studies
(e.g., CMA, FISH). The presence of extra genetic material from the
same chromosome is referred to as duplication. Duplications can also

Table 99.4  Common Deletions and Their Clinical
­Manifestations
DELETION

B

13

der(13;14)

4p–

Wolf-­Hirschhorn syndrome. The main features are a
typical “Greek helmet” facies secondary to ocular
hypertelorism, prominent glabella, frontal bossing,
microcephaly, dolichocephaly, hypoplasia of the
orbits, ptosis, strabismus, nystagmus, bilateral
epicanthic folds, cleft lip and palate, beaked nose
with prominent bridge, hypospadias, cardiac
malformations, and intellectual disability.

5p–

Cri du chat syndrome. The main features are
hypo­tonia, short stature, characteristic shrill cry
in the first few weeks of life (also called cat’s cry
syndrome), microcephaly with protruding metopic
suture, hypertelorism, bilateral epicanthic folds,
high arched palate, wide and flat nasal bridge, and
intellectual disability.

9p–

The main features are craniofacial dysmorphic features
with trigonocephaly, slanted palpebral fissures, discrete
exophthalmos secondary to supraorbital hypoplasia,
arched eyebrows, flat and wide nasal bridge, short
neck with low hairline, genital anomalies, long
fingers and toes with extra flexion creases, cardiac
malformations, and intellectual disability.

13q–

The main features are low birthweight, failure to
thrive, microcephaly, and severe intellectual disability.
Facial features include high, wide nasal bridge;
hypertelorism; ptosis; and micrognathia. Ocular
malformations are common (retinoblastoma). The
hands have hypoplastic or absent thumbs and
syndactyly.

18p–

A few patients (15%) are severely affected and
have cephalic and ocular malformations:
holoprosencephaly, cleft lip and palate, ptosis,
epicanthal folds, and varying degrees of intellectual
disability. Most (80%) have only minor malformations
and mild intellectual disability.

18q–

The main features are growth deficiency and
hypotonia with a “froglike” position with the legs
flexed, externally rotated, and in hyperabduction.
The face is characteristic, with depressed midface
and apparent protrusion of the mandible, deep-­set
eyes, short upper lip, and everted lower lip
(“carplike” mouth); antihelix of the ears is very
prominent. Varying degrees of intellectual disability
and belligerent personality are present. Myelination
abnormalities occur in the central nervous system.

14

Fig. 99.8 A, Schematic diagram (left) and partial G-­banded karyotype

(right) of a reciprocal translocation between chromosome two (blue)
and chromosome eight (pink). The breakpoints are on the long (q) arm
of both chromosomes at bands 2q33 and 8q24.1, with the reciprocal
exchange of material between the derivative (der) chromosomes 2 and
8. This translocation is balanced, with no net gain or loss of material.
The nomenclature for this exchange is t(2;8)(q33:q24.1). B, Schematic
diagram (left) and partial G-­banded karyotype (right) of a Robertsonian
translocation between chromosomes 13 (blue) and 14 (pink). The breakpoints are at the centromere (band q10) of both chromosomes, with
fusion of the long arms into a single derivative chromosome and loss
of the short (p) arm material. The nomenclature for this exchange is
der(13;14)(q10;q10).

common type is the insertional translocation. Insertional translocations result from a piece of chromosome material that breaks away and
later is reinserted within the same chromosome at a different site or
inserted into another chromosome.

INVERSIONS

An inversion requires that a single chromosome breaks at two points;
the broken piece is then inverted and joined into the same chromosome. Inversions occur in 1 in 100 live births. There are two types of
inversions, pericentric and paracentric. In pericentric inversions the
breaks are in the two opposite arms of the chromosome and include the
centromere. They are usually discovered because they change the position of the centromere. The breaks in paracentric inversions occur in
only one arm. Carriers of inversions are usually phenotypically normal,
but they are at increased risk for miscarriages, typically in paracentric inversions, and chromosomally abnormal offspring in pericentric
inversions.

DELETIONS AND DUPLICATIONS

Deletions involve loss of chromosome material and, depending on
their location, can be classified as terminal (at the end of chromosomes) or interstitial (within the arm of a chromosome). They may be
isolated or may occur along with a duplication of another chromosome
segment. The latter typically occurs in unbalanced reciprocal chromosomal translocation secondary to abnormal crossover or segregation in
a translocation or inversion carrier.

CLINICAL ABNORMALITIES

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

768 Part VIII u Human Genetics

A

C

B

D

Fig. 99.9 A, Child with velocardiofacial syndrome (deletion 22q11.2). B, Child with Williams syndrome (deletion 7q11.23). C, Child with Prader-­
Willi syndrome (deletion 15q11-­13). D, Child with Angelman syndrome (deletion 15q11-­13). (From Lin RL, Cherry AM, Bangs CD, et al. FISHing
for answers: the use of molecular cytogenetic techniques in adolescent medicine practice. In: Hyme HE, Greydanus D, eds, Genetic Disorders in
Adolescents: state of the art reviews. Adolescent medicine. Philadelphia: Hanley and Belfus; 2002: pp. 305–313.)

Table 99.5  Microdeletion and Contiguous Gene Syndromes and Their Clinical Manifestations
DELETION

SYNDROME

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

1p36

1p deletion

Growth restriction, dysmorphic features with midface hypoplasia, straight thin eyebrows,
pointy chin, sensorineural hearing loss, progressive cardiomyopathy, hypothyroidism,
seizures, intellectual disability

5q35

Sotos (50% are deletions of
NSD1 gene in Asians but
only 6% in Whites)

Overgrowth, macrocephaly, prominent forehead, prominence of extraaxial fluid spaces on
brain imaging, large hands and feet, hypotonia, clumsiness, mental disabilities

6p25

Axenfeld-­Rieger

Axenfeld-­Rieger malformation, hearing loss, congenital heart defects, dental anomalies,
developmental delays, facial dysmorphism

7q11.23

Williams

Round face with full cheeks and lips, long philtrum, stellate pattern in iris, strabismus,
supravalvular aortic stenosis and other cardiac malformations, varying degrees of
intellectual disability, friendly personality

8p11

8p11

Kallmann syndrome type 2 (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and anosmia), spherocytosis
(deletions of ankyrin 1), multiple congenital anomalies, intellectual disability

8q24.1-­q24.13

Langer-­Giedion or tricho­
rhinophalangeal type II

Sparse hair, multiple cone-­shaped epiphyses, multiple cartilaginous exostoses, bulbous
nasal tip, thickened alar cartilage, upturned nares, prominent philtrum, large protruding
ears, mild intellectual disability

9q22

Gorlin

Multiple basal cell carcinomas, odontogenic keratocysts, palmoplantar pits, calcification
falx cerebri

9q34

9q34 deletion

Distinct face with synophrys, anteverted nares, tented upper lip, protruding tongue,
midface hypoplasia, conotruncal heart defects, intellectual disability

10p12-­p13

DiGeorge type 2

Many of the DiGeorge type 1 and velocardiofacial type 1 features (conotruncal defects,
immunodeficiency, hypoparathyroidism, dysmorphic features)

11p11.2

Potocki-­Shaffer

Multiple exostoses, parietal foramina, craniosynostosis, facial dysmorphism, syndactyly,
intellectual disability

11p13

WAGR

Hypernephroma (Wilms tumor), aniridia, male genital hypoplasia of varying degrees,
gonadoblastoma, long face, upward-­slanting palpebral fissures, ptosis, beaked nose,
low-­set poorly formed auricles, intellectual disability (retardation)

11q24.1-­11qter

Jacobsen

Growth restriction, intellectual disability, cardiac and digit anomalies, thrombocytopenia

15q11-­q13
(paternal)

Prader-­Willi

Severe hypotonia and feeding difficulties at birth, voracious appetite and obesity in
infancy, short stature (responsive to growth hormone), small hands and feet,
hypogonadism, intellectual disability
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders

769

Table 99.5  Microdeletion and Contiguous Gene Syndromes and Their Clinical Manifestations—cont’d
DELETION

SYNDROME

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

15q11-­q13
(maternal)

Angelman

Hypotonia, feeding difficulties, gastroesophageal reflux, fair hair and skin, midface
hypoplasia, prognathism, seizures, tremors, ataxia, sleep disturbances, inappropriate
laughter, poor or absent speech, severe intellectual disability

16p13.3

Rubinstein-­Taybi

Microcephaly, ptosis, beaked nose with low-­lying philtrum, broad thumbs and large toes,
intellectual disability

17p11.2

Smith-­Magenis

Brachycephaly, midfacial hypoplasia, prognathism, myopia, cleft palate, short stature,
severe behavioral problems, intellectual disability

17p13.3

Miller-­Dieker

Microcephaly, lissencephaly, pachygyria, narrow forehead, hypoplastic male external
genitals, growth restriction, seizures, profound intellectual disability

20p12

Alagille

Bile duct paucity with cholestasis; heart defects, particularly pulmonary artery
stenosis; ocular abnormalities (posterior embryotoxon); skeletal defects such
as butterfly vertebrae; long nose

22q11.2

Velocardiofacial-­DiGeorge

Conotruncal cardiac anomalies, cleft palate, velopharyngeal incompetence, hypoplasia
or agenesis of thymus and parathyroid glands, hypocalcemia, hypoplasia of auricle,
learning disabilities, psychiatric disorders

22q13.3 deletion

Hypotonia, developmental delay, normal or accelerated growth, severe expressive
language deficits, autistic behavior

Xp21.2-­p21.3

Duchenne muscular dystrophy, retinitis pigmentosa, adrenal hypoplasia, intellectual
disability, glycerol kinase deficiency

Xp22.2-­p22.3

Ichthyosis, Kallmann syndrome, intellectual disability, chondrodysplasia punctata

Xp22.3

MLS

Microphthalmia, linear skin defects, poikiloderma, congenital heart defects, seizures,
intellectual disability

Table 99.6  Microduplications and Their Clinical Manifestations
DUPLICATION ­CHROMOSOME
REGION

DISEASE REGION

CLINICAL FEATURES

1q21.1

Macrocephaly, DD, learning disabilities

3q29

Mild to moderate DD, ID, microcephaly

7q11.23

Williams syndrome

DD and severe expressive language disorder, autistic features, subtle
dysmorphisms

15q13.3

Prader-­Willi/Angelman syndrome

DD, ID, autistic features in duplications of maternal origin

15q24

Growth restriction, DD, microcephaly, digital anomalies, hypospadias,
connective tissue abnormalities

16p11.2

FTT, severe DD, short stature, GH deficiency, dysmorphic features

17p11.2

Potocki-­Lupski syndrome

17q21.31

Hypotonia, cardiovascular anomalies, FTT, DD, verbal apraxia, autism,
anxiety
Severe DD, microcephaly, short and broad digits, dysmorphic features

22q11.2

Velocardiofacial-­DiGeorge
syndrome

Cardiovascular defects, velopharyngeal insufficiency

Xq28

MECP2 gene (Rett syndrome)

In males: infantile hypotonia, immune deficiency, dysmorphic features,
DD, speech delay, autistic behavior, regression in childhood

DD, Developmental delay; FTT, failure to thrive; GH, growth hormone; ID, intellectual disability.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

770 Part VIII u Human Genetics
be sporadic or result from abnormal segregation in translocation or
inversion carriers.
Microdeletions and microduplications usually involve regions that
include several genes, so the affected individuals can have a distinctive phenotype depending on the number of genes involved. When
such a deletion involves more than a single gene, the condition is
referred to as a contiguous gene deletion syndrome (Table 99.5).
With the advent of chromosome microarray, a large number of
microduplications, have been uncovered. Many of those microduplication syndromes are the reciprocal duplications of the known
deletions or microdeletion counterparts and have distinctive clinical
features (Table 99.6).
Subtelomeric regions are often involved in chromosome rearrangements that cannot be visualized using routine cytogenetics.
Telomeres, which are the distal ends of the chromosomes, are gene-­
rich regions. The distal repetitive sequence structure of telomeres is
essentially common to all chromosomes, but proximal to these are
unique regions known as subtelomeres, which typically are involved
in deletions and other chromosome rearrangements. Small subtelomeric deletions, duplications, or rearrangements (translocations,
inversions) may be relatively common in children with nonspecific
intellectual disability and minor anomalies. Subtelomeric rearrangements have been found in 3–7% of children with moderate to
severe intellectual disability and 0.5% of those with mild intellectual
disability and can be detected by CMA studies.
Pathogenic variants affecting telomere function and length have
been associated with dyskeratosis congenita and other aplastic anemia
syndromes, as well as pulmonary or hepatic fibrosis. Both the subtelomeric rearrangements and the microdeletion and microduplication
syndromes are typically diagnosed by molecular techniques like CMA
and multiple ligation-­dependent probe amplification (MLPA) studies.
CMA can detect 14–18% of abnormalities in patients who previously
had normal cytogenetic studies.

INSERTIONS

Insertions occur when a piece of a chromosome broken at two
points is incorporated into a break of a chromosome in another
location. A total of three breakpoints are then required, and they
can occur between two or within one chromosome. A form of nonreciprocal translocation, insertions are rare. Insertion carriers are
at risk of having offspring with deletions or duplications of the
inserted segment.

amount of chromosome material and number of genes included in
the fragment.
Ring chromosomes, which are found for all human chromosomes,
are rare. A ring chromosome is formed when both ends of a chromosome are deleted and the ends are then joined to form a ring. Depending on the amount of chromosome material that is lacking or in excess
(if the ring has duplicated chromosomal material), a patient with a ring
chromosome can appear normal or can have different degrees of intellectual disability and/or multiple congenital anomalies.
Marker and ring chromosomes can be found in the cells of solid
tumors of children. Some of these markers can be the result of tumor-­
specific rearrangements, such as translocations, deletions, and duplications, ultimately leading to gene fusions and tumor gene amplifications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

99.4 Sex Chromosome Aneuploidy
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee
About 1 in 400 males and 1 in 650 females have some form of sex
chromosome abnormality. Considered together, sex chromosome
abnormalities are the most common chromosome abnormalities
seen in liveborn infants, children, and adults. Sex chromosome
abnormalities can be either structural or numerical and can be present in all cells or in a mosaic form. Those affected with these abnormalities might have few or no physical or developmental problems
(Table 99.7).

TURNER SYNDROME

Turner syndrome is a condition characterized by complete or partial
monosomy of the X chromosome and defined by a combination of
phenotypic features (see Table 99.7 and Table 99.8). Half the patients
with Turner syndrome have a 45,X chromosome complement. The
other half exhibit mosaicism and varied structural abnormalities of
the X or Y chromosome. Maternal age is not a predisposing factor
for children with 45,X. Turner syndrome occurs in approximately 1
Table 99.7  Sex Chromosome Abnormalities
DISORDER

ISOCHROMOSOMES

Isochromosomes consist of two copies of the same chromosome arm
joined through a single centromere and forming mirror images of one
another. The most commonly reported autosomal isochromosomes
tend to involve chromosomes with small arms. Some of the more common chromosome arms involved in this formation include 5p, 8p, 9p,
12p, 18p, and 18q. There is also a common isochromosome abnormality seen in long arm of the X chromosome and associated with Turner
syndrome. Individuals who have one isochromosome X within 46
chromosomes are monosomic for genes in the lost short arm and trisomic for the genes present in the long arm of the X chromosome.

Klinefelter syndrome

XYY syndrome

APPROXIMATE
INCIDENCE

47,XXY

1/580 males

48,XXXY

1/50,000-­1/80,000
male births

Other (48,XXYY;
49,XXXYY; mosaics)
47,XYY

Other X or Y
chromosome
abnormalities

1/800-­1,000 males
1/1,500 males

XX males

46,XX

1/20,000 males

Turner syndrome

45,X

1/2,500-­1/5,000
females

MARKER AND RING CHROMOSOMES

Marker chromosomes are rare and are usually chromosome fragments that are too small to be identified by conventional cytogenetics; they usually occur in addition to the normal complement of 46
chromosomes. Most are sporadic (70%); mosaicism is often (50%)
noted because of the mitotic instability of the marker chromosomes.
The incidence in newborn infants is 1 in 3,300, and the incidence in
persons with intellectual disability is 1 in 300. The associated phenotype ranges from normal to severely abnormal, depending on the

KARYOTYPE

Variants and mosaics
Trisomy X

47,XXX

1/1,000 females

48,XXXX and
49,XXXXX

Rare

Other X chromosome
abnormalities
XY females

1/3,000 females
46,XY

1/20,000 females

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders
Table 99.8  Signs Associated with Turner Syndrome
Short stature
Congenital lymphedema
Horseshoe kidneys
Patella dislocation
Increased carrying angle of elbow (cubitus valgus)
Madelung deformity (chondrodysplasia of distal radial epiphysis)
Congenital hip dislocation
Scoliosis
Widespread nipples
Shield chest
Redundant nuchal skin (in utero cystic hygroma)
Low posterior hairline
Coarctation of aorta
Bicuspid aortic valve
Cardiac conduction abnormalities
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome and other left-­sided heart
abnormalities
Gonadal dysgenesis (infertility, primary amenorrhea)
Gonadoblastoma (increased risk if Y chromosome material is
present)
Learning disabilities (nonverbal perceptual motor and visuospatial
skills) (in 70%)
Developmental delay (in 10%)
Social awkwardness
Hypothyroidism (acquired in 15–30%)
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (insulin resistance)
Strabismus
Cataracts
Red-­green color blindness (as in males)
Recurrent otitis media
Sensorineural hearing loss
Inflammatory bowel disease
Celiac disease (increased incidence)

in 5,000 female live births. In 75% of patients, the lost sex chromosome is of paternal origin (whether an X or a Y). 45,X is one of the
chromosome abnormalities most often associated with spontaneous
pregnancy losses. It has been estimated that 95–99% of 45,X conceptions are miscarried.
Clinical findings in the newborns can include small size for gestational age, webbing of the neck, protruding ears, and lymphedema
of the hands and feet, although many newborns are phenotypically
normal (Fig. 99.10). Older children and adults have short stature
and exhibit variable dysmorphic features. Congenital heart defects
(40%) and structural renal anomalies (60%) are common. The most
common heart defects are bicuspid aortic valves, coarctation of the
aorta, aortic stenosis, and mitral valve prolapse. The gonads are
generally streaks of fibrous tissue (gonadal dysgenesis) (see Chapter 626). There is primary amenorrhea and lack of secondary sex
characteristics. These children should receive regular endocrinologic testing.
Patients with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism can have Turner syndrome,
although this form of mosaicism can also be associated with male
pseudohermaphroditism, male or female genitalia in association with
mixed gonadal dysgenesis, or a normal male phenotype. This variant
is estimated to represent approximately 6% of patients with mosaic
Turner syndrome. Some of the patients with Turner syndrome phenotype and a Y cell line exhibit masculinization. Phenotypic females with
45,X/46,XY mosaicism have a 15–30% risk of developing gonadoblastoma. The risk for the patients with a male phenotype and external

771

testes is not so high, but tumor surveillance is nevertheless recommended. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has recommended the use of FISH analysis to look for Y chromosome mosaicism
in all 45,X patients. If Y chromosome material is identified, laparoscopic gonadectomy is recommended.
Noonan syndrome (see Chapter 101.1) shares many clinical features
with Turner syndrome and was formerly called pseudo-­Turner syndrome, although it is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from
pathogenic variants in several genes involved in the RAS-­MAPK pathway. In contrast to Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome affects both
sexes and has a different pattern of congenital heart disease, typically
involving right-­sided heart lesions.

KLINEFELTER SYNDROME

Persons with Klinefelter syndrome are phenotypically male. This
syndrome is the most common cause of hypogonadism and infertility in males and the most common sex chromosome aneuploidy
in humans (see Chapter 623). Eighty percent of children with
Klinefelter syndrome have a male karyotype with an extra chromosome X-­47,XXY. The remaining 20% have multiple sex chromosome aneuploidies (48,XXXY; 48,XXYY; 49,XXXXY), mosaicism
(46,XY/47,XXY), or structurally abnormal X chromosomes; the
greater the aneuploidy, the more severe the mental impairment and
dysmorphism. The prevalence of 47,XXY is 1 in 580 liveborn males.
Errors in paternal nondisjunction in meiosis I account for ∼50% of
the cases.

47,XYY

The incidence of 47,XYY is approximately 1 in 800-­1,000 males, with
many cases remaining undiagnosed, because most affected individuals have a normal appearance and normal fertility. The extra Y is the
result of nondisjunction at paternal meiosis II. Those with this abnormality have normal intelligence but are at risk for learning disabilities.
Behavioral abnormalities, including hyperactive behavior, pervasive
developmental disorder, and aggressive behavior, have been reported.
Early reports that assigned stigmata of criminality to this disorder have
long been disproved.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

99.5 Mosaicism
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee
Mosaicism describes an individual or tissue that contains ≥2 genetically different cell lines typically derived from a single zygote.
Genetic differences can result from mitotic nondisjunction (see Fig.
99.1; Table 99.9) or sporadic variant. Study of placental tissue from
chorionic villus samples collected at or before the 10th week of gestation has shown that ≥2% of all conceptions are mosaic for a chromosome abnormality. With the exception of chromosomes 13, 18,
and 21, complete autosomal trisomies are usually nonviable, and the
contribution of a normal cell line might allow these other trisomic
conceptions to survive to term. Depending on the point at which
the new cell line arises during early embryogenesis, mosaicism may
be present in some tissues but not in others. Germline mosaicism,
which refers to the presence of mosaicism in the germ cells of the
gonad, may be associated with an increased risk for recurrence of
an affected child if the germ cells are affected with a chromosomal
abnormality or with a specific gene pathogenic variant.

PALLISTER-­KILLIAN SYNDROME

Pallister-­Killian syndrome is characterized by coarse facies (prominent full cheeks), abnormal ear lobes, localized alopecia (sparse hair

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

772 Part VIII u Human Genetics

A

C

B

D

E

Fig. 99.10 Physical manifestations associated with Turner syndrome. A, This newborn shows a webbed neck with low hairline, shield chest with

widespread nipples, abnormal ears, and micrognathia. B, The low-­set posterior hairline can be better appreciated in this older child, who also has
protruding ears. C, In this frontal view, mild webbing of the neck and small, widely spaced nipples are evident, along with a midline scar from prior
cardiac surgery. The ears are low-­set and prominent, protruding forward. D and E, The newborn shown in A also has prominent lymphedema of the
hands and feet. (From Madan-­Khetarpal S, Arnold G. Genetic disorders and dysmorphic conditions. In: Zitelli BJ, McIntire SC, Nowalk AJ, eds, Zitelli
and Davis’ Atlas of Pediatric Physical Diagnosis, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2012: Fig. 1.25.)

in the temporal regions), pigmentary skin anomalies, diaphragmatic hernia, cardiovascular anomalies, supernumerary nipples,
seizures, and profound intellectual disability. The syndrome is
caused by mosaicism for an isochromosome of the short chromosome of 12 (12p). The presence of the isochromosome 12p in cells
gives four functional copies for the short arm of chromosome 12 in
the affected cells. The isochromosome 12p is preferentially cultured
from fibroblasts that can be readily obtained from a skin punch
biopsy and is seldom present in lymphocytes. A CMA obtained
from a buccal swab can be another tool to detect this disorder. The
abnormalities seen in affected persons probably reflect the presence
of abnormal cells during early embryogenesis.

HYPOMELANOSIS OF ITO

Hypomelanosis of Ito is characterized by unilateral or bilateral
macular hypo-­or hyperpigmented whorls, streaks, and patches (see
Chapter 694). Sometimes these pigmentary defects follow the lines
of Blaschko that represent areas of early epidermal cell migration.
Hair and tooth anomalies are common. Abnormalities of the eyes,
musculoskeletal system (growth asymmetry, syndactyly, polydactyly,
clinodactyly), and central nervous system (microcephaly, seizures,
intellectual disability) may also be present. Patients with hypomelanosis of Ito might have two genetically distinct cell lines. The mosaic
chromosome anomalies that have been observed involve both autosomes and sex chromosomes and have been demonstrated in about

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders
Table 99.9  Other Rare Mosaic Aneuploidy Syndromes
DISORDER
Trisomy 8

KARYOTYPE
47,XX/XY,+8

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Variable growth and intellectual
deficiency
The majority of patients are
mosaic
Deep palmar and plantar furrows
Joint contractures

Trisomy 9

47,XX/XY,+9

The majority of patients are
mosaic
Craniofacial (high forehead,
microphthalmia, low-­set
malformed ears, bulbous nose)
Skeletal (joint contractures)
Heart defects (60%)

Trisomy 16

47,XX/XY,+16

The most commonly observed
autosomal aneuploidy in
spontaneous abortion
Recurrence risk negligible

Tetrasomy
12p

46,XX[12]/46,XX,
+i(12p)[8]
(mosaicism
for an
isochromosome
12p)

Pallister-­Killian syndrome
Sparse anterior scalp hair (more
so temporal region), eyebrows,
and eyelashes; prominent
forehead; full cheeks; long
philtrum with thin upper lip
and cupid-­bow configuration;
polydactyly; streaks of hyper-­
and hypopigmentation

50% of clinically affected patients. The mosaicism might not be visible in lymphocyte-­derived chromosome studies; it is more likely to
be found when chromosomes are analyzed from skin fibroblasts. The
distinct cell lines might not always be caused by observable chromosomal anomalies but might result from single-­gene pathogenic variants or other mechanisms.

99.6 Chromosome Instability Syndromes
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee
Chromosome instability syndromes, formerly known as chromosome
breakage syndromes, are characterized by an increased risk of malignancy and specific phenotypes. They display autosomal recessive
inheritance and have an increased frequency of chromosome breakage and/or rearrangement, either spontaneous or induced. Chromosome instability syndromes result from specific defects in DNA repair,
cell cycle control, and apoptosis. The resulting chromosomal instability leads to the increased risk of developing neoplasms. The classic
chromosome instability syndromes are Fanconi anemia, ataxia telangiectasia, Nijmegen syndrome, ICF (immunodeficiency, centromere
instability, facial anomalies) syndrome, Roberts syndrome, and Bloom
syndrome (Table 99.10).

773

99.7 Uniparental Disomy and Imprinting
Carlos A. Bacino and Brendan Lee

UNIPARENTAL DISOMY

Uniparental disomy (UPD) occurs when both chromosomes of a
pair or areas from one chromosome in any individual have been
inherited from a single parent. UPD can be of two types, uniparental isodisomy or uniparental heterodisomy. Uniparental isodisomy means that both chromosomes or chromosomal regions are
identical (typically the result of monosomy rescue by duplication).
Uniparental heterodisomy means that the two chromosomes are
different members of a pair, both of which were still inherited from
one parent. This results from a trisomy that is later reduced to
disomy, leaving two copies from one parent. The phenotypic result
of UPD varies according to the chromosome involved, the parent
who contributed the chromosomes, and whether it is isodisomy or
heterodisomy. Three types of phenotypic effects are seen in UPD:
those related to imprinted genes (i.e., the absence of a gene that is
normally expressed only when inherited from a parent of a specific
sex), those related to the uncovering of autosomal recessive disorders, and those related to a vestigial aneuploidy producing mosaicism (see Chapter 97).
In uniparental isodisomy, both chromosomes or regions (and
thus the genes) in the pair are identical. This is particularly important when the parent is a carrier of an autosomal recessive disorder. If the offspring of a carrier parent has UPD with isodisomy for
a chromosome that carries an abnormal gene, the abnormal gene
will be present in two copies, and the phenotype will be that of the
autosomal recessive disorder; the child has an autosomal recessive
disorder even though only one parent is a carrier of that recessive disorder. It is estimated that all humans carry approximately
20 abnormal autosomal recessive genes. Some autosomal recessive
disorders, such as spinal muscular atrophy, cystic fibrosis, cartilage-­
hair hypoplasia, α-­ and β-­thalassemias, and Bloom syndrome, have
been reported in cases of UPD. The possibility of uniparental isodisomy should also be considered when a person is affected with >1
recessive disorder because the abnormal genes for both disorders
could be carried on the same isodisomic chromosome. Uniparental
isodisomy is a rare cause of recessively inherited disorders. Uniparental isodisomies can also be detected by SNP microarrays.
Maternal UPD involving chromosomes 2, 7, 14, and 15 and paternal UPD involving chromosomes 6, 11, 15, and 20 are associated with
phenotypic abnormalities of growth and behavior. UPD of maternal
chromosome 7 is associated with Russell-­Silver syndrome with intrauterine growth restriction. These phenotypic effects may be related to
imprinting (see later) (Fig. 99.11).
Although microdeletions cause the majority of cases, UPD for
chromosome 15 is seen in some instances of Prader-­Willi syndrome
and Angelman syndrome. In Prader-­Willi syndrome, approximately 25–29% of cases have maternal UPD (missing the paternal
chromosome 15) (Fig. 99.12). In Angelman syndrome, paternal
UPD of chromosome 15 is only observed in approximately 5% of
the cases (missing the maternal chromosome 15). The phenotype
for Prader-­Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome in cases of
UPD is thought to result from the lack of specific parental contributions from chromosome 15. In Prader-­Willi syndrome the paternal
contribution is missing, and the maternal contribution is missing
in Angelman syndrome. Prader-­Willi syndrome may be caused by
paternal deficiency of a cluster of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

774 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 99.10  Chromosome Instability Syndromes
SYNDROME

LABORATORY FINDINGS AND GENES INVOLVED

CLINICAL FINDINGS

Fanconi anemia (FA)

Chromosome breakage induced by diepoxybutane and
mitomycin C
There are least 21 FA genes, most are autosomal
recessive, only one is X linked

Short stature, microcephaly in 1/3 of cases, radial ray
defects including thumb anomalies, pancytopenia,
skeletal anomalies, renal anomalies, café-­au-­lait
macules, ear abnormalities and hearing loss

Ataxia telangiectasia

Chromosome instability with rearrangements between
chromosomes 7 and 14 in lymphocytes often involving
the T-­cell receptors in those chromosomes
Decreased IgA levels
Pathogenic variants in the ATM gene. Autosomal
recessive

Progressive cerebellar ataxia with later development
of conjunctival telangiectasias, choreoathetosis,
and dystonia
Sinopulmonary infections
Predisposition to malignancies like B-­cell
lymphomas, T-­cell leukemias and solid tumors

Nijmegen syndrome

Translocations involving chromosomes 7 and 14 in up to
50% of cells
Pathogenic variants in the NBN gene (autosomal
recessive)

IUGR, short stature, progressive microcephaly, and
intellectual disability, recurrent sinopulmonary
infections
Susceptibility to malignancies before age 20 years
like T-­and B-­cell lymphomas, medulloblastomas,
gliomas, rhabdomyosarcoma

ICF (immunodeficiency,
centromere instability, facial
anomalies) syndrome, types
I and II

Pericentromeric chromosomal instability on PHA-­
stimulated metaphases in chromosomes 1, 9, and 16
Decrease of IgG and IgE in type I, IgM and IgE in type II
Low T cells, like NK cells.
Pathogenic variants in DNMT3B and ZBTB24 genes in
types I and II, respectively
Autosomal recessive

Immunodeficiency, recurrent infections, intellectual
disability, facial dysmorphic features

Roberts-­SC phocomelia
syndrome

Premature chromosome separation with chromatid/
centromere repulsion in prophase or early metaphase
easily detected using C-­banding
Pathogenic variants in ESCO2 gene
Autosomal recessive

Prenatal growth deficiency, absent or hypoplastic arms
typically symmetric with reduction of digits’ length
including thumbs that are usually more affected
than lower extremities, bilateral cleft lip and palate,
dysmorphic features, cardiac anomalies, renal
anomalies, and intellectual disability

Bloom syndrome

Marked chromosomal increase of sister chromatid
exchange in the presence of BrdU and increased
spontaneous chromosome breakage
Decreased IgG, IgA, IgM
Pathogenic variants in the RECQL3 gene. Autosomal
recessive

Severe prenatal and postnatal growth deficiency,
microcephaly (average intelligence), sensitivity to
sunlight (butterfly distribution over the face), cafe-­
au-­lait macules, insulin resistance, predisposition
to malignancies: lymphomas, leukemias,
squamous cell carcinoma and solid tumors
Hypersensitivity to chemotherapy

Werner syndrome

“Variegated translocation mosaicism”: chromosomal
aberrations, including translocations, inversions, and
deletions
Telomere loss
Pathogenic variants in RECQL2
Autosomal recessive

Short stature, premature aging appearance, and
predisposition to malignancies
Loss and graying of hair, hoarseness, scleroderma-­
like changes in the 20s
Cataracts, type II diabetes, osteoporosis, hypo­
gonadism in the 30s
Neoplasms in >40% of cases including sarcomas,
melanomas, and thyroid cancer
Myocardial infarction and malignancies are cause of
early death

IUGR, Intrauterine growth restriction; PHA, phytohemagglutinin; NK, natural killer.

These findings suggest that there are differences in function of certain regions of chromosome 15, depending on whether it is inherited from the mother or from the father. Angelman syndrome is
caused by absent function of the maternal gene UBE3A and can be
the result of maternal deletion, maternal UBE3A pathogenic variant, paternal UPD, and abnormalities in the maternal imprinting
center on chromosome 15q11-­13 region.
UPD most frequently arises when a pregnancy starts off as a
trisomic conception followed by trisomy rescue. Because most
trisomies are lethal, the fetus can only survive if a cell line loses
one of the extra chromosomes to revert to the disomic state. One
third of the time, the disomic cell line is uniparental. This is the

typical mechanism for Prader-­Willi syndrome, and it is often associated with advanced maternal age. The embryo starts off as trisomy 15 secondary to maternal meiosis I nondisjunction, followed
by random loss of the paternal chromosome. In this case the disomic cell line becomes the more viable one and outgrows the trisomic cell line. When mosaic trisomy is found at prenatal diagnosis,
care should be taken to determine whether UPD has resulted and
whether the chromosome involved is one of the disomies known
to be associated with phenotypic abnormalities (i.e., chromosome
involved in UPD containing imprinted genes). There must always
be concern that some residual cells that are trisomic are present
in some tissues, leading to malformations or dysfunction. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders
Pseudohypoparathyroidism Ib
Frequency: ?
#20q13.2
parathormone resistance,
hypoglycemia,...
Transient Neonatal
Diabetes Mellitus
1:400,000
#6q24
IUGR, transient neonatal
diabetes, omphalocele,
macroglossia
Beckwith-Wiedemann/
EMG syndrome
1:13,700
#11p15
Exomphalos, macroglossia,
gigantism,
Increased tumor risk
Silver-Russell
syndrome
1:10,000–30,000
#7q32, 11p15
Growth retardation, rel.
macrocephaly, triangular
face, asymmetry,...

775

Wang syndrome
Frequency: ?
#14q32
IUGR, ID, polyhydramnios,
bell-shaped
thorax,...

Overlapping Features
– Aberrant growth
– Asymmetry
– Hypo/hyperglycemia
– Intellectual disability
– Neonatal hypotonia
– Feeding difficulties

Common Molecular Findings
– (Epi)variants
– MLMDs
General Findings in IDs
– Non-mendelian inheritance
– Discordant monozygotic twins
– Environmental contribution

Angelman syndrome
1:16,000
#15q11q13
Severe ID, ataxia,
epilepsy, absent
speech,...

Prader-Willi syndrome
1:17,500
#15q11q13
Growth retardation, ID,
hypotonia,
obesity/hyperphagia,...
Temple syndrome
Frequency: ?
#14q32
Growth retardation,
ID, scoliosis,
obesity, precocious
puberty,...

Fig. 99.11 Overview of the

common clinical and molecular findings in the eight known
imprinting disorders, including
specific features, frequencies,
and major chromosomal localization. #6q24, Chromosome 6q24;
EMG, exomphalos-­macroglossia-­
gigantism; IUGR, intrauterine
growth restriction; ID, intellectual disability; MLMDs, multilocus
methylation defects. (From Eggermann T, Elbracht M, Schröder
C, et al. Congenital imprinting
disorders: a novel mechanism
linking seemingly unrelated disorders. J Pediatr. 2013;163:1204.)

C

A

B

D

Fig. 99.12 Prader-­Willi phenotype. A and B, Individual showing morbid obesity with facial features as shown. C, Upper extremities are notable for

small hands relative to body size. D, External genitalia after laparoscopic orchiopexy at 13 months. Parental informed consent, as approved by the
Baylor College of Medicine Institutional Review Board, was obtained to publish the photographs. (From Sahoo T, del Gaudio D, German JR, et al.
Prader-­Willi phenotype caused by paternal deficiency for the HBII-­85 C/D box small nucleolar RNA cluster. Nat Genet. 2008;40:719–721.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

776 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Fig. 99.13 In this hypothetical pedigree suggestive of imprinting, phenotypic effects occur only when the mutated gene is transmitted from the mother,
but not when it is transmitted from the father, that is, maternal deficiency. Equal numbers of males and females can be affected and not affected phenotypically in each generation. A nonmanifesting transmitter gives a clue to the sex of the parent who passes the expressed genetic information; that is, in maternal
deficiency disorders (also termed paternal imprinting), there are “skipped” nonmanifesting females. This is theoretical, because in most clinical scenarios of
maternal deficiency, such as Angelman syndrome, affected persons do not reproduce.

Fig. 99.14 In theoretical pedigrees suggestive of paternal deficiency (maternal imprinting), phenotypic effects occur only when the mutated gene

is transmitted from the father but not when transmitted from the mother. Equal numbers of males and females can be affected and not affected
phenotypically in each generation. In a theoretical situation, a nonmanifesting transmitter gives a clue to the sex of the parent who passes on the
expressed genetic information; that is, in paternal deficiency (also known as maternal imprinting), there are “skipped” nonmanifesting males. In
real-­life clinical cases of Prader-­Willi syndrome, affected persons do not reproduce.

Table 99.11  Consensus Diagnostic Criteria for Prader-­Willi Syndrome
MAJOR CRITERIA (1 POINT EACH)

MINOR CRITERIA (1/2 POINT EACH)

1

Neonatal/infantile hypotonia

Decreased fetal movement and infantile lethargy

2

Feeding problems and failure to thrive as an infant

Typical behavior problems

3

Weight gain at 1-­6 years; obesity; hyperphagia

Sleep apnea

4

Characteristic dysmorphic facial features

Short stature for family by 15 years

5

Small genitalia; pubertal delay and insufficiency

Hypopigmentation for the family

6

Developmental delay/intellectual disability

Small hands and feet for height

7

Narrow hands, straight ulnar border

8

Esotropia, myopia

9

Thick, viscous saliva

10

Speech articulation defects

11

Skin picking

From Cassidy SB, Schwartz S, Miller JL, Driscoll DJ. Prader-­Willi syndrome. Genet Med. 2012;14(1):15. Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 99 u Chromosome Disorders

777

Table 99.12  Nutritional Phases in Prader-­Willi Syndrome
PHASE

MEDIAN AGES

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS

0

Prenatal to birth

Decreased fetal movements and lower birthweight than siblings

1a

0-­9 mo

Hypotonia with difficulty feeding and decreased appetite

1b

9-­25 mo

Improved feeding and appetite and growing appropriately

2a

2.1-­4.5 yr

Weight increasing without appetite increase or excess calories

2b

4.5-­8 yr

Increased appetite and calories, but can feel full

3

8 yr to adulthood

Hyperphagic, rarely feels full

4

Adulthood

Appetite is no longer insatiable

Modified from Miller JL, Lynn CH, Driscoll DC, et al. Nutritional phases in Prader-­Willi syndrome. Am J Med Genet A. 2011;155A:1040–1049.

Table 99.13  Molecular Mechanisms Causing Prader-­Willi and Angelman Syndromes
PRADER-­WILLI SYNDROME

ANGELMAN SYNDROME

15q11-­q13 deletion

∼70% (paternal)

∼70% (maternal)

Uniparental disomy

∼30% (maternal)

∼5% (paternal)

Single-­gene pathogenic variants

None detected

UBE3A gene encoding the E6-­AP ubiquitin-­protein
ligase (11% of total but mostly in familial cases)

Imprinting center pathogenic variants

5%

1%

Unidentified

<1%

10–15%

Data from Nicholls RD, Knepper JL. Genome organization, function and imprinting in Prader-­Willi and Angelman syndromes. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2001;2:153–175; and
Horsthemke B, Buiting K. Imprinting defects on human chromosome 15. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;113:292–299.

presence of aggregates of trisomic cells might account for the spectrum of abnormalities seen in persons with some UPDs.

IMPRINTING

Genomic imprinting occurs when the phenotypic expression of a
gene depends on the parent of origin for certain genes or chromosome
regions. Whether the genetic material is expressed or not depends on
the sex of the parent from whom it was derived. Genomic imprinting
can be suspected in some cases on the basis of a pedigree. In these pedigrees the disease is always transmitted from the same sex and could
be passed on silently for several generations by the opposite sex (Figs.
99.13 and 99.14). Imprinting probably occurs in many different parts of
the human genome and is thought to be particularly important in gene
expression related to development, growth, cancer, and behavior; >60
genes have been classified as imprintable. Imprinting disorders may
arise from UPD, deletions or duplications, epigenetic aberrant methylation patterns, or single nucleotide pathogenic variants in a specific
gene.
A classic example of imprinting disorder is seen in Prader-­Willi
syndrome and Angelman syndrome, two very different clinical conditions. These syndromes are both commonly caused by a deletion of the

same region in the proximal long arm of chromosome 15. A deletion
of the paternally derived chromosome causes Prader-­Willi syndrome,
in which the maternally derived copy is still intact, for which some of
the imprinted genes within this region normally remain silent. Prader-­
Willi syndrome can be diagnosed clinically (Table 99.11) and confirmed with genetic testing. Additional clinical features and issues of
weight gain are noted in Table 99.12. The weight gain is difficult to control, but treatment with growth hormone has resulted in improvements
in height, lean body mass, decreased adipose tissue, and improvement
in cognitive function.
A maternal deletion of the same region as in Prader-­Willi syndrome
causes Angelman syndrome, leaving intact the paternal copy that in
this case has genes that are also normally silent. In other situations,
UPD can lead to the same diagnosis (Table 99.13). Many other disorders are associated with this type of parent-­of-­origin effect, as in some
cases of Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome (see Chapter 598.1), Russell-­
Silver syndrome, and neonatal diabetes.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

778 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Chapter 100

Dysmorphology,
­Phenotyping, ­and
Sequences
Anne M. Slavotinek
Dysmorphology is the study of differences in human form and the
mechanisms that cause them. It has been estimated that 1 in 40 newborns, or 2.5%, have a recognizable birth defect or pattern of malformations at birth; ∼50% of these newborns have a single, isolated
malformation, whereas in the other half, multiple malformations are
present. About 20–30% of infant deaths and 30–50% of deaths after
the neonatal period are caused by congenital abnormalities (http://ww
w.marchofdimes.com/peristats/). In 2021, birth defects accounted for
∼1 in 5 infant deaths in the United States, with a rate of 108.2 deaths
per 100,000 live births, which was higher than other causes of mortality, such as preterm/low birthweight (80.4/100,000), sudden infant
death syndrome (39.8/100,000), maternal complications of pregnancy
(33.4/100,000), and unintentional injury (33.5/100,000).

CLASSIFICATION OF BIRTH DEFECTS

Birth defects can be subdivided into isolated (single) defects or multiple
defects, typically described as multiple congenital anomalies (MCAs).
An isolated primary defect can be classified, according to the presumed
cause of the defect, as a malformation, dysplasia, deformation, or disruption (Table 100.1 and Fig. 100.1). Most birth defects are malformations, a term used interchangeably with anomalies. A malformation is
a structural defect arising from a localized error in morphogenesis that
results in the abnormal formation of a tissue or organ. Dysplasia refers
to the abnormal organization of cells into tissues. Malformations and
dysplasias can both affect the intrinsic structure of tissues and organs.
In contrast, a deformation is an alteration in the shape or form of a
structure or organ that has previously developed or differentiated normally. A disruption is a defect resulting from the destruction of a structure that had formed normally before the insult.
Most human disorders with altered morphogenesis display multiple
anomalies or malformations rather than an isolated birth defect. When

several malformations coexist in a single individual, they can be classified as a syndrome, sequence, or an association. A syndrome is defined
as a pattern comprising multiple anomalies that are related by pathophysiology, resulting from a single, defined etiology. Sequences consist
of multiple anomalies that are caused by a single event, although the
sequence itself can have different etiologies. An association refers to
a nonrandom grouping of anomalies in which there is an unclear, or
unknown, relationship among the anomalies, such that they do not fit
the criteria for a syndrome or sequence.

Malformations and Dysplasias

Human anomalies and dysplasias can be caused by pathogenic gene
variants, chromosome aberrations and copy number variants, environmental factors, or interactions between genetic and environmental factors (Table 100.2). Some malformations are caused by
deleterious sequence variants in single genes, whereas other anomalies
arise because of deleterious sequence variants in multiple genes acting
in combination, termed digenic or oligogenic inheritance. In the past,
it was thought that malformations were caused by monogenic pathogenic variants in 7.5% of patients; chromosomal anomalies in 6%; multigenic pathogenic variants in 20%; and known environmental factors,
such as maternal diseases, infections, and teratogens, in 6–7% (Table
100.3). In the remaining 60–70% of patients, malformations were classified as having an unknown etiology. Currently, the percentages have
increased for all of the possible genetic etiologies of malformations
due to improved cytogenetic and molecular genetic methods, including microarrays and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays
for detecting copy number variants, and next-­generation sequencing
(NGS) technologies, such as exome or genome sequencing, for identifying novel genes and pathogenic sequence variants.
Many developmental abnormalities caused by pathogenic
sequence variants in a single gene display characteristic of mendelian patterns of inheritance such as autosomal dominant, autosomal
recessive, and X-­linked inheritance. Genes that cause birth defects
or MCA syndromes are often transcription factors, part of evolutionarily conserved signal transduction pathways, or regulatory
proteins required for key developmental events (see Chapters 101
and 102 and Table 100.2).
In addition, syndromes with MCA can be caused by chromosomal
aberrations or copy number variants and teratogens (see Tables 100.2
and 100.3). Down syndrome typically results from an extra copy
of an entire chromosome 21 or, less frequently, an extra copy of the
Down syndrome critical region on chromosome 21. Chromosome 21
is a small chromosome that contains an estimated 250 genes, and thus
individuals with Down syndrome typically have an increased dosage

Table 100.1  Mechanisms, Terminology, and Definitions of Dysmorphology
TERMINOLOGY

DEFINITION

EXAMPLE

Sequence

Single error in morphogenesis that results
in a series of subsequent defects

Pierre-­Robin sequence, in which a small jaw results in glossoptosis and
cleft palate
22q11 deletion sequence of primary fourth brachial arch and third and
fourth pharyngeal pouch defects, leading to aplasia or hypoplasia of the
thymus and parathyroid glands, aortic arch anomalies, and micrognathia

22q11 deletion

Mechanical (uterine) force that alters
structure of intrinsically normal tissue

Oligohydramnios produces deformations by in utero compression of
limbs (e.g., dislocated hips, equinovarus foot deformity), crumpled ears,
or small thorax

Disruption sequence

In utero tissue destruction after a period
of normal morphogenesis

Amnionic membrane rupture sequence, leading to amputation of fingers/
toes, tissue fibrosis, and tissue bands

Dysplasia sequence

Atypical organization of cells into tissues
or organs

Neurocutaneous melanosis sequence, with atypical migration of
melanocyte precursor cells from the neural crest to the periphery,
manifesting as melanocytic hamartomas of skin and meninges

Malformation syndrome

Appearance of multiple malformations
in unrelated tissues that have a known,
unifying cause

Trisomy 21
Teratogens
Numerous multiple congenital anomaly syndromes as described above

From Kliegman RM, Greenbaum LA, Lye PS, eds. Practical Strategies in Pediatric Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2004.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 100 u Dysmorphology, ­Phenotyping, ­and Sequences

A

B

C

779

D

Fig. 100.1 Four major types of problems in morphogenesis: malformation, deformation, disruption, and dysplasia. A, Infant with campomelic dys-

plasia syndrome, which results in multiple anomalies caused by a pathogenic variant in SOX9. B, Infant with oligohydramnios deformation sequence
caused by premature rupture of membranes from 17 weeks’ gestation until birth at 36 weeks; the infant was delivered from a persistent transverse
lie. C, Fetus with early amnion rupture sequence with attachment of the placenta to the head and resultant disruption of craniofacial structures with
distal limb contractures. D, Infant with diastrophic dysplasia caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in a sulfate transporter protein. (From Graham Jr
JM. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Deformation, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007, Fig. 1-­1, p. 4.)

for the genes encoded by this chromosome that causes their physical
differences (see Chapter 57).
Neural tube defects (NTDs) are an example of a birth defect
that typically displays multifactorial inheritance. NTDs and other
birth defects, such as cleft lip and palate, can recur in families, but
inheritance for the majority of affected individuals does not follow a straightforward, mendelian inheritance pattern, and multiple
genes and environmental factors acting together likely contribute to
the pathogenesis (see Table 100.2). Many of the genes involved in
NTDs are unknown, so one cannot predict with certainty the mode
of inheritance or a precise recurrence risk for an individual case.
Empirical recurrence risks can be provided on the basis of population studies and the presence of single or multiple family members with the same malformation. However, one important gene/
environment interaction has been identified for NTDs (see Chapter
631.1). Folic acid deficiency is associated with NTDs and can result
from a combination of dietary factors and increased utilization during pregnancy. A common variant in the gene for an enzyme in the
folate recycling pathway, 5,10-­methylene-­tetrahydrofolate reductase
(MTHFR), that makes this enzyme less stable, may also be important in folic acid status. Several teratogenic causes of birth defects
have been described (see Tables 100.2 and 100.3). Ethanol causes a
recognizable pattern of anomalies that is variably called fetal alcohol
syndrome (FAS), fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), or fetal
alcohol effects (FAE) (see Chapter 146). Children who were exposed
to ethanol during the pregnancy can display microcephaly, developmental delays, hyperactivity, and facial anomalies. Ethanol, which
is toxic to the developing central nervous system (CNS), causes cell
death in developing neurons.

Deformations

Many deformations involve the musculoskeletal system (Fig. 100.2).
Fetal movement is required for the proper development of the musculoskeletal system, and restriction of fetal movement can result in
musculoskeletal deformations, such as clubfoot, or talipes. Two major
intrinsic etiologies of deformations are primary neuromuscular disorders and oligohydramnios, or decreased amniotic fluid, which can
be caused by fetal renal defects. Both primary neuromuscular disorders
and oligohydramnios can compromise fetal movements. The major
extrinsic causes of deformations are those that result in fetal crowding
and restriction of fetal movement. Examples of extrinsic causes include
oligohydramnios resulting from chronic leakage of amniotic fluid, and
abnormal shape of the amniotic cavity. When a fetus is in the breech
position (Fig. 100.3), the incidence of deformations is increased 10-­
fold. The shape of the amniotic cavity also has a profound effect on the

shape of the fetus and is influenced by many factors, including uterine
shape and the volume of amniotic fluid (Fig. 100.4).
It is important to determine whether deformations result from intrinsic or extrinsic causes. Most children with deformations from extrinsic
causes are otherwise completely normal, and their prognosis is usually
excellent. Correction typically occurs spontaneously. Deformations
caused by intrinsic factors, such as multiple joint contractures resulting from CNS or peripheral nervous system defects, have a different
prognosis and may be much more significant for the child (Fig. 100.5).

Disruptions

Disruptions are caused by destruction of a previously normally formed
organ or body part. At least two mechanisms are known to produce
disruptions. One involves entanglement followed by tearing apart, or
amputation, of a normally developed structure, usually a digit or limb, by
strands of amnion floating within amniotic fluid that are termed amniotic bands (Fig. 100.6). The other mechanism involves interruption to
the blood supply to a developing body part, which can lead to infarction,
necrosis, and resorption of structures distal to the insult. If interruption to the blood supply occurs early in gestation, the disruptive defect
typically involves atresia, or absence of a body part. Genetic factors have
been considered to play a minor role in the pathogenesis of disruptions,
as most occur as sporadic events in otherwise healthy individuals, but
little is known regarding etiology. The prognosis for a disruptive defect is
determined entirely by the extent and location of the tissue loss.

Multiple Anomalies: Sequences, Associations, and
Syndromes

The pattern of multiple anomalies that occurs when a single primary
defect in early development produces multiple anomalies because of
a cascade of secondary and tertiary developmental effects is called a
sequence (Fig. 100.7). When evaluating a child with MCAs, the physician must differentiate between multiple anomalies that are caused by a
single localized error in morphogenesis (a sequence) from syndromes
with multiple anomalies. In the former, recurrence risk counseling for
the multiple anomalies depends entirely on the risk of recurrence for
the single, localized malformation. Pierre-­Robin sequence is a pattern
of multiple anomalies produced by mandibular hypoplasia. Because
the tongue is relatively large for the oral cavity, it drops back (glossoptosis), blocking closure of the posterior palatal shelves and causing a
U-­shaped cleft palate. There are numerous causes of mandibular hypoplasia, all of which can result in the characteristic features of Pierre-­
Robin sequence.
VATER association was first defined as the nonrandom occurrence
of a combination of congenital anomalies comprising vertebral defects,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

780 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 100.2  Examples of Malformations with Distinct Causes, Clinical Features, and Pathogenesis
DISORDER

CAUSE/INHERITANCE

SELECTED CLINICAL FEATURES

PATHOGENESIS

Spondylocostal dysostosis
syndrome

Mendelian; autosomal recessive

Abnormal vertebral and rib
segmentation

Deleterious sequence variants in
DLL3 and other genes

Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome

Autosomal dominant

Intellectual disability
Broad thumbs and halluces;
valgus deviation of these digits
Hypoplastic maxillae
Prominent nose and columella
Congenital heart disease

Deleterious sequence variants in
CBP and EP300

X-­linked lissencephaly

X-­linked

Male: severe intellectual disability,
seizures
Female: variable

Deleterious sequence variants in
DCX

Aniridia

Autosomal dominant

Absent iris or iris/foveal
hypoplasia

Deleterious sequence variants in
PAX6

Waardenburg syndrome, type I

Autosomal dominant

Deafness
White forelock
Wide-­spaced eyes
Iris heterochromia and/or pale
skin pigmentation

Deleterious sequence variants in
PAX3

Holoprosencephaly

Loss of function or
haploinsufficiency for multiple
genes

Microcephaly
Cyclopia
Single central incisor

SHH, multiple other genes

Velocardiofacial syndrome

Microdeletion
22q11.2

Congenital heart disease,
including conotruncal defects
Cleft palate
T-­cell defects
Facial anomalies

TBX1 haploinsufficiency/
pathogenic variants;
haploinsufficiency for other
genes in the deleted interval also
contributes to the phenotype

Down syndrome

Additional copy of chromosome
21 (trisomy 21)

Intellectual disability
Characteristic facial anomalies
Congenital heart disease
Increased risk of leukemia
Alzheimer disease

Increase in dosage of an estimated
250 genes on chromosome 21

Neural tube defects

Multifactorial

Meningomyelocele

Defects in folate sensitive
enzymes or folic acid uptake

Fetal alcohol syndrome

Teratogenic

Microcephaly
Developmental delay
Facial anomalies
Behavioral abnormalities

Ethanol toxicity to developing brain

Retinoic acid embryopathy

Teratogenic

Microtia
Congenital heart disease

Isotretinoin effects on neural crest
and branchial arch development

anal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) with esophageal atresia,
radial anomalies, and renal dysplasia. The association was expanded to
include cardiac anomalies (C) and limb anomalies (L), leading to the
longer acronym, VACTERL. Although there are still no definitively
established diagnostic criteria, most clinicians consider that a minimum of three of the seven component features must be present for the
diagnosis. In addition, the designation of VATER/VACTERL association is typically one of exclusion; growth and developmental delays as
well as facial anomalies are atypical and should prompt the consideration of alternative diagnoses. Anorectal defects and TEF are considered more characteristic of VATER/VACTERL association than some
of the other components, such as cardiac anomalies. A single umbilical artery is a common finding. The estimated incidence of VATER/
VACTERL has ranged from 1 in 10,000 to 1 in 40,000 infants. VACTERL with hydrocephalus, also known as VACTERL-­H, is a separate
condition.
VATER/VACTERL association has so far defied the identification of
a simple mendelian etiology. Many cases are sporadic, although there
are rare reports of familial inheritance and first-­degree relatives with
clinical findings in the component systems of VATER/VACTERL association. Hedgehog signaling has been postulated to be important, as

mouse models with defective Hedgehog and/or ciliary signaling manifest the clinical findings observed in VATER/VACTERL. However,
cytogenetic studies have not demonstrated chromosome aberrations or
copy number variants. Exome sequencing (ES) has not identified a single causative gene or gene family, although nonrecurrent variants have
been described in mendelian disease genes, most typically in patients
with renal involvement. Clinical overlap has led to the identification of
pathogenic variants in the SALL1, SALL4, and MID1 genes in patients
with anorectal malformations.
Pathogenic variants in several autosomal recessive genes in the
kynurenine pathway, including KYNU, HAAO, and NADSYN1,
have been associated with a spectrum of anomalies that overlap
with VATER/VACTERL association, including vertebral defects,
cardiac anomalies, renal malformations, and limb defects of variable severity. Biallelic variants in these genes perturb the synthesis
of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) synthesis; these conditions have been grouped together as congenital NAD deficiency
disorders. The overall contribution of these genes to the pathogenesis of VATER/VACTERL association appears to be small in terms
of the entire group of patients but remains an important diagnostic consideration. Interestingly, studies in mice with biallelic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 100 u Dysmorphology, ­Phenotyping, ­and Sequences
Uterine compression

Table 100.3  Causes of Congenital Malformations
MONOGENIC
X-­linked hydrocephalus
Achondroplasia
Ectodermal dysplasia
Apert syndrome
Treacher Collins syndrome

Intrinsic
Oligohydramnios
Uterine hypertonia
Multiple fetuses
Large fetus
Uterine deformities
(bicornate)

CHROMOSOMAL ABERRATIONS AND COPY NUMBER VARIANTS
Trisomy 21, 18, 13
XO, XXY
Deletions 4p−, 5p−, 7q−, 13q−, 18p−, 18q−, 22q−
Prader-­Willi syndrome (70% of affected patients have deletion of
chromosome 15q11.2-­q13)

Fetal constraint

MATERNAL ILLNESS
Diabetes mellitus
Phenylketonuria
Hyperthermia

ENVIRONMENTAL AGENTS
Polychlorinated biphenyls
Herbicides
Mercury
Alcohol
MEDICATIONS
Thalidomide
Diethylstilbestrol
Phenytoin
Warfarin
Cytotoxic drugs
Paroxetine
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme inhibitors
Isotretinoin (vitamin A)
d-­Penicillamine
Valproic acid
Mycophenolate mofetil

Extrinsic
Small pelvis
Bony lumbar spines
Increased abdominal tone
Abnormal fetal posture
(including breech)
Abnormal fetal
muscular tone

Increased mechanical forces

MATERNAL INFECTION
Intrauterine infections (e.g., herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus,
varicella-­zoster virus, rubella virus, Zika virus, toxoplasmosis)

UTERINE ENVIRONMENT
Deformation
Uterine pressure, oligohydramnios: clubfoot, torticollis, congenital
hip dislocation, pulmonary hypoplasia, seventh nerve palsy
Disruption
Amniotic bands, congenital amputations, gastroschisis,
porencephaly, intestinal atresia
Twinning

781

Deformations

Craniofacial

Extremity

Other

Scaphocephaly
Plagiocephaly
Mandibular asymmetry
Flattened facies
Deviated nasal septum
Crumpled ear
Craniosynostosis

Dislocated hips
Metatarsus adductus
Equinovarus foot
Calcaneovalgus foot
Tibial bowing
Hyperflexed hips
Hyperextended knees
Contractures
Internal tibial torsion

Torticollis
Lung hypoplasia
Scoliosis

Fig. 100.2 Deformation abnormalities resulting from uterine com-

pression. (From Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, Marcdante KJ, et al., eds.
Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2005.)

UNKNOWN ETIOLOGIES
Neural tube defects, such as anencephaly and spina bifida
Cleft lip/palate
Pyloric stenosis
SPORADIC SEQUENCE COMPLEXES
VATER/VACTERL sequence (vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac
defects, tracheoesophageal fistula with esophageal atresia, radial
and renal anomalies)
Pierre-­Robin sequence
NUTRITIONAL
Neural tube defects due to low folic acid
From Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, eds. Nelson’s Essentials of Pediatrics, 4th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2002.

loss-­of-­function variants in Haao and Kynu that were provided
with niacin in their diet showed that the vitamin can overcome the
metabolic block associated with loss-­of-­function for these genes.
Niacin enters the NAD biosynthesis pathway downstream to Haao
and Kynu, and this finding implies that the availability of niacin
and other components of the kynurenine pathway can influence
NAD levels during pregnancy and consequently the clinical severity resulting from the variants affecting some of the genes involved

Fig. 100.3 Breech deformation sequence.

in NAD synthesis. These conditions outline the importance of considering the influence of environmental factors on the phenotype
caused by genetic variation.

MOLECULAR MECHANISMS OF MALFORMATIONS
Inborn Errors of Development

Genes that cause malformation syndromes, as well as genes whose expression is disrupted by environmental agents or teratogens, can participate in
numerous cellular processes, including signal transduction, transcription,
or the regulation of genes and proteins required for key developmental
events. When anomalies are viewed as alterations resulting from disturbances to important developmental pathways, this provides a molecular
framework for understanding the birth defects (see Chapter 101).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

782 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Hindgut
Mesonephric
duct
Mesonephric
ridge
Ureteral
bud

Normal
development
Happens at
about 31 days

Cloaca

Ureteral bud
induces metanephric
tissue to form renal
parenchyma

Defective
development
Renal agenesis
Lack of urine
into amniotic cavity
Relative lack of
amniotic fluid during
fetal life
Pulmonary
hypoplasia

Amnion
nodosum

Death from
respiratory
insufficiency

B
Fig. 100.4 A, Consequences of
renal agenesis. B, Multiple deformational defects. C, Defects in
amnion nodosum; brown-­
yellow
granules from vernix have been
ribbed into defects of the amniotic surface. (From Jones KL, Jones
MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s
Recognizable Patterns of Human
Malformation, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013: p. 821.)

Fetal
compression

Altered
facies

Breech
presentation

Abnormal
positioning of
hands and feet

Myo-neural
dysfunction

C

Lack of
amniotic fluid
Intra-uterine constraint

Fetal Akinesia

A

Growth
deficiency

Pulmonary
hypoplasia

Short
umbilical
cord

Limb
positional
defects

Facial
anomalies

A

B

Fig. 100.6 A, Amniotic band disruption sequence. B, Bands constrict-

ing the ankle leading to deformational defects and amputations. (From
Jones KJ. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 6th
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006.)

B

C

D

Fig. 100.5 A, Diagram demonstrating the etiologically heterogene-

ous phenotype that results from fetal akinesia. B, Infant born with myotonic dystrophy to a mother with the same condition. He had multiple
joint contractures with thin bones and respiratory insufficiency. C, Infant
immobilized in a transverse lie after amnion rupture at 26 weeks. D,
Fetus with bilateral renal agenesis resulting in oligohydramnios. (From
Graham JL. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 3rd
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2007: Fig. 47-­2.)

It is important to consider MCA syndromes as members of a group
based on shared or overlapping clinical findings and related causative
genes that act in the same developmental or metabolic pathway. See
Chapter 101 for the Sonic Hedgehog disorders, RASopathies, craniosynostoses, and chromatin regulatory disorders as examples; disruption of specific steps in this pathway result in a variety of related
developmental disorders and anomalies (see Fig. 100.2).

Cytogenetic Aberrations and Chromosomal
Imbalance

Cytogenetic imbalances resulting from an additional copy of a whole
human chromosome can result in characteristic and recognizable

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 100 u Dysmorphology, ­Phenotyping, ­and Sequences
Primary Defect in Prechordal Mesoderm
Prior to 21-25 days

783

Mesencephalon

Neural plate
Prechordal
mesoderm
Area of
future face

A

Amniotic cavity
Notochord
Heart

Rhombencephalon
Body
stalk

Allantois
Yolk sac

Prosencephalon
28 days

35 days

Incomplete cleavage
and morphogenesis
of forebrain

Missing or incomplete
midfacial development

Single ventricle
Absence of corpus
callosum
Fused thalami
Incomplete anterior and
posterior pituitary
Microcephaly
Severe intellectual
defect
Apneic episodes
Seizures
Abnormal EEG
Infant death

C

B

Cleft lip
Cleft palate

Hypotelorism
Lack of ethmoid
bone

Cyclopia
Anophthalmia
Microphthalmia
Coloboma, iris
Retinal defect
Absent philtrum
Absent nasal septum
Single naris
Proboscis

Lack of olfactory lobes
Lack of optic nerve

Fig. 100.7 Holoprosencephaly sequence. A, Schematic longitudinal section of 21-­day embryo. B, Developmental pathogenesis of the sequence.

C, Affected individual. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 7th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2013: pp. 802–803.)

syndromes. An additional copy of chromosome 21 results in Down syndrome (see Chapter 57); loss of one of the X chromosomes results in
Turner syndrome (see Chapter 99.2 for discussion of syndromes with
whole chromosomal imbalances). With the advent of high-­resolution
cytogenetic techniques, such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH),
array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH), and SNP arrays,
it has become straightforward to identify submicroscopic chromosome
deletions and duplications. Several recurrent chromosome deletions and
duplications have been identified as the cause of characteristic and recognizable syndromes (see Table 100.6 and Chapter 99), including Williams
syndrome (deletion of chromosome 7q11.23), Miller-­Dieker syndrome
(deletion of chromosome 17p13.3), Smith-­Magenis syndrome (deletion of chromosome 17p11.2), and 22q11 deletion syndrome (deletion
of chromosome 22q11.2, also known as velocardiofacial syndrome).
Collectively, chromosome microarrays (CMAs) and genetic sequencing
have made it possible to uncover rare microdeletions, microduplications,
and single nucleotide pathogenic variants associated with birth defects,
intellectual disability, and neuropsychiatric disorders. The sensitivity and
specificity of microarrays made them a standard starting point for the
evaluation of a child with MCAs and intellectual disabilities, but exome,
genome, and gene panel testing have been preferred due to higher diagnostic yield. It is important to note that unaffected individuals may carry
small microdeletions and microduplications as part of familial variation.
Therefore it is important to compare copy number variants that are identified in children with birth defects or developmental delays with their parents’ chromosome analyses and with databases of normal variants detected
in individuals without such birth defects.

APPROACH TO THE CHILD WITH FACIAL
ANOMALIES

One approach to the child with facial anomalies is the pattern recognition approach, which compares the physical differences in the patient

against a broad and memorized (or computerized) knowledge of
human disorders. This approach can be appropriate for experienced
dysmorphologists and clinical geneticists. In conjunction, a systematic
genetic mechanism approach can also be effective for clinicians who are
not dysmorphology experts. By gathering and analyzing the clinical
data, the general pediatrician can diagnose the patient in a straightforward case or initiate a referral to an appropriate specialist.

Medical History

The history for a patient with birth defects includes elements related to
etiologic factors. The family history, or pedigree, is necessary to assess
the inheritance pattern, or lack thereof, for a disorder. For disorders
that have a simple mendelian inheritance pattern, recognition of the
mode of inheritance can be critical for narrowing the differential diagnosis, then prioritizing common genes with the appropriate inheritance
pattern that could cause the patient’s clinical features. Many common
birth defects have a complex, or multifactorial, genetic etiology, such
as isolated cleft palate and spina bifida or NTDs. The recognition of a
close relative affected with a birth defect similar to the proband’s findings can be useful. Typically, a three-­generation pedigree is sufficient
for this purpose (see Chapter 97).
The perinatal history is also an essential component of the history.
It includes the pregnancy history of the mother, which can be useful
for recognition of recurrent miscarriages that may be indicative of a
chromosomal disorder, factors that may relate to deformations or disruptions such as oligohydramnios, and maternal exposures to teratogenic drugs or chemicals, including isotretinoin and ethanol, that are
potential causes of microcephaly.
Another component of the history that is often useful is the natural
history of the phenotype. MCA syndromes caused by chromosomal
aberrations and single-­gene disorders are frequently static, meaning
that, although the patients can experience new complications over

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

784 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 100.4  Definitions of Common Clinical Signs of Syndromes with Facial Anomalies
SIGN

DEFINITION

Brachycephaly

A condition in which head shape is shortened from front to back along the sagittal plane; typically the back
of the skull (occiput) and face are flatter than normal.

Brachydactyly

Short digits.

Brushfield spots

Speckled white spots or rings about two-­thirds of the distance to the periphery of the iris of the eye.

Camptodactyly

Permanent flexion of one or more fingers that can be associated with missing interphalangeal creases.

Clinodactyly

A medial or lateral curving of the fingers or toes; usually refers to incurving of the fifth finger.

Hypoplastic or small nail

A small nail on a digit.

Low-­set ears

This designation is made when the helix meets the cranium at a level below a horizontal plane that is an
extension of a line through both inner canthi.

Melia

A suffix meaning “limb” (e.g., amelia, missing limb; brachymelia, short limb).

Wide-­set eyes

Increased distance between the center of the pupils of the two eyes; can be measured as an increased
interpupillary distance (IPD).

Plagiocephaly

A condition in which head shape is asymmetric in the sagittal or coronal plane; can result from asymmetry in
cranial suture closure, asymmetry of brain growth, or deformation of the skull.

Posterior hair whorl

A single hair whorl occurs to the right or left of midline and is within 2 cm anterior to the posterior fontanel
in 95% of cases.

Postaxial polydactyly

Extra finger or toe present on the lateral side of the hand or foot.

Preaxial polydactyly

Extra finger or toe present on the medial side of the hand or foot.

Prominent lateral palatine ridges

Relative overgrowth of the lateral palatine ridges that can be caused by a deficit of tongue thrust into the
hard palate.

Scaphocephaly

A condition in which the head is elongated from front to back in the sagittal plane; most normal skulls are
scaphocephalic; also termed dolichocephaly.

Shawl scrotum

The scrotal skin joins around the superior aspect of the penis and represents a mild deficit in full migration of
the labial-­scrotal folds.

Short palpebral fissures

Decreased horizontal distance of the eyelid folds based on measurements from the inner canthus to the
outer canthus.

Syndactyly

Incomplete separation of the fingers or toes. It most commonly occurs between the third and fourth fingers
and between the second and third toes.

Synophrys

Eyebrows that meet in the midline.

Telecanthus

Lateral displacement of the inner canthi. The inner canthal distance (ICD) is increased, but the IPD is normal.

Widow’s peak

V-­shaped midline, downward projection of the scalp hair in the frontal region. It represents an upper
forehead intersection of the bilateral fields of periocular hair growth suppression. A widow’s peak can
occur together with wide-­spaced eyes.

time, the phenotype is typically not progressive. In contrast, disorders that cause facial anomalies because of metabolic perturbations,
for example, Hunter syndrome or Sanfilippo syndrome, can be mild or
may not be apparent at birth, but can progress, causing deterioration of
patient status over time.

Physical Examination

The physical examination is very important for identifying anomalies
that can aid a genetic diagnosis. The essential element of the physical
evaluation is an assessment of the patient’s clinical findings, with the
clinician performing an organized evaluation of the size and formation of various body structures. Familiarity with the terminology typically used to describe anomalies is helpful (Table 100.4). The size and
shape of the head is relevant; for example, many children with Down
syndrome have mild microcephaly and a shortened anteroposterior
dimension of skull, termed brachycephaly. Eye position, shape, and
the slant of the palpebral fissures are useful signs for many disorders.
Reference standards are available with which physical measurements
(e.g., interpupillary distance) can be compared. It can be useful to categorize anomalies as “major” or “minor” birth defects. Major defects

either cause significant dysfunction or require surgical correction (see
Table 100.5), and minor defects neither cause significant dysfunction
nor require surgical correction (e.g., clinodactyly) (Table 100.6 and Fig.
100.8). By cataloging physical parameters, the clinician may be able to
identify a characteristic pattern of anomalies and recognize the diagnosis. Facial recognition software has been helpful in identifying the
etiology of patients with facial dysmorphology (Fig. 100.9).

Imaging Studies

Imaging studies can be critical in diagnosing an underlying genetic etiology. If short stature or disproportionate stature (e.g., long trunk and
short limbs) is noted, a full skeletal survey with radiographs should be
performed. The skeletal survey can detect anomalies in bone number,
structure, and formation that can be used to narrow the differential
diagnosis. When there are abnormal neurologic signs or symptoms,
such as hypotonia, and an abnormal head size, such as microcephaly,
brain imaging can be indicated. Other studies and examinations, such
as echocardiography, renal ultrasonography, and hearing and ophthalmology evaluation, can also be useful to identify additional major or
minor anomalies that may serve as diagnostic clues.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 100 u Dysmorphology, ­Phenotyping, ­and Sequences
90

NEUROLOGIC
Severe hydrocephalus
Lissencephaly
Schizencephaly
Megalencephaly
Neural tube defect
Meningomyelocele
Encephalocele
CARDIOVASCULAR
Various congenital heart
malformations
Cardiomyopathy
Genetic arrhythmia syndromes
GENITOURINARY
Ambiguous genitalia
Kidney malformations
Urachal defects

ABDOMINAL WALL
Gastroschisis
Omphalocele
CRANIOFACIAL
Craniosynostosis
Facial cleft
Cleft lip and palate
Structural eye defect
Coloboma
Aniridia
Structural ear defects
Microtia
Aplasia of the auditory canal
LIMB
Amelia
Split/hand foot malformation

RESPIRATORY
Congenital pulmonary airway
malformation
Tracheoesophageal fistula
*Not an inclusive list.
From Basel D. Dysmorphology in a genomic era. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:15–23. Table 1.

Table 100.6  Minor Malformations*
CRANIOFACIAL
Large fontanel
Flat or low nasal bridge
Saddle nose, upturned nose
Micrognathia
Cutis aplasia of the scalp
EYE
Palpebral fissures
Telecanthus or epicanthus
Up or down slanting
Hypertelorism
Brushfield spots
EAR
Posteriorly rotated pinna
Lack of helical fold
Preauricular with or without
auricular skin tags
Small pinna
Auricular (preauricular) pit or
sinus
Folding of helix
Darwinian tubercle
Crushed (crinkled) ear
Asymmetric ear sizes
Low-­set ears
SKIN
Dimpling over the bones
Capillary hemangioma (face/
posterior neck)
Dermal melanosis (African, Asian)
Sacral dimple
Pigmented nevi
Redundant skin folds
Cutis marmorata
Café-­au-­lait macules

HAND
Simian crease
Bridged upper palmar creases
Fifth finger clinodactyly
Joint hypermobility
(hyperextension of thumb)
Cutaneous syndactyly
Polydactyly
Short, broad thumb
Narrow or hyperconvex nails
Hypoplastic nails
Camptodactyly
Short fourth metacarpal
FOOT
Syndactyly of second/third toe
Asymmetric toe length
Clinodactyly of second toe
Overlapping toes
Nail hypoplasia
Wide gap between hallux and
second toe
Deep plantar crease between
hallux and second toe
OTHER
Mild calcaneovalgus
Hydrocele
Shawl scrotum
Hypospadias
Hypoplasia of labia majora
Supernumerary nipples
Undescended testes
Tongue tie

*Not an inclusive list.
From Basel D. Dysmorphology in a genomic era. Clin Perinatol. 2020;47:15–23. Table 2.

Diagnosis

The examining physician should gather data on the patient’s pedigree
and perinatal and pediatric history and should have an appreciation for
the natural history of the clinical findings. At this point, the physician

With one or more major
malformations (%)

Table 100.5  Major Malformations*

785

90%
Mostly
multiple
major
anomalies

70
50
30
10

% of
babies

11%
1.4%

3%

0
(85%)

1
(13.4%)

2
(0.8%)

3 or more
(0.5%)

Number of minor malformations per newborn

Fig. 100.8 Frequency of major malformations in relation to the num-

ber of minor anomalies detected in a given newborn baby. (From Jones
KJ. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 6th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2006.)

has examined the child, identified atypical physical features, and
obtained appropriate imaging studies.
The clinician should now attempt to organize the findings to elucidate
potential developmental processes. An assessment based on specificity can
be helpful for this process. If a child has multiple findings, such as a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), mild growth restriction, mild microcephaly,
and holoprosencephaly, micropenis, and ptosis, a selection of the rarer or
pathognomonic findings may be prioritized. The PDA, ptosis, mild growth
restriction, and mild microcephaly are considered nonspecific findings, as
they are present in many disorders or often present as isolated features that
are not part of a syndrome. However, holoprosencephaly and micropenis
are present in fewer syndromes and are not considered part of normal
variation. The clinician can therefore search for disorders that include both
holoprosencephaly and micropenis. The search can be performed manually using the features index of a textbook such as Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation or a computerized database such as Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM). Searching for both holoprosencephaly and micropenis returns a list of diagnostic possibilities, and the
physician can then return to the patient to examine for additional features
of the leading possible candidate disorders. Appropriate genetic testing
can then be undertaken to confirm the clinician’s hypothesis and verify
the diagnosis. Alternatively, broad genetic testing can be undertaken if the
patient’s clinical findings are nonspecific.

Laboratory Studies and Genetic Testing

The laboratory evaluation of a child with anomalies can be critical to
reach or confirm the correct diagnosis, particularly for metabolic conditions. Array CGH and SNP arrays enable the detection of chromosome
abnormalities and copy number variants and, in the case of SNP arrays,
evaluation for loss of heterozygosity. Chromosome deletion syndromes
may also be identified with specific and sensitive FISH analysis, although
this technology has been largely replaced by chromosome arrays and
NGS sequencing. Cytogenetic studies with Giemsa-­banded (G-­banded)
chromosome analysis are still useful for the diagnosis of Down syndrome and balanced translocations (Table 100.7). These tests are sensitive methods for the detection of cytogenetic alterations associated with
birth defects and MCAs. Cytogenetic alterations can also be detected by
whole genome sequencing that is becoming increasingly utilized.
Molecular testing for deleterious sequence variants that cause pleiotropic malformation syndromes is also available for many disorders
as clinical testing. In most cases, however, such testing should not be
performed indiscriminately; instead, it should be ordered thoughtfully
after a differential diagnosis has been considered. NGS with ES and
whole genome sequencing has led to the identification of innumerable
novel genes and revolutionized the testing that is available for patients
and families with intellectual disability, birth defects, and other genetic
diseases. A strong suspicion of a genetic diagnosis warrants consideration of testing to confirm the diagnosis, facilitate patient treatment
and anticipatory guidance, clarify recurrence risks, and enable carrier
testing for additional family members. Single genes can still be tested
by Sanger sequencing that targets single or multiple exons. However,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

786 Part VIII u Human Genetics
CLM model
building

Healthy groups

Down syndrome
HCLM training

CLM

1st level model

ICA-based
shape model

2nd level
normal model

Local texture
model

2nd level DS
model

HCLM search
Face Detector

CLM search for
full landmark set

CLM refinement for
landmark subset

Model
selection

Fig. 100.9 The Framework of Fa-

φ

ROC
Geometric

Input space Feature space
Texture

Landmark
detection

Feature
extraction

Feature
selection

Classification

cial Recognition for Genetic Syndrome Detection. ICA, Independent component analysis; CLM,
constrained local model; HCLM,
hierarchical CLM; DS, Down syndrome; ROC, receiver operating
characterstics. (From Zhao Q, Okada
K, Rosenbaum K, et al. Digital facial
dysmorphology for genetic screening: hierarchical constrained local
model using ICA. Med Image Anal.
2014;18:699–710. Fig. 2.)

Table 100.7  Chromosomal Deletion Syndromes
CONDITION

BRIEF DESCRIPTION

PROBE

Williams syndrome

Proportionate short stature, mild-­moderate to severe intellectual disability, friendly
personality, stellate pattern of iris pigmentation, supravalvular aortic stenosis, wide mouth
with full lips

7q11

WAGR syndrome

Wilms tumor, aniridia, growth delay, intellectual disability, and genitourinary anomalies

11p13

Prader-­Willi syndrome
Angelman syndrome

Distinct syndromes with common or overlapping areas of deletion; phenotype depends on
gender of the parent of origin of the deletion
Prader-­Willi syndrome: hypotonia in infancy, short stature, obesity, mild-­moderate and
occasionally severe intellectual disability, small hands and feet (caused by paternal deletion
of 15q11-­13 or maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 15)
Angelman syndrome: severe intellectual disability, absence of speech, ataxia, tremulous
movements, large mouth, frequent drooling (caused by maternal deletion of chromosome
15q11-­13 or paternal uniparental disomy)

15q11

Smith-­Magenis syndrome

Brachycephaly, prognathism, self-­destructive behavior, wrist biting, pulling out nails, head
banging, indifference to pain, intellectual disability, hyperactivity

17p11.2

Miller-­Dieker syndrome

Microcephaly, narrow temples, hypotonia/hypertonia, abnormal posturing, seizures, severe to
profound intellectual disability, poor growth, lissencephaly and other brain abnormalities on
CT or MRI

17p13

22q11 deletion syndrome

Cleft palate, congenital heart disease, learning/behavior problems, long face, prominent
nose, limb hypotonia, slender hands with tapering fingers, T-­cell deficiency, immunoglobulin
deficiency

22q11

WAGR, Wilms tumor, aniridia, genitourinary anomalies, and mental retardation.
From Kliegman RM, Lye PS, et al., eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2018: Table 25-­10.

for diagnoses that have substantial genetic heterogeneity (e.g., hearing
loss), panel testing often using NGS, in which multiple relevant genes
can be interrogated for single nucleotide variants and gene deletions
and duplications, is more expeditious than single-­gene testing. Panel
tests also frequently have the advantage of providing high coverage
for the genes on the panel compared with the coverage for the same
genes that can be obtained by ES. However, in situations with diagnostic uncertainty, such as the investigation of a child with intellectual
disability and facial anomalies for which there is no clearly recognizable pattern, exome or genome sequencing (GS) may be most useful as a broad testing approach. ES examines approximately 200,000
exons, or the 1–2% of the DNA that comprises the coding regions of
the genome. ES is typically performed with a trio approach, in which
the patient and both biological parents are tested simultaneously, so
that the inheritance pattern, or segregation, of deleterious sequence

variants can be determined, thus simplifying analysis. Trio sequencing
has resulted in higher diagnostic yields than proband-­only sequencing and can approach 30–40% for indications such as intellectual disability. In contrast, GS examines the entire DNA content, including
noncoding regions, and increasingly enables analysis for cytogenetic
rearrangements in addition to copy number loss or gain. ES and GS are
applicable to a wide range of birth defects and genetic diseases and can
discover causative variants in known or novel genes associated with a
particular condition.

Management and Counseling

Management and genetic counseling are essential aspects of the
approach to a patient with a genetic disorder. For example, children with
Down syndrome have a high incidence of hypothyroidism, and children with achondroplasia have a high incidence of cervicomedullary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 101 u Signaling Pathway Disorders
junction abnormalities and monitoring for both is appropriate. One
of the many benefits of an early and accurate diagnosis is that anticipatory guidance and medical monitoring of patients for syndrome-­
specific medical risks can improve their quality of life and prolong it.
When a diagnosis is made, the treating physicians can access published
information on the natural history and management of the disorder
through the medical literature, genetics reference texts, and databases.
Providing access to disorder-­specific patient support groups can also
provide immense benefit to patients and families.
The second major benefit of an accurate diagnosis is that it provides
data for recurrence risk estimates. Genetic disorders may have direct
effects on only one member of the family, but the diagnosis of the condition can have implications for the entire family. One or both parents
may be carriers, and siblings may be carriers or may want to know their
genetic status when they reach their reproductive years. Recurrence
risk provision is an important component of genetic counseling and
should be included in all evaluations for families affected with birth
defects or other inherited disorders (see Chapter 98).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

787

Growth factor
RTK

Cell membrane
SHC
SHP2
UB
CBL

GRB2

SOS1

KRAS
-GTP

RAS
-GTP

HRAS
-GTP

NRAS

-GTP

Neurofibromin
NF-1

CS

p120GAP

SHOC2
CM-AVM

SPRED1

PP1C
CRAF BRAF

NS
NSML

Legius
syndrome
CFC

MEK1 MEK2

ERK1 ERK2

Numerous
cytosolic
effectors

Numerous
nuclear
effectors

Fig. 101.1 The RAS/MAPK signal transduction pathway. The MAPK

Chapter 101

Signaling Pathway
Disorders
Chad R. Haldeman-­Englert and
Anne M. Slavotinek
An increasing number of defined molecular genetic etiologies explain
many multiple congenital anomaly (MCA) syndromes. Several themes
have emerged: (1) many clinical disorders that were believed to represent a single entity have multiple genetic etiologies, often within genes
that are functionally related; (2) many disorders believed to be distinct
have common underlying genetic bases; and (3) teratogens and genetic
disorders with similar clinical features can often be understood in the
context of shared underlying pathology.
It is useful to consider MCA syndromes as members of a group of disorders based on shared or overlapping clinical findings and related causative
genes that act in the same developmental or metabolic pathway.

101.1 RAS/MAPK Pathway
Chad R. Haldeman-­Englert and Anne M. Slavotinek
The RASopathies comprise a clinically defined group of conditions caused
by germline pathogenic variants in genes encoding the components or
regulators of the renin-­angiotensin system (RAS)/mitogen-­activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway. This pathway is one of the most important
signaling pathways in human development (Fig. 101.1). Signaling is initiated when one of several growth factors or cytokines binds extracellularly to a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK), which transmits
the signal to activate of one of several intracellular RAS proteins, such
as HRAS, KRAS, or NRAS. Phosphorylation then occurs in a stepwise
manner to one or more RAF proteins (ARAF, BRAF, and/or CRAF), and
subsequently to MEK1 and/or MEK2, and then ERK1 and/or ERK2. Activation of ERK1/2 has downstream targets including transcription factors,

signaling pathway of protein kinases is critically involved in cellular
proliferation, differentiation, motility, apoptosis, and senescence. The
RAS­opathies are patterns of anomalies caused by pathogenic variants
in genes that encode components or regulators of the RAS/MAPK
pathway (indicated by dashed lines). These disorders include neurofibromatosis type one (NF1), Noonan syndrome (NS), Noonan syndrome
with multiple lentigines (NSML), capillary malformation–arteriovenous
malformation syndrome (CM-­AVM), Costello syndrome (CS), cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC), and Legius syndrome. RAS/MAPK, RAS
protein family/mitogen-­activated protein kinase. (From Rauen KA. The
RASopathies. Annu Rev Genom Hum Genet. 2013;14:355–369.)

membrane proteins, and other protein kinases that direct cellular growth
and differentiation.
More than 20 genes implicated in RAS/MAPK signaling have been
implicated in human disorders, most with some degree of clinical overlap. Common RASopathies include Noonan syndrome (NS), NS with
multiple lentigines, Costello syndrome, cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC)
syndrome, neurofibromatosis type one (NF1), Legius syndrome, and
capillary malformation–arteriovenous malformation syndrome (Table
101.1).
NS represents the canonical RASopathy and is an autosomal dominant disorder resulting from pathogenic variants in several genes
in the RAS/MAPK pathway. NS occurs in an estimated 1 in 1,000-­
2,500 live births. Approximately 30–75% of the cases are familial,
and the condition typically exhibits autosomal dominant inheritance, although the LZTR1 gene can be associated with autosomal
dominant or autosomal recessive inheritance. Pathogenic variants
in RAS/MAPK genes are found in ∼70% of individuals with NS,
with missense variants activating the PTPN11 gene that encodes the
nonreceptor protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-­2; this is observed
in 50% of affected individuals. Pathogenic variants involving SOS1
occur in 10–13% of affected individuals; variants in RAF1 and
RIT1 each occur in 5% of patients, and variants in KRAS, BRAF,
MAP2K1, LZTR1, and NRAS and duplications of the 12q24 region
containing the PTPN11 gene are rare. The strong clinical overlap
between NS and other RASopathies, such as CFC syndrome, is due
to the involvement of the same pathway and often identical genes
in pathogenesis.
Common features in NS comprise short stature, a characteristic pattern of facial anomalies including ptosis, wide-­spaced eyes
with down-­slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, anomalous
and low-­set ears and micrognathia, congenital heart disease, chest
deformities with pectus excavatum and/or pectus carinatum, a short
or wide neck with a low posterior hairline, and cryptorchidism

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

788 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 101.1  Genes and Features of the RAS/MAPK Pathway
RAS/MAPK
PATHWAY GENE

PROTEIN

PROTEIN FUNCTION

CLINICAL PHENOTYPE

Noonan syndrome

PTPN11
SOS1
RAF1
KRAS
NRAS
SHOC2
CBL
RIT1

SHP2
SOS1
CRAF
KRAS
NRAS
SHOC2
CBL
RIT1

Phosphatase
RasGEF
Kinase
GTPase
GTPase
Scaffolding
E3 ubiquitin ligase
GTPase

Craniofacial dysmorphic features, including a
broad forehead, hypertelorism, down-­slanting
palpebral fissures, ptosis, a high-­arched palate,
and low-­set, posteriorly rotated ears; congenital
heart defects; short stature; undescended
testicles; ophthalmologic abnormalities; bleeding
disorders; normal neurocognitive function or
mild impairment; predisposition to cancer

Noonan syndrome with
multiple
lentigines

PTPN11
RAF1

SHP2
RAF1/CRAF

Phosphatase
Kinase

Same as Noonan syndrome, but with possible
development of multiple skin lentigines as
individuals age; unclear predisposition to
cancer

Capillary malformation–
arteriovenous
malformation

RASA1

p120-­RasGAP

RasGAP

Multifocal capillary malformations, which may be
associated with arteriovenous malformations
and fistulae; unclear predisposition to cancer

Costello syndrome

HRAS

HRAS

GTPase

Craniofacial features similar to those of Noonan
syndrome but potentially more coarse;
congenital heart defects; failure to thrive; short
stature; ophthalmologic abnormalities; multiple
skin manifestations, including papilloma; normal
neurocognitive function or mild impairment;
hypotonia; predisposition to cancer

Cardiofaciocutaneous
syndrome

BRAF
MAP2K1
MAP2K2
KRAS

BRAF
MEK1
MEK2
KRAS

Kinase
Kinase
Kinase
GTPase

Craniofacial features similar to those of Noonan
syndrome; congenital heart defects; failure
to thrive; short stature; ophthalmologic
abnormalities; multiple skin manifestations,
including progressive formation of nevi; normal
neurocognitive function or mild impairment;
hypotonia; unclear predisposition to cancer

Neurofibromatosis type 1

NF1

Neurofibromin

RasGAP

Café-­au-­lait maculae; intertriginous freckling;
neurofibromas and plexiform neurofibromas;
iris Lisch nodules; osseous dysplasia; optic
pathway glioma; normal neurocognitive
function or mild impairment; predisposition
to other cancers

Legius syndrome

SPRED1

SPRED1

SPROUTY-­related,
EVH1 domain–containing
protein 1

Café-­au-­lait maculae; intertriginous freckling;
macrocephaly; normal neurocognitive function
or mild impairment; no apparent predisposition
to cancer

SYNDROME

Modified from Rauen KA. The RASopathies. Annu Rev Genom Hum Genet. 2013;14:355–369. Table 3.

(Table 101.2 and Fig. 101.2). The pattern of congenital heart disease
typically involves right-­sided lesions, most frequently presenting
with pulmonary valvular stenosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, but atrial and ventricular septal defects, branch pulmonary
artery stenosis, tetralogy of Fallot, and coarctation of the aorta have
all been described. Children with NS can manifest developmental
delays in association with hypotonia and may have challenges with
articulation and coordination. High-­f requency sensorineural hearing loss is common and should be considered in patients with language delays. Hepatosplenomegaly, low levels of clotting factors XI
and XII, and primary lymphatic anomalies have also been noted;
patients may rarely develop acute lymphoblastic leukemia or juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML). Puberty may be delayed,
and an adult height that reaches the lower limit of the typical range
can be achieved by the end of the second decade. Other distinctive
phenotypes include NS-­like disorder with loose anagen hair caused
by SHOC2 variants and NS-­like disorder with or without JMML
caused by CBL variants.

DIAGNOSIS

Initial suspicion of a RASopathy generally depends on recognition of
one or more characteristic features associated with the various conditions. Genetic testing includes a panel of genes including those in the
RAS/MAPK pathway. Multigene panel testing is preferred over single-­
gene analysis due to the many overlapping symptoms seen in RASopathy disorders. Genetic testing can often be performed on blood, saliva,
or a buccal swab. If a gene in the RAS/MAPK pathway is found to have
a pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant, this would provide molecular confirmation of the clinical diagnosis.

TREATMENT

Management of NS is noted in Table 101.3. Human growth hormone
will improve growth velocity in many individuals with NS and short
stature; it is recommended for those who fall below the third percentile for height. MEK inhibitors, such as trametinib, have been used to
treat refractory lymphedema or chylous effusions and possibly severe
cardiac hypertrophy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 101 u Signaling Pathway Disorders

789

Table 101.2  Clinical Findings Associated with Noonan
Syndrome
Short stature
Failure to thrive (use of specific Noonan syndrome growth curves is
recommended)
Tall forehead
Epicanthal folds
Ptosis
Blue-­green irides
Wide-­spaced eyes
Low nasal bridge, upturned nose
Down-­slanting palpebral fissures
Low-­set and posteriorly rotated ears
Dental malocclusion
Low posterior hairline
Pectus excavatum
Pectus carinatum superiorly
Scoliosis
Pigmented villonodular synovitis (polyarticular)
Cubitus valgus
Pulmonary valve stenosis (dysplastic valve)
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect
Lymphedema
Nevi, lentigines, café-­au-­lait spots
Cryptorchidism
Small penis
Delayed puberty
Bleeding disorders, including thrombocytopenia and coagulation
factor deficiencies
Leukemia, myeloproliferative disorders, other malignancies
Cognitive delay

NEUROFIBROMATOSIS

NF1 is a multisystem disorder that primarily abstractly involves the
skin and peripheral nervous system (see Chapter 636.1). NF1 is associated with marked clinical variability. NF1 is inherited in an autosomal
dominant manner. The disorder is caused by pathogenic variants in the
NF1 gene, which encodes neurofibromin and functions as a regulator
of RAS signaling (see Table 101.1 and Fig. 101.1).

LEGIUS SYNDROME

Legius syndrome is a RASopathy caused by pathogenic variants in
SPRED1, which encodes an HRAS regulator. Individuals with Legius
syndrome present with typical multiple café-­au-­lait macules inherited
as an autosomal dominant trait but do not develop the serious medical
complications of NF1.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

101.2 Sonic Hedgehog Pathway
Chad R. Haldeman-­Englert
The Hedgehog signaling pathway plays numerous tissue-­specific critical roles during embryogenesis and postnatal life. Disruption of specific steps in this pathway result in a variety of related developmental
disorders and anomalies (Fig. 101.3). Activation of this pathway in the
child or adult may lead to abnormal cellular proliferation and cancer.
Three genes, Sonic (SHH), Indian (IHH), and Desert (DHH), comprise
the hedgehog family, with SHH being the most widely expressed. These

A

B

C

Fig. 101.2 Noonan syndrome. A, Newborn. B, Toddler. C, Affected

male. Note the down-­slanting palpebral fissures, low-­set ears, elevated
left shoulder secondary to scoliosis, and wide-­spaced nipples. (From
Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns
of Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 1AC,
p. 150 and Fig. 2A, p. 151; A and B courtesy Dr. Jacqueline Noonan,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky.)

genes encode secreted signaling molecules important in cellular differentiation, proliferation, and survival. Secreted SHH acts as a ligand for
specific cellular receptors to have a signal transduced by other components of the pathway to regulate downstream gene transcription. The
SHH ligand is expressed in the embryo in regions important for development of the brain, face, limbs, and the gut.
Deleterious sequence variants in SHH can cause holoprosencephaly (see Fig. 100.7), a variably severe, midline defect associated with
clinical effects ranging from cyclopia to a single maxillary incisor with
close spacing of the ocular orbits. The SHH protein is processed by proteolytic cleavage to an active N-­terminal form, which is then further
modified by the addition of cholesterol. The steroidal alkaloid cyclopamine exerts a teratogenic effect by inhibiting cholesterol modification of SHH and can result in holoprosencephaly in sheep. In humans,
a defect in cholesterol biosynthesis involving the recessive delta-­7-­
dehydrocholesterol reductase gene (DHCR7) results in Smith-­Lemli-­
Opitz syndrome (SLOS) (see Chapter 106).
In addition to microcephaly and holoprosencephaly, patients with
SLOS (see Fig. 101.3) display syndactyly, classically of the second and
third toes, postaxial polydactyly of the hands and feet, an upturned or
anteverted nose, ptosis, and cryptorchidism.
The cholesterol-­modified active form of SHH binds to its transmembrane receptor Patched (PTCH1). This SHH-­PTCH1 complex then
inhibits the activity of the transmembrane protein Smoothened (SMO).
Because SMO normally acts to suppress downstream targets, the GLI
family of transcription factors, inhibition of SMO by PTCH1 results
in activation of GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3. Pathogenic variants resulting
in activation of SMO can be oncogenic, particularly in basal cell carcinomas and medulloblastomas. In addition, PTCH1 and its orthologue,
PTCH2, act as tumor suppressors, and somatic, inactivating sequence
variants can be associated with loss of tumor suppressor function.
Relatedly, germline inactivating variants in PTCH1 result in Gorlin
syndrome (see Fig. 101.3), an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by a broad face, dental anomalies, rib defects and shortened

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

790 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 101.3  Management of Noonan Syndrome
AT DIAGNOSIS

AFTER DIAGNOSIS

IF SYMPTOMATIC

General

Complete physical and neurologic
examination; medical genetics
consultation to confirm diagnosis,
consider molecular genetic testing
and genetic counseling

Yearly complete physical and
neuro­logic examination; return to
geneticist if genotype negative or
for multisystem assessment; genetic
counseling at adolescence or when a
young adult

Orchiopexy by age 1 year for
crypt­orchidism; if lymphoedema,
refer to specialty clinic; brain
and cervical spine MRI if
intracranial pressure increases;
electroencephalogram and referral to
neurologist if seizures suspected

Developmental

Multidisciplinary developmental
assessment

Developmental screening yearly for
children age 5-­18 years

Neuropsychologist testing if screening
abnormal; referral to early intervention
if delays detected before age 3 years;
individual education plan for children
age 5-­18 years with delays

Dental

First dental assessment between age 1
year and 2 years

Yearly dental assessment

—

Growth and feeding

Plot growth on curves for Noonan
syndrome

Plot growth on curves for Noonan
syndrome 3 times per year until age
3 years, then yearly

Refer to gastroenterologist for feeding
problems or recurrent vomiting, or
if evidence of growth failure without
comorbid cause exists; thyroid
function tests if signs or symptoms of
hypothyroidism

Cardiovascular

Cardiac examination,
electrocardiogram, echocardiogram

Follow up on the basis of initial
findings. If initial assessment normal,
repeat every 5 years

—

Ophthalmologic

Baseline eye examination Baseline
audiology examination

Repeat every 2 years, sooner if
indicated

—

Audiologic

Baseline audiology examination

Repeat if recurrent otitis media or
speech delay

Refer to ear, nose, and throat specialist
for recurrent otitis media or serous
otitis; hearing aids or classroom
interventions for hearing loss

Hematologic

Complete blood cell count with
differential, and prothrombin time or
activated partial thromboplastin time

Repeat complete blood cell count with
differential and prothrombin time or
activated partial thromboplastin time
if age 6-­12 months at initial screen
Preoperatively: complete blood
cell count with differential and
prothrombin time or activated partial
thromboplastin time, second tier
(in consultation with hematologist)
factor IX, XI, and XII concentrations,
von Willebrand factor, platelet
aggregation

Prothrombin time or activated partial
thromboplastin time if bleeding
abnormal or persistent, refer to
hematologist; complete blood
cell count with differential for
splenomegaly; complete blood
cell count with differential
and liver function studies for
hepatosplenomegaly

Renal

Kidney ultrasound

—

—

Skeletal

Clinical assessment of spine with
radiology if indicated by examination

Repeat spinal examination yearly
through adolescence; radiology and
referral to orthopaedic specialist if
abnormal

—

From Roberts AE, Allanson JE, Tartaglia M, Gelb BD. Noonan syndrome. Lancet. 2013;381:333–342.

metacarpals; basal cell nevi that can undergo malignant transformation; and an increased risk of cancers, including medulloblastomas
and rhabdomyosarcomas. GLI1 amplification has been found in several human tumors, including glioblastoma, osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and B-­cell lymphomas. Likewise, pathogenic variants
in GLI3 can cause Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS),
Pallister-­Hall syndrome (PHS), postaxial polydactyly type A (and
A/B), and preaxial polydactyly type IV (see Fig. 101.3). GCPS consists
of wide-­spaced eyes, syndactyly, additional digits on the radial border
of the hand or inner aspect of the foot, termed preaxial polydactyly,
and broad thumbs and halluces. PHS is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by postaxial polydactyly, syndactyly, hypothalamic

hamartomas, imperforate anus, and occasionally holoprosencephaly.
GLI3 binds to CBP, the protein that is haploinsufficient in Rubinstein-­
Taybi syndrome.
Disorders that are caused by pathogenic variants in genes that
function together in a developmental pathway typically have overlapping clinical manifestations. The overlapping features result from the
embryonic tissues in which SHH is important for development, including the brain, face, limbs, and gut as previously noted. Brain defects are
present in holoprosencephaly (see Fig. 100.7), SLOS, and PHS. Facial
anomalies are found in holoprosencephaly, SLOS, Gorlin syndrome,
GCPS, and PHS. Limb defects occur in SLOS, Gorlin syndrome,
GCPS, PHS, and the polydactyly syndromes. Overexpression, or activating sequence variants, affecting the SHH pathway results in cancer,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 101 u Signaling Pathway Disorders

791

Sonic Hedgehog
Cleavage
N-SHH
Cholesterol
Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome
• Microcephaly
• Intellectual disability
• Short, upturned nose
• Hypospadias
• Postaxial polydactyly

Holoprosencephaly
• Microcephaly
• Intellectual disability
• Failure of CNS
lateralization
• Hypotelorism

N-SHH•Chol
Patched 1

Smoothened

Gorlin Syndrome
• Macrocephaly
• Wide-set eyes
• Basal cell
carcinoma
• Rib anomalies

Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome
• Microcephaly
• Intellectual disability
• Prominent beaked nose
• Broad thumbs
• Hirsutism

GLI-1
GLI-2
GLI-3 • CBP
Twist

GLI1
PTC1
HNF3

Holoprosencephaly
Smith-Lemli-Opitz
Gorlin Syndrome
Greig Syndrome

Pallister-Hall
Syndrome
• Hypothalamic
hamartoma
• Short, upturned
nose
• Central and
postaxial
polydactyly
• Bifid epiglottis

Greig
Cephalopolysyndactyly
Syndrome
• Macrocephaly
• Hypertelorism
• Pre- and postaxial
polydactyly

Pallister-Hall Syndrome
Rubinstein-Taybi

including basal cell carcinomas, medulloblastomas, glioblastomas, and
rhabdomyosarcomas.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

101.3 Ciliopathies
Chad R. Haldeman-­Englert
Cilia are microtubule-­containing organelles that project from the surface of most human cells. Three types of cilia exist in humans: motile
cilia, nodal cilia, and primary cilia. Motile cilia typically contain a
sweeping motion and play important roles in the respiratory epithelium (see Chapter 455 for discussion of structure of cilia and their
role in primary ciliary dyskinesia and respiratory disorders). Nodal
cilia play a very brief role during embryonic development, and their
whirling flow in the Henson’s node during gastrulation is central in
determining the left-­right body axis. Defects in this process manifest as
alterations in body orientation, including situs inversus and heterotaxy
(see Chapter 480.11).
Primary cilia are nonmotile and are present in nearly all cells.
The membrane of each cilium is continuous with the plasma membrane. There are unique differences in its membrane that allow
cilia to detect changes in the extracellular environment to function as mechanoreceptors, osmosensors, and chemosensors and

Fig. 101.3 Signaling components and clinical
features of the sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling pathway. Deleterious sequence variants
in genes that function together in a developmental pathway typically have overlapping
clinical manifestations. Several components of
the SHH pathway have been identified and
their relationships elucidated. Pathogenic variants in several members of this pathway result
in phenotypes with facial anomalies, as seen
in holoprosencephaly, Smith-­
Lemli-­
Opitz syndrome, Gorlin syndrome, Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome, Pallister-­
Hall syndrome,
and Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome. CNS, Central
nervous system.

convey this information via various intracellular signaling pathways to regulate diverse cellular processes (proliferation, polarity, nerve growth, differentiation, and tissue maintenance). These
pathways may include Hedgehog (HH), G-­protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), Wingless and Int-­1 (WNT), RTKs, and transforming
growth factor β (TGF-­β).
Pathogenic changes to genes that control the function and signaling
within the cilia give rise to conditions called ciliopathies. Given the extent
of cilia located throughout the human body, symptoms associated with
ciliopathies can be variable and extensive. Defects can occur to many
different organs during fetal development through adulthood. Organ
systems generally affected in ciliopathies include the brain, eyes, liver, kidneys, and skeleton (Fig. 101.4). There are many well-­described ciliopathy
effects, including retinitis pigmentosa, hearing loss, infertility, primary
ciliary dyskinesia, polycystic kidney disease, and nephronophthisis, as
well as a number of syndromes including Joubert, Bardet-­Biedl, Meckel-­
Gruber, and orofaciodigital syndromes (Table 101.4).
The diagnosis of a ciliopathy is generally based on recognition of
the clinical features followed by either targeted gene testing, a multigene panel, or exome/genome sequencing. If a diagnosis is established
with molecular testing, additional studies may be indicated to evaluate
for additional medical and developmental concerns. Surveillance for
potential changes to the kidneys, liver, and eyes should be routinely
performed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

792 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Motile cilia
Non-motile cilia
Both types of cilia

Fig. 101.4 Ciliopathies of motile and/or

nonmotile cilia encompass most human
organ systems. Different organ systems or
tissues are affected in diverse ciliopathies,
with the most common phenotypic manifestations for each organ. Ciliopathies
caused primarily by defects in motile cilia
are in orange, those in nonmotile (primary) cilia are in blue, and those associated
with defects in nodal cilia are in green.
NPHP, Nephronophthisis; PKD, polycystic
kidney disease. (Modified from Reiter JF,
Leroux MR. Genes and molecular pathways underpinning ciliopathies. Nat Rev
Molec Cell. 2017;18:533–547. Fig. 2.)

Eyes

Retinal dystrophy

Nose

Anosmia

Ears

Hearing loss

• Ataxia
• Epilepsy
• Mental disability
• Brain malformations

Brain

Hydrocephalus
Facial anomalies

Organ
placement

Organ laterality
defects

Energy
homeostasis

Central obesity

Skeleton

Reproductive
system

Congenital heart
defects

Heart

Chronic
respiratory problems

Respiratory
system

Infertility

Renal anomalies
(PKD, NPHP)

Kidney

• Hypogonadism
• Genital anomalies

Hepatic disease
(liver fibrosis)

Liver

Skeletal anomalies
(polydactyly, rib cage)

Table 101.4  Childhood Diseases and Syndromes Associated with Motile and Primary/Sensory Ciliopathies
PEDIATRIC CILIOPATHY
MOTOR
Primary ciliary dyskinesia

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

SELECTED GENE(S)

Chronic bronchitis, rhinosinusitis, otitis media,
laterality defects, infertility, CHD

DNAI1, DNAH5, DNAH11, DNAI2, KTU,
TXNDC3, LRRC50, RSPH9, RSPH4A,
CCDC40, CCDC39

PRIMARY/SENSORY
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease

RFD, CHF

PKHD1

Nephronophthisis

RFD, interstitial nephritis, CHF, RP

NPHP1-­8, ALMS1, CEP290

Bardet-­Biedl syndrome

Obesity, polydactyly, ID, RP, renal anomalies,
anosmia, CHD

BBS1-­12, MKS1, MKS3, CEP290

Meckel-­Gruber syndrome

RFD, polydactyly, ID, CNS anomalies, CHD,
cleft lip, cleft palate

MKS1-­6, CC2D2A, CEP290, TMEM216

Joubert syndrome

CNS anomalies, ID, ataxia, RP, polydactyly,
cleft lip, cleft palate

NPHP1, JBTS1, JBTS3, JBTS4, CORS2, AHI1,
CEP290, TMEM216

Alström syndrome

Obesity, RP, DM, hypothyroidism,
hypogonadism, skeletal dysplasia,
cardiomyopathy, pulmonary fibrosis

ALMS1

Orofaciodigital syndrome type I

Polydactyly, syndactyly, cleft lip, cleft palate,
CNS anomalies, ID, RFD

OFD1

Ellis van Creveld syndrome

Chondrodystrophy, polydactyly, ectodermal
dysplasia, CHD

EVC, EVC2

Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy

Narrow thorax, RFD, RP, dwarfism, polydactyly

IFT80

Sensenbrenner syndrome

Dolichocephaly, ectodermal dysplasia, dental
dysplasia, narrow thorax, RFD, CHD

IFT122, IFT43, WDR35

Short rib–polydactyly syndromes

Narrow thorax, short limb dwarfism,
polydactyly, renal dysplasia

WDR35, DYNC2H1, NEK1

CHD, Congenital heart disease; CHF, congenital hepatic fibrosis; CNS, central nervous system; DM, diabetes mellitus; ID, intellectual disabilities; RFD, renal fibrocystic disease; RP,
retinitis pigmentosa.
From Ferkol TW, Leigh MW. Ciliopathies: the central role of cilia in a spectrum of pediatric disorders. J Pediatr. 2012;160:366–371.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 101 u Signaling Pathway Disorders

101.4 Craniosynostoses
Chad R. Haldeman-­Englert
To permit appropriate brain growth, the cranial sutures do not completely fuse until adulthood. Growth of the skull occurs perpendicular
to the direction of each suture. Craniosynostosis arises when one or
more cranial sutures prematurely ossify, which usually becomes apparent between the third trimester of pregnancy and the first year of life (see
Chapter 631.10). The shape of the skull is often the clue to the affected
suture (Fig. 101.5). Most patients with craniosynostosis do not have
additional syndromic features; this may depend on the sutures involved.
Patients with bicoronal or multisuture craniosynostosis often have an
associated genetic syndrome, whereas patients with isolated sagittal craniosynostosis do not have features of an identifiable genetic cause.
Craniosynostosis can result from reduced intrinsic factors (poor
brain growth), increased extrinsic forces (primiparity, multiple pregnancy, fetal position, high birth weight), or genetic abnormalities leading to uncontrolled cranial bone growth. Genes commonly associated
with syndromic craniosynostosis include three fibroblast growth factor
receptor genes (FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3), TWIST1, and EFNB1. FGFR1,

793

FGFR2, and FGFR3 are associated with recognizable conditions such
as Crouzon, Pfeiffer, Apert, and Muenke syndromes; TWIST1 with
Saethre-­Chotzen syndrome; and EFNB1 with craniofrontonasal syndrome. Distinguishing between the FGFR-­
related craniosynostosis
syndromes can often be made based on additional features, particularly
of the hands and feet (see Chapter 631.10).
Other pathogenic gene variants have been identified in patients with
syndromic and nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (Table 101.5). Given
the overlap of clinical features of many of the craniosynostosis conditions, appropriate genetic testing for patients with craniosynostosis
could include either a multigene panel or exome/genome sequencing.
The diagnosis is made based on the genetic abnormality and clinical
features.
Management of patients with craniosynostosis is often complex
and performed with a multidisciplinary team of various specialists,
including audiology, dentistry, genetics, neurosurgery, ophthalmology,
orthodontics, otolaryngology, pediatrics, plastic surgery, and speech
therapy (see Chapter 631.10).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Types of Craniosynostosis

Front

Metopic (Frontal) Suture

Frontal Bone
Coronal Suture

Anterior Fontanelle

Right

Left
Parietal Bone

Sagittal Suture

Posterior Fontanelle

Lambdoid Suture

Back

Metopic

Sagittal

Synostotic Trigonocephaly

Bicoronal
Synostotic Brachycephaly

Occipital Bone

Lambdoid

Synostotic Scaphocephaly

Synostotic Posterior Plagiocephaly

Unicoronal

(All Sutures Open)

Synostotic Anterior Plagiocephaly Deformational Posterior Plagiocephaly

Fig. 101.5 Types of craniosynostosis. (From Buchanan EP, Xue Y, Xue AS, Olshinka A, Lam S. Multidisciplinary care of craniosynostosis. J Multidiscip
Healthcare. 2017;10:263–270. Fig. 1. Dove Medical Press Ltd.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

794 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Table 101.5  Core Genes For Which Specific Types of Variants Are Associated with Craniosynostosis in More Than Half of
Affected Individuals
INHERITANCE
PATTERN

CLINICAL DISORDER
(MIM#)

PREVALENCE
(%)

ASXL1 (612990)

AD (n)

Bohring-­Opitz
syndrome (605039)

—

Metopic

Forehead nevus flammeus, ulnar
deviation and flexion of wrists
and metacarpophalangeal joints,
severe intellectual disability

CDC45 (603465)

AR

—

—

Coronal

Thin eyebrows, small ears, variable
short stature

COLEC11 (612502)

AR

3MC syndrome 2
(265050)

—

Metopic

Hypertelorism, blepharoptosis,
arched eyebrows, cleft lip/palate,
hearing loss, radioulnar synostosis,
genital and vesicorenal anomalies

EFNB1 (300035)

XLD (male sparing)

Craniofrontonasal
syndrome (304110)

0.8

Coronal

Hypertelorism, notched nasal tip,
chest anomalies, longitudinal
splitting of nails; heterozygous
females more severely affected
than hemizygous males

ERF (611888)

AD

ERF-­related
craniosynostosis
(600775)

1.1

Multisuture

Exorbitism, midface hypoplasia,
Chiari type I malformation, postnatal
onset of craniosynostosis

FGFR1 (136350)

AD

Pfeiffer syndrome
(101600)

—

Coronal

Mild craniofacial features, broad
medially deviated thumbs and
halluces, cutaneous syndactyly,
specific amino acid substitution
p.Pro252Arg

FGFR1

AD (n)

Osteoglophonic
dysplasia (166250)

—

Multisuture

Prominent brow ridges, depressed
nasal bridge, rhizomelic dwarfism,
localized lytic lesions of metaphyses

FGFR2 (176943)

AD (n)

Apert syndrome
(101200)

3.6

Coronal, multisuture

Midface hypoplasia, dilated cerebral
ventricles, complex syndactyly of
the hands and feet

FGFR2

AD (n)

Beare-­Stevenson
syndrome (123790)

*

Multisuture

Choanal atresia, prominent umbilical
stump, furrowed scalp/neck skin,
acanthosis nigricans in survivors

FGFR2

AD

Crouzon syndrome
(123500)

2.4

Multisuture, coronal,
sagittal

Exorbitism, midface hypoplasia,
beaked nose (“crouzonoid” facies),
clinically normal hands and feet

FGFR2

AD (n)

Pfeiffer syndrome
(101600)

0.8

Multisuture

Broad thumbs and halluces; in
severe cases, cloverleaf skull, brain
anomalies, tracheal sleeve, fused
elbows

FGFR2

AD (n)

Bent bone dysplasia
(614592)

*

Coronal

Osteopenia, reduced mineralization
of the calvaria, bent long bones;
perinatal lethal

FGFR3 (134934)

AD

Muenke syndrome
(602849)

4.0

Coronal

Defined by specific amino acid
substitution p.Pro250Arg; may
include sensorineural hearing loss,
mild brachydactyly, cone-­shaped
epiphyses

AD (n)

Crouzon/acanthosis
nigricans (612247)

0.4

Multisuture

Crouzonoid facies, choanal stenosis,
hydrocephalus, acanthosis
nigricans; specific amino acid
substitution p.Ala391Glu

AD (n)

Thanatophoric
dysplasia II (187601)

*

Multisuture

Lethal skeletal dysplasia, micromelic
limb shortening, straight femora;
specific amino acid substitution
p.Lys650Glu

AD

Philadelphia
craniosynostosis
(185900)

—

Sagittal

Cutaneous and osseous syndactyly

GENE (MIM#)

IHH (600726)

TYPICAL SUTURE
FUSION

MAJOR PHENOTYPIC
FEATURES

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 101 u Signaling Pathway Disorders

795

Table 101.5  Core Genes For Which Specific Types of Variants Are Associated with Craniosynostosis in More Than Half of
Affected Individuals—cont’d
INHERITANCE
PATTERN

CLINICAL DISORDER
(MIM#)

PREVALENCE
(%)

IL11RA (600939)

AR

Craniosynostosis and
dental anomalies
(614188)

—

Multisuture

Maxillary hypoplasia, delayed
tooth eruption, supernumerary
teeth, minor digit abnormalities,
conductive hearing loss

MEGF8 (604267)

AR

Carpenter syndrome 2
(614796)

—

Metopic

Hypertelorism, arched eyebrows,
lateralization defects, brachydactyly,
syndactyly, preaxial polydactyly

MSX2 (123101)

AD

Boston craniosynostosis
(604757)

—

Sagittal, coronal,
multisuture

None diagnostic; syndrome defined
by specific amino acid substitutions
p.Pro148His, p.Pro148Leu

POR (124015)

AR

Antley-­Bixler syndrome
(201750)

—

Bicoronal,
multisuture

Choanal stenosis, radiohumeral
synostosis, bowed femora,
multiple joint contractures,
genital abnormalities; abnormal
steroidogenesis

RAB23 (606144)

AR

Carpenter syndrome 1
(201000)

—

Multisuture

Obesity, cardiac defects,
polysyndactyly, brachydactyly,
genu valgum, hypogenitalism,
umbilical hernia, learning disability

RUNX2 (600211)

AD (n)

—

—

Multisuture

None diagnostic; syndrome defined
by specific gene duplication

SKI (164780)

AD (n)

Shprintzen-­Goldberg
syndrome (182212)

—

Sagittal, multisuture

Hypertelorism, micrognathia,
high-­arched palate, arachnodactyly,
joint contractures, pectus deformity,
aortic root aneurysm, mitral valve
prolapse, learning disability

TCF12 (600480)

AD

TCF12-­related
craniosynostosis
(615314)

1.3

Coronal

Resembles mild Saethre-­Chotzen
syndrome; diagnosis defined
by presence of mutations in the
gene, ∼50% nonpenetrance

TWIST1 (601622)

AD

Saethre-­Chotzen
syndrome (101400)

3.6

Coronal

Low frontal hairline, hypertelorism,
eyelid ptosis, down-­slanting
palpebral fissures, blocked tear
ducts, small ears with prominent
crus helicis

WDR35 (613602)

AR

Cranioectodermal
dysplasia 2 (613610)

—

Sagittal

Facial dysmorphism, narrow thorax,
short long bones, brachydactyly,
sparse hair, hypoplastic teeth,
cystic kidneys, hepatic fibrosis

ZIC1 (600470)

AD (n)

ZIC1-­related
craniosynostosis

0.2

Coronal

Severe learning disability

GENE (MIM#)

TYPICAL SUTURE
FUSION

MAJOR PHENOTYPIC
FEATURES

The prevalence figures are for percent total craniosynostosis cases with specified mutation, from the cohort attending the Craniofacial Unit, Oxford, born between 1998 and 2008 (n =
531) and surgically treated before end of 2013.
*Usually lethal at birth.
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; XLD, X-­linked dominant; (n), usually arises by new mutation.
From Twigg SRF, Wilkie AOM. A genetic-­pathophysiological framework for craniosynostosis. Am J Hum Genetics. 2015;97:359–377. Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

796 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Chapter 102

Chromatin Regulatory
Disorders
Kosuke Izumi
Pathogenic variants in genes that encode chromatin proteins that
orchestrate gene expression in a range of human tissues frequently
cause pediatric developmental disorders that include developmental
delay/intellectual disability and facial dysmorphisms.

KABUKI SYNDROME

Kabuki syndrome (MIM: 147920 and 300867) is a genetic disorder
characterized by facial features, mild to moderate intellectual disability,
growth deficiency, and skeletal anomalies. Kabuki syndrome was originally named “Kabuki make-­up syndrome” due to patients’ facial features, suggestive of those of Kabuki actors (Fig. 102.1). Approximately
1:32,000 to 1:86,000 individuals are estimated to have Kabuki syndrome.

Molecular Etiology

Heterozygous KMT2D pathogenic variants (∼90%), and hemizygous
(in males) or heterozygous (in females) KDM6A pathogenic variants
(∼10%) cause classic Kabuki syndrome; KMT2D encodes a histone
methyltransferase and KDM6A encodes a histone demethylase. Both of
these histone modification enzymes regulate histone codes to orchestrate global gene expression. Most genetic changes causing Kabuki syndrome are due to de novo changes. However, because KDM6A locates
on the X chromosome, its inheritance pattern can be complex, with
most KDM6A pathogenic variants being de novo, but maternal transmission of pathogenic KDM6A variants has been seen. Kabuki-­like
syndromes share many clinical features but do not have pathogenic
variants in KMT2D or KDM6A.

Clinical Features of Kabuki Syndrome (Table 102.1)

Physical features: Common features of Kabuki syndrome include long
palpebral fissures with eversion of the lateral third of the lower eyelid, arched broad eyebrows, a short columella, depressed nasal tip,
large, prominent or cupped ears, and persistent fingertip pads (see
Fig. 102.1). Dental anomalies such as widely spaced teeth and hypodontia are commonly seen.
Growth and feeding: Individuals with Kabuki syndrome often have
short stature and feeding difficulties. The degree of difficulty with

feeding and growth varies, but it is not uncommon for infants or
children with Kabuki syndrome to require feeding tubes.
Development and behavior: Global developmental delay is commonly seen in children with Kabuki syndrome, and individuals with Kabuki syndrome typically have mild to moderate intellectual disability. Most individuals speak and ambulate independently. Although
infrequent, autism is seen in Kabuki syndrome.
Neurology: Hypotonia is a common feature. Structural brain differences are typically not seen, but individuals with Kabuki syndrome
have an ∼30% risk for seizures.
Congenital heart disease: Approximately 70% of children with Kabuki syndrome have a structural heart defect. The most common
types include coarctation of the aorta and septal defects, although
complex congenital heart disease is also seen.
Gastrointestinal: In addition to feeding difficulties, structural anomalies such as anal atresia, congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH),
and cholestasis can be seen.
Endocrinology: Hypoglycemia or hyperinsulinemia can be seen,
and some females with Kabuki syndrome have early premature
thelarche.
Ophthalmology: The common everted lower eyelid seen in Kabuki
can lead to excessive tearing. Other eye differences can include ptosis, cataracts, corneal differences, blue sclerae, or strabismus.
Ear, nose, and throat: Hearing loss, mainly conductive hearing loss,
and more rarely sensorineural hearing loss, is seen in up to 50% of
individuals with Kabuki syndrome. Chronic otitis media is a major
cause of conductive hearing loss. Individuals with Kabuki syndrome
can also have cleft lip and/or palate.
Genitourinary: Kidney and urinary tract disorders occur in more than
25% and can include abnormal renal location, duplicated collecting
system, hypospadias and cryptorchidism in males, and hypoplastic
labia in females.
Musculoskeletal: Many individuals have joint hypermobility that can
manifest with scoliosis. Spinal abnormalities such as sagittal clefts
and hemivertebrae can be seen in individuals with Kabuki syndrome.
Immunology and hematology: Frequent and recurrent infections including sinopulmonary infections and otitis media are common in
children with Kabuki syndrome. Some can have hypogammaglobulinemia and immune dysfunction, with some needing regular intravenous immunoglobulin injection. Autoimmune disorders such as
vitiligo, immune thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, and coagulopathy are also common.
Molecular diagnosis of Kabuki syndrome: This is often made using sequencing and deletion/duplication analyses of KMT2D and KDM6A
following clinical suspicion or by exome sequencing. Often, parental
testing is performed to determine whether the identified variant is
de novo. In addition, a DNA methylation profile has been identified for Kabuki syndrome caused by KMT2D and KDM6A variants,
and a matching profile can support the diagnosis in the context of
uncertain pathogenicity of identified KMT2D or KDM6A variants.

RUBINSTEIN-­TAYBI SYNDROME

Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome (RSTS; MIM 180849 and 613684) is characterized by down-­slanted palpebral fissures, broad thumb and first
toe, developmental delay/intellectual disability, and short stature (Fig.
102.2). It occurs in ∼1 in 125,000 births.

Molecular Etiology
A

B

Fig. 102.1 Physical features of Kabuki syndrome. A, Patient with
KMT2D c.10201C>T, p.Gln3401* pathogenic variant. Dysmorphic features include long and up-­slanted palpebral fissures and large prominent
ears. B, Patient with KDM6A c.3717G>A; p.Trp1239* pathogenic variant.
Dysmorphic features include long and up-­slanted palpebral fissures.

RSTS is caused by heterozygous pathogenic variants in CREBBP and
EP300 genes. These genes encode transcriptional co-­activators as histone lysine acetyltransferases. RSTS is caused by pathogenic variants,
typically de novo in CREBBP in 55% and in EP300 in ∼8%. CREBBP
pathogenic variants tend to result in more typical RSTS features,
with EP300 alterations resulting in a wider, often milder, phenotypic
spectrum.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 102 u Chromatin Regulatory Disorders

797

Table 102.1  Kabuki Phenotype Scoring List
CLINICAL FEATURES

POSSIBLE SCORE

FEATURES

Facial features

0-­5 points (0-­3 features = 1 point; 4-­6 = 2 point;
7-­9 = 3 point; 10-­12 = 4 point; 13-­15 = 5 point)

Long palpebral fissures; everted lower eyelids; large dysplastic
ears; arched eyebrows, sparse lateral one third; flat nasal tip;
abnormal dentition; high/cleft palate; strabismus; blue sclera;
micrognathia; ptosis; broad nasal root; oligodontia; thin
upper and full lower lip; lip nodules

Limb/extremity features

Up to 1 point (0-­1 features = 0 point; 2-­4 = 1 point)

Persistent fetal pads; brachy-­or clinodactyly; lax joints; hip
dislocation

Microcephaly

1 point

Short stature

1 point

Heart

1 point

Kidney

1 point

Sum

0-­10

From Wang YR, Xu NX, Wang J, Wang XM. Kabuki syndrome: review of the clinical features, diagnosis and epigenetic mechanisms. World J Pediatr. 2019;15:528–535. Table 1.

septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, coarctation of the aorta,
pulmonary stenosis, aortic stenosis, and vascular ring.
Respiratory: Obstructive sleep apnea is common.
Genitourinary: Kidney anomalies include hydronephrosis and duplications. Many males have cryptorchidism.
Gastrointestinal: Feeding problems due to gastroesophageal reflux
and constipation are common.
Musculoskeletal: Joint laxity, scoliosis, and vertebral abnormalities
can be seen. Hypotonia is common.
Molecular diagnosis: This can be made using a gene panel (sequencing and deletion/duplication analyses of CREBBP and EP300). For
individuals with clinical features with atypical RSTS features, exome
sequencing is recommended.

A

B

Fig. 102.2 Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome. A, A 21-­month-­old child. Note

CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME

the hirsutism, down-­slanting palpebral fissures, maxillary hypoplasia,
prominent nose with nasal septum extending below alae nasi, and low,
posteriorly rotated ears. B, Broad thumbs with radial angulation and
persistent fingertip pads. (A courtesy Dr. Marilyn C. Jones, Children’s
Hospital, San Diego, California; from Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo
M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 1C, p. 108 and Fig. 2C, p. 109.)

Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; MIM 122470) is characterized by craniofacial features including synophrys, high-­
arched
eyebrows and thin downturned upper lip, hirsutism, intellectual
disability, microcephaly, growth retardation, limb anomalies, such
as micromelia, phocomelia, and oligodactyly, and several other systemic abnormalities. Its population incidence is approximately 1 in
50,000.

Clinical Features of RSTS

Molecular Mechanism of CdLS

Physical features: Characteristic facial features include arched eyebrows,
down-­slanting palpebral fissures, low-­hanging columella, and grimacing smile. Individuals often have broad thumbs and/or halluces.
Growth: Prenatal growth is usually normal, but most individuals have
short stature caused by slow postnatal growth. Obesity may be seen
during childhood or adolescence.
Development: Global developmental delay is typical with milder features often seen in individuals with EP300 pathogenic variants. The
average age of walking is 30 months and first words 25 months.
Speech delay occurs in 90% of children and some remain nonverbal.
Features of autism spectrum disorder, as well as impulsivity, distractibility, mood instability, and stereotypies can be seen.
Intellectual disability: This is in the moderate to severe range is typical
for individuals with RSTS, with an IQ range of 25-­79. Verbal ability
is typically poorer than other skills.
Neurologic: Craniospinal and posterior fossa abnormalities, such as
Chiari malformation or cervical cord compression, can be seen as
well as seizures or abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG).
Eye findings: These can include refractory errors, ptosis, cataracts,
coloboma, nystagmus, strabismus, and glaucoma.
Congenital heart defects: These are seen in ∼30% of individuals with
RSTS. Common defects include atrial septal defect, ventricular

CdLS is caused by pathogenic variants in genes encoding the structural and regulatory components of the cohesin complex. Variants
have been found in NIPBL, HDAC8, RAD21, SMC1A, and SMC3 in
CdLS. The cohesin complex is composed of SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21,
and other subunits that comprise a ringlike structure that “embraces”
chromatin. NIPBL encodes a protein that controls cohesin complex
genome loading. The SMC3 component of the cohesin complex
becomes acetylated once loaded onto the genome and is subsequently
deacetylated by HDAC8 for cohesin protein recycling. Pathogenic
variants in BRD4 are an infrequent cause of CdLS. Cohesin has shown
to play a key role in transcriptional regulation, and global transcriptional alterations due to cohesin dysfunction are thought to lead to
the pathogenesis of CdLS.
NIPBL pathogenic variants are found in approximately 60% of the
individuals with CdLS and are more likely to be identified in more
severely (or “classically”) affected individuals, with loss-­of-­function
variants resulting in a more severe phenotype. Pathogenic variants in
SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21, HDAC8, and BRD4 can be found in 1–5% of
the individuals with CdLS. Pathogenic variants in all related genes are
typically acquired de novo, although instances of inherited variants
from minimally affected mothers have been noted for the X-­linked
HDAC8 and SMC1A genes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

798 Part VIII u Human Genetics

Fig. 102.3 Physical features of Cornelia de Lange

A

syndrome. A, Patient with NIPBL c.3100_3106del;
p.K1034QfsX7 pathogenic variant. Dysmorphic features include synophrys, long eyelashes, upturned nasal tip with anteverted nares, long philtrum, and micrognathia. Severe reduction defects of upper extremities
are also depicted. B, Patient with SMC1A c.2077C>G;
p.R693G mutation. Dysmorphic features include mild
synophrys.

B

Clinical Manifestations of CdLS

Facial features: Include synophrys with highly arched and/or thick
eyebrows, long/thick eyelashes, short nasal bridge, upturned nasal
tip with anteverted nares, long and/or smooth philtrum, thin vermilion of the upper lip, downturned corners of the mouth, highly
arched palate with or without cleft palate, small widely spaced teeth,
and micrognathia (Fig. 102.3).
Growth failure: Prenatal-­onset growth failure and microcephaly are
common.
Ophthalmologic: Common manifestations include ptosis, myopia,
and nystagmus.
Otolaryngologic: Sensorineural hearing impairment is common, but
conductive hearing loss can be seen.
Cardiovascular: Approximately 50% of individuals with CdLS have
congenital heart disease. The most common abnormalities include
pulmonic or peripheral pulmonic stenosis, ventricular septal defects, atrial septal defects, coarctation or hypoplastic aortic arch,
aortic valve anomaly, tetralogy of Fallot, double-­outlet right ventricle, and atrioventricular canal.
Gastrointestinal: Gastroesophageal reflux disease is present in nearly
all instances, and some require a feeding tube during infancy/childhood. Other rare gastrointestinal abnormalities include pyloric stenosis (4%), intestinal malrotation (2%), and CDH (1%).
Genitourinary. Renal abnormalities such as vesicoureteral reflux and
cryptorchidism are common.
Skeletal: Severe abnormalities of the upper extremities are seen in 25%
of individuals with classical CdLS. Upper extremity deficiencies
range from severe reduction defects such as complete absence of the
forearms to mild fifth finger clinodactyly (see Fig. 102.3). Radioulnar synostosis is also common.
Skin: Hypertrichosis is common, and scalp hair, typically thick, can
extend onto the temporal regions.
Developmental delay/intellectual disability: Most individuals with
classical CdLS demonstrate global developmental delay. The overall
range of IQ levels is broad, from below 30 to 85, with an average
IQ of 53. Those affected individuals with classic features are more
likely to have severe to profound intellectual disability. Fifty percent of children with CdLS walk by 24 months and 95% by 10 years
old. A range of behavioral issues have been reported, and behavior
problems are often directly related to frustration from an inability
to communicate.
Neurologic: Approximately 25% of individuals with CdLS experience
seizures.
Molecular Diagnosis of CdLS: Due to a relatively high frequency of
mosaic variants not detected in blood, a next-­generation sequencing panel of CdLS genes (NIPBL, SMC1A, HDAC8, SMC3, RAD21,
and BRD4) performed on DNA extracted from buccal cells has been
recommended as the most effective way of detecting causal variants.
For individuals with atypical CdLS features, exome sequencing is
recommended.

A

B

Fig. 102.4 Coffin-­Siris syndrome. Note the coarse face and wide

mouth with full lips (A), and hypoplastic fifth fingernails (B). (From Jones
KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M, eds. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of
Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022, Fig. 1A and
1D, p. 819.)

COFFIN-­SIRIS SYNDROME

Coffin-­Siris syndrome (CSS) is characterized by thick eyebrows, periorbital fullness, wide mouth with full lips, and coarse facial features; fifth
fingernail hypoplasia; absence of terminal phalanges; hypertrichosis;
developmental delay/intellectual disability; and short stature (Fig. 102.4).

Molecular Mechanism of CSS

CSS is typically caused by de novo heterozygous germline pathogenic
variants in genes encoding a component of BAF (BRG1/hBRM-­associated
factors) complex, which belongs to the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeler complex family. Pathogenic variants have been found in ARID1A,
ARID1B, SMARCA4, SMARCB1, SMARCE1, and SOX11. Variants in
one of these genes can be found in ∼60–70% of the patients with CSS.

Clinical Features of CSS

Facial features: Characteristic facial features of CSS include wide
mouth with thick, everted upper and lower lips, broad nasal bridge
with broad nasal tip, thick eyebrows, and long eyelashes. Facial features typically coarsen over time.
Growth: Prenatal growth profile tends to be normal, but postnatal weight
and height measurements are usually below the 50th percentile.
Development: Global developmental delay is common and variable;
children sit around 12 months, walk at around 30 months, and say
their first words at 24 months. Most individuals have intellectual disability, typically moderate to severe (IQ range: 40-­69). Some individuals with CSS have behavioral concerns, aggression, or autistic features.
Neurologic: The majority of children with CSS have hypotonia. Structural brain malformations such as Dandy-­
Walker variant, and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 103 u Genetics of Common Disorders
a­ genesis of the corpus callosum may be seen. Seizures occur in up to
50% of individuals. Hearing impairment can occur.
Ophthalmology: Visual impairment is common, and ocular abnormalities include ptosis, strabismus and myopia.
Gastrointestinal: Feeding issues and slow growth are common.
Genitourinary: Renal malformation such as horseshoe kidney, and
genitourinary malformation such as cryptorchidism and hypospadias have been noted.
Musculoskeletal: Fifth digit nail and distal phalanx hypoplasia or aplasia, a diagnostic criterion in the pre-­exome era, is commonly seen.
Brachydactyly of the fifth finger, joint laxity, and scoliosis are also
frequent.
Cardiac: Congenital heart defects can be seen and include ventricular
septal defects, atrial septal defects, and tetralogy of Fallot.
Skin: Hirsutism and hypertrichosis are typical.

Molecular Diagnosis of CSS

For those whom clinical diagnosis of CSS is strongly suspected, CSS
gene sequencing and deletion/duplication panel is recommended. For
those with atypical clinical features, comprehensive genetic testing
such as exome sequencing is warranted.

OTHER CHROMATIN DISORDERS

An increasing number of genetic disorders, due to mutations in
genes encoding chromatin transcriptional regulatory proteins, have
been identified. These disorders include CHARGE syndrome due
to CHD7 pathogenic variants, Wiedemann-­Steiner syndrome due
to KMT2A pathogenic variants, Arboleda-­Tham syndrome due to
KAT6A pathogenic variants, and Say-­
Barber-­
Biesecker/Young-­
Simpson syndrome due to KAT6B pathogenic variants. CHD7 is
a chromatin remodeler protein with a chromodomain histone-­
modification recognition motif. KAT6A and KAT6B encode histone
modification enzymes. Common manifestations of genetic diagnoses due to these chromatin remodelers and histone modification
enzyme defects include developmental delay, hypotonia, and facial
dysmorphisms. Some of the clinical features enable astute clinicians
to distinguish between typical cases of these syndromes. However, in
their atypical presentations, a clinical diagnosis may not be feasible.
Exome sequencing is recommended in any children with facial dysmorphisms as well as developmental delay to detect possible chromatin disorders.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 103

Genetics of Common
Disorders
Neil A. Hanchard and Brendan Lee
Common pediatric diseases, like many common adult-­onset diseases,
are usually multifactorial. The combination of many genes and environmental factors contribute to a complex sequence of events leading
to disease. The complexity of the combination of contributing factors
increases the challenge of finding genetic variants that cause disease.
Genetic tools include public databases of genetic variants and the
human haplotype map. Genotyping has permitted very large numbers
of common genetic variants (those with population frequencies >5%)
to be efficiently tested in large numbers of patients. Genetic sequencing technologies are being used to investigate the role of rare coding

799

sequence variants in common diseases. The incorporation of these
tools into large, well-­designed population studies has developed into
the field of genetic epidemiology.

103.1 Major Genetic Approaches to the
Study of Common Pediatric Disorders
Neil A. Hanchard and Brendan Lee
Millions of genetic variants are present in every person. Many of these
variants have no known impact on health, while others have a measurable influence. Sometimes, sequence changes in a single gene consistently cause a disease, as seen with cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia;
more often, specific genetic changes are insufficient to determine the
manifestation of a specific medical condition by themselves. Rather,
these changes can contribute indirectly or partially to the development
of disease, and these are best conceptualized as modifiers of disease
risk. Figure 103.1 demonstrates the relationship between variant frequency and the relative medical impact of the allele. The spectrum of
variant impact ranges widely from a slightly increased risk of illness
to predetermined, fully expressed disease. Studies aimed at discovering rare variants with strong health effects require only small sample
populations to achieve statistical significance, whereas those studying
common variants that contribute partially to the overall effect often
require much larger sample sizes because of the small impact of multiple variants.
In many cases, genetic susceptibility is the result of the cumulative
risk of many common variants. For common conditions, the genetic
predisposition alone is not sufficient to cause disease. Everyone inherits a different degree of disease vulnerability, which is then augmented
by exposure to certain environmental or other factors. Figure 103.2 is
a model for the contribution of common genetic variants to individual
health. One goal of medical genetics is to identify the genes that contribute to initial genetic susceptibility and help prevent the occurrence of
disease, either by avoiding inciting environmental factors or by instituting interventions that reduce risk. For persons who cross the threshold
of disease, the goal is to better understand the pathogenesis in the hope
that this will suggest better approaches to treatment. Common genetic
variation can also influence responses to medications and the risk of
adverse drug reactions, as well as augments the impact of environmental
exposures.
Complex traits may be inherently difficult to study if the precision
of diagnosis (phenotype) is low, as often occurs with neurobehavioral
traits. A starting point in the genetic analysis of a complex trait, therefore, is to obtain evidence in support of a genetic contribution and to
estimate the relative strength of genetic and environmental factors.
Complex traits typically exhibit familial clustering but are not transmitted in a distinct pattern as seen with classical mendelian autosomal
dominant or recessive inheritance. Complex traits often show variation
between groups of different ancestries, possibly reflecting the differences in frequency and/or effect of genetic variants within these groups.
Assessing the potential genetic contribution begins by determining
whether the trait is seen among related individuals more often than
in the general population. A common measure of familiality is the
first-­degree relative risk (usually designated by the symbol λs), which
is equal to the ratio of the prevalence rate in siblings and/or parents to
the prevalence rate in the general population. The λs for type 1 diabetes
is about 15. The relative strength of genetic and nongenetic risk factors
can be estimated by variance components analysis. The heritability of
a trait is the estimate of the fraction of the total variance contributed by
genetic factors (Fig. 103.3).
A minority of cases of common diseases such as diabetes may be
caused by single-­gene pathogenic variants (mendelian inheritance),
chromosomal disorders, and other genomic disorders (see Chapter
629.4). However, these unique causes of the disease can provide important insight into the molecular pathways involved. Chromosomal
regions with genes that might contribute to disease susceptibility have
historically been located with linkage mapping, which locates regions

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

800 Part VIII u Human Genetics
Effect size
5.0
Few examples of
high-effect
common variants
influencing
common disease

Rare alleles
causing
Mendelian
disease

High

3.0

Fig. 103.1 Relationship between allele frequency and relative strength of genetic effect. Alleles
with large effect tend to be very rare but can be
studied with a small sample size because of the
relative ease of allele detection when medical
impact is high. Common variants tend to have a
modest or low effect on health, requiring large
datasets to visualize statistically small effects. The
vast majority of disease-­associated alleles identified to date have the characteristics shown within
the diagonal dotted lines. GWA, Genome-­wide association. (Adapted from McCarthy MI, Abecasis
GR, Cardon LR, et al. Genome-­wide association
studies for complex traits: consensus, uncertainty
and challenges. Nat Rev Genet. 2008;9:356–369.)

Low-frequency
variants with
intermediate effect

Intermediate
1.5

Common
variants
implicated in
common disease
by GWA

Rare variants of
small effect
very hard to identify
by genetic means

Modest
1.1
Low

0.001

Very rare

Rare

0.005

Low frequency

0.05

Common

Allele frequency

ence of gene-­
environment interaction on genetic susceptibility to
common diseases. Everyone inherits common variants that determine
initial genetic liability for disease
risk. For multifactorial disorders,
the initial genetic susceptibility is
insufficient to produce disease on
its own. Over time, exposure to
environmental factors increases the
likelihood of a disease state. Identifying the gene variants responsible
for risk can lead to prevention strategies or treatments.

Genetic
susceptibility

Prenatal



VG



viro
n
Fa ment
cto
al
rB

Path 3

En
tal
en
m
A
on
vir tor
En Fac

Pre

ven

tion

Infancy

A

Pre

l

ven

tion

l
nta
me
n
A
viro
En actor
F
Pr
ev
en
tio
n
B

Childhood

A

nta
me
n
o
C
vir
En actor
F

Prevention C

ntal
Environme
B
r
o
Fact
Adolescence

Path 2

Path 1

Adulthood

Time

Genetic Environmental Measurement
variance
variance
variance

Phenotypic
variance
VP

Disease Risk

Disease threshold

Fig. 103.2 Model for the influ-

Path 4

VE



VM

h2  VG / VP
Heritability

Fig. 103.3 Heritability concept. The phenotypic variance of a particu-

lar trait can be partitioned between the contributions of the genetic
variance, environmental variance, and measurement variance. This is
usually empirically determined. Heritability is defined by the proportion
of the phenotypic variance that is accounted for by the genetic variance. One can estimate the heritability from correlation of a quantitative trait between relatives.

of DNA that are inherited in families with the specific disease. In practical terms, however, this has become quite difficult for most complex
traits either because of a dearth of families or because the effects of
individual genetic loci are weak; thus linkage mapping is seldom used
anymore.
Genetic association studies are a powerful way of identifying common gene variants (>5% in the population) that each have an effect on
the risk of disease. Detection of the usually small to moderate effect of
each variant alongside interactions with environmental factors requires
well-­powered studies that often include thousands of individuals. A
number of parallel approaches for analyzing the aggregate effects of
rare variants in genes have also been developed. Such rare variant association methods also require large sample sizes because the gene effects
also appear to be relatively weak.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 103 u Genetics of Common Disorders
What is an SNP?
. . . G GTA A CTG ...
Different people can have a
different nucleotide or base at
a given location on a chromosome . . . GG CA A CTG ...
What is an SNP map?
Location of SNPs
on human DNA

Human
DNA

How can an SNP map be used to predict drug response?
Section of SNP genotype profile
Patients with efficacy
in clinical trials
Patients without efficacy
in clinical trials
Predictive of efficacy
Predictive of no efficacy

Fig. 103.4 Different combinations of single nucleotide polymor-

phisms (SNPs) are found in different individuals. The locations of these
SNPs can be pinpointed on maps of human genes. Subsequently, they
can be used to create profiles that are associated with difference in
response to a drug, such as efficacy and nonefficacy. (Adapted from
Roses A. Pharmacogenetics and the practice of medicine. Nature.
2000;405:857–865.)

Association studies require markers along the DNA that can be
genotyped (ascertaining the combination of alleles at a locus in a
diploid organism), typically with large-­scale, high-­throughput laboratory techniques. Markers that are typically used are single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; Fig. 103.4). A sample of the same
region of genome from 50 people will reveal that approximately 1
in every 200 bases varies between individuals. Catalogues of SNPs
identified in thousands of individuals from multiple populations
consist of tens of millions of SNPs across the genome (dbSNP; h
ttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/). Although most SNPs lack an
obvious function, some will alter the amino acid sequence of the
protein, and many have been shown to regulate the expression of
nearby or distant genes (https://gtexportal.org/home/) or indirectly
impact expression by altering the level of surrounding DNA methylation or the ability of proteins to act (The ENCODE Project Consortium). Some of these functional alterations can directly affect
susceptibility to disease.
A complex clinical phenotype can be defined by the presence
or absence of a disease as a dichotomous trait, or by selection of
a clinically meaningful continuous or quantitative trait, such as
serum glucose in type 2 diabetes. Although it might not be possible to define subgroups of patients in advance based on disease
mechanisms, the more uniform the phenotype, the more likely that
a genetic study will be informative. Locus heterogeneity refers to
the situation in which a similar trait results from alteration of different genes. Allelic heterogeneity is when more than one variant
in a particular gene can contribute to different diseases. The development of a trait or disease from a nongenetic mechanism results in
a phenocopy. These three factors often contribute to the difficulty
in identifying individual disease susceptibility genes, because they
reduce the effective size of the study population and thus require
even larger sample sizes.
For genetic variants that directly lead to disease, a person bearing
any variant or allele (inherited unit, DNA segment, or chromosome)
in a gene has a given probability of being affected with a specific gene
variant–associated disease. This is called the penetrance. Some diseases manifest signs only later in life (age-­related penetrance), which
could lead to misclassifying children with the disease-­producing variant to be classified as unaffected. Single-­gene disorders are typically
caused by pathogenic variants with relatively high penetrance. In contrast, most common variants have low penetrance because their overall contribution to the disease is small. Many such common variants

801

can contribute to disease risk for a complex trait; for example, human
height is influenced by >400 genes.
Ideally, important environmental exposures should be measured
and accounted for in a population because there may be a dependent
interaction between the environmental factor and specific genetic variant. An example is the likely requirement for a viral infection preceding
onset of type 1 diabetes. Although gene-­environment interactions are
strongly suspected to play an important role in common diseases, it is
difficult to identify and measure them. Very large studies with uniform
collection of information about environmental exposures are rare, but
are becoming more common with the expansion of large biorepositories that are integrated with electronic health records. Methods, such as
genome-­wide analyses of DNA methylation, sometimes referred to as
epigenome-­wide association studies, have been used to assess evidence
for early environmental exposures that influence common diseases
in later life. This apparent relationship between the environment and
DNA methylation (and related genetic features) is being used to discover and validate other possible gene-­environment interactions.

GENOME-­WIDE APPROACHES TO ASSOCIATION

For multifactorial common diseases, association analyses have been
used to identify disease-­related genes. There are two types of association study: direct association, in which the risk-­altering variant
itself is tested to see whether its presence correlates with disease, and
indirect association, in which markers that are physically close to the
biologically important variant are used as proxies. The correlation of
markers with other genetic variants in a small region of the genome
is called linkage disequilibrium. Indirect association is enabled by
the construction of linkage disequilibrium maps in continental reference populations (e.g., Europeans, Asians, West Africans) (International HapMap Project). SNPs that proxy most genetic variation have
been identified across most of the genome and can be genotyped at
low cost using specially designed microarrays that typically include
2-­5 million genetic markers. This resolution provides a good proxy of
genetic variation in relatively homogenous populations where linkage
disequilibrium is generally high (such as Europeans), thus facilitating
“genome-­wide” testing of variants in those populations.
Three basic study designs are used for association testing:
1.	Case-­control design: the frequency of an allele in an affected group
is compared with an unaffected group. This is the mostly commonly
used framework for association testing, as it aligns with many more
traditional epidemiologic study designs.
2.	Cohort design: large numbers of people are ascertained and then
followed for the onset of any number of diseases. Cohort analysis is very expensive, and there are few true cohort studies. However, investments in genomics of large-­scale population-­based cohorts in Iceland (https://www.decode.com/), the United Kingdom
(https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/), and the United States (https://allof
us.nih.gov/) include hundreds of thousands of individuals all tied to
electronic health records and have begun to show unique insights to
disease risk and pathogenesis.
3.	Family-­based control design: parents or siblings of an affected individual are used as the controls. Family-­based control study designs
are somewhat attractive for pediatric diseases because it is usually
possible to enroll parents. These studies also solve a major problem
in testing for association because the parents are perfectly matched
for genetic background; however, family-­based study designs are
inherently less efficient to recruit than case-­control studies and are
used less commonly.
The success of any association analysis depends on the design of a
well-­powered study and an accurately measured trait to avoid phenotypic misclassification. In large, population-­based studies, confounding by ethnicity or population stratification, could distort results.
Variants more common in people from a particular ancestry group
could cause an apparent association of a variant with a disease. This
association would not be a true association between an allele and a
disease, because the association would be confounded by genetic background. Methods for measuring subtle mismatching between cases
and controls using many thousands of markers routinely genotyped

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

802 Part VIII u Human Genetics
in genome-­wide association studies allow researchers to account for
this effect. The implementation of stringent thresholds for statistical
significance replicate associations in other groups have helped make
genome-­wide association studies robust and reproducible.
Association studies are a powerful tool to find genetic variation
that confers risk to an individual; however, the effect of any single
genetic variant will be a small contribution to the overall risk and
pathogenesis of disease. Hundreds of thousands of genetic associations between a variant or gene and disease, such as the APOEε4 allele
with an increased risk of Alzheimer disease, have now been observed
for thousands of complex diseases and traits, including autoimmune
disease, asthma, and bone density/fractures. Genetic variants that
implicate a novel gene in a process drive research into systems and
pathways that can alter disease outcome. With increasingly large datasets and advances in statistical analyses, all the genetic variants that
impact common disease risk can also be combined to derive a composite genetic risk score. This score can then be integrated with known
environmental risk factors to identify individuals at particularly high

risk of disease who might require more urgent intervention or monitoring. In adults, this approach is being developed to identify individuals at high risk for coronary heart disease, although concerns about
how well genetic risk scores work in different population groups are
yet to be overcome.
Low-­cost methods for sequencing the complete coding (exomes)
and full DNA sequence (genomes) of individuals have facilitated comprehensive evaluation of a wider range of genetic variants involved in
common diseases. Rare genetic variants, including small insertions
or deletions, are important in pediatric diseases such as neurodevelopmental disorders, cardiovascular malformations, and other birth
defects. Common traits such as height, obesity, diabetes, and autoimmune diseases are also affected by rare variants. In common severe disorders such as intellectual disability and complex heart malformations,
de novo pathogenic variants (i.e., pathogenic variants not present in
either parent) play an important role.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

