Learning and Developmental
Disorders

PART

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Chapter 49

Neurodevelopmental and
Executive Function and
Dysfunction
Desmond P. Kelly and Darla H. McCain
TERMINOLOGY AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

A neurodevelopmental function is a basic brain process needed for
learning and productivity and involves the following core neurodevelopmental domains: sensory, motor, language, visual-­spatial/visual-­
perceptual, intellectual, memory, social cognition, and executive
function. Executive function (EF) is a broad term used to describe
specific neurocognitive processes involved in the regulating, guiding, organizing, and monitoring of thoughts and actions to achieve a
specific goal. Processes considered to be “executive” in nature include
inhibition/impulse control, cognitive/mental flexibility, emotional
control, initiation skills, planning, organization, working memory, and
self-­monitoring.
Neurodevelopmental variation refers to differences in neurodevelopmental functioning. Wide variations in these functions exist within
and between individuals. These differences can change over time and
need not represent pathology or abnormality.
Neurodevelopmental and/or executive dysfunctions reflect any
disruptions or weaknesses in these processes, which may result from
neuroanatomic disturbance or neuropsychologic malfunctioning.
Neurodevelopmental and/or executive dysfunction places a child at
risk for developmental, cognitive, emotional, behavioral, psychosocial,
and adaptive challenges. Preschool-­age children with neurodevelopmental or executive dysfunction may manifest delays in developmental domains such as language, motor, self-­help, or social-­emotional
development and self-­regulation. For the school-­age child, an area of
particular focus is academic skill development. It is at this age that disorders of learning are often diagnosed. The Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorder, Fifth Edition (DSM-­5) classifies disorders
of learning within the group of neurodevelopmental disorders as specific learning disorder (SLD), with separate specifiers recognizing
impairments in reading, written expression, and mathematics. In the
International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Edition (ICD-­10), neurodevelopmental disorders include specific developmental disorders
of scholastic skills with specific reading disorder, mathematics disorder, and disorder of written expression. Dyslexia is a term used more
frequently by neurologists and by some advocacy groups to describe
reading disorders. Disorders of EF have traditionally been viewed as
a component of attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
which is also classified in DSM-­5 as a neurodevelopmental disorder.
Frontal lobe and executive function deficit is a recognized diagnostic
term used primarily by neuropsychologists.
There are no prevalence estimates specifically for neurodevelopmental dysfunction, but overall estimates for learning disorders range from
5% to 10% or more with a similar range reported for ADHD. These
disorders frequently co-­occur. The range in prevalence is related to
differences in criteria used for classification and diagnosis, the overlap and interaction of neurodevelopmental variations, and differing
methods of assessment.

IV

Neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunction may result from a
broad range of etiologic factors, including genetic, medical, psychologic, environmental, and sociocultural influences.
A high degree of heritability is reported in learning and attention disorders, with estimates ranging from 45% to 80%, but identification of
specific gene associations is elusive. Neurodevelopmental dysfunctions
generally fall along a continuum of traits with disorders becoming evident at extremes of dimensions or thresholds of dysfunction. The same
genetic and early environmental risk factors that are associated with a
disorder such as ADHD also predict trait levels in the general population. Specific genes have been identified as associated with reading disorders, including the DYX2 locus on chromosome 6p22 and the DYX3
locus on 2p12. Neuroimaging studies have confirmed links between gene
variations and variations in cortical thickness in areas of the brain known
to be associated with learning and academic performance, such as the
temporal regions. Chromosomal abnormalities can lead to unique patterns of dysfunction, such as visual-­spatial deficits in females diagnosed
with Turner syndrome (see Chapter 99.4) or executive and language
deficits in children with fragile X syndrome (see Chapter 99.6). Chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (see Chapter 99.3) has been associated
with predictable patterns of neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunction that can be progressive, including a higher prevalence of intellectual
disability and deficits in visual-­spatial processing, attention, working
memory (e.g., the ability to hold and manipulate information over short
periods), verbal learning, arithmetic, and language.
Perinatal factors, including very low birthweight, severe intrauterine growth restriction, perinatal hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy, and
prenatal exposure to substances such as alcohol and drugs or infections,
may independently disrupt neurodevelopment or exacerbate genetic
vulnerabilities. Increased risk of neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunction has also been associated with environmental toxins, including
lead (see Chapter 761); drugs such as cocaine; infections such as meningitis, HIV, and Zika; and brain injury associated with intraventricular
hemorrhage, periventricular leukomalacia, or head trauma. The negative
academic impact of concussion in children and adolescents, although
usually temporary, has been well characterized, including impaired concentration and slowed processing speed. Repeated injuries have a much
higher likelihood of long-­term negative neurocognitive effects.
Early psychologic trauma may result in both structural and neurochemical changes in the developing brain, which may contribute to
neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunction. Exposure to trauma,
abuse, or other adverse experiences in early childhood in the absence
of positive experiences—primarily safe, stable, and nurturing relationships—can lead to diminished regulatory influences mediated by key
brain regions (hippocampus and prefrontal cortex) and may influence right hemisphere function with associated risk for problems with
information processing, memory, focus, and self-­regulation. Environmental and sociocultural deprivation can also lead to, or potentiate,
neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunction, and numerous studies
have indicated that parent/caregiver executive functioning affects the
development of EFs in children.
Investigations of neuroanatomic substrates have yielded important
information about the underlying pathogenesis in neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunction. Differences have been demonstrated in
the left parietotemporal and left occipitotemporal brain regions of individuals with dyslexia compared to those without reading difficulties (see
Chapter 51). Studies have also described the neural circuitry, primarily in the parietal cortex, underlying mathematical competencies such
as the processing of numerical magnitude and mental arithmetic. The
associations between executive dysfunction and the prefrontal/frontal
cortex have been established, and injury to the frontal lobe regions often

300
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 49 u Neurodevelopmental and Executive Function and Dysfunction
result in dysfunction of executive abilities (e.g., poor inhibitory control). Although the prefrontal/frontal cortex may be the primary control
region for EFs, there is considerable interconnectivity between the brain’s
frontal regions and other areas, such as arousal systems (reticular activating system), motivational and emotional systems (limbic system), cortical association systems (posterior/anterior; left/right hemispheres), and
input/output systems (frontal motor/posterior sensory areas).

CORE NEURODEVELOPMENTAL FUNCTIONS

The neurodevelopmental processes that are critical to a child’s successful functioning may best be understood as falling within core neurodevelopmental domains that are highly integrated.

Sensory and Motor Function

Sensory development begins well before birth in the primary visual,
auditory, and somatosensory cortical regions along with the olfactory and gustatory cortices. This neurodevelopmental process is crucial in helping children experience, understand, and manipulate their
environments. Sensory development progresses in association with
environmental exposure and with the development of other cognitive
processes, such as motor development. Through sensory experiences,
children’s brains mature as new neuronal pathways are created and
existing pathways are strengthened.
There are three distinct, yet related, forms of neuromotor ability:
fine motor, graphomotor, and gross motor coordination. Fine motor
function reflects the ability to control the muscles that produce small,
exact movements. Deficits in fine motor function can disrupt the ability to communicate in written form and to excel in artistic and crafts
activities and can interfere with learning a musical instrument or
mastering a computer keyboard.
Graphomotor function refers to the specific motor aspects of written
output. Several subtypes of graphomotor dysfunction can significantly
impede writing. Children who harbor weaknesses of visualization during writing have trouble picturing the configurations of letters and
words as they write (orthographics), with poorly legible written output
and inconsistent spacing between words. Others have weaknesses in
orthographic memory and may labor over individual letters and prefer
printing (manuscript) to cursive writing. Some exhibit signs of finger
agnosia and have trouble localizing their fingers while they write, needing to keep their eyes very close to the page and applying excessive
pressure to the pencil. Others struggle to produce the highly coordinated motor sequences needed for writing. It is important to emphasize that a child may show excellent fine motor dexterity (as revealed
in mechanical or artistic domains) but very poor graphomotor fluency
(with labored or poorly legible writing).
Gross motor function refers to control of large muscles. Children
with gross motor incoordination often have problems in processing
“outer spatial” information to guide gross motor actions. Affected children may be inept at catching or throwing a ball because they cannot
form accurate judgments about trajectories in space. Others demonstrate
diminished body position sense. They do not efficiently receive or interpret proprioceptive and kinesthetic feedback from peripheral joints and
muscles. They are likely to evidence difficulties when activities demand
balance and tracking of body position and movement. Others are unable
to meet the motor planning demands of complex motor procedures such
as those needed for dancing, gymnastics, or swimming.
The term dyspraxia relates to difficulty in developing an ideomotor
plan and activating coordinated and integrated visual-­motor actions to
complete a task or solve a motor problem, such as assembling a model
or learning a new movement.
Developmental coordination disorder is categorized in DSM-­5 as a
motor disorder where the learning and execution of coordinated motor
skills is below age level given the child’s opportunity for skill learning,
and the motor difficulties significantly interfere with activities of daily
living, academic productivity, and play.

Language

Language is one of the most critical and complex cognitive functions
and can be broadly divided into receptive (auditory comprehension/

301

understanding) and expressive (speech and language production and/
or communication) functions (see Chapter 53). Children who primarily experience receptive language problems may have difficulty understanding verbal information, following instructions and explanations,
and interpreting what they hear. Expressive language weaknesses can
result from problems with speech production and/or problems with
higher-­level language development. Speech production difficulties
include oromotor problems affecting articulation, verbal fluency, and
naming. Some children have trouble with sound sequencing within
words. Others find it difficult to regulate the rhythm or prosody of their
verbal output. Their speech may be dysfluent, hesitant, and inappropriate in tone. Problems with word retrieval can result in difficulty finding exact words when needed (as in a class discussion) or substituting
definitions for words (circumlocution).
The basic components of language include phonology (ability to
process and integrate the individual sounds in words), semantics
(understanding the meaning of words), syntax (mastery of word order
and grammatical rules), discourse (processing and producing paragraphs and passages), metalinguistics (ability to think about and analyze how language works and draw inferences), and pragmatics (social
understanding and application of language). Children who evidence
higher-­level expressive language impediments have trouble formulating sentences, using grammar appropriately, and organizing spoken
(and possibly written) narratives.
To one degree or another, all academic skills are taught largely
through language, and thus it is not surprising that children who experience language dysfunction often experience problems with academic
performance. In fact, some studies suggest that up to 80% of children
who present with a specific learning disorder also experience language-­
based weaknesses. Additionally, the role of language in executive
functioning cannot be understated, because language serves to guide
cognition and behavior.

Visual-­Spatial/Visual-­Perceptual Function

Important structures involved in the development and function of
the visual system include the retina, the optic nerves, the brainstem
(control of automatic responses, e.g., pupil dilation), the thalamus
(e.g., lateral geniculate nucleus for form, motion, color), and the
primary (visual space and orientation) and secondary (color perception) visual processing regions located in and around the occipital
lobe. Other brain areas, although considered to be outside of the primary visual system, are also important to visual function, helping to
process what is seen (temporal lobe) and where it is located in space
(parietal lobe).
Critical aspects of visual processing development in the child
include appreciation of spatial relations (ability to perceive objects
accurately in space in relation to other objects), visual discrimination
(ability to differentiate and identify objects based on their individual
attributes, e.g., size, shape, color, form, position), and visual closure
(ability to recognize or identify an object when the entire object cannot
be seen). Visual-­spatial processing dysfunctions are rarely the cause of
reading disorders, but some investigations have established that deficits in orthographic coding (visual-­spatial analysis of character-­based
systems) can contribute to reading disorders. Spelling and writing can
emerge as a weakness because children with visual processing problems
usually have trouble with the precise visual configurations of words.
In mathematics, these children often have difficulty with visual-­spatial
orientation, with resultant difficulty aligning digits in columns when
performing calculations and difficulty managing geometric material.
In the social realm, intact visual processing allows a child to make use
of visual or physical cues when communicating and interpreting the
paralinguistic aspects of language. Secure visual functions are also
necessary to process proprioceptive and kinesthetic feedback and to
coordinate movements during physical activities.

Intellectual Function

A useful definition of intellectual function is the capacity to think
in the abstract, reason, problem-­solve, and comprehend. Intelligence
is viewed as a global construct composed of more specific cognitive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

302 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
functions (e.g., auditory and visual-­perceptual processing, spatial abilities, processing speed, and working memory).
The expression of intellect is mediated by many factors, including language development, sensorimotor abilities, genetics, heredity,
environment, and neurodevelopmental function. When an individual’s measured intelligence is >2 standard deviations below the mean
(a standard score of <70 on most IQ tests) and accompanied by significant weaknesses in adaptive skills, the diagnosis of intellectual
disability may be warranted (see Chapter 56). Functionally, some
common characteristics distinguish children with intellectual disability from those with average or above-­average abilities. Typically, those
at the lowest end of the spectrum (e.g., profound or severe intellectual disability) are incapable of independent function and require a
highly structured environment with constant aid and supervision. At
the other end of the spectrum are those with unusually well-­developed
intellect (“gifted”). Stronger intellect has been associated with better-­
developed concept formation, critical thinking, problem solving,
understanding and formulation of rules, brainstorming and creativity,
and metacognition (ability to “think about thinking”). Although high
levels of intellectual functioning offer many opportunities, they can
also be associated with functional challenges related to socialization,
learning, and communication style.
Individuals whose intellect falls in the below-­average range (sometimes referred to as the “borderline” or “slow learner” range) tend to
experience greater difficulty processing and managing information
that is abstract, making connections between concepts and ideas, and
generalizing information (e.g., may be able to comprehend a concept in
one setting but be unable to carry it over and apply it in different situations). In general, these individuals tend to do better when information is presented in more concrete and explicit terms (with repetition)
and when working with rote information (e.g., memorizing specific
material).

Memory

Memory is a term used to describe the complex, cognitive mechanism
by which information is acquired, retained, and recalled. Major brain
areas involved in memory processing include the hippocampus, fornix,
temporal lobes, and cerebellum, with connections in and between most
brain regions. Memory consists of multiple distinct and interconnected
subsystems that are categorized based on the length of time information is stored (e.g., short-­term memory, long-­term memory), type of
information stored (e.g., events, facts, procedures, emotional associations, conditioned reflexes), modality of the information (e.g., visual,
auditory, olfactory), and whether memories are consciously recalled
(explicit memory) or unconsciously recalled (implicit memory).
Information processing models also include working memory as a
distinct component.
Memory formation begins with sensory input (e.g., auditory, visual,
tactile) that is identified, or registered, and subsequently encoded.
Encoding is a mental process that transforms perceptual input into a
representational code for the memory system. Information in short-­
term memory is transferred into long-­term memory through the process of consolidation and storage. Information capacity in short-­term
memory is limited and brief, lasting for seconds to minutes, whereas
information in long-­term memory is potentially unlimited in terms of
capacity and can be available for hours or as long as a life span.
Once information finds its way into long-­term memory, it must be
accessed. In general, information can be retrieved spontaneously (a
process known as free recall) or with the aid of cues (cued or recognition recall). With deliberate, repeated practice, children can develop
automaticity, the ability to instantaneously and effortlessly access
information that has been learned in the past. Automaticity frees cognitive resources to process other information and promote learning.
For example, automaticity in decoding words allows a child to focus on
the meaning of the text.

Social Cognition

The development of effective social skills is heavily dependent on
secure social cognition, which consists of mental processes that allow

an individual to understand and interact with the social environment.
Although some evidence shows that social cognition exists as a discrete
area of neurodevelopmental function, multiple cognitive processes are
involved with social cognition. These include the ability to recognize,
interpret, and make sense of the thoughts, communications (verbal and
nonverbal), and actions of others; the ability to understand that others’ perceptions, perspectives, and intentions might differ from one’s
own (commonly referred to as “theory of mind”); the ability to use language to communicate with others socially (pragmatic language); and
the ability to make inferences about others and the environment based
on contextual information. It can also be argued that social cognition
involves processes associated with memory and EFs, such as flexibility
and shifting. Children with autism spectrum disorder harbor deficits in
social cognition (see Chapter 58).

Executive Function

EF involves multiple skills (Table 49.1) that begin development early in
life (early indications of inhibitory control and even working memory
have been found in infancy), mature significantly during the preschool
years, and continue to develop through adolescence and well into adulthood. Some studies suggest that secure EF may be more important
than intellectual ability for academic success and have revealed that
a child’s ability to delay gratification early in life predicts competency,
attention, self-­regulation, frustration tolerance, aptitude, physical and
mental health, and even risk for substance dependency in adolescence
and adulthood. Conversely, deficits in other areas of neurodevelopment,
such as language development, affect EF.
Attention is far from a unitary, independent, or specific brain function. This may be best illustrated through the phenotype associated
with ADHD (see Chapter 50). Disordered attention can result from
faulty mechanisms in and across subdomains of attention. These subdomains include selective attention (ability to focus attention on a
particular stimulus and to discriminate relevant from irrelevant information), divided attention (ability to orient to more than one stimulus
at a given time), sustained attention (ability to maintain one’s focus),
and alternating attention (capacity to shift focus between stimuli).
Attention problems in children can manifest at any point, from
arousal through output. Children with diminished alertness and

Table 49.1  Symptom Expression of Executive Dysfunction
EXECUTIVE
FUNCTION
DEFICIT
Inhibitory control
Shifting

Initiation
Working
memory
Organization
and planning
Self-­monitoring
Emotional
control

SYMPTOM EXPRESSION
Impulsivity/poor behavioral regulation
Interrupts
“Blurts things out”
Problems with transitioning from one task/activity
to another
Unable to adjust to unexpected change
Repeats unsuccessful problem-­solving approaches
Difficulty independently beginning tasks/activities
Lacks initiative
Difficulty developing ideas or making decisions
Challenges following multistep instruction (e.g.,
only completes one of three steps)
Forgetfulness
Fails to plan ahead
Work is often disorganized
Procrastinates and does not complete tasks
“Messy” child
Fails to recognize errors and check work
Does not appreciate impact of actions on others
Poor self-­awareness
Experiences behavioral and emotional outbursts
(e.g., tantrums)
Easily upset/frustrated
Frequent mood changes

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 49 u Neurodevelopmental and Executive Function and Dysfunction
arousal can exhibit signs of mental fatigue in a classroom or when
engaged in any activity requiring sustained focus. They are apt to have
difficulty directing and sustaining their concentration, and their efforts
may be erratic and unpredictable, with extreme performance inconsistency. Weaknesses in determining saliency often result in allocating cognitive resources to the wrong stimuli, at home, in school, and
socially, and missing important information. Distractibility can take
the form of listening to extraneous noises instead of a teacher, staring
out the window, or constantly thinking about the future. Attention dysfunction can affect the output of work, behavior, and social activity. It
is important to appreciate that most children with attentional dysfunction also have other forms of neurodevelopmental dysfunction that can
be associated with academic disorders (with some estimates suggesting
up to 60% comorbidity).
Inhibitory control (IC) can be described as one’s ability to restrain,
resist, and not act (cognitively or behaviorally/emotionally) on a
thought. IC may also be seen as one’s ability to stop thoughts or ongoing actions. Deficits in this behavioral/impulse regulation mechanism
are a core feature of the combined or hyperactive impulsive presentation of ADHD and have a significant adverse impact on a child’s overall
functioning. In everyday settings, children with weak IC may exhibit
difficulties with self-­
control and self-­
monitoring of their behavior
and output (e.g., impulsivity), may not recognize their own errors or
mistakes, and often act prematurely and without consideration of the
potential consequences of their actions. In the social context, disinhibited children may interrupt others and demonstrate other impulsive behaviors that often interfere with interpersonal relationships. The
indirect consequences of poor IC can include challenges with behavior, emotional regulation, and academic functioning and have adverse
impacts on social interactions and safety.
Shifting is the ability to transition from one activity, topic, or aspect
of a problem to another when needed. Effective shifting allows a child
to flexibly move through their day, tolerating changes in schedule and
routine. Additionally, shifting allows a child to change strategies when
working a problem and adjust to changes in topics when conversing with
others. Children with difficulties in shifting can become quickly upset
in novel situations (e.g., when presented with a substitute teacher) and
show marked resistance to change in routine. They can get stuck on one
problem-­
solving strategy, which compromises their work efficiency.
Socially, problems with shifting can result in one-­sided conversations,
negatively affecting a child’s ability to build and maintain friendships.
Initiation refers to the ability to independently begin an activity,
a task, or thought process (e.g., problem-­solve). Children who present with initiation difficulties often have trouble “getting started.” This
can be exhibited behaviorally, such that the child struggles to start on
physical activities like getting out of bed or beginning chores. Cognitively, weaknesses in initiation may manifest as difficulty coming up
with ideas or generating plans. In school, children who have poor initiation abilities may be slow or unable to start homework assignments
or tests. In social situations, initiation challenges may cause a child to
have difficulty beginning conversations, calling on friends, or going out
with friends.
Deficits in “primary” initiation are relatively rare and are often associated with significant neurologic conditions and treatments (e.g., traumatic brain injury, anoxia, effects of radiation treatment in childhood
cancer). More often, initiation deficits are secondary to other executive problems (e.g., disorganization) or behavioral (e.g., oppositional/
defiant behaviors), developmental (e.g., autism spectrum disorder), or
emotional (e.g., depression, anxiety) disorders.
Working memory (WM) can be defined as the ability to hold,
manipulate, and store information for short periods. In its simplest
form, WM involves the interaction of short-­term verbal and visual
processes (e.g., memory, phonologic awareness, and spatial skills) with
a centralized control mechanism that is responsible for coordinating all
the cognitive processes involved (e.g., temporarily suspending information in memory while manipulating it). Ultimately, this function
enables new information arriving in short-­term memory to be linked
to prior knowledge or procedures held in long-­term memory. As such,
working memory is critical to be able to complete multistep problems

303

and more complex instructions and tasks. WM capacity can double or
triple between the preschool years and adolescence. In the classroom, a
child with a weakness in working memory might appear inattentive or
careless when completing their work. When doing math, a child with
WM dysfunction might have difficulty carrying a number and following the expected procedure. When reading a paragraph, a child might
not recall key facts or be able to integrate information when reading,
particularly long paragraphs. For writing tasks, a child might leave out
ideas they intended to express while they are recalling grammar rules,
such as placing a comma, and working on spelling a word correctly.
Planning refers to the ability to effectively generate, sequence, and
put into motion the steps and procedures necessary to realize a specific
goal. In real-­world settings, children who struggle with planning are
typically described by caregivers and teachers as being inept at independently gathering what is required to solve a problem or as unable to
complete more weighty assignments. These children commonly exhibit
poor time management skills.
Organization is an ability that represents a child’s proficiency in
arranging, ordering, classifying, and categorizing information. Planning and organizing depend on discrimination ability, which refers to
the child’s ability to determine what is and is not valuable when trying
to problem-­solve or organize. Common daily life challenges associated
with organizational difficulties in childhood include problems with
gathering and managing materials or items. When children struggle
with organization, indirect consequences may include becoming overwhelmed with information and being unable to complete a task or
activity. Effective organization is a vital component in learning (more
specifically, in memory/retention); many studies, along with clinical
experience, have shown that poor organization significantly affects
how well a child recalls information.
Self-­monitoring involves awareness and assessment of one’s actions,
whether it be a work product (e.g., writing an essay) or social interaction with another. This EF allows one to evaluate and make necessary
corrections. Children with difficulty in self-­monitoring fail to recognize
errors in their work and struggle with editing. When interacting with
others, they may not realize how their verbal and nonverbal behaviors
are being perceived, ultimately missing opportunities to correct their
behavior and resulting in poor social interactions.
Emotional control is the ability to regulate emotions in order to
realize goals and direct one’s behavior, thoughts, and actions. It has
been well established that affective/emotional states have an impact on
many aspects of functioning. Conversely, executive function or dysfunction often contributes to modulation of affect. Although emotional
control is highly interrelated with different EFs (e.g., disinhibition, self-­
monitoring), separating it conceptually facilitates an appreciation for
and recognition of the often-­overlooked role that a child’s emotional
state plays in cognitive and behavioral functioning. Children with weak
emotional control may exhibit explosive outbursts, poor temper/anger
control, and oversensitivity. Understanding a child’s emotional state is
vital to understanding its impact not only on executive functioning but
also on functioning as a whole (e.g., socially, mentally, behaviorally,
academically).
Any discussion involving emotional control should also recognize
motivation. Motivation/effort may be defined as the reason or reasons
one acts or behaves in a certain way. Less motivated children are less
likely to engage and utilize all their abilities. Such a disposition not
only interferes with application of executive skills but also results in
less-­than-­optimal performance and functioning. The less success a
child feels, the less likely the child is to put forth effort and to persevere
when things become more challenging. If a child’s initial efforts are met
with a negative reaction, the likelihood that the child will continue putting forth adequate effort diminishes. If left unchecked, a child’s overall level of functioning will likely be compromised. More importantly,
the child’s sense of personal efficacy (e.g., self-­esteem) and competence
may suffer.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The symptoms and clinical manifestations of neurodevelopmental
and executive dysfunction differ with age. Preschool-­age children

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

304 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
might present with delayed language development, including problems with articulation, vocabulary development, word finding, and
rhyming. They often experience early challenges with learning colors,
shapes, letters, numbers, the alphabet, and days of the week. Children
with visual processing deficits may have difficulty learning to draw
and write and have problems with art activities. These children might
also have trouble discriminating between left and right. They might
encounter problems recognizing letters and words. Difficulty following
instructions, overactivity, and distractibility may be early symptoms
of emerging executive dysfunction. Difficulties with fine motor development (e.g., grasping crayons/pencils, coloring, drawing) and social
interaction may develop. These manifestations should be considered
as potential “red flags” for future learning challenges (see “Assessment
and Diagnosis”).
School-­age children with neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunctions can vary widely in clinical presentations. Their specific patterns of academic performance and behavior represent final common
pathways of neurodevelopmental strengths and deficits interacting
with environmental, social, or cultural factors; temperament; educational experience; and intrinsic resilience (Table 49.2). Children with
language weaknesses might have problems integrating and associating
letters and sounds, decoding words, deriving meaning, and being able
to comprehend passages. Children with early signs of a mathematics
weakness might have difficulty with concepts of quantity or with adding or subtracting without using concrete representation (e.g., their
fingers when calculating). Difficulty learning time concepts and confusion with directions (right/left) might also be observed. Poor fine
motor control and coordination and poor planning can lead to writing
problems. Attention and behavioral regulation weaknesses observed
earlier can continue, and together with other EF weaknesses (e.g.,
organization, initiation skills), further complicate the child’s ability
to acquire and generalize new knowledge. Children with weaknesses
in WM may struggle to remember the steps necessary to complete an
activity or problem-­solve. In social settings, these children often have
difficulty keeping up with more complex conversations.
Table 49.2  Neurodevelopmental Dysfunction Underlying
Academic Disorders*
ACADEMIC
­DISORDER

POTENTIAL UNDERLYING
­NEURODEVELOPMENTAL DYSFUNCTION

Reading

Language

•	Phonologic processing
•	Verbal fluency
•	Syntactic and semantic skills

Memory

•	Working memory

Sequencing
Visual-­spatial
Attention
Written expression,
spelling

Language

•	Phonologic processing
•	Syntactic and semantic skills

Graphomotor
Visual-­spatial
Memory

•	Working memory

Sequencing
Attention
Mathematics

Visual-­spatial
Memory

•	Working memory

Language
Sequencing
Graphomotor
Attention

*Isolated neurodevelopmental dysfunction can lead to a specific academic disorder, but
more often there is a combination of factors underlying weak academic performance.
In addition to the dysfunction in neurodevelopmental domains as listed in the table,
the clinician must also consider the possibility of limitations of intellectual and
cognitive abilities or associated social and emotional problems.

In middle school children the substantial increase in cognitive, academic, and regulatory demands can cause further difficulties for those
with existing neurodevelopmental and executive challenges. In reading
and writing, middle school children might present with transposition
and sequencing errors; might struggle with root words, prefixes, and
suffixes; might have difficulty with written expression; and might avoid
reading and writing altogether. Challenges completing word problems
in math are common. Difficulty with recall of information might also
be experienced. Although observable in both lower and more advanced
grades, behavioral, emotional, and social difficulties tend to become
more salient in middle school children who experience cognitive or
academic problems.
High school students can present with deficient reading comprehension, written expression, and slower processing efficiency. Difficulty
in answering open-­ended questions, dealing with abstract information,
and deploying executive control (e.g., self-­monitoring, organization,
planning, self-­starting) is often reported.

Academic Problems

Reading disorders (see Chapter 51) can stem from a number of neurodevelopmental dysfunctions, as described earlier (see Table 49.2).
Most often, language and auditory processing weaknesses are present,
as evidenced by poor phonologic processing that results in deficiencies
at the level of decoding individual words and, consequently, a delay in
automaticity (e.g., acquiring a repertoire of words readers can identify instantly) that causes reading to be slow, laborious, and frustrating. Deficits in other core neurodevelopmental domains might also be
present. Weak WM might make it difficult for a child to hold sounds
and symbols in mind while breaking down words into their component sounds, or might cause reading comprehension problems. Some
children experience temporal-­ordering weaknesses and struggle with
reblending phonemes into correct sequences. Memory dysfunction
can cause problems with recall and summarization of what was read.
Some children with higher-­order cognitive deficiencies have trouble
understanding what they read because they lack a strong grasp of the
concepts in a text. Although rare as a cause of reading difficulty, problems with visual-­spatial functions (e.g., visual perception) can cause
children difficulty in recognizing letters. It is not unusual for children
with reading problems to avoid reading practice, and a delay in reading proficiency becomes increasingly pronounced and difficult to
remediate.
Spelling and writing impairments share many related underlying
processing deficits with reading, so it is not surprising that the two
disorders often occur simultaneously in school-­age children (see Table
49.2). Core neurodevelopmental weaknesses that underlie spelling difficulties include phonologic and decoding difficulties, orthographic
problems (coding letters and words into memory), and morphologic
deficits (use of suffixes, prefixes, and root words). Problems in these
areas can manifest as phonetically poor, yet visually comparable,
approximations to the actual word (faght for fight), spelling that is phonetically correct but visually incorrect (fite for fight), and inadequate
spelling patterns (plade for played). Children with memory disorders
might misspell words because of coding weaknesses. Others misspell
because of poor auditory WM that interferes with their ability to process letters. Sequencing weaknesses often result in transposition errors
when spelling.
Writing difficulties have been classified as disorder of written
expression, or dysgraphia (see Table 49.2). Although many of the
same dysfunctions described for reading and spelling can contribute
to problems with writing, written expression is the most complex of
the language arts, requiring synthesis of many neurodevelopmental
functions (e.g., auditory, visual-­spatial, memory, executive; see Chapter 52.2). Weaknesses in these functions can result in written output
that is difficult to comprehend, disjointed, and poorly organized. The
child with WM challenges can lose track of what the child intended to
write. Attention deficits can make it difficult for a child to mobilize and
sustain the mental effort, pacing, and self-­monitoring demands necessary for writing. In many cases, writing is laborious because of an
underlying graphomotor dysfunction (e.g., fluency does not keep pace

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 49 u Neurodevelopmental and Executive Function and Dysfunction
with ideation and language production). Thoughts may also be forgotten or underdeveloped during writing because the mechanical effort
is so taxing.
Weaknesses in mathematical ability, known as mathematics disorder or dyscalculia, involve the assimilation of both procedural
knowledge (e.g., calculations) and higher-­order cognitive processes
(e.g., WM) (see Table 49.2). There are many reasons why children
struggle with mathematics (see Chapter 52.1). It may be difficult for
some to grasp and apply math concepts effectively and systematically;
good mathematicians are able to use both verbal and perceptual conceptualization to understand such concepts as fractions, percentages,
equations, and proportion. Children with language dysfunctions
have difficulty in mathematics because they have trouble understanding their teachers’ verbal explanations of quantitative concepts and
operations and are likely to experience frustration in solving word
problems and in processing the vast network of technical vocabulary
in math. Mathematics also relies on visualization. Children who have
difficulty forming and recalling visual imagery may be at a disadvantage. They might experience problems writing numbers correctly,
placing value locations, and processing geometric shapes or fractions.
Children with executive dysfunction may be unable to focus on fine
detail (e.g., operational signs), might take an impulsive approach to
problem solving, engage in little or no self-­monitoring, forget components of the problem, or commit careless errors. When a child’s
memory system is weak, the child might have difficulty recalling
appropriate procedures and automatizing mathematical facts (e.g.,
multiplication tables). Moreover, children with mathematical disabilities can have superimposed mathematics phobias; anxiety over
mathematics can be especially debilitating.

Nonacademic Problems

The impulsivity and lack of effective self-­monitoring of children with
executive dysfunction can lead to unacceptable actions that were unintentional. Children struggling with neurodevelopmental dysfunction
can experience excessive performance anxiety, sadness, or clinical
depression; declining self-­esteem; and chronic fatigue. Some children
may lose motivation and feel no need to exert effort and develop future
goals. These children may be easily led toward dysfunctional interpersonal relationships, detrimental behaviors (e.g., delinquency, substance
abuse), and the development of mental health disorders, such as mood
disorders (see Chapter 39) or conduct disorder (see Chapter 42).

ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS

Pediatricians have a critical role in identifying and treating the child
with neurodevelopmental or executive dysfunction (Fig. 49.1). They
have knowledge of the child’s medical and family history and social-­
environmental circumstances and have the benefit of longitudinal
contact over the course of routine health visits. Focused surveillance
and screening will facilitate early identification of developmental-­
behavioral and preacademic difficulties and interventions to facilitate
optimal outcomes.
A family history of a parent who still struggles with reading or time
management or an older sibling who has failed at school should spur
an increased level of monitoring. Risk factors in the medical history,
such as extreme prematurity or chronic medical conditions, should
likewise be flagged. Children with low birthweight and those born
prematurely who appear to have been spared more serious neurologic
problems might only manifest academic problems later in their school
career. Nonspecific physical complaints or unexpected changes in
behavior might be presenting symptoms. Warning signs might be subtle or absent, and parents might have concerns about their child’s learning progress but may be reluctant to share these with the pediatrician
unless prompted, such as through completion of standardized developmental screening questionnaires or direct questioning regarding
possible concerns. Concerns voiced to parents or caregivers by daycare,
preschool, or early elementary teachers might be the first indicators
of neurodevelopmental dysfunctions. There should be a low threshold
for initiating further school performance screening and assessment if
there are any concerns or “red flags” (see “Clinical Manifestations”).

305

In elementary school, review of school report cards and teacher comments can provide very useful information. In addition to patterns of
grades in the various academic skill areas, it is also important to review
ratings of classroom behavior and work habits. Group-­administered
standardized tests provide further information, although interpretation is required because poor scores could result from a learning
disorder, ADHD, emotional problems, lack of motivation, or some
combination. Conversely, a discrepancy between above-­average scores
on standardized tests and unsatisfactory classroom performance could
signal motivation, adjustment issues, or instructional mismatches.
Challenges related to homework, such as excessive time to complete,
can provide further insight regarding EFs, academic skill, and behavioral factors or factors related to the home environment.
Underlying or associated medical problems should be ruled out. Any
suspicion of sensory difficulty should warrant referral for vision or
hearing testing. The influence of chronic medical problems or potential side effects of medications should be considered. Sleep deprivation
is increasingly being recognized as a contributor to academic problems,
especially in middle and high school. Substance use must always be a
consideration as well, especially in the adolescent previously achieving
well who has shown a rapid decline in academic performance.
The physician should be alert for dysmorphic physical features,
minor congenital anomalies, or constellations of physical findings
(e.g., cardiac and palatal anomalies in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome)
and should perform a detailed neurologic examination, including an
assessment of fine and gross motor coordination and any involuntary
movements or soft neurologic signs. Genetic testing is often recommended for children with intellectual disability or autism spectrum
disorder; electroencephalogram and brain MRI are generally not indicated in the absence of specific medical findings or a family history.
Early signs of executive dysfunction can also be subtle and easily
overlooked or misinterpreted. Informal inquiry might include questions about how children complete schoolwork or tasks, how organized
or disorganized they are, how much guidance they need, whether they
think through problems or respond and react too quickly, what circumstances or individuals affect their ability to employ EFs, how easily
they begin tasks and activities, and how well they plan, manage belongings, and control their emotions.
Pediatricians who are interested in performing further assessment
before referral, or who are practicing in areas where psychologic testing resources are limited, can use standardized rating scales and
inventories or brief, individually administered tests to narrow potential diagnoses and guide next steps in diagnosis and treatment. Such
instruments, completed by the parents, teachers, and the child (if old
enough), can provide information about emotions and behavior, patterns of academic performance, and traits associated with specific neurodevelopmental dysfunctions (see Chapter 32). Screening instruments
such as the Pediatric Symptom Checklist and behavioral questionnaires
such as the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) and Behavior Assessment
System for Children, Third Edition (BASC-­3) can aid in evaluation.
EFs can be further assessed by instruments such as the Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function, Second Edition (BRIEF-­2), which
provides a comprehensive measure of real-­world behaviors that are
closely tied to executive functioning in children age 5-­18 years. Tests
that can be directly administered to gauge intellectual and language
functioning include the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition
(KBIT-­2) and Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, Fifth Edition (PPVT
5; assessing receptive vocabulary). A relatively brief test of academic
skills is the Wide Range Achievement Test5 (WRAT5). It should be recognized that these are midlevel tests that can provide descriptive estimates of function but are not diagnostic.
Children who are struggling academically are entitled to evaluations in school. Such assessments are guaranteed in the United States
under Public Law 101-­476, the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA). One increasingly common type of evaluation model
supported by IDEA is referred to as a Response to Intervention (RtI)
model (see Chapter 52.1). In this model, students who are struggling
with academic skills are initially provided research-­based instruction. If a child does not respond to this instruction, an individualized

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

306 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Primary Care Approach to Neurodevelopmental and Executive Dysfunction

Early Identification

Surveillance
Birth and perinatal history
Medical and family history
Parent/caregiver concerns
School or behavioral problems

Screening
Standardized developmental screening
Emotional-behavioral screening tests
School achievement test scores

Medical Assessment
Neurodevelopmental & Emotional Assessment
Abnormal movements; motor coordination;
“soft” neurological signs; focal findings
Questionnaires; interview; mid-level tests
Report cards; teacher reports

History and Examination
Sleep
Associated medical conditions
Medications; substance abuse
Growth; dysmorphic features; exam

Referral
School testing
Psychologist; Educational Specialist
Developmental-Behavioral Pediatrician
Medical subspecialist; Developmental therapist

Evaluation and Diagnosis
Developmental and/or Psychosocial Assessment
Speech-language; Physical and Occupational
Therapy; Psychology; Social Work;
Neuropsychology;
Psychiatry; Neurology; Genetics

Psychoeducational Assessment
Intellectual ability
Academic achievement
Executive function
Emotional-behavioral function

Treatment

Medical Home
Ensure adequate sleep, nutrition, exercise
Optimize management of associated conditions
Prescribe and manage medications if needed
Support child and parents
Explain test findings and “demystify”
Advocate for appropriate services; advise on
nonstandard therapies

Educational, Developmental, Mental Health
Accommodations: school and home
Interventions: tutoring; special education
resource services; developmental therapies
Address executive dysfunction: modeling;
games; strategies; programs
Strengthen strengths and leverage affinities
Counseling

evaluation by a multidisciplinary team is conducted. Children found
to have attentional dysfunction and other disorders might qualify for
educational accommodations in the regular classroom under Section
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (504 Plan) or might qualify for
an individualized education program (IEP).
The pediatrician should advise and support parents regarding
steps to request evaluations by the school. Multidisciplinary evaluations are focused primarily on determining whether a student meets
the eligibility criteria for special education services and to assist in
developing an IEP for those eligible for these services. Independent
evaluations can provide second opinions outside the school setting.

Fig. 49.1 Algorithm showing
components of a primary care approach to identification, diagnosis,
and comprehensive multidisciplinary management of neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunction.

The multidisciplinary team should include a psychologist and preferably an educational diagnostician who can undertake a detailed analysis of academic skills and subskills to pinpoint where breakdowns are
occurring in the processes of reading, spelling, writing, and mathematics. Other professionals should become involved, as needed, such as a
speech-­language pathologist, occupational therapist, and social worker.
A mental health specialist can be valuable in identifying family-­based
issues or psychiatric disorders that may be complicating or aggravating
neurodevelopmental dysfunctions.
In some cases, more in-­depth examination of a child’s neurocognitive status is warranted. This is particularly true for children who

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 49 u Neurodevelopmental and Executive Function and Dysfunction
present with developmental or cognitive difficulties in the presence
of a medical condition (e.g., epilepsy, traumatic brain injury, childhood cancers/brain tumors, genetic conditions). A neuropsychologic
evaluation involves comprehensive assessment to understand brain
functions across domains. Neuropsychologic data are often analyzed
together with other tests, such as MRI, to look for supporting evidence
of any areas of difficulty (e.g., memory weaknesses associated with
temporal lobe anomalies). Neuropsychologists can also provide more
in-­depth evaluation of EFs. Assessment of EFs is typically completed
in an examination setting using tools specifically designed to identify
any weaknesses in these functions. Although few tools are currently
available to assess EF in preschool-­age children, the assessment of
school-­age children is better established. Problems with EFs should be
evaluated across measures and in different settings, particularly within
the context of the child’s daily demands.

TREATMENT

Treatment for neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunction involves
a multimodal, multidisciplinary “cross-­sector” approach to foster optimal outcomes. This process begins with demystification,
which involves educating the child and family about the nature of the
child’s delay or dysfunction while also identifying a child’s strengths.
The explanation of the dysfunction should be provided in nontechnical language, communicating a sense of optimism for improvement
with appropriate intervention. Children need to have their affinities,
potentials, and talents identified clearly and emphasized as an integral component of the long-­term treatment plan. It is as important to
augment strengths as it is to attempt to remedy deficiencies. Athletic
skills, artistic inclinations, creative talents, and mechanical abilities are
among the potential assets of certain students who are underachieving
academically. Parents and school personnel need to create opportunities for such students to build on these assets. These well-­developed
personal assets can ultimately have implications for the transition into
young adulthood, including career or college selection.
In the clinic setting, the pediatrician plays an important role as a
consultant and advocate in overseeing and monitoring the implementation of a comprehensive multidisciplinary management plan
for children with neurodevelopmental dysfunctions. The primary
care provider should identify and treat any underlying or associated
medical problems that might contribute to neurodevelopmental and
EF dysfunction, such as iron deficiency, elevated lead levels, and sleep
problems, including inadequate sleep related to poor sleep hygiene or
poor quality of sleep (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea). Additionally, the
pediatrician will need to monitor for conditions that often co-­occur
with neurodevelopmental delays and executive dysfunction or that
may develop over time, including anxiety, depression, and substance
use disorder.

Bypass Strategies (Accommodations)

Numerous techniques can enable a child to circumvent neurodevelopmental dysfunctions. Such strategies are typically used in the regular
classroom and can be incorporated into a 504 Plan or IEP. Accommodations change how the child learns, allowing them to access material
and meet the same expectations as their peers. Examples of accommodations include using large print for those with visual impairment and
using a frequency modulation (FM) system for students with hearing
impairment. For children with learning disorders, accommodations
may include using a calculator while solving mathematical problems,
writing essays with a word processor and use of spellcheck, or presenting oral instead of written reports. Children with executive dysfunction
might benefit from being seated near the teacher to minimize distractions and taking tests untimed. These bypass strategies do not cure
neurodevelopmental dysfunctions, but they minimize their academic
and nonacademic effects and can provide a scaffold for more successful
academic achievement.

Curriculum Modifications

Many children with neurodevelopmental dysfunctions require alterations in the school curriculum to succeed, especially as they progress

307

through secondary school. A modification changes what the child is
taught or expected to learn. Modifications include a student learning
different material (e.g., continuing to work on addition and subtraction facts while peers move on to fractions) and instructors assigning
grades using a different standard. In high school and college, students
with memory weaknesses might need to work with an advisor to select
courses that avoid an inordinate cumulative memory load in any single
semester. For adolescents with learning disorders, the timing of foreign language learning and the selection of mathematics and science
courses are critical to their academic success.

Remediation/Targeted Intervention

Interventions can be implemented at home and in school to strengthen
academic skills. Early identification is critical so that appropriate
instructional interventions can be introduced to minimize the long-­
term effects of academic disorders. Any interventions should be
empirically supported (e.g., phonologically based reading intervention
has been shown to significantly improve reading skills in school-­age
children). Remediation may take place in a resource room or learning center at school and is usually limited to children who have met
the educational criteria for special education services described earlier.
Reading specialists, mathematics tutors, and other professionals can
use diagnostic data to select techniques that use a student’s neurodevelopmental strengths to improve decoding skills, writing ability, or mathematical computation skills. Remediation need not focus exclusively
on specific academic areas. Many students need assistance in acquiring
study skills, cognitive strategies, and productive organizational habits.
Speech-­language pathologists offer intervention for children with
various forms of language disability. Occupational therapists focus on
sensorimotor skills, including the motor skills of students with writing
problems, and physical therapists address gross motor incoordination.

Treatment of Executive Dysfunction

Interventions to strengthen EFs can be implemented throughout childhood but are most effective if started at a young age. Preschool-­age
children first learn EFs by way of the modeling, boundaries, and rules
observed and put in place by their parents/caregivers, and this modeled
behavior must gradually become “internalized” by the child. Early play
has been shown to be effective in promoting executive skills in younger
children with games such as peek-­a-­boo (WM); pat-­a-­cake (WM and
IC); follow the leader, Simon Says, and “Ring Around the Rosie” (self-­
control); imitation activities (attention and impulse control); matching
and sorting games (organization and attention); and imaginary play
(attention, WM, IC, self-­monitoring, cognitive flexibility).
In school-­age children it is crucial to establish consistent cognitive
and behavioral routines that foster and maximize independent, goal-­
oriented problem solving and performance through mechanisms that
include modification of the child’s environment, modeling and guidance with the child, and positive reinforcement strategies. Interventions should promote generalization (teaching executive routines in
the context of a problem, not as a separate skill) and should move from
the external to the internal (from “external support” with active and
directive modeling to an “internal process”). An intervention could
proceed from external modeling of multistep problem-­solving routines and external guidance in developing and implementing everyday
routines, to practicing application and use of routines in everyday situations, to a gradual fading of external support and cueing of internal
generation and use of executive skills. Such approaches should make
the child a part of intervention planning, should avoid labeling, reward
effort not outcomes, make interventions positive, and hold the child
responsible for his or her efforts. Studies have consistently shown that
a combination of medication and behavioral treatments are most
effective, although evidence for long-­term efficacy is lacking. It is
important that any treatment plans aimed at bolstering attention and
EF also include interventions that address the specific deficits associated with any comorbid diagnoses.
In addition to behavioral approaches, cognitive training, both computerized and noncomputerized, has been shown to strengthen the
cognitive skills on which one is trained. Some computerized training

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

308 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
programs show lasting improvements in WM skills in children, though
benefits are narrow and limited only to the aspects of WM specifically trained. Recently, game-­based digital therapy has been shown to
improve attention in children with ADHD-­inattentive type and combined type. Noncomputerized cognitive training has shown greater
improvements in EF than any type of computerized cognitive training.
This may be the result of instructor-­trainee interaction. Also evidencing positive outcomes are curriculum-­based classroom programs,
such as the Tools of the Mind (Tools) and Promoting Alternative Thinking Strategies (PATHS), which have been shown to improve IC.
Emerging evidence suggests physical activity can improve EF. Children who are more physically active and have better aerobic fitness
have been shown to have better EF than children who are sedentary.
Although plain aerobic exercise (e.g., walking, running) has not been
found to improve EF, encouraging findings have been noted when an
activity involves aerobic exercise and is also cognitively demanding.
Basketball and dance, for example, are high in physical exertion while
also requiring cognitive engagement through motor coordination
and planning. In contrast, resistance training has not been shown to
improve EF.
Approaches that use mindfulness techniques are also gaining prominence. Mindfulness practices incorporating movement (e.g., tai chi)
improve EF better than those performed in a seated position. Martial
arts such as taekwondo, which stresses discipline and self-­regulation,
have demonstrated improvements that generalize in many aspects of
EFs and attention (e.g., sustained focus).

COUNSELING AND PARENT TRAINING PROGRAMS

The pediatrician is often in a close, trusting relationship with families and is well-­positioned to identify adverse home factors that may
require additional supports, including counseling and parent training.

When academic difficulties are complicated by family problems or
identifiable psychiatric disorders, psychotherapy may be indicated.
Mental health professionals may offer long-­term or short-­term therapy. Such intervention may involve the child alone or the entire family. Cognitive-­behavioral therapy is especially effective for mood and
anxiety disorders. It is essential that the therapist have a firm understanding of the nature of a child’s neurodevelopmental dysfunctions.
Formal parenting interventions have also demonstrated strong evidence for effectiveness. Four programs that have the most empirical
support are the Triple P, Parent-­Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT),
Incredible Years, and New Forest Parenting Programme.
Table 49.3 outlines interventions to target the specific components
of EF. Although interventions may target each component separately,
success will be determined by how well treatments can be integrated
across settings and generalized to other areas of function. Whenever
possible, working with more than one EF simultaneously is encouraged as a means of scaffolding intervention and building on previously
mastered skills.

Medication

Psychopharmacologic agents may be helpful in lessening the toll of
some neurodevelopmental dysfunctions. Most often, stimulants are
used in the treatment of children with attention deficits. Although
most children with attention deficits have other associated dysfunctions, such as language disorders, memory problems, motor weaknesses, or social skill deficits, medications such as methylphenidate,
dextroamphetamine, lisdexamfetamine, and mixed amphetamine salts,
as well as nonstimulants such as α2-­adrenergic agonists and atomoxetine, can be important adjuncts to treatment by helping some children
focus more selectively and control their impulsivity. When depression
or excessive anxiety is a significant component of the clinical picture,

Table 49.3  Executive Function Categories: Presenting Symptoms, Suggested Dysfunction, and Potential Interventions
SYMPTOM/PRESENTING
COMPLAINT

SUSPECTED AREA
OF DYSFUNCTION

Acts before thinking
Interrupts
Poor behavioral and/or
emotional control

Inhibitory control

Increase structure in environment to set limits for inhibition problems.
Make behavior and work expectations clear and explicit; review with child.
Post rules in view; point to them when child breaks rule.
Teach response-­delay techniques (e.g., counting to 10 before acting).

Cannot follow multistep
instructions
Forgetful

Working memory

Repeat instructions as needed.
Keep instructions clear and concise.
Provide concrete references.

Struggles starting assignments/
tasks
Lacks initiative/motivation
Has trouble developing ideas/
strategies

Initiation

Increase structure of tasks.
Establish and rely on routine.
Break tasks into smaller, manageable steps.
Place child with partner or group for modeling and cueing from peers.

Does not plan ahead
Uses trial-­and-­error approach

Planning

Practice with tasks with only a few steps first.
Teach simple flow charting as a planning tool.
Practice with planning tasks (e.g., mazes).
Ask child to verbalize plan before beginning work.
Ask child to verbalize second plan if first does not work.
Ask child to verbalize possible consequences of actions before beginning.
Review incidents of poor planning/anticipation with child.

Work/belongings is/are “messy”
Random/haphazard problem
solving
Procrastinates/does not
complete tasks

Organization

Increase organization of classroom and activities to serve as model, and help child
grasp structure of new information.
Present framework of new information to be learned at the outset, and review again
at the end of a lesson.
Begin with tasks with only a few steps and increase gradually.

Gets “stuck”
Trouble transitioning
Does not adapt to change

Flexibility/shifting

Increase routine to the day.
Make schedule clear and public.
Forewarn of any changes in schedule.
Give “2-­minute warning” of time to change.
Make changes from one task to the next or one topic to the next, clear and explicit.
Shifting may be a problem of inhibiting, so apply strategies for inhibition problems.

POSSIBLE “REAL-­WORLD” INTERVENTIONS

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 50 u Attention-­Deficit/­Hyperactivity Disorder
antidepressants or anxiolytics may be helpful. Other medications
may improve behavioral control (see Chapter 33). Children receiving
medication need regular follow-­up visits that include a history to check
for side effects, a review of current behavioral checklists, a complete
physical examination, and appropriate modifications of the medication dose. Periodic trials off medication are recommended to establish
whether the medication is still necessary.

Nonstandard Therapies

Pediatricians should be aware of nonstandard therapies that purport to
treat neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunction or components
therein. A variety of treatment methods for neurodevelopmental dysfunctions have been proposed that currently have little to no known
scientific evidence of efficacy. This list includes dietary interventions
(vitamins, elimination of food additives or potential allergens), neuromotor programs or medications to address vestibular dysfunction, eye
exercises, filters, tinted lenses, and various technologic devices. Parents
should be cautioned against expending the excessive amounts of time
and financial resources usually demanded by these remedies. In many
cases, it is difficult to distinguish the nonspecific beneficial effects of
increased support and attention paid to the child from the purported
target effects of the interventions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 50

Attention-­Deficit/­
Hyperactivity Disorder
Elizabeth B. Harstad
Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most
common and extensively studied neurobehavioral disorders of childhood and is among the most prevalent chronic health conditions
affecting school-­age children. ADHD is characterized by inattention,
including increased distractibility and difficulty sustaining attention;
poor impulse control and decreased self-­inhibitory capacity; and
motor overactivity and restlessness (Table 50.1, Fig. 50.1). Definitions vary in different countries. In the International Classification
of Diseases (ICD) 2022 update from ICD-­10 to ICD-­11, hyperkinetic
disorder was replaced with ADHD, which aligns with Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-­5) terminology. Under ICD-­11, the essential features of ADHD are described,
but without giving age of onset, duration, or minimum number of
symptoms needed for the diagnosis as specified in DSM-­5 (Table
50.2). Children with ADHD may experience academic underachievement, problems with interpersonal relationships with family members and peers, and low self-­esteem. ADHD often coexists with other
emotional, behavioral, language, and learning disorders. Evidence
also suggests that for many people, the disorder continues, with varying manifestations across the life cycle, leading to significant underemployment and unemployment, social dysfunction, and increased
risk of antisocial behaviors (e.g., substance abuse), difficulty maintaining relationships, encounters with the law, and death from suicide
or accidents (Figs. 50.2 and 50.3).

309

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Studies of the prevalence of ADHD worldwide have generally reported
that 5–10% of school-­age children are affected, although rates vary
considerably by country, perhaps in part because of differing sampling
and testing techniques and a varying symptom threshold for diagnosis.
ADHD is more common in males than in females (male to female ratio
4:1 for the predominantly hyperactive-­impulsive presentation and 2:1
for the predominantly inattentive presentation). Many children with
ADHD will have coexisting diagnoses, including learning disabilities,
mood disorders, and/or language disorders. Children with high intellectual quotient (IQ) are just as likely to have ADHD as those with
average IQ, but children with below-­average IQ have increased risk of
having coexisting ADHD.

ETIOLOGY

There is no single etiology identified for ADHD; many factors play
a role in its development. A genetic contribution to the etiology of
ADHD is well established. Twin studies show 70–80% heritability, and
there is a 5-­to 10-­fold increased risk for ADHD among first-­degree
relatives of those with ADHD. However, there are many ways in which
genetic variants contribute to ADHD; it is thought that ADHD is a
polygenic disorder in which multiple common genetic variants act
together to increase the risk for ADHD.
Structural and functional abnormalities of the brain have been identified in children with ADHD. These include dysregulation of the frontal subcortical circuits; small cortical volumes in this region or more
widespread throughout the brain; and abnormalities of the cerebellum,
particularly midline/vermian elements. There is a median of a 3-­year
delay in attainment of peak cortical thickness in prefrontal regions
of the brain in those with ADHD. Although neuroimaging studies have advanced knowledge related to ADHD, neuroimaging does
not typically have a role in the clinical diagnosis or inform ongoing
management.
Brain catecholamine metabolism, specifically for dopamine and norepinephrine, appears to play a role in the pathophysiology of ADHD.
Animal studies suggest that an imbalance between these systems
(specifically a decrease in inhibitory dopamine activity and increase
in norepinephrine activity) contributes to ADHD. These findings are
supported by human studies showing that individuals with ADHD
have an increase in dopamine transporter density (which clears away
dopamine too quickly) compared to non-­ADHD controls. Additionally, studies showing that stimulant medications work to treat ADHD
by increasing the amount of available dopamine and norepinephrine at
the synapse support a role for catecholamine metabolism in the etiology of ADHD.
Some environmental factors also may contribute to the pathogenesis of ADHD. Prenatal exposure to tobacco smoke or alcohol is
associated with increased risk for ADHD. Prematurity, including even
late-­preterm birth, is also associated with increased risk for ADHD.
Maternal mental illness increases the risk for ADHD in offspring, and
research indicates underlying maternal mental illness itself, rather
than treatment of the mental illness, is the associated risk factor. Diet
is not thought to play a role in the pathogenesis of ADHD for most
children with the condition. A small subset of children with ADHD
may be uniquely sensitive to certain foods, sugars, or additives, but this
remains controversial, as studies reporting these findings are typically
small and often not rigorously designed.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Development of the DSM-­5 criteria for ADHD has occurred mainly in
field trials with children 5-­12 years of age (see Table 50.1). The DSM-­5
criteria state that the inattentive or hyperactive-­
impulsive behaviors must be developmentally inappropriate (substantially different
from that of other children of the same age and developmental level),
must begin before age 12 years, must be present for at least 6 months,
must be present in two or more settings, and must not be secondary
to another disorder. To meet criteria for ADHD, the symptoms must
interfere with social, academic, or occupational functioning.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 50 u Attention-­Deficit/­Hyperactivity Disorder
antidepressants or anxiolytics may be helpful. Other medications
may improve behavioral control (see Chapter 33). Children receiving
medication need regular follow-­up visits that include a history to check
for side effects, a review of current behavioral checklists, a complete
physical examination, and appropriate modifications of the medication dose. Periodic trials off medication are recommended to establish
whether the medication is still necessary.

Nonstandard Therapies

Pediatricians should be aware of nonstandard therapies that purport to
treat neurodevelopmental and executive dysfunction or components
therein. A variety of treatment methods for neurodevelopmental dysfunctions have been proposed that currently have little to no known
scientific evidence of efficacy. This list includes dietary interventions
(vitamins, elimination of food additives or potential allergens), neuromotor programs or medications to address vestibular dysfunction, eye
exercises, filters, tinted lenses, and various technologic devices. Parents
should be cautioned against expending the excessive amounts of time
and financial resources usually demanded by these remedies. In many
cases, it is difficult to distinguish the nonspecific beneficial effects of
increased support and attention paid to the child from the purported
target effects of the interventions.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 50

Attention-­Deficit/­
Hyperactivity Disorder
Elizabeth B. Harstad
Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most
common and extensively studied neurobehavioral disorders of childhood and is among the most prevalent chronic health conditions
affecting school-­age children. ADHD is characterized by inattention,
including increased distractibility and difficulty sustaining attention;
poor impulse control and decreased self-­inhibitory capacity; and
motor overactivity and restlessness (Table 50.1, Fig. 50.1). Definitions vary in different countries. In the International Classification
of Diseases (ICD) 2022 update from ICD-­10 to ICD-­11, hyperkinetic
disorder was replaced with ADHD, which aligns with Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-­5) terminology. Under ICD-­11, the essential features of ADHD are described,
but without giving age of onset, duration, or minimum number of
symptoms needed for the diagnosis as specified in DSM-­5 (Table
50.2). Children with ADHD may experience academic underachievement, problems with interpersonal relationships with family members and peers, and low self-­esteem. ADHD often coexists with other
emotional, behavioral, language, and learning disorders. Evidence
also suggests that for many people, the disorder continues, with varying manifestations across the life cycle, leading to significant underemployment and unemployment, social dysfunction, and increased
risk of antisocial behaviors (e.g., substance abuse), difficulty maintaining relationships, encounters with the law, and death from suicide
or accidents (Figs. 50.2 and 50.3).

309

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Studies of the prevalence of ADHD worldwide have generally reported
that 5–10% of school-­age children are affected, although rates vary
considerably by country, perhaps in part because of differing sampling
and testing techniques and a varying symptom threshold for diagnosis.
ADHD is more common in males than in females (male to female ratio
4:1 for the predominantly hyperactive-­impulsive presentation and 2:1
for the predominantly inattentive presentation). Many children with
ADHD will have coexisting diagnoses, including learning disabilities,
mood disorders, and/or language disorders. Children with high intellectual quotient (IQ) are just as likely to have ADHD as those with
average IQ, but children with below-­average IQ have increased risk of
having coexisting ADHD.

ETIOLOGY

There is no single etiology identified for ADHD; many factors play
a role in its development. A genetic contribution to the etiology of
ADHD is well established. Twin studies show 70–80% heritability, and
there is a 5-­to 10-­fold increased risk for ADHD among first-­degree
relatives of those with ADHD. However, there are many ways in which
genetic variants contribute to ADHD; it is thought that ADHD is a
polygenic disorder in which multiple common genetic variants act
together to increase the risk for ADHD.
Structural and functional abnormalities of the brain have been identified in children with ADHD. These include dysregulation of the frontal subcortical circuits; small cortical volumes in this region or more
widespread throughout the brain; and abnormalities of the cerebellum,
particularly midline/vermian elements. There is a median of a 3-­year
delay in attainment of peak cortical thickness in prefrontal regions
of the brain in those with ADHD. Although neuroimaging studies have advanced knowledge related to ADHD, neuroimaging does
not typically have a role in the clinical diagnosis or inform ongoing
management.
Brain catecholamine metabolism, specifically for dopamine and norepinephrine, appears to play a role in the pathophysiology of ADHD.
Animal studies suggest that an imbalance between these systems
(specifically a decrease in inhibitory dopamine activity and increase
in norepinephrine activity) contributes to ADHD. These findings are
supported by human studies showing that individuals with ADHD
have an increase in dopamine transporter density (which clears away
dopamine too quickly) compared to non-­ADHD controls. Additionally, studies showing that stimulant medications work to treat ADHD
by increasing the amount of available dopamine and norepinephrine at
the synapse support a role for catecholamine metabolism in the etiology of ADHD.
Some environmental factors also may contribute to the pathogenesis of ADHD. Prenatal exposure to tobacco smoke or alcohol is
associated with increased risk for ADHD. Prematurity, including even
late-­preterm birth, is also associated with increased risk for ADHD.
Maternal mental illness increases the risk for ADHD in offspring, and
research indicates underlying maternal mental illness itself, rather
than treatment of the mental illness, is the associated risk factor. Diet
is not thought to play a role in the pathogenesis of ADHD for most
children with the condition. A small subset of children with ADHD
may be uniquely sensitive to certain foods, sugars, or additives, but this
remains controversial, as studies reporting these findings are typically
small and often not rigorously designed.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Development of the DSM-­5 criteria for ADHD has occurred mainly in
field trials with children 5-­12 years of age (see Table 50.1). The DSM-­5
criteria state that the inattentive or hyperactive-­
impulsive behaviors must be developmentally inappropriate (substantially different
from that of other children of the same age and developmental level),
must begin before age 12 years, must be present for at least 6 months,
must be present in two or more settings, and must not be secondary
to another disorder. To meet criteria for ADHD, the symptoms must
interfere with social, academic, or occupational functioning.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

310 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 50.1  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for ADHD
A. A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity/impulsivity
that interferes with functioning or development, as characterized
by (1) and/or (2):
1.	
Inattention: Six (or more) of the following symptoms of
inattention have persisted for ≥6 mo to a degree that is
inconsistent with development level and that negatively affects
directly on social and academic/occupational activities:
a.	Often fails to give close attention to details or makes
careless mistakes in schoolwork, at work, or during
other activities (e.g., overlooks or misses details, work is
inaccurate).
b.	Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play
activities.
c.	Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly.
d.	Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to
finish schoolwork, chores, or duties in the workplace (not
the result of oppositional behavior or failure to understand
instructions).
e.	Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities.
f.	Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks
that require sustained mental effort (e.g., schoolwork,
homework).
g.	Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g.,
toys, school assignments, pencils, books, tools).
h.	Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli.
i.	Is often forgetful in daily activities.
2.	
Hyperactivity/impulsivity: Six (or more) of the following
symptoms of inattention have persisted for ≥6 mo to a degree
that is inconsistent with development level and that negatively
affects directly on social and academic/occupational activities.
a.	Often fidgets with hands or feet or squirms in seat.
b.	Often leaves seat in classroom or in other situations in
which remaining seated is expected.
c.	Often runs about or climbs excessively in situations in which
it is inappropriate (in adolescents or adults, may be limited
to subjective feelings of restlessness).
d.	Often has difficulty playing or engaging in leisure activities
quietly.
e.	Is often “on the go” or often acts as if “driven by a motor.”

f.	Often talks excessively. Impulsivity.
g.	Often blurts out answers before questions have been
completed.
h.	Often has difficulty awaiting turn.
i.	Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into
conversations or games).
B. Several inattentive or hyperactive/impulsive symptoms were
present before 12 yr of age.
C. Several inattentive or hyperactive/impulsive symptoms are
present in two or more settings (e.g., at school [or work] or at
home) and are documented independently.
D. There is clear evidence of clinically significant impairment in
social, academic, or occupational functioning.
E. Symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of
schizophrenia, or another psychotic disorder, and are not better
accounted for by another mental disorder (e.g., mood disorder,
anxiety disorder, dissociative disorder, personality disorder,
substance intoxication or withdrawal).
CODE BASED ON TYPE
314.01 Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder, combined presentation:
if both Criteria A1 and A2 are met for the past 6 mo.
314.00 Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder, predominantly
inattentive presentation: if Criterion A1 is met but Criterion A2 is
not met for the past 6 mo.
314.01 Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder, predominantly
hyperactive-­impulsive presentation: if Criterion A2 is met but
Criterion A1 is not met for the past 6 mo.
Specify if:
Mild: Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the
diagnosis are present, and if the symptoms result in no more than
minor impairments in social and occupational functioning.
Moderate: Symptoms or functional impairment between “mild” and
“severe” are present.
Severe: Many symptoms in excess of those required to make the
diagnosis, or several symptoms that are particularly severe, are
present, or the symptoms result in marked impairment in social or
occupational functioning.

From American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed, Text Revision, Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2000, and
Fifth Edition (Copyright 2013 American Psychiatric Association.)

Poor concentration

Difficulties with
school work

Hyperactivity

Struggle to
be organized

Constantly
on the go

Impulsivity

Less aware
of danger

Strained family and
peer relationships

Questions to ask

Is school attainment
below what is
expected?

Do they:

Do they:

Do they:

Lose things?

Run about excessively?

Do instructions often
need to be repeated?

Forget what they
were doing?

Need high levels of
adult supervision?

Struggle to sit still
during a favorite
movie or meal, or in
the classroom?

Struggle to get ready
for school?
Struggle to complete
tasks?

Have little road safety
awareness?
Experience many trivial
unintentional incidents?

Difficulty maintaining
peer relationships?
Strained parent-child
relationships?
Are they bullied or
do they bully others?
Easily led and
influenced to engage
in thoughtless acts,
occasionally leading
to police involvement?

Fig. 50.1 How to assess children for attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder. (From Verkuijl N, Perkins M, Fazel M. Childhood attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. BMJ. 2015;350:h2168, Fig. 2, p. 146.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 50 u Attention-­Deficit/­Hyperactivity Disorder

311

Table 50.2  Differences Between U.S. and European Criteria for ADHD or HKD
DSM-­5 ADHD

ICD-­10 HKD

ICD-­11 ADHD*

SYMPTOMS
Either or both of the following:

All of the following:

No minimum numbers of symptoms but must have:

PERVASIVENESS
Some impairment from symptoms is
present in one or more settings

Criteria are met for one or more settings

Symptoms must be evident across multiple situations
or settings but are likely to vary according to the
structure and demands of the setting

• A
 t least 6 of 9 inattentive symptoms
• At least 6 of 9 hyperactive or
impulsive symptoms

• A
 t least 6 of 8 inattentive symptoms
• At least 3 of 5 hyperactive symptoms
• At least 1 of 4 impulsive symptoms

• P
 ersistent pattern (≥6 mo) of inattention and/or
hyperactivity-­impulsivity that has a direct negative impact
on academic, occupational, or social functioning

*ICD-­11 went into effect on January 1, 2022.
ADHD, Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder; HKD, hyperkinetic disorder; DSM-­5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition; ICD-­10, International
Classification of Diseases, Tenth Edition.
Modified from Biederman J, Faraone S. Attention-­deficit hyperactivity disorder. Lancet. 2005;366:237–248.

Adulthood

School age
Preschool
Behavioral
disturbance
Unintentional
injuries
Feelings of parental
incompetence

Behavioral
disturbance,
including aggressive
tendencies
Academic
impairment
Difficulties in social
interaction often
tolerated by peers

College age

Mood
instability

Adolescence

Academic
failure

Low self-esteem

Not fulfilling
academic
potential

Not coping
with routine
tasks

Reduced tolerance
by peers

Occupational
difficulties

Low self-esteem

Low self-esteem

Smoking/alcohol/
drug experimentation

Alcohol and
substance misuse

Antisocial behavior

Injuries/
unintentional
incidents

Relationship
problems
Increased
road and
occupational
incidents
Difficulty planning and
completing tasks
Alcohol and
substance misuse
Inconsistent parenting
style

Fig. 50.2 Possible developmental impacts of attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder. (From Verkuijl N, Perkins M, Fazel M. Childhood attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. BMJ. 2015;350:h2168, Fig. 1, p. 145.)

DSM-­5 identifies three presentations of ADHD: the inattentive presentation, hyperactive-­impulsive presentation, and combined presentation. Clinical manifestations of ADHD may change with age; thus the
specific ADHD presentation for an individual may not be stable over
time but describes current symptomatology (see Fig. 50.2). The symptoms may vary from motor restlessness and aggressive and disruptive
behavior, which are common in preschool children, to disorganized,
distractible, and inattentive symptoms, which are more typical in older
adolescents and adults. Although hyperactivity generally decreases in
late childhood and adolescence, symptoms of impulsivity and inattention often persist. Females with ADHD are relatively more likely than
males to be diagnosed with the inattentive presentation, and this presentation is more commonly associated with internalizing symptoms
(anxiety and low mood).

DIAGNOSIS

An evaluation for ADHD should be initiated in any child ≥4 years
of age with symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, and/or impulsivity (Fig. 50.4). This evaluation includes a careful history and

clinical interview to rule in ADHD or to identify other causes or
contributing factors, completion of behavior rating scales by different observers from at least two settings (e.g., teacher and parent),
and a physical examination. It is important to systematically gather
and evaluate information from a variety of sources, including the
child, parents, teachers, and, when appropriate, other caretakers or
professionals involved in the child’s care.
The evaluation for ADHD may require several office visits. A thorough assessment should be conducted at the time of initial diagnosis,
and reevaluation should occur if there are worsening or new symptoms, given the common occurrence of coexisting conditions.

Clinical Interview and History

The clinical interview allows a comprehensive understanding of
whether the symptoms meet the diagnostic criteria for ADHD and to
assess for coexisting conditions. The interview should collect information about the history and duration of presenting problems, the
child’s attainment of developmental milestones, school performance,
social skills, mood, sleep, medical illnesses, sensory impairments, or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

312 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Violence
Antisocial disorders
Crime

Accidents
Substance use
Fighting
ADHD
Accidents
Inattention and Impulsivity
Poor health habits

Health risks
Risky behaviors
Accidents
Mood disorders

Suicide

Fig. 50.3 Pathways to premature death in persons with attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). (From Faraone SV. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and premature death. Lancet. 2015;385:2132–
2133.)

Obtain detailed clinical history from parents or carers and young
person

Carry out core ADHD symptom enquiry: are symptoms out of
keeping with child's age and developmental stage?

Obtain information across settings; consider questionnaires as an
adjunct

Screen for associated difficulties (eg, mental health symptoms,
other neurodevelopmental or learning problems)

• Developmental history (eg, motor delay)
• Medical history (eg, epilepsy)
• Family history (eg, mental health, educational history, physical
health problems)
• Medical histories especially important in relation to cardiac or other
risk factors if pharmacological treatment is being considered

Consider severity of symptoms, effects on functioning, comorbid
symptoms, medical history, and the family’s and child's strengths,
resources, demands, and psychosocial context when deciding on
treatment options

Physical assessment:
• Signs of other disorders (eg, dysmorphic features, skin lesions) and
motor coordination (eg, handwriting, balance); to be undertaken
more completely if considering pharmacological treatment
• Baseline height, weight, blood pressure, pulse

Fig. 50.4 Summary of the clinical assessment process for ADHD.
ADHD, Attention-­
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. (From Thapar
A, Cooper M. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Lancet.
2016;387[10024]:1240–1250, Fig. 2.)

medication use that might affect the child’s functioning. Disruptive
social factors, such as family discord, situational stress, and abuse or
neglect, can result in hyperactive or anxious behaviors. A family history of first-­degree relatives with ADHD, mood or anxiety disorders,
learning disability, antisocial disorder, or alcohol or substance abuse
might indicate an increased risk of ADHD and coexisting conditions.

Behavior Rating Scales

Behavior rating scales can help to elicit information about ADHD
symptoms across contexts (i.e., home and school). The Vanderbilt
ADHD Rating Scale (which has parent and teacher versions) is a
commonly used screening measure for ADHD in primary care. It
has specific questions about inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity that correspond directly with the DSM-­5 ADHD diagnostic
criteria and questions about overall performance to assess for functional impairment, as well as subscales for some common coexisting
conditions (anxiety/depression and oppositional behaviors/conduct
disorder). Additional ADHD-­specific rating scales include the Conners 3 ADHD Index and ADHD Rating Scale 5, among others that can
be used. Broadband rating scales (such as Achenbach Child Behavior
Checklist [CBCL] or Behavioral Assessment Scale for Children [BASC]
or Conners 3 Full Length Forms) can be useful in assessing for coexisting conditions. Electronic capture of rating scale information is
increasingly available and may facilitate completion and scoring. Rating scales provide information about the type, frequency, and severity
of ADHD or other behavioral/mood symptoms, but interpretation
requires clinical judgement. Contextual factors (such as triggers for a
certain behavior, responses to a behavior that may inadvertently reinforce it) should be considered when interpreting rating scales. When
there are discrepancies between results of rating scales for parents
and teachers, the context and level of support provided in each setting
should be assessed. ADHD rating scales can help with both the initial
diagnostic assessment and with monitoring treatment response over
time. Although there is no universal standard to use as a criterion
for a positive response to treatment in terms of rating scale results,
a decrease in ADHD symptom scores by 25% or more is generally
considered significant improvement. However, improvement in functional outcomes may be more important to consider than changes in
symptom scores. For children on medication, it is important to consider if the medication was “active” when the child was observed (i.e.,
stimulant medication may work to reduce ADHD symptoms during
the school day, but the symptoms may return as the medication wears
off in the afternoon/evening when the child is home).

Physical Examination, Laboratory, and Other
Assessments

Most children with ADHD will have a normal physical exam, but one
should be conducted as part of the diagnostic evaluation. Particular
attention should be paid to cardiac and neurologic evaluations, thyroid, hearing and vision, and assessment for dysmorphic features that
may signify an underlying condition, such as fetal alcohol syndrome.
A child’s behavior in the clinic visit may not represent the child’s usual
behaviors, as some children may be able to remain focused or calm
for brief periods and others may exhibit more impulsivity or high
activity level when nervous in the context of a clinic visit. Laboratory
tests and brain imaging are not routinely recommended as part of an
ADHD assessment. The presence of hypertension, ataxia, or asymmetric neurologic examination or symptoms of a sleep, seizure, or thyroid disorder may prompt further diagnostic tests. Lead levels could
be considered if there are other factors associated with risk for lead
toxicity. The clinician should identify possible vision or hearing problems. Computerized attentional tasks and quantitative electroencephalographic assessments are not needed to make the diagnosis. They are
subject to high rates of false-­positive and false-­negative results and thus
are of limited utility in the diagnostic assessment.
Educational testing should be considered if there are concerns
about academic progress, as specific learning disabilities in reading,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 50 u Attention-­Deficit/­Hyperactivity Disorder
mathematics, or written expression often coexist with ADHD (see
Chapters 51 and 52). If there has been slow attainment of developmental milestones, intelligence or developmental testing should be
conducted. If there are concerns about a child’s social communication skills combined with restricted, repetitive behaviors or interests,
a clinical assessment for autism spectrum disorder may be indicated
(see Chapter 58).

Differential Diagnosis and Coexisting Conditions

Given that the symptoms of ADHD can overlap with other conditions,
a broad differential diagnosis should be considered. For ease of presentation, the differential diagnosis for ADHD can be grouped into
specific categories of developmental, psychiatric, medical, and psychosocial (Table 50.3). Children at either end of the developmental/
cognitive level (i.e., with significant cognitive delays or with superior
intelligence) can appear inattentive and/or distracted and sometimes
also disruptive if the material in school or expectations at home are not
appropriate for their developmental level. In differentiating impulsivity
and challenging behaviors associated with ADHD versus an externalizing disorder (oppositional defiant disorder [ODD] or conduct disorder), consider whether the child “acts without thinking” and/or is more
reactive (easily upset over demands for sustained attention or other
small triggers), which would be more consistent with ADHD, versus
proactively looks to aggress, fight, and challenge authority, which may
be indicative of an externalizing disorder. Tic disorders can both present with some symptoms similar to ADHD (e.g., fidgeting, squirming,
making sounds that seem impulsive) and also commonly coexist with
ADHD. For cases in which ADHD symptoms are reported in one setting but not another, psychosocial causes should be considered, such
as unrealistic classroom expectations, distress at home, or untoward
parenting strategies. However, clinicians should be aware that inappropriate parenting strategies may be the result of the child’s ADHD, as
parents try anything (often unsuccessfully) to help their child. These
parents are in need of parenting and behavioral supports, without feeling blamed for their child’s symptoms.
Sleep disorders, including those secondary to chronic upper airway obstruction from enlarged tonsils and adenoids, often result in
Table 50.3  Differential Diagnosis of Attention-­Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
GENERAL
CATEGORY
Developmental

Psychiatric

Medical

Psychosocial

SPECIFIC CONDITIONS, CAUSES
Low developmental level/cognitive abilities
Very high cognitive abilities
Specific learning disabilities in reading,
mathematics, or written expression
Communication or language disorder
Autism spectrum disorder
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Anxiety/depression
Oppositional defiant disorder/conduct disorder
Bipolar disorder/disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder
Substance use disorder
Posttraumatic stress disorder/adjustment disorder
Sleep disorder, obstructive sleep apnea
Hearing or vision impairment
Specific medications, such as some antiepileptics
or high-­dose steroids
Thyroid disorders
Tic disorders
Posttraumatic head injury or encephalitis
Genetic conditions, such as fragile X, Klinefelter
syndrome, Turner syndrome, tuberous sclerosis,
and neurofibromatosis
Response to abuse, neglect
Response to distress in home, inappropriate
expectations or parenting practices
Response to inappropriate classroom setting

313

behavioral and emotional symptoms that can resemble or exacerbate
ADHD (see Chapter 31). Periodic leg movements of sleep/restless legs
syndrome have been associated with symptoms of inattention, and
inquiry regarding this should be made during the history. Behavioral
and emotional disorders can cause disrupted sleep patterns as well.
Mental health disorders: Depression and anxiety disorders can
cause many of the same symptoms as ADHD (inattention, restlessness,
inability to focus and concentrate on work, poor organization, forgetfulness) but can also coexist with ADHD (see Chapters 38 and 39).
Obsessive-­compulsive disorder can mimic ADHD, particularly when
recurrent and persistent thoughts, impulses, or images are intrusive,
interfering with normal daily activities. Adjustment disorders secondary to major life stresses (death of a close family member, parents’
divorce, family violence, parents’ substance abuse, or a move) or parent–child relationship disorders involving conflicts over discipline,
overt child abuse and/or neglect, or overprotection can result in symptoms similar to those of ADHD.
When considering a new diagnosis in an adolescent patient, there
should be an opportunity to interview the adolescent privately, and
the adolescent should be specifically asked about mood symptoms and
psychosocial stressors; frequent digital media use; and screened for use
of alcohol, marijuana, and illicit substances.

TREATMENT
Overall Treatment Approach

ADHD is considered a chronic condition and should be managed as
such, with education about ADHD at the time of diagnosis and regular
follow-­up visits to monitor and treat symptoms. Parent support groups
with appropriate professional consultation to such groups can be
very helpful. Treatment of ADHD should be multimodal and involve
behavioral therapy, school-­based supports, and/or medications. The
treatment plan should be developed in collaboration with the child (if
developmentally appropriate) and family. The recommended initial
treatments for ADHD vary by age.
Preschool-­age children: For children up until 6 years of age, the
recommended first-­line treatment is evidence-­based parent-­and/or
teacher-­administered behavior therapy. If behavior interventions do
not provide significant improvements and there is moderate to severe
impairment in the child’s functioning as a result of ADHD symptoms,
medication should be considered. If behavioral interventions are not
available, the risks of medication should be compared with risks of not
treating ADHD symptoms.
School-­age children and adolescents: For children ages 6 years old
and older, ADHD medications should be considered first-­line treatment, along with behavior and educational interventions. Organizational skills training, coaching, or cognitive-­behavioral therapy may be
helpful for adolescents and adults.

Behaviorally Oriented Treatments

Behavioral interventions should be an integral part of the treatment plan
for all children with ADHD. Behavioral interventions involve modifying the environment and empowering caregivers with strategies to promote positive behaviors and minimize negative behaviors. Behavioral
strategies typically focus on promoting a limited number of well-­defined
appropriate behaviors, using positive reinforcement with increased adult
attention, tangible rewards, or access to privileges. A token economy in
which a child earns (or loses) tokens that can be exchanged for rewards
may be used. Any rules should be clearly defined and consistently
enforced. Behavioral parent training, also known as parent training in
behavioral management, is a well-­established combination of behavioral
interventions shown to reduce problematic behaviors and improve adaptive skills for children with ADHD. It involves teaching parents how to
use behavior modification strategies to address specific behaviors, with
a strong emphasis on positive reinforcement (described earlier) while
ignoring or, if necessary, systematically implementing appropriate consequences for maladaptive behaviors. Treatments geared toward behavioral management for ADHD often occur in the time frame of 8-­12
sessions but may sometimes require more sessions.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

314 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Although there is much less research published on psychosocial
treatments for adolescents with ADHD, behavioral parent training
can be modified to focus on improving communication between
parents and adolescents with ADHD, developing a behavioral contract, and problem-­solving around challenging situations. For children and adolescents with ADHD and coexisting anxiety disorders
and/or depression, cognitive-­behavioral therapy may help address
anxiety or low mood.
At least 60 minutes of moderate to vigorous exercise is recommended for the general health of all children ≥6 years old, and some
studies indicate exercise may reduce ADHD symptoms in children;
thus encouraging regular exercise is reasonable. Interventions including cognitive training, electroencephalogram (EEG) biofeedback, and
diet modification do not have the level of evidence needed to recommend them for most children.

Educational Supports and Accommodations

Behavioral classroom management strategies can be used by teachers to implement strategies within the whole classroom that will
help children with ADHD. These include clear expectations and
consistency in follow-­
through, positive reinforcement for work
completion and on-­task behaviors, and appropriate consequences
when rules are not followed. Additionally, children with ADHD may
benefit from individualized educational supports and accommodations, such as preferential seating near the source of instruction and
away from distractions, motor breaks as needed, frequent teacher
check-­ins, being able to take tests in a less distracting environment,
and an individualized positive behavior plan. A daily report card or
communication log can be used to facilitate regular communication
between the parents and teachers. A daily report card is individually designed for each child to include target problem behaviors in
academic and/or social domains in the classroom (e.g., following
directions, turning in work, getting along with others). The teacher
provides a rating for each behavior on the report card, which is sent
home daily, and the child is given home-­based rewards for meeting
goals set for the ratings from school.
Children with ADHD often need explicit instruction in organization and executive functioning skills and may not develop these
skills at the same pace as non-­ADHD peers. The use of an agenda
book to record assignments, color coding for different classes, and
teacher check-­ins regularly to help with organization may be helpful for some children, and others may require a higher level of more
individualized instruction in the executive functioning domains
of staying organized, planning, initiating tasks, shifting gears, and
self-­monitoring.
Children with ADHD and coexisting learning disorders, communication or developmental delays, significant mental health or oppositional challenges, or autism spectrum disorder often need more
specialized educational supports than those that can be provided
through accommodations in a general classroom. In the United States,
these children would qualify to have an individualized educational
plan (IEP) developed through the public school system.

Medications

Before medication initiation, a history and physical examination
and an assessment for baseline sleep, eating, and mood should be
conducted because these need to be monitored for a child on medication. Children with ADHD and their families should be educated
on the benefits, risks, and side effects of medication, with a discussion about goals and expectations for medication treatment.
It is common for a child to need to try several trials of different
medications or doses to find the optimal ADHD pharmacologic
treatment that both reduces core ADHD symptoms and is well tolerated. ADHD rating scales can be used to assess for medication
effectiveness and side effects, both at initiation and during medication maintenance, and should be collected from parents and teachers when possible.
The types of medications used to treat ADHD fall into one of
the following three categories: stimulants, norepinephrine reuptake

inhibitors, and α2-­adrenergic agonists. Stimulants are the most
commonly used medications to treat ADHD and have been used
to treat this condition since the 1930s. Stimulant medications have
a slightly larger treatment effect size (standardized mean difference) than nonstimulants (approximately 1.0 for stimulants versus
approximately 0.7 for both norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors and
α2-­adrenergic agonists). Although stimulants are generally recommended as the first-­line ADHD medication, nonstimulant medications may be considered in the context of active substance use
disorder for an adolescent with ADHD or household family member
or if there is a strong family desire for a nonstimulant medication.
Stimulants have been found to have relatively high rates of adverse
effects (particularly moodiness and irritability) in preschool-­age
children and in children with intellectual disability or autism spectrum disorder, leading some physicians to choose nonstimulant
medication in these situations, as described later.
When starting a stimulant, the clinician can select either a
methylphenidate-­based or an amphetamine-­based medication. The
decision about which stimulant medication to use for a specific child
or adolescent with ADHD is often based on factors such as duration of action (short, intermediate, long acting), preparation (pills,
capsules that can be swallowed whole or whose contents can be
“sprinkled” into food, chewable tablets, and liquids), and clinician
preference or insurance company formularies. Stimulant medications
have a rapid onset of action (ranging from about 20 minutes to up to
an hour, depending on the formulation), and most leave the system
within 3-­12 hours, depending on if they are short, intermediate, or
long acting. A child who responds poorly to one stimulant medication may do well with a different medication in that class or the other
class (methylphenidate versus amphetamine). Stimulant medications
should be initiated at the lowest available dose and titrated upward,
assessing for both effectiveness and side effects, until reaching a dose
that reduces ADHD symptoms and has minimal to no side effects.
Common side effects of stimulant medication include decreased
appetite, headaches, stomachaches, and difficulty falling asleep. If
mood lability occurs, it should be noted whether this is while the
stimulant medication is active (which may indicate that a different
medication should be tried instead) or as the medication is wearing
off (also called rebound and may indicate that a short-­acting preparation should be replaced by a longer-­acting preparation or a low
dose of a short-­acting preparation should be added about 30 minutes
before the onset of the rebound symptoms).
Height, weight, pulse, and blood pressure should be periodically
monitored. Stimulants may be associated with a slight reduction in
linear growth, although studies of the impact of stimulants on adult
height range from findings of a slight impact to no significant difference. Children with decreased appetite from stimulants and difficulty
with weight gain can be counseled to increase caloric intake later in
the day when the appetite returns. Significant reductions (i.e., crossing
two lines on the growth curve) in either height or weight for a child
on stimulant medication may prompt changing to a different ADHD
medication.
Before starting stimulants, children should be screened for symptoms or signs suggestive of a cardiomyopathy, coronary artery disease,
cardiac arrhythmias, or a family history of cardiac arrhythmias or sudden death under 50 years of age, and if these symptoms are present, an
electrocardiogram and/or evaluation by a cardiologist to determine if it
is safe to start these medications is recommended. Most children with
tics can be treated with stimulant medication, but occasionally these
medications may exacerbate tics. In these cases, the risks and benefits
of continuing versus changing or stopping the medication should be
considered.
Treatment of ADHD with stimulant medication is associated with
reduced substance use risks. However, stimulant medications themselves are controlled substances with potential for misuse, diversion,
and abuse. Therefore clinicians should regularly counsel adolescent
patients about this risk, the importance of taking the medication only
as prescribed, and about safe medication storage practices (e.g., keeping medication in a secure location).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 51 u Dyslexia
Two types of selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors are
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the
treatment of ADHD in children and adolescents: atomoxetine and
viloxazine. These medications take up to 4 weeks to achieve effectiveness and should be taken consistently to be effective. Both atomoxetine
and viloxazine have common side effects of fatigue, decreased appetite, nausea, vomiting, and irritability and a rare potential for suicidal
thinking and behaviors for which the child must be monitored.
α2-­Adrenergic agonist medications include guanfacine and clonidine. Long-­acting preparations of both have U.S. FDA approval for
the treatment of ADHD in children ≥6 years old either as monotherapy or an adjunctive therapy with stimulant medication. Short-­
acting preparations are sometimes used off-­label to treat young
(<6-­year-­old) children with ADHD (especially those with coexisting autism spectrum disorder or sleep disorders). α2-­Adrenergic
agonists may take up to 2 weeks to achieve an initial response.
These medications can also treat motor and vocal tics and so may be
a reasonable choice in a child with a coexisting tic disorder. Common side effects of α2-­adrenergic agonists can include sedation,
headaches, and hypotension, and they should be stopped gradually
because abrupt discontinuation could result in rapid increase in
blood pressure.
Medication alone may not be sufficient to treat ADHD in children, particularly when children have additional psychiatric disorders, developmental disabilities, or significant psychosocial
challenges. When children do not respond to medication, it may be
appropriate to refer them to a mental health specialist. Consultation with a child psychiatrist, developmental-­behavioral pediatrician, or psychologist can be beneficial to determine the next steps
for treatment, including adding other components and supports to
the overall treatment program. Evidence suggests that children who
receive careful medication management, accompanied by frequent
treatment follow-­up, all within the context of an educational, supportive relationship with the primary care provider, are likely to
experience behavioral gains.

PROGNOSIS

More than half of individuals with a childhood diagnosis of ADHD
will manifest a mental health condition (e.g., anxiety, depression,
substance use disorders) in adulthood. Approximately one third to
two thirds of those diagnosed with ADHD in childhood will continue to manifest significant symptoms of ADHD in adulthood. In
children with ADHD, a reduction in hyperactive behavior often
occurs with age. Other symptoms associated with ADHD can
become more prominent with age, such as inattention, impulsivity, and disorganization, and these exact a heavy toll on adolescent
and young adult functioning. Adolescents and young adults with
ADHD have an increased likelihood of risk-­taking behaviors (early
sexual activity, delinquent behaviors, motor vehicle accidents, substance use), seizures, psychosis, educational underachievement or
employment difficulties, and relationship difficulties. With proper
treatment, the risks associated with ADHD, including injuries, can
be significantly reduced. Consistent treatment with medication and
adjuvant therapies appears to lower the risk of adverse outcomes,
such as substance abuse.

315

Chapter 51

Dyslexia
Sally E. Shaywitz and Bennett A. Shaywitz
DEFINITION

Dyslexia has always been defined as an unexpected difficulty in reading, which has been codified in U.S. Federal law (First Step Act of 2018,
PL: 115–391) as the most up-­to-­date, evidence-­based definition of
dyslexia: “The term dyslexia means an unexpected difficulty in reading
for an individual who has the intelligence to be a much better reader,
most commonly caused by a difficulty in the phonological processing (the appreciation of the individual sounds of spoken language),
which affects the ability of an individual to speak, read, and spell.”
In typical readers, development of reading and intelligence quotient
(IQ) are dynamically linked over time. In dyslexic readers, however, a
developmental uncoupling occurs between reading and IQ (Fig. 51.1),
such that reading achievement is significantly below what would be
expected given the individual’s IQ.
The uncoupling between reading achievement and IQ provides the
long-­sought empirical evidence for the seeming paradox between cognition and reading in individuals with developmental dyslexia, and this
discrepancy is recognized in the federal definition as unexpected difficulty in reading. However, clinicians may see other approaches to diagnosis. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition (DSM-­5) describes specific learning disorder with impairment
in reading for children with reading skills significantly below those
expected for the child’s age where the deficits are not explained by
intellectual disability, sensory deficits, neurologic disorders, or psychosocial adversity. This definition can be problematic in failing to
differentiate primary problems with reading comprehension from the
reading problems experienced by children with dyslexia despite strong
evidence that the two are distinct. Further, excluding children with
psychosocial adversity is concerning because children who struggle
with reading due to psychosocial adversity suffer similar adverse long-­
term consequences and have been shown to benefit from interventions
designed to help children with dyslexia.

Typical:
IQ-Reading Linked

Dyslexia:
IQ-Reading Diverge

Nonimpaired

Dyslexic

SECONDARY PREVENTION

Parent training can lead to significant improvements in ADHD
symptoms and oppositional behaviors in preschool and school-­
age children with ADHD. To the extent that parents, teachers,
physicians, and policymakers support efforts for earlier detection,
diagnosis, and treatment, prevention of long-­term adverse effects
of ADHD on affected children’s functioning can be considered
within the lens of secondary prevention of the long-­term effects of
untreated or ineffectively treated ADHD on children and youth.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

IQ
Reading
2

4

6

8

10
12
2
4
Grade in School

6

8

10

12

Fig. 51.1 Uncoupling of reading and IQ over time: empirical evidence

for a definition of dyslexia. Left, In typical readers, reading and IQ development are dynamically linked over time. Right, In contrast, reading
and IQ development are dissociated in dyslexic readers, and one does
not influence the other. (Copyright Sally Shaywitz, MD. Adapted from
Shaywitz S, Shaywitz J. Overcoming Dyslexia, 2nd ed. New York: Vintage Books;2020: 103.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

316 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
EPIDEMIOLOGY

Dyslexia is the most common of the learning disabilities, affecting
80–90% of children identified as having a learning disability. Dyslexia
may be the most common neurobehavioral disorder affecting children,
with prevalence rates ranging from 20% in unselected population-­
based samples to much lower rates in school-­
identified samples.
The low prevalence rate in school-­identified samples may reflect the
reluctance of schools to screen, assess, and identify dyslexia. Dyslexia
occurs with equal frequency in males and females in survey samples in
which all children are assessed. Despite such well-­documented findings, schools continue to identify more males than females, probably
reflecting the more rambunctious behavior of males who come to the
teacher’s attention because of misbehavior, whereas females with reading difficulty, who are less likely to be misbehaving, are also less likely
to be noticed and identified by the schools. Dyslexia fits a dimensional
model in which reading ability and disability occur along a continuum.

PATHOGENESIS

Evidence from a number of lines of investigation indicates that dyslexia
reflects deficits within the language system, and more specifically, within
the phonologic component of the language system engaged in processing the sounds of speech. Individuals with dyslexia have difficulty developing an awareness that spoken words can be segmented into smaller
elemental units of sound (phonemes), an essential ability given that reading requires that the reader map or link printed symbols to their sounds.
Increasing evidence indicates that disruption of attentional mechanisms
may also play an important role in reading difficulties.
Functional brain imaging in both children and adults with dyslexia
demonstrates an inefficient functioning of left hemisphere posterior
brain systems, a pattern referred to as the neural signature of dyslexia
(Fig. 51.2). These differences can be observed before the start of formal
reading instruction, suggesting they represent a biologic predisposition
to reading difficulties as opposed to a result of inadequate instruction.
Although functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) consistently
demonstrates differences between groups of dyslexic compared to typical readers, brain imaging is not able to reliably differentiate an individual case of a dyslexic reader from a typical reader and thus is not
useful in diagnosing dyslexia.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

mispronunciations, lack of glibness, speech that lacks fluency with
many pauses or hesitations and “ums,” word-­finding difficulties with
the need for time to summon an oral response, and the inability to
come up with a verbal response quickly when questioned; these reflect
sound-­based, not semantic or knowledge-­based, difficulties.
Struggles in decoding and word recognition can vary according to
age and developmental level. The cardinal signs of dyslexia observed
in school-­age children and adults are a labored, effortful approach to
reading involving decoding, word recognition, and text reading. Listening comprehension is typically robust. Older children improve
reading accuracy over time, but without commensurate gains in reading fluency; they remain slow readers. Difficulties in spelling typically
reflect the phonologically based difficulties observed in oral reading.
Handwriting is often affected as well.
History often reveals early subtle language difficulties in dyslexic
children. During the preschool and kindergarten years, at-­risk children
display difficulties playing rhyming games and learning the names for
letters and numbers. Kindergarten assessments of these language skills
can help identify children at risk for dyslexia. Although a dyslexic child
enjoys and benefits from being read to, the child might avoid reading
aloud to the parent or reading independently.
Dyslexia may coexist with attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (see Chapter 50); this comorbidity has been documented in both
referred samples (40% comorbidity) and nonreferred samples (15%
comorbidity).

DIAGNOSIS

A large achievement gap between typical and dyslexic readers is evident as early as first grade and persists (Fig. 51.3). These findings provide strong evidence and impetus for early screening and identification
of and early intervention for young children at risk for dyslexia. One
source of potentially powerful and highly accessible screening information is their teacher’s judgment about the child’s reading and reading-­
related skills. Evidence-­based screening can be carried out as early as
kindergarten, and also in grades 1-­3, by the child’s teacher. Their teachers’ responses to a small set of questions (10-­12 questions) predict a
pool of children who are at risk for dyslexia with a high degree of accuracy. This evidence-­based screening takes less than 10 minutes, is completed on a tablet, and is extremely efficient and economical. Children

Reflecting the underlying phonologic weakness, children and
adults with dyslexia manifest problems in both spoken and written language. Spoken language difficulties are typically manifest by

4

3

Reading

2

1

0

Fig. 51.2 A neural signature for dyslexia. Image on left shows left

hemisphere brain systems in typical (nonimpaired) readers. The three
systems for reading are an anterior system in the region of the inferior
frontal gyrus (Broca’s area), serving articulation and word analysis, and
two posterior systems: one in the occipitotemporal region serving word
analysis and a second in the occipitotemporal region (the word-­form
area) serving the rapid, automatic, fluent identification of words. In dyslexic readers (right image), the two posterior systems are functioning
inefficiently and appear underactivated. This pattern of underactivation in left posterior reading systems is referred to as the neural signature for dyslexia. (Copyright Sally Shaywitz, MD. Adapted from Shaywitz S. Shaywitz J. Overcoming Dyslexia, 2nd ed. New York: Vintage
Books;2020: 78.)

–1
Typical readers
Dyslexic readers

–2
1

2

3

6
4
5
Grade in school

7

8

9

Fig. 51.3 Reading from grades 1 through 9 in typical and dyslexic

readers. The achievement gap between typical and dyslexic readers is
evident as early as first grade and persists through adolescence. (Copyright Sally Shaywitz, MD. Adapted from Shaywitz S. Shaywitz J. Overcoming Dyslexia, 2nd ed. New York: Vintage Books;2020: 56.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 51 u Dyslexia
found to be at risk will then have further assessment and, if diagnosed
as dyslexic, should receive evidence-­based intervention.
Dyslexia is a clinical diagnosis, and history is especially critical. The
clinician seeks to determine through history, observation, and psychometric assessment if there are unexpected difficulties in reading (based
on the person’s intelligence, chronologic/grade, level of education, or
professional status) and associated linguistic problems at the level of
phonologic processing. No single test score is pathognomonic of dyslexia. The diagnosis of dyslexia should reflect a thoughtful synthesis of
all clinical data available.
Dyslexia is distinguished from other disorders that can prominently
feature reading difficulties by the unique, circumscribed nature of the
phonologic deficit, one that does not intrude into other linguistic or
cognitive domains. A core assessment for the diagnosis of dyslexia in
children includes tests of language, particularly phonology; reading,
including real and pseudowords; reading fluency; spelling; and tests of
intellectual ability. Additional tests of memory, general language skills,
and mathematics may be administered as part of a more comprehensive evaluation of cognitive, linguistic, and academic function.
For informal screening, in addition to a careful history, the
primary care physician in an office setting can listen to the child
read aloud from the child’s own grade-­level reader. Keeping a set
of graded readers available in the office serves the same purpose
and eliminates the need for the child to bring in schoolbooks. Oral
reading is a sensitive measure of reading accuracy and fluency. The
most consistent and telling sign of a reading disability in an accomplished young adult is slow and laborious reading and writing. In
attempting to read aloud, most children and adults with dyslexia
display an effortful approach to decoding and recognizing single
words, an approach in children characterized by hesitations, mispronunciations, and repeated attempts to sound out unfamiliar
words. In contrast to the difficulties they experience in decoding
single words, persons with dyslexia typically possess the vocabulary,
syntax, and other higher-­level abilities involved in comprehension.
Fluency forms the bridge between decoding, that is, reading a
word accurately, and comprehension, understanding what is read.
Fluent reading is reading accurately and rapidly, with good intonation (prosody) indicating an understanding of the text. The failure
either to recognize or to measure the lack of fluency in reading is
perhaps the most common error in the diagnosis of dyslexia, especially in older children and accomplished young adults. Simple
word identification tasks will not detect dyslexia in a person who
is accomplished enough to be in honors high school classes or to
graduate from college or obtain a graduate degree. Tests relying on
the accuracy of word identification alone are inappropriate to use to
diagnose dyslexia because they show little to nothing of the struggle
to read. Because they assess reading accuracy but not automaticity
or prosody, the types of reading tests used for school-­age children
might provide misleading data on bright adolescents and young
adults. Among the most critical tests are those that are timed; they
are the most sensitive in detecting dyslexia in a bright adult. Few
standardized tests for young adult readers are administered under
timed and untimed conditions; the Nelson-­Denny Reading Test is an
exception. The helpful Test of Word Reading Efficiency (TOWRE)
examines simple word reading under timed conditions, and the
Achievement Improvement Monitoring System (AIMSweb) and
Dynamic Indicators of Basic Early Literacy Skills (DIBELS) measure reading connected text under timed conditions. Any scores
obtained on testing must be considered relative to peers with the
same degree of education or professional training.

IS FAMILY HISTORY HELPFUL IN DIAGNOSING
DYSLEXIA?

Although dyslexia is familial, family history is not effective as a screening measure for dyslexia and does not improve the classification accuracy provided by an evidence-­based early screening measure.

317

Genome-­wide association studies (GWASs) in children with dyslexia have demonstrated that a large number of genes are involved,
each producing a small effect. Complex traits such as reading are the
work of thousands of genetic variants working in concert (see Chapter
103). Thus pediatricians should be wary of recommending any genetic
test to their patients that purports to diagnose dyslexia in infancy or
before language and reading have even emerged. It is unlikely that a
single gene or even a few genes will reliably identify people with dyslexia. Rather, dyslexia is best explained by multiple genes, each contributing a small amount toward the expression of dyslexia.

MANAGEMENT

The management of dyslexia demands a life-­span perspective. Early
in life the focus is on remediation of the reading problem. Applying
knowledge of the importance of early language, including phonologic
skills and vocabulary, leads to significant improvements in children’s
reading accuracy, even in predisposed children. As a child matures
and enters the more time-­demanding setting of middle and then
high school, the emphasis shifts to the important role of providing
accommodations. Based on the work of the National Reading Panel,
evidence-­based reading intervention methods and programs are identified. Effective intervention programs provide systematic instruction
in five key areas: phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary,
and comprehension strategies. These programs also provide ample
opportunities for writing, reading, and discussing literature.
Taking each component of the reading process in turn, effective
interventions improve phonemic awareness: the ability to focus on
and manipulate phonemes (speech sounds) in spoken syllables and
words. The elements found to be most effective in enhancing phonemic awareness, reading, and spelling skills include teaching children to manipulate phonemes with letters, focusing the instruction
on one or two types of phoneme manipulations rather than multiple
types, and teaching children in small groups. Providing instruction
in phonemic awareness is necessary, but not sufficient, to teach
children to read. Effective intervention programs include teaching phonics, or making sure that the beginning reader understands
how letters are linked to sounds (phonemes) to form letter-­sound
correspondences and spelling patterns. The instruction should be
explicit and systematic; phonics instruction enhances children’s
success in learning to read, and systematic phonics instruction is
more effective than instruction that teaches little or no phonics or
that teaches phonics casually or haphazardly. Important but often
overlooked is starting children on reading connected text early on,
optimally at or near the beginning of reading instruction. Reading connected text is critical in building vocabulary and increasing background knowledge—both important in improving reading
comprehension.
Fluency is of critical importance because it allows the automatic,
rapid recognition of words. Although it is generally recognized that
fluency is an important component of skilled reading, it is often overlooked in teaching. One approach is to have a child practice oral reading with a teacher or parent providing positive and helpful feedback.
Here practice is critical. Interventions for vocabulary development and
reading comprehension are not as well established. The most effective
methods to teach reading comprehension involve teaching vocabulary
and strategies that encourage active interaction between the reader and
the text. Emerging science indicates that it is not only teacher content
knowledge but the teacher’s skill in engaging the student and focusing
the student’s attention on the reading task at hand that is required for
effective instruction.
The interventions described here can be provided in multiple settings, but specialized schools for children with dyslexia that provide
intensive intervention over 4 years or more have been very effective.
Typically, these schools are costly, although increasingly offering
scholarships. Some school districts are considering developing public
schools specializing in educating children with dyslexia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

318 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
For those in high school, college, and graduate school, provision of
accommodations most often represents a highly effective approach to
dyslexia. Imaging studies now provide neurobiologic evidence of the
need for extra time for dyslexic students; accordingly, college students
with a childhood history of dyslexia require extra time in reading and
writing assignments and in examinations. Many adolescent and adult
students have been able to improve their reading accuracy, but without
commensurate gains in reading speed. The accommodation of extra
time reconciles the individual’s often high cognitive ability and slow
reading, so that the exam is a measure of that person’s ability rather
than disability. Another important accommodation is helping the
student access text-­to-­speech programs. Excellent text-­to-­speech programs and apps are available for Apple and Android systems and the
PC and include Voice Dream Reader, Immersive Reader (available for
free in all Microsoft Office programs, including Word, OneNote, and
PowerPoint), Kurzweil Firefly, Read & Write Gold, Read: OutLoud, and
Natural Reader. Voice-­to-­text programs are also helpful, often part of
the suite of programs, as well as the popular Dragon Dictate. Voice-­to-­
text is found on many smartphones. Other helpful accommodations
include the use of laptop computers with spelling checkers, access to
lecture notes, tutorial services, and a separate quiet room for taking
tests.
In addition, the impact of the primary phonologic weakness in dyslexia mandates special consideration during oral examinations so that
students are not graded on their lack of glibness or speech hesitancies,
but on their content knowledge. Unfortunately, speech hesitancies or
difficulties in word retrieval often are wrongly confused with insecure
content knowledge. The major difficulty in dyslexia—reflecting problems accessing the sound system of spoken language—causes great
difficulty learning a second language. As a result, an often-­necessary
accommodation is a waiver or partial waiver of the foreign language
requirement; the dyslexic student may enroll in a course taught in English on the history or culture of a non–English-­speaking country.

PROGNOSIS

Application of evidence-­based methods to young children, when provided with sufficient intensity and duration, can result in improvements in reading accuracy and, to a much lesser extent, fluency.
Improvements in fluency can be effected with frequent practice in
reading aloud with the helpful input of a teacher or parent. As noted
earlier, accommodations are critical in allowing the dyslexic child to
demonstrate his or her knowledge.
Sea of strengths model of dyslexia

Concept
formation

Comprehension
General
knowledge

Reasoning
Decoding
Critical
thinking

Empathy
Vocabulary

Problem
solving

A person who is dyslexic experiences through life aligns with our
Sea of Strengths model of dyslexia (Fig. 51.4). This model indicates that
in dyslexia there is a weakness in decoding reflecting the difficulties
connecting letters to sounds, a weakness that is very visible early on
when learning to read. At the same, this weakness is surrounded by a
sea of strengths in higher-­level cognitive, big-­picture thinking, including reasoning, problem solving, vocabulary, empathy, concept formation, and critical thinking. It is this sea of strengths that comes to the
fore and supports a positive future as a person with dyslexia matures.
The sea of strengths was very “visible” in a recent report examining the
academic and social experiences in college and outcomes in the workplace 5 or more years after graduation in Yale graduates with dyslexia
compared with a matched group of Yale graduates who were typical
readers. Dyslexic college graduates did not differ from typical graduates either in college or in the workplace. Parents of dyslexic children
often ask about their child’s future. These findings should reassure
those pediatricians and parents that dyslexic students can succeed all
along the developmental pathway throughout school, and now through
college and the workplace. With proper support, dyslexic children can
succeed in a range of future occupations that might seem out of their
reach, including medicine, law, journalism, and writing.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 52

Math and Writing
Disabilities
52.1 Math Disabilities
Kenneth L. Grizzle and Brittany J. Bice-­Urbach
Data from the U.S. National Center for Educational Statistics for 2009
showed that 69% of U.S. high school graduates had taken algebra 1,
88% geometry, 76% algebra 2/trigonometry, and 35% precalculus.
These percentages are considerably higher than those from 20 years
earlier. However, concerns remain about the limited mathematics literacy level for children, adolescents, and those entering the workforce;
poor math skills predict numerous social, employment, and emotional
challenges. The need for number and math literacy extends beyond the
workplace and into daily lives, and weaknesses can negatively affect
daily functioning. Research into the etiology and treatment of math
disabilities falls behind the study of reading disabilities (see Chapter
51), and yet the database needed to effectively identify, treat, and minimize the impact of math challenges on daily functioning and education
is growing.

MATH LEARNING DISABILITY DEFINED
Fig. 51.4 Sea of strengths model of dyslexia. In dyslexia, a circumscribed, encapsulated weakness in decoding is surrounded by a sea of
strengths in higher-­level thinking and reasoning. The weakness in decoding masks what are often excellent thinking and comprehension skills.
(Copyright Sally Shaywitz, MD. Adapted from Shaywitz S. Shaywitz J.
Overcoming Dyslexia, 2nd ed. New York: Vintage Books;2020: 141.)

Understanding learning challenges associated with mathematics
requires a basic appreciation of domain-­
specific terminology and
operations. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition (DSM-­5) has published diagnostic criteria for learning
disorders. Specific types of learning challenges are subsumed under the
broad term of specific learning disorder (SLD). The DSM-­5 identifies

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 52 u Math and Writing Disabilities
the following features of a SLD with an impairment in math: difficulties mastering number sense, number facts, or fluent calculation
and difficulties with math reasoning. Symptoms must be present for
a minimum of 6 months and persist despite interventions to address
the learning challenges. Number sense refers to a basic understanding
of quantity, number, and operations and is represented as nonverbal
and symbolic. Examples of number sense include an understanding
that each number is 1 more or 1 less than the previous or following
number, knowledge of number words and symbols, and the ability to
compare the relative magnitude of numbers and perform simple arithmetic calculations.
The DSM-­5 definition can be contrasted with an education-­defined
learning disability in mathematics. Two math-­related areas are identified as part of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA): mathematics calculation and mathematics problem solving.
Operationally, this is reflected in age-­level competency in arithmetic
and math calculation, word problems, interpreting graphs, understanding money and time concepts, and applying math concepts to
solve quantitative problems. The federal government allows states to
choose the way a learning disability (LD) is identified if the procedure
is “research based.” Referred to specifically in the IDEA as methods for
identifying an LD are a discrepancy model and “use of a process based
on the child’s response to scientific, research-­based intervention.” The
former refers to identifying an LD based on a pronounced discrepancy
between intellectual functioning and academic achievement. The latter,
referred to as a response to intervention (RtI) model, requires school
systems to screen for a disability, intervene using evidence-­based treatments for the identified disability, closely monitor progress, and make
necessary adjustments to the intervention as needed. If a child is not
responding adequately, a multidisciplinary team is created, and an
evaluation is then completed to determine whether the child qualifies for special education programming. Not responding to the interventions alone does not result in automatic qualification for services
outside of regular education. Rather, it is a three-­step process: lack of
adequate progress to the interventions, an evaluation of the area(s)
of concern, and then determination by the team if an individualized
educational plan (IEP) is needed. The IEP team typically consists of
teachers, special education teacher, school psychologist, school district
representative, parents, and, depending on their age, the student.
It is important that primary care providers understand the RtI process because many states require or encourage this approach to identifying LDs. Confusion can be avoided by helping concerned parents
understand that a school may review their child’s records, screen the
skills of concern, and provide intervention with close progress monitoring before initiating the process for an IEP. Traditional psychoeducation testing (IQ and achievement) may only be completed if a child
has not responded well to specific interventions. The RtI approach is a
valuable, empirically supported way to approach and identify a potential LD but is very different from a medical approach to diagnosis and
treatment. First and foremost, this allows for early intervention, which
has been shown repeatedly to decrease the likelihood of a later identified LD. Intervening early also allows educators to avoid the “wait to
fail” model that all too often waited for children to enter third or fourth
grade before receiving needed services.

Terminology

The term dyscalculia, often used in medicine and research but seldom
used by educators, is reserved for children with a SLD in math when
there is a pattern of deficits in learning arithmetic facts and accurate,
fluent calculations. The term math learning disability (MLD) is used
generically here, with dyscalculia used when limiting the discussion
to children with deficient math calculation skills. A distinction is also
made between children with a MLD and those who are low achieving
(LA) in math; both groups have received considerable research focus.
Although not included in either definition provided earlier, research
into math deficits often require that individuals identified with MLD
have math achievement scores below the 10th percentile across multiple grade levels. These children start out poorly in math and continue poor performance across grades, despite interventions. LA math

319

students consistently score below the 25th percentile on math achievement tests across grades, often showing the same weak math-­related
characteristics as those with MLD but with less severity. Complicating
the identification of MLD and its differentiation from LA math students is the variability in relative complexity of math concepts that may
result in short-­lived math difficulties.

EPIDEMIOLOGY
Prevalence

Depending on how MLD is defined and assessed, the prevalence varies.
Based on findings from multiple studies, approximately 7% of children
will show a MLD profile before high school graduation. An additional
10% of students will be identified as LA. Because research in the area
typically requires that individuals show deficits for consecutive years,
the respective prevalence estimates are lower than the 10th percentile
cutoff for being identified as having an MLD or the 25th percentile
cutoff for being identified as LA. It is not unusual for children to score
below the criterion one year and then above the criterion in subsequent
years. Males are at greater risk to experience MLD.

Risk Factors
Genetics

The heritability of math skills is estimated to be approximately 0.50.
The heritability or genetic influence on math skills is consistent across
the continuum from high to low math skills. This research emphasizes that although math skills are learned across time, the stability of
math performance is the result of genetic influences. Math heritability
appears to be the product of multiple genetic markers, each having a
small effect.

Medical/Genetic Conditions

Numerous genetic syndromes are associated with math problems.
Although most children with fragile X syndrome have an intellectual
disability (ID), approximately 50% of females with the condition do
not. Of those without an ID, ≥75% have a math disability by the end
of third grade and are already scoring below average in mathematics
in kindergarten and first grade. For females with fragile X MLD, weak
working memory seems to play an important role. The frequency of
MLD in Turner syndrome (TS) is the same as that found in females
with fragile X syndrome. A consistent finding is females with TS
complete math calculations at significantly slower speed than typically developing students. Although females with TS have weak calculation skills, their ability to complete math problems not requiring
explicit calculation is similar to that of their peers. The percentage of
children with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11.2ds) with MLD is
not clear. Younger children with this genetic condition (6-­10 years
old) showed similar number sense and calculation skills as typically
developing children but weaker math problem solving. Older children
with 22q11.2ds showed slower speed in their general number sense
and calculations, but accuracy was maintained. Weak counting skills
and magnitude comparison have been found in this group of children,
suggesting weak visual-­spatial processing. Children with myelomeningocele are at greater risk for math difficulties than their unaffected
peers. Almost 30% of these children have MLD without an additional
diagnosed learning disorder, and >50% have both math and reading
learning disorders. Although broad, deficits are most pronounced in
speed of math calculation and written computation.

Comorbidities

It is estimated that 30–70% of those with MLD will also have a reading disability. This is especially important because children with MLD
are less likely to be referred for additional educational assistance and
intervention than students with reading problems. Unfortunately, children identified with both learning challenges perform poorer across
psychosocial and academic measures than children with MLD alone.
Having a MLD places a child at greater risk for not only other learning
challenges but also psychiatric disorders, including attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), oppositional defiant disorder, conduct
disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and major depressive disorder.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

320 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Individuals with MLD have been found to have increased social isolation and difficulties developing social relationships in general.

CAUSES OF MATH LEARNING DISABILITY

There is a consensus that individuals with MLD are a heterogeneous
group, with multiple potential broad and specific deficits contributing to their learning difficulties. Research into the causes of MLD has
focused on math-­specific processes and broad cognitive deficits, with
an appreciation that these two factors are not always independent.

Broad Cognitive Processes
Intelligence

Intelligence affects learning, but if intellectual functioning were the
primary driver of poor math performance, the math skills of low-­IQ
children would be similar or worse than individuals with MLD. On the
contrary, children with MLD have significantly poorer math achievement than children with low IQ. Children with MLD have severe deficits
in math not accounted for by their cognitive functioning. Individuals
with lower cognition may have difficulty learning mathematics, but
their math skills are likely to be commensurate with their intelligence.

Memory

Working memory (WM) refers to the ability to keep information in
mind while using the information in other mental processes. WM is
composed of three core systems: the central executive, the language-­
related phonologic loop, and the visual-­based sketch pad. The central
executive coordinates the functioning of the other two systems. All
three play a role in various aspects of learning and in the development
and application of math skills in particular; children with MLD have
shown deficits in each area.
Committing math facts to and/or retrieving facts from memory
has consistently been found to be problematic for children with MLD.
This is not necessarily limited to inaccurate retrieval of facts but also
speed of retrieval, independent of broader speed of processing deficits. Unfortunately, unlike some typically developing peers who may
be slower but accurate in their fact retrieval, students with MLD are
often slow and inaccurate. Weak fact encoding or retrieval alone do
not determine an MLD diagnosis. Many math curricula in the United
States do not include development of math facts as a part of the instructional process, resulting in children not knowing basic facts.

Processing Speed

Individuals with MLD are often slower to complete math problems than
their typically developing peers, a result in part of their poor fact retrieval
rather than broader speed of processing deficits. However, young children later identified with a MLD when beginning school have numerical-­
processing speed that is considerably slower than same-­age same-­grade
peers. This is reflected in the time required to recognize numbers, correctly order fractions, and complete word problems.

Problem Solving

Not only do children with MLD struggle to quickly and accurately
engage in numerical-­related activities, in part because of these difficulties, they commonly rely on less efficient and laborious problem-­
solving practices. This is seen in children relying on finger counting
beyond second grade, use of repeated adding for multiplication facts,
pronounced difficulty moving beyond reliance on manipulatives, and
drawing objects to help with calculation. Difficulties with math processes across multiple levels can result in math being a time-­intensive
and time-­consuming process for kids with MLD.

Executive Skills

Difficulties with executive functioning (EF) can lead to challenges in
multiple areas of a child’s life, academic and nonacademic (see Chapter 49). Performance in math is but one example. EF refers to skills
including but not limited to sustained attention, managing impulses,
cognitive and behavioral flexibility, and WM. Anyone who has worked
with children diagnosed with ADHD, a group of kids notorious for
having EF challenges, can appreciate the impact these behaviors could

potentially have on math. Deficits in WM, auditory and visual, can negatively affect a child’s development of math skills. A child approaching
a word problem exemplifies the impact of various executive skills on
math. The child must keep in memory the content read and integrate it
with what they know about the topic and possible operation to apply,
all the while not responding to the irrelevant information contained
within the passage. Creating a mental representation of the problem
requires use of the visual sketch pad (visual WM).

Math-­Specific Processes
Number Sense

The term number sense has been defined in different ways, though the
general agreement is that the concept refers to an intuitive preverbal
ability to identify an approximation of items within a set that precedes
formal math instruction. This is seen in the ability to recognize and
manipulate nonsymbolic properties without having to apply a name to
the process—for example, recognizing that a box of three dots is fewer
than a box containing five dots. Unlike their peers, children with MLD
are more likely to count the number of items within the comparison
rather than recognizing the apparent difference.
Math is a symbolic process and cannot be efficiently learned and
mastered without understanding this numerical skill. There is considerable evidence that young children who struggle to develop symbolic
numerical representation, in contrast to number sense, are at considerable risk to have difficulty developing higher-­level math skills.
Examples of symbolic representations range from recognizing that the
numeral 4 and word four reflect a quantity and quickly recognizing the
larger (or smaller) of two numbers, all the way to understanding fractions and more complex notations.

Procedural Errors

The type of errors made by children with a, MLD are typical for any
child, the difference being that children with a LD show a 2-­to 3-­year
lag in understanding the concept. An example of a common error a
first-­grade child with a, MLD might make when “counting on” is to
undercount: “6 + 2= ?”; “6, 7” rather than starting at 6 and counting
an additional two numbers. As children with math deficits get older,
it is common to subtract a larger number from a smaller number. For
example, in the problem “63 − 29 = 46,” the child makes the mistake
of subtracting 3 from 9. Another common error is not decreasing the
number in the 10s column when borrowing: “64 − 39 = 35.” For both
adding and subtracting, there is a lack of understanding of the commutative property of numbers and a tendency to use repeated addition
rather than fact retrieval. It is not that children with an MLD do not
develop these skills, it is that they develop them much later than their
peers, thereby making the transition to complicated math concepts
much more challenging.
Unlike dyslexia, in which deficits have been isolated and identified as
causal (see Chapter 51), factors involved in the development of a MLD
are much more heterogeneous. Alone, none of the processes previously
outlined fully account for MLD, although all have been implicated as
problematic for those struggling with math.

TREATMENT AND INTERVENTIONS

The most effective interventions for MLD are those that include
explicit instruction on solving specific types of problems and that take
place over several weeks to several months. Skill-­based instruction is a
critical component; general math problem solving will not carry over
across various math skills unless the skill is part of a more complex
math concept. Clear, comprehensive guidelines for effective interventions for students struggling with math have been provided by the
U.S. Department of Education in the form of a Practice Guide released
through the What Works Clearinghouse. This document gives excellent direction in the identification and treatment of children with math
difficulties in the educational system. Although not intended for medical personnel or parents, the guide is available free of charge and can be
helpful for parents when talking to teachers about their child’s learning.
Table 52.1 lists additional resources for parents concerned about their
young child’s development of math facts.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 52 u Math and Writing Disabilities

321

Table 52.1  Parent Resources for the Child with Math
Learning Disability

Table 52.3  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Specific Learning
Disability with Impairment in Written Expression

Let’s Talk About Math. Available from http://www.zerotothree.org/p
arenting-­resources/early-­math-­video-­series. Accessed September
19, 2021.
Mixing in Math. Available from https://www.terc.edu/mixinginmath/.
Accessed September 19, 2021.
PBS Parents. Math resources available to parents through the Public
Broadcasting Service website. Accessed September 19, 2021.
http://www.pbs.org/parents/earlymath/index.html
http://www.pbs.org/parents/education/math/
Understood: Math. Available from https://www.understood.org/topi
cs/en/math.
U.S. Department of Education. Helping your child learn
mathematics. Available from https://www2.ed.gov/parents/academ
ic/help/math/index.html. Accessed September 19, 2021.

A.	Difficulties learning and using academic skills that have persisted
for at least 6 months, despite the provision of interventions that
target those difficulties.
Difficulties with written expression (e.g., makes multiple grammatical
or punctuation errors within sentences; employs poor paragraph
organization; written expression of ideas lacks clarity).
B.	The affected academic skills are substantially and quantifiably
below those expected for the individual’s chronologic age and
cause significant interference with academic or occupational
performance or with activities of daily living, as confirmed by
individually administered standardized achievement measures
and comprehensive clinical assessment. For individuals age 17
years and older, a documented history of impairing learning
difficulties may be substituted for the standardized assessment.
C.	The learning difficulties begin during school-­age years but may
not become fully manifest until the demands for those affected
academic skills exceed the individual’s limited capacities (e.g., as
in timed tests, reading or writing lengthy complex reports for a
tight deadline, excessively heavy academic loads).
D.	The learning difficulties are not better accounted for by intellectual
disabilities, uncorrected visual or auditory acuity, other mental or
neurologic disorders, psychosocial adversity, lack of proficiency in
the language of academic instruction, or inadequate educational
instruction.
315.2 (F81.81) With impairment in written expression:
Spelling accuracy
Grammar and punctuation accuracy
Clarity or organization of written expression
Specify current severity:
Mild: Some difficulties learning skills in one or two academic
domains, but of mild enough severity that the individual may be
able to compensate or function well when provided with appropriate
accommodations or support services, especially during the school
years.
Moderate: Marked difficulties learning skills in one or more academic
domains, so that the individual is unlikely to become proficient
without some intervals of intensive and specialized teaching during
the school years. Some accommodations or supportive services at
least part of the day at school, in the workplace, or at home may be
needed to complete activities accurately and efficiently.
Severe: Severe difficulties learning skills, affecting several academic
domains, so that the individual is unlikely to learn those skills without
ongoing intensive individualized and specialized teaching for most of
the school years. Even with an array of appropriate accommodations
or services at home, at school, or in the workplace, the individual may
not be able to complete all activities efficiently.

Table 52.2  Risk Factors for a Specific Learning Disability
Involving Mathematics
The child is at or below the 20th percentile in any math area, as
reflected by standardized testing or ongoing measures of progress
monitoring.
The teacher expresses concerns about the child’s ability to “take the
next step” in math.
There is a positive family history for math learning disability (this
alone will not initiate an intervention).
Parents think they have to “reteach” math concepts to their child.

Awareness that most public school systems have implemented some
form of an RtI model to identify LDs allows the primary care physician
to encourage parents to return to the school seeking an intervention
to address their child’s concern. Receiving special education services
in the form of an IEP may be necessary for some children. However,
the current approach to identifying children with an LD allows school
systems to intervene earlier, when problems arise, and potentially avoid
the need for an IEP. Pediatricians with patients whose parents have
received feedback from school with any of the risk factors outlined in
Table 52.2 should encourage the parents to discuss an intervention plan
with the child’s teacher.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

52.2 Writing Disabilities

From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2013:66–67.

Kenneth L. Grizzle and Brittany J. Bice-­Urbach
Oral language is a complex process that typically develops in the
absence of formal instruction. In contrast, written language requires
instruction in acquisition (word reading), understanding (reading
comprehension), and expression (spelling and composition). Unfortunately, despite reasonable pedagogy, a subset of children struggle
with development in one or several of these areas. The disordered
output of written language is currently referred to within the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(DSM-­5) as a specific learning disorder with impairment in written expression (Table 52.3).
Various terminology has been used when referring to individuals
with writing deficits; this subchapter uses the term impairment in
written expression (IWE) rather than “writing disorder” or “disorder of written expression.” Dysgraphia is often used when referring
to children with writing problems, sometimes synonymously with
IWE, though the two are related but distinct conditions. Dysgraphia

is primarily a deficit in motor output (paper/pencil skills), and IWE
is a conceptual weakness in developing, organizing, and elaborating
on ideas in writing.
The diagnoses of IWE and dysgraphia are made largely based on
phenotypical presentation; spelling, punctuation, grammar, clarity, and organization are factors to consider with IWE concerns.
Aside from these potentially weak writing characteristics, however,
no other guidelines are offered. Based on clinical experience and
research into the features of writing samples of children with disordered writing skills, one would expect to see limited output, poor
organization, repetition of content, and weak sentence structure
and spelling despite the child taking considerable time to produce
a small amount of content. For those with comorbid dysgraphia,
the legibility of their writing product will also be poor, sometimes
illegible.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

322 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of IWE is estimated at 6.9–14.7%, with the relative
risk for IWE ∼2.5 times higher for males than for females. The risk
for writing problems is much greater among select populations;
>50% of children with oral language disorders reportedly have
IWE. The relationship between attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and learning disorders in general is well established,
including IWE estimates in the 60% range for the combined and
inattentive presentations of ADHD. Because of the importance of
working memory (WM) and other executive functions in the writing process, any child with weakness in these areas will likely find
the writing process difficult (see Chapter 49).

SKILL DEFICITS ASSOCIATED WITH IMPAIRED
WRITING

Written language, much like reading, occurs along a developmental
trajectory that can be seamless as children master skills critical to
the next step in the process. Mastery of motor control that allows
a child to produce letters and letter sequences frees up cognitive
energy to devote to spelling words and eventually stringing words
into sentences, paragraphs, and complex composition. Early in the
development of each individual skill, considerable cognitive effort
is required, although ideally the lower-­level skills of motor production, spelling, punctuation, and capitalization (referred to as writing mechanics or writing conventions) will gradually become
automatic and require progressively less mental effort. This effort
can then be devoted to higher-­level skills, such as planning, organization, application of knowledge, and use of varied vocabulary. For
children with writing deficits, breakdowns can occur at one, some,
or every stage.

Transcription

Among preschool and primary grade children, there is a wide range
of what is considered “developmentally typical” as it relates to letter
production and spelling. However, evidence indicates that poor writers in later grades are slow to produce letters and write their name in
preschool and kindergarten. Weak early spelling and reading skills (letter identification and phonologic awareness; see Chapter 51) and weak
oral language have also been found to predict weak writing skills in
later elementary grades. Children struggling to master early transcription skills tend to write slowly, or when writing at reasonable speed, the
legibility of their writing degrades. Output in quantity and variety is
limited, and vocabulary use in poor spellers is often restricted to words
they can spell.
As children progress into upper elementary school and beyond,
a new set of challenges arises. They are now expected to have mastered lower-­level transcription skills, and the focus turns to the
application of these skills to more complex text generation. In addition to transcription, this next step requires the integration of additional cognitive skills that have yet to be tapped by young learners.

use of language, including though not limited to greeting and making requests, adjustments to language used to meet the need of the
situation or listener, and following conversation rules verbally and
nonverbally. Higher-­level language goes beyond basic vocabulary,
word form, and grammatical skills and includes making inferences,
understanding and appropriately using figurative language, and
making cause-­and-­effect judgments. Weaknesses in these areas,
with or without intact foundational language, can present challenges
for students in all academic areas that require writing. For example,
whether producing an analytic or narrative piece, the writer must
understand the extent of the reader’s background knowledge and in
turn what information to include and omit, make an argument for
a cause-­and-­effect relationship, and use content-­specific vocabulary
or vocabulary rich in imagery and nonliteral interpretation.

Executive Functions

Writing is a complicated process and, when done well, requires the
effective integration of multiple processes. Executive functions (EFs)
are a set of skills that include planning, problem solving, monitoring,
and adjusting as needed (see Chapter 49). Three recursive processes
have consistently been reported as involved in the writing process:
translation of thought into written output, planning, and reviewing.
Coming up with ideas, although challenging for many, is simply the
first step when writing a narrative (story). Once an idea has emerged,
the concept must be developed to include a plot, characters, and storyline and then coordinated into a coherent whole that is well organized and flows from beginning to end. Even if one develops ideas and
begins to write them down, persistence is required to complete the task,
which requires self-­regulation. Effective writers rely heavily on EFs, and
children with IWE struggle with this set of skills. Poor writers seldom
engage in the necessary planning and struggle to self-­monitor and
revise effectively.

Working Memory

WM refers to the ability to hold, manipulate, and store information for short periods. The more space available, the more memory
can be devoted to problem solving and thinking tasks. Nevertheless, there is limited space in which information can be held, and
the more effort devoted to one task, the less space is available to
devote to other tasks. WM has consistently been shown to play an
important role in the writing process, because weak WM limits the
Text Generation
(Words, sentences, discourse)

Working Memory

Oral Language

Language, though not speech, has been found to be related to writing skills. Writing difficulties are associated with deficits in both
expression and comprehension of oral language. Writing characteristics of children with specific language impairment (SLI) can differ from their unimpaired peers early in the school experience and
persist through high school (see Chapter 53). In preschool and kindergarten, as a group, children with language disorders show poorer
letter production and ability to print their name. Poor spelling and
weak vocabulary also contribute to the poor writing skills. Beyond
primary grades, the written narratives of SLI children tend to be
evaluated as “lower quality with poor organization” and weaker use
of varied vocabulary.
Pragmatic language and higher-­level language deficits also negatively affect writing skills. Pragmatic language refers to the social

Transcription

Executive Functions

(Handwriting, keyboarding,
spelling)

(Conscious attention,
planning, reviewing,
revising, strategies
for self-regulation)

Fig. 52.1 Simple view of writing. (From Berninger VW. Preventing

written expression disabilities through early and continuing assessment
and intervention for handwriting and/or spelling problems: Research
into practice. In: Swanson HL, Harris KR, Graham S [eds]. Handbook of
Learning Disabilities. New York: The Guilford Press;2003.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 52 u Math and Writing Disabilities
space available. Further, when writing skills that are expected to be
automatic continue to require effort, precious memory is required,
taking away what would otherwise be available for higher-­level
language.
The Simple View of Writing is an approach that integrates each
of the four ideas just outlined to describe the writing process (Fig.
52.1). At the base of the triangle are transcription and EFs, which
support, within WM, the ability to produce text. Breakdowns in
any of these areas can lead to poor writing, and identifying where
the deficit(s) are occurring is essential when deciding to treat the
writing problem. For example, children with weak graphomotor skills (e.g., dysgraphia) must devote considerable effort to the
accurate production of written language, thereby increasing WM
use devoted to lower-­level transcription and limiting memory that
can be used for developing discourse. The result might be painfully
slow production of a legible story or a passage that is largely illegible. If, on the other hand, a child’s penmanship and spelling have
developed well but their ability to persist with challenging tasks or
to organize their thoughts and develop a coordinated plan for their
paper is limited, one might see very little information written on
the paper despite considerable time devoted to the task. Lastly, even
when skills residing at the base of this triangle are in place, students with a language disorder will likely produce text that is more
consistent with their language functioning than their chronologic
grade or age.

TREATMENT

Poor writing skills can improve with effective treatment. Weak
graphomotor skills may not necessarily require intervention from
an occupational therapist (OT), although Handwriting Without
Tears is a curriculum frequently used by OTs when working with
children with poor penmanship. An empirically supported writing program has been developed by Berninger, but it is not widely
used inside or outside school systems (PAL Research-­Based Reading
and Writing Lessons). Her research suggests that for children with
dysgraphia, lower-­level transcription skills should be emphasized
to the point of becoming automatic. The connection between transcription skills and composition should be included in the instructional process; that is, children need to see how their work at letter
production is related to broader components of writing. Further,
because of WM constraints that frequently affect the instructional
process for students with learning disorders, all components of
writing should be taught within the same lesson. Building upon
Berninger’s sequencing of skills, Otaiba, Gillespie-­Rouse, and Baker
summarized features of effective handwriting instruction for kids
who struggle: direct instruction on letter formation that is modeled
and followed using verbal and visual instruction; retrieving letters
from memory using such strategies as a child viewing the letter,
covering, and reproducing the letter; children identifying their own
errors; newly learned letters are integrated into word and sentence
context and then into a child’s own writing product; integration of
multisensory strategies; and handwriting interventions included
practice, occurred regularly, and were relatively brief but meaningful (children learned that writing had a purpose beyond accurately
producing letters).
Explicit instruction of writing composition strategies combined
with implementation and coaching in self-­regulation will likely produce the greatest gains for students with writing deficits beyond

323

transcription. Emphasis will vary depending on the deficit specific
to the child. A well-­researched and well-­supported intervention for
poor writers is self-­regulated strategy development (SRSD). The
six stages in this model include developing and activating a child’s
background knowledge, introducing and discussing the strategy
that is being taught, modeling the strategy for the student, assisting
the child in memorization of the strategy, supporting the child’s use
of the strategy during implementation, and independent use of the
strategy. SRSD can be applied across various writing situations and
is supported until the student has developed mastery. The model
can emphasize the areas most needed by the child.
An additional excellent resource is entitled Teaching Elementary
School Students to Be Effective Writers and is found within the What
Works Clearinghouse maintained by the U.S. Department of Education’s Institute of Education Science.

Educational Resources

Children with identified learning disorders can potentially qualify for
formal education programming through special education or a Section 504 plan. Special education is guided on a federal level by the
Individual with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and includes
development of an individual education plan (IEP) (see Chapter 49).
The processes involved in pursuing an IEP are somewhat complex
and outlined in the chapter on math learning disability (MLD). A 504
plan provides accommodations to help children succeed in the regular
classroom. Accommodations that might be provided to a child with
IWE, through an IEP or a 504 plan, include dictation to a scribe when
confronted with lengthy writing tasks; additional time to complete
exams that require writing; and use of technology such as keyboarding, speech-­to-­text software, and writing devices that record teacher
instruction.
Speech-­
to-­
text capability is available on most smartphones,
which can be helpful for students from a functional standpoint.
Educational resources that can be accessed inside and outside the
classroom are often readily available for all children but may need
to be included as an accommodation for a child with dysgraphia.
Examples of easily available software include Voice Dictation in
Google Docs and Dictation in Microsoft Word, both available at
no cost. More sophisticated apps that can be purchased include
Co:Writer for Chrome, Read & Write, and Kurzweil 3000. Kurzweil
3000 is a comprehensive assistive technology device that, in addition to speech-­to-­text and text-­to-­speech, offers multiple valuable
resources for students with any type of literacy-­based learning disability. Editing is a critical component of the writing process and,
for children struggling with written expression, can present quite a
challenge. Microsoft Word has built-­in spelling and grammar correction suggestions, as do other word processing programs such as
Pages and Google Docs. Apps for use when using the internet are
also available to help with spelling, grammar, and writing mechanics. One example—though there are others—is Grammarly. When
recommending that parents pursue assistive technology for their
child as a potential accommodation, the physician should emphasize the importance of instruction to mastery of the device being
used. Learning to use technology effectively requires considerable
time and is initially likely to require additional effort, which can
result in frustration and avoidance.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

324 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders

Chapter 53

Language Development
and Communication
Disorders
Janet Y. Bang and Heidi M. Feldman
There are over 6,000 languages in the world, each with a distinct set of
symbols, defined as words or signs that signify objects, actions, ideas,
or relationships. By combining symbols in novel ways, humans can
create an infinite number of meanings. Human communication (Table
53.1) encompasses language, speech, nonverbal gestures, and written
language. Typically developing children learn language skills seemingly
without effort or explicit education early in the course of development.
However, there is wide variation in how and when children learn and
use language, speech, and communication. Globally, families differ in
the specific languages and number of languages they speak and in the
ways in which they communicate to convey their beliefs, values, and
circumstances. Children vary in their rates of learning language and
the highest level of skills they attain. Milestones within each domain
(language, speech, communication) signify the unfolding steps by
which new structures and skills come into children’s language abilities (Table 53.2 and Fig. 53.1). Some children require explicit education or clinical support to learn language or to make their speech easily
interpretable.

TYPICAL DEVELOPMENT
Development of Phonology

Every language is made up of an inventory of speech sounds or phonemes (see Table 53.1), and the number of speech sounds varies across
languages (e.g., Hawaiian = 13, Cantonese = more than 36, English =
46). Speech perception depends on the physical structures of the ear
and the auditory processing system. Fetuses detect sound as early as 28
weeks’ gestation, and within 5 days after birth, infants can demonstrate
the ability to discriminate vowel sounds (i.e., English vs Swedish) and
show preferences for their own prenatal monolingual or bilingual language environments (i.e., English vs Tagalog-­English). Infants develop
their speech sound perception, built on the ability to track the statistical probabilities of sound combinations (e.g., b + a is more prevalent
in language than b + d), segment sounds and words from a stream of
speech, and become attuned to the speech sounds in their respective
language or languages. Older children or adults learning a new language need to learn a new speech sound inventory.
Speech production involves activating the physical structures of
the respiratory tract and oral cavity, such as the lips, tongue, and vocal
cords, all of which work in concert. Infants begin producing nonspeech
cooing sounds at 4-­6 weeks. By 6-­8 months, many infants engage in
canonical babbling (e.g., bababa) followed by variegated babbling (e.g.,
badadeda). Infants who are exposed to sign language from birth demonstrate manual babbles at around the same time as hearing infants
begin vocal babbles. These skills lay the stage for infants’ first words
and subsequent word combinations. Speech production continues to
develop throughout early childhood, with easier consonant sounds
maturing early, around age 3 (e.g., in English p, b, m, h, w) and difficult sounds (e.g., in English l, s, r, v, ch, th) maturing late, typically by
around age 7.

Development of the Lexicon, Morphology, and
Syntax

It is difficult to pinpoint when in development children typically
understand their first word, but many children may say their first
words by around 1 year; English-­speaking families in the United States

report first words appearing as young as 7 and as late as 15 months.
Children’s first words mark their expressive skills in their lexicon (see
Table 53.1), and first words may come from a variety of categories (e.g.,
people, objects, and greetings). Many children recognize their own
name between 7 and 15 months old. Initial word learning is typically
very slow, but the rate of acquisition of new words gradually accelerates. Expressive lexical errors are common at this age and can include
overextensions (e.g., all edible objects are “apples”) or underextensions
(e.g., only one specific spoon is labeled “spoon”). Between 1 and 2
years, children build a lexicon of over 50 words. The vocabulary spurt
is rapid acceleration in word learning, usually after children reach 50
words in expressive language and coincident with the beginning of
two-­word phrases.
By approximately 2 years, children begin to demonstrate their developing understanding of morphology and syntax (see Table 53.1).
Morphology and syntax rules differ by language. Children’s receptive
syntax skills are evident when they can follow simple directions or
answer wh-­questions. Notable expressive morphologic milestones in
English include the use of the present progressive tense (e.g., “go-­ing”)
and the plural -­s (e.g., dog-­s). Expressive syntax skills are evident via
children’s early creative word combinations, starting with two-­word
combinations, which are likely to vary from adult models (e.g., in English “me down!” or “ick eggs!”). By 3 years, children begin to produce
sentences as long as five words and with increasingly complex grammar, such as negation (e.g., in English “I no want to”) and questions
(e.g., “What he do?”). As in these examples, lexical, morphologic, and/
or syntax errors in understanding and production are common during this early phase of syntactic development. Morphologic or syntax
errors in production may consist of overgeneralizations (e.g., in English, generalizing the “-­ed” ending to all verbs such as “runned” rather
than “ran”; in Spanish, Italian, or French, using the masculine articles
with feminine nouns). By 4-­5 years, children are able to use sentences
with adult-­like grammar (e.g., in English “I fell because I was running
too fast.”), although they may still make mistakes (e.g., in English “I gots
1 game and he got 3 games.”). Children also engage in longer, coherent,
connected discourse, such as telling or retelling stories and recounting
the steps of a familiar activity, such as taking a bath.

Development of Pragmatics

Pragmatic skills begin in infancy. The ability to attend to and follow
another’s eye gaze develops as early as 3-­4 months old. As young as 3
months old, children can engage in protoconversations, turn-­taking
patterns with caregivers that resemble early conversations. Responsive, contingent interactions between caregivers and children provide
infants the opportunity to experience, imitate, and practice the timing,
rhythm, and rate of nonverbal pragmatic skills, such as facial expressions, body language, and intonation. By 6 months, many infants can
passively follow the adult’s line of visual regard, resulting in a joint reference to the same objects and events in the environment. The ability
to share the same experience is critical to the development of further
language, social, and cognitive skills as infants “map” specific meanings
onto their experiences. By 10-­13 months, many infants can actively
show, give, and point to objects. Children vary widely in when these
skills first appear; English-­speaking families have reported pointing
skills as early as 6 months and as late as 16 months.
An important facet of typical communication development and a
building block of conversational turn-­taking skills includes establishing a joint focus of attention, a sharing of the topic of conversation
with a communicative partner, both in comprehension (e.g., infants
turn their heads to the object an adult is pointing at) and in production
(e.g., a child saying “look at that dog over there,” then looking back at
their caregiver and expressing a desire for a dog). Conversation skills
are important for forming relationships and especially strong social
bonds and friendships. As children reach school age and adolescence,
they develop nonliteral or figurative language skills (see Table 53.1),
including hints, idioms, metaphors, hyperbole, humor, and sarcasm.
In lexical development, understanding often occurs before production;
in children’s humor development, children’s production may precede
full understanding of their meaning. Another notable milestone of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 53 u Language Development and Communication Disorders

325

Table 53.1  Definitions of Basic Terms in Communication, Language, and Speech
DEFINITION

EXAMPLES

Communication

TERM

•	Broad umbrella term that encompasses
understanding and producing language, speech,
nonverbal communicative gestures, and written
language

•	Humans share ideas using verbal or signed speech
and language
•	Nonverbal communicative gestures include
nodding one’s head up and down to convey “yes”
in some cultures

Language

•	Verbal, signed, written, or other systems that use
arbitrary but conventional, rule-­governed symbols
to communicate about objects, events, and ideas
in the past, present, and future

•	Verbal symbols include words (e.g., apple in
English or manzana in Spanish, both of which
represent a red, tasty fruit)
•	Signed symbols include the word apple in
American Sign Language, produced by the twist of
the knuckle of the index finger on the cheek

Speech

•	Perception of the meaningful units of sounds
that comprise verbal language and production of
these sounds by coordinating the mouth, tongue,
airflow, and vibration of the vocal folds

•	Speech sounds or phonemes make a difference in
meaning (e.g., b, p, a, i, and t affect the meaning
of bat, bit, pat, and pit)
•	Speech does not include all vocal sounds, such as
coughs or throat clearing
•	Phonemes in sign language are based on spatial,
temporal features, such as hand shape

Receptive language

•	Hearing and understanding verbal or sign
language

•	Recognizing own name
•	Following two-­step directions

Expressive language

•	Speaking using verbal or sign language

•	Speaking first words or signs in a sign language
•	Telling stories

Phonology

•	The system of relationships among speech sounds
or phonemes that constitute a fundamental
component of language

•	Understanding seetheredball can be segmented
into see the red ball
•	Babbling, consonant-­vowel combinations that use
phonemes

Lexicon

•	All of the words or vocabulary of a person or a
language

•	The lexicon of the mathematician may vary from
the lexicon of the lawyer

Morphology

•	Units of meaning that can be combined to form
vocabulary

•	In English dogs is made of two morphemes, dog
and the plural -­s; untie is made of un-­and tie

Syntax

•	Grammar and word order to make sentences

•	In English word order, the dog chases the cat,
while in Hindi word order, the cat the dog chases

Pragmatics

•	Verbal and nonverbal communication skills that
govern how language and communication are
used in context
•	Includes intonation, facial expression, and body
language

•	Use of eye contact and gestures to make a point
forcefully
•	The timing and responsiveness between
communication partners (e.g., engaging, responding,
and maintaining reciprocal exchanges)

Nonliteral or figurative language
skill

•	Meaning of a word or phrase that is not literal but
understood in context

•	Hints (e.g., a teacher saying, “I think I hear children
talking”)
•	Idioms (e.g., “Give me a hand”)
•	Metaphor (e.g., “You are my sunshine”)
•	Hyperbole (e.g., “That’s the biggest thing I’ve ever
seen!”)

Advanced language skills

•	Ability to listen, speak, read, write, and reason
using language

•	Academic language
•	Ability to debate and deliver speeches

Literacy skills

•	Skills required for reading and writing

•	Reading an alphabetic language requires
awareness of the sounds of language, print, and
the relationship between letters and sounds
•	Spelling is a literacy skill

Bilingualism and multilingualism

•	Ability to speak and/or sign two or more
languages

•	Ability to communicate verbally in Chinese and
English
•	Ability to communicate verbally in English and to
use American Sign Language
•	Ability to use Chinese, English, and American Sign
Language

Biliteracy and multiliteracy

•	Ability to read and write in two or more languages

•	Ability to read and write Chinese, Spanish, and
English

Phonologic processes

•	Errors in speech production that affect more than
a single sound and are based on violations of
predictable, rule-­based features

•	Fronting, when a sound that should be made in
the back of the mouth (cat) is made in the front of
the mouth (tat)
•	Cluster reduction, when a consonant cluster (as in
stop) is reduced to a single consonant (top)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

326 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 53.2  Speech, Language, and Communication Milestones from Birth to 5 Years, Based on Typically Developing Children
Acquiring a Single Verbal Language
HEARING AND UNDERSTANDING

SPEAKING

BIRTH TO 3 MO
•	Startles at loud sounds
•	Recognizes voices and quiets if crying
•	Turns head toward sounds
•	Watches faces
•	Quiets or smiles when spoken to
4-­6 MO
•	Moves eyes in direction of sounds
•	Responds to changes in tone of voice
•	Notices music and sounds
•	Recognizes familiar people and things at a distance

7-­12 MO
•	Listens when spoken to
•	Turns and looks in direction of sounds
•	Enjoys social games, such as peek-­a-­boo and pat-­a-­cake
•	Responds to own name
•	Recognizes words for common items, such as cup, shoe, and juice
•	Begins to respond to simple requests (Come here; Want more?) or
No
•	Looks when an adult points at something
1-­2 YR
•	Listens to simple stories, songs, and rhymes
•	Follows simple commands and understands simple questions (Roll
the ball; Kiss the baby; Where’s your shoe?)
•	Points to things when asked or when named such as body parts and
objects
2-­3 YR
• Understands differences in meaning (e.g., go–stop, in–on, big–little,
up–down)
•	Follows two-­step requests (Get the book and put it on the table.)

3-­4 YR
•	Understands simple who, what, where, and why questions
•	Understands words for colors like red, blue, or green and shapes like
circle or square
•	Responds when you call from another room
4-­5 YR
•	Hears and understands most of what is said at home and in school
•	Pays attention to a short story and answers simple questions about it
•	Understands words for time like yesterday, today, and tomorrow
•	Understands words for order like first, next, and last
•	Follows longer directions such as (Find an animal you like, draw a
circle around it, and bring the paper to me)

•	Makes pleasure sounds (cooing, gooing)
•	Cries differently for different needs

•	Vocalizes differently to show excitement, being tired, or in pain
•	Makes sounds when alone and when playing
•	Makes babbling sounds that are speechlike and uses consonant
sounds, such as p, b, and m
•	Reaches for toys or objects
•	Engages in turn-­taking and protoconversations
•	Uses speech sounds or gestures to get and keep attention and to
respond to others
•	Imitates different speech sounds and gestures
•	Babbles with long and short groups of sounds, such as bababa upup
bibi, and mixes different syllables, such as badadeda
•	Says one or two words (bye-­bye, dada, mama)
•	Points to or shows things to spontaneously share interest with
familiar people
•	Uses gestures such as waving for hi and bye or shaking head for no
•	Learns to say more words every month
•	Uses some one-­and two-­word questions (Where kitty? Go bye-­bye?
What’s that?)
•	Combines two words in their own ways (more cookie, no juice,
mommy book)
•	Uses consonant sounds such as p, b, m, h, and w in English
•	Often asks for or directs attention to objects by naming them
•	Has a word for almost everything
•	Uses prepositions like in, on, and under
•	Often uses two-­to three-­word “sentences”
•	Speech is mostly understood by familiar listeners
•	Uses consonant sounds such as k, g, f, t, d, and n in English
•	Uses pronouns like I, you, me, we, and they
•	Uses sentences that have four or more words with more complex
grammar such as negative (I no want to) and questions
•	Talks about activities outside the home
•	Usually understood by people outside the family
•	Uses sentences that include details (I like to read my books) and
different action words like jump or play; may still make some
grammar mistakes (I gots one game and he got three games)
•	Tells simple stories using mostly full sentences
•	Communicates easily with other children and adults
•	Says most sounds correctly except a few that are harder to say, such
as l, s, r, v, z, ch, sh, and th in English

Milestones may not apply to bilingual children, children exposed to sign languages, children learning a second language, and children with language and learning disorders
For Spanish translations and more information, including activities for families:
• American Speech-­Language-­Hearing Association: http://www.asha.org/public/speech/development/chart.htm
• The American Academy of Pediatrics: https://healthychildren.org/English/Pages/default.aspx
• Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Milestones checklist: https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/milestones/index.html
Adapted from the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (2021), the American Academy of Pediatrics (2009), and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Milestones checklist (2021).

pragmatic skills is the ability to adapt how to narrate events or stories
for different audiences (e.g., friends vs teachers).

Advanced Language Skills

Once children enter school, they continue to develop new vocabulary
and use increasingly complex sentence constructions to communicate
about abstract, hypothetical, and imaginary topics. By adolescence,
many students in Westernized school systems are required to deliver

expository speeches or to debate. Formal schooling also affords new
situations to communicate with a broader network of individuals,
including teachers, coaches, and supervisors. The diversity of the situations requires nuanced attention to social rules and conventions and
increases exposure to diverse forms of nonliteral language use, though
proficiency in the use of nonliteral language varies by the language
and culture of the speaker and addressee. Finally, the introduction
of formal schooling presents children with the demands of acquiring

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 53 u Language Development and Communication Disorders
Pragmatics

Conversations

Protoconversations, social games

Watches faces,
smiling

Joint attention, pointing,
showing

Narratives, scripts, story retell,
connected discourse

Asks for or directs others’
attention to objects

327

Children’s
early language,
speech, and
communication
skills

Uses increasingly complex sentences with varying lengths
Lexicon
morphology
syntax

Produces
first words

Combines two words
in own ways

Uses more complex grammar
such as –ing, -s, in, on, under

Understands own name, new words,
responds to simple requests
Phonology

Babbling

Uses consonant
sounds such as p, b,
m, h, and w in English

Speech perception
0

Follows 2-step
requests

12

Understands questions and words for time,
follows longer directions

Uses consonant sounds
such as k, g, f, t, d, and n in English
24

Uses pronouns, questions,
negative statements

Still developing more difficult
sounds such as as l, s, r, v,
ch, and th in English

36

48

Child age
(months)
60

Provide positive interactions, follow into child’s focus of attention/interests,
use appropriately complex speech for child’s level of understanding
Engage with and imitate child’s
speech and gestures

Expose child to different words, different sentences,
and varying sentence complexity

Provide warmth and
responsiveness

Ask questions, converse about the past and future,
engage child about what they see, hear, feel, and think
in different situations

Caregiver
and educator
strategies
to support
language
development

Fig. 53.1 Timeline of children’s early language, speech, and communication skills and caregivers’ and educators’ strategies to support that devel-

opment. The timing and width of boxes for the child skills are adapted from milestones from the American Speech-­Language-­Hearing Association,
The American Academy of Pediatrics, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. More information on milestones can also be seen in Table
53.1. Caregivers and educators should be encouraged to engage with the child using the language with which they are most comfortable because
children, even children with delays, are capable of becoming bilingual. Specific child skills and caregiver/educator strategies may vary according to
language and cultural practices.

literacy skills (see Table 53.1), those skills required for reading and
writing. Early oral language skills are a robust predictor of children’s
early reading skills, and early oral language and reading skills are in
turn predictors of children’s writing skills (see Chapters 51 and 52.2).
Language skills become critical to support high-­level school-­and
work-­related literacy skills.

BILINGUALISM AND MULTILINGUALISM

Worldwide, learning more than one language is more common than
learning just one; many regions and countries in the world are home
to individuals who routinely speak two or more languages. The timing of exposure, balance between languages, and level of skill in each
language in dual-­language or multilanguage learners varies across situations. Simultaneous bilinguals refers to those regularly exposed to
both languages prenatally or from birth. Sequential bilinguals refers
to those exposed to the second language after the first language, often
when they enter school, though the timing of when the second language is introduced varies. Once children learn two languages, the
balance in skill level between them may vary. For example, a child
who was born in Nigeria, exposed to Igbo, and then immigrated to
Greece at age 5 years will initially be more proficient in Igbo than in
Greek. As the child attends school in Greece, Greek proficiency will
improve (likely also supported through the introduction of reading
and writing in a Greek monolingual school environment), and thus
the balance will shift and the child may become more proficient in
Greek over Igbo. A high level of skill across all domains of phonology, lexicon, syntax, and pragmatics is considered an ideal picture
of bilingualism, but this ideal is not always the case or necessary
for many bilingual learners. Bilingual learners often demonstrate

code-­switching, that is, alternating between languages, or code-­
mixing, mixing their languages together, especially when speaking
with other bilingual speakers. A distinction between conversational
and academic language skills may be made in reference to bilinguals.
Bilingual speakers may master conversational language, the language
used to communicate casually with family or friends, but remain less
skilled in academic language, the complex, technical, and specialized vocabulary and syntax required in academic or work settings,
particularly when school is presented in a language different from
the language of the home. Some bilingual learners may experience
language attrition, a reduction in the proficiency in one language
over time. Factors within the child, family (e.g., one caregiver/one
language, caregivers speaking both languages), community (e.g.,
availability of bilingual schooling, minority vs majority language of
the community, perceived prestige of a language), and policy (e.g.,
national acknowledgement of multiple languages or requirements of
accessibility of documents in school or business sectors) contribute
to proficiency in both languages.
Bilingualism or multilingualism is typical language development for
many children and not an adequate explanation for language delays as
long as the child’s skills in both languages are assessed. Even children
with language and developmental disorders, such as intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder, may be successful bilingual or
multilanguage learners. It is difficult to predict developmental trajectories in bilingual development because of the wide variety of factors
associated with the level of skill in different domains. Children in homes
with two or more languages who show delays in language development
(considering the accumulated accomplishments in all languages) should
be promptly referred for evaluation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

328 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
DRIVERS OF VARIATION IN TYPICAL LANGUAGE
DEVELOPMENT
Genetic

Similarities in language abilities across members of the same family
suggest that genetic factors contribute to individual differences in language abilities. Genetic factors have been studied more often in the
context of disorders of language learning than in the context of normal
variation (see below).

Environment

skills than watchful waiting. Biologic sex differences have been found
in many studies of language development. Though males are generally
slower to develop than females, the differences do not usually rise to
the level of being clinically apparent. However, males are more likely
to develop language disorders than females. Based on these findings,
children with moderate to severe delays in the development of language
and speech deserve a prompt evaluation, even if they are males, non–first
born children, twins, tongue-­tied toddlers, and/or children with chronic
otitis media.

Interactions between young children and their caregivers that are positive, responsive, and warm allow children to practice their early word
learning (e.g., social games, routines). Living in stable home environments is better for language development than living in an unstable
condition. The Bucharest Early Intervention Project conducted a randomized controlled trial to examine the role of being raised in a home
(foster care) versus in institutionalized care in Romanian orphanages
that were providing infants with low levels of responsive interactions.
Children taken from the orphanages and placed in foster care by age
15 months had language skills that were similar to typically developing peers at 30 and 42 months in the same Romanian community living with their biologic families; children placed in foster care after 24
months had persistent expressive language delays.
The role of caregivers specifically is one of the few levers available
to influence language outcomes in clinical practice and public programs. Positive links have been found between variability in socioeconomic backgrounds and children’s later language skills; caregivers have
been shown to mediate this link. Caregivers’ child-­directed speech
refers to changes to caregivers’ prosody (intonation patterns), phonology, grammar, and lexicon when engaging with young children.
This child-­directed speech has been measured across a wide variety of
features, which can be broadly categorized into measures of quantity
(e.g., total number of words spoken), quality (e.g., number of different words spoken), and interaction (e.g., warmth and responsiveness).
Taken together, these factors constitute language nutrition, which,
like dietary nutrition, is associated with rates of growth. However, the
causal links between caregivers’ child-­directed speech and children’s
language outcomes are still unclear in children with typical development or language delays or disorders. Meta-­analyses of interventions
targeting improved language nutrition to date have generally reported
either null effects or small to moderate positive effects on children’s
language skills. The specific role of book-­sharing interventions to support children’s language development is also mixed among different
meta-­analyses. Wide heterogeneity across intervention studies, including the method of delivery (e.g., one-­on-­one coaching vs caregiver
groups), intensity (e.g., 1 hour per week for 12 weeks vs two 45-­minute
visits), measures of caregiver-­child interaction, and child language
outcomes, may contribute to differences in results. Caregivers’ mental
health has been found to be an important mediator of child outcomes;
higher caregiver depression has been linked to poorer children’s language outcomes.
Greater amounts of screen time and early age of screen time are
negatively related to children’s early language skills. However, high-­
quality screen-­time practices (e.g., co-­viewing, educational programs)
are positively related to children’s language skills; effect sizes are small
to moderate.

LANGUAGE, SPEECH, AND COMMUNICATION
DISORDERS

Misattributions of Language Delay

Genetic factors appear to play a major role in influencing how children
learn to talk. A family history may identify current or past speech or
language problems in up to 30% of first-­degree relatives of proband
children. Concordance rate for low language test scores and/or a history of speech therapy within twin pairs is about 50% in dizygotic
pairs and 90% in monozygotic pairs. Consistent pathogenic genetic
variations have not been identified. Instead, multiple genetic regions
and epigenetic changes may result in heterogeneous genetic pathways
causing language disorders. Several single-­nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) involving noncoding regulatory genes, including CNTNAP2
(contactin-­associated-­protein-­like-­2) and KIAA0319, are strongly
associated with early language acquisition and are also thought to

Several common conditions have been erroneously implicated as an
adequate explanation for language delays and disorders. Typically
developing twins learn to talk at the same age as typically developing
single-­born children. Birth-­order effects on language development
have not been consistently found. Ankyloglossia (tongue-­
tie), an
extremely tight lingual frenulum, does not prevent the acquisition of
speech, but ankyloglossia may be the result of abnormalities associated with disorders of speech, such as neural injury and cerebral palsy.
Frequent ear infections and serous otitis media in early childhood do
not result in persisting language disorder. Prompt placement of tympanostomy tubes for chronic serous otitis media does not lead to better

Impairment in language, speech, and communication may occur in
isolation or may be associated with other conditions.

Isolated Language Disorders with or Without
Accompanying Speech Disorders
Clinical Presentation

Primary disorders of speech and language development are significant
difficulties found in the absence of major cognitive, sensory, or motor
dysfunction. The literature uses the term specific language impairment (SLI) or language impairment, the term we use here, also called
developmental language disorder or developmental dysphasia. Children with language impairment typically perform >1.25-­1.5 standard
deviations below the mean on standardized language assessments. The
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(DSM-­5) criteria for a language disorder are provided in Table 53.3.
Many children with language impairment eventually become competent language users, though they may show persistent and subtle
difficulties with skills related to phonology, lexicon, and/or syntax.
As adolescents and adults, compared to peers, they are generally less
proficient at producing stories, descriptions, and scripts of everyday
events, collectively known as oral narratives. Their narratives tend to
be shorter, including fewer prepositions, main story ideas, and devices
fostering cohesion. Children with language impairment may have
significant difficulty in higher-­level language skills (see Table 53.1),
reasoning skills (e.g., drawing correct inferences and conclusions),
the ability to take another person’s perspective, and the ability to paraphrase and rephrase. Some children with language impairment show
difficulties with social interaction because social interactions are often
mediated by verbal language. Young children with language impairment may interact more successfully with older children or adults, who
can adapt their communication to match the child’s level of function,
than with peers.

Epidemiology

Over 15% of 2-­year-­olds may not produce a vocabulary of 50 words or
two-­word utterances; estimates may vary for children exposed to two
or more languages. Almost half of preschool-­age children, age 3-­5 years
old, who qualify for special education meet eligibility based only on
speech-­language impairment. By age 5, approximately 6% of children
are identified as having a speech impairment alone, 5% as having both
speech and language impairment, and 8% as having language impairment alone. Males are nearly twice as likely to have an identified speech
or language impairment as females.

Etiology

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 53 u Language Development and Communication Disorders
affect early neuronal structural development. Several chromosomal
copy number variants (see Chapter 96) have also been associated with
abnormalities of language and speech; these variants may be associated with distinctive physical features (e.g., tall stature in Klinefelter
syndrome) or neurobehavioral conditions (e.g., autistic features).
Environmental, hormonal, and nutritional factors may exert epigenetic influences by dysregulating gene expression. These forces result
in aberrant sequencing of the onset, growth, and timing of language
development.
All of the family, community, and sociopolitical factors that appear
to contribute to variation in typical language learning may contribute
to the rate of learning in children with disorders. Improving the quality
of the verbal environment, and in particular the quantity and quality of
child-­directed speech (see above), may moderate the impact of genetic
and epigenetic factors.

Pathogenesis

Language functioning is widely distributed across the brain through
interconnected neural networks. Frank neurologic injury is typically
absent in children with language impairment. Language disorders have
been attributed to a fundamental difficulty in the brain’s capacity to
process complex information rapidly. Limitations in the amount of
information that can be stored in verbal working memory (see Chapter
49) may also limit the rate at which language information is processed.
Electrophysiologic studies show abnormal latency in the early phase of
auditory processing in children with language impairment. Neuroimaging studies identify an array of anatomic abnormalities, implicated
in language processing. MRI scans in children with language impairment may reveal white matter lesions and volume loss, ventricular
enlargement, focal gray matter heterotopia within the right and left
parietotemporal white matter, abnormal morphology of the inferior
frontal gyrus, atypical patterns of asymmetry of language cortex, or
increased thickness of the corpus callosum in a minority of affected
children. Postmortem studies of children with language disorders
found evidence of atypical symmetry in the plana temporale and cortical dysplasia in the region of the sylvian fissure. A high rate of atypical
perisylvian asymmetries has been documented in the parents of children with language impairment.

Language Disorders Associated with Cognitive
Impairment and Intellectual Disability

Speech and language impairment may be the first indication of a
global neurodevelopmental disorder. Global developmental delay or
early developmental impairment is defined as delays in two or more
domains. Children with substantial delays in adaptive function and
scores 2 or more standard deviations below the mean on intelligence
testing may meet criteria for intellectual disability (see Chapter 56).
Most children with a mild intellectual disability learn to communicate adequately, though they are likely to encounter difficulties with
higher-­level language skills (see Table 53.1). Children with an IQ as
low as 25 may eventually acquire a small lexicon and ability to combine
words. Specific genetic syndromes have distinctive language profiles:
in Down syndrome, verbal skills are more impaired than nonverbal
skills; in William syndrome, language skills may be relatively preserved
compared to nonverbal skills; in fragile X syndrome, unusual word or
sound repetition may be present.

Autism Spectrum Disorder

A disordered pattern of language, speech, and communication development characterizes autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (see Chapter
58). The core characteristics of ASD are persistent difficulties in social
communication and social interaction relative to age expectations and
restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities. Children with ASD show a wide range of language and communication
abilities. At the severe end, language and speech may be extremely
limited (nonverbal). Approximately 30–50% of children with ASD also
meet criteria for intellectual disability, which contributes to the challenges of developing communication skills. Parents report regression

329

in language and social skills (autistic regression) in approximately
20–25% of children with ASD, usually between 12 and 36 months of
age. The cause of the regression is not known; it is associated with an
increased risk for intellectual disability and severe ASD. Individuals with ASD who are high functioning may have large vocabularies
and use grammatically correct sentences but have unusual or impaired
social-­pragmatic features, such as odd intonation patterns, off-­topic
comments, and atypical conversational skills. For example, they may
engage in long monologues about a topic of special interest, without
considering the interest of their conversational partner. Some individuals with ASD have highly specialized, isolated, “savant” skills, such as
calendar calculations or hyperlexia (the precocious ability to recognize written words beyond expectation based on general intellectual
ability).
DSM-­5 identified social (pragmatic) communication disorder
(SPCD) as a category of communication disorder distinct from ASD
(see Table 53.3). Symptoms of SPCD include extreme literalness and
inappropriate verbal and social interactions. Socially appropriate use
and understanding of figurative language (see Table 53.1) depends on
correct interpretation of the meaning and the context of language and
the ability to draw proper inferences, skills limited in SPCD. SPCD has
been recognized as a symptom of a wide range of disorders, including
right-­hemisphere brain injury and nonverbal learning disabilities.

Hearing Impairment

Hearing loss may be caused by a sensorineural loss, a conductive loss,
or a mixed picture in one or both ears. Although it is not possible to
accurately predict the impact of hearing loss on a child’s verbal language development, the type, degree, and laterality of hearing loss;
the age of onset; and the duration of the auditory impairment before
amplification play important roles (see Chapter 55). Newborn screening programs are designed to identify congenital hearing loss but fail to
identify children with progressive or acquired hearing loss or deafness
after birth. Any child who shows a speech or language problem should
have a hearing assessment by an audiologist, even if they passed their
newborn hearing screen.
Conductive hearing loss occurs when sounds cannot get through
the outer and middle ear to stimulate the auditory nerve. In children,
the most common cause of conductive hearing loss is acute or chronic
serous otitis media. Otitis media is typically transient and may increase
the sound threshold at which children can detect tones or understand
language. Persistent fluid in the middle ear may be treated with tympanostomy or ventilation tubes. However, treatment of chronic serous
otitis media with tympanostomy tubes does not improve outcomes in
the domains of speech and language, cognition, academic skills, or psychosocial functioning from preschool years through middle childhood.

Neurologic Conditions
Epilepsy Syndromes

Children with Landau-­Kleffner syndrome or verbal auditory agnosia
have a history of typical language development until they experience
a regression in their ability to comprehend spoken language—verbal
auditory agnosia—along with the development of seizures, usually
between 3 and 7 years of age. Expressive language skills also typically
deteriorate. An electroencephalogram (EEG) may show a distinct pattern of status epilepticus in sleep (continuous spike wave in slow-­wave
sleep), and up to 80% of children with Landau-­Kleffner syndrome
eventually exhibit clinical seizures. Use of antiepileptic medication,
corticosteroids, and intravenous gamma globulin has led to varying
results. The prognosis for return of typical language ability is uncertain,
even if seizures resolve.
Epileptic interictal discharges are more frequently found on EEGs of
children with language impairments than EEGs of otherwise typically
developing children. The discharges are likely a manifestation of an
underlying disorder of brain, distinct from the language impairment.
Only when seizure symptoms or regression in language ability is present is a routine EEG recommended in the evaluation for a child with
speech and/or language impairment.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

330 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 53.3  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Communication Disorders
LANGUAGE DISORDER
A.	Persistent difficulties in the acquisition and use of language across
modalities (i.e., spoken, written, sign language, or other) due to
deficits in comprehension or production that include the following:
1.	Reduced vocabulary (word knowledge and use).
2.	Limited sentence structure (ability to put words and word
endings together to form sentences based on the rules of
grammar and morphology).
3.	Impairments in discourse (ability to use vocabulary and connect
sentences to explain or describe a topic or series of events or
have a conversation).
B.	Language abilities are substantially and quantifiably below those
expected for age, resulting in functional limitations in effective
communication, social participation, academic achievement, or
occupational performance, individually or in any combination.
C.	Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D.	The difficulties are not attributable to hearing or other sensory
impairment, motor dysfunction, or another medical or neurologic
condition and are not better explained by intellectual disability
(intellectual developmental disorder) or global developmental delay.
SPEECH SOUND DISORDER
A.	Persistent difficulty with speech sound production that interferes
with speech intelligibility or prevents verbal communication of
messages.
B.	The disturbance causes limitations in effective communication
that interfere with social participation, academic achievement,
or occupational performance, individually or in any
combination.
C.	Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D.	The difficulties are not attributable to congenital or acquired
conditions, such as cerebral palsy, cleft palate, deafness or hearing
loss, traumatic brain injury, or other medical or neurologic
conditions.

SOCIAL (PRAGMATIC) COMMUNICATION DISORDER
A.	Persistent difficulties in the social use of verbal and nonverbal
communication as manifested by all of the following:
1.	Deficits in using communication for social purposes, such as
greeting and sharing information, in a manner that is appropriate
for the social context.
2.	Impairment of the ability to change communication to match
context or the needs of the listener, such as speaking differently
in a classroom than on a playground, talking differently to
a child than to an adult, and avoiding use of overly formal
language.
3.	Difficulties following rules for conversation and storytelling,
such as taking turns in conversation, rephrasing when
misunderstood, and knowing how to use verbal and
nonverbal signals to regulate interaction.
4.	Difficulties understanding what is not explicitly stated (e.g.,
making inferences) and nonliteral or ambiguous meanings of
language (e.g., idioms, humor, metaphors, multiple meanings
that depend on the context for interpretation).
B.	The deficits result in functional limitations in effective communication,
social participation, social relationships, academic achievement, or
occupational performance, individually or in combination.
C.	The onset of the symptoms is in the early developmental
period (but deficits may not become fully manifest until social
communication demands exceed limited capacities).
D.	The symptoms are not attributable to another medical or neurologic
condition or to low abilities in the domains of word structure and
grammar and are not better explained by autism spectrum disorder,
intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), global
developmental delay, or another mental disorder.

From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2013:42, 44, 47–48.

Cerebellar Mutism Syndrome

In the aftermath of operations for tumors in the posterior fossa, such as
medulloblastoma, many children lose the ability to speak. Fortunately,
though the presentation is initially profound, most children recover the
ability to use language. Cerebellar mutism syndrome demonstrates
that the cerebellum probably plays a fundamental role in language and
communication. The syndrome is thought to result from damage to the
superior cerebellar peduncle that connects the cerebellum to language
centers in the frontal lobes.

Stroke

Strokes in childhood can occur prenatally, in the perinatal period, or at
any time in childhood. As in adults, a brain territory frequently affected
is supplied by the middle cerebral artery resulting in damage to the left
frontal and temporal lobes that are associated with language function
in adults. However, young children with stroke show greater plasticity
of language function than do adults with similar brain injuries. Many
children with left hemisphere stroke go on to demonstrate typical or
near-­typical language functions. Functional imaging studies document
that these children activate uninjured regions of the left hemisphere
around the stroke or homologous regions in the right hemisphere.
This demonstrates that though under usual circumstances the left
hemisphere serves language, alternative networks can substitute in the
case of early injury. The quality of the home language environment is
strongly associated with the language skills of children with strokes.

Metabolic and Neurodegenerative Disorders (see
Part IX and Chapter 639)

Regression of language development may accompany loss of neuromotor function at the outset of a number of metabolic diseases, including lysosomal storage disorders (metachromatic leukodystrophy),

peroxisomal disorders (adrenal leukodystrophy), ceroid lipofuscinosis (Batten disease), and mucopolysaccharidosis (Hunter disease,
Hurler disease). A creatine transporter deficiency was identified as an
X-­linked disorder that manifests with language delay in males and with
mild learning disability in female carriers.

Hydrocephalus (see Chapter 631.11)

Children with hydrocephalus may be described as having cocktail-­
party syndrome. In this syndrome, children may use sophisticated
words, but their comprehension of abstract concepts is limited, pragmatic conversational skills are weak, their analyses are superficial, and/
or they appear to be carrying on a monologue.

Language in the Context of Psychologic or Mental
Health Conditions
Selective Mutism

In selective mutism, children do not speak in specific social situations,
such as school or other settings outside the home, though they speak
normally in certain settings, such as within their home or when they
are alone with their parents. Other symptoms include excessive shyness, withdrawal, dependency on parents, and oppositional behavior.
Most cases of selective mutism are the manifestation of a chronic pattern of anxiety. Children with selective mutism often report that they
want to speak in social settings but are too afraid, worried, or distressed
to do so. The family history is often positive for anxiety symptoms.
Children with selective mutism may also have a language or speech
impairment, contributing to their sense of distress in speaking. Treatment of selective mutism generally uses evidence-­based approaches to
reducing general anxiety, including cognitive-­behavioral therapy and/
or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in conjunction with speech-­
language therapy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 53 u Language Development and Communication Disorders

331

Schizophrenia

cleft palate need long-­term therapy with a speech-­language pathologist (SLP). Cleft palate may occur in isolation, called nonsyndromic
cleft palate, or in conjunction with other malformations, called syndromic cleft palate. Velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS) is an autosomal dominant condition that results from a deletion on the long arm
of chromosome 22 (deletion22q11) and may include cleft palate. Many
different phenotypes are associated with this deletion, demonstrating
the complex relationship of genes, anatomic structure, and function.
The prognosis for speech and language in such cases is dependent on
the specific syndrome associated with the cleft palate.

Adverse Psychosocial Conditions
Orphanages

Velopharyngeal Insufficiency

A characteristic of schizophrenia is abnormal communication, including highly disorganized language that is difficult to follow and frequent
changes in topic (see Chapter 47.1). This communication challenge
accompanies the thought disturbance that is the hallmark of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia usually presents in individuals in adolescence
or young adulthood. The communication disorder is linked to other
features of schizophrenia, including slower processing speed, poorer
cognitive control, and weaker working memory relative to typically
developing peers.

An estimated 8 million children worldwide are living in residential
care or orphanages, despite recognition of the severe adverse impacts
of institutionalization on children’s health and development. Children
in orphanages have poor receptive and expressive language skills, most
likely the result of limited language exposure and lack of consistent
warm relationships with caring adults. Children from orphanages may
be adopted. In an international adoption, the children typically face a
new challenge: learning a different language (see Chapter 9). Outcomes
for internationally adopted children are mixed; meta-­analyses suggest
trends for stronger language outcomes when children are adopted
before the age of 1 year than after 1 year. However, findings were not
statistically significant, likely because of the wide variety of challenges
that the children face and difficulty identifying appropriate comparison
groups.

Foster Care

Approximately 30–75% of the children 6 years of age or younger in
foster care are delayed, and therefore assessing language skills for
them is imperative (see Chapter 10). An important contribution to
the language delay in many children in foster care, like that of children
in orphanages, is the lack of consistently warm, responsive parenting
that is fundamental to language nutrition. Encouraging foster parents
to increase language nutrition may positively affect the language skills
of children in foster care.

High-­Stress, Low-­Verbal Environments

Children from homes where they may experience stressors, such as
food insecurity, housing insecurity, poor childcare facilities, and high
levels of community violence, are at risk for slower language development relative to peers in stable environments. All of these factors may
contribute to initial delays in physical and cognitive development,
with language development being one of the most noticeable to track
developmental progress. If language delays persist, the chances that the
children will catch up with others from more resourced environments,
even if their circumstance change, are limited. Thus, what begins as
a delay may end up as a disorder. Referral of children from stressed,
low-­verbal environments to public and community-­based prevention
programs designed to provide stability and to enhance language input
may improve the children’s outcomes.

SPEECH DISORDERS
Structural Anomalies of the Organs of Speech
Cleft Lip and Palate

Cleft lip is a split in the formation of the lip. Cleft palate is a split in the
hard and/or soft palate (see Chapter 356). These conditions often occur
together but may occur separately. Cleft lip or palate is the most common structural abnormality at birth in the United States. The cleft is
often easy to see but may be subtle if isolated to the soft palate. A child
with isolated cleft lip may have minimal speech problems. A child with
cleft palate is likely to have speech difficulties, including hypernasal
speech in which air escapes through the nose, making it difficult to
produce consonants that need pressure to build in the mouth for proper
execution (e.g., b, k, and s). In addition, children with cleft palate may
have severe and persistent serous otitis media, leading to moderate to
severe conductive hearing loss beyond the frequency and complications of children with an intact palate. Therefore most children with

Velopharyngeal insufficiency (VPI) is an abnormality of the soft palate, such that the soft palate cannot regulate the flow of air between
the mouth and nose in speech. It may occur as part of cleft palate or
may be an isolated finding. VPI may not be apparent in early development when the adenoids are large and bolster the soft palate. As the
adenoids regress, it may become clear that the soft palate is not closing off the passage to the nose, creating hypernasal speech. Evaluation
of the intactness of the soft palate is important before adenoidectomy
because removal of the adenoids can bring on VPI suddenly. Surgery or
use of prosthetic devices may be required for individuals who cannot
be helped by speech therapy.

Speech Sound Disorders

Speech sound disorders is an umbrella term that refers to difficulties
with perception, motor production, or phonologic representation of
speech sounds and/or speech segments (see Table 53.3). Speech sound
disorders may be organic in origin, including neurologic conditions,
structural conditions, or sensory conditions. Speech sound disorders
are considered functional when no known cause can be identified.
Speech sound disorders may be accompanied by subtle difficulties in
speech perception.

Phonologic Disorders

Phonologic disorders are functional speech sound disorders that affect
linguistic aspects of speech. Phonologic processes (see Table 53.1) are
errors in speech production based on violations of predictable, rule-­
based features of speech. These phonologic processes are typical at
young ages and resolve at specific ages. Phonologic processes become
disorders when they persist to older ages and impair intelligibility.

Articulation Disorders

Articulation disorders focus on errors (such as distortions and substitutions) in production of individual speech sounds regardless of
where in a word or phrase the sound occurs. Articulation errors are
not the result of neuromotor impairment, but rather seem to reflect an
inability to correctly process the words they hear. As a result, they lack
understanding of how to fit sounds together properly to create words.
Children with articulation or other speech sound disorders are at risk
for later reading and learning disability.

Childhood Apraxia of Speech

In childhood apraxia of speech (CAS), difficulty in planning and coordinating movements for speech sound production results in inconsistent distortions or errors of speech sounds, even vowel sounds. The
same word may be pronounced differently each time, making intelligibility poor. Intelligibility also tends to decline as the length and
complexity of the child’s speech increase. Consonants may be deleted
and sounds transposed. As they try to talk spontaneously or imitate
others’ speech, children with CAS may display oral groping or struggling. Children with CAS frequently have a history of early feeding
difficulty, limited sound production as infants, and/or delayed onset
of spoken words. They may point, grunt, or develop an elaborate gestural communication system in an attempt to overcome their verbal
difficulty. Apraxia may be limited to verbal motor skills, may extend
to oral-­motor function, or may be a more generalized problem affecting fine and/or gross motor coordination. Childhood apraxia of speech
may co-­occur with disorders of language and learning.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

332 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Dysarthria

This motor speech disorder often originates from neuromotor disorders, such as cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, myopathy, and facial
palsy. Dysarthria is characterized by lack of strength and muscular control and manifests as slurring of words and distorting vowels.
Speech patterns are often slow and labored. Feeding difficulty, drooling, open-­mouth posture, and protruding tongue may accompany the
dysarthric speech.

Disorders of Fluency, Voice, and Resonance
Stuttering

Under normal circumstances, most people do not speak smoothly all
the time, but rather repeat words or sounds, hesitate to find a word,
pause, add “uh” or “you know” to the flow of speech, or repeat a sound
or word more than once. These disruptions are called dysfluencies
and are discussed further in Chapter 53.1. Stuttering in children over
age 4 that lasts longer than 6 months, includes repetition of individual
sounds, and/or creates emotional distress should be evaluated by a
speech and language pathologist.

Voice

A voice disorder is an abnormality in voice quality, pitch, and loudness that is unexpected or inappropriate for an individual’s age, gender,
cultural background, or geographic location. Voice disorders can be
subdivided into organic and functional. Organic voice disorders are
physiologic in nature and result from alterations in respiratory, laryngeal, or vocal tract mechanisms. Aerodigestive disorders cover congenital or acquired conditions of the aerodigestive tract; they include
abnormalities of the airway (pharynx and larynx), pulmonary tract
(trachea, bronchi, and lungs), and upper digestive tract (esophagus).
These structural problems may affect respiratory and swallowing functions and speech, especially voice. Functional voice disorders result
from improper or inefficient use of the vocal mechanism in the context of normal physical structure. Psychologic stress can also lead to
habitual and maladaptive voice quality, known as psychogenic voice
disorders. These categories may overlap. Vocal nodules result from
behavioral voice misuse that leads to repeated trauma to the vocal folds
and structural changes to the vocal fold tissue.

ASSESSMENT OF LANGUAGE AND SPEECH
DISORDERS
Screening

Developmental surveillance at each well-­child visit should include specific questions about typical language developmental milestones and
observations of the child’s behavior. Clinical judgment, defined as eliciting and responding to parents’ concerns, can detect many children
with speech and language challenges. The American Academy of Pediatricians (AAP) recommends clinicians employ standardized developmental screening questionnaires and observation checklists at select
well-­child visits (see Chapter 28). However, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reviewed screening for language impairment in young
children in primary care settings and found inadequate evidence to
support screening in the absence of parental or clinician concern about
children’s speech, language, hearing, or development. At present, when
parents, other caregivers, or physicians are concerned about speech or
language development, the child should be referred for a diagnostic
evaluation and intervention.

Diagnostic Evaluation

A developmental delay indicates abnormally slow timing relative
to same-­age peers in the development of the skill. A language delay
becomes a language disorder when it persists to school age; is functionally impactful in terms of communication, social skills, or learning and cognition; or is qualitatively different from normal patterns or
sequences of development. Language and communication skills should
be interpreted within the context of that child’s overall cognitive, social,
and physical abilities. A multidisciplinary evaluation of a child with
language delay or disorder is often warranted. At a minimum, the diagnostic evaluation should include psychologic or neurodevelopmental

evaluation, including an assessment of social skills, a speech-­language
evaluation, an audiologic assessment, and a pediatric examination.

Psychologic or Neurodevelopmental Evaluation

The two main goals for the psychologic evaluation of a young child
with a communication disorder are to assess nonverbal cognitive ability
and social skills. A broad-­based cognitive assessment is important to
determine the breadth and severity of developmental difficulties. At a
minimum, the child should have an assessment of both verbal and nonverbal skills. As children reach school age, they may be assessed with an
intelligence test and an assessment of adaptive function to determine if
they meet criteria for intellectual disability (see Chapter 56). If the child
has findings of global developmental delay or intellectually disability,
their language and speech skills should be evaluated within that context. Language and speech disorders may coexist with other conditions,
so that the psychologic evaluation at all ages should consider mental
health conditions, such as anxiety, mood disorder, and attention-­deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and, at older ages, learning challenges.
A child’s social behaviors must be assessed to determine whether the
child meets diagnostic criteria for ASD (see Chapter 58). Children with
language impairment may display an interest in social interaction, even
if they may have difficulty socializing because of limitations in communication skills, such as difficulties initiating conversation or taking
turns. Children with ASD do not display social interest in typical ways.
However, the distinction may be challenging in the context of a clinical evaluation when the child needs to interact only with professional
adults and not with peers. Observational tests include specific maneuvers, such as calling the child’s name, making exaggerated gestures, and
attempting to engage the child in a reciprocal interaction around blowing bubbles, to make this distinction.

Speech and Language Evaluation

A certified SLP should perform a speech and language evaluation on
a child with delays or difficulties in language and speech. A typical
evaluation includes assessment of language, speech, and the physical
mechanisms associated with speech production. Both expressive and
receptive language (see Table 53.1) are assessed, using a combination of
standardized measures, informal interactions, and pertinent observations. All components of language are assessed, including phonology,
lexicon, morphology, syntax, and pragmatics (see Table 53.1). Speech
assessment similarly uses a combination of standardized measures and
informal observations and includes assessment of speech sounds, fluency, voice, and resonance. Assessment of physical structures includes
oral structures and function, respiratory function, and vocal quality.

Audiologic Assessment (see Chapter 677)

In many settings, an SLP works in conjunction with an audiologist,
who can do an appropriate hearing evaluation of the child. If an audiologist is not available in that setting, a separate referral should be made.
No child is too young for a hearing evaluation. Passive methods can be
used in children who are young or unable to cooperate with testing.
Repeat assessment with an active assessment can be accomplished at
older ages. A referral for full hearing evaluation is appropriate whenever there is suspicion of language or speech impairment.

Pediatric Evaluation

History and physical examination should focus on the identification
of potential contributors to the child’s language and communication
difficulties. A family history of delay in talking, need for speech and
language therapy, or academic difficulty can suggest a genetic predisposition to language disorders. Pregnancy history might reveal risk
factors for prenatal developmental anomalies, such as polyhydramnios
or decreased fetal movement patterns. Small size for gestational age
at birth, symptoms of neonatal encephalopathy, or early and persistent oral-­motor feeding difficulty may presage speech and language
difficulty. Developmental history should focus on the age when various language skills were mastered and the sequences and patterns of
milestone acquisition. Regression or loss of acquired skills should raise
immediate concern.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 53 u Language Development and Communication Disorders
Physical examination should include measurement of height
(length), weight, and head circumference, even in children over age 2
years. The skin should be examined for lesions consistent with phakomatosis (see Chapter 636). Anomalies of the head and neck, such as white
forelock and hypertelorism (Waardenburg syndrome), ear malformations (Goldenhar syndrome), facial and cardiac anomalies (Williams
syndrome, VCFS), retrognathism of the chin (Pierre Robin anomaly),
or cleft lip/palate, are associated with hearing and speech abnormalities. Neurologic examination might reveal muscular hypertonia or
hypotonia, both of which can affect neuromuscular control of speech.
Generalized muscular hypotonia, with increased range of motion of
the joints, is frequently seen in children with language impairment.
The reason for this association is not clear, but it might account for the
fine and gross motor clumsiness often seen in these children. However, mild hypotonia is not a sufficient explanation for the impairment
of receptive and expressive language. Language impairment may be a
component of a syndrome or other recognizable condition. The physical examination gathers information to make other diagnoses.
No routine diagnostic studies are indicated for isolated language disorders with the exception of the hearing assessment. When language
delay is a part of a generalized cognitive or physical disorder, referral
for further genetic evaluation, genetic testing (e.g., fragile X testing,
microarray, whole exome or whole genome sequencing), neuroimaging studies, and EEG should be considered.

Treatment of Language and Speech Disorders

Disorders of language and speech are often treated by SLPs working
alone or as part of a multidisciplinary team with others, such as early
intervention specialists or occupational therapists. SLPs may work in
hospital in-­patient and out-­patient settings. More commonly, they
work in schools and early intervention programs. The nature and intensity of treatment are predicated on the nature and cause of the language
or speech disorder and the explicit objectives of treatment. Childhood
apraxia of speech typically requires that the child participate in four or
five short sessions per week to achieve intelligible speech, whereas language impairment disorder may require once-­or twice-­weekly therapy
in a peer-­group setting to increase communicative attempts. Speech-­
language therapy for young children is typically play-­based. Even drills
are couched in naturally occurring, enjoyable, or fun activities. Group
therapy with other young children is often well suited to children with
language and communication disorders because children practice their
emerging skills with peers in naturalistic settings. A strong family component to therapy is important to leverage the limited time that therapists can spend with children. Caregivers can be taught to use effective
techniques designed to meet the objectives of the treatment program.
For children who do not develop useful verbal language, the SLP may
consider the use of assistive and augmentative communication (AAC;
see Chapter 54), which may use high-­technology devices, such as
voice-­generating computer programs, or low-­
technology solutions,
such as sign language or picture exchanges. The use of AAC allows the
nonverbal child to communicate within the human community. Several systematic reviews and meta-­analyses provide compelling data
that speech-­language therapy is effective for improving many aspects
of language and speech. Therefore a timely referral for treatment with
an SLP is recommended over watchful waiting for many children with
delays and disorders of language and speech.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

53.1 Childhood-­Onset Fluency Disorder
Kenneth L. Grizzle and Karolyn Mirasola
Dysfluent speech describes speech, language, and voice behaviors that
interrupt the production and fluency of sounds, words, and thoughts.
All speakers produce dysfluent speech, but not all dysfluent speech is
stuttering. The words stuttering, stammering, and dysfluency are often
used interchangeably. Stutter is used informally, particularly in the

333

United States, to describe when an individual is struggling to express
themself and may speak in a halting manner. Stammering is used in
the United Kingdom in place of stuttering (Table 53.4). It is important
for clinicians to have a general understanding about what stuttering is
and when to counsel and refer families to speech-­language pathologists
(SLPs). It is important to distinguish between stuttered and nonstuttered dysfluencies and other fluency disorders and to identify concomitant symptoms.

DIAGNOSIS

In the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-­5), the term stuttering has been removed from the diagnostic classification, and the disorder is referred to as childhood-­onset
fluency disorder (Table 53.5). Note that impact on functional behavior is a component of the psychiatric diagnosis. In contrast, communication disorder specialists would consider anxiety and avoidance
of various activities as concomitant symptoms, but not necessarily a
requirement for the diagnosis of stuttering.
Child-­onset stuttering (formerly known as developmental stuttering) is a speech disorder that often begins in the preschool period

Table 53.4  Terminology Related to Childhood-­Onset
Fluency Disorder
TERM

DEFINITION

Stuttering

A speech disorder manifested through abnormal
speech patterns referred to as dysfluencies

Childhood-­onset
fluency disorder

Term used in DSM-­5 that is synonymous with
stuttering

Stammering

The clinical term used in the United Kingdom
rather than stuttering; stammering also used
informally to describe halting speech

Cluttering

A speech disorder characterized by an
excessively rapid and irregular rate of speech

Dysfluency

Speech disruptions that can occur in normal or
disordered speech

Table 53.5  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Childhood-­Onset
Fluency Disorder
A.	Disturbances in the normal fluency and time patterning of speech
that are inappropriate for the individual’s age and language skills,
persist over time, and are characterized by frequent and marked
occurrences of one (or more) of the following:
1.	Sound and syllable repetitions.
2.	Sound prolongations of consonants and vowels.
3.	Broken words (e.g., pauses within a word).
4.	Audible or silent blocking (filled or unfilled pauses in speech).
5. Circumlocutions (word substitutions to avoid problematic
words).
6.	Words produced with an excess of physical tension.
7. Monosyllabic whole-­word repetitions (e.g., “I-­I-­I-­I see him”).
B.	The disturbance causes anxiety about speaking or limitations in
effective communication, social participation, or academic or
occupational performance, individually or in any combination.
C.	The onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
Note: Later-­onset cases are diagnosed as 307.0 [F98.5] adult-­onset
fluency disorder.
D.	The disturbance is not attributable to a speech-­motor or sensory
deficit, dysfluency associated with neurologic insult (e.g., stroke,
tumor, trauma), or another medical condition and is not better
explained by another mental disorder.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2013:45–46.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

334 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
and is not associated with stroke, traumatic brain injury, or other possible medical conditions. Stuttering behaviors can occur in typically
developing children who do not have a speech disorder and in this
situation are more accurately referred to as developmental dysfluencies.
During the toddler and preschool years, children often produce repetition of sounds, syllables, or words, particularly at the beginning of sentences (normal dysfluencies). These developmental dysfluencies occur
between the ages of 2.5 and 4 years old when the language, motor, and
emotional systems are developing. These dysfluencies may occur as the
child struggles to try to express more complex ideas in a rapid and
precise manner.
Child-­onset stuttering disorder also typically begins between 2 and
4 years of age. Onset of symptoms varies from pronounced stuttering
within a few days to gradual worsening of symptoms across months.
Symptoms may ebb and flow, including disappearing for weeks before
returning, especially among young children. From 40% to 75% of
young children who stutter will stop spontaneously, typically within
months of starting. Although predicting which child will stop stuttering is difficult, risk factors for persisting include stuttering for >1 year,
continued stuttering after age 6 years, and experiencing other speech
or language problems. Additionally, certain types of dysfluencies are
typically seen only in child-­onset stuttering disorder.

Types of Dysfluencies

Dysfluencies interrupt the normal flow of speech through repeated
or prolonged sounds, syllables, or words. Types of dysfluency that
are not exclusive to children who stutter include interjections (“well,
uhh, umm”), hesitations (pause), revisions (“I thought . . . I mean”),
and phrase repetitions (“Did you say—Did you say”). In addition, the
perspective of the speaker and cause of the dysfluency differ between
true stuttering disorders and other types of dysfluency. The dysfluencies might sound the same but occur for different reasons. For example,
a typically developing child with dysfluency may talk around a word or
use a completely different word because of issues with word retrieval,
complex thought formulation, or distractibility. But for children who
stutter, they may talk around a word or retrieve a completely different
word because even though they know exactly what they want to say,
they are unable to produce or “get” the sounds out. This highlights the
notion that stuttering is about more than what the listener observes.
The “moment of stuttering” is different because something occurs that
only the person who stutters can perceive.
Dysfluencies that occur in child-­onset stuttering vary in type, frequency, and longevity. Specifically, children who stutter show greater
part-­word repetition (“b-­b-­b-­b-­but”), single-­syllable word repetition
(“My, my, my”), sound prolongation (“MMMMMM-­an”), and in more
severe cases, blocking. Blocking is a dysfluent behavior that is identified by a fleeting or sometimes lengthy blockage of the flow of air
at the level of the vocal folds or articulators (tongue, teeth, and lips).
Typically, the child has initiated an articulatory posture (tongue is in
the position to produce “k”), but she is unable to release any air and/
or phonation (i.e., voice). Often in response to this inability to produce sounds or words, the child will develop secondary behaviors that
recruit movement from other parts of the body that the child feels they
have more “control” over.
These types of behaviors and movements exist only within child-­
onset stuttering disorder. They are referred to as secondary characteristics, or physical concomitants that often occur as a response to
stuttering. Common secondary characteristics include movements of
the head (head turning or jerking), face (eye blinking/squinting, grimacing, opening or tightly closing the jaw), neck (tightening), and
limbs (stomping feet, slapping hand); an increase in body tension; and
irregular patterns of inhalations and exhalations.

Emotional Symptoms and Stuttering

Fear and anxiety are emotional symptoms associated with stuttering. Many people experience some level of fear and anxiety related to
speaking in front of a group, but children who stutter often experience high levels of fear and anxiety related to all speaking situations,

especially ones that occur with newer or unfamiliar people (e.g., ordering at a restaurant, calling a store to ask about store hours, introducing
oneself). Along with their own feelings interfering with speech production, the reactions of those around them may also increase the anxiety
of children who stutter. Negative interactions or comments may inhibit
a child’s future attempts to interact verbally with another person or in a
group setting. Consider also the potential social challenges associated
with entering a classroom for the first time, transitioning to middle/
high school/college, beginning a job, dating, and so on. Not surprisingly, just as avoiding production of a perceived sound or word is
common, avoidance of situations and people is a common way of coping with the anxiety created by the fear of stuttering. These avoidance
behaviors indicate a need for intervention.

Differential Diagnosis

Although many dysfluencies are often referred to as stuttering, it is
important to recognize that there are different types of fluency disorders. Cluttering is a fluency disorder that may occur with or separate
from stuttering but is different in form and cause. Stuttering and cluttering have been identified to exist on a continuum. Unlike stuttering, for which distinct episodes can be identified and even counted,
cluttering affects the entire speech output and is often diagnosed
around age 7 years or later. In addition to elevated repetitions of partial words (as in stuttering), whole words, and phrases, those who
clutter show speech bursts that are often choppy, and articulation can
be slurred and imprecise. In addition, there is often an increase in
disorganization of their language, unusual prosody, and listener perception of a fast rate of talking. The level of awareness of how their
speech affects those listening, unlike children who stutter, is minimal for those who clutter. In fact, children with a cluttering disorder
often experience a decrease in their dysfluent behaviors when they
are speaking in front of a group because of an increased focus on
their speech, whereas the impact for children who stutter is exactly
the opposite.
In addition to cluttering, neurogenic (result of a stroke, head trauma,
or other neurologic damage) and psychogenic (associated with psychologic trauma) stuttering also exist, though they rarely occur in childhood. Stuttering can also be confused with dysfluent speech that occurs
for other neurologic reasons (e.g., Tourette syndrome, cerebral palsy,
spasmodic dysphonia).

Epidemiology

Approximately 5% of children experience stuttering, with the highest rates among young children. Seldom does a child begin stuttering
before 2 years of age or after 12 years; in fact, the mean age of onset is
2-­4 years, and most children stop stuttering within 4 years of onset.
Symptoms will disappear within 4 weeks for a minority of children.
Stuttering is more common in males than in females, and the magnitude of the difference increases as children get older. The ratio among
children <5 years is approximately 2:1 and jumps to 4:1 among adolescents and young adults.

Genetics

There is convergent evidence of a genetic link for childhood-­onset fluency disorder. Concordance rates among monozygotic twins range
from 20% to 83%, and for dizygotic twins, 4–19%. Family aggregation
studies suggest increased incidence of approximately 15% among first-­
degree relatives of those affected, three times higher than the 5% rate
for the general population. The variance in risk for stuttering attributed
to genetic effects is high, ranging from 70% to 85%. Although evidence
is limited, stuttering appears to be a polygenic condition, and several
genes increase susceptibility.

Brain Structure and Function

Brain structure and function abnormalities found among individuals who stutter include deficits in white matter in the left hemisphere,
overactivity in the right cortical region, and underactivity in the auditory cortex. Abnormal basal ganglia activation has also been identified.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 53 u Language Development and Communication Disorders
EVALUATION
Comorbidities

Despite the widely held belief in a high degree of comorbidity between
childhood-­onset fluency disorder and other communication disorders,
research to date does not necessarily support this association. SLPs
consistently report high rates of comorbidity, although this would be
expected in clinical samples. Speech sound (phonologic) disorders are
the most commonly reported comorbidities, occurring in 30–40% of
children seen by SLPs. However, studies have not found greater incidence of phonologic disorders among those who stutter compared to a
control group. Similarly, SLPs report a much higher percentage of children with language disorders among their patients who stutter than the
approximately 7% expected in the population at large, yet studies find
the language functioning among individuals who stutter is no different
than in the general population. The same pattern holds for learning
disorders (LDs).
Children who stutter seem to experience more anxiety than their
nonstuttering peers, although research is limited. The frequency
of reported anxiety increases with age. Social anxiety and generalized anxiety disorder are common among adolescents who stutter.
Although one should not assume that an individual who stutters
will have an increased risk for any specific psychiatric disorder,
assessing for anxiety is important, as children who stutter frequently avoid situations that demand speaking, as discussed earlier
in the chapter.
Children who stutter have consistently been found to be bullied more than peers. In one study, these children were almost four
times more likely to be bullied than their nonstuttering counterparts. About 45% of children who stuttered reported having been
the victim of bullying.

Referral to Speech and Language Pathology

In deciding who to refer to an SLP, it is important to distinguish
developmental dysfluencies from stuttering. In addition to the risks
noted in Table 52.5, indications for referral include three or more
dysfluencies per 100 syllables (b-­b-­but; th-­th-­the; you, you, you),
secondary characteristics denoting escape or avoidance behaviors
(pauses, head nod, blinking), discomfort or anxiety while speaking,
family history of stuttering or other speech-­language disorders, and
suspicion of an associated neurologic or psychotic disorder. Most
children with persistent stuttering after age 4 years should be evaluated by an SLP.
As a part of the evaluation, the SLPs will be able to address the many
pressing concerns and worries of a parent whose child is stuttering. The
outcome of a speech-­language evaluation for stuttering should accomplish the following:
1.	Obtain a strong family history related to the existence of speech and
language disorders in general and more specifically related to stuttering and dysfluencies.
2.	Interview the parent or child about the child’s stress when speaking
in various situations.
3.	Record a speech sample to analyze the type, frequency, and complexity of the dysfluent behaviors and secondary characteristics that
the child is producing.
4.	Differentiate between developmental dysfluency behaviors, other
causes of dysfluent behaviors, and a child-­onset dysfluency disorder
(aka stuttering).
5.	Develop a plan with the family that involves a combination of direct
and indirect speech and language therapy, parent education, and
home programming.

335

TREATMENT

A true stuttering disorder is a lifelong condition. To date, no evidence
supports the use of a pharmacologic agent to treat stuttering in children and adolescents, and there is no cure for stuttering. However,
treatment in preschool-­age children has been shown to improve stuttering. In fact, speech-­language therapy is most effective when initiated during the preschool period. The broad focus of therapy allows for
minimizing the adverse effects of the condition.
Based on the child’s age, types and frequency of stuttered behaviors,
severity of secondary characteristics, and impact on the child’s qualify
of life, the SLP will decide if a less direct or more direct therapeutic
intervention is recommended.
Less direct therapy focuses on manipulating the situation and environment while allowing the child to experience increased fluency. Most
preschool children respond to interventions taught by SLPs that are
accompanied by behavioral feedback strategies implemented by parents
and teachers. It is important to recognize that parental pressure or speaking pressure does not cause stuttering. A less direct therapy approach
involves working with the caregiver to accomplish the following:
1.	Limit situations and expectations that cause increased dysfluencies
and stress
2.	Demonstrate and model how to adjust speaking rate and complexity
of language rather than reprimanding children for their speech errors or asking them to slow down
3.	Increase opportunities for the child to experience fluent communication
More direct therapy is recommended and implemented when less
direct therapy did not have an impact on the stuttering behaviors, the
child has increasing worries related to stuttering, the child has a high
risk of continuing to stutter, or the child is older and has been stuttering for some time. One of the overarching goals of the therapy implemented by an SLP is to help the child experience increased fluency and
strategies to learn how to “stutter” better.
Therapy that is more direct adds the following elements:
1.	Awareness and education: Recognizing and accepting that their speech
is different, identifying and naming types of speech, nonjudgmentally
noting episodes of stuttering using selected words and phrases (which
are often accompanied by pictures) that were developed with and
practiced by the child (“That was a bit bumpy”), appreciating others’
reaction to the child when stuttering, managing secondary behaviors,
admitting they are a person who stutters, and addressing avoidance
behaviors as a result of the stress and anxiety they are experiencing.
2.	Fluency-­shaping behaviors: Regulating rate of speech and breathing
and helping the child gradually progress from the fluent production
of syllables to more complex sentences. The child should be involved
in opportunities to identify speech disfluencies, implement self-­
correction, and respond to requests (“Can you say that again?”).
Because stuttering rarely disappears, the thrust of therapy is often to
“improve” the type of stuttering, decrease the occurrences of stuttering,
and develop strategies for coping with the fear and anxiety that will
continue to occur in various speaking opportunities.
Appreciating that dysfluency is a broad term and stuttering can be
one of the causes for this behavior allows pediatricians to have a more
accurate understanding of the symptoms, causes, and treatments associated with dysfluencies. Being armed with this information allows the
provider to include in their referral to an SLP an accurate description
of symptomology, which will be beneficial in the planning and execution of their initial evaluation.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

336 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders

Chapter 54

Augmentative and
Alternative Communication
Michelle M. Macias
Children must develop communicative competence to interact with
others, to influence their environment, and to participate fully in society. If children are not able to effectively communicate, they will have
minimal means to express what they need, exchange information with
others, and develop social skills and relationships. Some children are
unable to communicate effectively through natural means, including
speech, gestures, or writing (see Chapter 53). These children with complex communication needs (CCNs) have more independent function through augmentative and alternative communication (AAC)
methods to meet their communication needs and to avoid significant
restrictions on their participation in all aspects of life.
AAC interventions have been helpful for individuals with no speech,
limited speech, and those at risk for speech-­language disorders; this
includes individuals who rely on speech but need augmentation to
enhance speech, those recovering from a traumatic brain injury, and
those who may have temporary conditions affecting communication.
AAC has changed from an emphasis on providing the means to express
needs and wants to the recognition that communication must also foster exchange of information, development of social relationships, and
participation in social routines. In addition, there is recognition that
communication needs extend beyond face-­to-­face interactions and
also include written communication in the school setting and even
social media in peer communities.

DEFINITIONS

According to the American Speech-­
Language-­Hearing Association
(ASHA), AAC is “an area of clinical practice that addresses the needs
of individuals with significant and complex communication disorders
characterized by impairments in speech-­language production and/or
comprehension, including spoken and written modes of communication.” AAC encompasses the communication methods used to supplement or replace speech or writing for those with impairments in the
production or comprehension of spoken or written language. In pediatrics, AAC is used by youth with a wide range of speech and language
impairments, including cerebral palsy (CP), traumatic brain injury,
intellectual disabilities, autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and apraxia
of speech. In addition, children and adolescents hospitalized in intensive care units can benefit from AAC.
AAC is augmentative when used to supplement existing speech
and alternative when used in place of speech that is absent or not
functional. AAC uses a wide variety of electronic and nonelectronic
techniques from low technology to high technology, including manual
signs, gestures, tangible objects, line drawings, picture communication boards and letter boards, and speech-­generating devices. The term
assistive technology (AT) is a more general term describing systems
and devices that alleviate the effects of a disability and improve function, for example, bracing for a child with a neuromotor impairment
as well as AAC.

Prevalence

Across countries, the overall prevalence of AAC use ranges from
approximately 1.2% to 1.5% of the population; worldwide up to 0.6% of
the school-­age population has a severe speech impairment. A national
survey of U.S. special educators reported that approximately 18% of
students served in special education use a form of AAC for communication, with 7% using gestural modes, 6.5% using pictorial supports,
and 4.8% using a speech-­generating device (SGD). However, not all

U.S. children with developmental disabilities or children with special
healthcare needs have their communication needs met. The more
severe a child’s communication deficit, the more likely the child would
benefit from AAC support.
Across particular pediatric populations, it has been estimated that
25–50% of children with ASD have limited speech and would benefit
from AAC. Up to 45% of children with CP use AAC either exclusively
or to supplement speech. Several studies have found that in intensive
care units ∼30% of patients had communication breakdowns and met
AAC candidacy criteria, although alternative communication modes
were rarely used.

Goals of Communicative Interactions and AAC
Interventions

The ultimate goal of AAC is to enable individuals to effectively engage
in interactions and participate in activities of their choosing. Broadly
speaking, the goals of AAC interventions are to assist individuals with
meeting their current communication needs and prepare them to
meet their future communication needs. Communicative interactions
can be said to fulfill four purposes: (1) communicate needs/wants, (2)
transfer information, (3) social closeness, and (4) social etiquette. It is
important to remember that adequacy of communication depends on
the personal goals of the person using AAC, and the definition of success may vary by the professionals involved.
Most children with complex communication needs demonstrate
some ability to communicate using speech, although some are entirely
nonverbal. The effectiveness of natural speech for communication can
be divided into 10 levels (Meaningful Use of Speech Scale; Robbins &
Osberger):
1.	Makes vocal sounds in communicative exchanges
2.	Gets another person’s attention using speech
3.	Uses various vocal sounds depending on the intention and content
of messages
Uses speech for communication about:
1.	Known topics with familiar people
2.	Known topics with unfamiliar people
3.	New topics with familiar people
4.	New topics with unfamiliar people
5.	Messages that are understood by familiar people
6.	Messages that are understood by unfamiliar people
7.	Clarification messages as needed when communication breakdown
occurs

AAC Systems

An “AAC system” refers to the integrated group of components used
to support and enhance communication. These components include
the specific forms of AAC, selection techniques, and strategies for use.
Individuals with complex communication needs must have access to
a wide range of means to enhance their communication and participate
fully within social and educational contexts. This may include unaided
AAC, which does not require an external tool and requires some
degree of motor control (e.g., gestures, sign language, finger spelling,
speech approximations), or aided AAC, which requires either an electronic or a nonelectronic tool. Nonelectronic aided forms are referred
to as low-­tech aided AAC and include options such as communication boards/books, picture-­exchange communication systems (PE or
PECS, pictures, photographs), or visual schedules. Electronic forms are
referred to as mid-­tech or high-­tech AAC systems and include traditional speech-­generating devices (SGDs) or voice output communication aids (VOCAs), recordable devices, and computer/tablet options
and applications (“apps”). SGDs/VOCAs include multiple options.
Single-­level devices have pictures/words on a single-­level display,
whereas multilevel devices can have vocabulary programmed on more
than one level. Static display devices keep the same display, and the
user can sequence symbols or words to generate a message. Dynamic
display devices are usually those with a touch screen for the display in
which pages can change using navigation keys and link buttons. Text-­
to-­speech devices enable the user to spell messages that convert to synthesized speech. Some dynamic display devices include text-­to-­speech

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 54 u Augmentative and Alternative Communication

337

Table 54.1  Types of Augmentative and Alternative Communication
LOW TECH

MID-­HIGH TECH

Unaided

• Sign language
• Gestures

—

Aided

• Communication boards/books
• Picture exchange systems
• Visual schedules
• Eye-­gaze picture board
• Simple single-­message speech output devices

• Voice output communication aids (VOCAs)/speech-­
generating devices (SGDs) with prestored recordings of
natural speech or computer-­generated speech
• Specialized software on electronic tablet, smartphone
• Spelling and/or symbol systems to represent language

Unaided systems: Do not require special materials or equipment; rely on user’s body to covey messages.
Aided systems: Require the use of tools or equipment; can require power or no power.

and use symbols as well as text. Table 54.1 provides examples of the
range of AAC systems.
Mobile technology (e.g., iPad) and greater use of social media tools
have increased acceptance of AAC and reduced attitudinal barriers to
AAC use. However, the increased diversity of communication tools
also means increased operational demands, given that each tool is
designed with different representations, organizations, and layouts of
information as well as different access techniques (e.g., swiping, tapping). Each design may reflect different motor, cognitive, perceptual,
and linguistic learning demands. A combination of gestures/signs,
low-­technology systems, mobile technology devices, and SGDs can
provide AAC users with the most effective communication options
to suit their needs.

AAC Teams

AAC teams serving individuals with CCNs are the groups of people
that guide the AAC intervention decision-­making process and implement communication supports. Team members include the children
and adolescents with CCN themselves, parents/caregivers, and professionals playing a variety of roles.
Children with CCN. The most important member of the team is the
individual relying on AAC techniques. The role may change in response
to the individual’s maturation and capability, but to the extent possible,
the child or adolescent should participate in the decision-­making process regarding goals, social relationships, and support options related
to the AAC system and interventions.
AAC facilitators. The term facilitator refers to parents/family members, friends, professionals, and frequent communication partners who
assume some responsibility for keeping the AAC system operational
and/or supporting the person with CCN to use it effectively. They support communication interactions by coaching, serving as interpreters,
and/or helping resolve communication breakdowns. Importantly, the
role of facilitator is to support independent communication by the
individual with CCN, not to communicate for the individual.
AAC specialists. AAC specialists provide direct AAC intervention services by instructing and educating about AAC and designing and implementing AAC interventions. AAC specialists work
with clinicians and educators, such as speech-­language pathologists, occupational therapists, teachers, and pediatric healthcare
providers who provide clinical and educational services to youth
with CCN.

AAC Assessment

AAC assessment involves gathering information so that informed decisions can be made about the adequacy of current communication, the
communication needs, the AAC techniques that are most appropriate,
how to provide instruction in AAC techniques, and how to evaluate
outcomes. Proper evaluation and support for the use of AAC devices
are of paramount importance.
Studies comparing acquisition of communication skills reveal few
differences in terms of how quickly many children can learn to use
some of the available AAC options. For example, PEC and sign language comparison studies vary—some show PECs were acquired more
easily than signing, and others suggest both PECs and signing were

acquired at an equal pace. Studies comparing PECs with SGDs similarly vary in terms of effectiveness of device use.
Physicians, therapists, and other professionals who prescribe AAC
must make sure the child (and family) receives training and monitoring for using the device and that the device is accessible across settings
in which the child functions (e.g., home, school, community activities). A substantial number of AAC devices are abandoned shortly
after implementation without support for their use. AAC assessment
and intervention is a dynamic process, and usually ongoing, as often
the children and adolescents requiring the AAC system are unable to
speak or write because of physical, cognitive, language, and/or sensory
impairments. Assessment generally consists of four phases as outlined
here:
Phase 1: Referral. The “finder” role is an important role for pediatric
healthcare providers. They may be the impetus for recognizing that
a child has a CCN and that an AAC intervention may be helpful.
They then assist the patient and their family by initiating a referral
to an appropriate resource. The pediatric provider can support the
AAC funding application by certifying a medical diagnosis and signing a prescription for the recommended service. Although the role
is episodic, it is nonetheless a key role in the AAC assessment and
treatment process.
Phase 2: Initial Assessment. The goal of this phase is to gather information to design an AAC intervention to match the child’s existing needs and capabilities. The AAC specialist(s) assesses the child’s
current communication interaction needs and his or her physical,
cognitive, language, and sensory abilities. This typically focuses on
enabling communicative interactions between the child and familiar
AAC facilitators. The intervention is refined as the child learns about
the operational requirements of the AAC system and the AAC team
gathers information on how well the system works for the child.
Demonstrations and simulators are available to help with training
before the actual equipment is ordered.
Phase 3: Assessment for Other Settings. The goal is to develop a solid
communication system that supports the child with CCN in a variety of environments, including home, school, and recreational
environments. A child must have access to a system that allows educational and social participation.
Phase 4: Follow-­Up Assessment. This involves maintaining a comprehensive AAC system that accommodates the child’s changing
capabilities. The communication equipment must be examined
regularly to assess the needs of new communication partners, detect replacement/repair needs, and reassess the child’s capabilities
as they change.

Specific Assessment Details

Assess Current Communication. The initial step is to assess the effectiveness of the child’s current communication system. The assessment of
communication access focuses on the operational and social aspects
of communicative competence. A child with spastic quadriplegia, for
example, may be unable to use eye gaze consistently and therefore
operationally unable to use an eye-­gaze AAC system. On the other
hand, a minimally verbal adolescent with ASD may be able to operate
an electronic AAC device but never use it to initiate a social interaction.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

338 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Some questions to ask regarding current communication behaviors in
children with CCN include the following:
u What are the various methods your child uses to communicate? Examples: words/speech, vocalizations, gestures, signing, communication board, eye gaze, typing, and so on.
u 
What body part is used for each technique (e.g., left/right hand,
eyes)?
u On a scale of 1 to 5, how accurately and efficiently is your child able
to use this technique?
u On a scale of 1 to 5, how well is your child able to use this technique
in an interactive, socially appropriate manner?
Screening Tools. Various screening instruments exist that help document communication behaviors. These include the Communication
Matrix; the Inventory of Potential Communicative Acts (IPCA); and
the Social Communication, Emotional Regulation, Transactional
Support (SCERTS) Model Assessment, among others. The Communication Matrix focuses on individuals using any form of communication (presymbolic or AAC), and the IPCA focuses primarily
on presymbolic communicators with physical and/or developmental
disabilities. The SCERTS Model Assessment focuses on communication and social regulation behaviors in verbal and nonverbal children
with ASD.
Assess Potential to Use or Increase Speech. A key issue in AAC assessment for children with CCN is whether AAC is needed to augment
insufficient speech or serve as a replacement for speech. Parents are
often concerned that using an AAC device will negatively affect speech
development, as the child will have access to an “easier” alternative.
The use of AAC techniques does not inhibit natural speech; conversely,
AAC may enhance spoken language by supporting the development of
communicative competence and language skills.
Assess Potential for Environmental Adaptations. Modifications of
physical spaces or structures may be relatively straightforward or more
complex, depending on the specific situation. For example, at home,
furniture rearrangement or renovations to adapt the home to accommodate AAC devices may be necessary. In the school, desks/tables may
need to be raised/lowered or a vertical workspace may need to be created with a slanted board.

Specific Issues Regarding AAC for Children with
Disabilities
Cerebral Palsy

Communication impairments are commonly seen in children with
CP, both related to impaired (motor) speech intelligibility and language disorders (see Chapter 638.1). The incidence of dysarthria varies
depending on the type of CP and degree of motor impairment. Language impairments are associated with intellectual functioning and
hearing loss, if present.
More than any other disability, communication interventions for
children with CP require a multidisciplinary team approach. The wide
variety of motor impairments entails the involvement of occupational
and physical therapists, orthotics specialists, rehabilitation engineers,
and speech-­language pathologists. Positioning and seating adaptations
may need to be developed for optimum stability and to allow efficient
movement to access the AAC system. The team must consider the wide
range of options available and what is necessary to optimally match
the child with the system being used. Although up to half of children
with CP may be able to access the AAC device through use of a finger,
others will need alternative access techniques, including chin pointers,
joysticks, optical indicators, or switches.
Emphasis on AAC needs to be balanced with other developmental
interventions, including speech-­language therapy, motor development
training, and academic instruction. Some will require extensive motor
training to be able to use alternative access methods such as eye tracker,
head mouse, or a switch for scanning. Although speech, gestures, and
facial expressions may be affected as a result of motor impairment,
patients should still be encouraged in using these natural modes for
communication. A balanced approach supports the use of multimodal
systems, which can vary according to the situation. A child with CP
may be able to communicate effectively with family members using

natural speech and gestures but may need to rely on AAC techniques
with unfamiliar partners.
Long-­term planning for adulthood is essential, given the need to rely
on AAC devices and techniques that can accommodate the range of
demands that are communicative in nature, including interpersonal,
academic, and employment demands. Without advance planning,
AAC systems are unlikely to meet all these demands, or the individual
will not have all the skills required to use the systems.

Intellectual Disability

As defined by the American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AAIDD), intellectual disability (ID; see Chapter 57) is characterized by “significant limitations both in intellectual
functioning and adaptive behavior as expressed in conceptual, social,
and practical skills.” Appropriate supports, including AAC supports,
can have a significant impact on the ability of individuals with ID to
live and learn successfully in inclusive environments typical of their
same-­age peers. At least 30% of school-­age individuals requiring AAC
supports have an ID. One of the main barriers that exists for children
with ID is simply recognizing that the use of AAC can be beneficial and
that AAC use should be generalized across settings and not just used in
highly structured settings such as school.
Although most youth with ID do not engage in socially inappropriate behaviors, problem behaviors occur more frequently in this population compared to those without ID. Many individuals with ID do not
use speech as their primary mode of communication, and problem
behaviors can be exacerbated by difficulty communicating. Many of
the strategies used to support individuals with ID involve AAC strategies such as visual schedules or those used to teach choice making and
functional communication training.
The nature of interventions directed at both natural speech development and AAC varies considerably given the diversity of syndromes
and conditions that result in ID. Many individuals with ID may have
multiple diagnoses that affect the nature of their intervention needs.

Autism Spectrum Disorder

ASD (see Chapter 58) is a highly variable disorder; individuals with
ASD experience a wide range of complex issues related to language and
communication, which presents challenges regarding speech-­based
and AAC interventions. Individuals with ASD and ID may require
more extensive educational, behavioral, and community supports
compared with those without ID, but those without ID still require
supports in the core area of social communication. Language forms
are the language structures and vocabulary (e.g., grammar, syntax).
Language function refers to what individuals do with language as
they engage and interact with others. Because ASD affects the nature of
communication as a social mediator, it is important that AAC interventions emphasize the function, or pragmatic aspects of communication,
as well as the communication aspects related to the form of language.
Interventions must start at the individual’s level of social, communicative, and cognitive development and build skills in a natural
developmental progression. The development of dynamic, interactive
communication is critical, and the child with ASD needs to learn to use
communication skills related to functional activities in daily life. The
developmental profiles of youth with ASD are often characterized by an
uneven distribution of skills. Children with ASD often perform much
better with object permanence and tool use (causality) than those areas
requiring interpersonal interaction, such as gestural or vocal imitation,
symbolic understanding, or language comprehension. Therefore AAC
interventions must be geared to the child’s social and linguistic abilities
rather than the child’s object abilities (e.g., fine motor skills or object
manipulation skills). Manual sign or pictorial systems (PECS) are often
recommended for nonverbal children with ASD. This often presumes
that the problem is only one of output and that communicative intent
is intact; however, the child may not have the language or the social
base on which communication must be built. Therefore interventions
should initially build imitation, joint attention, and natural gestural
communication skills before initiating formal language-­based AAC or
speech approaches.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 55 u Outcomes Among Infants and Children Who Are Deaf/Hard of Hearing
SGDs and other speech-­output technologies can be used effectively
in children with ASD to teach both communication and literacy skills.
SGDs can act as a “social bridge” to familiar and unfamiliar communicative partners. They can be programmed with whole messages (e.g., “do
you want to play”) in addition to single words and phrases and thereby
increase communicative efficiency and decrease potential communication
breakdowns. These output devices are available via touch-­screen tablet and
mobile devices.

Childhood Apraxia of Speech

ASHA defines childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) as a neurologic
speech-­sound disorder “in which the precision and consistency of
movements underlying speech are impaired in the absence of neuromuscular deficits.” Given consensus on diagnostic criteria is lacking,
ASHA recommends that the term “suspected CAS” be used. There is
consensus on motor speech behaviors in three areas: (1) inconsistent
errors on consonants and vowels in repeated syllables or words; (2)
lengthened, disrupted transitions between sounds and syllables; and
(3) inappropriate prosody of speech (see Chapter 53).
Given CAS is primarily a motor speech disorder, AAC is usually a secondary intervention, with the primary intervention focused on improving natural speech production. Because children with CAS often evidence
significant language delays related to the inability to practice language, it is
important to provide them with AAC modalities early on. The use of AAC
will not inhibit speech development and production, and generally use of
AAC supports result in increased mean length of utterances for the child.
Children with suspected CAS who benefit from traditional AAC are
those who primarily speak in single words, have largely unintelligible
speech, and are not able to effectively communicate with family members,
peers, and teachers. The children benefit from a wide range of AAC, from
unaided techniques including gestures and signs and aided techniques
such as PECS communication books and/or SGD. It is important that the
AAC device facilitates both language development and social competence.
The AAC system should be designed so that the child learns to create
­longer and more complex messages that are grammatically accurate.
Children with suspected CAS who can produce single-­word utterances but struggle with multiword speech often benefit from AAC speech
supplementation. This supplementation may be in the form of key symbol supplementation, in which they point to key symbols in conjunction
with speech. This can help with topic setting—when the child introduces a
new topic of conversation, they point to a symbol, which helps narrow the
range of possibilities for the communication partner. Often children with
suspected CAS prefer to use natural speech and unaided approaches, using
aided AAC techniques only when communication breakdown occurs.

Special Considerations

Reimbursement and Funding. The AAC specialist (usually a speech-­
language pathologist) should be familiar with public and private funding
options. Funding can come from schools, third-­party payers (private or
public insurance companies), or philanthropic sources. Low-­tech AAC
systems are usually developed by a speech-­language pathologist and do
not usually require additional funding. SGDs are considered durable
medical equipment (DME), and funding can vary immensely. Coverage
will need to be verified based on the patient’s specific needs and insurance. Pediatric care providers are often asked to sign prescriptions and/
or write letters of medical necessity for an AAC device. This should be
done only after conferring with the AAC team members, especially the
speech-­language pathologist. The letter should include that the pediatric provider received the evaluation reports, reviewed the recommendations, and agrees that the recommended AAC devices are medically
necessary for treatment of the child’s CCN associated with the specific
diagnosis. SGD vendors are often able to assist with funding questions.
The Assistive Technology Act. The Assistive Technology Act of
2004 provides all U.S. states and territories with federal funding to
increase access to AT devices and services. This information can be
found at the National Assistive Technology Act Technical Assistance
and training (AT3) Center (https://www.at3center.net/stateprogram).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

339

Chapter 55

Outcomes Among Infants
and Children Who Are
Deaf/Hard of Hearing
Susan E. Wiley and Rachel D. St. John
See also Chapter 677.
Approximately 3 in every 1,000 infants in the United States are born
deaf or hard of hearing (D/HH). Additionally, for infants who pass
the newborn hearing screening, there are a number of risk factors for
developing delayed-­onset hearing loss at any time during infancy and
childhood. Given that the large majority of deaf infants are born to
hearing parents, there is the potential for a developmental crisis when
an infant or child does not have an accessible shared language in common with their parents.
Acquisition of one’s first language is a phenomenon of early development (see Chapter 53). The first months and years of a child’s life
are critical to developing an intact native language. When the process
of language acquisition is delayed or fragmented, as can happen with
an infant who is D/HH, it can have a significant and permanent effect
on overall lifetime cognitive development. Timely identification and
support of infants and children who are D/HH, including the provision of early access to language, is critical to the lifetime trajectory of
outcomes, including language, pragmatics, academic success, executive
functioning, and psychosocial well-­being.

DEAF CULTURE

It is important to recognize that we as authors do not speak for Deaf
individuals or parents of D/HH children but seek to bring awareness
of some fundamental norms as a starting point for increasing familiarity and collaboration with these groups. Readers are encouraged to
explore the resources cited in this chapter, as well as information provided by Deaf individuals and parents of D/HH children themselves.
Among individuals in America who are D/HH, there is a subset
who self-­designate as culturally Deaf (intentionally spelled with an
uppercase D) who share American Sign Language (ASL) as their primary means of communication and a set of beliefs and traditions that
are transmitted across generations. In the United States, the National
Association of the Deaf is the organizational body that supports and
represents this cultural Deaf community, with a mission “to preserve,
protect and promote the civil, human and linguistic rights of deaf and
hard of hearing people in the United States of America.”
There is a potential conflict between the “hearing” medical community and the culturally Deaf community, with the medical community
traditionally operating from a pathology model (identify and fix the
problem) and the Deaf community operating from a sociocultural one
(there is no problem in need of fixing). Hearing parents and professionals whose societal existence is grounded in listening and spoken
language often view being D/HH as a limitation to interpersonal connection, education, and vocation. Deaf individuals, who achieve virtually all the same milestones as hearing individuals do by using a visual
language medium, do not view being D/HH as a loss. Among culturally Deaf individuals, the terms “hearing loss” and “hearing impaired”
are often viewed as inaccurate and potentially offensive. For those who
were born deaf, the experience of hearing is something they never had
and therefore have never missed. It is not something that holds them
back, but instead is a source of maintaining a positive self-­identity and
pride in one’s culture and community.
Hearing clinicians caring for deaf infants and children or members of
the Deaf community must practice with the cultural humility necessary
to appreciate the perspectives of the Deaf community (see Chapter 2).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

340 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 55.1  Common False Assumption About Deaf or Hard of Hearing (D/HH) Infants and Children
FALSE ASSUMPTION

ALTERNATIVE APPROACH

Being D/HH causes language delay.

Often, the parent and deaf infant do not share a common language, creating a language barrier leading
to delays. Early identification (by 1-­3 mo of age) and intervention by 6 mo of age are critical for language
development.

Passing newborn hearing screening
tests means one does not need to
be concerned about hearing.

Many factors can cause delayed-­onset hearing loss. A full audiologic evaluation is indicated for any
caregiver concern about hearing or for delays in language development—a “wait and see” approach is
never indicated.

All behavioral symptoms or
developmental delays are
caused by the hearing loss.

Young neurotypical deaf children with adequate access to language through amplification and spoken
language, sign language, or both should not be expected to have challenges in development, behavior,
or social engagement. Referral for evaluation is essential if these symptoms are present.

Sign language is a last resort for
communication for D/HH infants or
children.

American Sign Language (ASL) is a full and complex language with a clear syntax and grammar structure.
Learning sign language can promote language development when children cannot access spoken
language during a period when this input is critical for cortical brain development.

Including access to Deaf individuals as part of healthcare teams
involved in the care of D/HH infants and children is an important first
step in including this cultural perspective in health service delivery and
decision-­making.
It is also important to recognize the concept of intersectionality (the
interconnected nature of social categorizations such as race, ethnicity,
class, and gender), which plays a role in the Deaf community. Being
Deaf and Black is not just the sum of the experiences of Deaf individuals and Black individuals—the two constructs existing simultaneously
in the same person makes for a unique life experience. Intersectionality
is recognized within the context of the Deaf Plus community because
those individuals do not simply experience life as a Deaf person who
also happens to have an additional condition. The interplay of these
aspects of individuals is a critical part of identity formation, self-­
esteem, cultural engagement, potential experiences of disadvantage/
discrimination, and personhood in general.

EARLY DETECTION AND LANGUAGE
DEVELOPMENT

Deaf children who are born to deaf/signing parents are natively
exposed to sign language from the first day of life and subsequently
can be expected to acquire sign language milestones in a predictable
manner similar to typically developing hearing children acquiring
spoken language milestones. Deaf children of signing parents achieve
their first signs, vocabulary expansion, combining of two discrete sign
concepts, progression to more complex phrases and sentences, and
other language-­related milestones at expected ages if assessed in sign
language. However, more than 90% of deaf infants are born to hearing
parents who most often do not sign fluently. This creates an immediate
and significant loss of a shared intact language. Families will turn to
professionals for advice on making decisions regarding language, education, amplification technology, and social engagement. Sometimes
these clinicians make false assumptions that delay detection or intervention for children who are D/HH (Table 55.1).
Clinicians should be aware that although language delay may be a
presenting symptom in a D/HH child, being deaf in and of itself does
not inherently cause delayed language development. Rather, the inability for a parent and an infant to share a common accessible language
creates a barrier to the development of language. This is why early identification and support are critical for D/HH infants to support language
access, whether to spoken language through amplification and therapy
or access to sign language (or both). Even children who have passed
their newborn hearing screening who have language delays must have
a full audiologic evaluation, as a substantial number of factors can contribute to delayed-­onset hearing loss (DOHL) at any time during early,
middle, or late childhood. Parental concern about language delay or
responsiveness of their child is a sensitive, but not specific, indicator of
possible hearing loss. It is important to respond to parental concerns
of hearing or language with referrals for hearing assessment, language
evaluation, and age-appropriate therapeutic support systems.

Clinicians should also consider the possibility of hearing loss in
young children with other behavioral changes. An older child may
report a sudden dramatic hearing loss. However, younger children may
not have the linguistic capacity or awareness to describe loss of hearing and may present instead with changes in behavior (being upset,
aggressive, withdrawn). Some children with a progressive or sudden
change in hearing status may appear to have a behavioral condition
such as attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or may be
described as defiant. Children with unidentified hearing changes and
children with ADHD can share behaviors—they are perceived as not
paying attention, they often are not aware of what is happening in the
moment, they may not respond as expected when being addressed, and
they may not focus on the things that are being discussed.
Another problematic issue known as diagnostic overshadowing can
occur when all developmental or behavioral challenges are attributed
to one cause (in this case, hearing status) when the symptoms should
suggest the possibility of another disorder. For example young neurotypical D/HH children who have adequate access to language (through
amplification technology and spoken language, sign language, or a
combination of both) should not automatically be expected to have
substantial challenges with language development, behavior, and social
engagement. If clinicians reflexively attribute delays in social and language development to the fact that the child is D/HH, they may miss
the diagnosis of a developmental disorder when they would not have
missed the diagnosis in a hearing child.
Sign language has many benefits for D/HH infants and children
and should not be regarded as an inferior last resort only to be
used if spoken language efforts are not successful. ASL is a full and
complex language. Much of the grammatical structure and concept
complexity in ASL is conveyed through spatial placement of signs
and body movements. Body movements can include body lean and
eyebrow shift to indicate a question, furrowing of the brow and
pursing of lips to convey negation, and shifting of body position
in space to define multiple individuals involved in conversation, to
name a few.
The active discouragement of using visual language with any D/
HH child is a developmental disservice, particularly so with the profoundly deaf infant whose hearing level is too low to benefit from
traditional hearing aids. For these infants, a cochlear implant is
likely the only potential route for accessing spoken language input,
and the earliest that the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) currently approves cochlear implantation is 9 months of age. There
remains a number of children who are not achieving such early ages
of cochlear implantation. Lack of access to sign language can mean
up to a year or more of complete lack of accessible linguistic input
during a period of cortical development when language input is
critical; that lack of language input can in turn affect infant bonding
with parents. Even after cochlear implantation, it takes a substantial
amount of therapy (auditory-­verbal/listening and speech-­language
therapy) to build spoken language skills.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 55 u Outcomes Among Infants and Children Who Are Deaf/Hard of Hearing
INTERVENTIONS

Supporting children who are D/HH requires a combination of a proactive approach to care, ongoing monitoring for delays in all developmental domains, and timely recognition and intervention of gaps that can
occur because of the impact of hearing status on language and overall
development.
There is a tendency, especially for those who are not familiar with D/
HH children, to assume that a child who does not hear will have reduced
developmental outcomes compared to their hearing peers. There is
robust evidence supporting the importance of early identification and
intervention for long-­term outcomes in children who are D/HH. A
child’s developmental and learning potential should not be defined by
their hearing; clinicians should encourage and support families’ high
expectations for a child’s development regardless of hearing status.
The medical home can fill a critical role in supporting a family’s journey,
though often primary care providers have relatively few children who are
D/HH in their practice and may not be well-­versed in how to monitor
the medical and psychosocial needs of a D/HH child. This prompts the
need to seek out information from a variety of sources and link families
with reputable information. Because D/HH is a low-­incidence condition,
it is challenging for one setting (early intervention–based, school-­based,
clinical-­based) to include a variety of children and match appropriate communication approaches. Interventions can be categorized in a variety of
ways. A framework for various communication approaches is commonly
used for understanding how to support language development in children
who are D/HH (Table 55.2), including technology and environmental
modifications.

Communication Approaches

Often different approaches to communication are presented as a choice to
make during the early years of critical language growth. Many communication approaches have passionate national organizations advocating for a
specific approach (Table 55.3). The educational philosophy known as total
communication is often misunderstood to mean using both signing and
spoken language; however, it refers to incorporating an array of communication modalities (formal signs and fingerspelling, gestures, body language,
lip reading, speaking, listening), with the goal of optimizing language
development that is tailored to be most effective for the individual child.
We have chosen to refer to the national organizations and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to guide definitions

341

of communication approaches (see Table 55.2). Each approach has
specific components needed for successful implementation and language outcomes. The overall goal to support communication development can be an unfolding journey. Choices and strategies that worked
well for a child in early childhood may not be as effective as the child
matures, particularly as social engagement and academic demands
evolve with age and advancement in school. Thus it is important for
families to recognize that communication needs can change over time,
prompting a shift from a prior decision to an alternative approach.

Technology
Hearing Aids

Hearing aid technology is very refined. Hearing aids are essentially mini-­
computers that take sound from the environment and are programmed
to adjust how this sound is processed and delivered to the ear. Hearing
aids have a number of different features that can augment the quality
of sound a child will hear. Hearing aids can analyze the sounds coming
into the device and preferentially reduce background noise. They can
compress sound waves to preferentially make soft sounds louder and
try to avoid distortion of loud sounds (wide dynamic range compression). Hearing aids can have microphones that can receive sound from
many directions or focus primarily on sounds coming from in front of
a child. A hearing aid can also carry a variety of programs for different listening settings. This allows a child to have a different program
for a quiet environment compared to a noisy environment. Technology can also include Bluetooth to link to other devices. There are a
number of apps to help monitor battery life and adjust the program for
the setting through the app. Follow-­up care with audiology is important to ensure continued supports for any amplification used and to
monitor for changes in hearing. For children with conductive hearing
changes, bone conduction aids may be indicated. These devices bypass
the outer and middle ear, conducting sound through the skull directly
to the cochlea and auditory nerve. When children are 5 years or older,
they can be considered for a surgically implanted bone conduction aid
called a bone-­anchored hearing aid (BAHA). These devices also have
the capacity to link to a frequency modulation (FM) system.
It is helpful to remember that even with advancements in technology, what children hear with hearing aids is not the same as
what people hear with a typically functioning auditory system. It is
equally important to consider environmental supports to optimize

Table 55.2  Communication Approaches for Children Who Are Deaf and Hard of Hearing (D/HH)
COMMUNICATION MODALITY

DESCRIPTION

CITATION/ORGANIZATION

American Sign Language (ASL)

ASL is the recognized sign language of the deaf community in
the United States. ASL conforms to linguistic principles and is
distinct from English.

National Association of the Deaf
(https://www.nad.org/about-­us/position-­
statements/position-­statement-­on-­
american-­sign-­language)

Conceptually Accurate Signed
­English (CASE)

Using conventional ASL signs in an English word order.

https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/hearingloss/
parentsguide/building/case.html

Manually coded English

Signing Exact English is an example of a manually coded
English. It is a sign system that matches signs with the
English language and includes manual representation of all
components of the English language.

www.signingexactenglish.com

Fingerspelling/Rochester
method

The Rochester method was intended to support English literacy
and uses fingerspelling for all words.

Cued Speech

Cued Speech is a visual communication system that uses eight
handshapes in four different placements near the face in
combination with the mouth movements of speech to make the
sounds of spoken language look different from each other.

National Cued Speech Association (https://
www.mdaap.org/pdf/CuedSpeech.pdf)

Spoken language and listening

Children learn to listen and talk with the support of hearing
technology such as hearing aids, assistive listening devices
(such as an FM system), or cochlear implants.
Auditory-­oral approaches include gestures, listening, speech/
lip reading, and spoken speech.
Auditory-­verbal relies on listening and spoken speech.

Communication Options (https://www.agb
ell.org/Families/Communication-­Options)
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention: How People with Hearing
Loss Learn Language (https://www.cdc.go
v/ncbddd/hearingloss/language.html)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

342 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 55.3  Resources for Families and Professionals
NATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS: FAMILY SUPPORT
Hand and Voices
(www.handsandvoices.org)

Supports families and children without a platform providing a specific mode of communication.

National Association for the Deaf

Advocates for use of American Sign Language and represents the culturally Deaf community.

Alexander Graham Bell Association for the
Deaf and Hard of Hearing (www.agbell.org)

Advocates for people who are D/HH to hear and use spoken language.

Beginnings (www.ncbegin.org)

Promotes language accessibility through cued speech (see Table 55.2).

American Society for Deaf Children
(www.deafchildren.org)
DEAF HISTORY AND CULTURE
The National Association of the Deaf

https://www.nad.org/about-­us/

Deaf Heritage: A Narrative History of Deaf
America

This 1981 book by Jack Gannon, a Deaf author and historian, is often referred to as a canon
of Deaf culture in the United States. The book covers a number of events throughout
history, including the establishment of schools for the deaf and the inception of the National
Association of the Deaf and explores topics such as American Sign Language, Deaf artists,
Deaf sports, and seminal Deaf publications.

Through Deaf Eyes

A 2007 documentary covering close to 200 years of being Deaf in the United States in a 2-­hour
run time through a diversity of interviews, movie shorts, and stories that capture the events
that have affected Deaf lives throughout American history (https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=PL5d8kyZUQk).

DEAF MENTORS
The National Center for Hearing Assessment
and Management

Houses a directory of D/HH adult involvement programs by state (https://www.infanthearing.or
g/dhhadultinvolvement/states/index.html)

SKI HI Deaf Mentor Program

Curriculum for infants and young children who are D/HH (http://www.deaf-­mentor.skihi.org)

Hand and Voices Deaf and HH Mentor/Guide/
Role Model Programs

https://handsandvoices.org/fl3/topics/dhh-­involvement/programs.html

American Society for Deaf Children: Deaf ASL
Ambassadors Program

https://deafchildren.org/knowledge-­center/asl-­resources/sign-­on/

PRACTICE GUIDELINES
American Academy of Pediatrics Early Hearing
Detection and Intervention Program

https://www.aap.org/en/patient-­care-­pages-­in-­progress/early-­hearing-­detection-­and-­
intervention/

EHDI National Technical Resource Center

https://www.infanthearing.org

The Joint Committee on Infant Hearing

www.jcih.org

listening environments. Contralateral routing of signal aids (CROS)
can be helpful for children with unilateral profound deafness. This
amplification system uses a transmitter at the ear that does not hear
and routes it to a receiver on the typically hearing ear. Assisted listening devices such as FM systems are used to help address problems hearing in background noise and when speakers are farther
away. This system has a small transmitter with a microphone. The
speaker wears the transmitter, and this then links directly into headphones or a personal amplification system (hearing aid or cochlear
implant). FM systems are traditionally used in the classroom setting, although they may be employed in other settings that tend to
have competing background noise such as restaurants or when the
focus on a particular individual speaking is important. The teacher
may also use a transmitter with microphone that links to a number
of speakers around the room (soundfield system). In this way, the
accommodation is available to all students in the classroom, may
benefit children easily distracted by background noise as well as the
D/HH student, and does not single out the D/HH child alone.

Cochlear Implants

Cochlear implants are surgically implanted devices that bring
direct electrical stimulation to the cochlea. These devices are FDA-­
approved for children 9 months and older with profound sensorineural hearing loss and in lesser degrees of hearing changes (70 dB
or more) when children are not receiving adequate benefit from

traditional amplification. A period of hearing aid trial is recommended before implantation. In children with hearing loss caused
by meningitis, it is important to monitor for bony changes in the
cochlea via imaging. Early signs of ossification would prompt earlier cochlear implantation to ensure the electrodes are in an optimal position to stimulate the auditory nerve. Even for children who
are bilaterally profoundly deaf, there can be reasons that a cochlear
implant is not appropriate. For example, absence of an auditory
nerve would preclude pursuing an implant.
Often pediatric cochlear implant centers use a multidisciplinary
approach to determining cochlear implant candidacy and to ensure
strong follow-­up support. In the past, children with developmental disabilities were deemed not appropriate for cochlear implantation, as results were thought to be limited. Although outcomes can
vary in this group of children, a developmental disability alone does
not preclude receiving benefit from the device. Ensuring global
developmental supports, addressing potential expectations and
outcomes, and linking children and families to resources can help
children gain benefit from access to sound.
Coordination of care and follow-­up is essential in all children
with cochlear implants. They initially will see audiologists at frequent intervals to program the implant, and speech therapy is a critical and ongoing component of fostering success with an implant.
At the age of 2 years, they should receive the 23-­valent pneumococcal vaccine to ameliorate the increased risk of meningitis. The

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 55 u Outcomes Among Infants and Children Who Are Deaf/Hard of Hearing
medical home can play an important role in managing this additional immunization, as well as in monitoring medical issues and
developmental progress.
Early implantation has been associated with better hearing, speech
perception, and spoken language outcomes, as it ensures early stimulation of the auditory cortex necessary for the development of spoken
language. Although FDA approval is for children 9 months and older,
there are situations where earlier implantation is indicated, and many
in the field of pediatric audiology and pediatric otology are advocating
for earlier implantation. Unilateral deafness is another emerging indication for cochlear implantation in children.

Other Supports and Factors Influencing ­
Amplification Decisions

The cost of amplification devices can be quite high. Many insurance
plans do not cover hearing aids, though more cover costs associated
with BAHAs and cochlear implants. Services and coverages vary by
state and insurance plan. Families often need to obtain insurance
or additional coverage to cover replacement costs associated with
damage or loss of the device. Technology updates can also add further expenses.
There are also many day-­to-­day factors that affect a child’s acceptance of amplification. In early childhood there is rapid growth of
the skull and ear canal. With hearing aids, children often need to
return to audiology frequently to resize the ear molds to ensure a
good fit. Children also can become very adept at removing their
hearing aids. Young children in daycare are particularly vulnerable
to potentially losing their amplification when rolling, crawling, or
playing or when naturally curious peers and playmates attempt to
take them. Parents, caregivers, and teachers routinely checking on
hearing aids/cochlear implants is a critical support to using amplification technology successfully in young children.
A number of environmental supports can be helpful. For families
seeking a spoken language approach, it is helpful to decrease background sounds. Turning off TVs and devices can help children be
able to listen and hear what is said. Children often struggle hearing
speakers from a distance. This affects incidental learning, as they
have fewer opportunities to “overhear” peripheral conversations.
Families are often coached in ways to optimize their child’s listening
environment and ways to highlight spoken language and concepts.
Technologic support can include captioning on the television,
video-­relay with sign language interpreters, texting, speech-­to-­text,
visual fire alarms, and vibrating alarms. These types of technologies
are often not covered through insurance, although some state agencies have programs to help defray costs. Other accommodations
for communication access can include sign language interpreters,
cued speech interpreters, and open captioning. The Americans with
Disabilities Act ensures children, adolescents, and adults have the
legal right to communication access. This is particularly important
in medical settings. Family members should not be asked to serve as
interpreters for the child, as this limits the ability for the parent to
listen and be part of the conversation or may limit the child’s access
to the conversation at hand.

LANGUAGE LEARNING

Language is a critical component of the human condition and allows
connection with others. The United Nations has recognized communication as a human right. Communication happens in many ways that
can include behavior, nonverbal communication, tone, facial expressions, words, and sentences. These aspects of communication are universal irrespective of mode of communication.
Promoting language development needs to focus on far more than the
ear and hearing. As in typical children, the quality and quantity of communication are important (see Chapter 53). Additionally, children who
are D/HH are at high risk of missing learning via “the unwritten curriculum”: social and cultural learning that occurs incidentally and passively.
Hearing children repeatedly overhear conversations that do not directly
include them but are related to them, such as when their parents talk to
the pediatrician about their care or how the parents interface with office

343

staff when they schedule the next appointment. D/HH children are vulnerable to missing years, if not decades, of incidental learning regarding
everyday interactions. Direct teaching of incidental information, or making the implicit explicit, is a tenet of supporting the language development
of children and youth who are D/HH. In the medical setting, this can be
addressed for the signing D/HH child by having a sign language interpreter present to ensure the child can build an understanding of their own
health history and expand health literacy, even if they may be too young
to engage in the conversation directly. Although it may feel more comfortable and efficient to get information directly from parents, it is critical
for the provider to engage the child directly as much as possible to maximize their involvement in their own plan of care. Addressing incidental
learning for children who are D/HH should occur regardless of mode of
communication.
As families hold an important role in their child’s language development, building and empowering families in the development of
skills and strategies is an important component of early intervention.
Within the field of early intervention, coaching parents on how to
engage and interact with their child to promote optimal development
has been noted to be effective for a number of populations of children. Communication is interactional, and coaching puts the family
in the position of providing the intervention and thus builds skills to
support their child.

When a Child Is Not Progressing

If a child’s language development is not progressing, it is necessary
to reevaluate factors that could contribute to language development. Factors to consider include problems with devices that have
not been fully optimized, aspects of access to language, and coexisting medical, developmental, or behavioral conditions impacting
learning.
In evaluating a child’s access to language, consider how the child is
learning, the language environment, and whether a child is getting a
quality language model for learning. If a communication modality is
pursued that cannot be supported across the environments the child
is in (e.g., school, home, community-­based organizations), the D/HH
child can lag behind their peers. Overt problematic scenarios include
a deaf child without good acoustic access attempting to learn spoken language or a child learning sign language but with limited sign
language proficiency in their home, community, and school environments. Regression of language should prompt reevaluation of hearing
and consideration of brain-centered as opposed to hearing-centered
problems with learning.
A child’s response to a communication approach may be affected
by broader developmental issues. A child may have a unique learning profile and benefit from alternative approaches to language-­
based learning. Whereas children who are D/HH often have strong
visual problem-­solving skills, some children who are D/HH are
stronger in the auditory domain. Although it should not be automatically assumed that a D/HH child will have developmental delay,
up to 40% also have a developmental disability or condition that can
affect progress. Early recognition of a child’s broader needs can help
ensure children receive effective interventions for all of their needs.

ACADEMIC CONSIDERATIONS

The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) ensures a
free, appropriate public education for all students with disabilities,
including those who are D/HH. This law recognizes the right to
be educated within the least restrictive environment (LRE), or to
the maximum extent that is appropriate, education with their peers
who do not have disabilities. This must be balanced with the individual student’s communication, linguistic, academic, social, emotional, and cultural needs. Because of the varied settings and range
of communication support needs, as well as the diversity of individual student strengths, endorsing one specific educational setting
is not possible or appropriate.
Reading and literacy skills are associated with language fluency
levels and tend to be improved by early age of identification and
intervention. Standardized achievement testing from the early

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

344 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
2000s demonstrated that only half of D/HH high school graduates
were reading above a fourth-­grade level. However, these data are old
and do not control for varying factors across students such as coexisting medical or developmental conditions, delays in identification
and early language access, and varying teaching methodologies.
Academic outcomes are likely to be optimized with early identification and support of language in infants who are D/HH and with
the prompt recognition of, and support for, other developmental or
behavioral challenges that may interfere with learning.

PSYCHOSOCIAL WELL-­BEING

An important consideration for any individual is psychosocial
well-­being. Because the population of D/HH individuals is heterogenous, it is difficult to make overarching statements regarding
mental health and wellness. Hearing loss in the elderly has been
associated with depression. This is due—at least in part—to the loss
of connection and communication with others. Similar effects can
be seen across the life span for deaf individuals who did not develop
enough formal language to communicate effectively. Studies have
linked a lack of language proficiency with in-­patient psychiatric
care in adults and psychosocial difficulties in children. A large-­scale
study in Taiwan spanning over a decade estimated an 11.1% lifetime
prevalence of clinically diagnosed unspecified anxiety disorder in
the D/HH group, which was twice the incidence in the hearing control group.
A phenomenon described by some D/HH individuals, deaf anxiety, is related to interpersonal challenges a D/HH individual can
experience when interfacing with a largely hearing society. Although
advances in technology with hearing aids and cochlear implants
continue to improve access to audiologic input, it is important to
consider that these are tools with inherent limitations—they are not
an equivalent “replacement” for natural hearing. D/HH adults have
described fears such as missing/misunderstanding information,
concern with appearing not to be interested in or not paying attention to someone speaking, disproportionately increased difficulty
when dealing with noisy environments, and worry about missing
significant information in nonaccessible environments such as
being unaware that a fire alarm has gone off if there is no visual
indicator in addition to the sound alarm.
The experiences of a deaf person in a predominantly hearing
world contribute to the critical journey of identity formation for D/
HH children as they become young adults. Deaf children, regardless
of their success with technology, are still deaf. When a child takes
off their hearing aids or cochlear implants to take a bath, swim, or
rest, they are deaf. The technology does not change who they are
fundamentally. Supporting families in their efforts to understand,
accept, and value their child as a deaf individual can provide resilience for identity formation in adolescence. There also needs to be
recognition that families are necessarily thrust into a position of
making decisions for their young D/HH child with the knowledge
they have at the time and may have concerns about how their child
as an emerging adult may feel later on about those decisions. Families can benefit tremendously from access to programs that can connect them with other deaf children, deaf adults, and community
resources that support a variety of ways to exist as a successful deaf
individual.

DEAF PLUS

It is helpful to recognize that some of the risks associated with being
D/HH are also risks for other conditions that impact functioning
in children who are D/HH (Table 55.4). It is important to look
beyond hearing status as the reason for delays so as not to miss
other factors contributing to a child’s slow rate of progress. Delayed

Table 55.4  Rates and Types of Disabilities Among
Children Who Are D/HH and Within the
General Population
TYPE OF DISABILITY

D/HH (%)

GENERAL
POPULATION (%)

No developmental disability

60

83

Cognitive/intellectual disability

8.3

1

Cerebral palsy

8

0.3

Blindness and vision impairment

5.5

0.3

Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity
disorder

5.4

9

Specific learning disability

8

7

Autism spectrum disorders

7

1.7

recognition of these factors causes delays in accessing effective
intervention strategies. Conversely, the presence of specific coexisting conditions should not be assumed to predict functioning or
decisions about communication. A child who is deaf and also has
cerebral palsy should not be assumed to be unable to use sign language because of impact on hand/arm movements, as these children
may use sign language receptively for language understanding quite
well. The need for individually tailored care and education plans is
particularly critical in children who are Deaf Plus.
Children who are D/HH have vision changes at nearly twice the
rates compared to the general population. Vision differences are
important to detect, as children who are D/HH often rely on their
vision for accessing information. Even among children who receive
effective amplification and good acoustic access to information,
some reliance on lip reading and visual attention to the speaker can
enhance a child’s ability to process information. There are no specific standards regarding the timing and frequency of ophthalmologic
evaluations and monitoring intervals, but it is important for all children who are D/HH to have regular monitoring of vision and eye
health with a pediatric eye care specialist.
For children who have both hearing and vision changes (DeafBlind), intervention strategies can be increasingly complex. IDEA
specifically defines DeafBlindness as “concomitant hearing and
visual impairments, the combination of which causes such severe
communication and other developmental and educational needs
that they cannot be accommodated in special education programs
solely for children with deafness or children with blindness.” When
the two conditions are present simultaneously, there are additional
challenges to be considered regarding language access and acquisition. Each state has a federally funded DeafBlind project that
provides resources and technical assistance to support children
identified as DeafBlind. For children who are DeafBlind, many are
advocating for interveners. Interveners are more than interpreters:
they facilitate communication and inclusion and address social and
emotional needs within educational settings.

FAMILY JOURNEY

Each family has a unique narrative to their overall family experience, as
well as a specific pathway to supporting the growth and development of
their D/HH child. Some families experience profound grief around the
loss of an expected parenting story. Many families speak of being overwhelmed initially by an immense amount of information and pressured
to make crucial decisions in a timely manner. Others move into an advocacy model and have their own unique take on the parenting journey. One

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 55 u Outcomes Among Infants and Children Who Are Deaf/Hard of Hearing

345

Table 55.5  Approaches in the Medical Home to Support the Family Journey
FAMILY JOURNEY THEMES

CONSIDERATIONS AND STRATEGIES

Family-­centered decision-­making:
Ensure families are central in decision-­making

Before the visit:
⦁	Physician reflection on their own knowledge, expertise, and biases
At the visit:
⦁	Listen to family concerns actively and address concerns, referring to others when outside
provider expertise is necessary

Families’ need for informed choice

Before the visit:
⦁	Recognize that each family and child are unique and decisions may vary across families
⦁	Recognize that decisions may change over the life span of the child
⦁	Recognize the passion across communication modalities, which drive potential biases in
information and guidance
At the visit:
⦁	Listen actively to understand the family’s values and intended goals and outcomes
⦁	Collaboratively seek information from a variety of reputable sources and discuss potential
biases across various “experts” in the field (see resource list)
⦁	Incorporate the family’s values in an action plan together
⦁	Refer to experts as appropriate

Family-­to-­family support:
Because having a child who is D/HH can feel
isolating and professionals do not carry the
same day-­to-­day experiences, family-­to-­
family connection is an important component
of support

Before the visit:
⦁	Recognize the importance of family-­to-­family support
⦁	Identify resources to link families with other families (see resources)
During the visit:
⦁	Discuss the possible isolation families face
⦁	Determine interest and readiness for family networking
⦁	Share resources that they can rely on when ready to reach out

Access to D/HH adults: To support the family’s
recognition of what success can be and to
provide children with a conceptual framework
for D/HH individuals as adults

Before the visit:
⦁	Recognize families may be experiencing grief over the loss of their child’s expected future
and that experiences with other individuals who are D/HH may be limited or nonexistent
⦁	Identify resources to link families with Deaf adults and Deaf mentoring programs (see Table 55.3)
During the visit:
⦁	Discuss family’s hopes and fears
⦁	Highlight the importance of high expectations for their child
⦁	Discuss ways to promote identity, connection, and independence for their child

Child interactions and supports

Before the visit:
⦁	Recognize the variability and uniqueness of children who are D/HH in terms of capabilities,
skills, and opportunities
At the visit:
⦁	Engage D/HH children directly rather than rely solely on family members for interpreting
communication; for children who use sign language, access to an interpreter is a right under
the Americans with Disabilities Act
⦁	Recognize children’s strengths and resilience
⦁	Ensure children have access to their own health information (at their developmental level)
and have the opportunity for inclusion in decisions as appropriate
⦁	Advocate with children and families to have high expectations for skills, recognizing that
often medical and educational settings use a deficit model (the child must be behind) to
­access supports

simply has to take a look at some of the family stories that are available
in the public realm to appreciate the diversity of the family experience in
raising a D/HH child.
A number of parent support organizations are available to families,
some of which are organized around specific communication philosophies (see Table 55.3).
The pediatrician may be the first medical professional that families
turn to if there is concern about language development and/or hearing.
Although these physician/family relationships are often just as diverse
as the families themselves, some universal concepts start to emerge
when listening to parent stories (Table 55.5). Recognizing these themes

and identifying ways to partner and support families is a critical role of
the medical home.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors extend their gratitude to Chris Moreland, MD, and Robert
Nutt, MD, for their input from the deaf adult/deaf professional perspective, and to Lauren Tyra, PhD, for her input from the perspective
of a parent of a deaf child.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

346 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders

Chapter 56

Developmental Delay and
Intellectual Disability
Meghan E. O’Neill and Bruce K. Shapiro
Intellectual disability (ID) refers to a heterogeneous group of disorders that have in common deficits of adaptive and intellectual function
and an age of onset before maturity is reached. In Europe, the term
learning disability is often used to describe ID.

DEFINITION

Contemporary conceptualizations of ID emphasize adaptive functioning
and social interaction rather than test scores in isolation. The definition
of ID requires significant impairment in general intellectual function
(reasoning, memory, learning, problem solving) and adaptive behavior,
with severity defined by limitations in adaptive functioning or levels of
needed support. This focus encourages the development of individual
treatment plans characterizing the supports needed to enhance functioning. Consistent across these definitions is onset of symptoms before
adulthood (18-­22 years of age). Children with ID have a nonprogressive disorder; loss of developmental milestones or progressive symptoms
with a downward developmental trajectory suggest another disorder.
Significant impairment in adaptive behavior reflects the degree to which
cognitive dysfunction directly contributes to impairments in daily functioning at home, at school and work, and in the community. Adaptive
behavior refers to the skills required for people to function in their everyday lives, and individuals with deficits require more support than same-­age
peers for optimal participation. The American Association on Intellectual
and Developmental Disabilities (AAIDD) and Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-­5) classifications of
adaptive behavior address three broad sets of skills: conceptual, social,
and practical. Conceptual skills include language, reading, writing, time,
number concepts, and self-­direction. Social skills include interpersonal
skills, personal and social responsibility, self-­esteem, gullibility, naiveté,
and ability to follow rules, obey laws, and avoid victimization. Representative practical skills involve performance of activities of daily living (dressing, feeding, toileting/bathing, mobility), instrumental activities of daily
living (e.g., housework, managing money, taking medication, shopping,
preparing meals, using phone and mail systems), occupational skills, and
maintenance of a safe environment. For a deficit in adaptive behavior to be
present, a significant delay in at least one of the three skill areas must be
present. The rationale for requiring only one area is the empirically derived
finding that people with ID can have varying patterns of ability and may
not have deficits in all three areas.
The requirement for adaptive behavior deficits is the most controversial aspect of the diagnostic formulation. The controversy centers on two
broad areas: whether impairments in adaptive behavior are necessary for
the construct of ID and what to measure. The adaptive behavior criterion
may be irrelevant for many children; adaptive behavior is impaired in
virtually all children who have IQ scores <50. The major utility of the
adaptive behavior criterion is to confirm ID in children with IQ scores
in the 60-­75 range, especially considering the historical overdiagnosis
of ID among individuals of color with typical adaptive functioning and
biased IQ testing results. It should be noted that deficits in adaptive
behavior are often found in disorders such as autism spectrum disorder (ASD; see Chapter 58) and attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD; see Chapter 50) in the presence of typical intellectual function,
often mediated by significant difficulties with executive functioning, self-­
directedness, or maladaptive behaviors. In contrast, deficits of adaptive
functioning in ID are primarily attributable to the individual’s overall
cognitive limitations.
The issues of measurement are important as well. The independence
of the three domains of adaptive behavior has not been validated.
The relationship between adaptive behavior and IQ performance is

insufficiently explored. Many adults with IQ scores in the 60-­75 range
do not have significant impairments in practical skills. Adaptive behavior deficits also must be distinguished from maladaptive behavior (e.g.,
aggression, self-­injury, inappropriate sexual behavior).
Significant impairment in general intellectual function refers to performance on an individually administered test of intelligence that is approximately 2 standard deviations (SDs) below the mean. Generally, these tests
provide a standard score that has a mean of 100 and SD of 15 points, so
that IQ scores <70 would meet these criteria. If the standard error of measurement is considered, the upper limits of significantly impaired intellectual function may extend to an IQ of 75. Using a score of 75 to delineate ID
might double the number of children with this diagnosis, but the requirement for impairment of adaptive skills limits the false positives. Children
with ID often show a variable pattern of strengths and weaknesses. Not all
their subtest scores on IQ tests fall into the significantly impaired range.
Onset before age 22 years or adulthood distinguishes dysfunctions
that originate during the developmental period from those that begin
in adulthood. The diagnosis of ID may be made after 22 years of age,
but the cognitive and adaptive dysfunction must have been manifested
before age 22 years. Age of onset may be relevant to qualification for
certain benefits programs that require a diagnosis of ID.
Intellectual disability as nonprogressive. Individuals with ID will
acquire new developmental milestones over time, although at a slower
rate than unaffected children. A slowing trajectory is not uncommon as individuals with ID get older. This should be distinguished
from regression of milestones, which involves true loss of previously
acquired skills and demands additional and often more extensive
etiologic workup. Sometimes regression is seen in the context of the
child’s larger medical picture, such as loss of mobility with increasing
spasticity and contractures in children with comorbid cerebral palsy
(CP) or loss of language skills in the setting of new seizures. Alternatively, regression could suggest a progressive encephalopathy caused
by an inborn error of metabolism or a neurodegenerative disorder (see
Chapters 104 and 639). Prompt identification is essential, as some of
these conditions are treatable or modifiable and some necessitate conversations about future reproductive risk.
Global developmental delay (GDD) is a term often used to describe
young children with delays across multiple domains of development
that have not yet resulted in a diagnosis of ID. In DSM-­5, GDD is a
diagnosis given to children <5 years of age who display significant
delay (>2 SDs) in acquiring early childhood developmental milestones
in two or more domains of development. These domains include receptive and expressive language; gross and fine motor function; cognition,
social and personal development; and activities of daily living. Typically, it is assumed that delay in two domains will be associated with
delay across all domains evaluated, including cognitive and intellectual abilities. Longitudinal studies following outcomes of children with
GDD are sparse but suggest that that upwards of 80% of children with
early global delays continue to experience development challenges
through the school-­age years. However, not all children who meet criteria for a GDD diagnosis at a young age go on to meet criteria for
ID later in childhood. Reasons for the lack of concordance between
GDD and later diagnosis of ID include lower reliability and predictive
validity of developmental testing in children under 5-­6 years of age; a
positive change in developmental trajectory with maturation or possibly with intervention; reclassification to a different disability category
(autism, ADHD, developmental coordination disorder); or imprecise
use of the GDD diagnosis initially. Conversely, in patients with more
severe early delays, the GDD term is often used beyond the point when
the child could be reclassified as having ID, such as when a child has
persistently and markedly low developmental quotients on multiple
assessments and despite intervention during the first few years of life.
It is important to distinguish the medical diagnosis of GDD from the
federal disability classification of “developmental delay” that may be used
by education agencies under the Individuals with Disabilities Education
Act (IDEA). This classification requires that a child have delays in only one
domain of development with subsequent need for special education. Each
state determines its own precise definition and terms of eligibility under
the broader definition outlined by IDEA, and many states use the label for
children up to 9 years of age.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 56 u Developmental Delay and Intellectual Disability

347

Table 56. 1  Genetic Testing Guidelines for ID/GDD and/or ASD
ORGANIZATION
Autism and Intellectual Disability
Committee of the American
Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry
(AACAP)

RECOMMENDATION(S) FOR GENETIC TESTING
•	CMA in all individuals with ID/GDD and/or ASD
•	FMR1 repeat analysis in males and females with ID or a family history of ID
•	Depending on history and physical examination, consider:

• PTEN testing if head circumference (HCM) is more than 2.5 SD above the mean for age in a child with ID/GDD and/or ASD
•	MECP2 testing for Rett syndrome in females with severe ID
•	Karyotype if a chromosomal syndrome is suspected

•	If other investigations do not provide an etiology and there are unresolved clinical findings, consider ES
and mitochondrial DNA testing
American Academy of Pediatrics
(AAP)

•	If a comprehensive history and exam are indicative of a specific syndrome or disorder, proceed with specific
testing in patients with ASD and/or ID/GDD
•	In all individuals with ASD and ID/GDD without specific findings, consider CMA and FMR1 CGG repeat
analysis
•	In females with ASD and/or ID/GDD without specific findings, consider MECP2 testing
•	In males with ID/GDD without specific findings, consider an X-­linked ID panel (XLID)
•	If an etiology is not identified, consider a referral to genetics for additional workup, including possible ES

International Standard
Cytogenomic Array
(ISCA) Consortium

•	CMA is the first-­tier genetic test in patients with GDD/ID, ASD, and/or multiple congenital anomalies

American College of Medical
Genetics (ACMG)

•	After a detailed family history and physical examination, proceed with specific testing for patients with ASD
if a syndrome is suspected or if features are suggestive of a mitochondrial or metabolic condition
•	If family history and physical exam are not suggestive of a specific diagnosis, metabolic, or mitochondrial
condition, proceed with CMA for all patients with ASD and FMR1 repeat analysis for all males with ASD
•	If CMA (in males and females) and FMR1 repeat analysis (in males) are not diagnostic, consider:

•	MECP2 sequencing in all females with ASD
•	MECP2 duplication testing in males with ASD if phenotype is suggestive
• PTEN testing in patients with ASD if HCM is more than 2.5 SD above the mean for age
•	FMR1 repeat analysis in females with ASD and additional features suggestive of fragile X (e.g., family history and phenotype)

American College of Medical
Genetics (ACMG)

•	CMA is the first-­tier genetic test in patients with multiple congenital anomalies that are not indicative of a
specific genetic syndrome and those with nonsyndromic ID/GDD and ASD

Multidisciplinary Expert
Consensus Panel

•	ES in all individuals with ID and/or ASD
•	If ES is nondiagnostic and does not include copy number variant analysis, proceed with CMA
•	If ES (and CMA if needed) is nondiagnostic, reanalysis of data from testing should be undertaken periodically

American Academy of
Neurology (AAN) and Child
Neurology Society (CNS)

•	High-­resolution karyotype and FMR1 repeat analysis for patients with ASD that also have ID, family history
of fragile X and/or ID, or dysmorphic features
•	After obtaining a detailed medical, developmental, and family history for patients with ID/GDD, if a specific
etiology is considered, perform appropriate testing such as single gene testing, metabolic testing, or XLID panel
•	If a specific etiology is not suspected, perform CMA (or, if not possible, karyotype and subtelomeric FISH)
for all individuals with ID/GDD, MECP2 testing for females with moderate to severe ID/GDD, and FMR1
repeat analysis in all individuals with mild ID/GDD
•	If these and other etiologic workups are negative, consider a referral to genetics

From Savatt JM, Myers SM. Genetic testing in neurodevelopmental disorders. Front Pediatr. 2021;9:526779, Table 3.

ETIOLOGY

Numerous identified causes of ID may occur prenatally, during delivery, postnatally, or later in childhood. These include infection, trauma,
prematurity, hypoxia-­ischemia, toxic exposures, metabolic dysfunction,
endocrine abnormalities, malnutrition, and genetic abnormalities. Most
people with ID will not have a readily identifiable underlying diagnosis based on prenatal or perinatal history or dysmorphology, meriting
further medical and genetic evaluation. Practice guidelines recommend
that an etiologic workup be pursued in all children with ID or GDD
when there is not a readily apparent explanation for the child’s presentation (Tables 56.1 and 56.2). It is anticipated that these diagnostic guidelines change because genome sequencing studies have identified severe
monogenic etiologies in previously difficult to diagnose developmental
disorders despite extensive previous recommended evaluations.
Among children with milder GDD, yield of etiologic workup will likely
be lower in comparison to children with more significant delays or disability. With increases in etiologic testing among all children with ID
and advancement of technologic capabilities of testing, the number of
identified biologic and genetic causes of ID is continuing to increase rapidly. There are slightly over 100 disorders (all of which are metabolic in
nature) for which treatment may ameliorate the core symptoms of ID (see
https://www.treatable-­id.org/), but these conditions account for a relatively
small percentage of children with ID (Table 56.3). However, there are several reasons beyond disease modification that should prompt providers

to seek etiologic answers in patients with ID. These include insight into
possible associated medical or behavioral comorbidities; information
on prognosis and life expectancy; estimation of recurrence risk for family planning counseling, potential validation, and closure for the family;
increased access to services or specific supports; and better understanding
of underlying pathology with the hope for new treatment options. When
surveyed, families of children with ID with no identified underlying etiology almost universally report that they would want to know of an etiologic
diagnosis if given the choice. Expanded testing will contribute to the growing pathophysiologic understanding of how ID occurs mechanistically and
serves as an opportunity for future targeted treatment opportunities and
clinical trial development.
Mild and more severe forms of ID have different but overlapping risk
factors and etiologies. Nongenetic risk factors that are often associated
with mild ID include low socioeconomic status, low maternal education levels, residence in a developing country, malnutrition, and poor
access to healthcare. The most common biologic causes of, or risk factors for, mild ID include intrauterine growth restriction; prematurity;
perinatal insults; intrauterine exposure to drugs of abuse (including
alcohol); postnatal exposure to neurotoxic substances (including lead);
some sex chromosomal abnormalities; and some genetic syndromes
with multiple, major, or minor congenital anomalies (e.g., 22q11 deletion syndrome, sex chromosomal abnormalities, Noonan syndrome).
Familial clustering is common.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

348
u Learning
and Developmental
Disorders
TablePart
56.2 IV Genetic
Tests Commonly
Used in Evaluation
of Neurodevelopmental Disorders
TEST

RESULTS/VARIANTS DETECTED

DETECTION LIMITATIONS

Chromosomal
microarray (CMA)

•	Copy number variants (CNV)
(generally >250 kb but could be
smaller if region is specifically
targeted)
•	Regions of homozygosity*

•	Repetitive DNA sequences, including trinucleotide repeat expansions
(e.g., FMR1 repeat expansion)
•	Balanced chromosomal rearrangements
•	Sequence-­level variants in the exome/genome
•	Mitochondrial variants
•	Epigenetics alterations (e.g., methylation abnormalities, uniparental
heterodisomy)
•	Low-­level mosaicism

Exome sequencing
(ES)

•	Sequence-­level variants in the
coding region (exome)

•	Repetitive DNA sequences, including trinucleotide repeat expansions
(e.g., FMR1 repeat expansion)
•	Balanced chromosomal rearrangements
•	Smaller copy number variants, including deletions/duplications involving one
to two exons
•	Mitochondrial variants
•	Epigenetics alterations (e.g., methylation abnormalities)
•	Intronic/noncoding variants
•	Variants in regions of the exome that are not well-­covered by sequencing

FMR1 CGG repeat
testing

•	CGG repeat number in
the FMR1 gene

•	Sequence-­level variants in FMR1 or elsewhere in the exome/genome
•	Copy number variants
•	Balanced chromosomal rearrangements
•	Exon-­level deletions/duplications
•	Mitochondrial variants
•	Epigenetics alterations (e.g., methylation abnormalities)

•	Copy number variants**

*Single-­nucleotide polymorphism–based chromosomal microarray (SNP-­CMA)
**Several laboratories are now calling CNVs as a routine part of ES, and this trend will continue to expand.
From Savatt JM, Myers SM. Genetic testing in neurodevelopmental disorders. Front Pediatr. 2021;9:526779, Table 2.

Table 56.3  Conditions in Which Early Treatment May Significantly Improve the Course of the Disease
CONDITION

TREATMENT

CONDITION

TREATMENT

Galactosemia

Lactose-­free diet

Creatine disorders

Creatine monohydrate

Fructosemia

Fructose-­free diet

Vitamin B12 deficiency

Vitamin B12

Phenylketonuria

Phenylalanine-­free diet

Ketogenic diet

Maternal phenylketonuria

Phenylalanine-­free diet during
pregnancy

Cerebral glucose transporter
defect
Metachromatic leukodystrophy

BMT

Niemann-­Pick disease

BMT, liver transplantation,
implanted amniotic epithelial cells

Adrenoleukodystrophy

BMT

Glycogen storage disease type IV

Liver transplantation

Maple syrup urine disease

Diet restricted in branched-­chain
amino acids + dialysis or
exchange transfusion

Hypoglycemia from any cause

Prevent hypoglycemia and/or
provide glucose

Lead intoxication

Separate child from source of
lead; chelation therapy

Menkes disease

Parenteral copper histidinate

Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome

Allopurinol + BMT

Hypothyroidism

Thyroid replacement

Krabbe disease

BMT

Recurrent otitis media

Antibiotic prophylaxis, pressure-­
equalizing tubes

α-­Mannosidosis

ERT: velmanase alfa

Malnutrition

Adequate nutrition

Aspartylglucosaminuria

BMT

Increased intracranial pressure
(e.g., hydrocephalus, neoplasm)

Shunt ventricles or cystic structure

Gaucher disease type III

ERT: Ceredase; SRT: Cerdelga;
PCT: Mucosolvan

Congenital HIV infection

Prenatal/postnatal treatment with
AZT (zidovudine)

Hunter syndrome (MPS II)

ERT: Elaprase

Hurler syndrome (MPS I)

ERT: Aldurazyme

Congenital toxoplasmosis

Prenatal treatment with
spiramycin, pyrimethamine,
and sulfonamide

Sanfilippo syndrome A (MPS IIIa)

SRT: Genistein

Sanfilippo syndrome B (MPS IIIb)

SRT: Genistein

Dopa-­responsive dystonia

Responds to levodopa; may be
misdiagnosed as cerebral palsy

Sanfilippo syndrome C (MPS IIIc)

SRT: Genistein

Sanfilippo syndrome D (MPS IIId)

SRT: Genistein

Biotinidase deficiency

Oral biotin

Sly syndrome (MPS VII)

ERT: Mepsevii

Biotin-­thiamine–responsive
basal ganglia disease

Biotin, thiamine

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
type II

ERT: Brineura

Wilson disease

Copper chelation; liver transplant

Cerebral folate disorder

Folinic acid

BMT, Bone marrow transplant; ERT, enzyme replacement therapy; MPS, mucopolysaccharidosis; PCT, pharmacologic chaperone therapy; SRT, substrate reduction therapy.
From Muriello M. Neurocognitive and developmental regression. In: Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D (eds). Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 28.10, p. 481.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 56 u Developmental Delay and Intellectual Disability

349

Table 56.4  Identification of Causes in Children with Significant Intellectual Disability
CAUSE

EXAMPLES

% OF TOTAL

Chromosomal disorder

Trisomies 21, 18, 13
Deletions 1p36, 4p, 5p, 11p, 12q, 17p, others
Microdeletions
Klinefelter, 47,XXX, and Turner syndromes

∼20

Genetic syndrome

Fragile X, Prader-­Willi, Angelman, and Rett
syndromes

∼20

Nonsyndromic autosomal mutations

Variations in copy number; de novo mutations
in SYNGAP1, GRIK2, TUSC3, oligosaccharyl
transferase, and others

∼10

Developmental brain abnormality

Hydrocephalus ± meningomyelocele;
schizencephaly, lissencephaly

∼8

Inborn errors of metabolism or
neurodegenerative disorder

Phenylketonuria, ceroid lipofuscinosis,
Tay-­Sachs disease, other storage diseases

∼7

Congenital infections

HIV, toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus,
syphilis, herpes simplex, Zika virus

∼3

Familial intellectual disability

Environment, syndromic, or genetic

∼5

Perinatal causes

Hypoxic-­ischemic encephalopathy, meningitis,
intraventricular hemorrhage, periventricular
leukomalacia, fetal alcohol syndrome

4

Postnatal causes

Trauma (abuse), meningitis, nutritional
deficiencies, hypothyroidism

∼4

Unknown

20

Adapted from Stromme P, Hayberg G. Aetiology in severe and mild mental retardation: A population-­based study of Norwegian children. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2000;42:76–86.

In children with more severe ID, a biologic cause (usually with prenatal onset) can be identified in about three fourths of all cases. Causes
include chromosomal (e.g., Down, Wolf-­Hirschhorn, and deletion 1p36
syndromes) and other genetic and epigenetic disorders (e.g., fragile X,
Rett, and Angelman syndromes), abnormalities of brain development
(e.g., lissencephaly), and inborn errors of metabolism and mitochondrial disorders (e.g., mucopolysaccharidoses, mitochondrial respiratory
chain complex disorders) (Table 56.4). Nonsyndromic severe ID may be
a result of inherited or de novo gene mutations, as well as microdeletions or microduplications. Currently, >1,300 single genes have been
associated with ID. Inherited genetic abnormalities may be mendelian
(autosomal dominant de novo, autosomal recessive, X-­linked) or nonmendelian (imprinting, methylation, mitochondrial defects; see Chapter
97). De novo mutations may also cause other phenotypic features such
as seizures or autism; the presence of these features suggests more pleotropic manifestations of genetic mutations. Consistent with the finding
that disorders altering early embryogenesis are the most common and
severe, the earlier the problem occurs in development, the more severe
its consequences tend to be.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

ID is one of the most common causes of disability in children globally. The prevalence of ID depends on the definition, method of
ascertainment, and population studied, both in terms of geography
and age. According to the statistics of a normal distribution, 2.5%
of the population should have ID (based on IQ alone), and 75%
of these individuals should fall into the mild to moderate range.
Variability in rates across populations likely results from the heavy
influence of external environmental factors and definitional differences on the prevalence of mild ID. The prevalence of severe ID is
relatively stable. Globally, the prevalence of ID has been estimated
to be approximately 16.4 per 1,000 persons in low-­income countries, approximately 15.9/1,000 for middle-­income countries, and
approximately 9.2/1,000 in high-­income countries. A meta-­analysis
of worldwide studies from 1980 to 2009 yielded an overall prevalence of 10.4/1,000. ID occurs more in boys than in girls, at 2:1 in

mild ID and 1.5:1 in severe ID. In part this may be a consequence of
the many X-­linked disorders associated with ID, the most common
being fragile X syndrome (see Chapter 59).
In the United States the prevalence of ID in school-­age children ranges
from 1.1% to 1.8%. There are several reasons why fewer children are identified as having mild ID than predicted from statistics. Professionals might
miss or defer the diagnosis and “give the benefit of the doubt” to the child
and await repeated confirmatory testing over time because it is more challenging to diagnose mild ID than the more severe forms. Other reasons
that contribute to the discrepancy between predicted and observed prevalence are use of instruments that under­identify young children with mild
ID, children diagnosed as having ASD without their ID being recognized
or addressed, misdiagnosis as a language disorder or specific learning disability, and a disinclination to make the diagnosis in minoritized students
because of concern about biased assessments that historically led to overdiagnosis. In some cases, behavioral disorders may divert the focus from
the cognitive dysfunction.
Beyond potential under diagnosis of mild ID, the number of children with mild ID may be decreasing because of public health and education measures to prevent prematurity and provide early intervention
and Head Start programs. However, although the number of school
children who receive services under a federal disability classification of
ID has decreased since 1999, when developmental delay is included in
analysis of the data, the numbers have not changed appreciably.
The prevalence of severe ID has not changed significantly since the 1940s,
accounting for 0.3–0.5% of the population. Many of the causes of severe
ID involve genetic or congenital brain malformations that can neither be
anticipated nor treated at present, though trends toward more expanded
prenatal screening (and subsequent termination) may alter this balance,
as seen with the decreasing incidence of Down syndrome. Additionally,
expanded newborn screening with early treatment has virtually eliminated
ID caused by phenylketonuria and congenital hypothyroidism. However,
continued high prevalence of fetal exposure to alcohol and illicit drugs,
improved survival of very low birthweight premature infants, and increasing overall maternal age during pregnancy (contributing to increased rates
of genetic abnormalities) have counterbalanced this effect.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

350 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The limitations in our knowledge of the neuropathology of ID are demonstrated by the finding that 10–20% of brains of persons with severe
ID appear normal on standard neuropathologic study. Many of the
brains that appear abnormal show only mild, nonspecific changes that
correlate poorly with the degree of ID, including microcephaly, gray
matter heterotopias in the subcortical white matter, unusually regular
columnar arrangement of the cortex, and neurons that are more tightly
packed than usual. Only a minority of the brains show more specific
changes in dendritic and synaptic organization, with dysgenesis of
dendritic spines or cortical pyramidal neurons or impaired growth of
dendritic trees. CNS maturation is defined by genetic, molecular, autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine influences. Receptors, signaling molecules, and genes are critical to brain development.
As the ability to identify genetic aberrations that correspond to
particular phenotypes expands through the use of next-­generation
sequencing, more will be elucidated about the pathogenesis of ID at a
genetic and molecular level. This expanding pathophysiologic knowledge base may serve as a framework with which to develop targeted
therapies to bypass or correct newly identified defects. For example,
use of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors has been shown to rescue
structural and functional neural deficits in mouse models of Kabuki
syndrome, a disorder of histone methylation that leads to variable levels
of ID and characteristic facial features. Similarly, there is growing interest in the role of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitor use

preventing seizures, neurodevelopmental disabilities, retinal tumors,
cutaneous tumors, and other manifestations seen in tuberous sclerosis
(see Chapter 636.2).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Early diagnosis of ID facilitates earlier intervention, identification of
abilities, realistic goal setting, monitoring for potential comorbid conditions, easing of parental anxiety, and greater inclusion of the child
in the community. Children with ID may first come to the pediatrician’s attention because of dysmorphisms (often in infancy), associated
developmental disabilities, or failure to meet age-­appropriate developmental milestones (Tables 56.5 and 56.6). Physical exam findings are
nonspecific, but constellations of dysmorphisms may be consistent
with certain genetic syndromes. With the advent of more sophisticated genetic testing, the limitations of dysmorphology have become
more apparent given the phenotypic variability seen with many genetic
causes of ID.
Most children with ID lag behind peers in their acquisition of developmental skills. In early infancy, failure to meet age-­appropriate expectations can include a lack of visual or auditory responsiveness, unusual
muscle tone (hypotonia or hypertonia), or posture and feeding difficulties. Between 6 and 18 months of age, gross motor delay (lack of sitting, crawling, walking) is the most common concern. Language delay
and behavior problems are common concerns after 18 months of age
(see Table 56.6). For some children with mild ID, the diagnosis remains

Table 56.5  Physical Examination of a Child with Suspected Developmental Disabilities
ITEM

POSSIBLE SIGNIFICANCE

General appearance

May indicate significant delay in development or obvious syndrome

STATURE
Short stature

Malnutrition, many genetic syndromes are associated with short stature (e.g., Turner, Noonan)

Obesity

Prader-­Willi syndrome

Large stature

Sotos syndrome, Sotos-­like syndromes

HEAD
Shape

Flat occiput: Down syndrome, Zellweger syndrome; prominent occiput: trisomy 18
Delayed closure of sutures: hypothyroidism, hydrocephalus
Craniosynostosis: Crouzon syndrome, Pfeiffer syndrome
Delayed fontanel closure: hypothyroidism, Down syndrome, hydrocephalus, skeletal dysplasia

Macrocephaly

Alexander syndrome, Canavan disease, Sotos syndrome, gangliosidosis, hydrocephalus,
mucopolysaccharidosis, subdural effusion

Microcephaly

Virtually any condition that can restrict brain growth (e.g., malnutrition, Angelman syndrome, Cornelia
de Lange syndrome, fetal alcohol effects)

FACE
Specific measurements may
provide clues to inherited,
metabolic, or other diseases

Midface hypoplasia: fetal alcohol syndrome, Down syndrome
Triangular facies: Russell-­Silver syndrome, Turner syndrome
Coarse facies: mucopolysaccharidoses, Sotos syndrome
Prominent nose and chin: fragile X syndrome
Flat facies: Apert syndrome, Stickler syndrome
Round facies: Prader-­Willi syndrome
Hypotelorism or hypertelorism; slanted or short palpebral fissure; unusual nose, maxilla, and mandible

Nose

Anteverted nares/synophrys: Cornelia de Lange syndrome
Broad nasal bridge: fetal drug effects, fragile X syndrome
Low nasal bridge: achondroplasia, Down syndrome
Prominent nose: Rubenstein Taybi, Coffin-­Lowry syndrome, Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz syndrome

Mouth

Long philtrum/thin vermilion border: fetal alcohol effects
Cleft lip and palate: isolated or part of a syndrome
Micrognathia: Pierre Robin sequence, trisomies, Stickler syndrome
Macroglossia: hypothyroidism, Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome

Teeth

Anodontia: ectodermal dysplasia
Notched incisors: congenital syphilis
Late dental eruption: Hunter syndrome, hypothyroidism
Talon cusps: Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
Wide-­spaced teeth: Cornelia de Lange syndrome, Angelman syndrome

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 56 u Developmental Delay and Intellectual Disability

351

Table 56.5  Physical Examination of a Child with Suspected Developmental Disabilities—cont’d
ITEM

POSSIBLE SIGNIFICANCE

EYES
Set

Hypertelorism: fetal hydantoin syndrome, Waardenburg syndrome
Hypotelorism: holoprosencephaly sequence, maternal phenylketonuria effect

Prominent

Crouzon, Seckel, Apert syndrome; Beckwith-­Wiedemann syndrome and fragile X syndromes

Iris/sclera

Brushfield spots: Down syndrome
Lisch nodules: neurofibromatosis
Blue sclera: osteogenesis imperfecta, Turner syndrome, hereditary connective tissue disorders

Cataract

Galactosemia, Lowe syndrome, prenatal rubella, hypothyroidism

Cherry-­red spot in macula

Gangliosidosis (GM1), metachromatic leukodystrophy, mucolipidosis, Tay-­Sachs disease, Niemann-­Pick
disease, Farber lipogranulomatosis, sialidosis type III

Chorioretinitis

Congenital infection with cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis, Zika virus, or rubella

Corneal cloudiness

Mucopolysaccharidosis types I and II, Lowe syndrome, congenital syphilis

EARS
Low-­set or malformed
pinnae

Trisomies such as Down syndrome, Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome, CHARGE syndrome,
cerebrooculofacioskeletal syndrome, Treacher Collins syndrome, fetal phenytoin effects

Hearing

Loss of acuity in mucopolysaccharidosis; hyperacusis in many encephalopathies

HEART
Structural anomaly or
hypertrophy
LIVER
Hepatomegaly

CHARGE syndrome, velocardiofacial syndrome, glycogenosis type II, fetal alcohol effects,
mucopolysaccharidosis type I; chromosomal anomalies such as Down syndrome; maternal PKU;
chronic cyanosis may impair cognitive development
Fructose intolerance, galactosemia, glycogenosis types I-­IV, mucopolysaccharidosis types I and II,
Niemann-­Pick disease, Tay-­Sachs disease, Zellweger syndrome, Gaucher disease, ceroid
lipofuscinosis, gangliosidosis

GENITALIA
Macroorchidism

Fragile X syndrome

Hypogenitalism

Prader-­Willi, Klinefelter, and CHARGE syndromes

EXTREMITIES
Hands, feet;
dermatoglyphics, creases

Joint contractures

SKIN
Café-­au-­lait spots

May indicate a specific entity such as Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome or may be associated with
chromosomal anomaly
Short limbs: achondroplasia, rhizomelic chondrodysplasia
Small hands: Prader-­Willi syndrome
Clinodactyly: trisomies, including Down syndrome
Polydactyly: trisomy 13, ciliopathies
Broad thumb: Rubinstein-­Taybi syndrome
Syndactyly: de Lange syndrome Smith Lemli Opitz
Transverse palmar crease: Down syndrome
Joint laxity: Down syndrome, fragile X syndrome, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Phocomelia: Cornelia de Lange syndrome
Signs of muscle imbalance around the joints (e.g., with meningomyelocele, cerebral palsy, arthrogryposis,
muscular dystrophy; also occurs with cartilaginous problems such as mucopolysaccharidosis)
Williams syndrome
Neurofibromatosis, Legius syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, chromosomal aneuploidy,
ataxia-­telangiectasia, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2b
Fanconi anemia, Gaucher disease
Syndromes: basal cell nevus; McCune-­Albright, Silver-­Russell, Bloom, Chediak-­Higashi, Hunter,
Bannayan-­Riley-­Ruvalcaba, Maffucci syndromes

Seborrheic or eczematoid rash

PKU, histiocytosis

Hemangiomas and
telangiectasia

Sturge-­Weber syndrome, Bloom syndrome, ataxia-­telangiectasia; Klippel Trenaunay Weber

Hypopigmented macules,
streaks, adenoma sebaceum

Tuberous sclerosis, hypomelanosis of Ito

Hair

Hirsutism: De Lange syndrome, mucopolysaccharidosis, fetal phenytoin effects, cerebrooculofacioskeletal
syndrome, trisomy 18, Hurler syndrome
Low hairline: Klippel-­Feil sequence, Turner syndrome
Sparse hair: Menkes disease, argininosuccinic acidemia, biotin deficiency
Abnormal hair whorls/posterior whorl: chromosomal aneuploidy (e.g., Down syndrome)
Hypertrichosis cubiti (elbows): Wiedemann-­Steiner, MacDermot-­Patton-­Williams syndromes
Abnormal eyebrow patterning: Cornelia de Lange syndrome
Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

352 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 56.5  Physical Examination of a Child with Suspected Developmental Disabilities—cont’d
ITEM

POSSIBLE SIGNIFICANCE

Nails

Hypoplastic or dysplastic: fetal alcohol, trisomies, Coffin Siris syndrome

NEUROLOGIC
Asymmetry of strength and tone

Focal lesion, hemiplegic cerebral palsy

Hypotonia

Prader-­Willi, Down, and Angelman syndromes; gangliosidosis; early cerebral palsy; muscle disorders
(dystrophy or myopathy)

Hypertonia

Neurodegenerative conditions involving white matter, cerebral palsy, trisomy 18

Ataxia

Ataxia-­telangiectasia, metachromatic leukodystrophy, Angelman syndrome

Spine

Sacral dimple/hairy patch: spina bifida

OTHER
Neck

Webbed neck/low posterior hairline: Turner syndrome, Noonan syndrome

Chest

Shield-­shaped chest: Turner syndrome
Inverted nipples; congenital disorders of glycosylation

CHARGE, Coloboma, heart defects, atresia choanae, retarded growth, genital anomalies, ear anomalies (deafness); CATCH-­22, cardiac defects, abnormal face, thymic hypoplasia,
cleft palate, hypocalcemia, defects on chromosome 22; PKU, phenylketonuria.
Modified from Simms M. Intellectual and developmental disability. In: Kliegman RM, Lye PS, Bordini BJ, et al, (eds). Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based Diagnosis. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2018: Table 24.11, p. 376.

Table 56.6  Common Presentations of Intellectual Disability
by Age
AGE

AREA OF CONCERN

Newborn

Dysmorphic syndromes, (multiple
congenital anomalies), microcephaly
Major organ system dysfunction (e.g.,
feeding, breathing)

Early infancy (2-­4 mo)

Failure to interact with the environment
Concerns about vision and hearing
impairments

Later infancy (6-­18 mo)

Gross motor delay

Toddlers (2-­3 yr)

Language delays or difficulties

Preschool (3-­5 yr)

Language difficulties or delays
Behavior difficulties, including play
Delays in fine motor skills: cutting,
coloring, drawing

School age (>5 yr)

Academic underachievement
Behavior difficulties (e.g., attention,
anxiety, mood, conduct)

uncertain during the early years and becomes clearer as the demands of
the school setting increase.
With increasing expectations for independence at home and socially,
limitations among those with mild ID become more salient. Older school-­
age children and adolescents with mild ID are typically up to date on
current trends and are conversant as to “who,” “what,” and “where.” It is
not until the “why” and “how” questions are asked that their limitations
become apparent. If allowed to interact at a superficial level, their mild ID
might not be appreciated, even by professionals such as healthcare providers. Because of the stigma associated with ID, adolescents may refer
to themselves as learning disabled, dyslexic, language disordered, or slow
learners. Some people with ID emulate their social milieu to be accepted.
Adolescents with mild ID are both at high risk of being bullied and of
being taken advantage of from a social perspective.

ETIOLOGIC EVALUATION

ID is one of the most frequent reasons for referral to pediatric genetic
providers, with separate but similar etiologic evaluation guidelines
(see Table 56.1). ID is a diagnosis of great clinical heterogeneity, with
only a subset of syndromic etiologies identifiable through classic dysmorphology. If diagnosis is not made after conducting an appropriate

history and physical examination, chromosomal microarray and testing for fragile X syndrome are often the recommended first steps in
the etiologic evaluation of ID. Other testing to consider in the etiologic
evaluation include exome or whole genome sequencing, neuroimaging, metabolic testing, and electroencephalography (Fig. 56.1).
Decisions to pursue an etiologic diagnosis should be based on the
medical and family history, physical examination, and the family’s
wishes. Table 56.7 summarizes clinical practice guidelines and the
yields of testing to assist in decisions about evaluating the child with
GDD or ID. Yield of testing tends to increase with worsening severity
of delays (see also Tables 56.1 and 56.2).
Microarray analysis has replaced a karyotype as first-­tier testing,
given that it discerns abnormalities that are far below the resolution
of a karyotype. Microarray analysis will detect copy number variations but may result in identification of variants of unknown significance or benign variants and therefore should be used in conjunction
with a genetic consultation. Karyotyping has a role when concerns
for trisomy, inversions, balanced insertions, and reciprocal translocations are present. If microarray analysis is not diagnostic, whole
exome sequencing (WES) increases the diagnostic yield in children
with nonsyndromic severe ID, especially when associated conditions
such as autism, epilepsy, or movement disorders are present. WES
will identify nucleotide sequence variants within the coding region of
genes which affect protein function, missing structural and noncoding variants, and trinucleotide repeat disorders. Starting with WES
may be more cost-­effective and may substantially reduce time to diagnosis with higher ultimate yields compared with the traditional diagnostic pathway. Whole genome sequencing, which identifies variants
within both exons and introns, represents the most comprehensive
sequencing option, providing roughly 3,000 times more data than a
microarray. Multimodal genome-wide analysis has identified monogenic etiologies in difficult to diagnose patients when previous testing
did not reveal a diagnosis.
Molecular genetic testing for fragile X syndrome is currently recommended, although a relatively low diagnostic yield has led some to
suggest that this should not be considered a first-­line test for all children with ID or GDD. Yields are highest in males with moderate ID,
unusual physical features, and/or a family history of ID or for females
with more subtle cognitive deficits associated with severe shyness and
a relevant family history, including premature ovarian failure or later-­
onset tremor-­ataxia symptoms (see Chapter 59). For children with a
strong history of X-­linked ID, specific testing of genes or the entire
chromosome may be revealing. Testing for Rett syndrome (methyl
CpG–binding protein 2 [MECP2]) should be considered in females
with moderate to severe disability, though WES may supplant this.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 56 u Developmental Delay and Intellectual Disability

353

Global Developmental Delay / Intellectual Disability
Family, personal history; physical exam, hearing and vision screening, and psychoeducational evaluation to determine accurate phenotype or signs of regression

Dysmorphology / Multiple Congenital Anomalies

Features

Unexplained GDD/ID

High-Risk Features Including Regression
Genetic
Imaging to define anomalies

Microarray
Standard chromosome
Prader Willi methylation test
History of teratogens
Glycosaminoglycans
Oligosaccharides

Features in the history Regression or significant change behavior
Possible or definite seizures
Movement disorder: continuous or paroxysmal
Muscle pain/fatigue
New onset sensory impairment; significant decline in
visual acuity or hearing
Examination findings Neurological signs: dystonia, ataxia, chorea, focal signs, cranial nerve
signs, muscle weakness/signs of a peripheral neuropathy,
arthrogryposis/joint contractures, cerebral palsy picture without a
clear cause
Ocular signs: nystagmus, eye movement disorder, abnormal fundi,
cataract, ptosis
Sensorineural deafness
Neurocutaneous lesions
Organomegaly / cardiomegaly

Microarray
Fragile X

Biochemical and metabolic
Blood tests
TFT
AA
Homocysteine
Acylcarnitine profile
Lactate + pyruvate
Ammonia
Uric acid
Urine tests
OA
GAG
Oligosaccharides
Creatine/GAA
Purine and pyrimidines
Other
Autism screening

WES / WGS
MRI/MRS especially with macrocephaly/microcephaly, regression
EEG if seizures suspected

Biochemical testing as indicated based on presence of white matter disease, basal ganglia involvement
Testing for congenital disorders of glycosylation
Plasma VLCFA, pipecolic acid, phytanic acid, RBC plasmalogens
Serum 7-dehydrocholesterol
Ceruloplasmin, CSF glucose, lactate, pyruvate, glycine, folate, neurotransmitters

Gene Testing
Targeted screening based on clinical
differential diagnosis
This could include:
• Fragile X
• Rett and Rett-like syndromes
• Angelman and similar disorders
Panel based testing:
• XLID panel if X-linked inheritance
Autism-associated genetic disorders
• PTEN related syndromes
• TSC and similar disorders

WES / WGS

Fig. 56.1 Algorithm for the evaluation of the child with unexplained global developmental delay (GDD) or intellectual disability (ID). AA, Amino
acids; ASD, autistic spectrum disorder; CK, creatine kinase; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; FBC, full blood count; GAA, guanidinoacetic acid; GAG, glycosaminoglycans; LFT, liver function test; OA, organic acids; TFT, thyroid function tests; TSC, tuberous sclerosis complex; U&E, urea and electrolytes;
VLCFA, very long-­chain fatty acids; WES, whole exome sequencing; WGS, whole genome sequencing; XLID, X-­linked intellectual disability genes.

A child with a progressive neurologic disorder, developmental
regression, or acute behavioral changes needs metabolic investigation, as shown in Figure 56.1. Some advocate for metabolic testing to
be done more frequently in children with ID because of the possibility
of detecting a condition that could be treatable (Fig. 56.2, Tables 56.3
and 56.8), though with expanded newborn screening many of these
conditions can be identified at birth. This is most relevant for children
born in countries without widespread newborn screening initiatives,
especially when there is a history of consanguinity. In the absence of
a specific indication, an electroencephalogram (EEG) is typically of
low diagnostic utility and should be reserved for evaluation of clinical
events that may represent seizures or when significant language regression occurs, which may be concerning for Landau-­Kleffner syndrome.
MRI of the brain may provide useful information in directing the care
of a child with microcephaly or macrocephaly, change in head growth
trajectory, asymmetric head shape, new or focal neurologic findings,
or seizures. MRI can detect a significant number of subtle markers
of cerebral dysgenesis in children with ID, but these markers do not
usually suggest a specific etiologic diagnosis, and the risk of anesthesia may outweigh the potential benefits in young children without any
additional concerning signs or symptoms.
Some children with subtle physical or neurologic findings can also
have determinable biologic causes of their ID (see Tables 56.5 and
56.6). How intensively one investigates the cause of a child’s ID is based
on the following factors:
u What is the degree of delay, and what is the age of the child? If milder
or less pervasive delays are present, especially in a younger child,
etiologic yield is likely to be lower.
u 
Is the medical history, family history, or physical exam suggestive

of a specific disorder, increasing the likelihood that a diagnosis will
be made? Are the parents planning on having additional children,
and does the patient have siblings? If so, one may be more likely to
intensively seek disorders for which prenatal diagnosis or a specific
early treatment option is available.
u Is there a potentially treatable disorder?
What are the parents’ wishes? Some parents have little interest in
u 
searching for the cause of the ID, whereas others become so focused
on obtaining a diagnosis that they have difficulty following through
on interventions until a cause has been found. The entire spectrum
of responses must be respected, and supportive guidance should be
provided.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

One of the important roles of pediatricians is the early recognition and diagnosis of cognitive deficits. Developmental surveillance should be multifaceted. Parents’ concerns and observations
about their child’s development should be listened to carefully.
Medical, genetic, and environmental risk factors should be recognized. Infants at high risk (prematurity, maternal substance abuse,
perinatal insult) should be registered in newborn follow-­up programs in which they are evaluated periodically for developmental lags in the first 2 years of life; they should be referred to early
intervention programs as appropriate. Developmental milestones
should be recorded routinely during healthcare maintenance visits.
The American Academy of Pediatricians (AAP) has formulated a
schema for developmental surveillance and screening at 9, 18, 24,
and 30 months of age, including general developmental and autism
screens (see Chapter 28).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

354 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 56.7  Suggested Evaluation of the Child with Intellectual Disability (ID) or Global Developmental Delay (GDD)
TEST

COMMENT

In-­depth history

Includes prenatal, perinatal, and postnatal events (including seizures); developmental attainments; and
three-­generation pedigree in family history (focusing on neurologic or developmental abnormalities,
miscarriages, consanguinity, etc.)

Physical examination

Particular attention to minor or subtle dysmorphisms; growth issues; neurocutaneous findings; eye and
skull abnormalities; hepatosplenomegaly; and neurologic examination for focality
Behavioral phenotype

Vision and hearing evaluation

Essential to detect and treat; can mask as developmental delay

Gene microarray analysis

A ∼15% yield overall
Better resolution than with karyotype; may identify up to twice as many abnormalities as karyotyping
Often included in exome testing

Karyotype

No longer a first-­line test
Reserve use when concerned for trisomic/monosomic conditions, inversions and balanced insertions, or
reciprocal translocations

Fragile X screen

Combined yield of 2%, preselection on clinical grounds can increase yield to 7.6%

Next-­generation gene sequencing

Detects inherited and de novo point mutations, especially in nonsyndromic severe intellectual disability
Whole exome sequencing gives an additional yield of about 30–40%
Pilot studies of whole genome sequencing (WGS) reveal additional yield of about 15%

Neuroimaging

MRI preferred; positive findings increased by abnormalities of skull contour or microcephaly and
macrocephaly or focal neurologic examination (30–40% if indicated, 10–14% if screening)
Identification of specific etiologies is rare; most conditions that are found do not alter the treatment plan;
need to weigh risk of sedation against possible yield

Thyroid (T4, TSH)

Near 0% in settings with universal newborn screening program

Serum lead

If there are identifiable risk factors for excessive environmental lead exposure (e.g., low socioeconomic
status, home built before 1950)

Metabolic testing

Yield of 0.2–4.6% based on clinical indicators and tests performed
Urine organic acids, plasma amino acids, ammonia, lactate, and capillary blood gas
Focused testing based on clinical findings is warranted if lack of newborn screen results or suggestive
history/exam (e.g., regression, consanguinity, hepatosplenomegaly, course facies)
Tandem mass spectrometry newborn screening has allowed for identification of many disorders in the perinatal
period and has decreased yield in older children; other disorders have emerged, such as congenital
disorders of glycosylation (yield 1.4%) and disorders of creatine synthesis and transport (yield 2.8%)

MECP2 for Rett syndrome

1.5% of females with criteria suggestive of Rett (e.g., acquired microcephaly, loss of skills)
0.5% of males

EEG

May be deferred in absence of history of seizures or significant language regression

Repeated history and physical
examination

Can give time for maturation of physical and behavioral phenotype; new technology may be available for
evaluation

EEG, Electroencephalogram; CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; MECP2, methyl CpG–binding protein 2; T4, thyroxine; TSH, thyroid-­stimulating hormone.
Data from Michelson DJ, Shevell MI, Sheer EH, et al. Evidence report. Genetic and metabolic testing on children with global developmental delay: Report of the Quality Standards
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the Practice Committee of Child Neurology. Neurology. 2011;77:1629–1635; Curry CJ, Stevenson RE, Aughton D, et al.
Evaluation of mental retardation: Recommendations of a Consensus Conference: American College of Medical Genetics. Am J Med Genet. 1997;12:72:468–477; Shapiro BK, Batshaw
ML. Mental retardation. In: Burg FD et al: Gellis and Kagan’s Current Pediatric Therapy, 18th ed, Philadelphia: Saunders; 2005; and Shevell M, Ashwal S, Donley D, et al. Practice
parameter: Evaluation of the child with global developmental delay. Neurology. 2003;60:367–380.

Before making the diagnosis of ID, other disorders that affect cognitive abilities and adaptive behavior should be considered. These include
conditions that mimic ID and others that involve ID as an associated
impairment. Sensory deficits (severe hearing and vision loss), communication disorders, refractory seizure disorders, poorly controlled
mood disorders, or unmanaged severe attention deficits can mimic
ID; certain progressive neurologic disorders can appear as ID before
regression is appreciated. Approximately half of children with cerebral palsy (see Chapter 638.1) and one third of children with autism
spectrum disorder (see Chapter 58) also have ID. Differentiation of
isolated CP from ID relies on motor skills being more affected than
cognitive skills and on the presence of pathologic reflexes and tone
changes. Importantly, cognitive testing may be limited because of
motor and communication impairments in CP such that an accurate

diagnostic assessment often hinges on evaluation by a professional with
experience with this population.
In ASD, social communication and social adaptive skills are more
affected than nonverbal reasoning skills, whereas in ID, there are usually more equivalent deficits in social, fine motor, adaptive, and cognitive skills. The discrepancy between social communication abilities and
overall developmental abilities and the presence, severity, and intensity
of restricted and repetitive behaviors differentiates whether an individual has ID alone or a comorbid diagnosis of ASD. Among toddlers with
ASD, those with lower verbal and nonverbal cognitive test scores in
conjunction with poor adaptive skills have an 85–90% chance of being
classified as having ID in adulthood. However, across all levels of cognition in ASD, there is a significant trend toward much lower adaptive
functioning than would be expected otherwise.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 56 u Developmental Delay and Intellectual Disability
Urine Tests

Urine Organic Acids (n=22)

β-Ketothiolase Deficiency
Cobalamin A Deficiency
Cobalamin B Deficiency
Cobalamin C Deficiency (&tHcy)
Cobalamin D Deficiency (&tHcy)
Cobalamin F Deficiency (&tHcy)
Ethylmalonic Encephalopathy (&ACP)
Glutaric Acidemia type I

Urine Glycosaminoglycans (n=7)

Hunter syndrome (MPS II)
Hurler syndrome (MPS I)

Urine Creatine Metabolites (n=3)

AGAT deficiency
GAMT deficiency

Urine Oligosaccharides (n=2)

α-Mannosidosis
Aspartylglucosaminuria

Urine Purines & Pyrimidines (n=2)

Pyrimidine 5’nucleotidase
superactivity
Molybdenum Cofactor Type A
deficiency

Blood Tests

Glutaric Acidemia type II
HMG-CoA Lyase Deficiency
Holocarboxylase Synthetase Deficiency
Homocystinuria
I.o. Isovaleric Acidemia (&ACP)
3-Methylcrotonyl Glycinuria (&ACP)
3-Methylglutaconic Aciduria
I.o. Methylmalonic Acidemia (&ACP)

355

MHBD Deficiency
mHMG-CoA Synthase Deficiency
I.o. Propionic Acidemia (&ACP)
SCOT Deficiency
SSADH Deficiency
Tyrosinemia type II (&PAA)

Sanfilippo syndrome (type a, b, c, d)
Sly syndrome (MPS VI)

Creatine
Transporter Defect

Plasma Amino-Acids (n=13)

I.o. Argininosuccinic Aciduria
I.o. Citrullinemia
I.o. Citrullinemia Type II
I.o. CPS Deficiency
I.o. Argininemia

Plasma Total Homocysteine (n=9)

Homocystinuria (&UOA)
I.o. MTHFR Deficiency (&PAA)
Cobalamin C Deficiency (&UOA)
Cobalamin D Deficiency (&UOA)

HHH syndrome
Maple Syrup Urine Disease
(Variant)
I.o. MTHFR Deficiency (&tHcy)
I.o. NAGS Deficiency

I.o. OTC Deficiency
Phenylketonuria
PDH Complex Deficiency
Tyrosinemia type II (&UOA)

Cobalamin E Deficiency
Cobalamin F Deficiency (&UOA)
Cobalamin G Deficiency

Fig. 56.2 Summary of treatable inherent errors of metabolism (IEM) that can be detected by metabolic tests in affected children, each of which is
affordable and accessible and has the potential to identify at least 2 IEM (and up to 22). Each bar represents the yield of the specific screening test
and lists the number and types of treatable IEM it can identify. PAA, Plasma amino acids; tHcy, total homocysteine; ACP, plasma acylcarnitine profile;
UOA, urine organic acids. (From van Karnebeek CD, Stockler S. Treatable inborn errors of metabolism causing intellectual disability: A systematic
literature review. Mol Genet Metab. 2012;105:368–381, Fig. 1, p. 374.)

Table 56.8  Treatable Intellectual Disability Endeavor (TIDE) Diagnostic Protocol
TIER 1: NONTARGETED METABOLIC SCREENING TO IDENTIFY 54 (60%) TREATABLE IEM
Blood

Plasma amino acids, total homocysteine, acylcarnitine profile, copper, ceruloplasmin

Urine

Organic acids, purine and pyrimidines, creatine metabolites, oligosaccharides,
glycosaminoglycans, amino acids (when indicated)

TIER 2: CURRENT PRACTICE ADHERING TO INTERNATIONAL GUIDELINES* (ONE OR MORE OF THE FOLLOWING)
Blood
Cytogenetic testing (array CGH), thyroid studies, complete blood count, lead, metabolic
testing, fragile X, targeted gene sequencing/molecular panel
Diagnostics

Brain MRI and 1H spectroscopy (where available)

Referrals

Audiology, ophthalmology

TIER 3: TARGETED WORKUP TO IDENTIFY 35 (40%) TREATABLE IEM REQUIRING SPECIFIC TESTING
According to patient’s symptomatology and clinician’s expertise
Use of digital tools (www.treatable-­id.org)
Blood

Plasma cholestanol, 7-­dehydroxycholesterol:cholesterol ratio, pipecolic acid and urine α-­amino
adipic semialdehyde (AASA), very-­long-­chain fatty acids
Plasma vitamin B12 and folate, serum lactate to pyruvate ratio, whole blood manganese

CSF

Lactate to pyruvate ratio, amino acids, neurotransmitters, CSF to plasma glucose ratio

Urine

Urine deoxypyridinoline

Other

Enzyme activities (leukocytes): arylsulfatase A, biotinidase, glucocerebrosidase, fatty aldehyde
dehydrogenase
CoQ measurement: fibroblasts
Molecular analysis: CA5A, NPC1, NPC2, SC4MOL, SLC18A2, SLC19A3, SLC30A10, SLC52A2,
SLC52A3, PDHA1, DLAT, PDHX, SPR, TH genes

*Low threshold for ordering tests.
IEM, Inborn errors of metabolism; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CGH, comparative genomic hybridization; CoQ, coenzyme Q (ubiquinone).
Adapted from Van Karnebeek CD, Stockler-­Ipsiroglu S. Early identification of treatable inborn errors of metabolism in children with intellectual disability: The Treatable Intellectual
Disability Endeavor protocol in British Columbia. Paediatr Child Health. 2014;19(9):469–471.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

356 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
DIAGNOSTIC PSYCHOLOGIC TESTING

The formal diagnosis of ID requires the administration of individual
tests of intelligence and adaptive functioning.
The Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development, Fourth Edition
(BSID-­4), the most used infant intelligence test, provides an assessment
of cognitive, language, motor, behavior, social-­emotional, and general
adaptive abilities between 16 days and 42 months of age. The BSID-­4
correlates more strongly with other standardized tests of cognition and
motor development than did prior versions of the test and permits
the differentiation of infants with severe ID from typically developing
infants, but it is less helpful in distinguishing between a typical child
and one with mild ID.
The most used intelligence tests for children older than 3 years
are the Wechsler Scales, although others are also used. The Wechsler
Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence, Fourth Edition (WPPSI­IV) is used for children with mental ages of 2.5-­7.6 years. The
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, Fifth Edition (WISC-­V) is
used for children who function above a 6-­year-­old mental age. Both
scales contain numerous subtests in the areas of verbal and performance skills. Although children with ID usually score low on all
subscales, they occasionally score in the average range in one or
more performance areas. Among children who have marked language or verbal limitations, tests like the Differential Ability Scales­II (DAS-­II) or the Leiter International Performance Scale, Third
Edition (Leiter-­3) may be used to optimally capture nonverbal performance skills.
Several normative scales are used in practice to evaluate adaptive
functioning, often through questionnaire or interview formats, with
information being attained from caregivers and educators in multiple different environments when possible (home, school, work).
For example, the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale (VABS-­3) uses
semi-­structured interviews with parents and caregivers/teachers
to assess adaptive behavior in four domains: communication, daily
living skills, socialization, and motor skills. Other tests of adaptive
behavior include the Adaptive Behavior Assessment System (ABAS-­
3), the Woodcock-­Johnson Scales of Independent Behavior–Revised,
and the AAIDD Diagnostic Adaptive Behavior Scale (DABS). There
is usually (but not always) a good correlation between scores on the
intelligence and adaptive scales in ID. However, it is important to
recognize that adaptive behavior can by influenced by environmentally based opportunities and by family or cultural expectations.
Basic practical adaptive skills (feeding, dressing, hygiene) are more
responsive to remedial efforts than is the IQ score itself. The trajectory of adaptive skill acquisition may not be consistent over time
because of the underlying condition, response to interventions, and
environmental expectations.

COMPLICATIONS AND ASSOCIATED CONDITIONS

Children with ID have higher rates of vision, hearing, neurologic,
orthopedic, and behavioral or emotional disorders than typically
developing children (Table 56.9). These problems are often detected
later in children with ID. If untreated, the associated impairments
may adversely affect the individual’s outcome more than the ID
itself.
The more severe the ID, the greater the number and severity
of associated impairments. Knowing the cause of the ID can help
predict which associated impairments are most likely to occur. For
example, fragile X syndrome (see Chapter 59) and fetal alcohol syndrome (see Chapter 146) are associated with a high rate of behavioral disorders and may be amenable to certain treatments. Children
with fetal alcohol syndrome may have a less robust response to
stimulant use, whereas preliminary data suggest that children with
fragile X syndrome may see behavioral improvements with the use
of metformin. Other genetic conditions may have well-­established
medical comorbidities that should be screened for throughout the
life span. For example, Down syndrome (see Chapter 57) has many

Table 56.9  Conditions Associated with ID
MEDICAL/PHYSICAL
CONDITIONS
Cerebral palsy/severe motor
impairment
Seizures
Endocrine abnormalities (e.g.,
hypothyroidism, short stature)
GI issues (constipation, reflux)
Dysphagia
Other organ system anomalies
(e.g., congenital heart disease,
malformations)
Hearing loss
Vision impairment (refractive
error, cataracts, strabismus)
Dental caries
Lead poisoning from associated
pica
Sleep disorders (OSA, behavioral
sleep dysfunction)
Obesity

DEVELOPMENTAL/
PSYCHIATRIC CONDITIONS
Attention-­deficit/hyperactivity
disorder
Emotional disorders (anxiety,
mood disorders, posttraumatic
stress disorder)
Obsessive-­compulsive disorder
Behavioral disorders (self-­
injurious behavior, aggression,
adjustment disorder, disruptive
behavior)
Autism spectrum disorder
Eating and feeding disorders
Psychotic disorders
Movement disorders (tics,
stereotypies,)
Developmental coordination
disorder
Learning disabilities (difficulties not
explained by cognition alone)
Substance abuse
Victimization (bullying, sexual
abuse, physical abuse)

GI, Gastrointestinal; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea.

medical complications (hypothyroidism, hearing and vision impairments, obstructive sleep apnea, congenital heart disease, atlantoaxial subluxation). Such associated impairments can require ongoing
physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech-­language therapy,
behavioral therapy, adaptive and mobility equipment, glasses, hearing aids, and medication or other medical management. Failure to
identify and treat these impairments can hinder successful habilitation and result in difficulties in the school, home, and neighborhood environment.
Special attention should be given to screening for accidental injury,
neglect, and abuse. Children with ID have a greater risk of preventable death from accidental injury. They are more likely to be victims of
frequent, continual abuse at the hands of multiple abusers and are more
frequently abused by unrelated or unfamiliar perpetrators compared to
typically developing peers. Up to 15–30% of children with ID are victims
of sexual abuse, with female teens with ID being at highest risk. Abuse may
precipitate the onset of maladaptive behaviors and changes in mood. As
such, a high index of suspicion must be maintained, with the knowledge
that even individuals with severe ID may be able to reliably disclose victimization and abuse.

PREVENTION

Examples of primary programs to prevent ID include the following:
u Increasing the public’s awareness of the adverse effects of alcohol and other drugs of abuse on the fetus (the most common
preventable cause of ID in the Western world is fetal alcohol exposure).
u Encouraging safe sexual practices, preventing teen pregnancy, and
promoting early prenatal care with a focus on preventive programs
to limit transmission of diseases that may cause congenital infection
(syphilis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, HIV).
u Preventing traumatic injury by encouraging the use of safety technologies (car seats, window locks, helmets, gun locks).
u Preventing poisonings by teaching parents about securing medications and potential poisons.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 56 u Developmental Delay and Intellectual Disability
Implementing immunization programs to reduce the risk of ID
caused by encephalitis, meningitis, and congenital infection.
Presymptomatic detection of certain disorders can result in
treatment that prevents adverse consequences. State newborn
screening by tandem mass spectrometry (now detecting >60 rare
genetic disorders in most states), newborn hearing screening, and
preschool lead poisoning prevention programs are examples. Additionally, screening for comorbid conditions can help to limit the
extent of disability and maximize the level of functioning in certain populations. Annual thyroid, vision, and hearing screening in a
child with Down syndrome is an example of presymptomatic testing
in a disorder associated with ID.
u

TREATMENT

Although the core symptoms of ID can be prevented in some conditions, they are generally not treatable once ID is diagnosed. Many
associated impairments are amenable to intervention and therefore
benefit from early identification. Most children with an ID do not
have a behavioral or emotional disorder as an associated impairment, but challenging behaviors (aggression, self-­injury, oppositional defiant behavior) and internalizing disorders (mood and
anxiety disorders) occur with greater frequency in this population
than among children with typical intelligence. These behavioral and
emotional disorders are the primary cause for out-­of-­home placements, increased family stress, reduced employment prospects, and
decreased opportunities for social inclusion. Some behavioral and
emotional disorders are difficult to diagnose in children with more
severe ID because of the child’s limited abilities to understand, communicate, interpret, or generalize. Other disorders are masked by
the ID. The detection of ADHD (see Chapter 50) in the presence
of moderate to severe ID may be difficult, as may be discerning a
thought disorder (psychosis) in someone with autism and ID.
Behavioral disorders in ID often result from a mismatch between
the child’s abilities and the demands of the situation, organic
problems, and family difficulties. These behaviors may represent
attempts by the child to communicate, gain attention, gain access
to desired tangibles, escape certain demands, exert control, or avoid
frustration. Determining the antecedents, functions, and consequences of behavior can help in developing an effective behavior
intervention plan. The most formal iteration of this is a functional
behavioral assessment carried out by a well-­trained behavior analyst. In assessing the challenging behavior, one must also consider
whether it is inappropriate for the child’s mental or developmental
age, rather than the chronological age. However, if the behavior is
dangerous to the individual or the external world, intervention is
required regardless of whether it is “appropriate” for their developmental age. When intervention is needed, an environmental change,
such as a more appropriate classroom setting, may improve certain
behavior problems. Behavior management techniques and parent
training are valuable; psychopharmacologic agents may be appropriate in certain situations, such as aggression or self-­injurious
behaviors with high levels of intensity and frequency.
No medication has been found that improves the core symptoms
of ID. However, several agents are being tested in specific disorders with known biologic mechanisms (e.g., mTOR inhibitors in
tuberous sclerosis and PTEN disorder), with the hope for future
pharmacologic options that could alter the natural course of cognitive impairment seen in patients with these disorders. Medication
is most useful in the treatment of associated behavioral and psychiatric disorders that do not respond to initial behavioral approaches
and environmental manipulation. Additionally, underlying medical
disorders and abuse/neglect should be considered as part of the differential before medication initiation in patients with self-­injury,
aggression, irritability, or significant disruptive behaviors.
Medications used among individuals with ID generally target specific associated symptom complexes, including inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity (stimulant medications and alpha-­agonists);
self-­
injurious behavior and aggression (antipsychotics); anxiety,
obsessive-­compulsive disorder, and depression (selective serotonin

357

reuptake inhibitors); and sleep-­
related dysfunction (melatonin,
alpha-­agonists, gabapentin, trazodone). Even if a medication proves
successful, its use should be reevaluated at least yearly to assess the
need for continued treatment of the target behaviors and improvements in functional goals. Generally, medications should be started
at a low dose and increased slowly, with frequent assessments of
whether benefits outweigh any adverse effects. Adverse effects and
idiosyncratic responses to medications may be more common in this
population.

PRIMARY CARE, SUPPORTIVE CARE, AND
MANAGEMENT

Each child with ID needs a medical home with a primary care clinician who is readily accessible to the family to answer questions,
help coordinate care, and discuss concerns. Healthcare clinicians
can have effects on patients and their families that are still felt
decades later. The role of primary care includes involvement in
prevention efforts, early diagnosis, identification and management
of associated deficits, longitudinal developmental surveillance
and screening, referral for appropriate diagnostic and therapeutic services, interdisciplinary management, provision of anticipatory guidance (see Chapter 13), and advocacy for the child and
family. The management strategies for children with an ID should
be multimodal, with efforts directed at all aspects of the child’s
life: health, education, social and recreational activities, behavior
problems, and associated impairments. Support for parents and
siblings should also be provided (Table 56.10). A strengths-­based
approach focusing on optimizing participation in all aspects of life
tends to be more beneficial than an exclusive focus on cognitive
or academic skill attainment. Goals of overall care should include
maximizing the individual’s independent functioning, identifying effective communication strategies, preserving and enhancing
physical fitness and well-­b eing, supporting positive relationship
building, and ensuring opportunities for the individual to participate fully in the community and find purpose and enjoyment in
life activities. Goals should be individualized, flexible, appropriate,
and attainable.
The AAP has published a series of guidelines and/or toolkits for
health supervision of children with specific disorders associated with
ID (Down syndrome, fragile X syndrome, Williams syndrome, fetal
alcohol spectrum disorder). Another source for disorder-­specific
information can be found at https://www.medicalhomeportal.org/d
iagnoses-­and-­conditions.
Goals should be considered and programs adjusted as needed
during the primary care visit. Decisions should also be made about
what additional information is required for future planning or to
explain why the child is not meeting expectations. Other evaluations, such as formal neuropsychologic or educational testing, can
be helpful for diagnostic clarification, attaining more appropriate
school-­based supports, understanding strengths and challenges, or
assisting with the process of transition at various time points.

Interdisciplinary Management

The primary care clinician has the responsibility for consulting with
other disciplines to make the diagnosis of ID and coordinate treatment services. Consultant services may include speech-­language
pathology, physical therapy, occupational therapy, psychology, audiology, nutrition, nursing, and social work, as well as medical specialties such as neurodevelopmental disabilities, neurology, genetics,
physical medicine and rehabilitation, psychiatry, developmental-­
behavioral pediatrics, and surgical specialties. Contact with early
intervention and school personnel is equally important to help prepare and assess the adequacy of the child’s individual family service
plan or individual education plan. The family should be an integral
part of the planning and direction of this process. Care should be
family centered and culturally sensitive; for older children, their
participation in planning and decision-­making should be promoted
to whatever extent possible. Goal setting should be appropriate,
individualized, and achievable

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

358 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 56.10  Resource List for Families by Category
Advocacy

Assistive Technology

Behavior and Mental
Health

Early Intervention

Special Education
and Inclusion

Postsecondary
Education

Consortium for Citizens with Disabilities

http://www.c-­c-­d.org/

The Arc

https://thearc.org/

American Association on Intellectual and Developmental
Disabilities

https://www.aaidd.org/

Council for Exceptional Children

https://exceptionalchildren.org/

The National Disability Rights Network

https://www.ndrn.org/

Ollibean

https://ollibean.com/

TASH

https://tash.org/

National Association for Councils on Developmental Disabilities

https://www.nacdd.org/

Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society of
North America

www.resna.org

AT Network

www.atnet.org

Association of Assistive Technology Act Programs (ATAP)

www.ataporg.org

Guide to Software Accessibility for the Disabled

ithare.com/guide-­to-­software-­accessibility-­for-­the-­
disabled/

National Association for the Dually Diagnosed (NADD)

www.thenadd.org

Behavior Analyst Certification Board

www.bacb.com

Challenging behaviors in I/DD informational article

https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/instructi
on-­in-­functional-­assessment/chapter/chapter-­
1-­challenging-­behaviors-­of-­individuals-­with-­
developmental-­disabilities/

Challenging Behaviors Toolkit

https://www.autismspeaks.org/sites/default/files/2018-­
08/Challenging%20Behaviors%20Tool%20Kit.pdf

Zero to Three

www.zerotothree.org/

Pathways.org

https://pathways.org/

First Signs Campaign

http://www.firstsigns.org/

Early intervention overview

https://www.parentcenterhub.org/ei-­overview/

CDC Early intervention information

https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/parents/states
.html

CDC developmental milestones

https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/milestones/ind
ex.html

Parent Training and Information Centers (PTIs)

https://www.parentcenterhub.org/find-­your-­center/

Iris Center (Inclusion)

https://iris.peabody.vanderbilt.edu/

Understood.org

https://www.understood.org/pages/en/learning-­
thinking-­differences/

WrightsLaw.com

http://www.wrightslaw.com/advoc/ltrs/inclusion_right_
suzanne.htm

Institute for Community Inclusion

http://www.communityinclusion.org

Kids Included Together

https://www.kit.org/what-­we-­do/inclusion-­resources/

Kidstogether.org

http://www.kidstogether.org/

PACER Center

www.PACER.org/transition

National Center for College Students with Disabilities

https://www.nccsdonline.org/

DREAM: Disability Rights, Education, Activism, and Mentoring

https://www.dreamcollegedisability.org/

Guide to Paying for College for People with Disabilities

https://lendedu.com/blog/paying-­for-­college-­for-­
people-­with-­disabilities/

Affordable Colleges Online College Resources for Students with
Disabilities

https://www.affordablecollegesonline.org/colle
ge-­resource-­center/resources-­for-­students-­with-­
disabilities/

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 56 u Developmental Delay and Intellectual Disability

359

Table 56.10  Resource List for Families by Category—cont’d
Transition, Vocational
Training,
Employment,
and Community
Participation

Recreation

Parent and Family
Resources

Government
Initiatives and
Services

Disorder-­Specific
Groups

The Arc

https://thearc.org/

Best Buddies International

https://www.bestbuddies.org/

Easter Seals

https://www.easterseals.com/EasterSeals.com

Got Transition

https://www.gottransition.org/

Project SEARCH

https://www.projectsearch.us/Project SEARCH

Recruit Disability job listings

https://www.recruitdisability.org/

Rehabilitation Services Administration

https://rsa.ed.gov/

Work Incentives Planning and Assistance Project Fact Sheet

https://www.ssa.gov/disabilityresearch/wi/generalinfo
.htm

Respectability

https://www.respectability.org/resources/Job-­Seekers-­
Disabilities/

Employer assistance and Resource Network on Disability
Inclusion

https://askearn.org/

What Can You Do? Resources for Employers

https://www.whatcanyoudocampaign.org/where-­to-­
learn-­more/resources-­for-­employers/

Special Olympics

https://www.specialolympics.org/

Summer camp locator

https://www.veryspecialcamps.com/

Family Voices

https://familyvoices.org/lfpp/f2fs/

Parents Helping Parents

https://www.php.com/

Eparent.com

http://www.eparent.com

Community Parent Resource Centers (CPRCs)

https://www.parentcenterhub.org/find-­your-­center/

Summer camp options for siblings of children with I/DD

https://www.veryspecialcamps.com/summer/siblings-­
camps/

Policy information on SSI for children with disabilities

https://www.cbpp.org/research/social-­security/ssi-­a-­
lifeline-­for-­children-­with-­disabilities

Supplemental security income and social security disability
insurance – beneficiaries with I/DD

https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/ssb/v77n1/v77n1p1
7.html

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services

http://www.cms.gov

Home-­and community-­based waiver programs

https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/home-­
community-­based-­services/index.html

Achieving a Better Life Experience (ABLE) Accounts – ABLE
national resource center

https://www.ssa.gov/ssi/spotlights/spot-­able.
htmlhttps://www.ssa.gov/ssi/spotlights/spot-­able.html
https://www.ablenrc.org/

Association of University Centers on Disabilities

http://www.aucd.org/directory/directory.cfm

Administration for Community Living

https://acl.gov/www.acl.gov/programs/aidd/index.as
px.

Division on Developmental Disabilities (DDD)

http://daddcec.org/Home.aspxwww.acl.gov/programs
/aidd/index.aspx.

National Association of States Directors of Developmental
Disabilities Services (NASDDDS)

http://www.nasddds.orgwww.nasddds.org
http://daddcec.org/Home.aspx

Division on Developmental Disabilities (DDD)

Individual state websites

Epilepsy

http://www.epilepsyfoundation.org

Autism

www.autismspeaks.org
www.autism-­society.org

Cerebral Palsy

https://www.yourcpf.org/

There are other disorder-­specific groups that are too numerous to list here, which include large national networks for
more common syndromes such as Down syndrome (e.g., http://www.ndss.org, https://www.ndsccenter.org/) or fragile X
syndrome (http://www.fragilex.org) and smaller support groups for more rare disorders (many of which can be located
through the unique website at https://rarechromo.org/).
Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

360 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 56.11  Severity of Intellectual Disability and Adult-­Age Functioning
FUNCTIONAL AGE
EQUIVALENT AS ADULT

LEVEL

SUPPORT LEVEL

Mild

Intermittent

9-­11 yr

Reads at fourth-­to fifth-­grade level; simple multiplication and division; can
write a simple list or letter; completes job application; basic independent
job skills (arrive on time, stay at task, interact with coworkers); uses public
transportation, might qualify for driver’s license; keeps house, cooks
using recipes; challenges with planning and money management; at risk
of being manipulated by others; may need support for making decisions
in healthcare, shopping, finances, and raising a family.

ADULT ADAPTATION

Moderate

Limited

6-­8 yr

Sight-­word reading; copies information (e.g., address from card to job
application); matches written number to number of items; recognizes time
on clock; communicates; some independence in self-­care;
housekeeping with supervision or cue cards; meal preparation, can
follow picture recipe cards; job skills learned with much repetition;
employment in a supported environment; use of public transportation
with some supervision; successful friendships attained, but social
judgment and life decisions require support.

Severe

Extensive

3-­5 yr

Little understanding of written language or number, time, and money
concepts; needs extensive supports for problem solving; trainable in
some basic activities of daily living, but needs some level of continuous
support and supervision for most activities; might communicate wants
and needs with use of basic words, phrases, gestures, or with the use of
augmentative and alternative communication techniques; trainable in
some basic activities of daily living.

Profound

Pervasive

<3 yr

Dependent for self-­care, continence, communication needs with supports
required for all activities of everyday living; co-­occurring physical and
sensory limitations are common; may use objects in a goal-­directed fashion
for recreation or self-­care; limited understanding of symbolic communication,
but may understand some gestures and emotional cues; uses nonverbal
expressions; might need complete custodial or nursing care.

Data from World Health Organization. International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th revision. Geneva: WHO; 2011 and American Psychiatric
Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.

Periodic Reevaluation

The child’s abilities and the family’s needs change over time. As the
child grows, more information must be provided to the child and
family, goals must be reassessed, and programming needs should be
adjusted. A periodic review should include information about the
child’s health status and the child’s functioning at home, at school, and
in other community settings. Other information, such as psychologic
or educational testing, may be helpful. Reevaluation should be undertaken at routine intervals (every 6-­12 months during early childhood),
at any time the child is not meeting expectations, or when the child is
moving from one service delivery system to another. This is especially
true during the transition to adulthood, beginning at age 16, as mandated by the IDEA Amendments of 2004, and lasting through age 21,
when care should be transitioned to adult-­based systems and providers
(see Chapter 152).

Federal and Education Services

Education is the single most important discipline involved in the
treatment of children with an ID. In the United States, the IDEA,
Part B, mandates a free and appropriate public education (FAPE) in
the least restrictive environment (LRE) for all school-­age children
(3-­21 years of age). Additionally, Part C mandates early intervention services from birth through 36 months of age to be delivered in
a natural environment (usually home) for all qualifying infants and
toddlers. The developmental and educational program for children
with GDD or ID must be relevant to the child’s unique needs and
address the child’s individual strengths and challenges. The child’s

developmental level, requirements for support, and goals for independence provide a basis for early intervention services to establish
an individualized family service plan (IFSP), which focuses on
the family’s needs to help them optimize the development of their
child. For children over 36 months of age, the school system develops an individualized education program (IEP), which focuses
on the child’s educational needs. Inclusive education seeks to support the right of every child, regardless of ability, to participate in a
broad range of activities and contexts as full members of families,
communities, and societies with an effort to maximize access, participation, and supports. Research on inclusion reveals benefits for
individuals with disabilities and for typically developing children.
As such, to the maximum extent appropriate, children with disabilities should be educated with children who do not have disabilities. In general, removal from the regular educational environment
should occur only when the nature or severity of the child’s disability is such that education in regular classes with the use of supplementary aids and services cannot be achieved satisfactorily, not
simply because significant curriculum modifications are needed.
Children who are educated in more inclusive settings, regardless
of overall developmental level, tend to have higher rates of community participation as adults. Behavioral challenges are the most
limiting factor in terms of full inclusion, both in school and within
the community, emphasizing the importance of implementing early
and consistent behavior management strategies.
Beyond education services, families of children with ID often
are eligible for federal or state-­provided social services. All states
offer developmental disabilities programs that provide home and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 56 u Developmental Delay and Intellectual Disability
community-­based services to eligible children and adults, potentially including in-­home supports, care coordination services, residential living arrangements, vocational and employment support
programs, and additional therapeutic options. A variety of Medicaid waiver programs are also offered for children with disabilities
within each state. Children with ID who live in low-­income-­status
households can qualify to receive supplemental security income
(SSI), but many of these families do not receive the benefits to
which they are eligible.

Leisure and Recreational Activities

The child’s social and recreational needs should be addressed.
Although young children with ID are generally included in play
activities with children who have typical development, adolescents
with ID often do not have opportunities for enriching social interactions. Community participation among adults with ID is much
lower than that of the typical population even though these individuals tend to have the same preferences and wishes for leisure
activities as their nondisabled peers. Individuals with ID experience
high rates of marginalization, especially from involvement in formal recreational programs, often because of insufficient resources
to accommodate participation, difficulties with expenses and transportation, and so forth. To reduce isolation, ideas for inclusion in
leisure activities should be explored with families, including church
group involvement, Boy and Girl Scout chapters, 4H clubs, local
park district programs, and musical opportunities like choir and
instrumental lessons. Participation in sports should be encouraged
(even if the child is not competitive) because it offers many benefits, including weight management, development of physical coordination, maintenance of cardiovascular fitness, and improvement
of self-­image. Inclusion in class trips, dances, dating, and other
social events should be encouraged. International programs such
as Special Olympics and Best Buddies International seek to enhance
inclusion and visibility of individuals with disabilities and can be a
valuable resource.

Family Counseling

Many families adapt well to having a child with ID, but some have
emotional or social difficulties. The risks of parental depression and
child abuse and neglect are higher in this group of children than in the
general population. The factors associated with good family coping
and parenting skills include stability of the marriage, good parental
self-­esteem, limited number of siblings, higher socioeconomic status, lower degree of disability or associated impairments (especially
behavioral), parents’ appropriate expectations and acceptance of the
diagnosis, supportive extended family members, and availability of
community programs and respite care services. In families in whom
the emotional burden of having a child with ID is great, family counseling, parent support groups, sibling support groups and camps,
respite care, and home health services should be an integral part of
the treatment plan.

Transition to Adulthood

The transition to adulthood can present a stressful and chaotic time for
the adolescent with ID and their family (see Chapter 152). A successful
transition correlates with better quality of life but requires significant
advanced planning. The transition process for those with ID extends
beyond medical care and needs to include education and employment,
health and well-­being, finances and independence, and social and
community life. Specific issues include:
u Decision-­making (supported decision-­making, guardianship, power
of attorney)
u Accessing and securing social benefits for which the person is eligible (e.g., SSI, Medicaid)
The choice of living arrangements and necessary supports (indeu 

361

pendent living, shared living arrangements, or living with parents;
community-­integrated living arrangements; group homes)
u Estate planning for the parents (ABLE accounts, special needs trust)
u 
Postsecondary training (vocational choices, postsecondary education – pacer.org)
u Community participation and involvement in leisure activities (e.g.,
community service and volunteering activities, religious groups,
Special Olympics, Best Buddies, local clubs)
Successful transition is difficult to achieve because of policies, systems, and services that are not comprehensive or coordinated. In
moving from child to adult care, families tend to find that services are
less readily available, more fragmented, and more difficult to navigate
across multiple agencies and jurisdictions.
Transition planning is a required element of the IEP process by
age 16 years, and options for continued education or entry into the
workforce after high school should be thoroughly considered, with the
greater goal of ultimate community-­based employment. Postsecondary education possibilities might involve community college or vocational training. In 2008, the U.S. Higher Education Opportunity Act
(HEOA) granted students with ID access to federal financial aid to
attend colleges with Comprehensive Transition Programs (CTPs),
which are designed for postsecondary students with ID to continue
academic, career and technical, and independent living instruction
to prepare for employment. As of 2019, more than 265 nondegree
postsecondary programs for students with ID exist nationwide in the
United States.
Although employment is a critical element of life adaptation for
persons with ID, only 15% are estimated to have jobs, with significant
gaps in pay and compensation compared to workers without disability. Employment selection should be “customized” to the individual’s
interests and abilities. Options may include participation in competitive employment, supported employment, high school–to–work
transition programs, job-­coaching programs, and consumer-­directed
voucher programs.

Self-­Advocacy

The self-­advocacy movement represents an important effort by persons with ID and other disabilities to advocate for maximal autonomy
and self-­determination in all aspects of life. This movement is a part
of the greater disabilities rights movement and represents a resistance
to historical systemic injustices experienced by individuals with ID,
including neglect, abuse, nonautonomy, marginalization, incarceration, sterilization, and isolation. Self-­advocacy stresses that individuals
with ID should be able to speak for themselves, should be involved
maximally in decision-­making, should be treated as equal and fully
included in society, and should be given as much control over their
own self-­direction as possible. This movement emphasizes the tenet
of “nothing about us without us” and has led to nationwide changes
in terms of policy and medical and legal nomenclature. Above all, the
self-­advocacy movement has sought to redefine the approach to disability, moving toward a social model of acceptance, equality, accommodation, and inclusion, putting the onus on society to change its
attitudes and practices rather than calling on the individual with ID
to change.

OUTCOMES

In children with severe ID or ID requiring significant supports, the
prognosis is often evident by early childhood. Mild ID might not
always be a lifelong disorder. Children might meet criteria for GDD
at an early age, but later the disability can evolve into a more specific
developmental disorder (language disorder, autism, ADHD, specific
learning disability, or borderline intelligence). Others with a diagnosis of mild ID during their school years may develop sufficient adaptive behavior skills that they no longer fit the diagnosis as adolescents
or young adults, or the effects of maturation and plasticity may result
in children moving from one diagnostic category to another (from

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

362 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
moderate to mild ID). Conversely, some children who have a diagnosis
of a specific learning disability or communication disorder might not
maintain their rate of cognitive growth and may fall into the range of
ID over time.
The apparent higher prevalence of ID in low-­and middle-­income
countries is of concern, given the limitations in available resources.
Community-­based rehabilitation (CBR) is an effort promoted by
the World Health Organization (WHO) over the past 4 decades as a
means of making use of existing community resources for persons
with disabilities in low-­income countries, with the goal of increasing inclusion and participation within the community. CBR is now
being implemented in >90 countries, although the efficacy of such
programs has not been established.
The long-­term outcome of persons with ID depends on the underlying cause; degree of cognitive and adaptive deficits; presence of associated medical, developmental, and behavioral impairments; capabilities
of the families and schools; and availability of community supports,
services, and training provided to the child and family (see Table
56.10). As adults, many persons with mild ID can gain economic and
social independence with functional literacy, but they may need periodic support or supervision (especially when under social, economic,
or health-­related stress). Most live successfully in the community,
either independently or in supervised settings. Many will marry, some
will have children, and meaningful and long-­lasting relationships can
be expected.
For persons with moderate ID, the goals of education are to
enhance adaptive abilities and “survival” academic and vocational
skills, so they are better able to live and function in the adult world
(Table 56.11). The concept of supported employment has been very
beneficial to these individuals; the person is trained by a coach to
do a specific job in the setting where the person is to work, bypassing the need for a “sheltered workshop” experience and resulting
in successful work adaptation in the community and meaningful
inclusion. These persons generally live at home with family or in
a supervised setting in the community, such as a community integrated living arrangement (CILA) where different levels of supervision and support are provided depending on the needs of the
individuals. There has been a strong movement away from institutionalized living, defined as residence in a facility of four or more
people who did not choose to live together.
As adults, people with severe to profound ID usually require extensive to pervasive supports (see Table 56.11). These individuals often
have associated impairments, such as CP, behavioral disorders, epilepsy, or sensory impairments, that further limit their adaptive functioning. They can perform simple tasks in supervised settings. Most
people with this level of ID can live in the community with appropriate supports, though some may require a higher level of “institutional
care” that is best provided though smaller community-­run group
home settings.
The life expectancy of people with mild ID is similar to the general population, with a mean age at death in the early 70s. However,
persons with severe and profound ID have a decreased life expectancy at all ages, presumably from associated serious neurologic or
medical disorders, with a mean age at death in the mid-­50s. Given
that persons with ID are living longer and have high rates of comorbid health conditions in adulthood (e.g., obesity, hypertension, diabetes), ID is now one of the costliest ICD-­10 diagnoses, with an
average lifetime cost of 1-­2 million dollars per person. Thus the priorities for pediatric primary care are to improve healthcare delivery
systems during childhood; facilitate the transition of care to adult
providers; and ensure high-­quality, integrated, community-­based
services for all persons with ID.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 57

Down Syndrome and
Other Abnormalities of
Chromosome Number
Mary Pipan
PRINCIPLES OF CARING FOR CHILDREN WITH
COMPLEX GENETIC DISORDERS

Down syndrome (trisomy 21) is the most common genetic cause
of intellectual disability, with an incidence of 1 in 700 live births
in the United States. Many of the principles of care for individuals
with Down syndrome generalize to other complex genetic disorders. Genetic disorders generally affect all cells in the body, and
hence tend to be multisystemic disorders. Trisomy 21’s multisystem
effects require monitoring of all organ systems for potential related
issues.
Chromosome 21 is the smallest human autosome, which likely
accounts for the relatively high fetal survival rate in trisomy 21. The
clinical manifestations of other trisomies and aneuploidies are shown
in Tables 57.1 and 57.2 and Figs. 57.1, 57.2, and 57.3. Fetuses with other

Table 57.1  Chromosomal Trisomies (13, 18) and Their
Clinical Findings
TRISOMY 13

TRISOMY 18

HEAD AND FACE
Scalp defects (e.g., cutis aplasia)
Microphthalmia, corneal
abnormalities
Cleft lip and palate in 60–80%
of cases
Microcephaly
Microphthalmia
Sloping forehead
Holoprosencephaly
(arrhinencephaly)
Capillary hemangiomas
Deafness
CHEST
Congenital heart disease (e.g.,
VSD, PDA, ASD) in 80% of
cases
Thin posterior ribs (missing ribs)
EXTREMITIES
Overlapping of fingers and toes
(clinodactyly)
Polydactyly
Hypoplastic nails, hyperconvex
nails
GENERAL
Severe developmental delays
and prenatal and postnatal
growth restriction
Renal abnormalities
1-year survival <10%

Small and premature appearance
Tight palpebral fissures
Narrow nose and hypoplastic
nasal alae
Narrow bifrontal diameter
Prominent occiput
Micrognathia
Cleft lip or palate
Microcephaly

Congenital heart disease (e.g.,
VSD, PDA, ASD)
Short sternum, small nipples

Limited hip abduction
Clinodactyly and overlapping
fingers; index over third, fifth
over fourth; closed fist
Rocker-­bottom feet
Hypoplastic nails
Severe developmental delays
and prenatal and postnatal
growth restriction
Premature birth, polyhydramnios
Inguinal or abdominal hernias
1-year survival <10%

ASD, Atrial septal defect; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; VSD, ventricular septal defect.
From Behrman RE, Kliegman RM. Nelson Essentials of Pediatrics, 4th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders;2002: 142.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 57 u Down Syndrome and Other Abnormalities of Chromosome Number

363

Table 57.2  Other Rare Aneuploidies and Partial Autosomal Aneuploidies
DISORDER

KARYOTYPE

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Trisomy 8

47,XX/XY,+8

Growth and mental deficiency are variable.
The majority of patients are mosaics.
Deep palmar and plantar furrows are characteristic.
Joint contractures are present.

Trisomy 9

47,XX/XY,+9

The majority of patients are mosaics.
Clinical features include craniofacial (high forehead, microphthalmia, low-­set malformed ears,
bulbous nose) and skeletal (joint contractures) malformations and heart defects (60%).

Trisomy 16

47,XX/XY,+16

The most commonly observed autosomal aneuploidy in spontaneous abortion; the recurrence
risk is negligible.

Tetrasomy 12p

46,XX[12]/46,XX, +i(12p)
[8] (mosaicism for an
isochromosome 12p)

Known as Pallister-­Killian syndrome
Sparse anterior scalp hair (more so temporal region), eyebrows, and eyelashes; prominent
forehead; chubby cheeks; long philtrum with thin upper lip and cupid-­bow configuration;
polydactyly; streaks of hyperpigmentation and hypopigmentation

A

B

C

Fig. 57.1 Several physical manifestations of trisomy 18. A, Typical profile reveals prominent occiput and low-­set, posteriorly rotated malformed
auricles. B, Clenched hand showing typical pattern of overlapping fingers. C, Rocker-­bottom feet. (Courtesy Kenneth Garver, MD, Pittsburgh, PA.)

Fig. 57.2 Trisomy 13 syndrome. Note sloping forehead with variable defect in facial development. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M.
Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 1 A-­C, p. 16.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

364 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders

A

C

B

D

Fig. 57.3 Trisomy 13. A and B, Note hyperconvex nails and postaxial polydactyly. C, Aplasia cutis congenita over posterior occiput. D, Scrotalization of the phallus. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2022: Fig. 2, p. 17.)

full autosomal trisomies are not always viable, but partial trisomy and
quatrosomy (trisomy or quatrisomy of only part of the chromosome)
or mosaic trisomy (only part of the cell lines contain the aneuploidy)
can be viable.
The Down syndrome phenotype can occur as a result of full trisomy
21 (95%), partial trisomy 21 (part of the 21st chromosome in triplicate), mosaic trisomy 21, or translocation. Maternal nondisjunction
in meiosis is the most common cause of trisomy 21. Paternal origin
accounts for less than 10%.
Chromosome abnormalities affect not only the product and function of that particular group of genes but can have upstream and downstream effects on other gene products in linked pathways. The over 314
triplicate genes in Down syndrome are known to affect the products
and metabolic activity of genes from every other chromosome. Possible phenotype (condition) gene relationships in trisomy 21 are noted
in Figure 57.4.
The link between children’s physical health, development, and
behavior becomes obvious when caring for children with complex
genetic disorders. Children with developmental disabilities often
cannot adequately communicate the symptoms of illness. Challenging behaviors can also interfere with adequate assessment and intervention. Too often, sources of distress, developmental challenges,
and behavioral issues are attributed to the genetic disorder and
dismissed by family, medical, and educational caregivers. Providing care for genetically complex children requires health and other
providers to consider a range of potential differential diagnoses
when presented with a change in behavior, a plateau or regression
in development, or a new physical complaint.
Trisomy 21 affects brain development across the life span, leading
to differences in brain anatomy, neurotransmission, and connectivity that affect processing, glial cell function, infrastructure support, energy metabolism, and in adults, the formation of amyloid
plaques leading to high risk for early Alzheimer disease. Alterations
in brain development and functioning affect learning, behavior, and
emotions, leading to an increased incidence of neurobehavioral and
psychiatric disorders such as autism spectrum disorders (ASDs),
attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), anxiety disorders, and depression.
It is important for the clinician to understand that children with
genetic disorders are genetically more closely related to their biologic family than they are to other children with similar disorders.
Children with Down syndrome will have similar patterns of familial
heritability for heritable traits and medical conditions as their biologic siblings. Individuals with genetic disorders need to be seen as
children/persons first who happen to have a genetic disorder. Using
person-­
first language (child with Down syndrome, not Downs
child) helps everyone focus on this principle.

APP
BACE2
PICALM
APOE

CRELD 1

Alzheimer
disease
• 70% chance
of AD

Heart defect
• CHD 50%
• AVSD 40%
• VSD 30%

Down syndrome
Hsa21 gene

Leukemia
• 10–20 fold
Hypertension
GATA 1(AMKL)
JAK2 (ALL)

Gastrointestinal
problems
• 12% HD
• 260 times DST
• 33 times IA

miRNA hsa-miR-155
DSCAM

Fig. 57.4 Various conditions associated with Down syndrome with its

causative genes. DST, Duodenal stenosis; IA, imperforate anus; HD,
Hirschsprung disease; CHD, congenital heart disease; AVSD, atrioventricular septal defects; VSD, ventricular septal defect; AD, Alzheimer
disease. (From Asim A, Kumar A, Muthuswamy S, et al. Down syndrome: An insight of the disease. J Biomed Sci. 2015;22:41, Fig. 1.)

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS

Children with Down syndrome are at increased risk for a variety of
congenital anomalies and comorbid medical conditions. Typically, they
have a characteristic facial appearance and other physical characteristics that allow clinical recognition of trisomy 21 in the newborn period
(Figs. 57.5 and 57.6 and Table 57.3).
The increased risk for a variety of medical conditions continues
throughout the life span (Table 57.4). The American Academy of
Pediatrics (AAP) has developed Down Syndrome Health Supervision Guidelines for clinicians caring for children with trisomy 21
(Table 57.5). Individuals with Down syndrome often have significant communication deficits, which can result in difficulty reporting pain and discomfort; clinicians need to pay attention to the
caregiver’s observation of changes in behavior when evaluating the
level of pain or illness. Paying close attention to subtle cues on exam

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 57 u Down Syndrome and Other Abnormalities of Chromosome Number

A

D

B

365

C

E

F

Fig. 57.5 Down syndrome in the neonatal period. A, Brushfield spots. B, Loose nuchal skin. C, Wide space between toes 1 and 2. D, Poor tone. E
and F, Accentuation of typical face when crying. (From Jones KL, Jones MC, Del Campo M. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation,
8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2022: Fig. 3, p. 7.)

Fig. 57.6 Appearance of two 2-­year-­old children with trisomy 21. The facial appearance of children with trisomy 21 is often characterized by
a low nasal bridge, small nose, small ears, up-­slanting almond-­shaped eyes, and epicanthal folds. (Photos courtesy of Children’s Hospital of
Philadelphia.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

366 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 57.3  Clinical Features of Trisomy 21 in the Neonatal Period
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Hypotonia*
Developmental delay
Poor Moro reflex*
CRANIOFACIAL
Brachycephaly with flat occiput
Flat face*
Upward slanted palpebral fissures*
Epicanthal folds
Speckled irises (Brushfield spots)
Three fontanels
Delayed fontanel closure
Frontal sinus and midfacial hypoplasia
Mild microcephaly
Short, hard palate
Small nose, flat nasal bridge
Protruding tongue, open mouth
Small dysplastic ears*
CARDIOVASCULAR
Endocardial cushion defects
Ventricular septal defect
Atrial septal defect
Patent ductus arteriosus
Aberrant subclavian artery
Pulmonary hypertension

MUSCULOSKELETAL
Joint hyperflexibility*
Short neck, redundant skin*
Short metacarpals and phalanges
Short fifth digit with clinodactyly*
Single transverse palmar creases*
Wide gap between first and second toes
Pelvic dysplasia*
Short sternum
Two sternal manubrium ossification centers
GASTROINTESTINAL
Duodenal atresia
Annular pancreas
Tracheoesophageal fistula
Hirschsprung disease
Imperforate anus
Neonatal cholestasis
CUTANEOUS
Cutis marmorata

*Hall’s criteria to aid in diagnosis.

Table 57.4  Frequency of Medical Conditions in Trisomy 21
SYSTEM

CONDITION

ESTIMATED FREQUENCY (IF KNOWN)

Cataracts (birth/later)
Glaucoma
Nystagmus
Strabismus
Refractive errors
Astigmatism
Nasolacrimal duct obstruction

1.4%/5–37 %
1%
18–30%
19–34%
80%
67–74%
11–30%

Stenotic ear canals
Choanal atresia
Bifid uvula/mucosal cleft
Laryngomalacia
Middle ear effusions
Adeno/tonsillar hypertrophy
Hearing loss

50%

Tooth agenesis
Malocclusion
Periodontal disease

54–58%
>70%
∼100% under 30 years

Congenital hypothyroidism
Acquired hypothyroidism
Subclinical hypothyroidism
Hyperthyroidism
Type 1 diabetes mellitus

1:113 to 1:141 live births
13–34%
7–40%
6.5%
0.3–1%

Congenital heart disease
AV canal defects
VSD
ASD
Tetralogy of Fallot
Acquired mitral, tricuspid, or aortic regurgitation PDA

44–54%
42% (of CHD)
22–35%
8–16%
2–4%
5–7%

EYE

ENT

5%
50–90%
37–78%

DENTAL

ENDOCRINE

CARDIAC

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 57 u Down Syndrome and Other Abnormalities of Chromosome Number

367

Table 57.4  Frequency of Medical Conditions in Trisomy 21—cont’d
SYSTEM

CONDITION

ESTIMATED FREQUENCY (IF KNOWN)

Pulmonary hypertension
Subglottic stenosis
Tracheo/laryngomalacia
Tracheal bronchus
Obstructive sleep apnea

1–5%
6%
33% (of ENT-­referred population)

Esophageal atresia
Duodenal malformations
Rectoanal malformations
Hirschsprung disease
Celiac disease
GERD
Constipation

0.5–0.9%
4%
1%
3%
5–9.8%
14–40%
30–49%

Renal/urinary tract findings

Up to 25%

Transient myeloproliferative disease (TMD)
Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL)
Acute lymphocytic leukemia

5–10%
10–20% with TMD, first 4 years of life
0.1–0.2%

Atlantoaxial instability (AAI)
Symptomatic AAI
Recurrent joint dislocations (shoulder, knee, elbow, thumb)
Pes planus
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis

9–27%
1–2%
1–7%
91%
∼1%

Alopecia/vitiligo
Hidradenitis suppurativa
Xerosis/eczema
Seborrheic dermatitis
Psoriasis

1–11%
2%

Infantile spasms
Seizure disorders
Strokes and moyamoya
Autism spectrum disorder
Early onset Alzheimer disease
Down syndrome disintegrative disorder

2–5%
8% (lifetime)

PULMONARY

∼50%

GASTROINTESTINAL

GENITOURINARY
HEMATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY

ORTHOPEDICS

DERMATOLOGY

0.5–8%

NEUROLOGY

7–16%
∼50% >50 yr
<1%

ENT, Ear/nose/throat; AV, atrioventricular; CHD, congenital heart disease; VSD, ventricular septal defect; ASD, atrial septal defect; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; GERD,
gastroesophageal reflux disease.

and asking direct questions about specific areas of pain or discomfort can be helpful (e.g., “Does your throat hurt?” while pointing to
or touching their throat).

Ophthalmology

The red reflex should be evaluated in the newborn period with a
thorough ophthalmologic exam in the first 6 months of life and then
annually until age 5, then every 2-­3 years thereafter. Children with
DS are at higher risk for cataracts, glaucoma, nystagmus, strabismus,
astigmatism, refractive error, accommodative error, blepharitis, and
keratoconus. Visual acuity and visual processing are foundational for
development.

Ear, Nose, and Throat

The pinna and external ear canals are often small with a predisposition to cerumen impaction. Middle ear effusion occurs in the majority of children, starting in infancy, and may require referral to an ear/
nose/throat (ENT) specialist for better visualization because of stenotic ear canals. Chronic nasal congestion, choanal atresia, adeno/
tonsillar hypertrophy, laryngo/tracheomalacia, subglottic stenosis,

and laryngeal cleft all can affect feeding and breathing, including contributing to sleep apnea. Most children with DS require regular ENT
follow-­up.
Many children with DS have some degree of hearing loss (HL). Most
commonly this is conductive HL associated with middle ear effusion.
Smaller numbers have mixed or sensorineural HL. Hearing is foundational for speech development. Hearing should be screened in the newborn period and with audiologic assessment between 6 and 9 months
and every 6 months thereafter until an accurate ear-­specific audiologic
evaluation is obtained, then annually. Hearing assessment through
auditory brainstem responses (requiring sedation) may be needed if
audiologic evaluation is inconclusive. Lack of parental concern about
hearing should not preclude obtaining audiologic assessment. Aggressive treatment of otitis media and middle ear effusion reduces the frequency of hearing loss.

Dental

Children with DS often have delayed tooth eruption, malformed
teeth, microdontia, permanent tooth agenesis, tooth impaction,
malocclusion, and supernumerary teeth. Periodontal disease is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

368 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 57.5  Summary of Down Syndrome-Specific Care
Action
 &RQILUP'6GLDJQRVLVZLWKHLWKHU&96RUDPQLRFHQWHVLVSUHQDWDOO\
RUNDU\RW\SHSRVWQDWDOO\
 5HYLHZUHFXUUHQFHULVNDQGRIIHUWKHIDPLO\UHIHUUDOWRDFOLQLFDO
JHQHWLFLVWRUJHQHWLFFRXQVHORU
 2IIHUSDUHQWWRSDUHQWDQGVXSSRUWJURXSLQIRUPDWLRQWRWKHIDPLO\
 8VH&'&'6VSHFLILFJURZWKFKDUWVWRPRQLWRUZHLJKWOHQJWK
ZHLJKWIRUOHQJWKKHDGFLUFXPIHUHQFHRU%0,8VHVWDQGDUGFKDUWV
IRU%0,DIWHUDJH\HDUV
 2UGHUDQHFKRWREHUHDGE\DSHGLDWULFFDUGLRORJLVW
 )HHGLQJDVVHVVPHQWRUYLGHRVWXG\LIDQ\PDUNHGK\SRWRQLD
XQGHUZHLJKW WKLOHZHLJKWIRUOHQJWKRU%0, VORZIHHGLQJRU
FKRNLQJZLWKIHHGVUHFXUUHQWRUSHUVLVWHQWDEQRUPDOUHVSLUDWRU\
V\PSWRPVGHVDWXUDWLRQVZLWKIHHGV
 2EWDLQREMHFWLYHKHDULQJDVVHVVPHQW PD\EH LQ1%6SURWRFROV 
DQGIROORZ(+',SURWRFROV
 ,I70FDQ¶WEHYLVXDOL]HGUHIHUWRRWRODU\QJRORJLVWIRUH[DPZLWK
PLFURVFRSHXQWLOUHOLDEOH70DQGW\PSDQRPHWU\H[DPVDUHSRVVLEOH
 &DUVDIHW\VHDWHYDOXDWLRQEHIRUHKRVSLWDOGLVFKDUJH
 &%&ZLWKGLIIHUHQWLDO
 ,I7$0PDNHFDUHJLYHUVDZDUHRIULVNVLJQVRIOHXNHPLD HJHDV\
EUXLVLQJEOHHGLQJUHFXUUHQWIHYHUVERQHSDLQ
 76+
 569SURSK\OD[LVEDVHGRQ$$3JXLGHOLQHV
 'LVFXVVFHUYLFDOVSLQHSRVLWLRQLQJIRUSURFHGXUHVDQGDWODQWRD[LDO
VWDELOLW\SUHFDXWLRQV
 $VVHVVIRU&$0XVHGLVFRXUDJHDQ\XQVDIH&$0SUDFWLFHV
 5HIHUFKLOGUHQWRHDUO\LQWHUYHQWLRQIRUVSHHFKILQHPRWRURUJURVV
PRWRUWKHUDS\
 ,IPLGGOHHDUGLVHDVHRFFXUVREWDLQGHYHORSPHQWDOO\DSSURSULDWH
KHDULQJHYDOXDWLRQ
 5HVFUHHQKHDULQJZLWKGHYHORSPHQWDOO\DSSURSULDWHPHWKRGRORJ\
%$(5EHKDYLRUDOHDUVSHFLILF 
 5HIHUWRRSKWKDOPRORJLVWZLWKH[SHULHQFHDQGH[SHUWLVHLQFKLOGUHQ
ZLWKGLVDELOLWLHV
 &%&ZLWKGLIIHUHQWLDOLIHDV\EUXLVLQJRUEOHHGLQJUHFXUUHQWIHYHUV
RUERQHSDLQ
 $VVHVVIRUVOHHSGLVRUGHUHGEUHDWKLQJLISUHVHQWUHIHUWRSK\VLFLDQ
ZLWKH[SHUWLVHLQSHGLDWULFVOHHSGLVRUGHUV
 (QVXUHFKLOGLVUHFHLYLQJGHYHORSPHQWDOWKHUDSLHVDQGIDPLO\
XQGHUVWDQGVDQGLVIROORZLQJWKHUDS\SODQDWKRPH
 &%&ZLWKGLIIHUHQWLDODQGHLWKHU  DFRPELQDWLRQRIIHUULWLQDQG
&53RU  DFRPELQDWLRQRIVHUXPLURQDQG7RWDO,URQ%LQGLQJ
&DSDFLW\
 ,IDFKLOGKDVVOHHSSUREOHPVDQGDIHUULWLQOHVVWKDQPFJ/WKH
SHGLDWULFLDQPD\SUHVFULEHLURQ VXSSOHPHQW
 9LVLRQVFUHHQLQJ

 ,IDFKLOGKDVP\HORSDWKLFV\PSWRPVREWDLQQHXWUDO&VSLQHSODLQ
ILOPV VHHWH[WIRUGHWDLOV 
 2EWDLQSRO\VRPQRJUDP
 3UHSDUHIDPLO\IRUWUDQVLWLRQIURPHDUO\LQWHUYHQWLRQWRSUHVFKRRO
 'LVFXVVVH[XDOH[SORLWDWLRQULVNV
 0DNHGHYHORSPHQWDOO\DSSURSULDWHSODQVIRUPHQDUFKH
FRQWUDFHSWLRQ DGYRFDWHRIIHU/$5& DQG67,SUHYHQWLRQ
 'LVFXVVULVNRI'6LISDWLHQWZHUHWREHFRPHSUHJQDQW
 $VVHVVIRUDQ\GHYHORSPHQWDOUHJUHVVLRQ
 'LVFXVVDQGIDFLOLWDWHWUDQVLWLRQVHGXFDWLRQZRUNILQDQFH
JXDUGLDQVKLSPHGLFDOFDUHLQGHSHQGHQWOLYLQJ

ERUGHU

'R RQFH DW WKLV DJH
'RLIQRWGRQHSUHYLRXVO\
5HSHDWDWLQGLFDWHGLQWHUYDOV
6HHUHSRUW IRUHQGSRLQW

Pre- Birth up to
natal 1 mo

1 mo up to
1 yr

1 yr up to 5 yr

5 yr up to
12 yr

12 yr up to
21 yr

$OOKHDOWKFDUHYLVLWV

$Q\YLVLW

8SWRPR
(YHU\
PR
%\GD\
$WELUWK LI
QRWLQ1%6
$QQXDOO\
$OO+09
$OO+09
$Q\YLVLW

(YHU\PR

$QQXDOO\DQGHYHU\PRLIDQWLWK\URLGDQWLERGLHVHYHUGHWHFWHG
7KURXJK\U
%LHQQLDOO\

8SWR\U
:KHQHDU
$IWHUWUHDWPHQW
FOHDU
6WDUWDWPRHYHU\ PRXQWLOHVWDEOLVKHGQRUPDOELODWHUDOO\E\HDUVSHFLILFWHVWLQJ
WKHQDQQXDOO\
%\PR
$Q\YLVLW
$WOHDVWRQFHE\PRWKHQDOOVXEVHTXHQW+09WKHUHDIWHU

$OO+09
$QQXDOO\
$Q\YLVLW
$OO+09XVH
GHYHORSPHQWDO
O\DSSURSULDWH
FULWHULD

3KRWRVFUHHQ DOO
+09 LIXQDEOH
UHIHUWR
RSKWKDOPRORJLVW
DQQXDOO\
$Q\YLVLW
%HWZHHQ\U
$WPR
$WOHDVWRQFH

$OO+09

3KRWRVFUHHQ DOO
+09 LIXQDEOH
UHIHUWR
RSKWKDOPRORJLVW
ELHQQLDOO\

9LVXDODFXLW\RU
SKRWRVFUHHQLQJDWDOO
+09RU
RSKWKDOPRORJ\
GHWHUPLQHGVFKHGXOH

$WOHDVWRQFH
$WOHDVWRQFH
$VGHYHORSPHQWDOO\DSSURSULDWHWKHQDOO
VXEVHTXHQW+09
$WOHDVWRQFH
$WOHDVWRQFH
$OO+09VWDUWLQJDW\U

$EEUHYLDWLRQV '6 'RZQ V\QGURPH &96 &KRULRQLF YLOOXV VDPSOLQJ +09 +HDOWK 0DLQWHQDQFH 9LVLW %0,
%RG\PDVVLQGH[&'&&HQWHUVIRU'LVHDVH&RQWURO(+',(DUO\+HDULQJ'HWHFWLRQDQG,QWHUYHQWLRQ1%6
1HZERUQVFUHHQ&$0&RPSOHPHQWDU\DQGDOWHUQDWLYHPHGLFLQH%$(5%UDLQVWHPDXGLWRU\HYRNHG
UHVSRQVH707\PSDQLFPHPEUDQH7$0WUDQVLHQWDEQRUPDOP\HORSRLHVLV

From Bull MJ, Trotter T, Santoro SL, et al. Health supervision for children and adolescents with Down syndrome. Pediatrics. 2022;149(5):e2022057010.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 57 u Down Syndrome and Other Abnormalities of Chromosome Number
seen in the majority of individuals with DS. Starting oral health preventive programs young, close supervision and support of dental
hygiene and chemical adjuvants improve outcomes. Children with
DS should first see a pediatric dentist at age 1 year and follow up
at least every 6 months. For children who do not tolerate dental
examinations or procedures, sedated examinations may be necessary, preferably in a hospital with anesthesiologists familiar with
caring for patients with DS.

Endocrine

Children with DS are at risk for congenital and acquired hypothyroidism (HT) and hyperthyroidism (Graves disease [GD]). Thyroid testing should be done at birth as part of newborn screening.
Acquired HT and GD are autoimmune disorders with elevated
thyroid antibodies. Thyroid-­stimulating hormone (TSH) testing
can detect both HT and hyperthyroidism and should be checked
by 6 months, at 1 year, and then annually thereafter. Most cases of
thyroid disorders are asymptomatic and would be missed without
screening. Compensated HT refers to mild elevations in TSH with
normal T4, requiring continued monitoring. Low TSH can indicate Graves disease. Children with DS who have GD can develop
HT, and those with HT can develop GD. Thyroid disorder should
be considered as part of the differential diagnoses with mood or
behavior changes, slowing of growth, exophthalmos, high blood
pressure, or tachycardia.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) is more common in children with DS.
Screening for type 2 DM, especially in obese individuals, should follow
similar guidelines to the typically developing (TD) population.

Cardiac

Congenital heart disease (CHD) affects about half of all children
with DS, including atrioventricular (AV) canal defects, atrial septal
defect (ASD), ventricular septal defect (VSD), tetralogy of Fallot
(TOF), patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), and patent foramen ovale
(PFO). All children with DS should have an infant echocardiogram
even with a normal physical examination. Cardiology follow-­up
will be based on echocardiogram findings. Signs of heart failure
such as failure to thrive, tachypnea, easy fatigue, or sweating with
feeds require expedited referral back to cardiology. Pulmonary
hypertension can also occur in children with DS related to congenital heart defects or to respiratory illness. Later in adolescence and
adulthood, clinicians should be aware of the increased risk for valvular heart disease and endocarditis.

Pulmonary

Respiratory infections are the most common cause for hospital
admission of children with DS without CHD and are a common
cause of mortality in children with CHD. Respiratory compromise
may present with subtle signs of respiratory distress such as tachypnea, intercostal retraction, shortness of breath, and easy fatigue
with exertion. The lack of overt distress may lead clinicians to
underestimate the level of respiratory compromise. Both anatomy
and immunodeficiency associated with DS can lead to increased
risk for upper and lower respiratory infections. Macro and micro
pulmonary structural anomalies have been reported. Gastroesophageal reflux disease, swallowing dysfunction, and upper airway differences (including transesophageal [TE] fistula) increase the risk
of aspiration.

Sleep

The estimated prevalence of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) ranges
from 31% to 79%, and onset occurs from infancy through adulthood. A sleep study before the age of 4 years is recommended.
Clinicians should consider ordering a sleep study at any age, with
chronic signs of respiratory compromise when awake or asleep or
daytime symptoms of nonrestorative sleep. There is some evidence
that OSA causes difficulties in cognitive, behavioral, and adaptive

369

functioning in children with DS. Obesity increases the risks for
OSA in many children with DS.

Neurology

Children with DS ages 6-­18 months are at increased risk for infantile spasms (IS). The outcome is often better with treatment than the
non–DS population with ID but is variable, ranging from no obvious
sequelae to ongoing seizure disorders, ASD, and more severe intellectual disability. In addition to the classic signs of IS, change in mental
status in an infant or toddler or a plateau or regression in development
should lead to prompt neurologic evaluation, including an electroencephalogram (EEG). Children with trisomy 21 are at increased risk for
other seizure disorders. There is an increased risk for strokes possibly
related to CHD, vascular malformations (including moyamoya syndrome), and other risk factors.

Gastrointestinal

Most children with DS have structural or functional gastrointestinal (GI) comorbidities, many of which can affect individuals across
the life span. There is evidence of abnormalities in enteric nerves
affecting microanatomy and nerve function. Congenital anomalies
include esophageal atresia, TE fistula and duodenal atresia, stenosis, and webs, Hirschsprung disease, and anorectal malformations.
Constipation and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) are frequent causes of irritability, GI discomfort, feeding issues, toileting
refusal, and incontinence. There appears to be a strong association
between GERD, pneumonia, and OSA. Children with DS are also at
higher risk of celiac disease, which can cause GI, nutritional, and
behavioral issues. The AAP guidelines do not recommend routine
celiac screening, but rather to maintain a high index of suspicion
with GI complaints, growth faltering, or behavioral concerns. Many
others, however, have performed routine screening because many
patients with DS who have celiac disease are asymptomatic; there
may be a lag of 2-­3 years before symptoms appear.

Nutrition/Obesity

In infancy and early childhood, dysphagia, GI conditions, cardiac,
and respiratory complications may cause failure to thrive. Weight
faltering can continue for older children because of the same issues
but may be more intermittent. Because of the high rates of dysphagia in infants with DS, video swallow studies should be considered
when there is any sign of weight faltering, aspiration, feeding difficulties, or recurrent respiratory infections. Thickened formulas,
low-­f low bottles/nipples, or slower paced feeding may be required.
Nasogastric (NG) or gastric tube (GT) supplementation to assure
adequate nutrition may be needed. Many babies with DS can successfully breastfeed, and clinicians need to be encouraging but
watchful for growth faltering.
Obesity becomes more prominent in early childhood and extending into adulthood. In school-age children with DS, those at 50% or
greater on DS-specific BMI charts are in the obese range. Thus to
gauge the level of overweight for children with DS, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) curves for BMI should be
used. When children with DS gain more autonomy in feeding, overeating can become a problem. Many do not appear to satiate and will
continue to eat as long as food is presented or will seek food. Caregivers therefore cannot rely on the child’s satiety to determine caloric
sufficiency. Decreased basal metabolic rates (reduced caloric needs)
and lower physical activity can also contribute to obesity. Anticipatory guidance regarding healthy nutritional practices, meal and snack
limits, and active lifestyle choices should be part of well-­child visits
from a young age.

Genitourinary

Renal and urinary tract abnormalities, including ureteropelvic junction obstruction, vesicoureteral reflux, renal hypoplasia,
obstructive uropathy and posterior urethral valves, hypospadias,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

370 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 57.6  Neurodevelopmental, Neurobehavioral, and Psychiatric Characteristics of Trisomy 21
MOTOR SKILLS
Gross motor skills

0-­24 mo: Mild delays initially which widen with age
At 2 years 25% walking
Dysphagia 0-­6 mo: 50%
Self-­feeding delays: 70%
Early skills delays: ∼75%
Bimanual skill delays: 100%

Oromotor
Fine motor skill
SPEECH AND LANGUAGE
Intelligibility

Language

Frequently unintelligible (parent report): 5-­21 yr: 54–57%
Motor speech impairment:
Delay: 27%
Articulation: 60%
Apraxia: 33%
Dysfluency:
Stuttering: 10–45%
Cluttering (abnormally rapid or irregular pace or both): 80%
Receptive: Similar to mental age–matched controls
Expressive: More delayed relative to mental age–matched controls
Syntax: More impaired than expressive vocabulary
Pragmatics: Same variety of language functions as mental age–matched peers; may be less
likely to ask for clarification

SOCIAL AND EMOTIONAL DEVELOPMENT

COGNITION

Oppositional behaviors
Aggression
Self-­injurious behavior
Autism spectrum disorders
ADHD
Anxiety disorders
Obsessive-­compulsive disorders
Depression
Catatonia/Down syndrome disintegrative
disorder

High sociability
Joint attention compared with mental age–matched peers
Strong imitation skills
Pro-­social empathetic responses to others in distress
Underexpression of emotional distress
Less frequent and shorter social referencing
Reduced ability to read facial expressions
More restricted repetitive behaviors and interests
Average social motivation but lower social cognition
Intellectual disability:
Mild: ∼25%
Moderate: ∼50%
Severe: ∼25%
Decline in IQ throughout childhood (slowing in developmental progress relative to same-­age peers)
Strengths: Implicit memory, visual spatial sequencing, visual spatial construction, and nonverbal memory
Weaknesses: Working memory capacity, explicit memory, verbal processing, auditory short-­term
memory, complex visual spatial skills, executive functioning
70%
4–15%
18%
15–20%
14–40%
10–22%
0.5–4.5%
5–11%
Multiple case series and case reports

IQ, Intelligence quotient; ADHD, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

asymptomatic renal pelvic dilatation, kidney ectopia, proteinuria
and hematuria, immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, and focal
segmental glomerulosclerosis, occur more frequently than in the
general population. There are no current guidelines for regular surveillance, but clinicians need to maintain a high index of suspicion.

Sexuality and Reproductive Health

Males and females with DS undergo puberty at similar ages to peers. In
males, after puberty, testicular volume decreases and gonadal dysfunction worsens with age. Males are infertile, with few exceptions. Females

with DS are fertile, having a 33% chance of having a child with DS.
Menstrual problems, including irregular periods, and premenstrual
irritability are common reasons for use of oral contraceptives. Most
females manage menstrual periods well, but there may be difficulties
with hygiene. Menopause tends to occur early.
Individuals with DS are at increased risk for sexual abuse, and caregivers should discuss appropriate and inappropriate contact and relationships from an early age. Sexuality education should be included in
their educational curriculum. Clinicians should discuss sexuality, birth
control, and reproductive issues at health maintenance visits.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 57 u Down Syndrome and Other Abnormalities of Chromosome Number
Hematology-­Oncology

AAP guidelines recommend a complete blood cell count (CBC)
with differential for all newborns with DS. Neonates with DS commonly have hematologic abnormalities, including peripheral blasts,
neutrophilia, thrombocytopenia, or polycythemia. Five to ten percent of neonates with DS have transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) (also called transient abnormal myelopoiesis [TAM]),
which is associated with pathologic variants in GATA1. Typically,
this resolves spontaneously within the first 1-­3 months of life, but
10–20% will develop acute megakaryocytic leukemia (AMKL) in
the first 4 years of life. AMKL is sensitive to treatment in most cases
and has a good prognosis.
Children with DS are ∼20 times more likely to get acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) (1 in 900-­1,000) than the typical population, which
is associated with pathologic variants in JAK2. Treatment trials show
lower response rates, higher recurrence rate, and higher treatment-­
related mortality.
Annual hemoglobin screening for anemia is recommended throughout childhood with additional testing for ferritin and C-­reactive protein
(CRP) when iron deficiency is suspected. The incidence of anemia in
DS may be similar or increased compared with the general population.
Other common CBC findings include macrocytosis, low white blood
cell (WBC) count, and polycythemia, the clinical significance of which
is unknown.

Immunology/Allergy

Individuals with DS are more susceptible to infections because of mild
to moderate T-­and B-­cell lymphopenia, with a decrease in naive lymphocytes, impaired mitogen-­induced T-­cell proliferation, reduced specific antibody responses to immunizations, and defects of neutrophil
chemotaxis. Nonimmunologic anatomic factors also contribute to the
increased risk of respiratory infections. Children with DS with significant numbers of serious infections or difficulty clearing infections need
further immunologic evaluation.
Autoimmune disorders are also more common, including thyroid
disorders, celiac disease, alopecia areata, vitiligo, type 1 DM, juvenile
idiopathic arthritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus.

Musculoskeletal

Individuals with DS have short stature across the life span and
stop growing sooner than typical peers, the mechanism of which is
unclear. Growth hormone is rarely deficient. Ligamentous laxity is
common, especially in the ankles and feet. Inflammatory arthritis
is underrecognized, and scoliosis is more common. Joint instability is most apparent in the neck (atlantoaxial instability [AAI]),
hips, and knees. Joint pain and impaired mobility can contribute to
motor skills deficits, impede independence, and add to behavioral
difficulties.
Radiographic screening for AAI is not recommended because flexion/extension neck x-­rays are not predictive for future neurologic
risk. Signs and symptoms of AAI occur because of compression of the
spinal cord from slippage of the C1 or C2 vertebrae, which can occur
after an injury or anesthesia but can also be seen spontaneously. Neck
pain, stiffness, and/or myelopathic signs and symptoms (e.g., change
in gait, bowel, or bladder pattern or weakness) should prompt referral to orthopedics or neurosurgery. Universal neck precautions are
recommended for all children with DS, assuming that all are at risk
for injury from AAI, including limited participation in any activities
that would be associated with forcible neck movement such as contact
sports, diving, and universal cervical precautions with intubation procedures/surgery. Children with DS should be secured in rear-­facing car
seats until 40 pounds and may need harness-­style car restraints over
40 pounds.
Hip instability resulting in recurrent (often painless and voluntary)
hip dislocation and patellar instability can impair ambulation and may
require surgical interventions.

371

Dermatology

Although causing minor morbidity, dermatologic problems can be
highly distressing to patients and families due to appearance (e.g., alopecia), discomfort (e.g., eczema, hidradenitis), or intractability (e.g.,
onychomycosis). Common conditions include folliculitis, hidradenitis
suppurativa, eczematous and seborrheic dermatitis, autoimmune alopecia and vitiligo, fungal infections including tinea pedis and onychomycosis, angular cheilitis, and hyperkeratosis.

DEVELOPMENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL
CHARACTERISTICS

Development and behavior concerns are almost universal. Some
concerns are easily explained and remediated and are responsive to
appropriate therapeutic or behavioral interventions, but others may
indicate an underlying neurobehavioral disorder such as autism,
ADHD, depression, or anxiety (Table 57.6). Thinking through the categories that follow will help clinicians understand this complexity and
direct families to appropriate resources.

Motor Skills

Children with DS often have marked delays in motor skills in early
development related to hypotonia, ligamentous laxity, and lack of
coordination.
Acquisition of early gross motor skills is foundational for postural control, feeding, visual motor development, socialization, and
communication. Without stimulation and support, infants with DS
may persist in lax postural control, further adding to motor delays.
Through toddler and childhood many gradually improve but have
persistent deficits in motor control and coordination and more difficulty with speed and complex postural changes, as well as persistent hypotonia. Physical therapy in the first years of life concentrates
on core strengthening and ensuring acquisition of adaptive motor
planning that supports effective ambulation. Gait abnormalities and
persistent low core strength often require ongoing physical therapy.
Developing physical literacy in recreational fitness activities, such as
swimming, and community sports can also support health and well-­
being in school-­age and adult years.
Oromotor skills are often delayed, with dysphagia in half of infants,
requiring feeding therapy, thickening of formula, low-­flow nipples,
pacing between swallows, and sometimes supplemental enteral feeding. Feeding therapy helps young children learn to handle food
boluses, chew, and drink from a cup.
Fine motor skills are also delayed, although they seem to be acquired
in the same sequence as typically developing peers, but with a wider
age range of acquisition. Most unaffected children are able to write
their name between 60 and 72 months, but in children with DS, this
usually occurs between 120 and 216 months. Occupational therapy
often helps remediate or compensate for motor difficulties interfering
with independence in activities of daily living.

Speech and Language Skills

Individuals with DS often have difficulty speaking clearly enough to
be readily comprehensible to listeners across the life span resulting
in communication breakdowns, which can be frustrating to both
parties. Typical children are 90–100% intelligible by age 4 years.
In individuals with DS over 50% of parents reported frequent difficulties in intelligibility over the age of 5 years into adulthood, and
almost all qualify for a diagnosis of a motor speech disorder. Differences in voice quality, articulation, phonology, fluency, prosody, and
motor coordination (apraxia) all contribute to making speech hard to
understand (see Chapter 53). The complexity of speech impairments
in children with DS requires speech therapy evaluation with targeted
interventions for each individual.
Children with DS relative to children matched for nonverbal
skills show similar abilities in receptive vocabulary but impairments
in expressive vocabulary, syntax, grammar, and verbal short-­term

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

372 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
memory indicative of a specific language impairment (SLI). The
frequency of such impairments requires comprehensive language
assessment for all children with DS. The language impairment may
be associated with decreased ability to express thoughts and feelings
verbally and use of fewer words in answer to questions or to carry on
a conversation.
Misunderstandings may occur if the individual refers to past
events in the present tense or thinks that something described as a
future event will happen immediately. Verbal short-­term memory
deficits affect comprehension of more complex language (e.g., multistep instructions, complex sentences, conversation, and narrative)
and reading comprehension. Visual, contextual, and multisensory
supports incorporated into both receptive and expressive language
can be helpful.
Speech and language intervention has been shown to be effective,
especially when of higher intensity; focused on individual needs and
targeted skills; and when taking into account the individual’s age,
interests, and motivators. Use of applied behavior analysis to teach
communication skills improves outcomes. Incorporating interventions
across contexts (classroom, home, and community settings) and into
pragmatic language situations outside of structured learning settings
(e.g., peer interaction, conversation) supports generalization of skills
learned in therapy. For some individuals with DS, speech and language intervention will be required through school and possibly into
adulthood.

Social and Emotional Development

Social and emotional development occurs as a complex transactional
process between the child and their social partners. Children with
developmental delays will likely also have delays in their social interactions, social communication, and play. Children with DS often have
a strong orientation toward sociability. From early infancy, mutual
gaze in babies with DS emerges more slowly but once established
tends to last longer, with sometimes strong preferences for looking
at people as opposed to toys and other objects. Development of joint
attention is commensurate with developmental age-­matched peers
and may be a relative strength. Strong imitation skills are noted in
children with DS. Children with DS show stronger pro-­social empathetic responses to others’ distress, but their own expression of distress tends to be dampened (often described as high pain tolerance
or, in older children, a perceived reluctance to acknowledge feelings
of distress).
There are relative weaknesses in social development, which can help
explain some of the social difficulties caregivers encounter. Children
with DS have been shown to socially reference less frequently, with
shorter glances toward others, and some have more difficulty interpreting the facial expressions of others. Older children with DS have
more restricted repetitive behaviors and interests, including rigidity
and insistence on sameness. Despite typical social motivation, they
may have difficulties with social cognition and difficulty gaining and
maintaining friendships. Having friends has been associated with
improved quality of life in children with DS. Most adolescents are
happy with their level of friendships, but friends may include helpers
and adult companions. Leisure time is often spent at home with family
or by themselves, and socializing with same-­age peer-­friends occurs
predominantly in the context of common educational or community
activities. Building healthy sustained friendships with both TD peers
and those with developmental disabilities often requires active ongoing caregiver and community support to prevent social isolation and
loneliness as children transition to adulthood.

Cognition

Individuals with DS have varied degrees of intellectual and learning disabilities. Intelligence quotient (IQ) scores of adults with DS
are mostly in the 40s-­60s, and tests of adaptive functioning typically
have standard scores in the low 50s. In children with DS, IQ scores
tend to decline with age because progress is slower than same-­age

peers, and deficits are more marked in higher-­level thinking. Thus
the gap between children with DS and same-­age peers widens with
age. An actual plateau in functioning before mid-­adolescence or a
decline at any age is not typical and should prompt thorough etiologic
evaluation.
IQ scores are of limited value for intervention planning, as they
provide limited information about relative strengths and weaknesses. Children with DS often have relative strengths in areas of
imitation, implicit memory, visual spatial sequencing, visual spatial
construction, and nonverbal memory. Relative weaknesses tend to
occur in working memory capacity, explicit memory, verbal processing, auditory short-­term memory, more complex visual spatial
skills (mental rotation, closure, wayfinding), and executive functioning (see Chapter 49). Recognizing a child’s individual learning
profile and building on strengths while supporting weaknesses will
help caregivers, teachers, and therapists work together to teach children effectively to their potential.
Children’s reading skills are generally commensurate with their
nonverbal mental age. Many children with DS can learn to read,
some phonologically, some orthographically. Reading comprehension largely relies on language comprehension skills and is often
more difficult.
Mathematics is much more difficult because of weak working memory, language deficits, and fine motor skills. Math interventions generally include direct instruction, modeling, guided and repeated practice,
and use of concrete materials.

Neurobehavioral Challenges and Disorders
Autism Spectrum Disorder

Due to the sociability associated with children with DS, ASDs have
been underrecognized in the past but are estimated to occur in 15–20%
of children with DS. Studies also have shown that autism symptoms
are not attributable to the degree of developmental disability and that
individuals with DS and ASD are distinct from those with DS alone.
Children with DS who show high levels of repetitive behavior, maladaptive behaviors (e.g., aggression, self-­injury, destructive behaviors), social
isolation, or difficulty with reciprocal social interaction should be referred
for further evaluation, even when overtly sociable. Children with ASD
require specialized behavioral and educational interventions with an
emphasis on functional communication, social and play skills development, and sensory-­based supports (see Chapter 58).

ADHD

The reported incidence of ADHD in children with DS varies greatly,
from 14% to 44%. Inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity, the
core symptoms of ADHD, are nonspecific, and it can be difficult
to differentiate all the factors contributing to these symptoms in
children with DS (see Chapter 50). From a clinical perspective, the
diagnosis of ADHD relies on reports of ADHD symptoms from
two different settings (usually parent and teacher) and dysfunction
caused by the ADHD symptoms in areas such as learning, socialization, and safety. Medication use in ADHD has been shown to
be effective in children with DS, but the response rates are lower
than in typical peers with ADHD. Further, there are higher rates
of significant side effects, with some children showing decline in
behavior and cognitive performance on medication.

Aggression and Self-­Injurious Behaviors

Aggressive behavior is more common in children with many genetic
disorders, including DS. The estimated incidence in DS is 4–15%,
which is higher than the general population but less than many other
genetic syndromes. Aggression disproportionately affects quality of life
for the individual and family members and may result in the use of
medications and more restrictive educational placements. These behaviors occur more often in males and in individuals with ASD, ADHD,
or poor communication skills. Self-­injurious behavior (SIB) occurs in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 58 u Autism Spectrum Disorder
∼18%. Individuals with DS who engage in SIB are likely to have lower
cognitive and communication ability (may be nonverbal), more repetitive behaviors, higher levels of activity and impulsivity, and fewer social
interactions. Assessment of aggression or SIB should include a functional behavioral analysis (FBA) along with overall skills assessment
with emphasis on communication. New onset or escalation of aggression or SIB should also include careful assessment for potential sources
of pain or discomfort that may exacerbate these behaviors. Behavioral
interventions designed based on the results of the FBA should be the
initial intervention. Medications may be needed to address symptoms
of ADHD, irritability, mood, or anxiety.

Oppositional Behaviors

Disobedience and stubbornness are common. In some cases, this
behavior may relate, at least in part, to differences in cognitive
processing. Children with DS have difficulty shifting attention or
disengaging from activities. They often desire sameness and resist
changes to routine or to the way they think things should be done.
Difficulties with language comprehension or frustration with a task
or trying to express oneself may result in behaviors that are seen
as oppositional. When combined with difficulty problem solving,
low frustration tolerance, and emotional dysregulation, disruptive
or sometimes verbally or physically aggressive behaviors may result.
Before diagnosing a child as having oppositional defiant disorder
(see Chapter 42), clinicians should try to understand potential comprehension or skill deficits that may be contributing to the behavior. If the child has difficulty with transitions, interventions to help
them shift activities more easily such as transition routines, warnings, or countdowns may be most helpful. Visual schedules can also
be helpful to prepare the child for what is next, as can providing
some additional time for the transition. Simplifying language can
help avert communication frustration.

Anxiety

There is an increased prevalence of anxiety disorder in children
with DS compared with typical peers. Generally, anxiety disorders
are diagnosed based on verbal descriptions of fear or worry and the
impact of the fear or worrying on functioning or individual distress. Whereas some individuals with DS have the language skills
to describe these experiences, others do not. Clinicians often need
to rely on the history from caregivers and contextual cues. Behavioral reactions to anxiety can result in flight-­or-­fight responses.
Thus anxiety could manifest with aggressive or escape/avoidance
behaviors. Cognitive-­
behavioral therapy or exposure therapies
can be helpful, and medication management is sometimes needed
when anxiety is overwhelming or affects sleep or daytime functioning. Evidence for effectiveness of intervention in DS specifically is
sparse.

Obsessive-­Compulsive or Perseverative Behaviors

Children and adults with DS often need specific things to be a certain
way or may have repetitive patterns of behavior that can seem obsessive or compulsive. They may spend many minutes arranging pillows
on their bed, need all doors in the house to be shut, make long lists,
or perseveratively ask about upcoming events. These behaviors can be
associated with anxiety, and the possibility of increased anxiety should
be investigated if there are sudden increases in intensity or frequency
of these behaviors.

Depression

The prevalence of depression in DS ranges from 4% to 11%, with
most studies being done in adults. This may be an underestimation,
as depression in individuals with intellectual disability can be difficult to diagnose because of limited abilities to self-­report internal
mood states. Behavioral symptoms can include anxiety, increases
in obsessive-­compulsive behaviors, depressed affect, crying for no
reason, lack of emotion, social isolation, anhedonia, irritability with

373

increases in outbursts or aggression, sleep disturbance, psychomotor retardation, low self-­esteem, catatonia, and psychosis. Clinicians
need to consider potential contributing factors, including medical
factors, recent life stressors, trauma, and family history. Anecdotally, interventions that involve reengagement in previously enjoyed
activities and treatment with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) can be effective.

Catatonia (Also Known as Down Syndrome
Disintegrative Disorder or Down Syndrome
Regression Disorder)

Older children and young adults can experience a sudden regression
in communication, socialization, and daily living skills associated with
psychomotor retardation, negative mood or mood lability, refusal to
participate in activities, social withdrawal, and insomnia with signs
and symptoms of catatonia on the Bush Frances Catatonia Scale (see
Chapter 47.3). Patients should undergo a medical evaluation for
mental status change. Contributing etiologic factors include stressful
events, depression, anxiety, or high physiologic stress. Treatment consists of addressing the underlying suspected cause and may include a
trial of Ativan and then electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) if Ativan is
unsuccessful.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 58

Autism Spectrum Disorder
Carolyn F. Bridgemohan and
Carol C. Weitzman

DEFINITION

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurobiologic disorder with
onset in early childhood. The key features are impairment in social
communication and social interaction and restricted and repetitive
behaviors. The presentation of ASD can vary significantly from one
individual to another, as well as over the course of development for a
particular child. There is currently no diagnostic biomarker for ASD.
Accurate diagnosis therefore requires careful review of the history and
direct observation of the child’s behavior.

DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA AND SYMPTOMS

The diagnostic criteria in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fifth
Edition (DSM-­5) focus on symptoms in two primary domains: (1)
social communication and social interaction and (2) restricted interests and repetitive behaviors (Table 58.1). To meet criteria for ASD,
the symptoms need to have been present since the early developmental period, significantly affect functioning, and not be better explained
by the diagnosis of intellectual disability (ID) or global developmental
delay (GDD; Chapter 56). Table 58.2 provides associated features not
included in the DSM-­5 criteria.
Symptoms can present in infancy, with reduced response to name
and unusual use of objects being strong predictors for risk of ASD.
However, symptoms before age 12 months are not as reliably predictive of later diagnosis. Individuals with milder severity may not present

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

374 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 58.1  DSM-­5 Diagnostic Criteria for Autism Spectrum
Disorder
A.	Persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction
across multiple contexts, as manifested by the following, currently
or by history:
1.	Deficits in social-­emotional reciprocity.
2.	Deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviors used for social
interaction.
3.	Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding
relationships.
B.	Restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, as
manifested by at least two of the following, currently or by history:
1.	Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or
speech.
2.	Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or
ritualized patterns of verbal or nonverbal behavior.
3.	Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in
intensity or focus.
4.	Hyperreactivity or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual
interest in sensory aspects of the environment.
C.	Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (may
not become fully manifest until social demands exceed limited
capacities, or may be masked by learned strategies in later life).
D.	Symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of current functioning.
E.	These disturbances are not better explained by intellectual
disability (intellectual developmental disorder) or global
developmental delay.
From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition.
(Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association, pp. 50–51.

Table 58.2  Associated Features of Autism Not in DSM-­5
Criteria
Atypical language development and abilities
Age <6 yr: frequently disordered and delayed in comprehension;
two thirds have difficulty with expressive phonology and grammar
Age ≥6 yr: disordered pragmatics, semantics, and morphology,
with relatively intact articulation and syntax (i.e., early difficulties
are resolved)
Motor abnormalities: motor delay; hypotonia; catatonia; deficits in
coordination, movement preparation and planning, praxis, gait,
and balance
For version with full references, see American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition. Washington DC: American
Psychiatric Association; 2013. Adapted from Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Baron-­Cohen S.
Autism. Lancet. 2014;383:896–910.

until preschool or school age, when the social demands for peer interaction and group participation are higher.

Social Communication and Social Interaction

Individuals with ASD have difficulty understanding and engaging in
social relationships. The problems are pervasive and affect three major
areas: social-­emotional reciprocity, nonverbal communication, and
understanding of social relationships. The presentation can vary with
severity and developmental functioning. A diagnosis of ASD requires
the presence of symptoms from all three categories (Table 58.3).

Social-­Emotional Reciprocity

Reduced social interactions in ASD may range from active avoidance
or reduced social response to having an interest in, but lacking ability
to initiate or sustain, an interaction with peers or adults. A young child
with ASD may not respond when their name is called, may exhibit limited showing and sharing behaviors, and may prefer solitary play. In

addition, the child may avoid attempts by others to play and may not
participate in activities that require taking turns, such as peek-­a-­boo
and ball play. An older child with ASD may have an interest in peers
but may not know how to initiate or join in play. The child may have
trouble understanding the rules of conversation and may either talk at
length about an area of interest or abruptly exit the interaction. Younger
children often have limited capacity for imaginative or pretend play.
Older children may engage in play and conversation but lack flexibility
and may be highly directive to peers. Some children with ASD interact
well with adults but struggle to interact with same-­age peers.

Nonverbal Communicative Behavior

Difficulties with nonverbal communication may manifest as reduced or
overly intense use of eye contact and gestures such as pointing. Children
may also show reduced awareness or response to the eye gaze or pointing
of others. They may use eye contact only when communicating a highly
preferred request or may have difficulty coordinating the use of nonverbal with verbal communication. Children with ASD may have limited
range of facial social-­communicative expression or expressed emotion.

Developing, Maintaining, and Understanding
Relationships

Children with ASD have limited insight regarding social relationships.
They may have difficulty understanding the difference between a true
friend and a casual acquaintance, and even when the definitions are
well understood, there may still be difficulty in developing and maintaining more intimate relationships They have trouble picking up on
the nuances of social interactions and understanding social expectations for polite behavior. They may have reduced understanding of personal boundaries and may stand too close to others. In addition, they
can have trouble understanding and inferring others’ emotions and are
less likely to share emotion or enjoyment with others. Adolescents and
young adults have difficulty engaging in group interactions and navigating romantic relationships.

Restrictive and Repetitive Behavior

A diagnosis of ASD requires the presence of two of the four symptoms
of restrictive and repetitive patterns of behavior discussed next.

Stereotyped Motor Movements or Speech

Stereotyped (or stereotypic) movements and repetitive behaviors
may include hand flapping, finger movements, body rocking and
lunging, jumping, running and spinning, and repetitive speech such
as echoing words immediately after they are said. Repetitive patterns of play may be present, such as lining up objects, repetitively
turning light switches on and off or opening and closing doors,
spinning objects, or arranging toys in a specific manner. These
repetitive patterns may not be seen in very young toddlers but may
develop as they get older. Stereotyped movements can change over
time and in older children are seen more often in individuals with
lower cognitive functioning.

Insistence on Sameness

Children with ASD have difficulty tolerating transitions or change.
They may insist on certain routines or schedules and can become
very distressed with unexpected events or new situations. They may
repeat scripts from shows or movies or watch the same portion of
a video repeatedly. Intolerance for change can cause significant
impairment and irritability and have an effect on child and family
function.

Restricted Interests

This symptom may manifest as interests that seem of greater intensity
when compared to same-­age peers. Younger children may play with a
limited range of toys or may insist on retaining a small object in each
hand. Older children may have a strong preference for a particular
story or movie. The area of interest may be shared by peers (e.g., Disney movies, Legos, Thomas the Train) but unusual in its intensity.
Other affected children may have interests that are both intense and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 58 u Autism Spectrum Disorder

375

Table 58.3  Signs and Symptoms of Possible Autism in Preschool Children (or Equivalent Mental Age)
Spoken Language
Language delay (in babbling or using words; e.g., using <10 words
by age 2 yr).
Regression in, or loss of, use of speech.
Spoken language (if present) may include unusual features, such
as vocalizations that are not speechlike; odd or flat intonation;
frequent repetition of set words and phrases (echolalia); reference
to self by name or “you” or “she” or “he” beyond age 3 yr.
Reduced and/or infrequent use of language for communication (e.g.,
use of single words, although able to speak in sentences).
Responding to Others
Absent or delayed response to name being called, despite normal
hearing.
Reduced or absent responsive social smiling.
Reduced or absent responsiveness to other people’s facial
expressions or feelings.
Unusually negative response to the requests of others (“demand
avoidance” behavior).
Rejection of cuddles initiated by parent or caregiver, although the
child may initiate cuddles.
Interacting with Others
Reduced or absent awareness of personal space, or unusually
intolerant of people entering their personal space.
Reduced or absent social interest in others, including children of
own age—may reject others; if interested in others, child may
approach others inappropriately, seeming to be aggressive or
disruptive.
Reduced or absent imitation of others’ actions.
Reduced or absent initiation of social play with others; plays alone.
Reduced or absent enjoyment of situations that most children like
(e.g., birthday parties).
Reduced or absent sharing of enjoyment.

Eye Contact, Pointing, and Other Gestures
Reduced or absent use of gestures and facial expressions
to communicate (although may place an adult’s hand on
objects).
Reduced and poorly integrated gestures, facial expressions, body
orientation, eye contact (looking at people’s eyes when speaking),
and speech used in social communication.
Reduced or absent social use of eye contact (assuming adequate
vision).
Reduced or absent “joint attention” (when one person alerts another
to something by means of gazing, finger pointing, or other verbal
or nonverbal indication for the purpose of sharing interest). This
would be evident in the child from lack of:
Gaze switching
Following a point (looking where the other person points to—may
look at hand)
Using pointing at or showing objects to share interest
Ideas and Imagination
Reduced or absent imagination and variety of pretend play.
Unusual or Restricted Interests and/or Rigid and Repetitive
Behaviors
Repetitive “stereotypic” movements such as hand flapping, body
rocking while standing, spinning, and finger flicking.
Repetitive or stereotyped play (e.g., opening and closing doors).
Overfocused or unusual interests.
Excessive insistence on following own agenda.
Extremes of emotional reactivity to change or new situations;
insistence on things being “the same.”
Overreaction or underreaction to sensory stimuli, such as textures,
sounds, or smells.
Excessive reaction to the taste, smell, texture, or appearance of
food, or having extreme food fads.

Adapted from Baird G, Douglas HR, Murphy MS. Recognizing and diagnosing autism in children and young people: Summary of NICE guidance. BMJ. 2011;343:d6360, Box 1, p. 901.

unusual, such as an interest in brands of vehicles, license plate numbers, or fans and heating systems. These interests interfere with social
interactions; a child may only want to talk about their area of interest
or may insist that peers act out a particular story in a rigid and inflexible manner.

Hyporeactivity or Hyperreactivity to Sensory Input

Children with ASD may be overly sensitive to sensory input, such
as noise, smells, or texture. Children may scream or react strongly
when they hear a siren or vacuum and may gag and choke with certain foods or odors. They may refuse to wear certain clothing or may
become very distressed with bathing or with cutting nails and hair.
Conversely, some affected children seem to crave sensory input. They
may engage in repetitive jumping or hugging and may smell or lick
objects or people. Young children may inappropriately touch the face
or hair of others.
Diagnosing ASD with DSM-­5 criteria can be challenging in very
young children because of reduced expression of repetitive behaviors,
particularly stereotyped behavior and intense interests. Studies monitoring development in high-­risk young children who have an older
sibling with ASD indicate these additional symptoms may emerge
over time. This creates a dilemma for specialty clinicians evaluating
very young children for ASD, because they may not be able to endorse
sufficient symptoms to make an early diagnosis and access specialized
intervention services.

Severity Levels Defined in DSM-­5

Severity levels in ASD are based on the level of support the individual
requires in each of the major domains impacted—social communication and restricted interests and repetitive behavior. Levels range from
“needing support” (level 1), to “needing substantial support” (level 2),
to “needing very substantial support” (level 3) (Table 58.4).

Specifiers Defined in DSM-­5

A formal diagnosis of ASD also includes documenting associated
conditions, including whether the individual has cognitive and/or
language impairment; any related medical, genetic, or environmental factors; and any other neurodevelopmental or behavioral health
conditions, including catatonia (Table 58.5). This process helps
to better characterize the presentation in an individual child and
ensures that the diagnosis has been made by considering the symptoms in the context of the child’s current cognitive and language
abilities.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The prevalence of ASD is estimated at 1 in 36 persons by the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). This information comes from prevalence data of 8-­year-­olds derived from
11 sites participating in the Autism and Developmental Disabilities Network (ADDM) and shows a greater than 300% increase in
prevalence since systematic surveillance began in the year 2000.
The increased prevalence relates, at least in part, to improved diagnosis and case finding, as well as inclusion of less severe presentations within the autism spectrum. There is a 4:1 male predominance,
although new emerging information suggests that the prevalence in
females may be higher than previously believed. Females with ASD
often use “camouflaging,” which is intentionally or unconsciously
hiding social communication difficulties by mimicking the facial
expressions of others, having more effective compensatory behaviors, and displaying less clearly unusual preoccupying interests. All
of these things, including clinician bias, may decrease girls with
ASD being diagnosed. The prevalence is increased in siblings (up
to 18% recurrence rate) and particularly in identical twins. There
are no racial or ethnic differences in prevalence. Individuals from
racial minorities and lower socioeconomic status are at risk for later

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

376 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 58.4  DSM-­5 Severity Levels for Autism Spectrum Disorder
SEVERITY LEVEL

SOCIAL COMMUNICATION

RESTRICTED, REPETITIVE BEHAVIORS

Level 3
“Requiring very
­substantial
­support”

Severe deficits in verbal and nonverbal social communication skills cause
severe impairments in functioning, very limited initiation of social
interactions, and minimal response to social overtures from others.
For example, a person with few words of intelligible speech who
rarely initiates interaction and, when he or she does, makes unusual
approaches to meet needs only and responds to only very direct social
approaches.

Inflexibility of behavior, extreme difficulty
coping with change, or other restricted/
repetitive behaviors markedly interfere with
functioning in all spheres. Great distress/
difficulty changing focus or action.

Level 2
“Requiring
substantial
support”

Marked deficits in verbal and nonverbal social communication skills;
social impairments apparent even with supports in place; limited
initiation of social interactions; and reduced or abnormal responses to
social overtures from others. For example, a person who speaks simple
sentences, whose interaction is limited to narrow special interests, and
who has markedly odd nonverbal communication.

Inflexibility of behavior, difficulty coping with
change, or other restricted/repetitive behaviors
appear frequently enough to be obvious to the
casual observer and interfere with functioning
in a variety of contexts. Distress and/or difficulty
changing focus or action.

Level 1
“Requiring support”

Without supports in place, deficits in social communication cause
noticeable impairments. Difficulty initiating social interactions,
and clear examples of atypical or unsuccessful responses to social
overtures of others. May appear to have decreased interest in social
interactions. For example, a person who is able to speak in full
sentences and engages in communication but whose to-­and-­fro
conversation with others fails and whose attempts to make friends are
odd and typically unsuccessful.

Inflexibility of behavior causes significant
interference with functioning in one or
more contexts. Difficulty switching between
activities. Problems of organization and
planning hamper independence.

From the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed (Copyright 2013). American Psychiatric Association, p. 52.

diagnosis, although the most recent prevalence data suggest that
this gap is closing.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of ASD is thought to result from disrupted neural connectivity and is primarily impacted by genetic variations affecting
early brain development. Animal models and studies of individuals
with ASD indicate changes in brain volume and neural cell density
in the limbic system, cerebellum, and frontotemporal regions. One
study documented changes in early brain development, characterized as “hyperexpansion of cortical surface area,” at age 6-­12 months
on brain MRI, which correlated with later development of impaired
social skills. Functional studies show abnormalities of processing
information, particularly related to foundational social skills such
as facial recognition. The disruptions in early brain development
likely are responsive to treatment. Early developmental therapies in
young children with ASD have demonstrated the capacity for normalization of electrophysiologic response to visual stimuli, including faces.
Numerous genes involved in brain development and synaptic function have been associated with ASD. Pathogenic variants that include
large genetic deletions or duplications and small sequencing changes
have been implicated; these can be inherited or occur de novo. Heterozygous mutations in genes, such as present in deletion or duplication
of 15q11.2 or 16p11.2, may have variable expression within a family.
Rare recessive mutations have been implicated in some populations
with high levels of consanguinity. Patients with a number of genetic
syndromes (e.g., fragile X, Down, Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz, Rett, Angelman,
Timothy, Joubert), as well as disorders of metabolism and mitochondrial function have higher rates of ASD than the general population
(Tables 58.5, 58.6, and 58.7).
There is also possible evidence for environmental contributions to
ASD. Older maternal or paternal age may increase the risk of ASD.
In addition, factors influencing the intrauterine environment, such as
maternal obesity or overweight, short interval from prior pregnancy,
premature birth, and certain prenatal infections (e.g., rubella, cytomegalovirus), are associated with ASD. Population-­level associations
have been investigated for environmental toxins such as organophosphates, pesticides, air pollution, and volatile organic compounds. An
epigenetic model is considered one explanation for the etiology; individuals with genetic vulnerability may be more sensitive to environmental factors influencing early brain development.

Despite frequent concerns from families that vaccines or the preservatives in vaccines lead to ASD, there is no evidence to support this
claim. Multiple research studies and meta-­analyses have failed to show
an association of vaccines with ASD.
No biomarkers are available yet, but there is emerging evidence from
neuroimaging findings, electrophysiologic testing, and eye tracking
that hold the promise for presymptomatic detection along with accurate clinical diagnosis and prognostic assessment.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of ASD is complex because many conditions
in the differential can also occur with ASD. The most important conditions to consider in young children are language disorder (see Chapter
53), ID or GDD (Chapter 56), and hearing loss (Chapter 55). Children
with language disorder may have impairments in social communication and play; their social and play skills, however, are typically
on par with their language level. In addition, they do not have associated restricted and repetitive behavior or atypical use of language,
such as scripting. The diagnosis of social communication disorder
is also distinguished from ASD by the lack of restrictive and repetitive behaviors. Children with ID or GDD may have delays in social
and communication skills as well as stereotyped behavior. However,
social and communication skills are typically commensurate with their
cognitive and adaptive functioning. Children with hearing loss may
present with some “red flags” for ASD, such as poor response to
name. However, they typically develop nonverbal communication
and play skills as expected and do not have stereotyped or restricted
behavior patterns.
In older children, disorders of attention, learning, and mood regulation must be considered in the differential diagnosis of ASD. Children
with attention-­
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) may present with reduced eye contact and response to name caused by poor
attention rather than lack of social awareness. Children with ADHD,
however, do not have associated impairments in shared enjoyment and
social reciprocity or repetitive behaviors. Children with social anxiety
or other anxiety disorders may present with some symptoms suggestive
of ASD. Shy children may have reduced eye contact and social initiation. Anxious children can be resistant to change and prefer familiar
routines. Children with anxiety, however, typically will have preserved
social interest and insight and will not exhibit high levels of stereotyped
behaviors. Reactive attachment disorder can be difficult to distinguish
from ASD, particularly in younger children with a history of prolonged

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 58 u Autism Spectrum Disorder

377

Table 58.5  Common Co-­occurring Conditions in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)
COMORBIDITY

INDIVIDUALS WITH
AUTISM AFFECTED

DEVELOPMENTAL DISORDERS
Intellectual disability

∼45%

Language disorders

Variable

Tic disorders
Motor abnormality

14–38%
≤79%

GENERAL MEDICAL DISORDERS
Epilepsy

35-46%

Gastrointestinal problems

9–70%

Immune dysregulation
Genetic disorders

≤38%
10–20%

Sleep disorders

50–80%

BEHAVIORAL HEALTH DISORDERS
Any behavioral health disorder
ADHD
Anxiety

70–90%
40–70%
∼40%

Catatonia

Unknown

Depression

12–70%

Obsessive-­compulsive disorder
(OCD)

7–24%

Psychotic disorders

12–17%

Substance use disorders
Oppositional defiant disorder

≤16%
16–28%

Eating disorders

10-21%

COMMENTS
Prevalence estimate is affected by the diagnostic boundary and definition of
intelligence (e.g., whether verbal ability is used as a criterion).
In individuals, discrepant performance between subtests is common.
An autism-­specific language profile (separate from language disorders) exists, but with
substantial interindividual variability.
∼6.5% have Tourette syndrome.
See Table 58.2.
Increased frequency in individuals with intellectual disability or genetic syndromes.
Two peaks of onset: early childhood and adolescence.
Increases risk of poor outcome.
Common symptoms include chronic constipation, abdominal pain, chronic diarrhea,
cyclic vomiting, and gastroesophageal reflux.
Associated disorders include gastritis, esophagitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease,
inflammatory bowel disease, celiac disease, Crohn disease, and colitis.
Associated with allergic and autoimmune disorders.
Collectively called syndromic autism.
Examples include fragile X syndrome (21–50% of individuals affected have autism), Rett
syndrome (most have autistic features but with profiles different from idiopathic autism),
tuberous sclerosis complex (24–60%), Down syndrome (5–39%), phenylketonuria (5–20%),
CHARGE syndrome* (15–50%), Angelman syndrome (50–81%), Timothy syndrome
(60–70%), and Joubert syndrome (∼40%).
Insomnia is the most common.

Common across all age-­groups.
Most common are social anxiety disorder (13–29% of individuals with autism) and
generalized anxiety disorder (13–22%).
High-­functioning individuals are more susceptible (or symptoms are more detectable).
Autism shutdown disorder similar to Down syndrome disintegrative disorder
(see Chapters 47.3 and 57).
Common in adults, less common in children.
High-­functioning adults who are less socially impaired are more susceptible (or
symptoms are more detectable).
Shares the repetitive behavior domain with autism that could cut across nosologic
categories.
Important to distinguish between repetitive behaviors that do not involve intrusive,
anxiety-­causing thoughts or obsessions (part of autism) and those that do (and are
part of OCD).
Mainly in adults.
Most commonly recurrent hallucinosis.
High frequency of autism-­like features (even a diagnosis of ASD) preceding adult-­onset
(52%) and childhood-­onset schizophrenia (30–50%).
Potentially because individual is using substances as self-­medication to relieve anxiety.
Oppositional behaviors could be a manifestation of anxiety, resistance to change,
stubborn belief in the correctness of own point of view, difficulty seeing another’s
point of view, poor awareness of the effect of own behavior on others, or no interest
in social compliance.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake may lead to nutrient deficiencies and poor growth.

PERSONALITY DISORDERS†
Paranoid personality disorder

0–19%

Schizoid personality disorder
Schizotypal personality
disorder
Borderline personality disorder

21–26%
2–13%

Obsessive-­compulsive
personality disorder
Avoidant personality disorder

19–32%

Could have similarity in behaviors (e.g., difficulties in interpersonal relationships,
misattributing hostile intentions, problems with affect regulation), which requires
careful differential diagnosis.
Could be a misdiagnosis of autism, particularly in females.
Partly overlapping diagnostic criteria.

13–25%

Could be secondary to repeated failure in social experiences.

0–9%

Could be secondary to difficulty understanding others’ intentions and negative
interpersonal experiences.
Partly overlapping diagnostic criteria.
Some overlapping criteria, especially those shared with schizoid personality disorder.

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

378 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 58.5  Common Co-­occurring Conditions in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)—cont’d
INDIVIDUALS WITH
AUTISM AFFECTED

COMORBIDITY
BEHAVIORAL DISORDERS
Aggressive behaviors

≤68%

Self-­injurious behaviors

≤50%

Pica

∼36%

Suicidal ideation or attempt

11–14%

COMMENTS
Often directed toward caregivers rather than noncaregivers.
Could be a result of empathy difficulties, anxiety, sensory overload, disruption of
routines, and difficulties with communication.
Associated with impulsivity and hyperactivity, negative affect, and lower levels of ability
and speech.
Could signal frustration in individuals with reduced communication, as well as anxiety,
sensory overload, or disruption of routines.
Could also become a repetitive habit.
Could cause tissue damage and need for restraint.
More likely in individuals with intellectual disability.
Could be a result of a lack of social conformity to cultural categories of what is deemed
edible, or sensory exploration, or both.
Risks increase with concurrent depression and behavioral problems and after being
teased or bullied.

*Coloboma of the eye; heart defects; atresia of the choanae; retardation of growth and development, or both; genital and urinary abnormalities, or both; and ear abnormalities and deafness.
†Particularly in high-­functioning adults.
DSM-­IV, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition; DSM-­5, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition.
Adapted from Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Baron-­Cohen S. Autism. Lancet. 2014;383:896–910.

Table 58.6  Syndromes with Autistic-­Like Behaviors
CHROMOSOME DELETIONS
1q21
7q11.28
16p11.2
17q12
2q23.1 (MBD5*)
12q24.3
Cri-­du-­chat (5p15.2-­p15.33)
22q deletion syndrome
Jacobsen (11q23.2)
Phelan-­McDermid (SHANK3;
22q13)
Pitt-Hopkins (18q21.2)
CHROMOSOME DUPLICATIONS
15q11.1-­q13.3
7q11.23
18q12.2
16p11.2
1q21.1
22q11.2
Potocki-Lupski (17p11.2)
EPILEPSY ENCEPHALOPATHIES,
EPILEPSY
Cortical dysplasia focal epilepsy
SCN1A-­related syndromes
(Dravet, Lennox Gastaut, others)
Early myoclonic encephalopathies
(Ohtahara: STXBP1, ARX, SIK1)
SCN2A-­related syndromes
(West, others)
SLC6A1 myotonic-­atonic
epilepsy
HCN1-­related epilepsies
CDKL5
SCN8A
PCDH19
SCL35A2-­related disorders
Epilepsy-­aphasia spectrum
(Landau-­Kleffner; GRIN2A;
continuous spike wave during
low-­wave sleep)
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
(RING2)

OTHER SYNDROMES
2q37 monosomy
Angelman
Bardet-­Biedl
Cardiofaciocutaneous
CHARGE association
Cohen
Congenital rubella
Cornelia de Lange
Costello
FOXG1 variants
Fragile X
Hypomelanosis of Ito
Joubert
Kleefstra (EHMT1)
Lujan-­Fryns
Moebius sequence
Muscle-­eye brain disease
Myotonic dystrophy
Neurofibromatosis
Nonsyndromic intellectual
disability due to SYNGAP1
variants
Noonan
Oculoauriculovertebral spectrum
(including Goldenhar)
Partial monosomy 1p36
Partial tetrasomy 15
Prader-­Willi
PTEN variants
Rett complex (female >> male)
Ring chromosome 14
SETD1B variants
Sex chromosome aneuploidies
Sashi-­Pena (ASXL2)
Smith-­Lemli-­Opitz
Smith-­Magenis
Sotos
Timothy
Tolchin-­Le Caignec (TOLCAS)
Trisomy 21
Tuberous sclerosis
WAGR
Wiedemann-­Steiner (KMT2A)
Williams

*Italics denoted affected gene
Modified from Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric
Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 32.6, p. 537.

Table 58.7  Inborn Errors of Metabolism with Autistic-­Like
Behavior
Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency
Biotinidase deficiency
Cerebral creatinine deficiency
Cerebral folate deficiency
Ceroid lipofuscinosis (infantile)
Cystathionine β-­synthase deficiency
Dihydropyrimidinase deficiency
Disorders of creatine transport or metabolism
Homocystinuria
Lesch-­Nyhan syndrome
Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency
Mitochondrial disorders
Mucopolysaccharidosis
Phenylketonuria (untreated)
Modified from Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric
Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 32.8, p. 539.

neglect or trauma. However, social behaviors in these children generally improve with positive caretaking.
The differentiation of ASD from obsessive-­compulsive disorder
(OCD), tics, and stereotyped behaviors can sometimes be challenging.
In general, stereotyped behaviors may be calming or preferred, whereas
tics and compulsive routines generally are distressing to the individual.
Children with OCD have intense interests, as well as repetitive behaviors and rituals, but do not have impairment in social communication
or interaction. Children with stereotypic movement disorder will not
have impaired social skills or other types of restricted and repetitive
behaviors. Children with Landau Kleffner syndrome (LKS) present
with a loss of skills in language comprehension (auditory verbal agnosia) and verbal expression (aphasia) associated with onset of epileptic
seizures during sleep (see Chapter 53). In contrast to ASD, children
with LKS usually present with typical early development followed by
loss of language function at age 3-­6 years.

CO-­OCCURRING CONDITIONS

Between 35% and 50% of individuals with ASD have ID, ranging in
severity from mild to severe (see Table 58.5). An additional 23% of
children have intellectual functioning in the borderline range (IQ
= 71-­85), and approximately 40% of individuals with ASD are nonverbal. ID is associated with higher rates of both identified genetic
conditions and epilepsy. Children with ASD often have associated
language impairments, including delays in expressive, receptive,
and pragmatic (social) language skills. Language function can range

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 58 u Autism Spectrum Disorder
widely from nonverbal status to age appropriate. Gastrointestinal
(GI) problems such as cyclic vomiting, constipation, esophagitis,
and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) are reported in up to
70% of children with ASD. Epilepsy occurs in up to 35–46% of children with ASD and presents in two peaks: in early childhood and in
adolescence. Children with ID, female gender, and lower gestational
age are at higher risk for having seizures.
Overall, between 70% and 90% of children with ASD are identified
as having a co-­occurring behavioral health condition, with ADHD
being the most common, occurring in between 40% and 70% of children with ASD. There are higher rates of anxiety (∼40%) and mood
disorders in ASD, particularly during adolescence. Children with ASD
are also at increased risk for being bullied and may present with secondary irritability, anxiety, or depression. Adolescents may develop
gender-­nonconforming roles, gender variance, and transgender identities; this may also lead to being bullied. Children with ASD are at high
risk for suicidal ideation and attempts. Catatonia can also occur, most
commonly developing during the teenage years, and may present with
changes in activity level, unusual movements, and behavioral regression or loss of skills (Chapter 47.3).
Sleep problems, including delayed sleep onset, frequent night waking, and abnormal sleep architecture, are reported in 50–80% of children with ASD. There is some evidence for baseline abnormalities in
melatonin secretion. The use of screen-­based activities such as television, computers, or tablets before bedtime can inhibit melatonin
secretion.
Children with ASD commonly have high rates of feeding and
toileting problems resulting from resistance to change, sensory
sensitivity, and repetitive behavior patterns. Many children with
ASD have restrictive feeding patterns and food selectivity. DSM-­5
introduced the diagnosis of avoidant and restrictive food intake
disorder (ARFID) that, although not specific to children with
ASD, describes a pattern of a severely disturbed eating experience
resulting in nutritional deficiency or inadequate weight gain and
may affect as many as 21% of children with ASD. Restrictive eating
patterns may lead to nutritional deficiencies, such as scurvy, rickets, anemia, or protein malnutrition. Children with ASD also have
higher rates of overweight, possibly because of diets higher in carbohydrates, reduced physical activity, use of food rewards to regulate behavior, and side effects from medications used for managing
mood and behavior. As many as 25% of preschool-­age children with
ASD have pica (eating of nonfood items), and this tends to persist
in children with co-­occurring ID.
Self-­injury and aggression are common in ASD patients, but most
common in individuals with lower cognitive function and limited language. Sleep deprivation, nutritional deficits, pain, epilepsy, and medication side effects may contribute to these behaviors.
Wandering frequently co-­occurs with ASD, with nearly 50% of children between 4 and 10 years of age reported as trying to elope. In children who were missing long enough to call the police, approximately
66% were at risk for traffic-­related injury and nearly 30% had near-­
drowning events, which is the leading cause of death in children who
wander.

SCREENING

The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends screening for ASD
for all children at age 18 months and 24 months (see Chapter 28).
Screening should also occur when there is increased risk for ASD, such
as a child with an older sibling who has ASD, or whenever there is
concern for possible ASD. Screening can be done by a parent checklist
or direct assessment. The most frequently used screening tool is the
Modified Checklist for Autism, Revised/Follow-­Up Interview (MCHAT­R/FU), a 20-­item parent report measure, with additional standardized
parent interview completed for intermediate scores. The MCHAT-­R/
FU can be used from age 16-­30 months. Children who score ≥8 or
between 3 and 7 after the parent interview are at high risk for a diagnosis of ASD or some developmental delay. The Parent’s Observation
of Social Interaction (POSI) is another commonly used autism specific
screener. It includes seven items.

379

ASSESSMENT

Diagnostic assessment optimally should include medical evaluation
and assessment of the child’s cognitive, language, and adaptive function. Developmental-­
behavioral pediatricians, neurodevelopmental
disability specialists, neurologists, psychiatrists, and psychologists are
qualified to make a formal diagnosis of ASD. Other specialists, including speech-­language pathologists and occupational therapists, should
also be included depending on the child’s age and the presenting
concerns.
Assessment of ASD includes direct observation of the child to
evaluate social-­communicative skills and behavior. Informal observation can be supplemented with structured diagnostic tools such as
the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, Second Edition (ADOS-­
2) or the Toddler module (ADOS-­T). These structured play-­based
assessments provide social prompts and opportunities to evaluate the
frequency and quality of a child’s social responsiveness to, initiation,
and maintenance of social interactions, the capacity for joint attention and shared enjoyment; the child’s behavioral flexibility; and the
presence of repetitive patterns of behavior and preoccupying interests. These measures also provide some understanding of a child’s
insight about social relationships and emotional awareness. The
ADOS-­2 and ADOS-­T are not required for accurate diagnosis and do
not stand alone, but rather can be used to augment a careful history
and observation. The Childhood Autism Rating Scale, Second Edition
(CARS-­2) is a 15-­item direct clinical observation instrument that
can assist clinicians in the diagnosis of ASD. The Autism Diagnostic
Interview-­Revised (ADI-­R) is a lengthy clinical interview tool that is
used primarily in research settings because it takes several hours to
administer. Other tools include standardized rating scales, such as
the Social Responsiveness Scale or the Social Communication Questionnaire, that parents and teachers can complete to report on the
child’s social skills and behaviors. There is an emergence of the use of
telehealth to assess children with ASD, and preliminary studies have
suggested that 80% of children could be determined to have or not
have ASD with reasonable certainty.
Medical evaluation should include a thorough history and detailed
physical examination of the child, including direct behavioral observations of communication and play. In addition, the examination should
include measurement of head circumference, careful evaluation for
dysmorphic features, and screening for tuberous sclerosis with Wood
lamp exam. Children with ASD should have genetic testing, an audiology examination to rule out hearing loss, and in children with pica, a
lead test (Table 58.8).
There are currently several specialty-­specific clinical guidelines for
genetic evaluation of children diagnosed with ASD. Genetic testing is
shown to impact clinical decision-­making, but no studies have evaluated the impact of genetic testing on the outcome for the child. The
American College of Medical Genetics recommends a tiered approach
to genetic testing.

Initial Etiologic Assessment

All children with ASD should have a chromosomal microarray
(CMA). CMA will be positive in 10–15% of individuals with ASD.
The rate is increased to almost 30% in individuals who have complex
presentations, such as associated microcephaly, dysmorphic features,
congenital anomalies, or seizures. CMA technology will identify copy
number variants but not DNA sequencing errors, balanced translocations, or abnormalities in trinucleotide repeat length. Fragile X DNA
testing is recommended for all males with ASD. Fragile X testing should
also be considered in females with physical features suggestive of fragile X syndrome or with a family history of fragile X, X-­linked pattern of
ID, tremor/ataxia, or premature ovarian failure (see Chapter 59).

Second Tier Etiologic Assessment

Females with ASD should have testing for pathologic variants in the
MeCP2 gene. Males who have hypotonia, drooling, and frequent respiratory infections should have MeCP2 deletion/duplication testing.
All individuals with ASD and a head circumference greater than 2.5

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

380 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 58.8  Medical and Genetic Evaluation of Children
with Autism Spectrum Disorder
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Dysmorphic physical features
Muscle tone and reflexes
Head circumference
Wood lamp examination for tuberous sclerosis
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Chromosomal microarray (CMA) in all individuals
Fragile X DNA test in males
Audiology and vision evaluation
Lead test in children with pica
ADDITIONAL TARGETED GENETIC TESTING
Fragile X DNA test in females with symptoms suggestive of fragile
X, family history of X-­linked intellectual disability, tremor, ataxia, or
premature ovarian failure
MeCP2 sequencing in females
PTEN testing if head circumference >2.5 standard deviations (SD)
above the mean
MeCP2 deletion/duplication testing in males with significant
developmental regression, drooling, respiratory infections, and
hypotonia
Karyotype if unable to obtain CMA or if balanced translocation
suspected
ADDITIONAL TARGETED DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
Electroencephalogram (EEG) in children with seizures, staring spells,
or developmental regression
Brain MRI in children with dysmorphology, microcephaly, focal neurologic
findings, seizures, severe hypotonia, or developmental regression
Metabolic testing in children with developmental regression,
hypotonia, seizures, food intolerance, cyclic vomiting, lethargy,
hearing loss, ataxia, or course facial features
Exome or genome sequencing if atypical features are present
(behavioral or dysmorphic) (see Table 56.1)
Data from Schaefer GB, Mendelsohn NJ. Clinical genetics evaluation in identifying
the etiology of autism spectrum disorders: 2013 guideline revisions. Genet Med.
2013;15(5):399–407 and Lord C, Charman T, Havdahl A, et al. The Lancet Commission
on the future of care and clinical research in autism. Lancet. 2022;399:271–326.

standard deviations (SD) above the mean should have testing for pathologic variants in the PTEN gene because there is a risk for hamartoma
tumor disorders (Cowden, Proteus-­
like, Bannayan-­
Riley-­
Ruvakaba
syndromes) in these individuals. Cytogenetic testing (karyotype) has a
lower yield than CMA. Karyotype is recommended if microarray is not
available and in children with suspected balanced translocation, such
as history of multiple prior miscarriages.
Further medical diagnostic testing is indicated by the child’s history
and presentation. Brain imaging (MRI) is indicated in cases of microcephaly, significant developmental regression, seizures, or focal findings
on neurologic examination. Because of the high rate (up to 25%) of macrocephaly in ASD, imaging is not indicated for macrocephaly alone. MRI
is not recommended for minor language regression (loss of a few words)
during the second year of life that is often described in toddlers with
ASD. Children with concern for seizures, spells, or developmental regression should have an electroencephalogram (EEG). Metabolic screening is
indicated for children with signs of a metabolic or mitochondrial disorder, such as developmental regression, weakness, fatigue, lethargy, cyclic
vomiting, or seizures (see Table 58.7 and Chapters 56 and 104).

Next-­Generation Sequencing

Whole exome sequencing (WES) can identify single-­nucleotide variants, including pathogenic loss of function mutations and missense
mutations; studies have identified a molecular diagnosis in nearly 30%
of individuals tested because of the presence of a neurodevelopmental

disorder. If the initial genetic testing is negative, clinicians should consider ordering this test in conjunction with genetic counseling to aid in
understanding results.

TREATMENT AND MANAGEMENT
Approaches to Intervention

The primary treatment for ASD is done outside the medical setting
and includes developmental and educational programming (Fig. 58.1).
Numerous resources have been developed that can help families in the
complex process of treatment planning (Table 58.9). Intensive behavioral therapies have the strongest evidence to date. Earlier age at initiation of treatment and higher intensity of treatment are associated
with better outcomes, although recent studies comparing two different
treatments at different levels of intensity (15 vs 25 hr/wk) did not show
significant differences between groups in any of the outcomes assessed.
Programming must be individualized, and no approach is successful
for all children. In addition, research treatments are often conducted
with a high level of intensity and fidelity that is difficult to scale up
or reproduce in community settings. Higher cognitive, play, and joint
attention skills and lower symptom severity at baseline are predictors
for better outcomes in core symptoms, intellectual function, and language function.
There are many evidence-­based approaches to treating children with
ASD, with three main approaches identified. The intervention with the
strongest evidence base is applied behavioral analysis (ABA), which
is based on the principles of direct incremental teaching of skills within
a traditional behavioral framework using reinforcement of desired
behavior, careful data collection, and analysis and adjustment of the
treatment program based on review of data. The second is developmental relationship-­
based intervention (DRBI), which includes
parent-­mediated interventions that focus on building warm, meaningful interaction to improve communication, learning, and problem
solving. The best-­known approach in this category is Floortime. The
third approach is the naturalistic developmental behavioral intervention, which builds upon ABA to incorporate more choices for children and is implemented in natural situations. Comprehensive models
integrating behavioral and developmental approaches that build on
key foundational skills, such as joint attention, shared enjoyment, and
reciprocal communication, show strong evidence of efficacy for young
children, particularly toddlers, with ASD. Examples include the Early
Start Denver Model (ESDM), Joint Attention Symbolic Play Engagement
and Regulation (JASPER), and Social Communication/Emotional Regulation/Transactional Support (SCERTS).
Educational approaches such as the Treatment and Education of
Autistic and Communication Handicapped Children (TEACCH) incorporate structured teaching, visual supports, and adjustment of the
environment to the individual needs of students with ASD, such as difficulty with communication, understanding time, and need for routine.
These approaches have demonstrated efficacy for improved cognitive
and adaptive skills. For older children with more severe symptoms,
approaches that use behavioral principles in addition to adjusting the
environment may be most effective.
Speech and language therapy can help build vocabulary, comprehension, and pragmatic skills. Children with ASD benefit from visual supports
for comprehension, understanding expectations, and communicating their
needs. Augmentative communication approaches using photographs or
picture icons can improve comprehension and ability to communicate (see
Chapter 54). There are a range of options with varying levels of complexity, flexibility, and technology. Using augmentative communication does
not inhibit acquisition of verbal language. On the contrary, supporting a
child’s language development with augmentative supports can facilitate the
development of spoken language, even in older children.
Additional strategies to build social skills are used for school-­age
children and adolescents and may be administered in the school
or community setting by a variety of specialists, including speech
therapists, psychologists, and counselors. Social skills programs
that include training peer mentors have higher rates of efficacy.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 58 u Autism Spectrum Disorder
Preschool age
(before the age of 6 years)

School age
(between the ages of 6 and 11 years)

Adolescence
(between the ages of 12 and 17 years)

381

Adults (18 years and older)

Family
Family
Family

Family

Child

Adolescent

Child

School or
community

Adult

School or
community

Community

Community
(preschool
childcare)
Family
• Family psychoeducation
• Family coaching around core
features
• Parent-mediated treatments (eg,
JASPER, Early Social Interaction,
and PACT)
• Behavior management (as
advocates)
Child
• Speciﬁc short-term therapies (eg,
JASPER)
• General approaches (eg, PRT,
Project ImPACT, and DTT)
• Comprehensive curricula (eg, ESDM
and Lovaas approach
• Speciﬁc disciplines (eg,
occupational therapy and speech)
Community
• Support in childcare and preschool
(no evidence)
• ESDM classrooms
• TEACCH classrooms
• LEAP classrooms

Family
Family
• Behavior management (RUBI)
• As supports in group
Child
• Behavior management
Adolescents
• General approaches (eg, PRT and
DTT)
• CBT (eg, Coping Cat and BIACA)
• Academic skills
• Social skills (eg, PEERS)
• Psychopharmacology
• Social skills (eg, PEERS)
• Speciﬁc disciplines (eg,
• Academic skills
psychopharmacology)
Community
• CBT (eg, Coping Cat and Facing your • School inclusion
Fears)
• Classes
Community
• Special education
• School inclusion
• Sports and community
• Classes
• Special education
• Sports and community programs

Family
• As advocates
Adults
• CBT
• Social skills (eg, PEERS)
• Psychopharmacology
• Pre-employment
Community
• Support in education
• Support in employment
• Support in housing
• Sports and activities
• Project ImPACT job training
• Project SEARCH

Fig. 58.1 Sources of support and locations of treatment. The size of each ellipse represents the extent of care or intervention received. BIACA,

Behavioral Interventions for Anxiety in Children with Autism; CBT, cognitive-­behavioral therapy; DTT, discrete trial training; ESDM, Early Start Denver
Model; ImPACT, Improving Parents as Communication Teachers; JASPER, Joint Attention, Symbolic Play, Engagement, and Regulation approach;
LEAP, Learning Experiences and Alternative Program for Preschoolers and their Parents; PACT, Preschool Autism Communication Trial; PEERS,
Program for the Education and Enrichment of Relational Skills; PRT, Pivotal Response Treatment; RUBI, Research Units in Behavioral Intervention;
TEACCH, Treatment and Education of Autistic and Related Communication Handicapped Children program. (From Lord C, Charman T, Havdahl A,
et al. The Lancet Commission on the future of care and clinical research in autism. Lancet. 2022;399:271–326, Fig. 6, p. 287.)

Table 58.9  Autism Resources for Families
Autism Speaks First 100 Days kit
https://www.autismspeaks.org/family-­services/tool-­kits/100-­day-­kit
Autism Speaks Toolkits–dental, transition, guardianship
https://www.autismspeaks.org/family-­services/tool-­kits
AACAP Autism Spectrum Disorder Parent’s Medication Guide
https://www.aacap.org/App_Themes/AACAP/Docs/resource_
centers/autism/Autism_Spectrum_Disorder_Parents_Medicat
ion_Guide.pdf
Sexuality information for individuals with developmental disability
http://vkc.mc.vanderbilt.edu/healthybodies/

Occupational and physical therapy may be indicated for individuals with motor delay and difficulty acquiring adaptive skills such as
dressing and toileting.
For some high school students with ASD, training in life skills
and vocational skills is critical for maximizing independence in
adulthood. Training may focus on basic self-­care (e.g., dressing,
hygiene), functional academics (e.g., money management, banking

skills), learning to fill out a job application, and understanding how
to behave with strangers and in work settings. Social skills and job
coaching may be needed even for adolescents with strong cognitive
and academic function, because they may struggle with social perception and may be vulnerable to exploitation by others.
There continue to be disparities in regard to accessing care, with
racially and ethnically minoritized groups and children from low-­
income families showing less access to acute care and specialized, community and educational services, when compared with higher-­income
and White families.

Co-­occurring Conditions

Additional medical or behavioral health treatment is often required
for the management of co-­occurring conditions in ASD. Seizures
occur in up to 35% of children with ASD and should be managed with appropriate antiepileptic therapy (see Chapter 633). GI
problems (e.g., cyclic vomiting, constipation, esophagitis, GERD)
may present with nonspecific irritability, sleep disturbance, self-­
injury, aggression, and signs of pain or discomfort, such as crying,
and can be managed with the same approaches used in typically

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

382 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Table 58.10  Common Pharmacologic Treatments in Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)
TARGET SYMPTOM

MEDICATION CLASS*

EFFECTS

SIDE EFFECTS

MONITORING

Hyperactivity and/or
Inattention

Stimulants

Decreased hyperactivity,
impulsivity, improved
­attention

Activation, irritability, emotional
lability, lethargy/social withdrawal,
stomach ache, reduced appetite,
insomnia, increased stereotypy

Height, weight, BP, HR

α2-­Agonists

Decreased hyperactivity,
impulsivity, improved
attention

Drowsiness, irritability, enuresis,
decreased appetite, dry mouth,
hypotension

Height, weight, BP, HR

Selective norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor

Decreased hyperactivity,
­impulsivity, improved
­attention

Irritability, decreased appetite,
fatigue, stomach ache, nausea,
vomiting, racing heart rate

Height, weight, BP, HR

Anxiety

Selective serotonin
­reuptake inhibitors

Decreased anxiety

Activation, hyperactivity,
inattention, sedation, change in
appetite, insomnia, stomachache,
diarrhea
Citalopram: prolonged QTc interval

Weight, BP, HR

Irritability

Atypical antipsychotics
(risperidone,
aripiprazole)

Decreased irritability,
aggression, self-­injurious
behavior, repetitive
behavior, ­hyperactivity

Somnolence, weight gain,
extrapyramidal movements,
drooling, tremor, dizziness,
vomiting, gynecomastia

Weight, BP, HR
Monitor CBC, cholesterol,
ALT, AST, prolactin,
glucose or hemoglobin
A1c

Insomnia

Melatonin

Shortened sleep onset

Nightmares, enuresis

—

*Specific medication names are provided in parentheses when there is a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved indication for the use of the medication to treat the
symptom in children with ASD. Further information about these medications is available in Chapter 33.
BP, Blood pressure; HR, heart rate; CBC, complete blood count; ALT, alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase.

developing children. Children with pica should have lead and iron
levels monitored.
Management of co-­
o ccurring attention and mood disorders
is similar to that for typically developing children. Strategies to
increase structure and organization in the environment and use of
visual supports (e.g., schedules) can improve attention and reduce
anxiety. Some children with ASD benefit from modified cognitive-­
behavioral therapy to address anxiety and OCD. (see Chapter 31).
Strategies to promote sleep hygiene and use of behavioral
approaches, such as structured bedtime routines, can address
delayed sleep onset. Other medical problems, such as epilepsy or
GERD, can also contribute to poor sleep and should be treated
directly. In cases refractory to behavioral approaches, medications
may be used.
Structured behavioral approaches for delayed toilet training in
concert with treatment to prevent constipation are often needed
for children with ASD. For children with highly restrictive diets,
nutrition counseling and behaviorally based feeding therapy may
be needed to address poor caloric intake or lack of nutritional quality. Because of limited diets, children with ASD may be at risk for
low levels of calcium, vitamins C and D, and iron. Children who are
overweight may still have poor nutrition as a result of restrictive
diets.
Irritability is a nonspecific symptom and can be a reflection of pain,
anxiety, distress, or lack of sleep. Children with ASD are prone to irritability because of their difficulty tolerating change and their limited
communication skills. Management of irritability includes evaluating
carefully for medical problems that may be causing pain and for any
factors in the child’s home or school environment that may be causing distress. Possible causes of distress range from common experiences such as changes in the routine to undisclosed abuse or bullying.
Treatment should be targeted first at any underlying cause. Medications are often used to treat irritability in ASD, but should only be used
after appropriate behavioral and communication supports have been
implemented.

Pharmacology

There are currently no medications that treat the core symptoms of
ASD. Medications can be used to target specific co-­occurring conditions or symptoms (Table 58.10; see also Table 58.5). Families should
be cautioned, however, that the effect size may be lower and the rate of
medication side effects higher in children with ASD.
Preliminary data suggested that intranasal therapy with neuropeptide oxytocin may improve social functioning in children with ASD,
particularly those with low pretreatment oxytocin levels, but a recent
randomized trial did not demonstrate any effect of oxytocin on social
or cognitive functioning.
There is evidence to support the use of stimulant medications,
atomoxetine, and α-­agonists for ADHD in ASD. Selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) can be used for anxiety and OCD and in
adolescents may also be useful for depression. Benzodiazepines may
be useful for situational anxiety, for example, triggered by dental and
medical procedures or air travel. Medications used to treat ADHD and
anxiety may result in activation or irritability in ASD and require careful monitoring.
Melatonin can be used to improve sleep onset but will not address
night waking. Clonidine or trazodone may be used for sleep onset and
maintenance. No medications are specifically labeled for treatment of
insomnia in ASD.
The α-­adrenergic agonists may be helpful in children who present with significant behavioral dysregulation. There are two atypical
antipsychotic medications that have U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommendation for irritability and aggression in
children with ASD. Both risperidone and aripiprazole have several
studies documenting efficacy for reducing irritability, aggression,
and self-­injury. Secondary improvements in attention and repetitive behavior were also noted. Side effects include weight gain and
metabolic syndrome, as well as tardive dyskinesia and extrapyramidal movements. Careful laboratory monitoring is recommended.
Mood-­stabilizing antiepileptic medications have also been used to
treat irritability.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 59 u Fragile X Syndromes
Complementary and Alternative Medicine

Families of children with ASD often use complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) approaches. These treatments can include
supplements, dietary changes, and body or physical treatments. There
is limited evidence to inform families, who often learn about these
treatments from friends and family members, alternative medicine
providers, or the internet. For most therapies, evidence is insufficient
to show benefit. There is strong evidence that secretin and facilitated
communication are not effective. Some therapies, such as hyperbaric
oxygen, chelation, and high-­dose vitamins, are potentially harmful. For
children with restrictive diets, taking a daily multivitamin and 400 IU
vitamin D may be indicated, although there is no evidence to support
megadoses of vitamins. Similarly, for children with evidence of gluten
sensitivity, a trial of a gluten-­free diet may be indicated. However, current evidence does not support this as a treatment for all children with
ASD. There is an interest in the use of cannabidiol (CBD) to treat core
autism symptoms or co-­occurring problems such as anxiety, ADHD,
or sleep problems, but there is currently no evidence to support this
therapy.
When discussing CAM with a family, it is best to use open and
collaborative communication, encouraging them to share their current practices and any questions. Specifically ask if they use any
herbal treatments, supplements, or other therapies, such as acupuncture, massage, or chiropractic treatment, and what they have
observed since trying the treatment. Provide accurate information
regarding potential benefit and risk for any treatment. Educate
about “red flags” such as treatments that are marketed as a cure for
multiple conditions, that report no risk of side effects, or that are
marketed by the clinician recommending the treatment. Encourage
families to identify a target symptom, “try one thing at a time,” and
monitor response carefully.

Transition

Navigating a successful transition to adult care is a key role for the
pediatric provider. This process should ideally start as early as age
12-­13 years. Parents are faced with a complex and disconnected system of diverse agencies that they need to navigate. Use of structured-­
visit templates and care coordinators can help ensure that families
and their youth with ASD are able to make appropriate decisions
about secondary and postsecondary educational programming,
vocational training, guardianship, finances, housing, and medical
care. High school educational programming should include individualized and meaningful vocational training, as well as instruction regarding sexuality, relationships, safety—particularly internet
safety and abuse prevention—finances, travel training, and general
self-­advocacy. More than half of young adults with ASD remain
unemployed and unenrolled in higher education 2 years after high
school graduation. Individuals with ASD who are of average cognitive intellectual functioning will need help accessing supports for
college or postsecondary skills training and may benefit from referral to their state vocational rehabilitative services and personal life
coaches or counselors. Families who have adult children with more
significant cognitive disability need information about the range
of adult disability services; how to apply for supplemental security
income (SSI); and the process for considering guardianship, medical and financial conservatorship, or supported decision making for
their adult child. These decisions are complex and must be individualized for the adult with ASD and the family.

OUTCOME

ASD is a lifelong condition. Although a minority of individuals no
longer meet criteria for the diagnosis, most will make progress but
continue to have some impairment in social, behavioral, learning,
language, or emotional functioning as adults. Adult outcome studies are sobering, indicating that many adults with ASD are socially
isolated, lack gainful employment or independent living, and have
higher rates of depression and anxiety. It is not clear if these data

383

can be extrapolated to younger children currently receiving intensive educational therapies. There is a growing network of adult
self-­advocates who promote the unique strengths in individuals
with ASD. Outcome, as measured by developmental progress and
functional independence, is better for individuals who have higher
cognitive and language skills and lower ASD severity at initial
diagnosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography

Chapter 59

Fragile X Syndromes
Amanda E. Bennett and Marcy Schuster
Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a genetic disorder associated with
intellectual, learning, and behavioral symptoms and some specific
physical characteristics. In FXS an expansion of >200 CGG repeats
on the distal long arm of chromosome Xq27.3 silences the FMR1
gene, which leads to a deficiency in fragile X mental retardation
protein (FMRP) and affects synaptic function throughout much of
the brain. It is the most common heritable cause of intellectual disability and has a prevalence rate of approximately 1 in 4,000 males
and 1 in 7,000 females. Like many X-­linked disorders, males with
fragile X tend to present with more features and more significant
impairments than females.
On average, unaffected individuals have 30 CGG repeats in the
untranslated region of the FMR1 gene. Those with 55-­200 repeats are
described as having the premutation. Females with the premutation are
at increased risk of expansion of the number of CGG repeats causing
FXS in their children (Table 59.1). When males with the premutation
alleles pass them to daughters, they typically remain as premutation
alleles. Those with premutation alleles may also have clinical manifestations (Tables 59.2 and 59.3).
Fragile XE syndrome (FRAXE) resembles FXS and manifests
within a variable spectrum of intellectual and learning disabilities.
The involved gene (AFF2) results in an expansion of CCG trinucleotide repeats and is inherited as an X-­linked disorder. Symptoms also
include aggressive behaviors, agitation, autistic behaviors, clumsiness, and delayed speech and language development. This form of
FXS will not usually be detected with standard fragile X testing.

EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS

The phenotype of FXS early in life can be nonspecific with symptoms such as developmental delay, including motor and language
delays, and autistic-­like behaviors, such as repetitive motor mannerisms, sensory sensitivities, and deficits in eye contact. Manifestations in early to middle childhood often include problems
with learning, attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
anxiety, and aggressive behaviors. The physical features become
more pronounced during or after puberty and include macro-­
orchidism, hyperextensible finger joints, and characteristic facial
features, including a long face, large ears, and a prominent square
jaw (Fig. 59.1). Females affected with FXS show varying degrees
of intellectual disability and/or learning disabilities, and they may
present with symptoms of ADHD and anxiety as well.
Children with FXS are at increased risk for ophthalmologic, feeding, and orthopedic problems, as well as recurrent otitis media in
early childhood. Females are at increased risk for precocious puberty.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

384 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders
Adolescents should be monitored for seizures and heart murmurs, and
adults with FXS are at increased risk for mitral valve prolapse. Adults
are also at risk for intention tremor and ataxia and premature menopause, which can also occur in those with the premutation. Table 59.3
includes phenotypic features, clinical signs, and their typical age of
onset.

Family History and Premutation Carriers

Collecting a detailed family history can help identify potential risk
factors for FXS. Individuals with premutation triplet repeat expansions have been found to have a variety of clinical manifestations.
Fragile X–associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that most commonly affects

Table 59.1  	Risk of Expansion of a Premutation to a
Full Mutation in Male Offspring Based on
Maternal Number of CGG Triplet Repeats
MATERNAL CGG TRIPLET
REPEAT NUMBER

RISK FOR EXPANSION OF
PREMUTATION TO FULL MUTATION

59-­69

37%

70-­79

65%

80-­89

70%

90-­99

95%

100 or more

100%

CGG triplet repeat, Cytosine-­guanine-­guanine trinucleotide repeat.
From Fragile X Syndrome. Clinical Overview. Elsevier Point of Care. https://www.clinica
lkey.com/#!/content/clinical_overview/67-­s2.0-­c9588237-­6031-­4f21-­b273-­34970f89cd2e.
Updated June 14, 2021. Copyright Elsevier. All rights reserved; with data from
Hersh JH et al. Health supervision for children with fragile X syndrome. Pediatrics.
2011;127(5):994–1006, Table 1; and Saul RA et al. FMR1-­related disorders. In: Pagon RA
et al, eds. GeneReviews [internet]. University of Washington; 1993–2018.

Table 59.2  	
VARIATION TYPE

males over age 50 years. Females are less commonly affected and
tend to have mild disease. Symptoms include an intention tremor
followed by ataxia that may manifest as needing support when
walking or with a wide-­based gait. Females with premutation triple repeat expansions are at risk for developing fragile X–associated premature ovarian insufficiency (FXPOI). Women with this
condition undergo menopause approximately 5 years earlier than
women without the condition, but symptoms are variable, with the
most severely affected experiencing irregular or absent menstrual
periods before age 40 and often infertility. A variety of neuropsychiatric symptoms, including anxiety, ADHD, social deficits, or autism
spectrum disorder (ASD), have also been associated with the premutation. Asking about family members for a history of developmental, behavioral, or learning problems or adult family members
with early menopause, fertility challenges, or adult-­onset neurologic problems may help to identify risk for a positive fragile X test
in a child with developmental or behavioral concerns. Asymptomatic siblings or other family members may benefit from testing to
determine premutation status, which can also be associated with the
symptoms noted earlier. See Table 59.3 for additional information
about clinical symptoms in premutation carriers.

Diagnostic Testing

A diagnosis of FXS is possible through PCR and Southern blot
analysis of a patient’s blood. Positive DNA testing shows an expansion of >200 trinucleotide CGG repeats inside an area of the FMR1
gene on the X chromosome. Diagnostic testing that reports methylation status of the gene region is preferred because methylation
status is inversely correlated with cognitive functioning. Because
the physical features of FXS are not always apparent in early childhood, diagnostic testing is recommended for any child who presents with global developmental delay, intellectual disability, or ASD
(see Chapters 56 and 58). Any positive test for fragile X should
include genetic counseling to inform of inheritance risk, phenotypic variability, and medical conditions associated with FXS and
premutation status. Specific gene (AFF2) testing for FRAXE should
be considered if CGG repeat testing is negative.

Phenotypic and Genetic Effect of Number of CGG Repeats
CGG ALLELE SIZE

TYPICAL PHENOTYPE

GENETIC CONSEQUENCES

Full mutation

More than 200 repeats

Males are affected with fragile X syndrome
About 50% of females are affected with
fragile X syndrome

Repeat expansion and methylation typically
result in partial or complete silencing of FMR1
Females usually benefit from having two X
chromosomes, because usually one of them is
unaffected (i.e., no expanded CGG repeats) and
X-­inactivation does not silence all copies of it

Premutation

About 55-­200 repeats

Patients typically have normal intellect,
and some may have mild manifestations
associated with fragile X syndrome
Carriers may be at increased risk for fragile
X–associated tremor ataxia syndrome and
FMR1-­related primary ovarian insufficiency

FMRP expression is usually not significantly
impaired; however, larger mutations may have
lowered expression
Alleles are at risk for CGG expansion during
maternal gametogenesis, and offspring are at
risk for fragile X syndrome

Intermediate (gray
zone)

About 45-­54 repeats

Patient does not have fragile X syndrome
caused by CGG repeats

A minority of intermediate/gray zone alleles may
have minor instability; however, expansion of
CGG repeats is unlikely, and if it occurs, it will
not reach full mutation number within a single
generation

Normal

About 5-­44 repeats

Patient does not have fragile X syndrome
caused by CGG repeats

No meiotic or mitotic instability is present;
alleles are transmitted without any change in
repeat number

FMR1 gene, FMRP translational regulator 1; FMRP, fragile X mental retardation protein.
From Fragile X Syndrome. Clinical Overview. Elsevier Point of Care. https://www.clinicalkey.com/#!/content/clinical_overview/67-­s2.0-­c9588237-­6031-­4f21-­b273-­34970f89cd2e.
Updated June 14, 2021. Copyright Elsevier. All rights reserved; with data from Hersh JH et al. Health supervision for children with fragile X syndrome. Pediatrics. 2011;127(5):994–1006,
Table 1; and Saul RA et al. FMR1-­related disorders. In: Pagon RA et al, eds. GeneReviews [internet]. University of Washington; 1993–2018.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 59 u Fragile X Syndromes
Table 59.3  	Clinical Features of Fragile X Syndrome and
Premutation Carriers
COGNITIVE, BEHAVIORAL, AND
PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS

AGE REPORTED

FULL MUTATION FRAGILE X SYNDROME (>200 CGG REPEATS)
Hypotonia

Infancy

Reflux

Infancy

Poor suck

Infancy

Developmental delay/intellectual disability
(96% males, 64% females)

Early childhood

Autism (46% males, 16% females)

Early childhood

Attention problems (84% males, 67%
females)

Early childhood

Hyperactivity (66% males, 30% females)

Early childhood

Anxiety (70% males, 56% females)

Early childhood

Aggression (38% males, 14% females)

Early childhood

Self-­injurious behaviors (41% males, 10%
females)

Early childhood

Depression (12% males, 22% females)

Early childhood

Recurrent otitis media (>60%)

Early childhood

Seizures (18% males, 7% females)

Early childhood

Strabismus (20%)

Early childhood

Sleep disturbances

Early childhood

Flat feet

Early childhood

Low muscle tone

Early childhood

Hyperextensible joints

Early childhood

Large prominent ears

Early/middle childhood

Elongated face

Early/middle childhood

Large testes

Adolescence

Obesity (30%)

Adolescence

Mitral valve prolapse

Adulthood

Cognitive decline/parkinsonism (17%)

Adulthood

Perseveration

Adulthood

PREMUTATION CARRIERS (55-­200 CGG REPEATS)
Attention problems

Early childhood

Autism spectrum disorder

Early childhood

Seizures

Early childhood

Anxiety

Adolescence

Depression

Adulthood

Hypertension

Adulthood

Sleep disturbances

Adulthood

Migraine

Adulthood

Fibromyalgia

Adulthood

Hypothyroidism

Adulthood

Fragile X–associated primary ovarian
insufficiency (FXPOI) (∼20%)

Adulthood

Fragile X–associated tremor ataxia syndrome Later adulthood
(FXTAS) (40% males, 16% females)
Data from National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. Data and Statistics on Fragile X Syndrome, 2021;
Hagerman RJ, Berry-­Kravis E, Hazlett HC, et al. Fragile X syndrome. Nat Rev Dis
Primers. 2017;3:17065; Hersh JH, Saul RA; Committee on Genetics. Health supervision
for children with fragile X syndrome. Pediatrics. 2011;127(5):994–1006; Wheeler A, Raspa
M, Hagerman R, Mailick M, Riley C. Implications of the FMR1 Premutation for Children,
Adolescents, Adults, and Their Families. Pediatrics. 2017;139(Suppl 3):S172–S182.

385

MANAGEMENT OF FRAGILE X SYNDROME

Management of FXS in children often requires a multidisciplinary
approach focused on monitoring for and managing developmental
and/or behavioral symptoms. In addition to health supervision visits
with a primary care clinician, many children with FXS benefit from
ongoing care with a medical professional with experience or knowledge of FXS. Families will also benefit from accessing educational and
behavioral health resources in the community.

Educational

Many individuals with FXS will require educational support to meet
their needs starting from a young age. Early intervention services,
including speech therapy, occupational therapy, physical therapy,
and special instruction, are often vital components of addressing developmental delays. As a child ages and ongoing assessment
occurs, special education support through an individualized education plan (IEP) may be warranted (See Chapter 49). There are
interventions shown to be specific to the learning needs of individuals with FXS. Biologic males typically demonstrate strengths in
receptive language, verbal labeling, simultaneous processing, imitation, and daily living activities. Biologic females typically demonstrate areas of strength in vocabulary, comprehension, reading,
writing, spelling, and short-­term visual memory. These advantages
should be explored when educational interventions are being developed. Areas often in need of interventions for individuals with FXS
include improving complex problem solving, maintaining attention, improving impulse control, understanding spatial relationships, and math concepts.
Environmental modifications and adaptive technologies can be
an asset for an individual with FXS. This can include a modified
keyboard and/or mouse and touch-­screen computer options integrated into classroom lessons. A quiet environment with minimal
distractions can help improve focus on tasks. Small group and one-­
on-­one instruction for teaching new tasks can minimize anxiety and
improve generalization of skills to the larger classroom. Teaching
students to request breaks when feeling overwhelmed can minimize
overall frustration. Visual schedules, manipulatives, clutter-­
f ree
areas, and social stories are all interventions to improve compliance
and learning.

Behavioral

Individuals with FXS can present with a variety of cognitive and
behavioral challenges. ASD is diagnosed in between 50% and 60%
of individuals with FXS. ASD is characterized by deficits in communication and social skills along with restricted interests and/or
repetitive behaviors that interfere with one’s daily life (see Chapter
58). Individuals with FXS can struggle with making eye contact,
engaging in conversations, and expressing wants and needs. Often
individuals with FXS want social contact but may avoid it due to
anxiety. Hyperarousal is a common behavioral symptom, particularly in social situations where eye contact is expected, suggesting
the presence of significant sensory aversions. Behavioral interventions that include skill development and anxiety management can
be helpful in addressing social skills deficits. Other sensory-­aversive
behaviors can be related to auditory, visual, or tactile stimuli. Tantrums, and occasionally aggression, can emerge when children with
FXS are overstimulated.
Sensory-­seeking behaviors can also be present in individuals with
FXS. These may include repetitive movements, narrowed interests,
rigid routines, and atypical sensory exploration. Behaviors such as
rocking, pacing, and jumping could occur to obtain sensory input.
Individuals with FXS can become extremely anxious if a routine is
changed or if a preferred activity is interrupted. Teaching coping strategies along with the recognition of triggers for anxiety can be helpful as
a behavior management strategy.
Individuals with FXS can present with deficits in attention and
focus, impulsivity, and/or hyperactivity, particularly during childhood. This can lead to a diagnosis of ADHD (see Chapter 50).
These deficits can affect learning in school and require specialized

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

386 Part IV u Learning and Developmental Disorders

A

B

C

Fig. 59.1 Boys with fragile X syndrome. Note the long faces, prominent jaws, and large ears and the similar characteristics of children from different
ethnic groups: European (A), Asian (B), and Latin American (C). (From Jorde, LB, Carey JC, Bamshad MJ. Medical Genetics, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2020: Fig. 5.20.)

instruction or classroom accommodations to help improve focus
and participation.
Individuals with FXS can present with aggressive behavior directed
toward themselves and toward others. These behaviors are seen in
approximately 50% of males with FXS and tend to increase with age.
Individuals who exhibit ongoing aggression also typically present with
more significant intellectual impairment, communication delays, and
anxiety. Aggression can put a strain on caregivers or lead to injury and
therefore often emerges as a primary focus of treatment.
Behavior management techniques vary depending on a child’s needs.
If an ASD diagnosis is present, applied behavioral analysis (ABA) programs are often integrated into treatment. ABA promotes multiple
areas of development, including language, emotion, and cognition.
ABA focuses on tracking specific behaviors through observation and
data collection, learning their antecedents (the event or environment
before the behavior occurred), and managing their consequences (the
response others have after the behavior occurs) through a structured
approach. Most interventions for unwanted behaviors (e.g., aggression
or self-­injury) aim to change the antecedents to reduce the likelihood
of the behavior occurring or to change the consequence in order to
make the behavior less rewarding for the individual. Interventions that
aim to increase a desired behavior (e.g., complying with an instruction
or toilet training) will incorporate environmental changes to remind
and encourage the behavior and identify rewarding consequences that
can be delivered after the behavior has occurred. ABA interventions
delivered during daily living activities, community participation, and
family interactions allow for optimal skill development. Special education programs often include similar behavior management techniques
throughout the early childhood for individuals with FXS.

Medical

In addition to educational and behavioral management, many children with FXS may present with certain medical conditions and
may require additional monitoring or care by a specialist (see Table
59.3). Monitoring in infancy and early childhood should emphasize assessment for orthopedic, growth, and/or feeding concerns.
Because young children with FXS are more susceptible to otitis
media and may lack communication skills to convey discomfort,
a full physical examination, including ear examination, is recommended if a child presents with acute behavior changes. Young
children should also be routinely screened for ophthalmologic

problems, such as strabismus or astigmatism, and monitored for
symptoms related to connective tissue problems, such as hypermobile joints or inguinal hernias. Seizures are more prevalent in children with FXS; symptoms concerning for any type of seizure should
be investigated with electroencephalogram (EEG) when the child
is both awake and asleep. Although risk for mitral valve prolapse is
not typically increased until adulthood, examination for murmurs,
clicks, or changes in blood pressure should be performed regularly.
Sleep disturbances commonly reported among children with FXS
include delayed sleep onset, frequent night waking, and occasionally obstructive sleep apnea. Screening for sleep concerns should be
done at every visit, and parents should be counseled on behavioral
strategies to address sleep onset and waking challenges (see Chapter
31). Concerns for apnea or snoring may require further evaluation
by a sleep specialist or with polysomnography. Medications to help
address sleep concerns may include melatonin or clonidine, neither
of which is currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in children with FXS.
There are currently no approved treatments for the core symptoms of FXS, but many individuals will benefit from medication to
address some of the commonly co-­occurring behavioral symptoms
associated with absence of FMRP. If behavioral strategies are not
sufficient to address hyperactivity or impulsivity, a young child (<5
years) may benefit from a trial of an α2-­adrenergic agonist, such
as clonidine or guanfacine. School-­aged children with FXS often
show improvements in hyperactivity, impulsivity, and/or attention
problems when treated with a stimulant, but side effects such as
irritability or aggression may occur. Selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs) can be safe and effective in reducing anxiety,
obsessive-­
compulsive symptoms, and sometimes aggression in
young children with FXS; one trial of sertraline in young children
with FXS demonstrated improvements in visual reception and fine
motor coordination in 2-­to 6-­year-­olds. Additional analyses demonstrated improvements in expressive language skills for children
with FXS and ASD. Treatment with an atypical antipsychotic, such
as risperidone or aripiprazole, may be needed in cases of severe
anxiety, aggression, or mood instability that have not responded to
other medications.
Neurobiologic studies of FXS have identified overactivation
of brain glutamate pathways and underactivation of gamma-­
aminobutyric acid (GABA) pathways leading to studies of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 59 u Fragile X Syndromes
medications targeting these pathways in the hopes that they would
improve cognitive outcomes. Although some studies in animal
models were encouraging, human trials have yet to demonstrate
consistent benefits. Some clinical trials are ongoing.
In addition to continued monitoring for cardiac, seizure, sleep,
and behavioral symptoms, health supervision in late childhood

387

and adolescence should also include discussion of adult transition
issues, including vocational training, accessing state-­specific adult
disability services, and transition to adult medical care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 20, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

