4384 Part XXX u Bone and Joint Disorders
Blood values of minerals (e.g., calcium, phosphorus), vitamin D
metabolites, alkaline phosphatase, and parathyroid hormone are usually normal. Evaluation of bone mineral content and areal bone density
by DXA is the clinical gold standard for measuring BMD. DXA evaluation in patients 15 years of age or younger includes total body less head
and lumbar spine, and in those 16 years and older includes lumbar
spine and hip. In certain clinical scenarios, it may be useful to obtain
alternative sites, such as the distal femur or forearm scan. Additional
research modalities allow for the assessment of bone microarchitecture
(e.g., trabecular versus cortical bone), quality, and strength, such as
peripheral quantitative CT and trabecular bone score.
In the pediatric age group, osteoporosis may be primary or secondary (Table 749.1, Fig. 749.1). The primary osteoporoses can be
divided into heritable disorders of connective tissue, including osteogenesis imperfecta (see Chapter 742), Bruck syndrome, osteoporosis-­
pseudoglioma syndrome, Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome (see Chapter 744),
Marfan syndrome (see Chapter 743), homocystinuria, and idiopathic
juvenile osteoporosis. Secondary forms of osteoporosis include various neuromuscular disorders, chronic illness, endocrine disorders, and
drug-­induced and inborn errors of metabolism, including lysinuric
protein intolerance and Gaucher disease.
When no obvious primary or secondary cause can be detected,
idiopathic juvenile osteoporosis should be considered, especially if
the following clinical features are evident: onset before puberty, long
bone and lower back pain, vertebral fractures, long bone and metatarsal fractures, a washed-­out appearance of the spine and appendicular
skeleton on standard radiographs, and improvement of bone density
after puberty. Trabecular bones such as the spine and metatarsals are

particularly affected by atraumatic fractures. Several modes of therapy
(including oral calcium supplements, calcitriol, bisphosphonates, and
calcitonin) have been used with some success in individual conditions,
but the effect of these treatments is difficult to gauge because spontaneous recovery occurs after the onset of puberty in more than 75% of
cases.
Osteoporosis-­pseudoglioma syndrome is an autosomal recessive
disorder manifested by variable age at onset, low bone mass, fractures
in childhood, and abnormal eye development. It is caused by pathogenic loss of function variants in LRP5, which encodes the low-­density
lipoprotein receptor-­related protein 5. Interestingly, gain-­of-­function
pathogenic variants to this gene result in increased bone density.
The life-­cycle implications of either significant demineralization or
osteoporosis in childhood need to be stressed. Events in childhood influence peak bone mass, and late adolescence is a period of rapid bone
mineral accretion. Peak bone mass is typically achieved by 20-25 years
of age (depending on the bone measured), and the contribution during
childhood is considerable. A number of measures influence bone mass
including adequate calcium intake, vitamin D sufficiency, weight-­bearing
physical activity, and body mass index (BMI) within a healthy range.
General recommendations include achieving the recommended daily
allowance (RDA) of calcium for age. Excellent and convenient sources
of dietary calcium include dairy products, but also bony fish, green vegetables, and calcium-­supplemented drinks (e.g., orange juice). Yogurt and
hard cheeses can be used in many lactase-­deficient children. Also, a serum
25-­hydroxyvitamin D level between 30-50 ng/mL in those with known
threats to bone health can be beneficial to maximize calcium absorption
and ensure normal range parathyroid hormone. Weight-­bearing exercise

Table 749.1  Diagnoses That Confer Increased Risk for Osteoporosis
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
Female Hypogonadism
Turner syndrome
Hypothalamic amenorrhea (female athletic triad)
Anorexia nervosa
Premature ovarian insufficiency
Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate therapy
Estrogen receptor α (ESR1) pathogenic variants
Hyperprolactinemia
Male Hypogonadism
Primary gonadal failure (Klinefelter syndrome)
Secondary gonadal failure (idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism)
Delayed puberty
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypercortisolism (therapeutic or Cushing disease)
Growth hormone deficiency
Thyrotoxicosis
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS
Dermatomyositis
Chronic hepatitis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
Malabsorption syndromes (cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, biliary atresia)
True or perceived lactose intolerance
Inflammatory bowel disease
Chronic obstructive jaundice
Primary biliary cirrhosis and other cirrhoses
Alactasia
Subtotal gastrectomy

CONNECTIVE TISSUE/BONE DISORDERS
Idiopathic juvenile osteoporosis
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Marfan syndrome
Homocystinuria
Fibrous dysplasia
Previous or recurrent low impact fractures
Early-­onset osteoporosis with WNT1 pathogenic variants
X-­linked osteoporosis with fractures with PLS3 pathogenic variants
DRUGS
Alcohol
Heparin
Glucocorticoids
Thyroxine
Anticonvulsants
Gonadotropin-­releasing hormone agonists
Cyclosporine
Chemotherapy
Tobacco cigarettes
MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERS
Immobilization (cerebral palsy, spinal muscular atrophy, Duchenne
muscular dystrophy)
Chronic renal disease
Glycogen storage disease type 1
Chronic hepatitis
Hypophosphatasia
Low calcium dietary intake
Gaucher disease
Severe congenital neutropenia

BONE MARROW DISORDERS
Bone marrow transplant
Lymphoma
Leukemia
Hemolytic anemias (sickle cell anemia, thalassemia)
Systemic mastocytosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 749 u Osteoporosis 4385
The apparently healthy child with a history of multiple fractures
(excluding fractures secondary to severe trauma and crush fractures of fingers, toes, nose)

1. < 2 long bone fractures by 10 years of age
2. < 3 long bone fractures by 19 years of age
3. Fractures that are explainable by the severity
and exposure of the trauma

One or more of the following:
1. ≥ 2 long bone fractures by 10 years of age
2. ≥ 3 long bone fractures by 19 years of age
3. ≥ 1 vertebral compression fracture (≥20% height loss of vertebral body)

First-line evaluation
Pediatrician or family doctor

Exclude nonaccidental injury (particularly in infants)

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Review for family history of fractures or osteoporosis
Review of constitutional symptoms for underlying chronic medical condition
Nutritional and physical activity assessment
Examination: blue sclera, joint laxity, hyperflexibility, deformities
Growth and pubertal assessment
Investigations: calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone, 25(OH)D, renal
function, alkaline phosphatase, celiac screen, urine calcium, and creatinine
Lateral spine radiograph: to assess for presence of vertebral compression fractures
Lumbar spine and total body bone densitometry

Ensure adequate vitamin D, calcium intake,
and weight-bearing activity
Review again if further fractures occur

Initial Management
• Ensure adequate vitamin D, calcium intake, and weight-bearing activity
• If a secondary diagnosis is able to be made, treat and minimize the factors
contributing to increased bone fragility
Referral criteria to an Endocrinologist/Bone Health Clinic
• ≥1 vertebral compression fracture
• Z score ≤ −2.0
• Bone pain
• Clinical features suggestive of a primary osteoporosis

Does the child meet any of the criteria for
referral for specialist evaluation?

Yes

Specialist assessment for underlying etiology and
management of bone fragility
Further testing may include
• Genetic testing (COL1A1, COL1A2, and related genes)
• Histomorphometry of transiliac bone biopsy sample to
assess bone quality and turnover
Depending on clinical picture, further pharmacological
treatment with, for example, bisphosphonate therapy, may
be considered

No

•
•

Repeat bone densitometry in 1 year to ensure z score is
tracking or improving
If further fractures occur, or z score decreases over
time, refer for specialist review

Fig. 749.1 An algorithm for the management of a child presenting with a clinically significant fracture history. The algorithm outlines the initial eval-

uation, management, and when to consider referral for specialist review. (Data from Mayranpaa MK, Viljakainen HT, Toiviainen-­Salo S, et al. Impaired
bone health and asymptomatic vertebral compressions in fracture-­prone children: a case-­control study. J Bone Miner Res. 2012;27:1413–1424; and
Bishop N, Arundel P, Clark E, et al. Fracture prediction and the definition of osteoporosis in children and adolescents: the ISCD 2013 pediatric official
positions. J Clin Densitom. 2014;17:275–280.)

enhances bone formation and reduces bone resorption. Factors that can
prevent acquisition of peak bone mass include the use of alcohol and
tobacco. Because it appears that adult-­onset osteoporosis stems primarily from genetic factors, representing a complex trait interaction, specific
interventions during childhood to augment bone mass are not available.
The treatment of secondary osteoporosis is best achieved by treating
the underlying disorder when feasible (see Fig. 749.1). Hypogonadism
should be treated with hormone replacement therapy, but in adolescent
girls, nutritional issues should first be addressed and, ultimately, prescription of transdermal over oral estrogen (see Chapter 732). Calcium intake
should be increased to 1,500-2,000 mg/day. In glucocorticoid-­induced
osteoporosis, an emphasis is placed on the lowest possible dose to prevent
disease activity (e.g., in children with inflammatory bowel disease) with
alternate-­day dosing or, when appropriate, topical (e.g., eczema) or inhaled
(e.g., asthma) glucocorticoids. Special diets for inborn errors of metabolism are also appropriate, as well as enzymatic replacement for diseases
such as hypophosphatasia, a genetic disorder leading to deficient endogenous alkaline phosphatase production and defective bone mineralization.
Screening for celiac disease should be carried out in unexplained cases of
low bone mass, as adherence to a gluten-­free diet can significantly enhance
bone health in these patients (see Chapter 384).

Treatment with bisphosphonates that inhibit bone resorption in certain secondary (e.g., glucocorticoid-­induced) and adult-­onset osteoporosis has been successful. Bisphosphonate therapy can also be beneficial
for children and adolescents and has historically been used with osteogenesis imperfecta and cerebral palsy. The use of bisphosphonates has
expanded to additional patient populations with secondary osteoporosis, such as recurrent fractures and low bone mineral density, and
high risk for skeletal fragility because of their underlying medical conditions. In consultation with a metabolic bone expert, bisphosphonate
treatment should be considered in the following patient populations:
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, spinal muscular atrophy, and other
nonambulatory patients (i.e., cerebral palsy, metabolic disorders). All
modifiable risk factors should be addressed, including adequate calcium intake; sufficient vitamin D; weight-­bearing physical activity,
such as time within a stander and physical therapy; healthy range BMI;
and evaluation of overall heath (i.e., regular menstrual periods in adolescent girls, no other endocrinopathies, and optimizing the treatment
status of the underlying medical condition).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Rehabilitation Medicine

PART

XXXI

age range. Nonaccidental TBI remains a significant cause of TBI at this
age (20-­30 cases/100,000) (see Chapter 17). Falls (35.1%) and being
struck by or against an object (34.9%) are most common in those 5-­14
years of age. Assaults, falls, and motor vehicle injuries make up to 85%
of the TBI experienced in those 15-­24 years of age. TBI is more common in males than females at all ages.

Chapter 750

Rehabilitation for
Traumatic Brain Injury

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

Chong-­Tae Kim and J. Michael King

TBI is the consequence of primary and secondary injury (see Chapter
82). Primary injury results from direct physical impact. Secondary injury
is the consequence of aberrant neurochemical homeostasis after primary
injury (Fig. 750.1). This injury mechanism helps explain why individuals
may experience global dysfunction of the brain despite relatively small
or focal brain lesions on imaging studies. Minimizing secondary injury
is critical to preventing further brain insult after the primary injury.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major cause of pediatric disability
in children older than 1 year old in the United States (see Chapter 82).
According to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2006–2010), TBI due to falls (72.8%) is most common in the 0-­4

Normal

PSH
Thalamus

Thalamus

Brain
level

PAG

PAG

Cortical centers

Cortical centers

Hypothalamus

Hypothalamus

Normal sensory input
and perception

Non-noxious stimuli
perceived as noxious Impaired descending
inhibition

Normal descending
inhibition

Normal descending inhibition

Impaired descending inhibition

Non-noxious sensory input
Spinal
level

Normal balance of
interneuron activity

Sympathetic output
Motor output

Non-noxious sensory input
Increased excitatory
interneuron activity

Increased sympathetic output
Increased motor
output

Fig. 750.1 Excitatory:inhibitory ratio model of the pathogenesis of PSH. In normal circumstances, various cortical, hypothalamic, thalamic, and

other subcortical inputs modulate activity within brainstem centers—the PAG is shown here as one of the key brainstem hubs in this process. These
brainstem nuclei provide inhibitory drive to spinal-­reflex arcs, thereby maintaining balance between inhibitory and excitatory interneuron influences
on motor and sympathetic efferents, allowing normal sensory stimuli to be perceived as nonnoxious. In the excitatory:inhibitory ratio model of PSH,
disconnection of descending inhibition produces maladaptive dendritic arborization and spinal-­circuit excitation, with nonnoxious stimuli triggering increased motor and sympathetic output (spinally) and potentially becoming perceived as noxious (centrally). PAG, Periaqueductal grey. PSH,
paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity. (From Meyfroidt G, Baguley IJ, Menon DK. Paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity: the storm after acute brain
injury. Lancet. 16:721–729, 2017 [Fig. 2].)

4386
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 750 u Rehabilitation for Traumatic Brain Injury
Very young children who have not yet closed their cranial sutures
accommodate some increase in intracranial pressure that may result
from TBI. However, young children have a relatively large head size
compared with their body, higher brain water content, and less myelination, all of which may contribute to greater brain distortion and injury
than from a comparable injury experienced by an adult.

SEVERITY

The acute severity of TBI is typically classified with the Pediatric Glasgow
Coma Scale (GCS) (see Chapter 82). GCS scores of 13-­15 are considered
mild TBI, 9-­12 moderate TBI, and 3-­8 severe TBI. Additional parameters
may be helpful in classifying severity. The longer the duration of loss of
consciousness (i.e., <30 min, <24 hr, or >24 hr), the more severe the TBI.
Longer duration of posttraumatic amnesia (<1 day, 1-­7 days, or >7 days)
is also reflective of a more severe TBI. Biomarkers (chemicals sensitive
to nerve tissues) are being investigated as potential indicators of severity.

MEDICAL COMPLICATIONS
Disorders of Consciousness

Children with severe TBI manifest various levels of altered consciousness (Table 750.1). They may progress from coma to unresponsive
wakefulness syndrome (formerly vegetative state) and/or minimally
conscious state. The longer the period of impaired consciousness, the
poorer the functional recovery. Rapid transition from coma/unresponsive wakefulness syndrome to a minimally conscious state increases
the possibility of better recovery. As patients recover from impaired
consciousness, they may have altered circadian sleep–wake patterns.
In this phase, it is particularly important to avoid overstimulation at
night, such as with procedures, and to avoid sedative medications during the day. A sleep diary over a period of several days to a week is a
useful measure to monitor sleep patterns and determine the effectiveness of medications. Neurostimulators (e.g., amantadine, bromocriptine, methylphenidate, or L-­dopa) may be used to improve arousal
during the day. Trazodone or melatonin may help facilitate sleep onset
or maintenance at night, respectively. Modafinil or donepezil can be

4387

tried if the above neurostimulators are ineffective. Paradoxically zolpidem has been reported to improve alertness in several cases.

Cognitive-­Behavioral Disorders

The management and outcome of mild TBI (concussion) are discussed
in Chapter 729. As patients with severe TBI recover from initial low
levels of consciousness, they may demonstrate significant cognitive-­
behavioral disorders, such as agitation, aggression, decreased frustration tolerance, impulsivity, inattention, emotional lability, perseveration,
impaired working memory, and poor safety awareness and judgement.
Agitation is common in the early stages of recovery. The first line of
management for agitation is to decrease excessive environmental, visual,
auditory, and tactile stimulation. Physical constraint is typically implemented as a last resort to prevent harm to the patient and others, and it
should be removed as soon as the danger has resolved. The Rancho Los
Amigo scale (RLAS) (Table 750.2) may be used to evaluate the level of
this impairment. It is important to exclude potential exacerbating factors or medical causes of impaired mental status and behavior, including
electrolyte abnormalities, infection, and concomitant injuries in patients
who incur multiple traumas including severe TBI. Posttraumatic amnesia can be particularly debilitating because it may limit the acquisition
and retention of new learning skills. The Children’s Orientation and
Amnesia Test may be helpful in determining when a patients’ posttraumatic amnesia has ended, after which these children may be candidates
for cognitive rehabilitation. This test assesses general orientation (name,
age, birthdate, school, etc.), temporal orientation (current time, day of
the week, year, etc.), and memory (verbal and nonverbal).
Most patients who have moderate or severe TBI will have varying degrees of long-­term residual cognitive impairments, which can
include impaired judgment, attention deficits, and impaired working
memory (see Chapter 49). The most rapid recovery in cognitive skills
tend to occur in the first year after the TBI. Children with more severe
injuries and children from lower socioeconomic status (SES) families
tend to have more significant long-­term deficits after a TBI.

Table 750.1  Level of Consciousness
COMA

UNRESPONSIVE
WAKEFULNESS SYNDROME

MINIMALLY CONSCIOUS
STATE (–)

MINIMALLY CONSCIOUS
STATE (+)

Eye opening

None

Spontaneous or to stimulus

Spontaneous

Spontaneous

Brain stem reflexes

None

Present

Present

Present

Orientation

None

None

Inconsistent

Consistent

Purposeful response

None

None

Trivial responses with localization (visual
fixation or tracking, localization to pain)

Evident reliable responses with
verbal, behavioral, and/or motor

Table 750.2  Rancho Los Amino Scale
LEVEL

COGNITIVE-­BEHAVIORAL CHARACTERISTICS

CLINICAL FEATURES

I

No response

Comatose state

II

Generalized response

Nonpurposeful, reflexive, stereotyped response to simulations

III

Localized response

Specifically localized (head turn, blink eye, grasp), consistent response to
stimulations

IV

Confused-­agitated

Confused and hyperactive or bizarre behavior

V

Confused-­inappropriate

Less agitated and able to follow simple instructions consistently but difficult to
follow complicated ones

VI

Confused-­appropriate

Still impaired recent memory, needs assistance for unfamiliar situations

VII

Automatic-­appropriate

Able to do daily routine independently but has difficulty solving problems

VIII

Purposeful-­appropriate

Independent and functional in activities at home and community but may have
some difficulties in stressful situations

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4388 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
Posttraumatic Seizure

The incidence of posttraumatic seizure (PTS) is dependent on injury
severity and age. About 30–35% of children with severe TBI will
experience a PTS. Very early-­onset PTS may develop within 24 hours
after a TBI, early-­onset PTS within 7 days, and late onset more than
7 days after a TBI. Early-­onset PTS is more common in children,
and late-­onset PTS is more common in adults. The risk of late-­onset
PTS is increased in particularly severe TBI, those caused by penetrating injury, the presence of subdural hematoma, in injuries occurring
in children younger than 5 years, and in patients with a history of
early-­onset PTS. Prophylactic treatment with an antiepileptic medication for 7 days after a TBI is commonly prescribed (see Chapter 82).
However, treatment with an antiepileptic medication beyond 1 week
offers no further benefit as a prophylactic agent. The risk of PTS decreases
to the same incidence as in the general population after 5 years
from TBI.

Paroxysmal Sympathetic Hyperactivity

Paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity (PSH) is a constellation of
symptoms manifested by hyperthermia, tachycardia, tachypnea,
diaphoresis, and increased tone, including dystonic posturing. It is
primarily attributable to autonomic dysregulation. The mechanism
has not been clearly defined but is thought to be because of disruption of the inhibitory function of the mesencephalon on the diencephalon (see Fig. 750.1). Some drug-­related symptoms may mimic
the features of PSH and may require discontinuation and the use of
alternative medication; for example, haloperidol and chlorpromazine may cause neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and phenytoin
may precipitate a fever. The assessment measure pediatric PSH-­AM
is suggested to improve diagnostic sensitivity (Tables 750.3, 750.4,
and 750.5). There is no current established standard of care for
management of PSH, but bromocriptine, propranolol or labetalol,
clonidine, amantadine, intrathecal baclofen, morphine, benzodiazepine, and gabapentin have been prescribed with variable success.
Morphine, fentanyl, propofol, propranolol, and gabapentin have
consistently been effective in adult patients for both prevention and
treatment. Most patients require more than one class of medication
(opioid, beta blockers, alpha 2 agonists, neuromodulators, benzodiazepines, sarcolemmal calcium release blockers). Oral baclofen,
Dilantin, and carbamazepine are reported to be ineffective for PSH.
PSH is a negative factor for short-­term but not long-­term functional
outcomes.

Neuroendocrine Disorders

Hypothalamic-­pituitary injury that occurs with TBI can cause various endocrine disorders. Growth hormone deficiency is the most
common and results in growth retardation. Precocious puberty, more
common in females than males, may result from loss of neural inhibition on gonadotropin release. Three different types of salt and water
metabolism derangements, diabetes insipidus (DI), syndrome of
inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), and cerebral salt wasting (CSW) can develop after a severe TBI (see Chapter
82).

Spasticity

Spasticity is a major complication that develops in children with severe
TBI (see Chapter 752).

OUTCOME ASSOCIATED WITH SEVERE TRAUMATIC
BRAIN INJURY

Given different mechanisms of injury, younger children who incur
a severe brain injury tend to have better functional outcomes than
older children. However, given the same severity of TBI, the outcome of very young children is poorer than that of older children.
The age defined as “very young children” (2-­5 years) is variable
depending on the studies. The specific reason for this difference in
outcomes has not been identified, but a plausible explanation is that
although very young children demonstrate a higher potential for
neuroplasticity with focal brain injuries, their immature and developing brains are more vulnerable to the diffuse effects on the brain
of most forms of TBI.
The GCS score is a strong prognostic factor for mortality and
functional outcome in the acute injury phase but not for functional
outcome in the subacute or chronic phase for children within the
severe TBI group. Duration of posttraumatic amnesia or time to follow commands are better prognostic factors for long-­term functional
outcomes.
Cognitive and behavioral impairments (poor memory-­learning and
executive skills, hyperactivity, depression, awareness deficits) are the
most common and long-­lasting sequelae of TBI. These deficits can
inhibit successful school reentry and participation in social activities.
Given the same severity, the long-­term functional outcome of children
who sustain nonaccidental (inflicted) trauma is worse than that of children with other forms of TBI. Children who incur nonaccidental trauma
are typically very young. If developmentally delayed before their brain
injury, they are likely to have poorer long-­term functional outcomes. The

Table 750.3  Pediatric PSH-­AM
Pediatric Clinical Feature Scale (PCFS)
AGE
(YR)

0

1

2

3

1-­4

<110

100-­124

125-­139

≥140

5-­15

<100

100-­119

120-­139

≥140

1-­4

<30

30-­34

35-­39

≥40

5-­15

<25

25-­29

30-­34

≥35

1-­4

<100

100-­109

110-­119

≥120

5-­15

<120

120-­129

130-­139

≥140

1-­4

<65

65-­72

73-­79

≥80

5-­15

<75

75-­82

83-­89

≥90

Temperature

37

37-­37.9

38-­38.9

≥39

Sweating

Normal

Increased sweating

Localized diaphoresis

Generalized diaphoresis

Posturing (muscle tone) during episode

None

Mild increase

Neat increase

Generalized spasticity/opisthotonos

Heart rate

Respiratory rate

Systolic BP

Diastolic BP

Severity of CF (subtotal score of PCFS): Nil =0, Mild 1-­6, Moderate 7-­12, Severe ≥13
BP, Blood pressure; PSH-­AM, paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity-­assessment measure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 751 u Spinal Cord Injury and Autonomic Dysreflexia Management
Table 750.4  Pediatric Diagnosis Likelihood Tool (PDLT)
PRESENT/­ABSENT (1/0)
1.	Clinical features occur
simultaneously
2.	Episodes are paroxysmal in nature
3.	Sympathetic overactivity to normally
nonpainful stimuli
4.	Features persist > 3 consecutive
days
5.	Features persist > 1 week postinjury
6.	Features persist despite treatment
of alternative differential diagnoses
7.	At least single episode daily
8.	Medication administered to
decrease sympathetic features
9.	Absence of parasympathetic
features during episodes
10.	Absence of other presumed cause
of features
11.	Antecedent acquired brain injury

Table 750.5  Pediatric PSH-­AM
PSH DIAGNOSTIC
LIKELIHOOD

COMBINED TOTAL
(PCFS + PDLT)

Unlikely

<8

Possible

8-­16

Probable

>17

PSH-AM, paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity assessment measure; PCFS, pediatric
clinical feature scale; PDLT, pediatric diagnosis likelihood tool.

long-­term functional outcome of children who sustain a TBI is better
than those who sustain a nontraumatic (anoxic) brain injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 751

Spinal Cord Injury and
Autonomic Dysreflexia
Management
Ashlee M. Jaffe and Abigail Case
See Chapter 81.
Individuals from birth to 21 years of age account for 25% of all cases
of traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI). Children are more susceptible
to lap-­belt injuries, upper cervical injuries, SCIs without radiologic
abnormalities (SCIWORA), and delayed onset of neurologic deficits,
ranging from 30 minutes to 4 days. A population-­based study found
the epidemiology of pediatric spinal injury in the US varies greatly by
age, ethnicity, and payor. Low-­income populations are more likely to
sustain spinal cord injury due to firearms than other populations.

4389

The most accurate way to evaluate a patient who has sustained an SCI
is by performing a standardized physical examination, as endorsed by the
International Standards for Neurological and Functional Classification
of SCI, recommended for children 6 years of age and older (Fig. 751.1).
Life expectancy is related to the neurologic level of injury and the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale classification.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Immediately after an SCI, there is typically a period of spinal shock
with low tone and absent reflexes. Eventually, signs of an upper motor
neuron lesion may emerge, including spasticity and involuntary muscle spasms. However, if there is a substantial segment of spinal cord
infarction present, patients may have persistent flaccid paralysis.
Children with neurologic levels of injury at T6 or above are at particular risk for interruption and decentralization of the autonomic nervous
system. The most common manifestations include bradycardia, hypotension, temperature dysregulation, and, once spinal shock has resolved,
autonomic dysreflexia (AD). AD is a sustained sympathetic response as
a result of a noxious stimulus below the level of injury. Symptoms resulting from AD typically include hypertension, bradycardia, headache, and
flushing of the skin above the level of injury, although vague symptoms
such as fatigue, irritability, or crying may be the presenting symptoms in
younger patients. Noxious stimuli resulting from bladder or rectal distention is a common cause of AD, but there are a large number of other causes
that need to be considered (Table 751.1). Children and adolescents with
cervical and upper thoracic level SCI have lower baseline blood pressures
(BPs) compared with the general population. Therefore caution should be
used when referencing age-­appropriate BPs because BP elevations of even
20-­40 mm Hg above this lower baseline may be suggestive of AD. Identification and treatment of the noxious stimulus is typically associated with
resolution of symptoms without the use of antihypertensive medication. If
necessary, antihypertensive agents with a rapid onset and short duration,
such as nifedipine and nitropaste, are advocated to treat elevated BP while
the underlying cause is identified (Fig. 751.2). Emergent management of
AD is necessary because of the risk of stroke and additional organ damage
resulting from sustained hypertension. Consideration of a medical alert
bracelet, education of supervising adults, and carrying of an AD emergency reference card is recommended (Fig. 751.3).
Patients with SCI are particularly vulnerable to deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism because of immobilization of their affected
limbs and venous stasis during the first 90 days after an injury. Deep venous
thromboses are more common in postpubertal children >14 years old
than in younger children. Mechanical prophylaxis (graduated compression stockings and sequential calf compression devices) are recommended
for all children with acute SCI; adolescents should also start anticoagulant thromboprophylaxis, especially if additional risk factors like lower
extremity fractures are present (unless contraindicated because of the risk
of bleeding or prior allergic response). Late-­occurring deep venous thrombosis most commonly occurs with prolonged immobilization related to
illness or surgery, and prophylactic measures should be continued during
these situations as well.
Consequent of SCI, patients often present with varying degrees of bowel
and bladder incontinence. After an SCI, the bladder can be areflexic or
hyperreflexic, and detrusor sphincter dyssynergia may occur. Clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) of the bladder is typically performed up to
4-­6 times/day to prevent urinary retention and vesicoureteral reflux. Constipation can negatively impact the success of a CIC program. Anticholinergic medications may improve bladder storage capacity and prevent
urinary incontinence between bladder catheterizations. Antibiotics are
only recommended for symptomatic urinary tract infections; asymptomatic
bacteriuria, without vesicoureteral reflux, is generally due to colonization
and typically not treated. If intermittent catheterization is required, one can
begin teaching the skills necessary for independent catheterization as early
as 3 years of age with a goal of obtaining complete independence by 5-­7
years old reflecting the progression toward independent bladder management of the child’s able-­bodied peers.
Bowel continence programs can be successfully introduced around
2-­4 years old. There should be an attempt to distinguish between upper
motor neuron (UMN) and lower motor neuron (LMN) bowel dysfunction because the management and bowel agents chosen may vary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 751 u Spinal Cord Injury and Autonomic Dysreflexia Management
Table 750.4  Pediatric Diagnosis Likelihood Tool (PDLT)
PRESENT/­ABSENT (1/0)
1.	Clinical features occur
simultaneously
2.	Episodes are paroxysmal in nature
3.	Sympathetic overactivity to normally
nonpainful stimuli
4.	Features persist > 3 consecutive
days
5.	Features persist > 1 week postinjury
6.	Features persist despite treatment
of alternative differential diagnoses
7.	At least single episode daily
8.	Medication administered to
decrease sympathetic features
9.	Absence of parasympathetic
features during episodes
10.	Absence of other presumed cause
of features
11.	Antecedent acquired brain injury

Table 750.5  Pediatric PSH-­AM
PSH DIAGNOSTIC
LIKELIHOOD

COMBINED TOTAL
(PCFS + PDLT)

Unlikely

<8

Possible

8-­16

Probable

>17

PSH-AM, paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity assessment measure; PCFS, pediatric
clinical feature scale; PDLT, pediatric diagnosis likelihood tool.

long-­term functional outcome of children who sustain a TBI is better
than those who sustain a nontraumatic (anoxic) brain injury.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 751

Spinal Cord Injury and
Autonomic Dysreflexia
Management
Ashlee M. Jaffe and Abigail Case
See Chapter 81.
Individuals from birth to 21 years of age account for 25% of all cases
of traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI). Children are more susceptible
to lap-­belt injuries, upper cervical injuries, SCIs without radiologic
abnormalities (SCIWORA), and delayed onset of neurologic deficits,
ranging from 30 minutes to 4 days. A population-­based study found
the epidemiology of pediatric spinal injury in the US varies greatly by
age, ethnicity, and payor. Low-­income populations are more likely to
sustain spinal cord injury due to firearms than other populations.

4389

The most accurate way to evaluate a patient who has sustained an SCI
is by performing a standardized physical examination, as endorsed by the
International Standards for Neurological and Functional Classification
of SCI, recommended for children 6 years of age and older (Fig. 751.1).
Life expectancy is related to the neurologic level of injury and the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale classification.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Immediately after an SCI, there is typically a period of spinal shock
with low tone and absent reflexes. Eventually, signs of an upper motor
neuron lesion may emerge, including spasticity and involuntary muscle spasms. However, if there is a substantial segment of spinal cord
infarction present, patients may have persistent flaccid paralysis.
Children with neurologic levels of injury at T6 or above are at particular risk for interruption and decentralization of the autonomic nervous
system. The most common manifestations include bradycardia, hypotension, temperature dysregulation, and, once spinal shock has resolved,
autonomic dysreflexia (AD). AD is a sustained sympathetic response as
a result of a noxious stimulus below the level of injury. Symptoms resulting from AD typically include hypertension, bradycardia, headache, and
flushing of the skin above the level of injury, although vague symptoms
such as fatigue, irritability, or crying may be the presenting symptoms in
younger patients. Noxious stimuli resulting from bladder or rectal distention is a common cause of AD, but there are a large number of other causes
that need to be considered (Table 751.1). Children and adolescents with
cervical and upper thoracic level SCI have lower baseline blood pressures
(BPs) compared with the general population. Therefore caution should be
used when referencing age-­appropriate BPs because BP elevations of even
20-­40 mm Hg above this lower baseline may be suggestive of AD. Identification and treatment of the noxious stimulus is typically associated with
resolution of symptoms without the use of antihypertensive medication. If
necessary, antihypertensive agents with a rapid onset and short duration,
such as nifedipine and nitropaste, are advocated to treat elevated BP while
the underlying cause is identified (Fig. 751.2). Emergent management of
AD is necessary because of the risk of stroke and additional organ damage
resulting from sustained hypertension. Consideration of a medical alert
bracelet, education of supervising adults, and carrying of an AD emergency reference card is recommended (Fig. 751.3).
Patients with SCI are particularly vulnerable to deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism because of immobilization of their affected
limbs and venous stasis during the first 90 days after an injury. Deep venous
thromboses are more common in postpubertal children >14 years old
than in younger children. Mechanical prophylaxis (graduated compression stockings and sequential calf compression devices) are recommended
for all children with acute SCI; adolescents should also start anticoagulant thromboprophylaxis, especially if additional risk factors like lower
extremity fractures are present (unless contraindicated because of the risk
of bleeding or prior allergic response). Late-­occurring deep venous thrombosis most commonly occurs with prolonged immobilization related to
illness or surgery, and prophylactic measures should be continued during
these situations as well.
Consequent of SCI, patients often present with varying degrees of bowel
and bladder incontinence. After an SCI, the bladder can be areflexic or
hyperreflexic, and detrusor sphincter dyssynergia may occur. Clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) of the bladder is typically performed up to
4-­6 times/day to prevent urinary retention and vesicoureteral reflux. Constipation can negatively impact the success of a CIC program. Anticholinergic medications may improve bladder storage capacity and prevent
urinary incontinence between bladder catheterizations. Antibiotics are
only recommended for symptomatic urinary tract infections; asymptomatic
bacteriuria, without vesicoureteral reflux, is generally due to colonization
and typically not treated. If intermittent catheterization is required, one can
begin teaching the skills necessary for independent catheterization as early
as 3 years of age with a goal of obtaining complete independence by 5-­7
years old reflecting the progression toward independent bladder management of the child’s able-­bodied peers.
Bowel continence programs can be successfully introduced around
2-­4 years old. There should be an attempt to distinguish between upper
motor neuron (UMN) and lower motor neuron (LMN) bowel dysfunction because the management and bowel agents chosen may vary

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4390 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine

Fig. 751.1 American Spinal Injury Association standards worksheet. (From the American Spinal Injury Association: International standards for neurological and functional classification of spinal cord injury [ISNCSCI]. Richmond, Virginia, 2019, https://asia-­spinalinjury.org/international-standardsneurological-classification-sci-isncsci-worksheet/.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 751 u Spinal Cord Injury and Autonomic Dysreflexia Management
Table 751.1  Potential Etiologies of Noxious Stimuli
Causing Autonomic Dysreflexia
URINARY SYSTEM
• Bladder distention
• Bladder or kidney stones
• Blocked/kinked catheter
• Detrusor sphincter dyssynergia
• Urinary tract infection
• Urologic instrumentation
• Shock wave lithotripsy
GASTROINTESTINAL SYSTEM
• Bowel distention
• Bowel impaction
• Gallstones
• Appendicitis
• Gastric ulcers
• Gastritis
• Gastrointestinal instrumentation
• Hemorrhoids
INTEGUMENTARY SYSTEM
• Constrictive clothing, shoes, or orthotics
• Blisters
• Burns, sunburn, or frostbite
• Ingrown toenail
• Insect bites
• Pressure ulcers
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
• Fractures
• Heterotopic ossification
• Functional electrical stimulation
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM—MALE
• Epididymitis
• Scrotal compression (sitting on scrotum)
• Sexual intercourse
• Sexually transmitted infections
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM—FEMALE
• Menstruation
• Pregnancy, especially labor and delivery
• Vaginitis
• Sexual intercourse
• Sexually transmitted infections
HEMATOLOGIC SYSTEM
• Deep vein thrombosis
• Pulmonary embolus
OTHER SYSTEMIC CAUSES
• Boosting (an episode of autonomic dysreflexia intentionally
caused by an athlete with spinal cord injury in an attempt to
enhance physical performance)
• Excessive alcohol intake
• Excessive caffeine or diuretic intake
• Over-­the-­counter or prescribed stimulants
• Substance abuse
From Consortium for Spinal Cord Medicine: Acute management of autonomic
dysreflexia: individuals with spinal cord injury presenting to health-­care facilities,
Washington, DC, 2001, Paralyzed Veterans of America, 10–11.

significantly. Lesions at or proximal to the conus medullaris typically
result in UMN bowel dysfunction, whereas lesions distal to the conus
typically result in LMN bowel dysfunction characterized by an areflexic
bowel lacking peristalsis. Management of bowel incontinence requires
the use of diet modifications, bowel medications, and planned evacuations. Emptying is facilitated by use of the gastrocolic reflex, digital
stimulation, suppositories, and enemas in those with UMN bowel
dysfunction. Individuals with LMN bowel dysfunction often require
manual removal because peristalsis and reflexes are not intact.
Individuals with SCI have increased risk for dysphagia, delayed gastric
emptying, ileus, gastric ulcerations, pancreatitis, and superior mesenteric
artery syndrome. Presentation of an acute abdomen in SCI is challenging
to identify because a patient may be incapable of feeling the pain intensity

4391

Patient with spinal cord injury demonstrates signs/
symptoms of autonomic dysreflexia: blood pressure
elevation >15 mm Hg above patient’s baseline, pounding
frontal headache, bradycardia or tachycardia, flushing of
skin and/or diaphoresis above level of injury, anxiety

Obtain vital signs, including heart rate, blood pressure, and
temperature, and repeat vital signs every 5 min

Elevate head of bed unless contraindicated.
Reposition patient and loosen tight clothing. Assess for
potential noxious stimuli (wounds, brace creating
pressure, etc.) (see Table 751.1)

Bladder management: empty bladder through
catheterization using 2% xylocaine jelly as lubricant. If
indwelling catheter is in place, ensure catheter is not
plugged or kinked

If blood pressure remains elevated, proceed with bowel
management: examine the rectum after inserting 2%
xylocaine jelly and gently remove any stool if present

If blood pressure remains elevated, consider use of rapidonset and short-duration antihypertensives:
• Nifedipine: 0.25–0.5 mg/kg/dose every 4–6 hr (maximum 10 mg/dose)
• Nitropaste 2%: titrating to effect, 1 inch above level of injury, starting with
1/2 inch and increasing by 1/2 inch increments to achieve desired results.
Remember to wipe away excess nitropaste after results are obtained

Fig. 751.2 Algorithm for the management of autonomic dysreflexia.
typically associated with an intraabdominal disorder. As a result, an acute
abdomen may be manifested by nonspecific signs and symptoms, such as
vomiting, poorly localized dull pain, restlessness, fever, and leukocytosis.
Frequent monitoring for skin breakdown and pressure ulcers is
necessary, both acutely as well as lifelong. Pressure ulcers may heal
more slowly in patients with SCI and can significantly impact function. Common locations include the occiput, elbows, sacrum, ischium,
and heels. Devices such as halo vests and splints increase the risk of
developing a pressure sore. Frequent inspection and repositioning for
pressure relief when in bed and when sitting are important measures to
minimize the risk of pressure ulcer development.
Depending on the level of the lesion, paralysis of the diaphragm or intercostal and abdominal muscles can result in restrictive ventilatory impairment and ineffective coughing. Respiratory muscle training, abdominal
binders, and noninvasive ventilation and airway clearance devices, such
as the insufflator–exsufflator cough assist device, should be considered in
select patients.
Spasticity typically increases with noxious stimulation and can
interfere with sleep, comfort, positioning, and care (see Chapter 752).
Untreated spasticity can lead to contracture development and functional limitations. Management includes pharmacologic therapy,
stretching, splinting, and positioning to reduce tone. Focal spasticity
can be treated with chemodenervation by injecting botulinum toxin
into select hypertonic muscles or phenol perineurally. Intrathecal
baclofen may be an option for severe generalized spasticity or spasticity that is predominately in the lower extremities.
Increased bone resorption occurs as a result of prolonged immobilization. If excessive calcium is not adequately excreted by the kidneys,
insidious onset of abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, polydipsia, polyuria, and behavior changes may occur. This immobilization

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4392 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine

Fig. 751.3 Example of pediatric autonomic dysreflexia emergency card, which can be downloaded in multiple languages for free from the Christopher & Dana Reeve Foundation Paralysis Resource Center website (https://www.christopherreeve.org/living-­with-­paralysis/free-­resources-­and-­
downloads/wallet-­cards).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 751 u Spinal Cord Injury and Autonomic Dysreflexia Management
hypercalcemia is managed with IV normal saline and the bisphosphonate pamidronate. Failure to manage the immobilization hypercalcemia
may result in nephrocalcinosis, urolithiasis, or renal failure. Loss of bone
mineral density begins immediately after an SCI occurs and osteopenia
plateaus 6-­12 months later. This may result in pathologic fractures, with
the most common sites of fracture including the supracondylar region
of the femur and the proximal tibia. Precautions are necessary because
fractures may occur with minor trauma, range of motion exercises, and
gait training. Treatment should include the use of removable splints or
casts that are well padded over bony prominences to prevent skin breakdown, which is more likely with insensate skin under the cast. Prevention through progressive weight bearing, if feasible and safe, and calcium
and vitamin D supplementation is encouraged.
The risk of development of spinal deformities and scoliosis is about 25%
in patients sustaining SCI both before and during puberty, and some of these
children will require surgical correction. Because of the high incidence of
scoliosis in patients younger than 15 at the time of their injury, radiographs
of the thoracolumbar-­sacral spine should generally be obtained every 6
months before skeletal maturity and every 12 months thereafter. Children
who sustain injuries before puberty are also susceptible to hip dislocation
and require periodic screening for this condition. Although neurologic
heterotopic ossification is less prevalent in children compared with adults,
it may occur on average about 4 months, but up to 14 months, after the
initial injury. The most common site of heterotopic ossification is the hip,
but it may also occur in the knee, elbow, and shoulder.
Children and adolescents with SCI are at risk for decreased muscle
mass, insulin resistance, decreased glucose transport, dyslipidemia, obesity, and decreased bone health as they age. Long term, patients with SCI
have a 3-­5-­fold greater odds of cardiovascular disease compared with

4393

able-­bodied individuals. Nutrition education and monitoring are important for decreasing long-­term morbidities. Promoting exercise and physical activity and fitness are important for well-­being. Youth with SCI may
develop latex allergy thought to be a result of repeated, early exposure to
latex products; thus a latex-­free environment and degree of suspicion for
allergies to bananas, kiwis, avocados, or chestnuts is advised.
Psychologic adjustment to SCI is influenced by the developmental age
at the time of injury. SCI will impact the child’s psychosocial development,
so adjustment should be monitored closely. Long-­term outcomes related
to coping, depression, and anxiety are better in adults who sustained their
injury during childhood, compared with those who sustained their injuries in adulthood. Positive coping strategies and strong social supports are
associated with greater social participation. Education regarding sexual
development and function with SCI injury should be provided.

PROGNOSIS

Prognosis for functional recovery after an SCI depends on the neurologic level of injury and the level of completeness. Examination at least
72 hours after injury has been determined to be a better indicator of
the prognosis than earlier examinations. Reexamination after recovery from spinal shock provides additional prognostic information. It
is prudent for those determining and communicating the diagnosis
to understand the limitations of the anorectal examinations, and thus
completeness of injury, unique to children. Those individuals with
an initial incomplete injury have an increased likelihood of eventual
neurologic recovery. The neurologic level of injury can be helpful in
determining the level of independence with functional activities (Table
751.2). The use of technology in rehabilitation encourages the pediatric
patient to become more engaged in their own care and advance their

Table 751.2  Projected Functional Outcomes at 1 Year After Injury and/or Diagnosis According to Neurologic Level of Injury
C1-­C4

C5

C6

C7

C8-­ T1

Feeding

Dependent

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Independent

Independent

Independent

Dressing—Upper
Body

Dependent

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Independent

Independent

Independent

Dressing—Lower
Body

Dependent

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Independent with
adaptive equipment

Bathing

Dependent

Dependent

Dependent

Some assistance to
independent with
equipment

Independent

Bed mobility

Dependent

Dependent

Some assistance to
independent

Independent

Independent

Transfers— Level
Surface

Dependent

Dependent

Some assistance to
independent

Independent

Independent

Wheelchair
Propulsion

Independent with
power; dependent
with manual

Independent with
power; may be
independent with
manual on level
surfaces

Independent

Independent

Independent

Driving

Dependent

May be independent
with adaptations

Independent

Independent

Independent

T2-­T9

T10-­L2

L3-­L5

Activities of daily
living (feeding,
dressing bathing)

Independent

Independent

Independent

Transfers

Independent

Independent

Independent

Ambulation

Standing in frame, tilt
table, or standing
wheelchair Exercise
only

Household
ambulation with
orthosis

Community
ambulation is
possible

Adapted from Hornyak J, Wernimont C: Spinal cord injuries. In: Murphy K, McMahon M, Houtrow A eds. Pediatric Rehabilitation: Principles and Practice, 6th ed. New York: Demos
Medical Publishing, 2021.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4394 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
independence, which is correlated with higher quality of life. Common
technology includes therapeutic and functional stimulation, EMG
biofeedback and EMG-­triggered stimulation, assistive technology for
computer access, and implanted functional electrical stimulation system including phrenic nerve stimulators.

reduction while minimizing adverse cognitive effects. Oral baclofen
is considered a first-­line medication for the management of dystonia in CP with common indications including pain or difficulty
sleeping associated with dystonia. Abrupt cessation of oral or ITB
baclofen must be avoided because of withdrawal potential.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

α2-­Adrenergic Agents

Chapter 752

Spasticity
Joyce L. Oleszek and Loren T. Davidson
Spasticity is a component of the upper motor neuron syndrome
characterized by velocity-­dependent resistance to passive range of
motion, resulting in tonic stretch reflexes and accompanied by exaggerated tendon jerks. Spasticity management is determining what
degree of spasticity may be tolerable and of functional benefit versus
detrimental.
When devising a treatment plan, both the positive and negative
effects of spasticity on function must be considered. Treatment
should maximize function, independence, comfort, and quality of
life while minimizing sedation and adverse effects. Management
strategies including systemic medications, injections, and surgery
are reviewed.

SYSTEMIC MEDICATIONS

Systemic medications are used as a treatment for generalized spasticity (Table 752.1). Although efficacy of certain antispasmodics has been
demonstrated, their use should be contingent on functional benefit
because adverse effects are quite common. Frequently used medications include baclofen, benzodiazepines, dantrolene sodium, tizanidine, clonidine, and trihexyphenidyl.

GABAergic Medications

γ-­Aminobutyric acid (GABA) is an inhibitory neurotransmitter of
the central nervous system. The two most relevant GABA receptors
for the purposes of pharmacologic management of spasticity are
GABAA and GABAB. Benzodiazepines exert their effect by increasing the affinity of GABA for the GABAA receptor. This results in
presynaptic inhibition and a net inhibitory effect at both spinal and
supraspinal levels. Of the benzodiazepines, diazepam is a commonly
used medication to treat spasticity because of its long half-­life and
need for less frequent administration. In children younger than 2
years of age, clonazepam is a good option because of the availability
of a liquid formulation and dosing guidelines. Sedation and cognitive slowing limit the usefulness of this class of medications in children. However, benzodiazepines can be helpful for dystonic storms
or disturbed sleep in children with cerebral palsy (CP). The use of
benzodiazepines may lead to physiologic dependence; thus abrupt
discontinuation should be avoided to prevent withdrawal.
Baclofen is a GABAB agonist and a preferred agent in the treatment of spasticity of spinal origin. Baclofen exerts an inhibitory
effect on both monosynaptic and polysynaptic spinal reflexes, but
its supraspinal receptor sites can result in sedation as is common
to all GABAergic medications. Daytime dosing of oral baclofen is
often better tolerated than benzodiazepines with regard to sedation.
Intrathecal administration of baclofen via an intrathecal baclofen
(ITB) pump (see later) allows greater selectivity of spasticity

Clonidine and tizanidine are examples of centrally acting α2-­
adrenergic agonists that decrease spasticity and have an anti-­
nociceptive effect. Clonidine is used more frequently as an antihypertensive. Clonidine exerts its effect on spasticity via both
presynaptic inhibition of sensory afferents as well as release of glutamate at the level of the spinal cord. In comparison to clonidine,
tizanidine has less-­potent hemodynamic effects, which is desirable
when used primarily for spasticity reduction. However, tizanidine
is extensively metabolized by the liver, so hepatic impairment may
have a significant effect on its pharmacokinetics. Although clonidine and tizanidine are used widely as antispasmodics in practice,
there is limited evidence for their use in reducing spasticity in
children with CP. Tizanidine’s antispasticity effect has been demonstrated in adults with multiple sclerosis and spinal cord injury.
Clonidine has been shown to be effective for disturbed sleep associated with severe hypertonia. The adverse effect profile of these
agents can limit their use.

Peripherally Acting Calcium Blockers

Dantrolene sodium works at the level of skeletal muscle to block calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Despite its peripheral
site of action, dantrolene may induce sedation, although to a lesser
degree than other centrally acting agents. A few small studies have
shown that dantrolene decreases clonus and spasticity but can also
decrease strength. Dantrolene is often well tolerated in children, but its
risk of hepatotoxicity requires monitoring of liver function tests. Hepatotoxicity risk increases with age, increasing dose, and female gender
(see Table 752.1).

INJECTION MANAGEMENT

Injection management of spasticity should be considered when
spasticity causes significant functional impairments that are refractory to more conservative options. Combining treatment options
such as injections and systemic medications can be very effective.
Botulinum toxin (BoNT) and phenol injections are used to
treat localized spasticity. OnabotulinumtoxinA (Botox) and AbobotulinumtoxinA (Dysport) have obtained U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approval for both upper and lower limb
spasticity in pediatrics. RimabotulinumtoxinB (Myobloc) and IncobotulinumtoxinA (Xeomin) both have FDA approval but neither
have a pediatric indication. BoNT is derived from the bacteria Clostridium botulinum, and there are seven immunologically distinct
serotypes designated A through G. Its mechanism of action involves
a light chain protein binding to synaptobrevin at the neuromuscular junction, inhibiting vesicles from anchoring to the cell membrane and preventing acetylcholine release from the presynaptic
membrane. This interferes with nerve impulse transmission and
results in weakness of the muscle injected. Onset of action is within
2 weeks of administration, duration is 3-­6 months, and effects
wane as the neuromuscular junction reestablishes its original function. Injections should be administered no more frequently than
every 3 months to reduce neutralizing antibody formation, which
occurs in 1–2% of treated individuals. BoNT-­A is a safe and effective treatment for spasticity in the upper and lower extremities in
children with CP, but the effects on long-­term functional improvement with repeated injections are less well known. The combination of BoNT-­A injections to the gastrocnemius muscles and serial
casting has been shown to improve ankle range of motion and gait.
BoNT-­A can also improve ease of care and comfort in nonambulatory children with CP. The most common adverse events (AEs)
include localized pain and weakness, unsteadiness and increased
falls, fatigue, urinary incontinence, and dysphagia. Systemic AEs

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4394 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
independence, which is correlated with higher quality of life. Common
technology includes therapeutic and functional stimulation, EMG
biofeedback and EMG-­triggered stimulation, assistive technology for
computer access, and implanted functional electrical stimulation system including phrenic nerve stimulators.

reduction while minimizing adverse cognitive effects. Oral baclofen
is considered a first-­line medication for the management of dystonia in CP with common indications including pain or difficulty
sleeping associated with dystonia. Abrupt cessation of oral or ITB
baclofen must be avoided because of withdrawal potential.

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

α2-­Adrenergic Agents

Chapter 752

Spasticity
Joyce L. Oleszek and Loren T. Davidson
Spasticity is a component of the upper motor neuron syndrome
characterized by velocity-­dependent resistance to passive range of
motion, resulting in tonic stretch reflexes and accompanied by exaggerated tendon jerks. Spasticity management is determining what
degree of spasticity may be tolerable and of functional benefit versus
detrimental.
When devising a treatment plan, both the positive and negative
effects of spasticity on function must be considered. Treatment
should maximize function, independence, comfort, and quality of
life while minimizing sedation and adverse effects. Management
strategies including systemic medications, injections, and surgery
are reviewed.

SYSTEMIC MEDICATIONS

Systemic medications are used as a treatment for generalized spasticity (Table 752.1). Although efficacy of certain antispasmodics has been
demonstrated, their use should be contingent on functional benefit
because adverse effects are quite common. Frequently used medications include baclofen, benzodiazepines, dantrolene sodium, tizanidine, clonidine, and trihexyphenidyl.

GABAergic Medications

γ-­Aminobutyric acid (GABA) is an inhibitory neurotransmitter of
the central nervous system. The two most relevant GABA receptors
for the purposes of pharmacologic management of spasticity are
GABAA and GABAB. Benzodiazepines exert their effect by increasing the affinity of GABA for the GABAA receptor. This results in
presynaptic inhibition and a net inhibitory effect at both spinal and
supraspinal levels. Of the benzodiazepines, diazepam is a commonly
used medication to treat spasticity because of its long half-­life and
need for less frequent administration. In children younger than 2
years of age, clonazepam is a good option because of the availability
of a liquid formulation and dosing guidelines. Sedation and cognitive slowing limit the usefulness of this class of medications in children. However, benzodiazepines can be helpful for dystonic storms
or disturbed sleep in children with cerebral palsy (CP). The use of
benzodiazepines may lead to physiologic dependence; thus abrupt
discontinuation should be avoided to prevent withdrawal.
Baclofen is a GABAB agonist and a preferred agent in the treatment of spasticity of spinal origin. Baclofen exerts an inhibitory
effect on both monosynaptic and polysynaptic spinal reflexes, but
its supraspinal receptor sites can result in sedation as is common
to all GABAergic medications. Daytime dosing of oral baclofen is
often better tolerated than benzodiazepines with regard to sedation.
Intrathecal administration of baclofen via an intrathecal baclofen
(ITB) pump (see later) allows greater selectivity of spasticity

Clonidine and tizanidine are examples of centrally acting α2-­
adrenergic agonists that decrease spasticity and have an anti-­
nociceptive effect. Clonidine is used more frequently as an antihypertensive. Clonidine exerts its effect on spasticity via both
presynaptic inhibition of sensory afferents as well as release of glutamate at the level of the spinal cord. In comparison to clonidine,
tizanidine has less-­potent hemodynamic effects, which is desirable
when used primarily for spasticity reduction. However, tizanidine
is extensively metabolized by the liver, so hepatic impairment may
have a significant effect on its pharmacokinetics. Although clonidine and tizanidine are used widely as antispasmodics in practice,
there is limited evidence for their use in reducing spasticity in
children with CP. Tizanidine’s antispasticity effect has been demonstrated in adults with multiple sclerosis and spinal cord injury.
Clonidine has been shown to be effective for disturbed sleep associated with severe hypertonia. The adverse effect profile of these
agents can limit their use.

Peripherally Acting Calcium Blockers

Dantrolene sodium works at the level of skeletal muscle to block calcium release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Despite its peripheral
site of action, dantrolene may induce sedation, although to a lesser
degree than other centrally acting agents. A few small studies have
shown that dantrolene decreases clonus and spasticity but can also
decrease strength. Dantrolene is often well tolerated in children, but its
risk of hepatotoxicity requires monitoring of liver function tests. Hepatotoxicity risk increases with age, increasing dose, and female gender
(see Table 752.1).

INJECTION MANAGEMENT

Injection management of spasticity should be considered when
spasticity causes significant functional impairments that are refractory to more conservative options. Combining treatment options
such as injections and systemic medications can be very effective.
Botulinum toxin (BoNT) and phenol injections are used to
treat localized spasticity. OnabotulinumtoxinA (Botox) and AbobotulinumtoxinA (Dysport) have obtained U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approval for both upper and lower limb
spasticity in pediatrics. RimabotulinumtoxinB (Myobloc) and IncobotulinumtoxinA (Xeomin) both have FDA approval but neither
have a pediatric indication. BoNT is derived from the bacteria Clostridium botulinum, and there are seven immunologically distinct
serotypes designated A through G. Its mechanism of action involves
a light chain protein binding to synaptobrevin at the neuromuscular junction, inhibiting vesicles from anchoring to the cell membrane and preventing acetylcholine release from the presynaptic
membrane. This interferes with nerve impulse transmission and
results in weakness of the muscle injected. Onset of action is within
2 weeks of administration, duration is 3-­6 months, and effects
wane as the neuromuscular junction reestablishes its original function. Injections should be administered no more frequently than
every 3 months to reduce neutralizing antibody formation, which
occurs in 1–2% of treated individuals. BoNT-­A is a safe and effective treatment for spasticity in the upper and lower extremities in
children with CP, but the effects on long-­term functional improvement with repeated injections are less well known. The combination of BoNT-­A injections to the gastrocnemius muscles and serial
casting has been shown to improve ankle range of motion and gait.
BoNT-­A can also improve ease of care and comfort in nonambulatory children with CP. The most common adverse events (AEs)
include localized pain and weakness, unsteadiness and increased
falls, fatigue, urinary incontinence, and dysphagia. Systemic AEs

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 752 u Spasticity 4395
Table 752.1  Dosing Guidelines, Pharmacologic Actions, and Adverse Event Profile of Commonly Prescribed Oral
Antispasmodic Medications for Children
MEDICATION/DOSING GUIDELINES

PHARMACOLOGIC ACTIONS

ADVERSE REACTIONS/PRECAUTIONS

BACLOFEN

• Centrally acting, structural analog of
GABA
• Binds to GABAB receptors causing
presynaptic inhibition of mono/
polysynaptic spinal reflexes
• Rapid absorption, blood level peaks in
1 hr, half-­life 5.5 hr.
• Renal excretion (70–80% unchanged)
• Hepatic excretion (15%)

• CNS depression (sedation, fatigue)
• Nausea
• Headache
• Dizziness
• Confusion
• Euphoria
• Hallucinations
• Hypotonia
• Ataxia
• Paraesthesias
Note: Abrupt withdrawal may cause seizures,
hallucinations, rebound muscle spasms, and
hyperpyrexia.

• Centrally acting, binds to GABAA
receptors mediating presynaptic
inhibition in brainstem reticular
formation and spinal polysynaptic
pathways
• Rapid absorption, blood level peaks in
1 hr, with half-­life of 30-­60 hr

• CNS depression (sedation, impaired memory,
and impaired attention)
• Ataxia
• Dependence/potential for substance abuse/
overdose
• Withdrawal syndrome (including anxiety,
agitation, irritability, tremor, muscle twitching,
nausea, insomnia, seizures, hyperpyrexia)
• Increased potential for adverse effects with low
albumin levels due to being 98% protein bound

• Peripheral action, blocking release of
calcium from sarcoplasmic reticulum
with uncoupling of nerve excitation and
skeletal muscle contraction
• Blood level peaks in 3-­6 hr (active
metabolite 4-­8 hr), half-­life of approx.
15 hr

• Malaise
• Fatigue
• Nausea
• Vomiting
• Diarrhea
• Muscle weakness with high dose
Note: Hepatotoxicity (baseline liver function tests
MUST be checked before starting dantrolene,
tested weekly during dose titration and regularly
every 1-­2 months thereafter). Drug should be
discontinued promptly if liver enzymes become
elevated.

• Centrally acting, alpha2 adrenoceptor
agonist activity at both spinal and
supraspinal sites. Prevents release of
excitatory amino acids, facilitating
presynaptic inhibition
• Good oral absorption, blood level peaks
in 1-­2 hr, half-­life of 2.5 hr

• Dry mouth
• Drowsiness
• Headache
• Dizziness
• Insomnia
• Anxiety
• Aggression
• Mood swings
• Visual hallucinations
• Risk of hypotension (although 10 times less anti-­
hypertensive potency than clonidine)
• Nausea/vomiting
• Constipation
• Liver function tests should be monitored; baseline
and 1 month after maintenance dose achieved.

• Centrally acting, mixed alpha
adrenoceptor agonist with predominant
alpha-­2 activity causing membrane
hyperpolarization at multiple sites in
brain, brainstem, and dorsal horns of
spinal cord.
• Rapidly absorbed orally, blood level
peaks in 1-­1½ hr, half-­life of 6-­20 hr.

• Drowsiness
• Dry mouth
• Bradycardia
• Orthostatic hypotension
• Abrupt cessation may result in rebound
hypertension.

0.125-­1 mg/kg/day
2-­7 yr:
2.5-­10 mg tid-­qid (10-­40 mg/day)
8-­12 yr:
5 mg-­15 mg tid-­qid (15-­60 mg/day)
12-­16 yr:
5-­20 mg tid-­qid (20-­80 mg/day)
Note: Caution advised with renal
impairment; consider reducing dose.
DIAZEPAM
0.12-­0.8 mg/kg/day
6 mo-­12 yr:
0.12-­0.8 mg/kg/day PO divided q 6-­8h
>12 yr:
2-­10 mg PO bid-­qid
Note: Starting a qhs dose only or
proportionately larger dose at bedtime
may limit excessive daytime sedation.
DANTROLENE SODIUM
3-­12 mg/kg /day
>5 yr:
6-­8 mg/kg/d PO divided bid-­qid
Start 0.5 mg/kg qd-­bid for 7 days, then 0.5
mg/kg tid for 7 days, then 1 mg/kg tid for
7 days, then 2 mg/kg tid to a maximum of
12 mg/kg/d or 400 mg/day.

TIZANIDINE
<10 yr:
Initiate 1 mg orally at bedtime initially,
increasing to 0.3-­0.5 mg/kg in 4 divided
doses
>10 yr:
Commence 2 mg orally at bedtime
initially, increased according to response,
maximum 24 mg/day in 3-­4 divided
doses

CLONIDINE
0.025-0.1 mg/day in 2-­3 divided doses.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4396 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
can occur in up to 3.6% of children with CP receiving BoNT-­A,
and those with a history of dysphagia and/or aspiration pneumonia are at increased risk. The FDA requires black box labeling on
BoNT products, cautioning of a rare but potentially life-­threatening
complication of BoNT effects spreading beyond the injection site.
Co-­administration of BoNT and other agents interfering with neuromuscular transmission, such as aminoglycosides and curare-­like
agents, should be performed with caution because the effect of the
toxin may be potentiated.
Phenol neurolysis can be used in combination with BoNT injections
to allow treatment of more affected muscles while remaining within the
safe dose range of BoNT. Phenol causes nonselective denaturing of proteins upon exposure to the nerve, thereby causing nerve injury by precipitating and dehydrating the protoplasm. This, in turn, interferes with
nerve conduction and impairs innervation to muscles. Phenol injections
are typically used to target nerves to large proximal muscles (musculocutaneous, obturator and sciatic nerves), and the duration of clinical effect
may be longer than BoNT. There is limited evidence on the use of phenol in children with CP, but a few small studies show safety and efficacy.
Phenol injection of the anterior branch of the obturator nerve in children
with CP has been found to be safe and effective. AEs include pain, swelling and inflammation, and dysesthesias. The low cost of phenol incurs a
significant advantage over BoNT, but the need for electrical stimulation
or ultrasound guidance and general anesthesia may negate this benefit.

SURGICAL MANAGEMENT

Intrathecal baclofen (ITB) is approved to treat spasticity of cerebral
origin. ITB is delivered to the intrathecal space by a catheter connected
to a sub­fascially implanted pump. This mechanism of delivery produces much higher local concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid at a
fraction of the equivalent systemic dose of baclofen, thereby minimizing the CNS depressive effects. Catheter tips are typically positioned
at C5-­T2 but can be placed intraventricularly for severe dystonia. ITB
pumps require refills at 2-­6–month intervals depending on dose rate
and pump size and need to be replaced every 5-­7 years for end of battery life. The frequent maintenance required can be prohibitive to some
families. Before ITB pump placement, a single bolus dose of baclofen
can be delivered via lumbar puncture to evaluate responsiveness and
impact on functional abilities. ITB is effective in reducing spasticity
and dystonia in CP and may improve the ease of care and quality of life
of children with CP. Continuous ITB treatment is superior to placebo
on attainment of individual treatment goals in children with Gross
Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS) level IV and V CP
(Fig. 752.1). Serious AEs can occur with ITB. One 14-­year study of 430
patients found at least one complication in 25% of patients: infection in
9.3%, CSF leak in 4.9%, catheter problem in 15.1%, and a pump-­related
problem in 1%. Electromagnetic interference and MRI may cause transient operational changes to the ITB pump and changes to the flow
rate; thus the pump should be interrogated by a programmer after MRI
as a precaution. ITB withdrawal is a medical emergency and needs
to be identified early and managed aggressively. Sequelae can include
high fever, altered mental status, exaggerated rebound spasticity, and
muscle rigidity that, in rare cases, can advance to rhabdomyolysis, multiple organ–system failure, and death. Caregivers need to be educated
on the early symptoms of baclofen withdrawal. Prevention of abrupt
discontinuation of ITB requires careful attention to programming and
monitoring of the infusion system, refill scheduling, and pump alarms.
Selective dorsal rhizotomy (SDR) is a surgical procedure that decreases
muscle spasticity by sectioning hyperexcitatory sensory nerve rootlets that
innervate the lower extremities. The surgical technique involves single or
multilevel osteoplastic laminectomies exposing the L2-­S1 nerve roots,
and sensory rootlets are chosen for sectioning using intraoperative electromyography. The most ideal candidates are thought to be children 3-­8
years of age with spastic diplegic CP, minimal upper limb involvement,
good selective motor control and strength with the ability to rise from
the floor independently, minimal contractures, and good cognitive skills.

GMFCS E & R between 6th and 12th birthday:
Descriptors and illustrations
GMFCS Level I
Children walk at home, school, outdoors and in the
community. They can climb stairs without the use
of a railing. Children perform gross motor skills such
as running and jumping, but speed, balance and
coordination are limited.

GMFCS Level II
Children walk in most settings and climb stairs
holding onto a railing. They may experience difficulty
walking long distances and balancing on uneven
terrain, inclines, in crowded areas or confined spaces.
Children may walk with physical assistance, a handheld mobility device or used wheeled mobility over
long distances. Children have only minimal ability to
perform gross motor skills such as running and jumping.

GMFCS Level III
Children walk using a hand-held mobility device in
most indoor settings. They may climb stairs holding
onto a railing with supervision or assistance. Children
use wheeled mobility when traveling long distances
and may self-propel for shorter distances.

GMFCS Level IV
Children use methods of mobility that require physical
assistance or powered mobility in most settings. They
may walk for short distances at home with physical
assistance or use powered mobility or a body support
walker when positioned. At school, outdoors and in
the community children are transported in a manual
wheelchair or use powered mobility.

GMFCS Level V
Children are transported in a manual wheelchair
in all settings. Children are limited in their ability
to maintain antigravity head and trunk postures and
control leg and arm movements.

Fig. 752.1 Gross Motor Function Classification System Expanded and
Revised (GMFCS E & R). (Descriptors: ©Palisano et al, 1997 – Dev Med
Child Neurol., 39:214-­23 (CanChild: www.canchild.ca); Illustrations Version 2 © Bill Reid, Kate Willoughby, Adrienne Harvey and Kerr Graham,
The Royal Children’s Hospital Melbourne)

Ambulatory children with CP have better function and quality of life in the
24 months after SDR. A prospective gait analysis study in adults with CP
20 years after SDR showed improved locomotor function with increased
gait speed. SDRs are performed to a lesser extent in children with spastic
quadriplegic CP, and goals in this population are often to decrease lower
limb spasticity while improving comfort, care, and positioning. A study in
nonambulatory children with severe CP showed improvements in daily
care and comfort at a mean follow-­up of 19 months after SDR, although
unmasking of prior dystonia can occur. AEs after SDR include bladder or
bowel dysfunction, sensory dysesthesias, and back pain; however, these
occur infrequently and are typically transient. A systematic review of spinal deformities after SDR in children with CP found scoliosis to be the
most common deformity occurring in approximately 30% of children,
but this risk has never been satisfactorily shown to be higher than the risk
in those children who have not undergone SDR. Studies have reported
higher rates of spondylolysis and spondylolisthesis after SDR than would
be expected in the general CP population. Spine radiographs should be
obtained routinely after SDR to monitor for spinal deformity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 753 u Birth Brachial Plexus Palsy

Chapter 753

Birth Brachial Plexus Palsy
Maureen R. Nelson and Nicholas L. Fleming
Birth brachial plexus palsy (BBPP) may cause significant arm weakness and subsequent functional deficits in children. The nerves to
the arm are affected with variable degrees of weakness and sensory
loss. Most children will have good recovery spontaneously, but
functional deficits will remain in 20–30% of children with BBPP.
The mechanism for BBPP is lateral stretch of the plexus for the vast
majority of cases. Anatomic variations in bones, blood vessels, and tendons lead to a very small number of cases. The incidence of BBPP is
reported as 0.5-­4.6 per 1,000 live births, with variability thought to be
attributable to the type of obstetric care and the size of infants around
the world.
Risk factors for BBPP include prior infants with BBPP, shoulder dystocia, birthweight >4 kg, multiparous mothers, mothers with excessive
weight gain, and diabetic mothers. Delivering twins or triplets, as well
as cesarean sections, have been described as protective from BBPP. Factors with a higher risk of poor outcome are birthweight greater than
4 kg, Horner syndrome, cephalic presentation, and induction or augmentation of labor.
Nerve injuries include neurapraxia, neurotmesis, and axonotmesis. Neurapraxia is the least severe of these types and is a reversible
loss of nerve conduction. This type will recover. Neurotmesis is the
most severe and is a total and complete disruption of the nerve.
An avulsion describes a neurotmesis that is a preganglionic lesion,
and a rupture describes the same event for a postganglionic lesion.
Axonotmesis is the intermediate form and the most difficult to
delineate. There is disruption of the epineurium with variable
injury to the axons creating the diagnostic and prognostic difficulties (Fig. 753.1). For these reasons, it is advisable to urgently seek
out consultation from specialty clinics or specializing physicians in
your geographic area for close monitoring and treatment considerations, including surgical candidacy.
Not only is there variability in the degree of nerve injury, but there is
also variability in location. The brachial plexus consists of the anterior
primary rami, or roots, from C5, C6, C7, C8, and T1. These roots will
combine and then branch to form the trunks, divisions, and branches
before separating distally to individual peripheral nerves as illustrated
by Figure 753.2.

External Sheath

Epineurium
Fascicle
Perineurium

Neurotmesis: Rupture

Neurotmesis: Avulsion

Axonotmesis
Endoneurium
Neuropraxia
Myelin

Axon

Fig. 753.1 Anatomy of peripheral nerve and injury type. (Courtesy
Kendall Hulk, DO.)

4397

There is variable impact on motor and sensory systems as well. The
sensory fibers are relatively protected compared with the motor fibers
because the sensory fibers run together until they are outside of the spinal cord into the dorsal root ganglion, where their cell bodies lie. The
motor fibers have the cell bodies within the spinal cord and so are not
as cohesive in their path. Therefore the sensory fibers may be spared,
while motor fibers show clinical deficits.
Narakas is a commonly used classification system (Table 753.1).
Erb palsy is generally described as the upper trunk or C5-­C6 palsy.
It is by far the most common injury seen in BBPP. When C7 is
included in the injury, it may be referred to as extended Erb palsy.
Together, these forms of Erb palsy make up 75% of all BBPP. These
two groups also demonstrate the greatest recovery rate, at 80% and
60%, respectively, resulting in a functional arm. Klumpke palsy,
C8-­T1, is extremely rare in BBPP, likely not occurring except in the
case of anatomic variation. If a baby presents with a C8-­T1 deficit,
the baby most likely originally had a complete C5-­T1 BBPP and
then had recovery of the upper portion of the plexus. This can happen because C4, C5, C6, and sometimes C7 are protected coming
out from the spinal cord, held in a gutter along the transverse processes by connective tissue, whereas C8 and T1 are not. The phrenic
nerve may also be involved with its innervation from C3, C4, and
C5, with potential respiratory concerns. The differential diagnosis
of an infant with a weak or less functional arm is broad, and there
should be consideration for other neurologic injury (stroke, spinal
cord injury, underlying congenital or metabolic diagnosis), musculoskeletal issues (fracture, muscular torticollis, anomalous rib
impinging nerves), infection, tumor, and other sources of pain or
pathology that could lead to developmental disregard or a learned
non­use of an extremity. Phrenic nerve (4th cervical and C3-C5)
injury may also be present and result in ipsilateral diaphragm paralysis and respiratory distress.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION

Motor movement evaluation is the focus of this exam. The Active
Movement Scale is a reliable passive assessment of muscle strength
that is widely used for infant examination of BBPP. Mallet scores,
which assess shoulder abduction and external rotation deficits, are
likewise useful but are more pertinent for examination of the toddler or older children. Examination for sensation, particularly sharp
sensation, useful in its own right, will also frequently help with active
motor evaluation in infants. Assessment of muscle stretch reflexes
is important, in that infants with brachial plexus palsy will be areflexive or hyporeflexive in the involved arm. Evaluation of primitive
reflexes, particularly the Moro reflex, is helpful, because most of
these infants will have C5-­C6 involvement, and therefore the Moro
may show shoulder abduction and elbow flexion on one side but not
the involved side. Range-­of-­motion examination is critical. Deficits
are commonly seen because of the imbalance of muscles that are
active and those that are not. Shoulder adduction and internal rotation is a common position, as is elbow flexion, forearm pronation,
and wrist and finger flexion. Torticollis is commonly present and
almost always with the face turned away from the involved arm.
Horner syndrome (ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis) may be present
ipsilaterally and is an indicator of severity. In children with very
severe deficits, the arm may be cooler because of the sympathetic
nervous system outflow at T1. The size of the involved arm eventually is usually smaller, about 95% of the uninvolved arm, because of
muscle atrophy and smaller diameter and length of the bone.
Among older infants and children, compensatory movements of
the arm may be noted. Common examples are use of trunk momentum to move (particularly to rotate) the proximal arm, hyperlordosis of the lumbar spine to position the arm more advantageously,
use of the pectoralis muscle to flex the shoulder, and use of the knee
while sitting to physically flex the elbow. Examination of the back
for symmetry, along with the scapulae for winging, is also relevant.
Scapular winging can be problematic both socially and clinically.
Having the older child manipulate buttons, snaps, or zippers, throw

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4398 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine

3 tr

co

al
i n es
m ch
r
Te ran
b

rd

s

u nk

Contribution
from C4
Dorsal
ramus

C5
C6

r
er i o

s

Sup

Lateral pectoral
nerve (C5, 6, 7)

t
La

Musculocutaneous
nerve (C5, 6, 7)

Dorsal scapular
nerve (C5)
To phrenic
nerve

Suprascapular
nerve (C5, 6)
To subclavius
muscle (C5, 6)

s
on s
isi sion
v
i
r d ivi
rio r d
nte terio
a
3 os
3p

3

f
ots
5 ro l rami o )
tra nerves
n
e
v
(
al
spin

er

Mi d
al

C7

dl e

In
s
Po

ter

C8

fe

rio

r

T1

ior
Contribution
from T2
To longus colli
and scalene
muscles
(C5, 6, 7, 8)

1st rib
Axillary
nerve (C5, 6)

Me

Radial nerve
(C5, 6, 7, 8, T1)

dia

l

1st intercostal nerve
Long thoracic
nerve (C5, 6, 7)
Medial pectoral nerve (C8, T1)

Median nerve
(C5, 6, 7, 8, T1)
Ulnar nerve
(C7, 8, T1)

Medial cutaneous nerve of arm (T1)
Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm (C8, T1)
Upper subscapular nerve (C5, 6)

Inconstant contribution

Thoracodorsal (middle subscapular) nerve (C 6 , 7, 8)
Lower subscapular nerve (C5, 6)

Fig. 753.2 Schematic of the brachial
plexus. (Netter illustration from www.nette
rimages.com. Elsevier Inc.)

Table 753.1  Narakas Classification
GROUP

NAME

ROOTS

CLINICAL DESCRIPTION

I

Erb palsy

C5-­6

Paralysis of shoulder and biceps with should abduction, external rotation, and elbow
flexion

II

Extended Erb palsy

C5-­7

As above with paralysis of wrist

III

Total palsy

C5-­8, T1

Complete flaccid paralysis

IV

Total palsy with Horner syndrome

C5-­8, T1

Complete flaccid paralysis with Horner syndrome

and catch a ball, and write, print, or color may be revealing, along
with how they remove their shirt for examination.
When hand function was evaluated with testing of children with
upper-­
plexus involvement, 80% of the children had significantly
decreased performance compared with the contralateral hand. This
indicates the hand function is impaired even in children who only have
upper plexus involvement.

EVALUATION

Radiographic evaluation may be needed. Plain films can be viewed
immediately if there is reason to consider clavicle or humerus fracture, infection, osteomyelitis, or tumor. Ultrasound (US) can be
used to evaluate for shoulder dislocation. CT myelogram had been
the mainstay diagnostic tool for brachial plexus evaluation despite
its radiation dose and invasive lumbar puncture. However, MRI
lacks these drawbacks and provides a more accurate and reliable
evaluation.
US and electrodiagnostic evaluation (EDX) can also be helpful in
evaluation of the brachial plexus. US is an ever-­improving technology but does not yet evaluate the deeper nerve root avulsions or

ruptures, making isolated US imaging inappropriate. However, US
can be useful for postganglionic injury evaluation, specifically for
the upper plexus. EDX may be supplemental and is especially helpful as a confirmatory test for lower plexus avulsion injuries given its
strong specificity and MRI’s weaker diagnostic accuracy for these
lower plexus injuries.
EDX includes both nerve conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography (EMG) and should be performed by someone who
is experienced in the examinations of infants and young children,
both for the most precise evaluation and the most comfortable
experience for the youngster. The following EDX pearls should be
noted:
1.	Normal electrical sensory response in areas where the child cannot
feel indicates a preganglionic neurotmesis (avulsion).
2.	Motor nerve conduction studies are useful to check for continuity of
nerve fibers to muscles that are weak or paralyzed.
3.	F waves are useful in evaluating proximally because these responses
go from peripheral nerves to the spinal cord and back.
4.	Somatosensory evoked potentials are difficult to perform on infants
while awake, because of motor artifact obliterating the responses

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 753 u Birth Brachial Plexus Palsy
with movement, and are imprecise because of overlapping responses
to peripheral stimulation. These are useful intraoperatively because
stimulation can be performed on the nerve roots themselves to determine proximal continuity.
5.	EMG can show activation in muscles with paralysis or severe weakness.
6.	The absence of biceps motor unit potentials at 1 month of age predicts future lack of clinical biceps recovery, although biceps EMG at
3 months has been reported to overestimate recovery potential.

TREATMENT

Early referral or consultation with a specialty clinic or specialized
physician is paramount and should be completed as early as possible or by 1 month of age for close monitoring and consideration
of possible microsurgery. Postoperative improvement in hand and
arm function has been shown to have a negative correlation with
age at time of primary surgery. Infants who do not show satisfactory
improvement in muscle strength are candidates for such primary
surgeries, which may include nerve transfers, in which branches
from an uninvolved nerve are microsurgically transferred to the
distal peripheral nerves supplied by the injured nerve roots and/
or nerve grafting, in which one or more of the nonavulsed roots is
attached distally to the trunk, cord, or peripheral nerve by means
of an autogenous graft (commonly the sural nerve of the leg) or
synthetic nerve conduits. There is general consensus that primary
nerve surgeries should be performed at 3 months of age for Narakas type III and type IV. Those with upper-­plexus (Narakas type I
and type II) involvement are monitored closely, and there is surgical
consideration for primary nerve surgery between 3 and 6 (or even 9)
months of age. Classically, observed elbow flexion less than 3/5 at 6
months of age or a positive “cookie test” (child cannot bring cookie
to mouth without bending neck forward more than 45 degrees) at
9 months would prompt decision to undergo primary surgery in
these populations. The surgical focus for a complete palsy or “flail
arm” is reinnervation of the hand, whereas the surgical goals of an
upper-­plexus reconstruction include, in descending priority, elbow
flexion, glenohumeral abduction, shoulder stability, and shoulder
external rotation. It should be noted that the goals of surgery are
not to regain normal arm function but rather to have a more functional arm.
Regarding primary nerve surgeries, some have reported better
outcomes with nerve transfer rather than nerve graft procedures.
However, the heterogenous nature of BBPP, variable surgical techniques, and available nerve options often dictate what can be performed. Spinal accessory to suprascapular nerve transfer and radial
nerve (long head of triceps branch) to axillary nerve transfer has
been reported as the most common dual nerve transfer procedure.
Other common nerve transfers include median or ulnar nerve to
the musculocutaneous nerve (MCN), medial pectoral nerve to
MCN, intercostal nerve to MCN, and contralateral or cross cervical
nerve root transfers. Nerve graft procedures typically include harvesting of the sural (purely sensory) nerve or using synthetic nerve
grafts. These grafts are typically used to reestablish the conduit of
the suprascapular nerve, graft C5-­to-­posterior division, or graft C3/
C4-­to-­upper trunk.
Regardless of whether primary surgery is pursued, treatment
begins on the initial evaluation with instruction to the parents for
positioning and early stretching exercises to begin at 2 weeks, or
at 3-­4 weeks if a humerus or clavicle fracture is present. They are
also told of the critical task of maintaining infant awareness of the
involved arm, initially by manually mimicking activities with the
affected arm that the baby performs with the contralateral arm and
by using a wrist rattle on the arm. Lack of awareness of the arm,

4399

sometimes called developmental disregard, in children can result in
less active use of the arm, with functional loss, as a consequence.
The parents also are informed of the higher risk of BBPP for future
infants, and so the families are encouraged to speak with the obstetrician about optimal management in future deliveries.
The baby will start with occupational or physical therapy at
approximately 2 weeks of age with focus on maintaining joint
motion, maximizing strength, promoting sensory awareness, and
supporting age-­appropriate development. Parent education should
be reinforced and a home program including daily stretching,
positioning, and strengthening techniques should be constructed.
Therapeutic taping may be done for supination, wrist extension, or,
most commonly, for shoulder positioning to minimize an adducted,
internally rotated posture. Neuromuscular electrical stimulation to
the muscles minimizes atrophy and promotes increased size, and
therefore strength, of muscle fibers. Ideal parameters for its use
have not yet been determined, but a 20-­30–minute twice-­daily program is effective and has been shown to increase bone density.
The therapist or physician may consider a brace or splinting.
Splints can be prescribed in conjunction with a physical or occupational therapist’s guidance and are often worn the majority of the
day (e.g., 22 hours/day). Common splinting strategies include supporting wrist extension with a baby with wrist-­drop and/or extending the fingers and abducting the thumb as well, providing straps to
assist with supination (Sup) of the forearm and even braces focused
on positioning the shoulder in external rotation (ER). Protocols for
splinting strategies such as the “Sup-­ER orthosis” have been created
and studied in small populations; however, there is currently no
general consensus on implementation of such protocols. Early, close
monitoring is not only important for surgical considerations, but it
is also important for monitoring for secondary problems that can
increase the negative impact of functional deficits in children with
BBPP. Contractures of the elbow, shoulder, forearm, wrist, and fingers may occur. Although muscle imbalance and fibrosis can contribute to contracture, the evidence suggests a physiologic response
related to muscle denervation leading to a failure of growth in the
sarcomeres of these affected muscles. Early shoulder dislocations
have been described in severe presentations. Botulinum toxin injections help balance out muscles that are overpowering weak muscles
and such an intervention can minimize contractures and even prevent or help reduce a shoulder dislocation in these severe cases.
For older babies and children, muscle, tendon, and bony procedures are generally performed. These are often called secondary surgeries. Monitoring for shoulder deformity and dislocation
is an important part of long-­term follow-­up. Because the shoulder
joint develops as the infant and toddler grows, deficits frequently
develop. Glenohumeral dysplasia, sometimes with shoulder dislocation, occurs in 60–80% of those with BBPP. Muscular imbalance
across the developing shoulder results in deformity of the skeletally
immature glenohumeral joint. The weakness of shoulder external
rotation, combined with strong internal rotation, leads to this difficulty. The natural history of this deformity is progression if left
untreated. This leads to further functional limitations, even with a
strong hand. Treatment aims to minimize this progression. Treatment options include botulinum toxin injections, arthroscopic or
open anterior capsule release or release of contracture, musculotendinous lengthening, tendon transfers (e.g., latissimus dorsi to
increase external rotation and abduction strength), muscle transfers (e.g., gracilis muscle can be transferred to allow for elbow flexion and/or wrist extension), and, for severe deficits, a derotational
humeral osteotomy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4400 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
interventions, mainly prenatal surgical closure of the defect. Prenatal closure decreases the need for a ventricular shunt and lowers
the incidence of severe Arnold-­Chiari malformations, along with
improved motor outcomes. However, there is an increased incidence of preterm delivery and a risk for uterine dehiscence; these
risks may be reduced with fetoscopic procedures.

Chapter 754

Meningomyelocele
­(Spina Bifida)
Pamela E. Wilson and Tess S. Simpson
See also Chapter 631.
Meningomyelocele, or spina bifida (SB), is a congenital neural tube defect that results in the malformation of the spine and a
potential dysplastic spinal cord. The severity of defect ranges from
SB occulta (see Chapter 631.2) upward to anencephaly (see Chapter
631.6). SB without anencephaly is the most prevalent nonchromosomal central nervous system (CNS) defect in the United States.
For unknown reasons, Hispanic women have the highest rate of SB
(3.80/10,000 live births), followed by non-­Hispanic White women
(3.09/10,000 live births); the lowest rate is in non-­Hispanic Black
women (2.73/10,000 live births).

ETIOLOGY

See Chapter 631.1.

PREVENTION

See Chapter 631.1.

PRENATAL SCREENING

Prenatal screening is recommended for all pregnant women to
detect neural tube defects. A blood test is done in the second trimester to evaluate alpha-­fetal protein (AFP). If a neural tube defect
is present, the AFP is often elevated, and further screening using
high-­resolution ultrasound is indicated. Ultrasound may reveal
not only the spinal defect but also abnormal brain development,
suggested by the “lemon and banana signs.” The lemon sign is a
medial indentation and scalloping of the frontal bones in the skull,
whereas the banana sign is associated with hindbrain herniation of
the cerebellum into the foramen magnum. The importance in early
identification allows families to plan for delivery and consider fetal

CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS

Meningomyelocele is a multisystem condition that includes characteristic abnormalities within the CNS. The neurologic lesion is
assessed by the most caudal intact nerve segment with a motor test
of grade 3. Lesions associated with SB are often grouped together
as thoracic, upper lumbar (L1-­L2), midlumbar (L3), lower lumbar
(L4-­L5), and sacral. Based on this information, a clinician can make
inferences on the functional capabilities of the child and answer
pertinent questions during the initial encounters (Table 754.1). The
most basic question all families ask is: “Will my child walk?”
Initial surgical interventions are related to closure of the open
defect. This is generally done the first day of life. Once the back is
closed, the child will be monitored to see if hydrocephalus develops.
Hydrocephalus is very common and related to hindbrain herniation
and obstruction of the fourth ventricle. Hydrocephalus may occur
at any time but most frequently within the first few months. Ventricular dilation may precede a change in head circumference or
signs of increased intracranial pressure. The occurrence of hydrocephalus is approximately 77–95% and does appear to have an association with level of lesion. Treatment of ventriculomegaly, if mild,
may be limited initially to clinical observation. Surgical placement
of a ventricular shunt or endoscopic third ventriculostomy is indicated when occipital frontal circumference (OFC) is increasing.
The risk for shunt revision in the first 2 years is 30–50%, which
then decreases to 10%.
Hindbrain herniation or the Chiari type II malformation is
seen in 80–90% of individuals with meningomyelocele. The classic manifestations include caudal displacement of the cerebellum,
pons, and medulla and elongation of the fourth ventricle. The Chiari II malformation can be symptomatic (from brainstem herniation/compression) in approximately 20% of children. Respiratory
symptoms associated with a Chiari malformation include stridor,
vocal cord dysfunction, and central or obstructive apnea. Swallowing and feeding problems may require gastrostomy tube placement.
If the child has a symptomatic Chiari II malformation, surgical

Table 754.1  Prognosticating in Meningomyelocele
MOTOR LEVEL SPINAL
CORD SEGMENT

CRITICAL MOTOR
FUNCTION PRESENT

MOBILITY: SCHOOL AGE

RANGE: ADULT

ACTIVITY: ADOLESCENT

T12

Totally paralyzed lower limbs

Standing brace, wheelchair

Wheelchair

Wheelchair, no ambulation

L1-­L2

Hip flexor muscles

Crutches, braces, wheelchair

Wheelchair, household
ambulation

Wheelchair, nonfunctional
ambulation

L3-­L4

Quadriceps muscles

Crutches, braces, household
ambulation, wheelchair

Crutches, household
ambulation, wheelchair

50% Wheelchair, household
ambulation with crutches

L5

Medical hamstrings,
anterior tibial muscles

Crutches, braces, community
ambulation

Crutches, community
ambulation

Community ambulation with
crutches

S1

Lateral hamstring and
peroneal muscles

Community ambulation

Community ambulation

Community ambulation 50%
crutch or cane

S2-­S3

Mild loss of intrinsic foot
muscles possible

Normal

Normal

Limited endurance because
of late foot deformities

From Braddon RL, ed. Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011: Table 54.1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 754 u Meningomyelocele ­(Spina Bifida) 4401
decompression is indicated. All children with SB are at risk for tethered cord syndrome (see Chapter 646.1). After shunt malfunction,
this is the second most common cause for neurologic decline. Clinical manifestations of tethered cord syndrome include any change
in gait, change in bowel or bladder function, increasing scoliosis,
back pain, or orthopedic changes. Surgical detethering procedures
are indicated in those with neurologic decline, but the success rate
is variable.
The orthopedic complications of myelomeningocele are common and have predictable patterns. The spine deformities include
scoliosis, lordosis, and kyphosis (see Chapter 720). The development of scoliosis has an association with the neurologic level. Children with thoracic level meningomyeloceles have an 80–100% risk,
whereas those with a sacral level are at very low risk. Spine deformities tend to increase more rapidly during growth, especially puberty.
Treatment of scoliosis includes both nonsurgical and surgical
options. Braces, such as thoracic-­lumbar-­sacral orthotics (TLSO),
therapy, and proper seating options may be beneficial. Surgically
implanted growing rods to support the developing spine have been
used in younger children. Spine surgery should be considered if the
scoliotic spine curvature reaches 45 degrees; the child who is nearing skeletal maturity is a better candidate for spine surgery. Realistic
expectations need to be discussed with the child and family. Correction of the spine may improve sitting, posture, and pelvic obliquity
but may have a negative impact on function and ambulation.
The development of the hip is also influenced by neurologic level
(see Chapter 719). The risk for dislocation is highest for those with
lesions at the L3 level, followed by L1-­L2. Unilateral hip dislocations
should be fixed surgically because they may result in pelvic obliquity
and problems with sitting, whereas bilateral dislocations generally do
not require interventions. Contractures of soft tissues are commonly
seen in children with higher lesion levels. Hip flexors and knee flexors
are commonly involved.
Abnormalities in the foot occur in approximately 90% of children and adolescents. The goal of treatment is to achieve a plantar grade foot for weight bearing and to allow shoe wear. Clubfoot
deformities are common in babies, and treatment includes serial
casting and orthotics (see Chapter 715.3). The results are often suboptimal, and surgery may be needed. In addition, congenital vertical talus (rocker-­bottom feet) is often encountered and needs to be
addressed (see Chapter 715.4).
Osteoporosis (see Chapter 749) begins to develop in childhood
and is more severe in higher-­level meningomyelocele. Fractures of
the lower extremities are most common in the femur, followed by the
tibia. Preventive treatment includes nutritional approaches such as the
use of supplemental calcium and vitamin D. Those with documented
fractures should undergo a diagnostic evaluation (see Table 749.1),
including dual-­
energy x-­
ray absorptiometry (DEXA). The use of
bisphosphonates may be considered if the diagnostic evaluation does
not reveal other underlying causes. The utility of early weight bearing has been advocated, but passive standing may have little impact on
bone density.
Neurogenic bladder and bowel can be anticipated. The goals of
treatment interventions are to protect kidney function and achieve
social continence. For continence of urine, clean intermittent catheterization (CIC) is the mainstay of management. It is not atypical
for newborn babies to be started on a CIC program. Urodynamics
and renal ultrasounds are routinely used to monitor for hydronephrosis and track intravesicular pressures. Medications may be used
to reduce bladder contractions and improve volume capacity. Surgical techniques are being used to improve continence, including

bladder augmentation, urethral surgeries, and catheterizable channels. Poor CIC technique and/or urinary reflux may lead to urinary
tract infection (UTI), which is diagnosed by having two findings: a
urinalysis with white cell count of >10 and urinary culture >100,000
cfu/mL. A multicomponent bowel program is generally needed to
achieve bowel continence. Nonsurgical interventions include adequate hydration, dietary manipulation, fiber regulation, and use of
laxatives and enemas. Surgical interventions, such as the antegrade
continence enema (ACE), have improved continence in many children and adolescents with SB.
Latex allergies are common. The etiology is likely multifactorial,
but increased early exposure may play a role in the development of
severe reactions (see Chapter 190). Care providers need to be keenly
aware of products that contain latex or that have a cross reactivity,
such as foods mixed with avocado, bananas, or kiwi fruit. Radioallergosorbent testing is used for identification of potential severe
allergens.
People with SB show a wide range of neuropsychologic abilities. Many show a complex neuropsychologic profile that includes
strengths in some areas and weaknesses in other areas. Common
areas of strengths include vocabulary, word reading, spelling, and
certain types of memory. Common weaknesses include motor skills,
attention, organization, math, reading comprehension, and executive functioning skills. Overall cognitive functioning typically falls
within the average range for children with SB; however, neurologic
factors such as a Chiari II malformation or the presence of hydrocephalus increase the risk for neuropsychologic challenges. Neuropsychologic assessment is recommended to identify any potential
gaps in cognition and social or emotional skills. This assessment
can provide helpful information related to a child or adolescent’s
education and employment needs and assist with development of an
individualized educational plan (IEP) or vocational rehabilitation
plan. Appropriate early intervention and support programs should
be initiated through an IEP or 504 plan if indicated (see Chapter
56). Effective interventions both at school and the home should be
structured, explicit, and individualized. Parents and teachers can
support learning goals by progressing in an orderly fashion from
one learning target to the next and by modeling how to approach
problems or tasks, often with step-­by-­step instructions and supervised practice.

ADOLESCENCE AND TRANSITION TO ADULTHOOD

Improved and expanded clinical care has increased the life span
of individuals with SB, with the majority of individuals now living
well into adulthood. Secondary conditions associated with SB (e.g.,
UTIs, skin breakdown, learning challenges) and more difficulty
accessing healthcare services compared with their age-­
matched
peers make adolescents and young adults with SB less likely to
achieve emerging adult milestones such as leaving home, attending
college, or finding employment.
The primary care clinician, in conjunction with specialty services,
plays a pivotal role in developing future planning. It is important to
discuss early on strategies to encourage developmentally appropriate
independence and self-­management skills. Individualized, comprehensive transition care that includes care coordination, decision-­making
support, education and employment resources, and independent living
support is recommended for providers caring for children and adolescents with SB.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4402 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine

Chapter 755

Upper and Lower
Extremity Assistive
Devices
Abigail Case and Sarah Helen Evans
Assistive devices, such as orthoses, prostheses, walkers, crutches, and
wheelchairs, are key components of intervention for individuals with
physical disabilities, and with the continued advancement in technology, robotic forms of these devices are also important to consider. The
type of device chosen depends on the underlying diagnosis, functional
abilities of the individual, prognosis for functional improvement or
decline, tone abnormalities, range of motion, strength, and the overall
gait pattern. Physicians, licensed independent practitioners, and physical therapists perform the evaluation of a child requiring an assistive
device.

ORTHOSES

An orthosis is a device that is applied to the surface of the body to
maintain alignment or position, to prevent or assist movement of the
body part, or to provide support. Named for the body parts covered,
orthoses can be static, made of rigid material, and designed to immobilize joints to inhibit movement, or they can be dynamic, allowing
movement of the limb to occur. For example, AFO stands for ankle-­foot
orthosis, a brace worn on the foot that extends from the toes to the midcalf position, supporting the foot and ankle joints (Fig. 755.1). Prefabricated orthoses are available, but many children require custom-­made
orthoses for optimal fit. Orthoses are modified or replaced during
periods of growth or changes in function and can be obtained either
directly through the orthotist or through the child’s physical therapist.
In most of the United States, braces must be prescribed by a physician
or licensed independent practitioner to obtain insurance coverage, and
it is best practice to have a prescription.
The use of an upper limb orthosis can be more conspicuous than
its lower limb counterparts, and physicians should analyze the user’s
psychosocial well-­being and tolerance for such device. In addition to

patient goals and outcomes, the therapeutic intent of the upper limb
orthosis must be considered. The efficacy of the orthosis may be measured by the reduction of the effects of the three Ps: paralysis, pain, and
position.
The type of lower-­extremity orthosis prescribed is based on the
child’s diagnosis, functional status, prognosis, and the goals of treatment, with the prescription frequently modified over time as the child
changes. Before writing a prescription, the provider performs an examination, which may include an evaluation of the child’s gait, strength,
tone, and range of motion. There are many types of braces that have
specific functions to improve gait. Table 755.1 lists examples of these
orthoses and their potential uses.
The most prescribed braces are solid and articulated AFOs. Solid
AFOs are used for children with hypertonicity because they help to
biomechanically reduce tone and provide stability with standing and
walking. Children who are nonambulatory also benefit from wearing
solid AFOs to maintain range of motion of the ankle.
Articulated (hinged) AFOs allow the child to have ankle dorsiflexion
by permitting forward movement of the tibia and supporting the foot
for heel strike. This design makes ambulating on uneven surfaces and
using stairs easier because of the movement allowed at the ankle, while
still supporting the foot position and maintaining medial-­lateral stability of the ankle. Articulated AFOs should not be used in children with
cerebral palsy, spina bifida, or other disorders if they have a crouched
gait pattern because the hinge in the ankle joint may allow further
crouching. In crouched gait, the hips and knees are held in flexion and
ankles in dorsiflexion throughout the gait cycle, leading to an inefficient gait pattern.

PROSTHESES

A prosthesis is a device that replaces a missing body part, such as an
arm or a leg. Lower-­extremity prostheses are used to improve mobility,
but upper-­limb prostheses are not always needed to improve function
because children can be quite independent with a single upper limb.
Children with congenital upper limb amputations or deficiencies need
to have prosthetic devices fit at the time they begin to sit for them to use
the prosthesis functionally, and because, developmentally, young children are not ready to learn to use complicated devices, teaching them
to use a mechanical prothesis requires intensive occupational therapy.
Myoelectric protheses are too heavy and too hard to use at this age.
Children with acquired upper limb amputations may be more likely to
adjust to the use of a prosthetic arm.
Lower-­limb prostheses are used in children with acquired amputations as a result of trauma or cancer and also in congenital transverse
amputations or for those who have undergone surgical correction, as
often occurs with longitudinal fibular deficiency or proximal femoral
focal deficiency.
There are multiple components to lower-­limb prostheses, which
include the socket and foot, but may also include a hip and knee joint,
depending on the level of amputation. A prosthetist works with the
child and family to fabricate the prosthesis. A physician or licensed
independent practitioner with experience in prostheses provides the
prescription for this device.
The type of prosthesis depends on the age of the child, the level of the
amputation, and the status of the residual limb. In very young children,
use of a lower-­extremity prosthesis follows developmental milestones,
with the first prosthesis prescribed at the time the child should be
pulling to stand. Addition of joints to the prosthesis also occurs when
developmentally appropriate, such as use of a knee joint around the age
of 3 years when the child is learning to use stairs.
Advances in technology are helping children who use prostheses
achieve a fluid gait pattern that makes their prosthetic use virtually
undetectable to the untrained eye. New components and designs allow
amputees to lead active lifestyles that may include running, swimming,
biking, and mountain climbing.

ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES
Fig. 755.1 Hinged ankle-­foot orthosis. (Courtesy Ultraflex Systems,
Inc., Pottstown, PA.)

The function of assistive mobility devices is to provide a wider base of
support to improve stability during ambulation, reduce the possibility

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 755 u Upper and Lower Extremity Assistive Devices

4403

Table 755.1  Orthotic Options
ORTHOSIS

FUNCTION

COMMENTS

Neoprene thumb abductor

Places thumb in abduction to promote functional use
of hand

Will not overcome severe cortical thumb position

Thumb spica

Immobilizes and protects the thumb and provides a
stable post against which the index finger can pinch

Need to allow for full metacarpophalangeal (MCP)
flexion of the fingers

Resting hand

Preserves balance between extrinsic and intrinsic
musculature and provides joint stability; prevents
contracture

Pressure at the MCP joint or proximal phalanx should
be avoided because it can injure the MCP joint. This
splint is to be used for positioning, not function

Wrist cock-­up

Supports, immobilizes, or stabilizes wrist in extension,
which allows for mechanical advantage in grasp

Must maintain full MCP flexion and thumb motion

Elbow extension

Increases extensor end range of motion (ROM)

Not for severe flexor tone with contracture or
fluctuating tone; in that case, use a drop out cast or
splint

Gunslinger

Supports shoulder girdle and prevents subluxation

Make sure the edges of splint are not cutting into hip
area; check in standing and supine

Myomo

Sensor-­activated, power-­driven upper limb orthosis
can train the arm and hand while providing
assistance with bimanual activities

Heavy
Minimal growth with a child

Foot orthosis (FO)

Provides support of foot only to keep ankle in subtalar
neutral

Not typically customized but can be with a UCBL*

Supramalleolar orthosis (SMO)

Provides medial-­lateral support of foot to prevent
excessive pronation, supination, or instability

Appropriate for children with low tone such as in
Down syndrome. Also useful for young children with
equinovarus posture or mediolateral instability

Ankle-­foot orthosis (AFO)

Provides support at the ankle and reduces foot drop
or plantarflexion tone by keeping the ankle in a
neutral position

Commonly used for ambulatory and nonambulatory
children
Assists with dorsiflexion and inhibits plantarflexion.
Requires rocker bottom shoe for rollover in gait

FES activated AFO

Uses functional electrical stimulation to assist
dorsiflexion at the appropriate time in the gait cycle

Cannot inhibit plantarflexion
Less restrictive than a solid or hinged AFO
Can be used with an SMO to provide mediolateral
stability at the ankle

Ground reaction ankle-­foot
orthosis (GRAFO)

Provides knee extension moment to reduce crouching
or collapsing into dorsiflexion during standing or
walking

Appropriate for children with spina bifida or who have
weakness in the plantar flexors who crouch when
walking

Knee-­ankle-­foot orthosis
(KAFO)

Provides support at the knee when there is quadriceps Less commonly used because of large size of brace
weakness to promote an upright posture with
but may be appropriate for child with spina bifida or
standing or walking
spinal cord injury

Walking assistance exoskeleton

Bionic robot for use in paraplegic patients

Heavy. Very expensive. Does not grow with a patient.
Cannot be used in patients with spared sensation in
the legs

*UCBL – University of California Berkley Laboratories, where this maximum control foot orthosis was developed.

of falls, and improve efficiency of gait. The least supportive device is
a traditional single-­point cane commonly used after an orthopedic
injury. For most children with gait abnormalities secondary to neurologic disorders, this is not a functional option because a cane does not
provide enough stability. More supportive gait aids, such as forearm
(Lofstrand) crutches, are appropriate in children with neurologic disorders; however, use of these devices requires good coordination and
strength. Children with cerebral palsy and spina bifida may benefit
from these devices.
Walkers provide more support than crutches and canes; they do not
require as much strength and coordination to operate. Children with
cerebral palsy, for example, may use a reverse walker, which they pull
behind them. This reverse configuration provides a wide base of support and stability, helps maintain an erect posture, and allows the child
to engage with the environment without the barrier of the walker in
front of them. Having the walker behind them also reduces the risk for
more serious injury from a forward fall.
For children who require a significant amount of support because
of poor head and trunk control, gait trainers are often used. These

devices allow the child to work on leg movements while the trunk and
pelvis are stabilized (Fig. 755.2). Although gait trainers provide a child
with moderate to severe motor impairments upright supportive mobility, “gait trainer” is a misnomer in that it is not intended to train a child
to walk independently.

WHEELCHAIR

Wheelchairs should be considered as a means of mobility when
ambulation is not possible or is difficult outside of the home setting.
Children with spinal cord injuries, spina bifida, neuromuscular diseases, or cerebral palsy may benefit from the use of a wheelchair. The
goal is to provide a wheelchair that will allow the child to move independently about the environment, including home, school, and the
community. Children as young as age 2 years can self-­propel a manual
wheelchair and operate a power wheelchair. The type of wheelchair
prescribed will depend on the child’s underlying diagnosis, cognition,
vision, motor skills (such as head and trunk control), strength and
endurance of upper limbs, musculoskeletal deformities, if present,
and medical comorbidities. One must also consider future growth or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4404 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
from the user’s neuromuscular system while bionic limbs respond to
sensors implanted in the brain. The use of robotic assistive devices is
less common than mechanical devices, in part because of availability
and in part because of higher cost. The advantage of most robotic assistive devices compared with their mechanical counterparts is the ability
of the device to train the user to need it less while providing the assistance required in the moment.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 756

Health and Wellness for
Children with Disabilities
Meghan A. Klawonn, David M. Kanter, and
Margaret A. Turk
DISABILITY
Children with Special Healthcare Needs
Fig. 755.2 Gait trainer. (Photo copyright 2013 by Rifton Equipment,
http://www.rifton.com.)

anticipated changes in function over time, as well as the family’s ability to transport the chair. An important consideration when ordering
a pediatric wheelchair is the adjustability to accommodate growth.
A typical wheelchair may last 3-­5 years with periodic adjustments to
growth by a seating specialist. There are many components that can
be added to provide more support in the wheelchair, including head
rests, lateral trunk support, hip guides, antitippers that prevent the
wheelchair from tipping backward, and specialized tires. The seating
system is considered a separate item from the wheelchair itself and
is, in fact, a seating orthosis. It should be properly fit for the child’s
current size and seating needs. The function of a seating system is to
promote the upright positioning of the head and trunk as well as control of the position of the legs, especially the hips, in sitting. Children
with good trunk control will require a simple seat back, while a child
with poor trunk control, such as someone with a high cervical spinal
cord injury, will require a system that includes a head rest and lateral
thoracic supports. The seat itself must be customized to provide a
stable base on which the trunk can align. Restraint at the pelvis, such
as a seatbelt or bar, helps maintain proper positioning in the chair.
Specialized cushions are needed for those with decreased sensation
to prevent pressure-­related skin sores.

ROBOTIC DEVICES

Rehabilitation robotics is a subspecialty field that is helping to increase
independence for individuals with disabilities. Robots are currently
defined as machines programmable by a computer and capable of carrying out a complex series of activities automatically. Although there
is a wide range of the types of robots used in rehabilitation, a subset of
robots provide assistance in the form of adaptive equipment. Most of
these robots are wearable; notable exceptions are fully automated voice-­
controlled feeding systems and speech generating devices. Lower limb
devices are designed to help a child progress toward a typical gait pattern and range in complexity from exoskeletons to programable AFOs
that provide electrical stimulation to muscles that control foot position
and strength across the ankle joint. Upper limb devices are designed to
increase the use of a minimally functional arm and hand. Programmable prostheses, such as myoelectric arms and hands, respond to input

The expansion of the disability definition to include children with special healthcare needs (CSHCN), chronic conditions, and activity limitations from any cause (e.g., limitations in usual daily activities such as
age-­appropriate self-­care, mobility, communication, and cognition) has
made the health issues of the more traditional childhood disability types
(e.g., cerebral palsy, intellectual disability, spina bifida, congenital musculoskeletal disorders) more difficult to identify. U.S. data note continued
increasing prevalence of developmental disabilities and identify developmental, emotional, and behavioral conditions as the leading conditions.
Physical health conditions comprise a smaller proportion of disabilities,
although mobility and motor control issues may be noted among the
aforementioned developmental, behavioral, and emotional conditions.
These disabilities contribute to continued economic and health problems
into adulthood. Childhood and adolescent health promotion interventions can decrease functional impairment across the life span. Monitoring children with disabilities throughout their development is essential
for identifying times when support to children, adolescents, and/or their
families is needed to promote positive health outcomes.

Health Promotion Definitions and Background for
Disability

The World Health Organization (WHO) defines health promotion as
“the process of enabling people to increase control over, and to improve,
their health.” For people with disabilities, this concept is important
because they are both underserved and have comparatively large health
disparities. The WHO further defines health promotion approaches as
including more than health education and consisting of community
action, supportive and accessible environments, policy changes, health
service modifications, and development of personal skills. Health and
wellness programs also include traditional preventive management
strategies, such as anticipatory guidance. There is ample evidence that
engaging in specific areas of health promotion results in improvement,
although the evidence for its influence on adult health is less robust.
Children with disabilities encounter many barriers to healthy behaviors (Table 756.1). Both broad and focused health promotion programs
consider severity of condition, barriers and resources, and self-­efficacy to
achieve health-­promoting behaviors. Children with disabilities may also
require modeling or assistance to apply healthy behaviors to their particular disability or economic, social, and environmental circumstances.
Individuals with disabilities and their families often view health differently than those without disabilities. Disability may influence health and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 756 u Health and Wellness for Children with Disabilities

4405

Table 756.1  Barriers and Facilitators for Children to Engage in Healthy Behaviors
SELF

FAMILY

INSTITUTION

BARRIERS

BARRIERS

BARRIERS

1.	Lack of knowledge and
skills
2.	Fear of injury or failure
3.	Personal choices
4.	Fatigue
5.	Lack of initiative
6.	Limited functional
capability

1.	Negative attitudes
by parents, peers,
healthcare providers
2.	Limited parental healthy
behaviors
3.	Stress in the close family
network
4.	Economic restrictions

1.	Inaccessible facilities or
resources
2.	Needing adult or aide
assistance
3.	Policies and procedures
of facilities or programs
4.	Noninclusive providers
5.	Transport challenges

FACILITATORS

FACILITATORS

FACILITATORS

1.	Education or knowledge
about heathy behaviors
2.	Engaging child in
discussions and
decisions
3.	Desire to be active
4.	Making activities a
part of the routine—
repetition and
consistency promote
ongoing activities

1.	Promotion of activities
by rehabilitation and
other healthcare
professionals
2.	Family support and
participation
3.	Involvement of friends
and peers in activities
4.	Models or directions
for participation with
adaptions
5.	Creative and
knowledgeable
professionals

1.	Accessible facilities
and opportunities with
knowledgeable staff
2.	Policies and resources
promoting participation
3.	Welcoming and
inclusive providers:
Adaptable approaches

vice versa, but their perception of their own health and wellness does not
equate with their level of disability. Experiences as a child with a disability often foreshadow adult behaviors, especially negative attitudes toward
therapy, exercise, and activity. Beliefs of parents, families, and healthcare
providers also influence the views of health by children with disabilities.
Health promotion programs for these children must (1) understand and
support the role and well-­being of parents, (2) recognize that parents of
children with more functional limitations may require more resources
and support, (3) involve children with disabilities in the design of programs and decisions about participation, and (4) address barriers to participation, perceived and real (see Table 756.1).
An effective health and wellness program should involve multiple
approaches and opportunities for success by considering novel and
inclusive approaches, including partnerships with families, school staff,
and rehabilitation providers. Effectiveness requires addressing any mismatch between the child’s positive sense of health and well-­being and
that expected by the healthcare providers; recognizing limitations of an
education-­only model; engaging the child in discussions about the importance of healthy behaviors, ways to engage in healthy behaviors related to
the child’s disability and circumstances, and decisions about participation; promoting self-­efficacy and self-­management of health and wellness
in preparation for adult healthcare when possible; and parent and family
involvement coupled with sensitivity for the high level of support a family
may already be providing for a child with a disability.

Anticipatory Guidance, Counseling, and
Preventive Care

Preventive healthcare through health education, anticipatory guidance,
and participation in screening and immunization schedules is the mainstay of pediatric public health programs (see Chapter 12). Bright Futures,
developed by the American Academy of Pediatrics and their collaborators and supported by the Maternal and Child Health Bureau, Health
Resources, and Services Administration, provides a knowledge base for
pediatric healthcare providers and the public about anticipatory guidance,
health promotion, and prevention for children and adolescents with a section in the 4th edition titled “Promoting Health for Children and Youth
with Special Health Care Needs.” For the general population, 25% of parents receive no information, and <50% receive all recommended guidance.

Although parents of CSHCNs report similar or better receipt of general
preventive information, it is not clear whether those with higher severity
of functional limitations receive this guidance or counseling, and whether
it is provided in the context of disability and other circumstances.
CSHCNs require typical prevention, as well as more specific counseling or screening related to their disability. Some of this more specific counseling can be managed by specialty care providers, although
CSHCNs often have difficulty obtaining appropriate specialty outpatient services. Additional barriers to care, especially with increasing
age of the child, are the lack of accessible medical equipment and
facilities. Planning for transitions to adult care should begin early,
with consideration of environmental access, preparedness for self-­
management when possible, and knowledge and skills of local healthcare providers. Although discussions of health risks with adolescents
about smoking, drinking, and protected sexual activity should be
undertaken, the discussions may require a different focus for adolescents with disabilities. Higher violence and abuse rates toward
children with disabilities are reported, for which providers must be
vigilant. Internet and social media use increases the risk of bullying
and other negative experiences. It appears adolescent females with
disabilities are more vulnerable than males to this victimization.
The recommendation is to recognize the need for modifications
to typical guidance and to be alert for any signs of emotional disturbances. CSHCNs experience family issues with separation/divorce,
mental health and substance abuse problems, incarceration, domestic or neighborhood violence, discrimination, parental death, and
maltreatment more than those without special needs. Counseling
should be broadened to include questions and discussions about
conditions associated with the specific disabilities (e.g., epilepsy
or cognitive impairments often seen with cerebral palsy, or neurogenic bladder and bowel in spinal cord dysfunction) or secondary
conditions, such as pain, osteoporosis/fractures, or the fatigue seen
in many CSHCNs. Early recognition of emotional and psychiatric
disorders, at early ages and especially during times of transition,
can help to address nationally acknowledged unmet mental healthcare needs. There are also signs of comorbidities commonly seen in
adulthood, such as cardiovascular and renal conditions, in children
with disability.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4406 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
Physical Activity and Exercise

National health guidelines recommend at least 60 minutes of physical
activity daily for children, but any activity increase from sedentary
levels to even moderate activity (30-­40 minutes of moderate intensity or 20 minutes of more strenuous activity) provides some health
benefit. Health professionals should give specific advice about how
children with disabilities can increase their level of activity. Exercise
and activity increase aerobic capacity, functional ability, and quality
of life for children with many kinds of disabilities and chronic diseases. National 24-hour movement guidelines have been established
in Canada and Australia, with age-specific recommendations regarding lengths of time to sleep, perform physical activity, and sedentary
time. It has been shown that individuals with disabilities meet the
24-hour movement guidelines at lower rates compared to the general population, which in turn may affect mental health. And yet,
many healthcare providers and families accept sedentary lifestyles for
children and adolescents with disabilities, whatever their functional
abilities. Video gaming systems that involve movement can help to
overcome this lack of activity because they can provide another way
to increase movement. For children with disabilities, school physical
education and recess programs can support activities at or greater
than the recommendation, and school requirements can reinforce
activity expectations; however, there should be monitoring for possible negative affect, poor sense of belonging, and presence of victimization during open recess opportunities. School-based interventions
for adolescents with intellectual and developmental disabilities have
been shown to increase healthy behaviors, such as engagement in
physical activity and increased consumption of fruit and vegetables.

Healthy behaviors are in turn associated with improvement in mental health. The need for exercise beyond physical therapy should
be clarified to help children understand the benefits and purpose
of both. The activities in which youth with disabilities wish to participate can be supported, and shared decision-­making should be
invoked. Children with disabilities who participate in physical activities report social benefits, such as developing friendships, building a
support system, gaining knowledge of self, and acquiring a sense of
accomplishment. These factors also contribute to higher adherence to
activities. Children with disabilities may also be more likely to participate in physical activities when those activities are supervised and
organized, as opposed to free play in an open room. For children with
disabilities to engage in physical activity in supported environments,
school and public playgrounds must be made sufficiently accessible
to support community physical activity. A number of agencies have
endorsed the Commit to Inclusion campaign to promote building
healthy, inclusive communities for people of all ages with disability
(e.g., the President’s Council on Fitness, Sports, and Nutrition, along
with the National Center on Health, Physical Activity, and Disability;
the American Association on Health and Disability; and the Center
on Disability at the Public Health Institute).
Physical activity for children and adolescents improves
fitness and quality of life for youth with developmental disabilities
(Table 756.2). These exercise and fitness programs require 2-­3
months of participation, at least twice a week, to achieve any
changes, and many of the changes achieved are longer lasting than
expected. These programs are not traditional therapy, and participation in therapy is not a substitute. These focused fitness and

Table 756.2  Examples of Effective Exercise Programs for Children with Disabilities
CENTER-­BASED
FITNESS PROGRAM
AND HOME PROGRAM

ONLINE EXERCISE
PRESCRIPTION TOOL

GROUP AQUATIC AEROBICS

GROUP TRAINING CLASS

• Children with a variety of
disabilities
• Group exercise: 2×/wk for
14 wk, warm-­up, aerobics,
strengthening, cool-­down
• Home program: 2×/wk for 12
wk using video exercises
• Outcomes: improved walking
efficiency, strength, general
functiona

• Children with a variety of
disabilities, 50% able to walk
2×/wk
• Recreation to achieve
target heart rate; aquatic
strengthening program
• Outcomes: improved walk/runb

• Children with cerebral palsy
able to walk 2×/wk for 14 wk
• Warm-­up, circuit training
stations (treadmill, balance
stairs, closed-­chain exercises)
• Outcomes: improved muscle
strength, mobility, functionc

• Children with a variety of
disabilities
• 8 wk home exercise program
delivered using Physitrack, an
online exercise prescription tool
• Outcomes: equivalent
adherence to traditional paper-­
based method, more easily
accessibled,e

• Strength
• Training

• Walking-­jogging program

• Treadmill training program

• Skill-­related fitness (SRF)

• Children with cerebral palsy
including a majority able to
walk with assistive devices 3×/
wk for 6 wk
• Progressive training program,
conducted in the home
• Outcomes: improved
perceptions of strength,
walking, stair management,
improved psychologic benefitsf

• Children with down syndrome
• 3×/wk for 10 wk, 30 min
sessions, achieving 65–70%
peak heart rate
• Outcomes: improved peak
exercise time and grade,
improved walking capacityg

• Children with intellectual
disabilities daily for 2 months
• Progressive treadmill use with
goal of 20-­30 min
• Outcomes: improved heart rate
with and without activitiesh

• Adolescents with intellectual
disabilities
• SRF is a physical fitness
component related to sports
performance, used to enhance
participation with peers in
leisure activities
• Outcomes: positive exercise
training effects on agility, power
RT, and speedi

aFrom Fragala-­Pinkham MA, Haley SM, Rabin J, Kharasch VS. A fitness program for children with disabilities. Phys Ther. 2005;85(11):1182–1200.
bFrom Fragala-­Pinkham M, Haley SM, O’Neil ME. Group aquatic aerobic exercise for children with disabilities. Dev Med Child Neurol 2008;50(11):822–827.
cFrom Blundell SW, Shepherd RB, Dean CM, Adams RD, Cahill BM. Functional strength training in cerebral palsy: A pilot study of a group circuit training class for children age 4-­8

years. Clin Rehabil 2003;17(1):48–57.
dFrom Johnson RW, Williams SA, Gucciardi DF, Bear N, Gibson N. Can an online exercise prescription tool improve adherence to home exercise programmes in children with

cerebral palsy and other neurodevelopmental disabilities? A randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open. 2020;10(12):e040108.
eFrom Johnson RW, Williams SA, Gucciardi DF, Bear N, Gibson N. Evaluating the effectiveness of home exercise programmes using an online exercise prescription tool in children

with cerebral palsy: protocol for a randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open. 2018;8(1):e018316.
fFrom McBurney H, Taylor NF, Dodd KJ, Graham HK. A qualitative analysis of the benefits of strength training for young people with cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2003;45(10):658–663.
gFrom Millar AL, Fernhall B, Burkett LN. Effects of aerobic training in adolescents with Down syndrome. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1993;25(2):270–274.
hFrom Lotan M, Isakov E, Kessel S, Merrick J. Physical fitness and functional ability of children with intellectual disability: effects of a short-­term daily treadmill intervention. Sci World

J 2004;4:449–457.
iFrom Jeng SC, Chang C-­W, Liu W-­Y, Hou Y-­J, Lin Y-­H. Exercise training on skill-­related physical fitness in adolescents with intellectual disability: A systematic review and meta-­

analysis. Disabil Health J. 2017;10(2):198–206.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 756 u Health and Wellness for Children with Disabilities
exercise programs generally require the support and direction of
rehabilitation professionals, although programs can be community
based in nonmedical surroundings.
Recreation and organized sports are other areas where children and
adolescents with disabilities can engage successfully, at times with modifications. Participation improves cardiopulmonary parameters, motor
function, social competence, and general sense of well-­being. Many
children with disabilities require 1-­on-­1 instruction for development of
skills, with a goal of participation in activities with their peers. Perceived
barriers to participation in sports differ based on the source: children
were concerned about dependency; parents required more information
about possible sport participation. Programs through Special Olympics
International are an opportunity for children and adolescents to engage
in supportive and monitored environments for sport and recreation.
Rehabilitation professionals can assist with problem-­solving activity
participation, such as by using computerized technologies for “exergaming” (e.g., Wii, Xbox, PlayStation), developing individual or group challenges with mobile devices (e.g., activity trackers), adapting equipment
(e.g., modified upper-­limb prosthesis to allow baseball glove use or modified bicycle equipment), and knowing of adapted recreation programs in
the area (e.g., horseback riding, winter/water sports). Technologies that
allow for exercise as part of gaming provide new opportunities for moderate to vigorous exercise in people with disabilities, especially in those
with limited use of the lower limbs. Youth with greater functional limitations may not be able to achieve moderate to vigorous exercise, but even
light intensity exercise may be enough to give them some health benefits.
“Exergaming” programs are viewed as more fun than traditional exercises, which may increase likelihood of participation.

Sleep and Pain

Poor sleep quality or the presence of pain will have an impact on physical
activity and general performance in children and youth with disabilities.
Regular inquiry about sleep and pain is important because of the higher
prevalence of problems in these areas in children with disabilities. Common sleep disturbances include difficulty initiating sleep, frequent sleep
disruptions, and reduced sleep duration. Causes are often complex and
multifactorial, with some associations with disability type (e.g., obstructive sleep apnea with Down or Prader-­Willi syndromes, disrupted sleep
patterns with autism, negative bedtime behaviors with attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder, pain as trigger with cerebral palsy) and comorbidities (e.g., epilepsy, gastroesophageal reflux). Frontline approaches are sleep
hygiene and behavioral interventions, and further evaluation may be warranted for targeted interventions (see Chapter 31).
Pain has been described as a cause for behavioral changes, poor sleep,
activity interference, and change in school performance in children
with a variety of disabilities. Children with cerebral palsy have been
most closely studied, with high prevalence of both acute and chronic
pain. Routine screening is important for early identification and evaluation for cause, and interventions should be tailored to address the biopsychosocial model of pain management.

Nutrition and Obesity

See also Chapter 65.
Managing the combination of nutrition and physical activity is the
key ingredient of weight control. Estimates suggest that children with
physical activity limitations were twice as likely as the general population to be overweight, and youth with cognitive impairments are at
increased risk. It is unclear if obesity is a cause for the activity limitations or is a result of the limited activity, which may be an important
distinction in developing interventions. The concern with obesity
contrasts with early life weight gain needs of many children with
disabilities, and it may be confusing for parents and families when
the focus changes to weight decrease. Confounding factors related
to monitoring percent body fat in children with disability include
(1) the propensity for some disabilities, often those that are genetically mediated, to be associated with obesity; (2) standards of measurement may not be appropriate for certain diagnoses or disability
types (e.g., inaccurate weight [limb deficiencies/amputation, scale
inaccessibility], inaccurate height [unable to stand, contractures],

4407

no standards related to short stature or muscle wasting); (3) obesity
may be a side effect of medication, and this effect must be balanced
against the drug benefits (e.g., antipsychotics, steroids); and (4) the
social network of family, friends, schools, and healthcare providers
may unwittingly negatively influence health habits, including use of
food as reward for behavior management. Both children and their
parents should be a part of the conversations related to obesity or any
weight-­related topic. Information must be presented in a direct and
understandable way and modified for the child’s and parents’ needs.
Discussion of promoting health through nutrition and physical activity, while problem solving challenges to participation, may be a better
approach than explaining body composition and metabolic pathways.

Emotional Health and Leisure Activities

Emotional health is often overlooked in children with disabilities.
Youth and adolescents with disabilities appear to be at higher risk for
feeling low, stressed, or anxious (especially those with higher levels of
limitations), and those with mental health needs may have lower adaptive functioning or a family history of mental illness. While children
and young adults diagnosed with autism have received much attention related to emotional support needs, there are increasing reports
of this need with most childhood-­onset disability conditions, including at ages before teenage years. Sexuality, gender identity, and other
sex-­related issues can also be reasons for emotional turmoil. Adolescents with physical disabilities participate in fewer social activities,
have fewer close or intimate friends, and have fewer plans for ongoing
education. There is a risk for continued isolation into adulthood. Passive social media use may exacerbate this problem. Novel programs
to improve self-­concept and build resilience based on psychoeducational therapy principles, typically developed through interdisciplinary
teams, and involving peer groups, parents, and family members, have
been shown to successfully promote positive outcomes. Medications
may be considered, but effectiveness is not guaranteed, and unwanted
side effects may produce more health challenges. Counseling requires
insurance support or discretionary funding. There is some early work
on using apps to try and help track mental health issues.
Leisure and recreational activities provide social supports, additional
stress-­coping mechanisms, and ability to develop social skills and a
stronger personal identity. Although the negative aspects of social media
are often discussed, there are also positive aspects. Adolescents with disabilities may more easily communicate and socialize with peers online,
improving their mental well-­being. Females with disabilities tend to
engage in social or skill-­based activities, and males in physical activities,
with decreasing participation with increasing age. In general, encouraging socialization through leisure activities, recreation, or sports and
physical activity can be a part of counseling in a routine health visit.

Dental Care

Dental care is a frequently unmet healthcare need for children with disabilities, especially for those in low-­income families or with more severe
impairments. The principal deficits are in receipt of specific dental care
(not preventive services). Condition severity may also predict the degree
to which parents are interested in oral health–related education and actually engage in oral health efforts. Parents and caregivers play a critical role
in oral health support. Challenging behaviors often limit dental care, and
the use of behavior management techniques and education programs have
been effective in allowing dental care. Dental treatment under anesthesia
may be necessary to provide effective oral healthcare.

Role of Healthcare Providers

Primary care and other healthcare providers should be mindful of
discussing and promoting health and healthy behaviors with children and adolescents with disabilities and their families (Table 756.3).
Initial discussions and preventive screening, including exploration
for early signs of cardiovascular or renal diseases and assessing the
need for emotional support, are a responsibility of primary care providers individually or in conjunction with specialty care providers.
Children with a wide range of impairments should be included in
multi-method inclusive research. Innovative strategies for engaging

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4408 Part XXXI u Rehabilitation Medicine
Table 756.3  Targeting Healthy Behaviors for Children with Disabilities
GENERAL PREVENTION

PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

NUTRITION AND OBESITY

• Recognize risks for less healthy behaviors
and facilitators of behavior changes and
participation.
• Cover typical topics for all children counsel
regarding disability or situation context.
• Specifically monitor for abuse and violence.
• Provide typical age-­appropriate adolescent
information about smoking, drinking,
substance abuse, sexual contacts; refer if
unable to provide.
• Monitor for disability-­specific health
conditions; many require referral.

• Promote exercise and activity with an
expectation for activity.
• Ensure that family and child/adolescent are
knowledgeable about benefits and possible
adaption.
• Review need for possible dietary changes.
• Consider referral to community programs
and/or rehabilitation professionals

• Recognize obesity can cause limitations and
can be the result of poor dietary habits and
limited activity.
• Follow percent body fat in a consistent way,
recognizing the need for accurate measures
or limitations of measures (e.g., weight,
body mass index [BMI], skinfold thickness,
other traditional measures) in many
disability conditions.
• Ensure that family and child/adolescent are
knowledgeable about healthy nutrition.
• Consider referral to nutritionist or other
professional to engage patient and
family in education and behavior change
counseling
• Review need for increased activity level with
dietary intervention.

EMOTIONAL

HEALTH, RECREATION, AND LEISURE

DENTAL

• Question for sense of anxiety/feeling low,
stress management and ability to adapt,
and social supports.
• Consider medications and counseling
based on expected effect, monitor effects/
side effects; consider referral, making
sure that insurance/payment coverage is
available.
• Consider recreation and leisure activities
to promote social support and ability to
develop social skills.
• Recommend use of social media in positive
ways to enhance connections.

• Question about social activities outside
the home: highlight the importance of
developing social skills, sense of self, and
support networks
• Consider referral to community programs or
rehabilitation professionals.
• Consider recommending online support
groups, social groups.

• Discuss more than preventive dental care.
• Suggest behavior strategies if there are
problems engaging in dental appointments
and refer for this service as needed.

children with disabilities have been identified and offer much hope
for the future. Parents are more likely to positively engage with a referral to healthcare professionals with expertise in providing a more tailored approach to health promotion after initial advice and support.
Strategizing with parents about accessible environments or opportunities can promote inclusive community opportunities for participation. Providers should be willing to discuss intimate relationships and

sex-­related issues at appropriate times as they do with youth without
disabilities—and refer when unable to meet those needs. Family-­
centered and coordinated care, commonly found in medical homes,
can support healthy behaviors and emergency planning for unforeseen events.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Environmental Health
Chapter 757

Overview of
Environmental Health
and Children
Ruth A. Etzel
GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE

Pediatricians’ primary goal is prevention. One dominant prevention challenge of the 21st century is the climate crisis. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concluded that the Earth is
undergoing adverse global climate change and that anthropogenic
(human-­made) contributions are significant. These climate changes
are creating conditions that have already affected public health,
with disproportionate impacts on certain life stages, including children. Children are especially vulnerable to the impacts of climate
change because their bodies are growing and developing, they have
unique behaviors and interactions with their environment, and they
must rely on parents or caregivers to provide for their basic needs.
Climate change affects children’s health as a result of their exposure
to elevated temperatures; more frequent, severe, or longer-­lasting
extreme weather events; transmission rates of food-­borne, water-­
borne, and vector-­borne diseases; increases in air pollution from
molds, pollens, and the burning of fossil fuels; and mental health
stressors (Fig. 757.1). Natural disasters such as floods and hurricanes, damp housing, and mycotoxin-­related illnesses are worsening as temperatures and sea levels rise. The impacts are being felt
most among young children and those who are living in poverty.
The need to reduce carbon dioxide in the environment has compelled many countries to sign the Paris Agreement. This agreement
promises to keep the global temperature rise well below 2°C above
preindustrial levels, and to try to limit the temperature increase to
1.5°C. Even though the Paris Agreement began in 2016, its promises have not been kept and the temperature is already 1.2°C higher
than in the preindustrial era. Individual actions are another necessary step in carbon dioxide reduction. Parents and caregivers can
work to reduce their family’s burning of fossil fuels. They also can
protect children’s health by checking the air quality index and pollen counts and considering a limit to children’s outdoor play time if
levels are high. Parents can watch for signs of dehydration or overheating in their children and can prevent tick and mosquito bites
by using insect repellent and protective clothing. Pediatricians and
those who care for children can be highly effective advocates for an
urgent governmental response to the climate crisis by speaking out
at the community, national, and international level.

LOCALIZED ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS

Localized exposures to a wide variety of chemical, biologic, and
physical agents can also harm children. Numerous epidemics of disease from chemical, biologic, and physical agents (both natural and
human-­made) over the past 80 years have documented a variety of
adverse outcomes among children (Table 757.1). Some epidemics,
such as those caused by the nighttime release of methyl isocyanate

PART

XXXII

from a factory in Bhopal, India, the nuclear meltdown in Chernobyl, and the melamine contamination of infant formula in China,
received widespread attention and heightened the awareness of parents and pediatricians about hazards in the environment. For many
people, the word epidemic conjures up images of hospital isolation
wards, poor sanitation, and rapidly spreading infectious diseases.
Epidemics of environmental origin often have served to elucidate
new hazards for children. Many of the routinely used chemicals
understood to be toxic to children were initially identified when a
cluster of children was exposed and developed symptoms during a
relatively short period of time. Unfortunately, the children served
as the “canaries in the coal mine” to indicate that specific chemicals (including thallium, mercury, arsenic, and lead) contained in
products for children such as diaper rinses, teething powders, and
depilatory agents, posed a threat to their health. The comparison of
children to canaries is apt: following underground mine explosions,
canaries were used by miners throughout recent history to help
detect elevated levels of carbon monoxide gas. Canaries were useful
“carbon monoxide detectors” because of their rapid breathing rate
and high metabolism, making them more sensitive to the effects of
gases, including carbon monoxide. Likewise, young children have
a rapid breathing rate and a high metabolic rate and may be more
sensitive than adults to chemicals in the environment.
Table 757.1 summarizes major incidents of environmental poisoning that affected children. The characteristics of environmental
exposure and the age and developmental stage of the child affect
the likelihood of developing health problems. After the release of
methyl isocyanate (used in the production of some pesticides) at
Bhopal in 1984, an estimated 200,000 children living near the Bhopal chemical plant were affected by the gas release (see Table 757.1).
Methyl isocyanate gas is 1.4 times heavier than air; thus higher
concentrations of the gas were found near the ground or floor.
Because of their short stature, children’s breathing zones are closer
to the ground or floor than adults’ breathing zones; therefore children likely inhaled higher concentrations of the toxic gas. Children
exposed to the same levels of methyl isocyanate as adults may have
received larger doses because they have relatively greater lung surface area to body weight ratios and higher minute volume to weight
ratios. Based on each of the poisoning events listed in Table 757.1,
additional precautions were taken to avoid children’s unnecessary
exposure to the specific product or chemical implicated.
Although major poisonings such as those listed in Table 757.1
have caused substantial morbidity and mortality among children,
environmental health hazards may also result in more subtle effects
that may not manifest until later in life. In addition to the exposures
received during large outbreaks, children receive smaller doses of
chemicals on an almost daily basis through the water they drink,
the food they eat, and the air they breathe. Because of their unique
vulnerability, they may exhibit symptoms from these exposures earlier than do adults.

TOXINS VERSUS TOXICANTS

A toxin is a poisonous substance produced naturally by a living organism (e.g., aflatoxin). A toxicant is a poisonous substance made by
humans or introduced into the environment by human activity (e.g.,
dioxins). Synthetic chemicals are referred to as toxicants.

MYCOTOXINS

Children’s exposures to mycotoxins, the toxins produced by certain fungi on grains, nuts, and other crops, will likely increase as the

4409
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4410 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

Environmental Change

Climate Change

Ecological Change

Fig. 757.1 The relationship between environmental

change, climate change, ecologic change, and child
health. (Adapted from Bunyavanich S, Landrigan CP,
McMichael AJ, et al. The impact of climate change on
child health. Ambul Pediatr. 2003;3:44–52. Fig. 2.)

Air Pollution

•
•

Cough
Asthma

UV Radiation

•
•
•

Sunburn
Malignant Melanoma
Immunosuppression

Thermal Pollution

•

Heat Stroke

Weather Disasters

•
•
•
•

Psychosocial Trauma
Drowning
Dehydration
Gastrointestinal

Food Availability

•
•
•

Malnutrition
Growth Retardation
Developmental Delay

Allergen/Mycotoxin

•
•
•

Allergies
Cancer
Birth Defects

Infectious Disease
Exposure

•
•
•
•

Malaria
Dengue
Encephalitis
Lyme Disease

Emerging Infect.
Disease

•
•
•

West Nile Disease
Hantavirus
Zika Virus

Table 757.1  Epidemics of Environmental Disease Affecting Children
VEHICLE

DATE

COUNTRY

APPROX. #
SICKENED

Thallium

Depilatory agents

1930

Grenada

16

Thallotoxicosis

13

Methylmercury

Fish and shellfish

1956

Japan

2,265

Cerebral palsy

1,784

Arsenic

Contaminated milk powder

1955

Japan

11,778

Fever, diarrhea darkened
skin, swollen abdomen

113

Hexachlorobenzene

In human milk after
pregnant women ate
HCB-­treated seed grain

1957

Turkey

∼200

Pembe yara (pink sore) rash,
weakness convulsions

<2 yr ∼200

Methyl isocyanate

Leak from chemical plant

1984

India

<15 yr:
200,000

Coughing, eye irritation
choking death

All ages
2,500-­5,000

Dioxin

Chemical plant explosion

1976

Italy

193 (88%)

Chloracne

0

Radiation

Chernobyl

1986

Ukraine

<18 yr: 4,000

Thyroid cancer

∼8

Radiation

Scrapped medical machine
stolen from hospital

1987

Goiânia,
Brazil

249

Acute radiation syndrome

4 (1 child)

Fungi

Water-damaged homes

1990s

Ohio, US

30

Pulmonary hemorrhage

5

Aflatoxin

Grain

2004

Kenya

317

Aflatoxicosis

125

Melamine

Infant formula

2008

China

290,000

Kidney stones

6

Lead

Small-­scale gold mining

2010

Nigeria

>2,000

Seizures, death

200

CONTAMINANT

climate changes because their production is influenced by temperature, humidity, and rainfall. Exposure to mycotoxins results in different
health outcomes dependent on the route of exposure. Exposure from
eating or drinking may lead to gastrointestinal illness, tremors, and
cancer in adulthood; exposure via breathing may result in acute respiratory illness during infancy. There also is emerging evidence linking

ILLNESS

APPROX. #
WHO DIED

mycotoxin exposures among children, especially those in developing
countries, to stunted growth.

Pediatric Conditions Linked to Mycotoxin Exposures

Exposures to mycotoxins have been linked to at least two conditions that
affect children: neural tube defects and acute pulmonary hemorrhage.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 757 u Overview of Environmental Health and Children

4411

Neural Tube Defects

years, Stachybotrys and other toxigenic fungi including Trichoderma
have been associated with acute pulmonary hemorrhage among
infants in other areas of the United States, Canada, and New Zealand.
The rapidly growing lungs of infants are especially vulnerable to the
effects of the trichothecene mycotoxins produced by Stachybotrys and
Trichoderma.

Infant Pulmonary Hemorrhage

FOOD-­BORNE DISEASES CAUSED BY
ENVIRONMENTAL EXPOSURES

Studies of an epidemic of birth defects in 1990 in south Texas suggested an association between maternal ingestion during pregnancy
of high levels of fumonisin, universally present in corn and in corn-­
based products, and birth defects such as anencephaly and spina bifida.
Fumonisins are known to interfere with cellular folate uptake.
Several studies of a 1994 epidemic of acute pulmonary hemorrhage
in Cleveland, Ohio, documented a novel association between life-­
threatening pulmonary hemorrhage and the presence of the toxigenic
mold Stachybotrys in the water-­damaged homes in which the infants
were living. Stachybotrys produces mycotoxins that are lipid soluble
and readily absorbed by the airways, as well as a hemolysin and several proteinases that can degrade vascular collagen. In subsequent

Contamination of food with viruses and bacteria is a major cause of
childhood food-­borne diseases (see Chapter 387), and children are also
at risk from a variety of noninfectious food-­borne hazards in the environment, which include natural hazards such as mycotoxins and synthetic persistent organic pollutants such as dioxins (see Chapter 759;
Table 757.2).

Table 757.2  Food-­Borne Illnesses (Noninfectious)
INCUBATION
PERIOD

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION
OF ILLNESS

ASSOCIATED
FOODS

Antimony

5 min to 8 hr
usually <1 hr

Vomiting, metallic taste

Usually self-­
limited

Metallic container

Identification
of metal in
beverage or
food

Supportive care

Arsenic

Few hours

Vomiting, colic,
diarrhea

Several days

Contaminated
food

Urine; may cause
eosinophilia

Gastric lavage BAL
(dimercaprol)

Cadmium

5 min to 8 hr
usually <1 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
myalgia, increase in
salivation, stomach
pain

Usually self-­
limited

Seafood, oysters,
clams, lobster,
grains, peanuts

Identification of
metal in food

Supportive care

Ciguatera fish
poisoning (ciguatera
toxin)

2-­6 hr

GI: abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea

Days to
weeks to
months

3 hr

Neurologic:
paresthesias, reversal
of hot and cold, pain,
weakness

A variety of
large reef
fish, grouper,
red snapper,
amberjack, and
barracuda (most
common)

Radioassay for
toxin in fish or
a consistent
history

Supportive care,
IV mannitol;
children more
vulnerable

2-­5 days

Cardiovascular:
bradycardia,
hypotension,
increase in T-­wave
abnormalities

Copper

5 min to 8 hr
usually <1 hr

Nausea, vomiting, blue
or green vomitus

Usually self-­
limited

Metallic container

Identification
of metal in
beverage or
food

Supportive care

Mercury

1 wk or longer

Numbness, weakness
of legs, spastic
paralysis, impaired
vision, blindness,
coma
Pregnant women
and developing
fetuses are especially
vulnerable

May be
protracted

Fish exposed to
organic mercury,
grains treated
with mercury
fungicides

Analysis of blood,
hair

Supportive care

Vomiting, diarrhea,
confusion, visual
disturbance,
salivation,
diaphoresis,
hallucinations,
disulfiram-­like
reaction

Self-­limited

Wild mushrooms
(cooking may
not destroy
these toxins)

Typical syndrome
and mushroom
identified or
demonstration
of the toxin

Supportive care

ETIOLOGY

Mushroom toxins,
<2 hr
short-­acting
(museinol,
muscarine,
psilocybin, coprius
artemetaris, ibotenic
acid)

LABORATORY
TESTING

TREATMENT

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4412 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 757.2  Food-­Borne Illnesses (Noninfectious)—cont’d
ETIOLOGY

INCUBATION
PERIOD

Mushroom toxin,
long-­acting
(amanitin)

4-­8 hr diarrhea;
24-­48 hr liver
failure

Diarrhea, abdominal
cramps, leading to
hepatic and renal
failure

Often fatal

Mushrooms

Typical syndrome
and mushroom
identified and/or
demonstration
of the toxin

Supportive care,
life-­threatening,
may need life
support

Nitrite poisoning

1-­2 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
cyanosis, headache,
dizziness, weakness,
loss of consciousness,
chocolate brown–
colored blood

Usually self-­
limited

Cured meals, any
contaminated
foods, spinach
exposed to
excessive
nitrification

Analysis of food,
blood

Supportive care,
methylene blue

Pesticides
(organophosphates
or carbamates)

Few minutes to Nausea, vomiting,
few hours
abdominal cramps,
diarrhea, headache,
nervousness, blurred
vision, twitching,
convulsions,
salivation, and
meiosis

Usually self-­
limited

Any contaminated
food

Analysis of food,
blood

Atropine: 2-­PAM
(pralidoxime)
is used when
atropine is not
able to control
symptoms and is
rarely necessary
in carbamate
poisoning

Puffer fish
(tetrodotoxin)

<30 min

Paresthesias, vomiting,
diarrhea, abdominal
pain, ascending
paralysis, respiratory
failure

Death usually
in 4-­6 hr

Puffer fish

Detection of
tetrodotoxin in
fish

Life-­threatening,
may need
respiratory
support

Scombroid (histamine) 1 min to 3 hr

Flushing, rash, burning
sensation of skin,
mouth, and throat,
dizziness, urticaria,
paresthesias

3-­6 hr

Fish: bluefin,
tuna, skipjack,
mackerel, marlin,
escolar, and
mahi mahi

Demonstration
of histamine in
food or clinical
diagnosis

Supportive care,
antihistamines

Shellfish toxins
(diarrheic,
neurotoxic, amnesic)

Diarrheic
shellfish
poisoning
(DSP)—
30 min to 2 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, and
abdominal pain
accompanied by
chills, headache, and
fever

Hours to 2-­3
days

Detection of
the toxin in
shellfish; high-­
pressure liquid
chromatography

Supportive care,
generally self-­
limiting

Neurotoxic
shellfish
poisoning
(NSP)—few
minutes to
hours

Tingling and numbness
of lips, tongue, and
throat, muscular
aches, dizziness,
reversal of the
sensations of hot and
cold, diarrhea, and
vomiting

A variety of
shellfish,
primarily
mussels, oysters,
scallops, and
shellfish from
the Florida coast
and the Gulf of
Mexico

Amnesic
shellfish
poisoning
(ASP)—
24-­48 hr

Vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain
and neurologic
problems such as
confusion, memory
loss, disorientation,
seizure, coma

30 min to 3 hr

Diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting leading
to paresthesias
of mouth, lips,
weakness, dysphasia,
dysphonia, respiratory
paralysis

Days

Scallops, mussels,
clams, cockles

Detection of toxin
in food or water
where fish are
located; high-­
pressure liquid
chromatography

Life-­threatening,
may need
respiratory
support

Shellfish toxins
(paralytic shellfish
poisoning)

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION
OF ILLNESS

ASSOCIATED
FOODS

LABORATORY
TESTING

TREATMENT

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 758 u Biologic Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Children

4413

Table 757.2  Food-­Borne Illnesses (Noninfectious)—cont’d
INCUBATION
PERIOD

SIGNS AND
SYMPTOMS

DURATION
OF ILLNESS

ASSOCIATED
FOODS

LABORATORY
TESTING

Sodium fluoride

Few minutes
to 2 hr

Salty or soapy taste,
numbness of mouth,
vomiting, diarrhea,
dilated pupils,
spasms, pallor, shock,
collapse

Usually
self-­limited

Dry foods (e.g.,
dry milk, flour,
baking powder,
cake mixes)
contaminated
with sodium
fluoride–
containing
insecticides and
rodenticides

Testing of vomitus
or gastric
washings,
analysis of food

Supportive care

Thallium

Few hours

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, painful
paresthesias, motor
polyneuropathy, hair
loss

Several days

Contaminated
foods

Urine, hair

Supportive care

Tin

5 min to 8 hr,
usually <1 hr

Nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea

Usually
self-­limited

Metallic container

Analysis of food

Supportive care

Vomitoxin

Few minutes
to 3 hr

Nausea, headache,
abdominal pain,
vomiting

Usually
self-­limited

Grains such as
wheat, corn,
barley

Analysis of food

Supportive care

Zinc

Few hours

Stomach cramps,
nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, myalgias

Usually
self-­limited

Metallic container

Analysis of food,
blood, and
feces, saliva, or
urine

Supportive care

ETIOLOGY

TREATMENT

BAL, Bronchoalveolar lavage; GI, gastrointestinal; IV, intravenous.
Adapted from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Diagnosis and management of foodborne illnesses: a primer for physicians and other health care professionals. MMWR.
2004;53(No. RR-­4):1–33.

Aflatoxins

Aflatoxins are poisonous substances that are formed as a result of mold
growth on peanuts, corn, figs, oil-­seeds, tobacco, and other products.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) has classified aflatoxin B1 as a group I carcinogen (known to be carcinogenic
to humans). Ingestion of elevated levels of aflatoxin also can result in
acute aflatoxicosis, characterized by vomiting, abdominal pain, hepatitis, and sometimes death.

started vomiting after they ate wheat products that contained vomitoxin and other mycotoxins. For infants, the estimated tolerable
daily intake is 1.5 μg/kg body weight. A suspected epidemic of
vomitoxin-­related illness that affected about 1,700 school children
in the United States in 1997-98 was linked to burritos that had measurable levels of vomitoxin of 0.3 parts per million (ppm; the advisory level set by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for adults
is 1 ppm).

Ochratoxin A

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

The mycotoxin ochratoxin A, produced by many different species of
Aspergillus molds, is toxic to the kidneys. Ochratoxin A contaminates
many foods, including barley, rye, and other cereals, cereal-­derived
foods, dry fruits, beans, cocoa, coffee, beer, wine, poultry, eggs, pork,
and milk. Ochratoxin A is teratogenic, immunotoxic, genotoxic, and
mutagenic. The IARC has indicated that ochratoxin is a possible
human carcinogen (category 2B).

Chapter 758

Fumonisins are mycotoxins that may contaminate cornmeal and
cereals. The fumonisins are known to interfere with sphingolipid
metabolism. Consuming foods contaminated with fumonisins during pregnancy has been linked to an increased risk of having a child
with a neural tube defect and an increased risk of esophageal cancer
in adulthood.

Biologic Effects of
Ionizing Radiation on
Children

Deoxynivalenol

Samuel L. Brady and Donald P. Frush

Fumonisins

This mycotoxin, often called vomitoxin because its predominant
effect is vomiting, can be present in foods made from wheat and
corn. Even after the grain is baked or cooked, vomitoxin retains
its toxicity. Multiple epidemics of vomiting illness that occurred
in China during 1961 to 1985 were associated with ingesting grain
contaminated with vomitoxin. In India in 1987, almost 100 people

DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING, RADIATION THERAPY

Ionizing radiation is produced when energy is absorbed within an
atom such that a bound electron is liberated, and the atom becomes
ionized. Exposure to ionizing radiation is characterized by three

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4414 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
categories: (1) absorbed dose, (2) equivalent dose, and (3) effective dose. In terms of radiation interaction with humans, absorbed
dose is defined as the energy imparted (i.e., absorbed) within a
mass of tissue from a radiation source. Absorbed dose is calculated
based on the attenuation properties of the irradiated tissue (e.g.,
attenuation is greater in bony tissue due to its higher electron density and mass than water equivalent, soft tissue organs). The units
of absorbed dose, as defined by the International Commission of
Radiation Units, are the Gray (Gy), the preferred unit, and the older
radiation absorbed dose (rad). There are different types of radiation
including x-­ray, γ-­ray, α particles (helium nucleus stripped of all
electrons), β particles (unbound electrons), neutrons, and protons.
Not all radiation has the same effect on biologic tissue for a given
absorbed dose; for example, β particles are quite superficial, protons
deposit most of their energy deeper within the body, and α particles and neutrons cause significantly more damage than x-­rays or
γ-­rays. Diagnostic imaging uses x-­rays and γ-­rays. The therapeutic
use of radiation for cancer treatment primarily uses x-­rays, β particles, and protons depending on their application and location of
disease within the body. Equivalent dose is a term used to define
the relative effectiveness to cause biologic damage. The International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) gives x-­rays,
γ-­rays, and β particles a relative weighting of 1, protons a weighting of 2, neutrons a weighting of 2.5-­20 (neutron weighting factor
depends on the energy of the neutron), and α particles a weighting
of 20. Thus, for the same level of radiation exposure to an organ,
the equivalent dose, i.e., the relative level of biologic damage, would
be higher for absorbed doses from protons compared with x-­rays.
Effective dose is a term that represents “the sum of the weighted
[applying organ and tissue weighting factors] equivalent doses for
the radiosensitive tissues and organs of the body” (National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements). A list of relative
organ and tissue weighting factors defined by the ICRP is provided
in Table 758.1. Equivalent dose and effective dose are measured in
units of sievert (Sv), with levels in diagnostic imaging typically in
millisieverts (mSv), and the rem (older unit) (Table 758.2). Effective dose is not applied as a metric of dose to an individual but is
a population average. Effective dose is not adjusted based on real
or potential radiation susceptibilities for tissues for either gender
or age.
Nuclear medicine and PET imaging examinations are described by
the amount of radioactivity given, commonly injected intravenously.
Administered radioactivity is referred to as the administered radiopharmaceutical dose, commonly defined in millicuries (mCi) or megabecquerels (MBq). Radiopharmaceutical dose may be converted to
Table 758.1  Tissue Radiosensitive Weighting Factors;
ICRP Report 103
TISSUE WEIGHTING ∑
wT
TISSUE
FACTOR (W )
T

Red bone marrow, colon,
lung, stomach, breast,
remainder tissues*

0.12

0.72

Gonads

0.08

0.08

Bladder, esophagus, liver,
thyroid

0.04

0.16

Bone surface, brain, salivary
glands, skin

0.01

0.04

Total

1.00

*Remainder tissues: Adrenal glands, extrathoracic region, gallbladder, heart, kidneys,
lymphatic nodes, muscle, oral mucosa, pancreas, prostate, small intestine, spleen,
thymus, uterus/cervix

effective dose by applying correction factors provided in ICRP reports
53, 80, 106, and 128.
For the average adult, ionizing radiation exposure occurs from
both natural (60%) and medical (40%) sources, and for the average
pediatric-­age individual, ionizing radiation exposure occurs primarily from natural sources (91%) as compared to medical sources
(9%) (National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements). Radon gas accounts for the majority of natural radiation
exposure. For the adult population, the percentage contribution
from medical imaging to the total ionizing radiation exposure had
been increasing in the late 20th and early 21st century, but is now
declining since 2006. As of 2016, for the average adult, CT imaging comprised 63% of the total of ionizing radiation procedures
(Fig. 758.1A), but medical imaging accounted for only 42% of the
average adult population exposure to ionizing radiation; this has
decreased slightly in the past decade due to technologic advances in
imaging equipment and how we use the equipment in practice. For
the pediatric patient population, CT remains the primary source of
medical radiation exposure, accounting for 84% of the total medical
exposure (annual per capita exposure) from ionizing radiation (see
Fig. 758.1B). Despite efforts to educate the medical community and
the public on radiation safety and the guiding principle of keeping radiation dosing “as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA),”
understanding of sources, amounts, and potential risks of ionizing radiation can still be limited. Some imaging procedures do
not produce ionizing radiation (Table 758.3), and not all ionizing
radiation-­producing modalities expose a child to the same amount
of radiation (Table 758.4). To facilitate choosing the appropriate
imaging modality for a patient’s clinical indications, American
College of Radiology appropriateness criteria have been published
(https://www.acr.org/Clinical-­R esources/ACR-­Appropriateness-­
Criteria) to assist referring physicians in making the most appropriate imaging or treatment decision for a specific clinical condition.

BIOLOGIC EFFECTS OF RADIATION

Biologic effects of radiation are divided into tissue reactions (previously known as deterministic effects) and stochastic effects. Tissue reactions do not occur below a threshold absorbed dose, and
severity is directly related to the magnitude once the threshold is
exceeded. No evidence of tissue reactions has been demonstrated
from radiation dose levels typical of diagnostic imaging examinations (i.e., <100 mGy), but complicated interventional procedures
have on rare occasions led to these effects. Typical tissue reactions
can present as temporary hair loss (epilation) and skin reddening
(erythema), which occur in regions of peak dose of >2 Gy (Table
758.5). Cataracts have been reported to occur with acute exposure
of >0.5 Gy.
The second type of biologic effect is the stochastic effects that
are of concern because they are assumed to potentially occur at any
dose; that is, there is no threshold. Stochastic effects are most commonly discussed as cancer risk but also include heritable effects.
The probability of a stochastic effect increases with rising level of
absorbed dose, but not the severity. Cancer, if radiation induced,
is not more severe with higher doses. It is generally accepted by
the scientific and medical community that stochastic effects may
be caused by any level of radiation striking vulnerable tissue (most
importantly DNA, but cytoplasm also may be at risk) and causing
irreversible damage. The most widely accepted model representing
stochastic effects is the linear no (dose) threshold (LNT) model.
This model maintains that any level of radiation dose has a potential risk, although this risk is currently uncertain at effective dose
levels below 50-­100 mSv. Greater than this range, there is a recognized, although very small, statistically significant risk of a stochastic effect. In the LNT model, no level of radiation exposure is
assumed to be safe.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 758 u Biologic Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Children

4415

Table 758.2  Radiation Measurements
UNITS

RADIOACTIVITY

ABSORBED DOSE

EFFECTIVE DOSE

EXPOSURE

Common units

Curie (Ci)

rad

rem

Roentgen (R)

SI units*

Becquerel (Bq)

Gray (Gy)

Sievert (Sv)

Coulombs/kg

CONVERSION EQUIVALENTS
1 millicurie (mCi) = 37 megabecquerels (MBq)
100 rad = 1 Gy (1 rad = 1 cGy)
100 rem = 1 Sv (1 rem = 10 mSv)
Background radiation dose is approximately 10 μGy/day (1 millirad/day)
*SI units: International System of Units.

Radiation can cause permanent cell injury leading to carcinogenesis, genetic variants, or cell death. The biologic effects of radiation result primarily from damage to DNA. Direct effect reactions
occur mainly through interactions of high linear energy transfer
(LET) particles, such as α particles or neutrons, directly with the
DNA structure. A similar mechanism also can occur with x-­ray or
γ-­ray photons by directly liberating an electron from atoms (called
a recoil electron) near the DNA structure. The kinetic energy of the
recoil electron or high LET particles may directly cleave chemical
bonds in the DNA structure.
An indirect effect is caused by the formation of free radicals.
This is the more common mechanism with x-­rays and γ-­rays used
in medical imaging. Approximately 80% of the cell is water, so most
of the energy deposited in a cell results in the production of aqueous free radicals. This occurs when the absorbed x-­ray or γ-­ray photon energy is converted to recoil electrons that create ion radicals
(H2O+ and H2O−). The ion radicals promptly decay (10−18 to 10−3
seconds) into free radical species (OH−, H+, H3O+). Approximately
two thirds of DNA damage is believed to be caused by this indirect
effect through creation of hydroxyl (OH−) free radicals, which then
primarily reacts with DNA by attaching to the hydrogen bound to
the deoxyribose carbon resulting in a base release from the DNA
structure and strand break of the DNA helix. The biochemical
changes that follow either direct or indirect effects take hours or
days to manifest, whereas the physiologic changes leading to the
likely complex cascade of a variety of factors for cancer induction
may take years to decades to manifest.
The results from DNA injury are variable. The cell containing the
damaged DNA almost always repairs itself and continues as a viable
cell for miotic division. In some instances, the cell might die; one
form of cell death is called apoptosis, which is a common pathway
to eliminate heavily damaged and potentially mutable cells. Damage
to a single base pair from radiation exposure is the most prevalent
and least significant effect. Ninety percent of single-­strand DNA
breaks are repaired within an hour by naturally occurring DNA
repair processes; therefore they usually have little biologic significance because each strand is repaired with use of the opposite
strand as a template. Though less likely, a pathogenic variant can
result from single-­strand break repair if inaccurate repairs occur;
however, large regions of the DNA genome on somatic cells are not
active or do not have genes that are expressed. Inaccurate repair in
these regions of the genome lead to minimal biologic effect and are
sufficient to produce viable cells.
Breakage of both strands of DNA (i.e., double-­strand break) is
the least common event, but more problematic. The ultimate outcome for cell viability depends on the proximity of the break in each
strand. If widely separated (greater than 10 base pairs), which is
essentially two remote single-­strand breaks, repairs occur rather
seamlessly. If the breaks in the two strands are opposite or near each
other (separated by less than 10 base pairs), repair is more difficult
as there is no reciprocal base pair to serve as a “memory” template.
Radiation-­induced double-­stranded breaks generally lead to cell
death or chromosomal misrepair, potentially leading to pathogenic gene variants that may result in carcinogenesis.

Noncardiac interventional
fluoroscopy, 6 %
Computed
tomography, 63 %

Cardiac interventional
fluoroscopy, 6 %
Radiography and
fluoroscopy, 10 %

Nuclear medicine,
15 %

A
Fluoroscopy, 3 %
Interventional
(including cardiac), 4 %

Nuclear medicine, 3 %

Radiography, 6 %

CT, 84 %

B
Fig. 758.1 Percentage radiation exposure by diagnostic imaging
modality for (A) adult and (B) pediatric populations. (Adapted with
permission of the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Report 184: Medical Radiation Exposure of Patients in the
United States, 2019. Figs. 14.3 and 12.2.)

When misrepaired DNA damage occurs, aberrations may then
be produced in chromosomes, resulting in an unstable aberration
(usually lethal to dividing cells) or a stable aberration. Stable aberrations can result in failure of chromosomes to reunite (leading to
deletions) or in abnormal rearrangement of chromosomes, such

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4416 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
as reciprocal translocation or aneuploidy. Although it is logical to
think that these abnormalities in chromosomes lead to variants
that can activate oncogenes or protooncogenes, or cause variants in

Table 758.3  Imaging Modalities
MODALITY

SOURCE

Radiography (digital plain film
x-­ray)

Radiation (x-­ray)

Fluoroscopy and fluoroscopically
guided procedures

Radiation (x-­ray)

Ultrasonography

Sound beams

Computed tomography

Radiation (x-­ray)

Magnetic resonance imaging

Magnetic field with
radiofrequency

Nuclear medicine (including
positron emission tomography)

Radiation (administered isotope)

Table 758.4  Average Radiation Dose by Imaging Test for
Pediatric Population*
EXAMINATION (0-­18 YEARS)

EFFECTIVE DOSE (mSv)

Interventional fluoroscopy: AP
and lateral abdomen

0.2-­1.1 mSv/min

Interventional fluoroscopy: head

0.02-­0.08 mSv/min

Interventional fluoroscopy:
cardiac

0.1-­1 mSv/min

Digital radiography: 2-­view chest

0.04-­0.06

Digital radiography: 2-­view
abdomen

0.1-­0.6

Computed tomography: brain

0.8-­2

Computed tomography: chest

0.5-­4

Computed tomography:
abdomen/pelvis†

1-­9

Nuclear medicine (99mTc
methylene diphosphonate:
bone)

2-­5

Positron emission tomography
(18F-­FDG; whole body)

2-­11

15

Table 758.5  Tissue Reaction Dose Levels
APPROXIMATE THRESHOLD

SKIN
Transient erythema

2 Gy (200 rad)

Dry desquamation

8 Gy (800 rad)

Moist desquamation

15 Gy (1,500 rad)

Temporary epilation

2 Gy (200 rad)

Permanent epilation

7 Gy (700 rad)

EYES
Cataracts (acute)

2 Gy (200 rad)*

*Has been reported as occurring between 0.5 and 1 Gy.

Attributable Lifetime Risk % per Sv

Attributable Lifetime Risk

*Background radiation reference = 0.01 mSv/day or 3 mSv/yr.
†Radiation dose upper limit includes young adult age population.

INJURY

tumor-­suppressor genes (see Chapter 541), few radiation-­induced
cancers show specific translocations such as would be associated
with activation of specific oncogenes or known tumor-­suppressor
genes. An exception is the radiation induction of papillary thyroid
carcinoma in children, which probably results from activation of
the RET oncogene (see Chapter 607).
A longitudinal study of the lifetime risks of excess cancer mortality to irradiation has been evaluated in atomic bomb survivors. More
than 120,000 survivors since 1950 have been followed since exposure;
additionally, 3,600 in utero survivors and their 77,000 progeny have
been followed since 1945. Individual radiation doses were estimated
by considering the person’s location in relation to distance from the
epicenter and individual shielding situations (such as line of sight with
respect to buildings and terrain). Radiation types were mixed, and
most of the exposure was direct gamma irradiation; neutron exposure
was out to approximately 2,000 m. Age at exposure, lifestyle, and other
factors were considered in the analytic models when calculating cancer
occurrence (Fig. 758.2).
The pediatric population is approximately two to three times more
sensitive to radiation-­induced carcinogenesis compared with middle-­
age adults; however, the risk even in this population is indirectly
related to age where the neonate is more sensitive than the older child
to an identical radiation exposure. Because of the higher risks associated with breast and thyroid cancer, females are also more sensitive than males. It must be understood that cancer rates in this study
are mortality figures; the incidence of cancer is approximately twice
that of the mortality incidence for all ages. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) reports no scientific evidence demonstrating noncancerous effects (e.g., malformations, growth, intellectual disability, etc.) from in utero exposure <50 mGy, an exposure
level that is greater than essentially any single diagnostic examination
using ionizing radiation. Additionally, noncancerous effects may only
increase slightly with exposure levels between 50 and 500 mGy. In
utero radiation exposure is associated with an excess risk of developing (all types) childhood cancer: 1% (<100 mGy), 1–6% (100-­500
mGy), and >6% (>500 mGy) as compared to 0.7% naturally. Children
are at increased risk of stochastic risks for identical levels of exposure
seen in adults because (1) children are growing rapidly, with many

10

Population averages

Female
Male

5

Females
Males
0
0

50

100

Age at Time of Exposure

Fig. 758.2 Lifetime risk of excess cancer per sievert (Sv) as a function
of age at the time of exposure. Data from the atomic bomb survivors.
The average risk across all ages in a population is approximately 5% per
Sv, but the risk varies considerably with age: children are much more
sensitive than adults. At early ages, girls are more sensitive than boys.
(From Hall EJ. Introduction to session I: Helical CT and cancer risk. Pediatr Radiol. 2002;32:225–227.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 758 u Biologic Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Children
Table 758.6  Inherited Human Syndromes Associated with
Sensitivities to X-­Rays
Ataxia-­telangiectasia
Basal cell nevoid syndrome
Cockayne syndrome
Down syndrome

Fanconi anemia
Gardner syndrome
Nijmegen breakage syndrome
Usher syndrome

Modified from Davis JT, Frush DP. Biologic effects of diagnostic radiation on children.
In: Coley BD, ed. Caffey’s Pediatric Diagnostic Imaging, 13th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2019: p. 5; and Hall EJ. Radiobiology for the Radiologist, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2006: p. 41.

cells undergoing mitotic activity dependent on undamaged DNA and
chromosomes, and (2) radiation-­induced tumors (except leukemia)
take a relatively long time to develop and children have a longer lifetime. Policies relating to the use of therapeutic abortion have been
established by the ICRP and American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, which state that fetal doses <100 mGy should not
be considered a reason for terminating pregnancy, and that every
woman should be counseled that exposure from a single diagnostic
procedure does not result in tissue effects to the fetus.
Most childhood tumors occur sporadically, but 10–15% of cases
have a strong familial association. Familial tumors have specific chromosomal deletions in common. In some of these tumors (e.g., retinoblastoma), the two-­hit hypothesis is apparent (see Chapter 541).
Individuals with certain congenital diseases are at higher risk for the
development of tumors after irradiation. Table 758.6 lists diseases that
are associated with sensitivity to radiation.

RADIATION EXPOSURE IN DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
OF CHILDREN

Imaging modalities utilizing ionizing radiation for diagnostic purposes (e.g., CT, nuclear medicine, PET, radiography, and fluoroscopy or
fluoroscopically guided procedures) are commonly utilized; however,
increased awareness of the long-­term risk for cancer induction and
mortality has led to declining pediatric CT use over the past decade.
The European EPI-­CT study found a significant dose-­response relationship between CT-­related radiation exposure and brain cancer as
well as hematologic malignancies in a large international study cohort,
supporting the concept that stochastic effects are a dose-­dependent
probability, with the probability of an effect increasing with radiation
dose. Therefore it is important that we use the lowest dose necessary
to get sufficient diagnostic images. Various federal agencies, healthcare
accrediting bodies, and national professional organizations support this
goal and provide recommendations or requirements for all imaging
examinations to have some retrievable radiation dose estimate, and for
institutions and clinics that provide ionizing radiation imaging services
to track and review patient examination dose levels annually, comparing
these dose levels with expected dose ranges and external benchmarks.
Dose reporting and aggregating software provides the ability to collect and analyze individual examination doses and gives healthcare
providers a powerful tool to correct outlier examinations (i.e., over
exposures), over utilization, and address other systemic errors present
in imaging clinics (such as radiation dose creep with time).

DECREASING UNNECESSARY DIAGNOSTIC
RADIATION IN CHILDREN WHILE STILL OBTAINING
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGES

Ultimately, the lowest radiation dose examination is the imaging
examination performed without ionizing radiation. For an increasing
number of indications, utilization of nonionizing radiation modalities
such as ultrasound or MRI may be the first consideration for diagnosis.
Selecting the correct examination is the responsibility of the requesting
healthcare provider and may involve consultation with the radiologist,
preferably with pediatric expertise. Clinical decision support algorithms are also available to assist with examination appropriateness
(e.g., American College of Radiology’s Appropriateness Criteria). The
risk of using ionizing radiation for imaging should be weighed against

4417

other risks during imaging. CT (depending on the indication and
region examined) may detect as many abnormalities as MRI, but CT
involves ionizing radiation. However, sedation is often required to successfully obtain MRI imaging in young children; in these cases, consideration of the relative risks of cognitive impairment from moderate
sedation and anesthetic versus potential radiation risks use should
come into play.

Reducing Radiation from the CT Examination

The most common source of medical radiation for all ages is CT. CT
offers the ability to acquire high-­quality volumetric imaging datasets in
seconds. For many years, adult parameters for CT settings were used
for children, which led to dosages for children much higher than the
dosage for adults. This occurs because lower energy x-­rays that would
have been absorbed in the near field in an adult pass into the entire
child, with relatively greater organ irradiation for the same exposure.
When comparing dosages given to newborns and adults during CT
scanning of the head, with the same parameters in both groups, the
dosage given to newborns can be four times that of the dosage given to
adults; with abdominal imaging, the dosage is increased by 60%. It is
the role of the radiologist and technologist, with the help of a medical
physicist, to develop and monitor protocols that tailor the examination
to the individual indication and for the variabilities in sizes found in
the pediatric population.
Modern CT scanners have many tools to help administer the appropriate amount of radiation dose to a pediatric patient and acquire the
necessary diagnostic image quality from the imaging examination.
Radiologists should work in conjunction with medical physicists and
vendor supplied application specialists to tailor specific examination
protocols to the pediatric patient population by establishing appropriate scan parameters such as the kilovoltage (kV). Scan range should
be limited to only the necessary area for diagnosis (e.g., a chest only
scan should begin at the lung apices and extend to no more than a
little below the lowest lung base). Multiphasic scanning should be only
obtained when justified; for example, in pediatric abdominopelvic CT
multiple phases should be necessary in no more than approximately
5% of examinations.
Technologic advances for modern CT scanners are using reconstruction algorithms, such as statistical iterative reconstruction
(IR), model-­based IR, and deep learning reconstruction (DLR), as
well as photon counting technology. These algorithms have been
shown to allow the reduction of radiation dose for IR algorithms by
15-30% and DLR algorithms by 44-83% in some patient populations
while maintaining equivalent diagnostic confidence to the pre-­dose
reduced image datasets. Other practical steps to reduce pediatric
population radiation dose include replacing older CT scanners with
technologically advanced scanners; monitoring institution dose values, which can be compared with available benchmarks, such as diagnostic reference levels (DRLs); and performing only examinations
that are justified. Advances in technology and attention to proper
performance of examinations have contributed to overall reductions
in pediatric patient population doses by >50% during the past two
decades.

RADIATION THERAPY: ACUTE AND LATE EFFECTS

Radiation therapy uses high doses to kill malignant cells. The sensitivity of normal cells is quite close to that of malignant cells, and to
achieve significant cure rates, radiation oncologists must accept a given
percentage of serious complications (5–10%). Radiation causes tissue
loss plus injury to the underlying vasculature. The vascular change
may be progressive, leading to arteriocapillary fibrosis and irreparable
injury, in turn leading to further tissue loss.
The acute effects of therapy (occurring less than 3 months after therapy begins) are usually related to the area of the body being irradiated
(except fatigue, which can begin during this time period). These acute
effects include radiation-­induced pneumonitis, dermatitis, mucositis
and esophagitis, cerebral edema, and swelling of the organ irradiated.
There may be changes in bowel movement patterns. Of these, one of
the most severe acute reactions is pneumonitis. It can manifest within

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4418 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 758.7  Late Effects of Radiation Therapy in Children
Treated for Cancer
SYSTEM

LATE EFFECT

DOSE (GY)

Musculoskeletal

Muscular hypoplasia
Scoliosis, kyphosis, lordosis
Osteocartilaginous exostosis/
osteochondroma

>20
>20
>12

Neuroendocrine
(cranial or
cranial spinal)

Impaired growth hormone
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
deficiency
Thyrotropin-­releasing deficiency
Precocious puberty (females
mostly)
Gonadotropin deficiency

>15
>30

Gonad failure

Ovarian failure
Testicular failure

>10
>3

Central nervous
system
dysfunction

Structured changes
Cognitive changes/Processing
speed

>18
Variable

Other

Pulmonary fibrosis
Nephropathy
Liver disease

>15
>20
>30 (>60%
liver volume)
>50
>5

Cerebral arteriopathy
Eye impairment (cataracts,
legally blind, double vision,
dry eyes)
Hearing loss
Dental abnormalities
Cardiac impairment

>40
>18
>30

>30
>20
>30

24 hours of irradiation when there is an exudation of proteinaceous
material into the alveoli and interalveolar edema. Most often, however, radiation pneumonitis begins 2-­6 months after the beginning
of radiation with a clinical presentation of fever, cough, congestion,
and pruritic pain. The late effects of therapy (beginning more than 3
months after therapy) are numerous (Table 758.7). The most common
are abnormalities of musculoskeletal development, endocrine/reproductive function, pulmonary function, neurocognition, hearing loss,
cardiac function, eye impairment, and dental abnormalities.
As of 2020, there are more than 500,000 childhood cancer survivors
in the United States. The risk of developing a second cancer among
cancer survivors is over fivefold higher than the general population.
Second cancers account for 2.3% of all cancers in children; this reflects
an overall standard incidence rate (SIR) of 5.5%. Primary malignancies with the highest cumulative incidence of a second neoplasm in the
order of frequency are retinoblastoma (10.4%), CNS cancers (7.4%),
cancers of bone (7.2%), soft tissue sarcomas (6.5%), hepatic cancer
(5.9%), and neuroblastoma (5.9%) [data from the U.S. Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results program (SEER)]. Table 758.8 relates
second cancers to primary cancer and latency period. Almost 70% of
the second neoplasms are in the field of the original irradiation. Radiation therapy increases the risk of second cancers in a dose-­dependent
manner for nongenetic neoplasms.
The exact complications depend on the location of the treatment
field. In children, because of the location of many childhood tumors,
the normal brain is commonly in the treatment field. Standard irradiation of the brain in children results in cortical atrophy in more than
half of patients who receive 20-­60 Gy; 26% are left with white matter changes (leukoencephalopathy) and 8% with calcifications. The
younger the child is at the time of irradiation, the greater the atrophy. Some patients also demonstrate mineralizing microangiopathy.
Radiation-­induced changes of the brain are potentiated by methotrexate administered before, during, or after radiation therapy.

Cerebral necrosis is a serious complication of radiation-­induced
vascular disease. It is usually diagnosed 1-­5 years after irradiation but
can occur up to a decade later. Brain necrosis may manifest as headache, increased intracranial pressure, seizures, sensory deficits, and
psychotic changes.
Spinal cord irradiation may result in radiation myelitis, which may
be either transient or permanent. Acute transient myelitis often appears
2-­4 months after irradiation. Patients with myelitis usually present with
Lhermitte sign, a sensation of little electrical shocks radiating down
the spine into the arms and legs, occurring with neck flexion or other
movements that stretch the spinal cord. Reversal of transient myelopathy usually occurs between 8 and 40 weeks and does not necessarily
progress to delayed necrosis.
Delayed myelopathy occurs after a mean latent period of 20 months
but can occur earlier if the total dose or the dose per fraction is high.
It usually manifests as discontinuous deterioration and is irreversible.
In the cervical and thoracic regions, sensory dissociation develops,
followed by spastic and then flaccid paresis. In the lumbar cord, flaccid paresis is dominant. The mortality for high thoracic and cervical
lesions reaches 70% with death commonly being due to pneumonia
and urinary tract infections.
CNS irradiation may affect growth by compromising function of the
pituitary-­hypothalamic axis and leading to diminishing growth hormone production and release. Non–growth hormone tropins may also
be affected by CNS irradiation, leading to gonadotropin deficiency or
precocious puberty. Central hypothyroidism can also develop. CNS
irradiation also compromises bone mineral deposition both locally (in
the radiation field) and systemically.
Irradiation has other effects specific to children. Scoliosis and
hypoplasia of bones may occur if fractionated treatment schemes
exceed 4,000 rad. Fractionated doses higher than 25 Gy can result
in slipped capital femoral epiphyses. An increase in the incidence of
benign osteochondromas has been reported after childhood irradiation. Chest wall irradiation in females (besides causing breast cancer)
may impair breast development and/or cause fibrosis and atrophy of
breast tissue.

WHOLE BODY IRRADIATION
Uncontrolled Large-­or Small-­Scale Exposure to
Radiation

Large-­scale exposure to radiation can occur in an event of nuclear accidents, war, or terrorist attacks (Fig. 758.3). Radiation as well as explosive and thermal injury need to be considered.

Clinical Manifestations

A large single exposure of penetrating radiation can result in acute
radiation syndrome (Table 758.9). The signs and symptoms of this
syndrome result from damage to major organ systems that have different levels of radiation sensitivity, modulated by the rate at which
the radiation exposure occurred. Delivery of 1 Gy in 1 minute would
be symptomatic, but delivery of 1 cGy/day for 100 days would not be
symptomatic.
The hematopoietic syndrome results from acute whole body
doses >0.7-­10 Gy; where healthy patients will almost always recover
from doses <2 Gy. The dose that kills 50% of a population in 60 days
is approximately 3.5-­4.5 Gy, where effective blood transfusions and
antibiotics may extend the dose range to 5-­8 Gy. Doses >8 Gy almost
always lead to hematopoietic-­induced death. Symptoms of exposure
consist of a prodromal phase during which the patient will experience nausea/vomiting, diarrhea, and fatigue within the first 12 hours,
with symptoms usually lasting up to 48 hours. A latent period of 2-­3
weeks, during which patients may feel quite well, follows. Although
patients are asymptomatic, bone marrow impairment has occurred.
The most obvious laboratory finding is lymphocyte depression (Table
758.10). Maximal bone marrow depression occurs approximately 30
days after exposure, when hemorrhage and infection can be major
problems. If the bone marrow was not completely eradicated, a recovery phase then ensues. This radiation effect is similar to what occurs
when whole body irradiation (given as 12 Gy in two treatments) is used

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 758 u Biologic Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Children

4419

Table 758.8  Second Cancers and Their Relationship with Primary Cancers
SECOND CANCERS

LATENCY (MEDIAN
IN YEARS)

PRIMARY CANCERS

RISK FACTORS

Brain tumors

ALL; brain tumors; HD

9-­10

Radiation; younger age

Myelodysplastic syndromes/
acute myelogenous leukemia

ALL; HD; bone tumors

3-­5

Topoisomerase II inhibitors;
alkylating agents

Breast cancer

HD; bone tumors; soft tissue sarcomas; ALL; brain
tumors; Wilms tumors; NHL

15-­20

Radiation; female gender

Thyroid cancer

ALL: HD; neuroblastoma; soft tissue sarcomas; bone
tumors; NHL

13-­15

Radiation; younger age;
female gender

Bone tumors

Retinoblastoma (heritable); other bone tumors; Ewing
sarcoma; soft tissue sarcomas; ALL

9-­10

Radiation; alkylating agents;
removal of the spleen

Soft tissue sarcomas

Retinoblastoma (heritable); soft tissue sarcomas; HD;
Wilms tumors; bone tumors; ALL

10-­11

Radiation; younger age;
anthracyclines

ALL, Acute lymphocytic leukemia; HD, Hodgkin disease; NHL, non-­Hodgkin lymphoma.
From Bhatia S, Sklar S. Second cancers in survivors of childhood cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2:124–132.

Management of radiation sickness based on early symptoms

No
vomiting

Vomiting
>2 hr after
exposure

Vomiting
1-2 hr after
exposure

Vomiting in <1 hr,
diarrhea, hypotension,
hyperthermia, erythema,
(central nervous system
symptoms at >10 Gy)

<1 Gy

1-2 Gy

2-4 Gy

>4 Gy

Outpatient
surveillance
(3-5 wk)

Surveillance
in general
hospital

Hospitalization
in a department
of hematology

Hospitalization
in a center of
radiopathology

Fig. 758.3 Management algorithm for radiation sickness at different

levels of medical care, depending on the appearance of early symptoms and the estimated radiation dose to the whole body. (From Turai
I, Veress K, Günalp B, et al. Medical response to radiation incidents and
radionuclear threats. BMJ. 2004;328:568–572.)

to obliterate the bone marrow in children with leukemia before bone
marrow transplantation.
The gastrointestinal (GI) syndrome occurs from acute whole body
doses >6-­10 Gy. Prompt onset of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea follows. There is a latent period of approximately 1 week if intense medical treatment is administered. Following the latent period, recurrence
of GI symptoms, sepsis, and electrolyte imbalance occurs, which results
in death at about 2 weeks postexposure from GI tract and bone marrow
destruction.
At dose levels exceeding 20-­50 Gy, the cardiovascular/CNS syndrome predominates. Nausea, vomiting, prostration, hypotension,
ataxia, and convulsions are almost immediate. The latent period occurs
between 4 and 6 hours postexposure followed by severe manifestation
of the initial illness stage leading to eventual coma and death within
2-­3 days.

Treatment

For the hematopoietic and GI syndromes, treatment is supportive
involving transfusions and Neupogen (filgrastim), Neulasta (pegfilgrastim) and other hematopoietic growth factors, fluids, and, if infected
antibiotics and antiviral agents. Stem cell (bone marrow) transplantation may be needed in severe cases.

Localized Irradiation
Clinical Manifestations

Because localized exposure involves a small amount of tissue, systemic
manifestations may be less severe, and patients may survive even if
locally absorbed doses are very high. The hand is the most common
site for accidental localized irradiation injuries, usually as a result of
picking up or playing with lost radiation sources. The second most
common accidental site is the thigh and buttocks, predominantly from
placing unsuspected highly radioactive sources in the pockets.
Table 758.11 lists the skin changes that occur after a single acute,
localized irradiation. As opposed to other forms of thermal burns,
signs of irradiation appear a period of days after the exposure. Vascular
insufficiency may appear months to years later and cause ulcerations
or necrosis in formerly healed areas. The penetrability of the radiation
is an important factor in the outcome of local radiation injury. Beta
particles from heavy radiation fallout can cause superficial skin burns
because they have low penetrability.
Some tissues that may receive localized radiation exposure are relatively radiosensitive. Cataract formation (see Chapter 668) may occur
with single γ-­ray exposures in the range of <1 Gy. Such cataracts usually take from 2 months to several years to develop. Oligospermia may
take up to 2 months to develop. Transient infertility in men may result
from doses as low as 0.15 Gy, and permanent sterility may occur in
males at dose levels between 3 and 6 Gy.

Treatment

Skin therapy is directed at prevention of infections. Treatment of localized injuries usually involves class II to III topical steroids and plastic
surgery and grafting, if the radiation exposure was not deeply penetrating (see Chapter 89). The nature of the surgery depends on the dose at
various depths in tissue and the location of the lesion. The full expression of radiation injury often is not apparent for 1-­2 years due to slow
arteriolar narrowing that can cause delayed necrosis. After relatively
penetrating radiation, amputation may be necessary because of obliterative changes in small vessels.

INTERNAL CONTAMINATION
Epidemiology

Accidents involving internal contamination are rare and are usually the
result of misadministration in hospital settings or voluntary ingestion
of unsuspected contaminated radioactive materials. Other possible
causes of internal contamination of children include ingestion of breast
milk from mothers who have had diagnostic nuclear medicine scans
and radiation exposure when a parent or sibling receives a therapeutic
dose of iodine-­131.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4420 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 758.9  Acute Radiation Syndrome
MANIFEST ILLNESS
STAGE

SYNDROME

DOSE*

PRODROMAL STAGE

LATENT STAGE

Hematopoietic (bone
marrow)

>0.7 Gy (>70 rads)
(mild symptoms may
occur as low as 0.3
Gy or 30 rads)

• Symptoms are
anorexia, nausea
and vomiting
• Onset occurs 1
hr to 2 days after
exposure
• Stage lasts for
minutes to days

• Stem cells in
bone marrow are
dying, although
patient may
appear and feel
well
• Stage lasts 1-­6
wk

• Symptoms are
anorexia, fever, and
malaise
• Drop in all blood cell
counts occurs for
several weeks
• Primary cause of
death is infection and
hemorrhage
• Survival decreases
with increasing dose
• Most deaths occur
within a few months
after exposure

RECOVERY
• In most cases,
bone marrow
cells will begin to
repopulate the
marrow
• There should be
full recovery for a
large percentage
of individuals from
a few weeks up to
2 yr after exposure
• Death may occur in
some individuals at
1.2 Gy (120 rads)
• The LD50/60† is
about 2.5-­5 Gy
(250-­500 rads)

Gastrointestinal (GI)

>10 Gy (>1,000 rads)
(some symptoms
may occur as low
as 6 Gy or 600
rads)

• Symptoms are
anorexia, severe
nausea, vomiting,
cramps, and
diarrhea
• Onset occurs within
a few hours after
exposure
• Stage lasts about 2
days

• Stem cells in
bone marrow
and cells lining
GI tract are
dying, although
patient may
appear and feel
well
• Stage lasts <1
wk

• Symptoms are
malaise, anorexia,
severe diarrhea, fever,
dehydration, and
electrolyte imbalance
• Death is due
to infection,
dehydration, and
electrolyte imbalance
• Death occurs within 2
wk of exposure

• The LD100‡ is about
10 Gy (1,000 rads)

Cardiovascular (CV)/
central nervous
system (CNS)

>50 Gy (5,000 rads)
(some symptoms
may occur as low
as 20 Gy or 2,000
rads)

• Symptoms are
extreme nervousness
and confusion;
severe nausea,
vomiting, and watery
diarrhea; loss of
consciousness; and
burning sensations
of the skin
• Onset occurs within
minutes of exposure
• Stage lasts for
minutes to hours

• Patient may
return to partial
functionality
• Stage may last
for hours but
often is less

• Symptoms are return
of watery diarrhea,
convulsions, and
coma
• Onset occurs 5-­6 hr
after exposure
• Death occurs within 3
days of exposure

• No recovery is
expected

*The absorbed doses quoted here are “gamma equivalent” values. Neutrons or protons generally produce the same effects as γ-­, β-­, or x-­rays but at lower doses. If the patient has
been exposed to neutrons or protons, consult radiation experts on how to interpret the dose.
†The LD /60 is the dose necessary to kill 50% of the exposed population in 60 days.
50
‡The LD
100 is the dose necessary to kill 100% of the exposed population.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Acute radiation syndrome: a fact sheet for clinicians. Table 1. https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/radiation/emergencies/arsphysicianfa
ctsheet.htm.

Table 758.10  Expected Outcome Based on Absolute
Lymphocyte Count After Acute Penetrating
Whole Body Irradiation
MINIMAL LYMPHOCYTE COUNT
WITHIN FIRST 48 HR AFTER
EXPOSURE

PROGNOSIS

1,000-­3,000 (normal range)

No significant injury

1,000-­1,500

Significant but probably
nonlethal injury, good
prognosis

500-­1,000

Severe injury, fair prognosis

100-­500

Very severe injury, poor
prognosis

<100

Lethal without compatible
bone marrow donor

Clinical Manifestations

The hazards from internal contamination depend on the nature of
both the radionuclide (particularly in terms of its solubility in water,
half-­life, biologic half-­life, and radioactive emission) and the chemical
compound.

Treatment

The most effective treatment requires knowledge of both the radionuclide and the chemical form. Treatment must be instituted quickly
to be effective (Table 758.12). Removal treatment involves cleaning
a contaminated wound and performing gastric lavage or administration of cathartics in the case of ingestion. Administration of alginate-­
containing antacids (e.g., Gaviscon) also usually helps in removal by
decreasing absorption in the GI tract. An example of blocking therapy is the administration of potassium iodine or other stable iodine-­
containing compounds to patients with known internal contamination
with radioactive iodine. The stable iodine effectively blocks the thyroid,
although its effectiveness decreases rapidly as time elapses after the
contamination. The recommended dose of potassium iodine is 16 mg

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 758 u Biologic Effects of Ionizing Radiation on Children
for neonates (up to 1 month of age); 32 mg for children ages 1 month
to 3 years; 65 mg for children ages 3-­18 years (if less than 70 kg), and
130 mg for adults and adolescents >70 kg. Each dose protects for only
1 day. Dilution therapy is used in cases of tritium (radioactive hydrogen as water) contamination. Forcing fluids promotes excretion. Cases
of internal contamination with transuranic elements (americium and

4421

plutonium) may require chelation therapy with calcium diethylenetriamine pentaacetate.
Prussian blue is a drug approved by the FDA for patients with
internal contamination with cesium or thallium. It can speed fecal
elimination of radioactive cesium from the body. It acts by intercepting
the cesium coming into the gut from the bile. Prussian blue prevents

Table 758.11  Skin Changes After a Single, Acute, Localized Radiation Exposure
APPROXIMATE
THRESHOLD (GY)

CHANGE

2-­4

Primary erythema within hours of exposure (appears more quickly after larger doses)

3

Second phase erythema (develops during the manifestation phase of local radiation injury); appears 14-­21 days after
exposure

3

Temporary epilation (14-­18 days after exposure)

7

Definitive epilation (25-­30 days after exposure)

10

Dry desquamation (20-­28 days after exposure)

15

Moist desquamation, possible ulceration (15-­25 days after exposure)

25

Desquamation with blistering, ulceration, and necrosis (>21 days after exposure)

Data from the International Atomic Energy Agency. Safety Reports Series, No. 101: Medical management of radiation injuries, 2020. https://www-­pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/P
DF/PUB1891_web.pdf

Table 758.12  	Decontamination of Common Elements in Industrial and Medical Accidents
ELEMENT

EMISSIONS

CRITICAL ORGAN

EFFECTIVE T1/2*

DECONTAMINATION

Cesium-137

Beta, gamma

Total body

70 days

Prussian blue
(Radiogardase) 3 g po
3 times/day (adults and
adolescents); 1 g po 3
times/day (2-12 yr old);
consider lavage and
purgatives

Cobalt-60

Beta, gamma

Total body

10 days

Lavage, purgatives,
penicillamine

Iodine-125, iodine-131

Beta, gamma

Thyroid

Iodine-125, 42 days;
iodine-131, 8 days

Potassium iodide:
0-1 mo, 16 mg/day
> 1 mo to 3 yr, 32 mg/day
> 3 mo to 3 yr, 32 mg/day
> 3 to 12 yr and
< 70 kg, 65 mg/day
adults or ≥ 70 kg,
130 mg/day; consider
lavage

Iridium-192

Beta, gamma

Lung

74 days

Lavage for large quantities

Technetium-99 m

Gamma

Total body

5 hours

Potassium perchlorate to
reduce thyroid dose

Tritium-3

Beta

Total body

12 days

Forced fluids

Uranium-235, uranium-238

Alpha

Kidney,† bone, liver, lung

Can be permanent if in
bone

Bicarbonate to alkalinize
the urine

*Effective t1/2 combines radioactive and chemical properties and rates of elimination without decontamination efforts.
†The kidney is most vulnerable to large amounts of uranium because of the chemical properties of this heavy metal. Uranium can ultimately be deposited in bone.
po, Per os; qd, once per day.
Data from U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Prussian blue, Radiogardase, package insert. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/infopage/prussian_blue/default.htm; U.S.
Food and Drug Administration. Guidance: Potassium iodide as a thyroid blocking agent in radiation emergencies. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/4825fnl.htm;
Management of Persons Accidentally Contaminated with Radionuclides. NCRP Report No. 65. Bethesda, MD: National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements; 1980;
and Jarrett D, ed. Medical Management of Radiation Casualties: Handbook. 2nd ed. AFRRI Special Publication 03-1. Bethesda, MD: Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute;
2003. Available at: http://www.afrri.usuhs.mil.
From Linder JA, Linder LS: Radiation accident—dispersed exposure. In Ciottone GR (ed). Ciottone’s Disaster Medicine, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2016. Table 108-1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4422 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 758.13  Nuclear Regulatory Commission Guidelines
on Breastfeeding During the Period During
a Nuclear Medicine Examination
RADIOPHARMACEUTICAL

BREASTFEEDING CESSATION

11C, 13N, 15O, 82Rb

None

18F-­labeled

12 hr

68Ga-­labeled

12 hr

99mTc-­labeled

24 hr

123-­I Sodium iodide

7 days

111In-­leukocytes

7 days

99m-­Tc labeled

No interruption*

201Tl chloride

14 days

67Ga and 89Zr

28 days

177Lu, diagnostic

35 days

131I-­NaI

Stop breastfeeding

177Lu, therapeutic

Stop breastfeeding

223Ra and all alpha emitters

Stop breastfeeding

*The guideline for 99mTc compounds is a 24-­hr interruption for >1110 MBq administered,
12 hr for 444-­1110 MBq, and no interruption for <444 MBq administered. The normally
administered activity is below activities that require any interruption.
From Dilsizian V, Metter D, Palestro C, Zanaonico P. The Advisory Committee on
Medical Uses of Isotomes (ACMUI) Sub-­Committee on Nursing Mother Guidelines for
the Medical Administration of Radioactive Materials, 2018, p. 12. https://www.nrc.gov/d
ocs/ML1803/ML18033B034.pdf

cesium from being absorbed again from the gut. Prussian blue can be
given days after ingestion, unlike potassium iodine, which must be
given initially in the first 12-­24 hours after exposure.
In the case of breastfeeding after a nuclear medicine procedure,
two primary concerns are considered: (1) the internal dose to the
infant passed through the excreted milk and (2) the dose from the
radiopharmaceutical absorption in the female breast that exposes
the infant to external γ-­rays while undergoing decay. Most imaging
radiopharmaceuticals are below the activity calculated to expose
the infant to a dose of 1 mSv via either internal or external mode
of exposure. Table 758.13 provides a comprehensive list of radiopharmaceuticals and the recommended period for breastfeeding
cessation by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. In the case
of delaying breastfeeding, pumped milk may be stored for the times
indicated in Table 758.13, after which they will be safe to feed the
infant.

EXTERNAL CONTAMINATION

The presence of external radioactive contamination on a patient’s
skin is not an immediate medical emergency. Management involves
removing and controlling the spread of radioactive materials. If a
patient has suspected surface contamination and no physical injuries, decontamination can be performed relatively easily. If substantial physical trauma or other life-­threatening injuries are combined
with external contamination, surface decontamination should proceed only after the patient has been stabilized physiologically. In
many accident situations, essential medical care may be delayed
inappropriately by hospital emergency staff because of fear of radiation or spread of contamination in the hospital. After a radiation
accident, triaging of patients is critical and is based on exposure and
symptoms (see Fig. 758.3).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 759

Chemical Pollutants
Joel A. Forman and Lauren M. Zajac
More than 85,000 new synthetic chemicals have been developed in the
past 75 years. These chemicals are used in millions of products, ranging from food packaging to clothing, building materials, motor fuels,
cleaning products, cosmetics, medical products, toys, and baby bottles.
Synthetic chemicals are widely disseminated in the environment. The
Toxic Release Inventory of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) reports that in 2021, of 29.3 billion pounds of production-­
related chemical waste managed, nearly 3.3 billion pounds (11%) were
discharged into air, water, and land in the United States. These chemicals are detected today in even the most remote corners of the planet,
such as the polar icecaps and in the ocean depths.
All people are at daily risk of exposure to synthetic chemicals, and
children are especially likely to be exposed to the nearly 3,000 chemicals that are produced in amounts of 1 million pounds or more per
year, designated by the EPA as high-­production-­volume chemicals.
Biomonitoring data on blood and urine levels of more than 400 high-­
production-­volume chemicals are obtained annually by the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention in a sample of the U.S. population through the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES). These data document that most Americans, including
children, are routinely exposed to scores of synthetic chemicals; exposure often falls disproportionately on poor children and children
of color. Examples are wide ranging and include lead, air pollutants,
endocrine disrupting chemicals like phthalates, and many others.
Toxic chemicals are exported in ever-­increasing quantities to the
world’s poorer countries as these countries undergo industrial development. Environmental safeguards in those countries are typically not
as stringent as in high-­income countries, and the potential for serious
exposure is therefore high. Examples of tragedies that have resulted
from the movement of toxic chemicals to low-­and middle-­income
countries include the Bhopal disaster in India, in which hundreds were
killed and thousands injured by methylisocyanate gas released by an
explosion in a pesticide production facility, and the ongoing export
each year of more than 2 million tons of newly produced asbestos to the
world’s poorest countries, where this asbestos is responsible for nearly
200,000 deaths annually from asbestosis, lung cancer, and malignant
mesothelioma.

SYNTHETIC CHEMICALS AND HUMAN HEALTH

A recurrent pattern is that chemicals are brought to market with great
enthusiasm, presumed harmless, and undergo little or no premarket
safety testing. Then years or decades later, after they had come into
wide use, the chemicals were found to be harmful to children’s health.
Often the first cases of disease caused by these chemicals are clinically severe, but as time passes, evidence of widespread subclinical toxicity comes to light.
Classic historical examples of epidemics caused by inadequately
tested toxic chemicals include the following:
• Tetraethyl lead: This was added to gasoline in the United States from
the early 1920s until 1980. It was responsible for widespread lead
poisoning, initially evident as an epidemic of acute toxicity manifesting as encephalopathy, seizures, and even death, but later demonstrated to have caused subclinical neurotoxicity and reduction in
IQ across two generations of U.S. children (see Chapter 761).
• Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT): This pesticide very nearly
led to extinction of the osprey and the American bald eagle and
more recently has been linked to increased risk for breast cancer
among women exposed decades ago in utero.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 759 u Chemical Pollutants
• Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs): These are highly persistent pollutants banned from production in the United States in 1977, which
continue today to contaminate major lakes and rivers and have been
found also to be responsible for loss of IQ and disruption of behavior
in children.
• Chlorofluorocarbons: These destroy the ozone.
Other examples of synthetic chemicals that came into wide use with
little assessment of their safety and are now recognized as causing harm
to children’s health include the following:
• Phthalates: These chemicals are added to plastics, cosmetics, medical equipment like intravenous tubing, and common household
products that are now linked to increased risk for reproductive
abnormalities in male infants and heightened risk of behavioral
abnormalities such as attention-­deficit/hyperactivity disorder (see
Chapter 50).
• Polybrominated diphenyl ethers: These are used as flame retardants in
carpets, furniture, and electronic equipment and are now linked to
persistent loss of intelligence and disruption of behavior in children.
• Bisphenol A: A plastics chemical linked to neurodevelopmental disorders.
These chemicals are all produced in volumes of millions of tons per
year, are widely disseminated in the environment, and are detectable in
the bodies of nearly all Americans. Only decades after their introduction are these chemicals’ risks to children beginning to be recognized.

CHILDREN’S UNIQUE SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
SYNTHETIC CHEMICALS

The health effects of synthetic chemicals are especially serious when
exposure occurs during windows of vulnerability in early life such as
during pregnancy, infancy, and early childhood. Children are highly
vulnerable to chemical pollutants for several reasons:
1.	Children have proportionally greater exposure to environmental
pollutants than adults. Because they drink more water, eat more
food, and breathe more air per kilogram of body weight, children are
more heavily exposed to pollutants in water, food, and air. Children’s
hand-­to-­mouth behavior and their play close to the ground further
magnify their exposures.
2.	Children’s metabolic pathways, especially in the first few months
after birth, are immature. Although in some instances children are
better able than adults to cope with environmental toxicants because
they cannot metabolize these chemicals to their active forms, more
commonly children are not as able as adults to detoxify and excrete
chemical pollutants.
3.	Infants and children are growing and developing, and their complex,
fast-­moving, and highly choreographed developmental processes are
exquisitely sensitive to disruption by chemical pollutants. Exposures
to even minute doses of toxic chemicals during windows of vulnerability in early development have been shown to cause a wide array
of diseases in childhood and to increase risk for chronic disease and
disability lifelong (Table 759.1).
4.	Because children have many future years of life, they have time for
the development of multistage chronic diseases that may be triggered by early exposures.

SAFETY TESTING OF SYNTHETIC CHEMICALS

Legally mandated testing of chemicals for safety and toxicity coupled
with strict controls on dangerous chemicals are the linchpins of chemical safety. Strong chemical safety policies are needed to protect children against disease and death caused by chemicals. A fundamental
problem in environmental pediatrics today is that chemical safety
policies in many countries are weak. Only approximately 65% of
high-­production-­volume chemicals have been tested for their safety
or potential hazard to human health, and fewer than 30% have been
assessed for their pediatric or developmental toxicity.
Failure to test chemicals for safety and toxicity reflects the chemical industry’s unwillingness to take responsibility for the products they
produce coupled with long-­standing failure of the previous U.S. federal
law on chemical safety, the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). Only
five chemicals were banned or controlled under the original TSCA law:

4423

Table 759.1  Effects of Selected Chemical Pollutants on
Infants and Children
CHEMICAL POLLUTANT

EFFECT(S)

Air pollution

Asthma, other respiratory
diseases, sudden infant death
syndrome

Asbestos

Mesothelioma and lung cancer

Benzene, nitrosamine, vinyl
chloride, ionizing radiation

Cancer

Environmental tobacco smoke

Increased risk of sudden infant
death syndrome and asthma

Ethyl alcohol

Fetal alcohol syndrome after
intrauterine exposure

Lead

Neurobehavioral toxicity from
low-­dose exposure

Methyl mercury

Developmental neurotoxicity

Organophosphate insecticides

Developmental neurotoxicity

Per-­ and poly-­fluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS)

Increased cholesterol levels,
altered liver function tests,
decreased antibody response
to childhood vaccines

Polychlorinated biphenyls

Developmental neurotoxicity

Polybrominated diphenyl ethers

Developmental neurotoxicity

Phthalates

Developmental neurotoxicity and
reproductive impairment

Trichloroethylene

Elevated risk of leukemia after
intrauterine exposure

PCBs, the ozone-­destroying chlorofluorocarbons, and three known
human carcinogens—dioxin, asbestos, and hexavalent chromium.
To address the problem of exposure to untested chemicals, countries have enacted stronger chemical safety legislation. In 2007, the
European Union enacted the Registration, Evaluation, Authorization,
and Restriction of Chemical Substances (REACH) legislation. This law
places responsibility on industry to generate data on potential risks of
commercial chemicals and to register this information with the European Chemical Agency in Helsinki. The European Union is using this
information to craft regulations to protect children’s health. Since 2009
REACH has restricted more than 1,000 toxic substances.
In June 2016, the United States passed legislation to revamp TSCA.
This law—the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act—requires the EPA to assess the safety of any new chemical
before it is allowed to enter the market, to prioritize safety testing of
existing chemicals, and to use a risk-­based standard to evaluate chemical safety that considers only hazards to health and is blind to the
costs of protective action. This law holds much promise for improving
the protection of children’s health against toxic chemicals, but it also
includes a federal preemption clause that could inhibit state-­based protective regulations. Transparency, oversight, and advocacy is critical to
ensuring that the law is implemented in a timely manner that is true to
the intent to prioritize children’s health.
The UN Environment Programme (UNEP) is the United Nations
agency responsible for chemical safety. UNEP has called for “a global
commitment to the sound management of chemicals. The agency supports and tracks the progress of international agreements and treaties
limiting the manufacture, environmental release and global transport
of persistent pollutants, pesticides, hazardous waste, and mercury.” The
Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management, a program supported by UNEP, provides a platform for coordinating international control of toxic chemicals and hazardous waste across a broad

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4424 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
range of stakeholders. UNEP has worked closely with the World Health
Organization (WHO) to coordinate the removal of lead from gasoline
in countries around the world.

SYNTHETIC CHEMICALS AND DISEASE IN
CHILDREN

A large and growing body of evidence documents that toxic chemicals
can cause disease, disability, and death in children. High-­dose exposures can cause acute, clinically evident disease. Lower-­dose exposures
can cause subclinical injury (injury that is very real but detectable only
through special testing), such as decreases in intelligence, shortening
of attention span, reductions in fertility, and slowing of lung growth.
When exposure to a neurotoxic pollutant is widespread, the resulting
widespread subclinical neurotoxicity can reduce the intelligence, creativity, and economic productivity of entire societies.
Exposures to toxic chemicals in early life are linked not only to
increased risks of disease in childhood, but also to increased risks of
disease in later life. This recognition, termed the developmental origins
of health and disease concept, derives from studies conducted by Barker
and colleagues who found that undernutrition in utero is associated
decades later with increased risks for hypertension, obesity, diabetes,
and cardiovascular disease. Epigenetic programming of gene expression during windows of vulnerability in early development appears
to be the underlying mechanism. Increased risks for disease in adult
life have now been associated also with early-­life exposures to toxic
chemicals and appear to be mediated through epigenetic changes in
gene expression. Among the health problems linked to toxic chemical exposures in early life are decreased cognition in adults who were
exposed as children to lead, neurobehavioral disorders in children
exposed to a range of developmental neurotoxicants, and cancer.

CHEMICAL POLLUTANTS OF MAJOR CONCERN
Air Pollutants

Air pollution—ambient air pollution and household air pollution—is
the world’s largest environmental threat to health and, according to the
WHO, is responsible for an estimated 6.7 million deaths each year. The
air pollutants of greatest concern for children’s health are particulate
matter (especially fine particulates less than 2.5 microns in aerodynamic diameter), photochemical oxidants (especially ozone), oxides
of nitrogen, sulfur oxides, and carbon monoxide; these are the “criteria air pollutants” regulated by the U.S. EPA in the Clean Air Act.
In the United States, approximately 60% of children live in areas that
do not meet national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS), most
commonly particulate matter and ozone. Globally, ambient levels of air
pollutants can be magnitudes higher than the United States.
Fuel combustion is the principal source of air pollution. In high-­
and middle-­income countries, combustion of fossil fuels—coal, oil,
and gas—accounts for most air pollution. In low-­income and lower
middle-­income countries, the major source is burning of biomass, such
as wood, dung, straw, and charcoal. Coal is the single most highly polluting fossil fuel and the most important source of the greenhouse gas
emissions that drive global climate change, but fixed and mobile oil and
gas combustion are also major contributors. As the climate changes,
wildfires are becoming more common and are further contributing to
air pollution and climate change.
Elevated levels of ambient air pollutants are associated with respiratory problems in children, including decreased expiratory volume,
wheezing, exacerbations of asthma, and slowed lung growth. Slowed
lung growth leads to decreased lung volume and increases risk for
respiratory disease in childhood, adolescence, and adult life. Long-­term
improvements in ambient air quality, especially reductions in levels of
particulates and oxides of nitrogen, are associated with statistically and
clinically significant improvements in lung growth in children, effects
that appear likely to persist into adulthood and to reduce lifetime risk
of pulmonary and cardiovascular disease.
Aside from the criteria air pollutants, other pollutants emitted from
mobile, stationary, and area sources are considered hazardous air pollutants (HAPs), which are known or suspected to cause cancer, reproductive effects, or birth defects. Some common examples are metals

such as mercury (neurotoxin), asbestos (mesothelioma, lung cancer),
and volatile organic compounds such as polychloroethylene (reproductive effects, cancer). Diesel exhaust is a particularly concerning source
of air pollution as it contains fine and ultrafine particulates (capable of
reaching alveoli and getting absorbed into bloodstream) and multiple
HAPs (e.g., formaldehyde), and has been classified by the International
Agency for Research on Cancer as a known human carcinogen.
The effects of household air pollution on children’s health are magnified by the fact that many children spend 80–90% of their time
indoors, and pollutant levels can be 2-­5 times higher indoors especially
in poorly ventilated spaces. In 2020, the WHO estimated that 237,000
children <5 years old died from illnesses attributable to household air
pollution. Secondhand tobacco smoke (SHS) is an especially hazardous
constituent of indoor air pollution and a powerful trigger for asthma
(see Chapter 759.1). Household products, particularly some disinfectants, cleaners, paints, and floor finishes, have also been connected to
respiratory tract irritation and increased asthma morbidity. Allergens
in indoor air can contribute to respiratory problems and include cockroach, mite, mold, and cat and dog allergens.

HEALTH HAZARDS OF UNCONVENTIONAL
NATURAL GAS DEVELOPMENT (FRACKING)

Unconventional natural gas development (UNGD) using high-­volume
horizontal hydraulic fracturing (fracking) has made possible the cost-­
effective extraction of natural gas from previously inaccessible underground shale deposits and has catalyzed a 16-­fold increase in fracking
wells in the United States between 2000 and 2020. Natural gas has
surpassed coal to become the major source of electricity generation in
North America.
In fracking, large volumes of water containing a mix of chemicals
(whose composition is a closely guarded secret) are injected at very
high pressure through deep wells into shale deposits to break apart the
rock and allow release of gas. The gas is brought up to the wellhead
through return pipes, collected, and sent to market. In some areas, gas
and oil occur together, and the gas may be burned off (flared) at the
wellhead while the more valuable oil is piped to market.
The hazards of fracking to children’s health include:
• Toxic air pollution by volatile organic compounds released from fracking wells such as benzene, ethyl-­benzene, hydrogen sulfide (H2S), n-­
hexane, and methane: Benzene and ethyl-­benzene are known human
carcinogens, H2S and n-­hexane are neurotoxicants, and methane is a
climate pollutant that contributes to greenhouse gas emissions.
• Traffic-­related air pollution resulting from the large volumes of diesel
truck traffic required to bring piping, chemicals, and water to drilling operations: Diesel exhaust contains coarse and fine particulates,
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and formaldehyde, and
has been classified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer as a known human carcinogen.
• Water pollution by toxic chemicals: Leaks of toxic materials into waterways occur commonly during fracking operations; in addition, much
of the water injected into the wells returns to the surface containing
proprietary injected chemicals, along with high concentrations of salt
dissolved from underground deposits and naturally occurring radioactive materials. These chemicals have been shown to contaminate
both ground and surface waters. Water pollution is a particularly severe problem in arid regions with limited water supplies.
• Radon released from underground deposits: Radon has been shown
to contaminate air near wellheads, and high concentrations of radon
have been identified in shipped gas. Additional, nonchemical hazards of fracking include incessant noise, high risk of vehicular injury
to children from fast-­moving heavy trucks on poorly maintained
rural roads, societal disruption in rural communities, and extensive
degradation of the environment.

Lead

See Chapter 761.

Mercury

See Chapter 760.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 759 u Chemical Pollutants
Asbestos

Between 1947 and 1973, asbestos was sprayed as insulation on classroom walls and ceilings in approximately 10,000 schools in the United
States. It was also widely utilized in homes as pipe insulation and in
floor tiles. Subsequent deterioration or unsafe removal of this asbestos
can release asbestos fibers into the air. Asbestos is not a health hazard
so long as it is intact, but once it becomes airborne, it can be inhaled
by children to produce adverse health effects. Asbestos is a human
carcinogen, and the two principal cancers caused by asbestos are lung
cancer and mesothelioma. U.S. federal law requires that all schools be
inspected periodically for asbestos and that the results be made public.
Removal by an EPA-­certified contractor is required only when asbestos
is visibly deteriorating or is within the reach of children. In most cases,
placement of barriers (drywall walls or drop ceilings) provides appropriate protection.

Pesticides

Pesticides are a diverse group of chemicals used to control insects, weeds,
fungi, and rodents, and are used in large quantities in agriculture, homes,
schools, parks, gardens, and recreational areas. Children are at risk of
exposure when pesticides are used inside or outside in places where
children live, learn, and play, and in rural areas they can be exposed to
pesticide drift from fields that have been sprayed. Children employed in
agriculture or living in migrant farm camps are at risk of direct exposure
to pesticides. Diet is another major route of exposure because children are
exposed to residual levels of multiple pesticides on fruit and vegetables,
especially fruits and vegetables imported from countries where pesticide
use is heavier than in the United States. Children can be acutely overexposed to pesticides and clinically evident poisoning results. High-­dose
exposure to neurotoxic insecticides such as the organophosphate and carbamate pesticides can cause acute neurotoxicity. Both classes of pesticides
act through inhibition of acetylcholinesterase and are responsible for the
largest number of acute poisoning cases. Symptoms include meiosis, excess
salivation, abdominal cramping, vomiting, diarrhea, and muscle fasciculation. In severe cases, the child may experience loss of consciousness, cardiac arrhythmias, and death by respiratory arrest. The war gas sarin is an
organophosphate. See Chapter 94 for treatment of poisoning from drugs,
chemicals, and plants.
Pesticides can also cause a range of chronic toxic effects that include
polyneuropathy and central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction
(organophosphates), hormonal disruption and reproductive impairment (DDT, kepone, dibromochloropropane), cancer (aldrin, dieldrin, chlorophenoxy herbicides [2,4,5-­T]), and pulmonary fibrosis
(paraquat).
Prenatal exposure to the organophosphate pesticide chlorpyrifos at levels that produce no evident toxicity in pregnant women has
been associated with neurodevelopmental disability in children with
reduced cognitive function (lowered IQ), disordered executive function, and functional and anatomic changes in the brain discernible by
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Two classes of pesticides of concern are synthetic herbicides and
the neonicotinoid insecticides. Herbicides account for about 48%
of total pesticide use, and their application is increasing. A major
use of herbicides is in production of genetically modified (GM) food
crops, mainly corn and soybeans that are engineered to be tolerant
to glyphosate (Roundup), the most used herbicide worldwide. Herbicides can be sprayed on herbicide-­resistant crops throughout the
growing season, and glyphosate-­
resistant, “Roundup-­
Ready,” GM
crops account for more than 90% of all corn and soybeans planted in
the United States.
Studies of agricultural workers exposed occupationally to glyphosate
and other herbicides have found evidence for increased incidence of
non-­Hodgkin lymphoma. On the basis of these studies and convergent
results from toxicologic studies, the International Agency for Research
on Cancer has determined that glyphosate is a “probable human carcinogen.” Measurable levels of glyphosate metabolites are commonly
detected in the urine of Americans.
The neonicotinoids are a class of neurotoxic pesticides developed
in the 1980s to replace the organophosphates and carbamates. Use

4425

of neonicotinoids rose dramatically in the early 2000s, and the neonicotinoid insecticide, imidacloprid, is one of the most widely used
insecticides in the world. A growing body of evidence indicates that
neonicotinoids are toxic to bees and other pollinators at concentrations found currently in agricultural areas, and neonicotinoids are
suspected of contributing to bee colony collapse disorder. In 2020, the
EPA proposed a number of restrictions and precautions for neonicotinoid use. More than a dozen states have also introduced legislation
limiting neonicotinoids, and several European countries have banned
or severely restricted their use. Almost no information is available on
the possible developmental or pediatric toxicity of the neonicotinoids.
This is another example of a new pesticide in widespread use without
prior testing for health impacts on children.
Children’s exposures to pesticides can be reduced by minimizing
applications to lawns, gardens, schools, and playgrounds; adapting
techniques of integrated pest management; and reducing pesticide
applications to food crops. Pediatricians and parents can look to
resources including the National Pesticide Information Center (NPIC)
and the EPA for guidance on integrated pest management and safer
use of pesticides in and around the home. Consumption of organic
produce has been shown to dramatically reduce pesticide exposure in
school-­age children. Families can choose organic produce when available and cost-­competitive but should not avoid a diet rich in fruits and
vegetables if organic options are not feasible.

Persistent Organic Pollutants: Per-­and Poly-­
fluoroalkyl Substances and Chlorinated Hydrocarbons

Per-­and Poly-­fluoroalkyl Substances. Per-­and poly-­fluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of synthetic chemicals that have been used in
industrial processes and consumer products because they are resistant to
water and heat, and do not break down in the environment. In addition,
they can move through soil into drinking water sources and can build up
in fish and wildlife (bioaccumulate). They may make clothing stain resistant and also reduce friction. PFAS are also known as “forever chemicals”
due to their persistence in the environment, as their strong carbon-­fluorine
chain is resistant to degradation. NHANES has documented universal
exposure to some PFAS due to their ubiquity in consumer products (e.g.,
nonstick pans, take-­out food containers, water-­resistant textiles) and the
food chain. PFAS have also been detected in drinking water sources (both
municipal systems and private wells) across the United States. In March
2023, the EPA proposed a draft of enforceable maximum contaminant
levels (MCLs) for six different PFAS chemicals in public drinking water
systems; the final regulations are expected by the end of 2023. Several states
have enacted their own MCLs for various PFAS compounds; these state
MCLs will have to become at least as stringent as the federal MCLs (once
finalized).
Ingestion of contaminated food, water, or household dust is the
major route of exposure to these chemicals. PFAS can cross the placenta and enter breastmilk. The half-­life in the body can be days to
decades, depending on the specific PFAS compound. Epidemiologic
studies suggest a link between PFAS exposure and increased cholesterol levels, altered liver function tests, decreased antibody response to
childhood vaccines, increased risk of preeclampsia/high blood pressure during pregnancy, and cancer (kidney and testicular). Health outcome studies in highly exposed communities are ongoing.
Chlorinated Hydrocarbons. The chlorinated hydrocarbons are a
large and diverse class of chemicals that include insecticides (DDT),
plastics (polyvinyl chloride), electrical insulators (PCBs), and solvents
(trichloroethylene). Highly toxic chlorinated dioxins and furans are
formed during synthesis of chlorinated herbicides or as by-­products
of plastic combustion. These materials are widely dispersed and highly
persistent in the environment. Dioxins and furans are known human
carcinogens. Brominated flame retardants are used in carpets, furniture, and computers and are environmentally persistent.
The embryo, fetus, and young child are at particularly high risk of
injury from halogenated hydrocarbons. All of these compounds are
lipid soluble. They readily cross the placenta, and they accumulate
in breast milk. Intrauterine exposure to PCBs and brominated flame
retardants has been linked to persistent neurobehavioral dysfunction

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4426 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
in children manifested by cognitive impairment (reduced IQ), shortening of attention span, and behavioral disorders.
Consumption of fish from contaminated waters is a major source
of children’s exposure to PCBs. Children can be exposed in utero or
through breast milk. To protect children and pregnant women against
PCBs in fish, government agencies have issued advisories concerning
fish consumption for certain lakes and rivers. Combustion of medical
wastes containing polyvinyl chloride and the use of chlorine to bleach
paper products are major preventable sources of environmental dioxin
emissions and should be discouraged. Older fluorescent light ballasts
that were installed decades ago in schools in the United States are
another source of PCB exposure. PCB-­containing ballasts should be
removed from schools as soon as possible to prevent environmental
contamination. Removal must be performed by trained workers.

Endocrine Disruptors

Endocrine disruptors are synthetic chemicals that mimic, block, or
alter the actions of normal hormones such as estrogen, testosterone,
growth hormone, insulin, and thyroid hormone. Synthetic endocrine
disruptors are manufactured in volumes of millions of pounds per
year. They include phthalates, bisphenol A, perchlorate, certain pesticides, brominated flame retardants, certain metals, and dioxins. These
chemicals are widespread today in consumer products such as soaps,
shampoos, perfumes, and plastics. They are widely disseminated in the
environment and encountered in air, food, and drinking water.
Exposures to endocrine disruptors in early human development
are especially hazardous. Even extremely low-­dose exposures during critical early periods can lead to lasting impairments in organ
function and to increased risk of disease. Reproductive effects are one
consequence of early life exposures to endocrine disruptors. Endocrine disruption is implicated in the epidemiologic observations of
a trend toward earlier thelarche and menarche in females, with rising rates of testicular cancer and hypospadias, and with diminishing sperm counts. Among the most clearly documented reproductive
effects of early life exposures to endocrine disruptors are adenocarcinoma of the vagina in women and cryptorchidism in men whose
mothers took diethylstilbestrol (DES). Another well-­
documented
effect is shortening of the anogenital distance, a measure of in utero
feminization, in infant males whose mothers had elevated exposures
to phthalates during pregnancy.
Early life exposures to endocrine disruptors can have adverse effects on
brain development. Prenatal exposure to low molecular weight phthalates
is associated with shortening of attention span in children 4-­9 years old,
as well as with increased risk for autistic behaviors. Prenatal exposure to
bisphenol A has also been linked to behavioral anomalies.
Endocrine disruptors have been reported to have adverse impacts
on lipid metabolism and to increase the risk for obesity. Higher urinary levels of bisphenol A are associated with obesity-­related outcomes, such as cardiovascular disease, in a cross-­sectional analysis of
NHANES 2003-­2004 data in adults.
Early life exposures to endocrine disruptors, most notably DDT, are
linked with increased risk for cancer. A long-­term epidemiologic study
of women in California found that those who were exposed in utero
to high levels of DDT have increased risk for breast cancer in adult life
40-­50 years later.

Environmental Carcinogens

Leukemia and brain cancer, the two most common forms of pediatric malignancy in the United States, both increased in incidence
from 1972 to 2018, despite declining mortality. The cumulative
increase in incidence for childhood leukemia was more than 20%,
and for brain and CNS cancer more than 40%. In the same time
period, testicular cancer in young men, ages 15-­30 years, more
than doubled in incidence and is occurring at younger ages. These
increases are too rapid to be of genetic origin and are not likely due
to better diagnostic capabilities. They are most probably the result
of still undefined exposures in the environment. Cancer is now the
second-­leading cause of death in American children, surpassed
only by injuries.

Children may be exposed to carcinogenic pollutants in utero or after
birth. Children appear more sensitive than adults to certain chemical carcinogens and also to ionizing radiation (see Chapter 758). The
potential for chemical carcinogenesis in utero was initially recognized
with the discovery that clear cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina could
develop in young women who were exposed in utero to DES.
Carcinogenesis may be associated with exposures in the home and
community. Children of asbestos workers and children who have
grown up near asbestos plants have been found to have an elevated
incidence of mesothelioma. Children who attended elementary school
in communities containing synthetic rubber plants have been shown
to be at increased risk of leukemia as a result of their exposure to
1,3-­butadiene, a known human carcinogen and a major component of
synthetic rubber. Children who grow up on farms have elevated rates
of leukemia; pesticides are suspected of playing an etiologic role. Intrauterine exposure to trichloroethylene via contaminated drinking water
has been associated with an increased incidence of leukemia among
females living near an industrial facility and industrial waste site.

Routes of Exposure

Transplacental. Heavy metals such as lead and mercury, fat-­soluble

compounds such as PCBs and DDT, and endocrine disruptors such
as phthalates, readily cross the placenta. They may have serious and
irreversible toxic effects on the developing nervous, endocrine, and
reproductive organs, even at very low levels. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists have recognized the hazards of environmental exposures during pregnancy and provide detailed guidance
for counseling to reduce these exposures in their 2021 statement Reducing Prenatal Exposure to Toxic Environmental Agents (Table 259.2).
Water. Approximately 200 chemicals have been detected at various
levels in water supplies including contaminants like lead, solvents, pesticides, and emerging chemicals like PFAS. Lead is an especially common
contaminant. Water supplies are generally lead-­free at the source but can
become contaminated by lead that dissolves from lead pipes and from
lead-­containing plumbing fixtures. Lead is especially likely to dissolve
from pipes and plumbing when the water is acidic, as happened in Flint,
Table 759.2  Toxic Chemicals or Pollutants and Reported
Association with Adverse Reproductive
Health Outcomes*
CHEMICAL OR POLLUTANT
WITH REPORTED ADVERSE
ASSOCIATION

POTENTIAL HEALTH EFFECT

Antineoplastic drugs, bisphenol
A (BPA), cigarette smoke,
ethylene oxide, formaldehyde,
polybrominated diphenyl ether
(PBDE) flame retardants, solvents

Infertility and miscarriage

Air pollutants from fracking,
ambient air pollutants,
antineoplastic drugs,
cigarette smoke, ethylene
oxide, formaldehyde,
perfluorochemicals (PFAS),*
pesticides, phthalates, PBDEs,
toluene

Preterm birth and low
birthweight

Ambient air pollutants, BPA, lead,
mercury, pesticides, phthalates,
PBDE flame retardants,
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)

Neurodevelopmental
impairment

*Associations noted are from reports of animal and limited human studies. Although
there are reported associations between exposures and adverse obstetric outcomes,
an association does not necessarily mean that the exposure is a cause of the
outcome. More research is needed to understand if there is causality and, if so, at
what level of exposure or use of a specific product.
Modified from American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Committee on
Obstetric Practice. Reducing prenatal exposure to toxic environmental agents: ACOG
Committee Opinion, Number 832. Obstet Gynecol. 2021;138(1):e40–e54. Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 759 u Chemical Pollutants
Michigan, in 2014. The highest levels of lead occur in water that has been
standing in lead pipes overnight. It is wise therefore to run water for 2-­3
minutes each morning before making up infant formula. Solvents and
components of gasoline such as methyl tertiary-­butyl ether and benzene
are commonly encountered in groundwater. Chemical contaminants
from gas drilling can contaminate water in areas where fracking is taking
place. Herbicides, such as glyphosate and atrazine, are commonly found
contaminants in drinking water in agricultural areas.
In the United States, the EPA regulates approximately 90 drinking
water contaminants including organic chemicals, inorganic chemicals, radionuclides, and infectious agents in public water systems. The
municipal water systems are responsible for ensuring that the regulated
contaminants are below MCLs and will notify customers of any exceedance and steps to address the issue. Those families using private wells,
however, are responsible for testing their water on a regular basis. Families with well water can be directed to the EPA private well website or
their local health department for guidance on the recommended tests.
Air. Vehicular emissions are the major source of urban air pollution, notably ground-­
level ozone and particulate matter. Diesel
exhaust is a human carcinogen. Coal-­fired power plants are another
major source of outdoor air pollution. In rural areas, wood smoke
can contribute to air pollution. Pediatricians and parents can follow local air quality alerts that include recommendations to reduce
risk especially for sensitive groups (airnow.gov). Children living
in the vicinity of smelters and chemical production plants can be
exposed to toxic industrial emissions such as lead, benzene, and
1,3-­butadiene. Specific information about toxic air pollution release
in a community can be obtained via the Toxics Release Inventory
(www.epa.gov/toxics-­release-­inventory-­tri-­program).
Food. Many chemicals are intentionally added to food to improve
appearance, taste, texture, or preservation, but many such chemicals
have been poorly tested for potential toxicity. Residues of many pesticides are found in both raw and processed foods. Levels of pesticides
are lower in organic produce than in conventionally grown fruits and
vegetables. Children who consume organic produce have substantially
lower urinary pesticide levels than children who eat conventional produce. Elevated levels of methylmercury can be found in large predator
fish such as swordfish, shark, king mackerel, and tuna sushi; families
should be encouraged to follow fish advisories. Baby foods can contain
trace amounts of metals, and rice and rice-­based products (especially
those made of brown rice) can have inorganic arsenic.
Breast Milk. Breast milk provides many benefits to infants including protection from illness, reduction in allergic diseases like asthma,
and reduced risk of obesity, among many others. Breast milk can also
be a route of exposure to environmental chemicals including fat-­
soluble persistent organic pollutants, pesticides, and metals. In almost
all situations, the benefits of breastfeeding outweigh the risks of these
exposures, and numerous professional organizations support breast
milk as the first choice for infant feeding. In addition, chemical regulation can further reduce unnecessary exposure through this route.
Work Clothes. Illnesses in children sometimes may be traced
to contaminated dust from parents’ work clothes; toxicity from lead,
beryllium, dioxin, organophosphate pesticides, and asbestos has
occurred. Such exposure (termed fouling the nest) can be prevented by
providing facilities at work for changing and showering. If facilities are
not available, caregivers can be advised to change clothes and shoes
before returning home and wash work clothes separately from household laundry. Some work activities and hobbies that occur at home can
also expose children to toxins including metals like lead and solvents.
School. Children may be exposed in schools, kindergartens, and
nurseries to lead paint, molds, asbestos, tobacco smoke, pesticides, and
hazardous arts and crafts materials. Substantial opportunities for prevention exist in the school environment, and pediatricians are often
consulted for advice. The EPA has school related environmental health
materials (www.epa.gov/schools) that can be shared with stakeholders.
Child Labor. Four to five million children and adolescents in the
United States work for pay, and child labor is widespread around the
world. Working children are at high risk of physical trauma and injury.
They also may be exposed to a wide range of toxic chemicals, including

4427

pesticides in agriculture and lawn work, asbestos in construction and
building demolition, and benzene in pumping gasoline.

THE PHYSICIAN’S ROLE

Pediatricians have time and again played key roles in the initial recognition of diseases caused by toxic chemicals. Every pediatrician needs to be
an “alert clinician” open to the possibility of discovering new diseases in
children caused by hazardous exposures in the environment. In considering the origins of noninfectious disease, pediatricians should ask about the
home environment, parental occupation, unusual exposures, and neighborhood factories. An environmental cause is particularly likely when several unusual cases of disease or constellations of findings occur together.
Any adolescent with a traumatic injury may have been injured at work.
The history is the single most important instrument for obtaining information on environmental exposures (Table 759.3). Information about current and past exposures (including questions about work and travel to or
residence in developing countries) should be sought routinely for every
new patient. The age of the patient can help focus questions and provide
anticipatory guidance on key exposures of concern, such as screening
for common sources of lead exposure in young children. Patients with
asthma should be evaluated for exposure to common allergens (mold,
cockroaches, dust mites) and irritants (tobacco smoke, strong odors).
Children with neurodevelopmental disorders should be assessed for pica
and other behaviors that increase their risk of toxic exposures. Consider
targeted environmental health history questions in patients with illness of
unclear causation. Changes in patterns of exposure or new exposures may
be especially important. If suspicious information is elicited, more detailed
follow-­up should be pursued. Referral to a state or local health department
or to a Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit may be indicated
(https://www.pehsu.net/). Accurate diagnosis of an environmental cause
of disease can lead to better care of sick children and prevention of disease
in other children.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

759.1 Tobacco
Judith A. Groner
Cigarette smoking is the single most preventable cause of morbidity
and mortality, contributing to over 480,000 annual deaths in the United
States. The most common reason that people smoke is nicotine addiction, and people who start smoking at an earlier age are more likely to
develop a severe addiction than those who start when they are older. In
2022, 4.5% of middle school students and 16.5% of high school students
reported current tobacco use (see Chapter 157.2). While youth use a variety of tobacco products, e-­cigarettes are the most common. E-­cigarettes
work by heating liquid to produce an aerosol that is then inhaled into the
lungs; this process is called vaping. While the long-­term health effects
of vaping are still being evaluated, the 2019 E-­cigarette or Vaping Use-­
Associated Lung Injury (EVALI) epidemic drew attention to the dangers
associated with e-­cigarette use (see Chapter 450).

COMPOSITION OF SECONDHAND SMOKE AND
TOXICITIES

Along with active tobacco use, secondhand tobacco smoke (SHS)
exposure is a very serious health hazard for both children and adults.
SHS is a mixture of approximately 7,000 chemicals and is made up of
the mainstream smoke exhaled by the smoker and side-­stream smoke
expelled from the end of a lit tobacco product. At least 70 carcinogens
have been identified in SHS, along with 250 chemicals that are toxic to
the CNS, immune system, heart, and liver.
SHS also contains particulate matter, which is an independent health
hazard. Particulate matter is microscopic solid and liquid matter suspended in air, which can be inhaled and enter the circulation. The most
studied of these include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and
the tobacco-­specific nitrosamines, which are both carcinogenic. Most
particulate matter in side-­stream smoke is unfiltered by the smoker

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4428 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 759.3  Clinical Tools for Incorporating Environmental Health into Patient Care
Tips for implementing a focused environmental health history:

Resources and tools for clinical practice:

1.	Age: Patient age can help direct screening questions and
anticipatory guidance on key exposures of concern, such as
lead screening questions for young children. Refer to American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Bright Futures or the Pediatric
Environmental Health Toolkit for age-­specific information.
2.	Location: Local environmental conditions can help direct
environmental guidance. For example, in rural communities with
high prevalence of private wells for drinking water, families can be
counseled on the importance of routine well water testing.
3.	Symptoms: Consider environmental exposures in the differential
diagnosis. For example, carbon monoxide exposure should be on
the differential for families presenting with headaches and flulike
symptoms (afebrile, no cough).
4.	Asthma: assess for common environmental asthma triggers in the
home such as mold, cockroaches, mice, environmental tobacco
smoke, furry pets, cleaning chemicals, strong odors/fragrances
5.	Neurodevelopmental disorders: assess for pica behavior and
other risk factors that may increase the likelihood of exposures
(e.g., lead); assess for use of alternative medications

Environmental history forms:
• National Environmental Education Foundation (NEEF) has
a general environmental history and an asthma-­focused
environmental history (English and Spanish): www.neefusa.org/res
ource/pediatric-­environmental-­history
• World Health Organization (WHO) Paediatric Environmental
Health History (Green Page) provides a series of concise
questions to assess potential exposures: https://www.who.int/pub
lications/m/item/children-­s-­environmental-­record-­-­green-­page
Evidence-­based clinical resources:
• The Green Book: American Academy of Pediatrics. Pediatric
Environmental Health. 4th ed. Etzel RA, Balk SJ, eds. Elk Grove
Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2019.
• Pediatric Environmental Health Specialty Unit (PEHSU). One
PEHSU is located in each of the 10 federal regions in the
United States. The PEHSUs provide online classroom materials,
resources, and access to network of experts in pediatric and
reproductive environmental health: www.pehsu.net
• The Pediatric Environmental Health Toolkit is an online clinical
tool that providers can use to access information on common
exposures, including identification of sources of exposure and
provision of targeted anticipatory guidance: https://peht.ucsf.e
du.
• Bright Futures provides guidance for well child care for children
and adolescents (includes key environmental anticipatory
guidance): https://brightfutures.aap.org/.
• American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).
Reducing Prenatal Exposure to Toxic Environmental Agents: https
://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34259492/
Resources for patients:
• Prescriptions for Prevention are tools that link patients to
evidence-­based simple steps to reduce or prevent common
environmental exposures (English and Spanish): https://nyscheck.
org/rx
• National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS).
Environmental health topics: https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/to
pics/index.cfm

Components of environmental health history (can be adapted
based on patient scenario):
General home health and safety:
• Age and condition of home
(lead paint in pre-­1978 home)
• Carbon monoxide and fire
alarms
• Heat and cooking sources
(stove ventilation, safe space
heater use)
• Tobacco smoke
• Radon (test basement and
first/second floors)
• Cleaning products-­safe
storage and use (e.g., bleach)
Common indoor allergens:
• Water leaks/mold
• Pests (cockroaches, mice) and
pesticide use

Water and food:
• Drinking water source (well
water requires routine testing)
• Fish advisories
(methylmercury) for pregnant
persons and children
• Fresh produce (rinse well
before eating)
• Rice-­based products (vary
grains to reduce arsenic
exposure)
Jobs and hobbies:
• Caregiver jobs (contaminant
transfer from clothing, shoes)
• Adolescent jobs (safety)
• Hobbies in the home (paints,
chemicals)
• Sun protection outdoors
• Noise from headphones, toys

and is in the submicron (<1 μm diameter) range, meaning that it is
classified as fine particulate matter. These are smaller than the particles in mainstream smoke and can penetrate deeper into the lungs,
resulting in higher toxicity through oxidative stress and inflammation.
Short-­and long-­term exposure to fine particulate matter contributes
to the aggravation of asthma and other respiratory diseases, lung and
other cancers, cardiovascular disease, and death.
SHS concentration in the indoor environment depends on the number
of cigarettes smoked in a period, the volume of the room, the ventilation
rate, and other processes that eliminate pollutants from the air. There are
multiple mechanisms by which SHS causes injury to the respiratory tract,
and injury to the cardiovascular system is due to endothelial cell dysfunction due to smoke exposure and its prothrombotic effects.

THIRDHAND SMOKE

Thirdhand smoke (THS) was defined in 2011 as consisting of the residual
tobacco smoke pollutants that remain on surfaces and in dust after tobacco
has been smoked. These toxins are reemitted into the gas phase or react
with oxidants and other compounds in the environment to yield secondary pollutants. These residual pollutants can be detected in the indoor
environment well after being generated. About half the particulate matter
from SHS is still airborne after 5-­6 hours. Many chemicals, such as nicotine and some PAHs, exist in both the gaseous and the particulate phase
of SHS. Classified as “semi-­volatile,” their ability to change form according to environmental conditions means that they remain detectable in the
indoor environment for longer periods after active smoking has ceased.
These components in dust and on surfaces can be ingested, inhaled, or

even absorbed through the skin. The health implications of THS are not
well understood, but there is growing evidence both in vitro and in vivo of
health harms of THS exposure, particularly respiratory symptoms. Young
children are at higher risk of health issues due to THS absorption because
of their hand to mouth behaviors, crawling near surfaces, time spent in the
home, and increased respiratory rate.

TOBACCO USE AND EXPOSURE IS A HEALTH RISK
DISPARITY

Tobacco use, and hence childhood exposure, is found disproportionately among socially disadvantaged low-­income populations, who can
least afford tobacco and SHS-­related illness and evidenced-­based treatment for nicotine addiction. There has been a profound decrease in
smoking rates among the middle and upper classes within the United
States since the 1960s (83% decrease), but the rate of decrease is much
less (39%) among lower income groups. The smoking rate for the overall U.S. population is approximately 12.5%, but it is as high as 32%
among adults with a high school equivalency degree. Because of these
disparities in smoking rates among adults, children born into low-­
income homes are more likely to be exposed to SHS. More than 38% of
U.S. children age 3-­11 years were exposed to tobacco smoke from 2017
to 2018, based on a biologic marker of exposure, serum cotinine levels.
Children from low-­income homes have the highest rates of biologically
measured SHS exposure; for every decrease in family income ratio,
serum cotinine levels increase by 1.18 ng/L among children. Having
a parent who smokes has also been shown to be an independent risk
factor for food insecurity in children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 759 u Chemical Pollutants
MATERNAL SMOKING DURING PREGNANCY
AND TOBACCO SMOKE EXPOSURE DURING
PREGNANCY

The effects of maternal smoking on the fetus are profound and can be
divided into pregnancy-­related and long-­term effects. Fetal exposure is
one of the most important modifiable risk behaviors for childhood and
long-­term health.

Pregnancy-­Related Effects

Maternal smoking increases the risk of placenta-­associated complications
of pregnancy, with an increased rate of placental abruption and placenta
previa among maternal smokers. Both active maternal smoking and secondhand maternal tobacco smoke exposure have been shown to reduce
birthweight and to increase the risk of preterm birth. In utero tobacco
exposure from either maternal active tobacco product use or maternal SHS exposure increases the rate of stillbirth. Smoking both during
and after pregnancy is a risk factor for sudden infant death syndrome
(SIDS); one study found that any smoking during pregnancy was associated in a doubling of SIDS risk and that there was a linear correlation
between the average number of cigarettes smoked daily and an increased
risk for SIDS. These associations are modifiable by public policy. Several
countries in Europe have shown decreased perinatal complications after
comprehensive smoke-­free laws; within the United States, pregnancy
complications and SIDS are inversely related to tobacco taxation levels.

Long-­Term Effects

Maternal smoking in early pregnancy is considered causal for orofacial
clefts (Surgeon General Report 2014).
Both active smoking during pregnancy and SHS exposure of the
mother increases the child’s later risk of being overweight or obese.
This finding may appear surprising due to the long-­known relationship between smoking during pregnancy and low birthweight. This
relationship has been shown in multiple epidemiologic studies and is
robust to adjustment for potential confounders, such as parental body
mass index (BMI), breastfeeding, family diet, and lifestyle.
Maternal smoking during pregnancy has been associated with both an
increased risk of learning problems and neurobehavioral issues during
childhood. The adverse effects of prenatal smoking on child neurodevelopment include poor language development and reduction in cognitive
functioning. Prenatal exposure to smoking may also reduce the child’s
motor performance, mental development (measured by the Bayley Scales
of Infant Development), IQ scores, and language development through
age 3 years. This exposure may also increase the risks of several child
behavioral problems, including externalization of aggressive and hyperactive behavior, prolonged periods of verbal or physical aggression and
socially undesirable behavior (conduct disorder) throughout childhood,
and delinquency in later childhood. In one study, a dose-­response relationship with increasing severity of poor school performance was related
to the number of cigarettes the mother smoked during pregnancy.

Maternal Smoking During Pregnancy and Lung
Development

Smoking during pregnancy is associated with poor lung growth and
function in the offspring and with a greater risk for wheezing between
age 2-­4 years. According to the Surgeon General Report (2014), there is
sufficient evidence to consider this relationship to be causal.

POSTNATAL SECONDHAND SMOKE EXPOSURE—
EFFECTS ON THE CHILD
Respiratory

Children exposed to SHS have a higher rate of asthma prevalence and
greater asthma severity. The Surgeon General Report (2006) concluded
that there is a causal relationship between parental smoking and cough,
phlegm, wheezing, and breathlessness, along with asthma, among school-­
age children. Children with SHS exposure have a weakened response to
inhaled corticosteroids. Children with asthma who are SHS-­exposed are
more likely to have an acute care visit, an overnight hospital stay, and a
higher number of hospital admissions than children with asthma and
no SHS exposure. The rate of hospital readmissions for asthma has been

4429

associated with the level of the child’s saliva cotinine, a biomarker of smoke
exposure, and this is true even at very low levels of exposure.
Tobacco smoke exposure is a cause of lower respiratory tract infection in children. Findings of the Surgeon General in 2006 were updated
by a systemic review of parental and household smoking and risk of
lower respiratory tract infections in infancy in 2011. The strongest relationship was for bronchiolitis, where the risk of any household smoke
exposure was increased in the first two years of life.
SHS exposure during childhood increases the rate of middle ear disease, including acute, recurrent otitis media and chronic middle ear
effusion. The Surgeon General Report (2006) rated this evidence as
sufficient to infer a causal relationship between parental smoking and
middle ear disease in children.

Cardiovascular Effects

Tobacco smoke exposure during adulthood has been linked to an increased
risk of cardiovascular disease. Evidence links childhood exposure to findings of preclinical atherosclerosis. These include increased carotid intima-­
media thickness and decreased flow-­mediated dilation, both indirect tests
for preclinical changes leading to atherosclerosis during adulthood. Other
findings have included increased inflammation as measured by C-­reactive
protein, abnormal lipid profiles, higher blood pressure, and increased rates
of metabolic syndrome among SHS-­exposed children and youth.

Infection

Childhood exposure to SHS is related to increased rates of invasive
meningococcal disease in children less than 5 years old. SHS in the
home doubled the risk of invasive meningococcal disease with some
evidence of a dose-­response relationship. The strongest effect was seen
in children under 5 years, with SHS exposure more than doubling the
rate of meningococcal disease. This relationship was seen both with
prenatal smoking and postnatal exposure.
SHS exposure has also been shown to increase the severity of influenza among children hospitalized for the disease. Children with SHS
exposure were 4.7 times more likely to be admitted to intensive care
and had a 70% longer length of stay than nonexposed children, after
controlling for multiple potential confounding factors.

Healthcare Utilization

Children and teens age 3-­19 years who are SHS-­exposed had higher
healthcare utilization compared with nonexposed peers based on an
analysis of NHANES data from 2009–2012. Children with high SHS
exposure based on serum cotinine were almost three times more
likely to have an overnight hospital stay and two times as likely to
have a higher number of total hospital admissions as children with no
exposure.

Special Vulnerable Pediatric Populations

There is evidence that SHS exposure exacerbates disease processes
among children with significant chronic health conditions. Children with sickle cell disease who are exposed to SHS have increased
morbidity, specifically increased rates of emergency department
visits, and hospitalizations for vasoocclusive crisis and acute chest
syndrome (see Chapter 511.1). In addition, tobacco smoke exposure is also associated with pulmonary function abnormalities
among children with sickle cell disease, independent of their baseline disease.
Children with cystic fibrosis (CF) are another vulnerable population in which SHS exposure presents an additive threat to overall health. Core health issues for this group of children include
problems with growth, lung function, and pulmonary infections
(see Chapter 454). SHS-­exposed children with CF had decreased
growth between 4 and 12 months compared with non–SHS exposed
infants. Furthermore, tobacco smoke exposure was associated with
increased bronchodilator responsiveness and air trapping, and with
increased methicillin-­resistant Staphylococcus aureus and anaerobic
growth on respiratory culture. Tobacco smoke exposure can be considered a modifiable risk factor for children with sickle cell disease
and CF.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4430 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
TREATMENT FOR TOBACCO USE AND
SECONDHAND TOBACCO SMOKE EXPOSURE

There is no risk-­free level of youth tobacco use or SHS exposure. Thus the
best method to treat tobacco use and SHS exposure is to eliminate this
exposure by helping adolescents and their caregivers quit smoking. Methods to reduce exposure such as “smoking outside” or wearing a “smoking
jacket” have not been shown to eliminate biochemically confirmed SHS
exposure. A meta-­analysis of six controlled trials aimed specifically at SHS
exposure reduction for children (not parental smoking cessation) showed
some reduction in tobacco smoke pollution post intervention. However,
all homes had significant tobacco-­related air pollution at the end of the
study period.
The pediatric office has long been considered an excellent venue for
pediatricians to screen for youth tobacco use as well as children’s SHS
exposure and to intervene with youth and their caregivers. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends that providers:
1.	Inquire about tobacco use and tobacco smoke exposure as part of
health supervision visits and visits for diseases that may be caused or
exacerbated by tobacco smoke exposure.
2.	Include tobacco use prevention as part of anticipatory guidance.
3.	Address parent/caregiver tobacco dependence as part of pediatric
healthcare.
4.	Offer tobacco dependence treatment and/or referral to adolescents
who want to stop smoking.
The United States Preventative Services Task Force also recommends that
primary care clinicians provide school-­age children and adolescents who
have not started to use tobacco with interventions (including education or
brief counseling) to prevent initiation of tobacco use. The “Ask-­Counsel-­
Treat” (ACT) model developed by the AAP provides tips on addressing
youth tobacco use in the office (available at https://www.aap.org/en/patient-­
care/tobacco-­control-­and-­prevention/youth-­tobacco-­cessation/tobacco-­
use-­considerations-­for-­clinicians/); it is recommended that screening
begin at age 11. The Clinical Effort Against Secondhand Smoke Exposure
(CEASE) is a program that trains pediatricians and their office staff to systematically provide cessation counseling and interventions to caregivers
who smoke. The CEASE model is (1) ask if anyone in the home or who
cares for the child smokes; (2) assist the patient or caregiver with quitting
by providing brief counseling, pharmacotherapy, or appropriate referrals;
and (3) refer the smoker to evidence based cessation treatments, including telephone-­based Quitlines or Text to Quit services. The CEASE model
(found at https://www.massgeneral.org/children/cease-­tobacco) involves
training pediatricians to provide smoking cessation pharmacotherapy to
caregivers who wish to quit smoking; it includes tools to both identify caregivers who smoke and facilitate pediatric healthcare providers’ delivery of
counseling, medications, and referral for tobacco treatment.
Despite the AAP recommendations for pediatricians to incorporate
these methods into practice, a meta-­analysis in 2016 of controlled trials in
routine healthcare settings of child SHS exposure reduction did not show
an intervention effect. However, three controlled trials of maternal postpartum smoking relapse prevention did demonstrate beneficial outcomes
of the intervention.
Decreasing smoking initiation among youth will prevent the children
of the future from SHS exposure. Ninety percent of smokers initiate
use before 19 years of age, and 80% of youth who are smokers persist in
smoking in adulthood. Of those, half will die earlier than their nonsmoking peers. After many years of individual states working to enact stricter
tobacco laws, new federal legislation known as Tobacco 21 was signed in
2019 that raised the minimum age for sale of tobacco products from 18
to 21 years nationwide. By increasing the age of tobacco purchase to 21
years, there is hope that a whole generation of smoking can be prevented.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

759.2 Marijuana Smoke Exposure
Karen M. Wilson
Unlike tobacco smoke exposure, which has long been recognized as
a cause of morbidity and mortality among nonsmokers, marijuana

smoke exposure is far less well studied. In 2021, 13.2 million persons
age 12 years or older used marijuana on a daily or almost daily basis in
the past 12 months, an increase from the 5.7 million daily or almost
daily users in 2013 (see Chapter 157.3). The use of marijuana has been
increasing in both acceptability and legality in the past 20 years. Current use of marijuana is more common among males and younger
adults (18-­34 years vs 35 years or older), and those with less than a high
school degree. As of 2023, 38 states allow the legal use of marijuana for
medical reasons, and 24 states plus Washington DC and Guam have
legalized its recreational use. Analysis of poison control center calls for
exposure to marijuana for children under 6 years of age showed an
increase of 148% from 2006 to 2013; from 4.2/1 million children to
10.4/1 million. Tobacco-­smoking parents with young children residing
in the home are four times more likely to use marijuana as compared
with nontobacco smoking parents. About 38% of young children in the
United States are exposed to tobacco smoke, compared to an estimate
of 15% of children exposed to marijuana smoke. Studies examining the
presence of biomarkers of marijuana smoke exposure have found an
exposure prevalence of 16% in young children hospitalized for bronchiolitis in Colorado, and 21% in children 0-­3 years being seen at a
clinic in New York City.

COMPONENTS OF MARIJUANA SMOKE

While marijuana can also be aerosolized or ingested as hash oil or leaf,
combusted marijuana is still the most common form. A recent analysis of data from the U.S. National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey (NHANES) finds that daily marijuana users have higher levels
of combustion biomarkers (e.g., volatile organic compounds and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) than nonusers. In addition to the
particulates and other chemicals of combustion, marijuana comprises
two primary active chemicals: Δ9-­tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and
cannabidiol (CBD). Exposure to combustion products likely extends to
adjacent nonusers, as has been shown for tobacco smoke. Most states
with legal marijuana use do not have any restrictions on combustible
marijuana use in the presence of children.

IMPACT OF MARIJUANA SMOKE EXPOSURE

While there is clear research on the dangers of secondhand tobacco
smoke (SHS), there have been very few studies examining the impact
of marijuana smoke exposure. Secondhand marijuana smoke contains particulate matter that is known to be harmful when inhaled,
in addition to other toxic and carcinogenic chemicals such as volatile
organic compounds, PAHs, and aromatic amines. Studies in adults
have demonstrated that it is possible to get a “contact high” from
intense exposure. Even brief exposures have been found to impair
vascular endothelial function in animal models. Children can be
exposed to secondhand and thirdhand marijuana smoke when parents or other household contacts smoke indoors, similar to children
living with tobacco smokers. Also similar to tobacco, children could
be exposed to marijuana smoke through incursions from neighboring apartments; in a New York City sample, 31% of parents reported
marijuana incursions, whereas 34% reported tobacco incursions.
Neonates can be exposed to marijuana prenatally or through breast
milk. Prenatal exposure has been linked to growth restriction and
neonatal intensive care admissions, as well as behavioral issues such
as impulsivity. Prenatal exposure has also been linked to impaired
executive functioning in young adulthood. One study examined
the role of indoor cannabis smoke and health; although they found
increased particulates in homes with cannabis use, there was no statistically significant difference in health outcomes.

TREATMENT

In the absence of convincing data showing that marijuana is not harmful, parents should be counseled to avoid exposing their children to
marijuana smoke, to lock marijuana in a safe place out of reach of any
children, to avoid edibles in appealing or non–child proof packaging, and to be cautious about their own level of impairment if they do
choose to use legal marijuana.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 760 u Heavy Metal Intoxication 4431

Chapter 760

Heavy Metal Intoxication
Prashant V. Mahajan
Lead, mercury, arsenic, and cadmium, four of the World Health Organization’s (WHO) “Ten chemicals of greatest public health concern,”
are the heavy metals posing the greatest threats to humans. The most
prevalent of these exposures is lead (see Chapter 761).
Heavy metal intoxication results in multiorgan toxicity through
widespread disruption of vital cellular functions. A meticulous history of environmental exposure may be necessary to correctly identify
heavy metals as the source of the protean manifestations associated
with such exposure. Arsenic exposure can occur from contaminated
food or water; globally, more than 140 million people are estimated
to be chronically exposed to drinking water containing high arsenic
levels. Mercury exposure occurs primarily through food; fish is a major
source of methyl mercury exposure.

ARSENIC

Arsenic is a metalloid that exists in four forms: elemental arsenic, arsine
gas, inorganic arsenic salts (pentavalent arsenate form or trivalent arsenite form), and organic arsenic compounds. Toxic manifestations are
higher in the more soluble and higher-­valence compounds. Arsine gas
is the most toxic form of arsenic. Mass poisonings from exposure to
arsenic have occurred throughout history, including one in 1998 in
Wakayama, Japan, in which 70 people were poisoned. Children may be
poisoned after exposure to inorganic arsenic found in pesticides, herbicides, dyes, homeopathic medicines, and certain contaminated folk
remedies from China, India, and Southeast Asia (see Chapter 94). Soil
deposits contaminate artesian well water. Groundwater contamination
with arsenic is a common problem in developing countries and has
been reported to be a common well contaminant in many areas of the
United States as well (Fig. 760.1). The Southwest has the highest arsenic
concentrations in the country with more than 16% of sampled wells
exceeding the maximum contaminant level. Food products (e.g., rice,

organic brown rice syrup, fruit juices) cooked in contaminated water
may absorb arsenic, thus concentrating it in the food (Fig. 760.2). The
WHO and United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have
set 10 μg/L as the upper limit of safety. In many parts of Asia and South
America, this limit is frequently exceeded. Arsenic concentrations in
a quarter of the wells in Bangladesh exceed 50 μg/L, and 35-­77 million of the 125 million inhabitants of Bangladesh regularly consume
arsenic-­
contaminated water. Occupational exposure may occur in
industries involved in the manufacturing, mining, smelting, or refining of glass, pottery, electronic and semiconductor components, and
lasers. Although arsenic is no longer produced in the United States, it
is produced in many countries and is imported into the United States
for industrial use. Organic arsenic compounds may be found in seafood, pesticides, and some veterinary pharmaceuticals. In contrast to
mercury, the organic forms of arsenic found in seafood are nontoxic.

Pharmacokinetics

Elemental arsenic is insoluble in water and bodily fluids, and thus is insignificantly absorbed and nontoxic. Inhaled arsine gas is rapidly absorbed
through the lungs. The inorganic arsenic salts are well absorbed through
the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, and skin. The organic arsenic compounds
are well absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract. After acute exposure,
arsenic initially is bound to the protein portion of hemoglobin in the red
blood cells (RBCs) and rapidly distributed to all tissues. Inorganic arsenic is
methylated and is eliminated predominantly by the kidneys, with approximately 95% excreted in the urine and 5% excreted in the bile. Most of the
arsenic is eliminated in the first few days, with the remainder slowly excreted
over a period of several weeks. Arsenic concentrates in hair, nails, and skin.
Arsenic can also accumulate in the fetus, as it can cross the placenta.
Measurement of the distance of Mees lines (transverse white striae on
the nail) from the nailbed can provide an estimate of time of exposure
(nails grow at the rate of 0.4 mm/day) (Fig. 760.3).

Pathophysiology

After exposure to arsine gas, absorbed arsine enters RBCs and is oxidized to arsenic dihydride and elemental arsenic. Complexing of these
derivatives with red cell sulfhydryl groups results in cell membrane
instability and massive hemolysis. The inorganic arsenic salts poison enzymatic processes vital to cellular metabolism. Trivalent arsenic binds to sulfhydryl groups, resulting in decreased production of

Arsenic concentrations in at least 25% of
samples exceed:
50 mg/L

5

1

10

3

Insufficient data

Fig. 760.1 U.S. Geological Survey map of
arsenic in groundwater. Groundwater may
also contain elevated concentrations of arsenic from agricultural runoff, contamination from runoff from wood preservatives
containing arsenic, improperly disposed
arsenical chemicals, or mining. For the latest on
the US Geological survey: https://www.usgs.
gov/mission-areas/water-resources/science/
arsenic-and-drinking-water#overview.
(Modified from Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry: Arsenic toxicity.
What Are the Routes of Exposure for Arsenic?
Fig 1. https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/csem/
arsenic/what_routes.html.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Mean concentrations of urinary
inorganic arsenic and its major
metabolites MMA and DMA (µg/L)

4432 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
14.0

12.84 (±10.6)
n = 24

12.0

8.0
6.0

11.19 (±5.73)
n = 102

8.86 (±4.60)
n = 112

10.0

9.18 (±4.95)
n = 76

8.00 (±4.65)
n = 137

7.07 (±3.36)
n = 115
6.68 (±3.42)
n = 1522

Table 760.1  Effects of Arsenic on Organ Systems
ORGAN SYSTEM

EFFECTS OF ARSENIC

Gastrointestinal system

Submucosal vesicles, watery or bloody
diarrhea, severe hematemesis,
pancreatitis, jaundice, toxic hepatitis

Cardiovascular system

Reduced myocardial contractility,
prolonged QT intervals,
tachyarrhythmias, torsades de pointes,
pericarditis
Vasodilation, hypotension, shock

Kidneys

Hematuria, proteinuria, oliguria, renal
failure

Nervous system

Toxic encephalopathy with seizures,
headache, cerebral edema, and coma
Chronic exposure: peripheral painful
sensorimotor neuropathy, paresthesias

Hematologic and
lymphatic system

Anemia, leukopenia, and
thrombocytopenia; acute hemolysis with
arsine gas, basophilic stippling

Liver

Fatty degeneration with central necrosis

Skin

Desquamation, alopecia, hyperkeratosis,
nail changes (Mees lines), brown
pigmentation
Chronic exposure: hyperkeratosis,
hyperpigmentation

Teratogenic

Neural tube defects in the fetus

Oncologic

Urologic cancer, other malignancies

4.0
0

0.5

1

2

3

4-6

7+

Servings of cooked rice (1/4 cup) per day

Fig. 760.2 Mean concentrations of urinary inorganic arsenic and its

major metabolites monomethylarsonic acid (MMA) and dimethylarsinic
acid (DMA) by categories of rice intake in children ages 6-­17, National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2003-­2008, excluding subjects with recent seafood consumption. (From Lai PY, Cottingham KL, Steinmaus C, et al. Arsenic and rice: Translating research to
address health care providers’ needs. J Pediatr. 2015;167[4]:797–803.
Fig. 1.)

Fig. 760.3 Mees lines. Transverse white bands are clearly visible on
the nails. (From Chauhan S, D’Cruz S, Singh R, et al. Mees’ lines. Lancet.
2008;372[9647]:1410.)

adenosine triphosphate through the inhibition of enzyme systems such
as the pyruvate dehydrogenase and α-­ketoglutarate complexes. Pentavalent arsenic may be biotransformed to trivalent arsenic or substituted for phosphate in the glycolytic pathway, resulting in uncoupling
of oxidative phosphorylation.

Clinical Manifestations

Arsine gas is colorless, odorless, nonirritating, and highly toxic. Inhalation causes no immediate symptoms. After a latent period of 2-­24 hours,
exposed individuals experience massive hemolysis, malaise, headache,
weakness, dyspnea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, hepatomegaly,
pallor, jaundice, hemoglobinuria, and renal failure (Table 760.1). Acute
ingestion of arsenic produces gastrointestinal toxicity within minutes
to hours and is manifested as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and
diarrhea. Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis with extensive fluid loss and
third spacing may result in hypovolemic shock. Cardiovascular toxicity includes QT interval prolongation, polymorphous ventricular
tachycardia, congestive cardiomyopathy, pulmonary edema, and cardiogenic shock. Acute neurologic toxicity includes delirium, seizures,
cerebral edema, encephalopathy, and coma. Lethal doses of arsenates
are 5-­50 mg/kg; lethal doses of arsenites are <5 mg/kg.

Late sequelae include hematuria, proteinuria, and acute kidney
injury. A delayed sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy may appear
days to weeks after acute exposure, secondary to axonal degeneration.
Neuropathy manifests as painful dysesthesias followed by diminished
vibratory, pain, touch, and temperature sensation; decreased deep tendon reflexes; and in the most severe cases, an ascending paralysis with
respiratory failure mimicking Guillain-­Barré syndrome (see Chapter
656). Adult survivors of infant arsenic poisoning experience higher
mortality from disorders of the nervous system compared with adults
without such exposure.
Subacute toxicity is characterized by prolonged fatigue, malaise,
weight loss, headache, chronic encephalopathy, peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy, leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, chronic
cough, and gastroenteritis. Mees lines in the nails become apparent 1-­2
months after exposure in approximately 5% of patients. Dermatologic
findings include alopecia, oral ulceration, peripheral edema, a pruritic
macular rash, and desquamation.
Chronic arsenic toxicity causes significant morbidity in children
resulting in skin lesions, lung disease, and deficits in intellectual function. Chronic exposure to low levels of arsenic is usually from environmental or occupational sources. Over the course of years, dermatologic
lesions develop, including hyperpigmentation, hypopigmentation,
hyperkeratoses (especially on the palms and soles), squamous and
basal cell carcinomas, and Bowen disease (cutaneous squamous cell
carcinoma in situ). Encephalopathy and peripheral neuropathy may
be present. Hepatomegaly, hypersplenism, noncirrhotic portal fibrosis, and portal hypertension occur. Blackfoot disease is an obliterative
arterial disease of the lower extremities associated with chronic arsenic exposure that has been described in Taiwan. Carcinogenicity of
chronic arsenic exposure is reflected in increased rates of cancers of
the skin, lung, liver, bladder, and kidney as well as of angiosarcomas.
Arsenic is carcinogenic, possibly through epigenetic dysregulation. The
effects of prenatal exposure to arsenic are uncertain but may include
low birthweight.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 760 u Heavy Metal Intoxication 4433
Laboratory Findings

The diagnosis of arsenic intoxication is based on characteristic clinical
findings, a history of exposure, and elevated urinary arsenic values, the
last of which confirm the exposure. A spot urine arsenic level should
be determined for symptomatic patients before chelation, although initially the result may be negative. Because urinary excretion of arsenic is
intermittent, definitive diagnosis depends on a 24-­hour urine collection.
Concentrations greater than 50 μg/L in a 24-­hour urine specimen are
consistent with arsenic intoxication (Table 760.2). Urine specimens must
be collected in metal-­free containers. Ingestion of seafood containing
nontoxic arsenobetaine and arsenocholine can cause elevations of urinary arsenic. Blood arsenic levels rarely are helpful because of their high
variability and the rapid clearance of arsenic from the blood in acute
poisonings. Elevated arsenic values in the hair or nails must be interpreted cautiously because of the possibility of external contamination.
Abdominal radiographs may demonstrate ingested radiopaque arsenic.
Later in the course of illness, a complete blood cell count may show
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukocytosis, followed by leukopenia,
karyorrhexis, and basophilic stippling of RBCs. The serum concentrations of creatinine, bilirubin, and transaminases may be elevated; urinalysis may show proteinuria, pyuria, and hematuria; and examination
of the cerebrospinal fluid may show protein elevations.

MERCURY

Mercury exists in three forms: elemental mercury, inorganic mercury
salts, and organic mercury (Table 760.3). Elemental mercury is present in thermometers, sphygmomanometers, barometers, batteries, gold
or silver smelting processes, and some latex paints produced before
1991. Workers in industries producing these products may expose
their children to the toxin when mercury is brought home on contaminated clothing. Vacuuming of carpets contaminated with mercury and
breaking of mercury fluorescent light bulbs may result in elemental
mercury vapor exposure. Severe inhalation poisonings have resulted
from attempts to separate gold from gold ore by heating mercury
and forming a gold-­mercury amalgam. Elemental mercury has been
used in folk remedies by Asian and Mexican populations for chronic
stomach pain, by Latin Americans and Caribbean natives in occult
practices, and as a skin-­lightening agent. Dental amalgams containing
elemental mercury release trace amounts of mercury. An expert panel
for the National Institutes of Health concluded that existing scientific
evidence does not indicate that dental amalgams pose a health risk and
should not be replaced merely to decrease mercury exposure. A 2009
WHO expert panel concluded that a global near-­term ban on amalgam
would be problematic for public and dental health. However, this committee recommended that alternatives to amalgam should be sought as
part of a phase-­out of the use of mercury-­containing amalgams.
Inorganic mercury salts are found in pesticides, disinfectants, antiseptics, pigments, dry batteries, and explosives and as preservatives
in some medicinal preparations. Organic mercury in the diet, especially fish containing methyl mercury, is a major source of mercury
exposure among the general population. Industries that may produce
mercury-­containing effluents include chlorine and caustic soda production, mining and metallurgy, electroplating, chemical and textile
manufacturing, paper and pharmaceutical manufacturing, and leather
tanning. Mercury compounds in the environment are methylated to

methyl mercury by soil and water microorganisms. Methyl mercury in
the water rapidly accumulates in fish (swordfish, king mackerel, fresh
tuna, tile fish, shark) and other aquatic organisms, which are in turn
consumed by humans. To address concerns that maternal consumption of large quantities of fish during pregnancy may expose the fetus
to concentrations of mercury with adverse consequences, the longitudinal Seychelles Child Development Study has been ongoing since the
late 1980s. The first cohort of the study involved nearly 800 mother–
child pairs, with subsequent cohorts enrolled. Despite a high maternal
fish intake (mean of 12 fish meals per week), follow-­up of children at
least through 9 years of age has revealed no consistent adverse developmental effects. Well-­known large outbreaks of methyl mercury intoxication include the incidents in Japan in the 1950s (Minamata disease,
from consumption of contaminated seafood) and in Iraq in 1971 (from
consumption of grain treated with a methyl mercury fungicide).
Thimerosal is a mercury-­containing preservative used in some vaccines. Thimerosal contains 49.6% mercury by weight and is metabolized to ethyl mercury and thiosalicylate. During an ongoing review
of biologic products in response to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Modernization Act of 1997, the FDA determined that
infants who received thimerosal-­containing vaccines at multiple visits might have been exposed to more mercury than recommended by
federal guidelines. As a precautionary measure, the American Academy of Pediatrics, American Academy of Family Physicians, Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, and U.S. Public Health
Service issued a joint recommendation in 1999 that thimerosal be
removed from vaccines as quickly as possible. In the United States, thimerosal has been removed from all vaccines in the recommended childhood immunization schedule. Infants and children who have received
thimerosal-­containing vaccines do not need to undergo blood, urine,
or hair testing for mercury because the concentrations of mercury
would be quite low and would not require treatment. The larger risks
of not vaccinating children far outweigh any known risk of exposure
to thimerosal-­containing vaccines. Studies do not demonstrate a link
between thimerosal-­containing vaccines and autism spectrum disorders (see Chapter 58), and no evidence supports a change in the standard of practice regarding administration of thimerosal-­containing
vaccines in areas of the world where they are used. A rise in blood
mercury levels following a single dose of hepatitis vaccine was seen in
preterm infants, but the clinical significance is unknown.

Pharmacokinetics

Inhaled elemental mercury vapor is 80% absorbed by the lungs and is
distributed rapidly to the central nervous system because of its high
lipid solubility. The elemental mercury is oxidized by catalase to the
mercuric ion, which is the reactive form that causes cellular toxicity.
Elemental mercury liquid is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract, with less than 0.1% being absorbed. The half-­life of elemental
mercury in the tissues is approximately 60 days, with most of the excretion occurring in the urine.
Inorganic mercury salts are approximately 10% absorbed from the
gastrointestinal tract and cross the blood-­brain barrier to a lesser
extent than elemental mercury. Mercuric salts are more soluble than
mercurous salts and therefore produce greater toxicity. Elimination
occurs primarily in the urine, with a half-­life of approximately 40 days.

Table 760.2  Acceptable and Toxic Levels of Arsenic and Mercury
ARSENIC

MERCURY

Molecular weight

74.9 Da

200.59 Da

Acceptable blood level

<5 μg/L (<0.665 nmol/L)

<10 μg/L (<50 nmol/L)

Acceptable urine level

<50 μg/L (<6.65 nmol/L) 24-­hr urine sample

<20 μg/L (<100 nmol/L)

Intervene at blood level
Intervene at urine level

>35 μg/L (>175 nmol/L)
>100 μg/L (>13.3 nmol/L) 24-­hr urine sample

>150 μg/L (>750 nmol/L)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4434 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 760.3  Differential Characteristics of Mercury Exposure
ELEMENTAL

INORGANIC (SALT)

ORGANIC (ALKYL)

Primary route of exposure

Inhalation

Oral

Oral

Primary tissue distribution

CNS, kidney

Blood (transient, acute), kidney,
CNS (delayed)

CNS, kidney, liver, blood, hair

Clearance

Kidney, GI

Kidney, GI

Methyl: GI
Aryl: kidney, GI

CLINICAL EFFECTS
CNS

Tremor

Tremor, erethism (irritability)

Paresthesias, ataxia, tremor, tunnel
vision, dysarthria

Pulmonary

+++

—

—

Gastrointestinal

+

+++ (caustic)

+

Renal

+

+++ (acute tubular necrosis)

+

Acrodynia

+

++

—

Therapy

BAL, succimer

BAL, succimer

Succimer (early)

+, mild; ++, moderate; +++, severe; BAL, British antilewisite (also known as dimercaprol); CNS, central nervous system; GI, gastrointestinal.
From Sue YJ. Mercury (heavy metals). In: Nelson LS, Howland MA, Lewin NA, et al., eds. Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies, 11th ed. New York: McGraw-­Hill; 2019: Table 95.3.

Methyl mercury is the most avidly absorbed of the organic mercury
compounds, with approximately 90% absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. The lipophilic, short-­chain alkyl structure of methyl mercury
allows it to distribute rapidly across the blood-­brain barrier and placenta. Methyl mercury is approximately 90% excreted in the bile, with
the remainder being excreted in the urine. The half-­life is 70 days.

Pathophysiology

After absorption, mercury is distributed to all tissues, particularly the
central nervous system and kidneys. Mercury reacts with sulfhydryl,
phosphoryl, carboxyl, and amide groups, resulting in disruption of
enzymes, transport mechanisms, membranes, and structural proteins.
Widespread cellular dysfunction or necrosis results in the multiorgan
toxicity characteristic of mercury poisoning.

Clinical Manifestations

Five syndromes describe the clinical presentation of mercury poisoning. Acute inhalation of elemental mercury vapor results in rapid
onset of cough, dyspnea, chest pain, fever, chills, headaches, and visual
disturbances. Gastrointestinal findings include metallic taste, salivation, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Depending on the severity of
the exposure, the illness may be self-­limited or may progress to necrotizing bronchiolitis, interstitial pneumonitis, pulmonary edema, and
death from respiratory failure. Younger children are more susceptible
to pulmonary toxicity. Survivors may demonstrate restrictive lung disease. Renal dysfunction and neurologic disturbances (ataxia, persistent
weakness, emotional lability) may develop subacutely. Chronic exposure to volatilized elemental mercury in dental amalgams has not been
found to be of any clinical significance.
Acute ingestion of inorganic mercury salts (typically secondary to
ingestion of a button battery) can manifest in a few hours as corrosive
gastroenteritis, signified by metallic taste, oropharyngeal burns, nausea, hematemesis, severe abdominal pain, hematochezia, acute tubular
necrosis, cardiovascular collapse, and death.
Chronic inorganic mercury intoxication produces the classic triad
consisting of tremor, neuropsychiatric disturbances, and gingivostomatitis. The syndrome may result from long-­term exposure to elemental mercury, inorganic mercury salts, or certain organic mercury
compounds, all of which may be metabolized to mercuric ions. The
tremor starts as a fine intention tremor of the fingers that is abolished
during sleep but that may later involve the face and progress to choreoathetosis and spasmodic ballismus. Mixed sensorimotor neuropathy and visual disturbances may also be present. The neuropsychiatric
disturbances include emotional lability, delirium, headaches, memory

loss, insomnia, anorexia, and fatigue. Renal dysfunction ranges from
asymptomatic proteinuria to nephrotic syndrome.
Acrodynia, or pink disease, is a rare idiosyncratic hypersensitivity
reaction to mercury that occurs predominantly in children exposed to
mercurous powders. The symptom complex includes generalized pain,
paresthesias, and an acral (hands, feet) rash that may spread to involve
the face. The rash typically is red-­pink, papular, pruritic, and painful; it
may progress to desquamation and ulceration. Morbilliform, vesicular,
and hemorrhagic variants have been described. Other important features include anorexia, apathy, photophobia, and hypotonia, especially
of the pectoral and pelvic girdles. Irritability, tremors, diaphoresis,
insomnia, hypertension, and tachycardia may be present. Some cases
initially were diagnosed as pheochromocytoma. The outcome is good
after removal of the source of mercury exposure.
Methyl mercury intoxication (also known as Minamata disease
after the widespread mercury poisoning that occurred at Minamata
Bay in Japan in people who had ingested contaminated fish) manifests
as delayed neurotoxicity that appears after a latent period of weeks to
months. It is characterized by ataxia; dysarthria; paresthesias; tremors;
movement disorders; impairment of vision, hearing, smell, and taste;
memory loss; progressive dementia; and death. Infants exposed in
utero are the most severely affected, with low birthweight, microcephaly, profound developmental delay, cerebral palsy, deafness, blindness,
and seizures. Although there is significant residual morbidity from
methyl mercury neurotoxicity, observations on long-­term follow-­up of
children exposed in Iraq reveal complete or partial resolution in most
cases.

Laboratory Findings

The diagnosis of mercury intoxication is based on characteristic clinical findings, a history of exposure, and elevation of whole blood or
urine mercury values, the last of which confirms the exposure. Thin-­
layer and gas chromatographic techniques can be used to distinguish
organic from inorganic mercury. Blood should be collected in special
tubes for trace elements from laboratories that capably perform those
tests. Levels <10 μg/L in whole blood and <20 μg/L in a 24-­hour urine
specimen are considered normal (see Table 760.2). Although blood
mercury levels may reflect acute exposure, they decrease as mercury
redistributes into the tissues. Urine mercury levels are most useful for
identifying long-­term exposures, except in the case of methyl mercury, which undergoes minimal urinary excretion. Urinary mercury
levels are used in monitoring efficacy of chelation therapy, whereas
blood levels are used primarily in monitoring organic mercury poisonings. Hair analysis for mercury is not reliable because hair reflects

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 760 u Heavy Metal Intoxication 4435
both endogenous and exogenous mercury exposure (hair avidly binds
mercury from the environment). Abdominal radiographs may demonstrate ingested radiopaque mercury.
Urinary markers of early nephrotoxicity include microalbuminuria, retinol-­
binding protein, β2-­microglobulin, and N-­acetyl-­
β-­d-­
glucosaminidase. Early neurotoxicity may be detected with
neuropsychiatric testing and nerve conduction studies, whereas severe
central nervous system toxicity is apparent on CT or MRI.

TREATMENT OF ARSENIC AND MERCURY
INTOXICATION

The principles of management for arsenic and mercury intoxication
include prompt removal from the source of poisoning, aggressive stabilization and supportive care, decontamination, and chelation therapy
when appropriate. Once the diagnosis is suspected, the local poison
control facility should be contacted, and care coordinated with physicians who are familiar with the management of heavy metal poisoning.
Supportive care for patients exposed to arsine gas requires close
monitoring for signs of hemolysis, including evaluation of the peripheral blood smear and urinalysis. Transfusion of packed RBCs may
be necessary, as may administration of intravenous fluids, sodium
bicarbonate, and mannitol to prevent renal failure secondary to the
deposition of hemoglobin in the kidneys. After inhalation of elemental mercury vapor, patients require careful monitoring of respiratory
status, which may include pulse oximetry, arterial blood gas analysis,
and chest radiography. Supportive care involves administration of
supplemental oxygen and, in severe cases, intubation and mechanical
ventilation.
Acute ingestion of inorganic arsenic and mercury salts results in
hemorrhagic gastroenteritis, cardiovascular collapse, and multiorgan
dysfunction. Fluid resuscitation, pressor agents, and transfusion of
blood products may be required for management of cardiovascular
instability. Severe respiratory distress, coma with loss of airway reflexes,
intractable seizures, and respiratory paralysis are indications for intubation and mechanical ventilation. Renal function must be monitored
carefully for signs of renal failure and the need for hemodialysis.
Gastrointestinal decontamination after ingestion of inorganic arsenic and mercury salts has not been well studied. Because of the corrosive effects of these compounds, induced emesis is not recommended,
and endoscopy may be considered before gastric lavage. Arsenic and
mercury are not well adsorbed to activated charcoal, but its use may be
helpful if coingestants are suspected. Whole bowel irrigation is used to
remove any radiopaque material remaining in the gastrointestinal tract.
Chelation for acute arsenic and mercury poisoning is most effective
when administered as soon as possible after exposure. Chelation should
be continued until 24-­hour urinary arsenic or mercury levels return to
normal (<50 μg/L for arsenic and <20 μg/L for mercury), the patient is
symptom-­free, or the remaining toxic effects are believed to be irreversible. The efficacy of chelation in long-­term exposures is reduced because
heavy metal in the tissue compartment is relatively nonexchangeable
and some degree of irreversible toxicity has already occurred.
Dimercaprol, also known as 2,3-­dimercaptopropanol or British antilewisite (BAL), is the chelator of choice for a patient who cannot tolerate oral therapy, as often is true for critically ill patients and after
ingestion of the corrosive inorganic arsenic and mercury salts. Dimercaprol is available in 3-­mL ampules at a concentration of 100 mg/mL
for deep intramuscular (IM) injection. It is formulated in a peanut oil
and benzyl benzoate suspension; as such, it is not suitable for patients
with peanut allergy. For arsenic poisoning, the recommended regimen
of dimercaprol is 2.5 mg/kg IM q4 hours for six doses, then every 6
hours for four doses, then every 8 hours for three doses, then every
12 hours for two doses, followed by once daily for 10 days. For severe
arsenic poisoning, the dose of dimercaprol is increased to 3.5-­5 mg/
kg; the same dosing interval is followed. The dose of dimercaprol for
inorganic mercury poisoning is 5 mg/kg every 4 hours IM for 24-­48
hours, and then 2.5 mg/kg IM q12 hours for 10 days. The dimercaprol–heavy metal complex is excreted in the urine and bile. A period of

Table 760.4  Potential Strategies for Reducing Exposure
of Arsenic in Rice
1.	Diversify the diet
• Eat a well-­balanced diet and a variety of grains†,‡,§
• Identify children at risk for high consumption of rice and rice
products (e.g., gluten-­free diets, highly allergic)
2.	Consider alternatives to rice for first food
• Start infants on barley, oats, or other grains†,‡
• If rice cereal must be used for infants, limit to one serving per
day§
3.	Adopt strategies that help minimize exposure
• Rinse rice in a colander before cooking§
• Cook rice like pasta, with plenty of extra water§
• Choose lower-­arsenic varieties of rice (e.g., basmati)§
• Avoid or limit use of rice milk or other rice beverages for
infants‡ and children under 5 yr old§,¶
• Read labels of processed foods: choose alternatives to foods
sweetened with brown rice syrup or thickened with rice
products
4.	Regulatory action
• Federal agencies should establish regulatory limits for arsenic
content in rice and rice products§
†U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
‡American Academy of Pediatrics.
§Consumer Reports.
¶United Kingdom Food Standard Agency.
From Lai PY, Cottingham KL, Steinmaus C, et al. Arsenic and rice: translating research
to address health care providers’ needs. J Pediatr. 2015;167(4):797–803.

5 days between courses of chelation is recommended. Adverse effects
of dimercaprol include pain at the injection site, hypertension, tachycardia, diaphoresis, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, a burning sensation in the oropharynx, and a feeling of constriction in the chest.
Dimercaprol may cause hemolysis in glucose-­6-­phosphate dehydrogenase–deficient individuals. It is important to note that dimercaprol
is contraindicated for chelation of methyl mercury because dimercaprol redistributes methyl mercury to the brain from other tissue sites,
resulting in increased neurotoxicity.
Oral chelating agents are used to replace the painful dimercaprol injections when the patient is stable enough to tolerate oral therapy and prolonged chelation is necessary. Succimer, also known as
2,3-­dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA), is an orally administered water-­
soluble derivative of dimercaprol. DMSA is available in 100 mg capsules. The recommended regimen of DMSA for both arsenic and
mercury poisoning is 10 mg/kg orally every 8 hours for 5 days followed
by 10 mg/kg orally every 12 hours for 14 days. The DMSA–heavy metal
complex is excreted in the urine and bile. A period of 2 weeks between
courses of chelation is recommended. Mild adverse effects include
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite, and transient elevations
in liver enzyme levels. DMSA also may cause hemolysis in glucose-­6-­
phosphate dehydrogenase–deficient patients.
d-­Penicillamine is an orally administered chelator that has been
used in the past for less-­severe mercury poisoning or as an adjunct to
dimercaprol therapy in arsenic poisoning. Its use is largely restricted
because of the potential for significant leukopenia, thrombocytopenia,
and proteinuria along with the improved tolerability of succimer.
Patients with ingestion of elemental mercury require no follow-­up
unless there is an underlying disease that decreases the gastrointestinal transit time. Serial abdominal radiographs to document the progression of the metal are recommended. Acute inhalation of mercury
fumes and ingestion of inorganic mercury require hospitalization to
monitor the respiratory and gastrointestinal status, respectively. Therapeutic abortion may be considered in pregnant patients because of the
teratogenic effect of mercury.
Strategies to reduce arsenic exposure in rice are noted in Table 760.4.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4436 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

Chapter 761

Lead Poisoning
Morri Markowitz
Lead is a metal that exists in four isotopic forms. Clinically it is purely a
toxicant; no organism has an essential function that is lead dependent.
Chemically its low melting point and ability to form stable compounds
have made it useful in the manufacture of hundreds of products; this
commercial attractiveness has resulted in the processing of millions of
tons of lead ore, leading to widespread dissemination of lead in the
human environment.
The blood lead level (BLL) is the gold standard for determining
risk of health effects. The threshold level at which lead begins to cause
biochemical, subclinical, or clinical disturbance remains to be determined. In 2021, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
designated 3.5 μg/dL as the “reference value based on the 97.5th percentile of the population of US children aged 1-­5 years.” It is the BLL that
identifies the 2.5% of children with the highest BLLs. As a measure
of the distribution of BLLs in young American children rather than
a toxicity threshold, this number will change in a manner dependent
on the epidemiology of BLLs. Surveillance by the CDC has shown that
the prevalence of elevated BLLs has declined markedly. Approximately
500,000 U.S. children ages 1-­5 years currently have BLLs ≥3.5 μg/dL.
Fortunately, children with levels high enough to be life-­threatening
(>100 μg/dL) are rarely seen in the United States, though deaths continue to occur in other areas of the world. Although BLL ≥3.5 μg/dL is
stated as a reference value, it is likely that clinicians and departments of
health will consider this a threshold for action.

PUBLIC HEALTH HISTORY

In the late 1970s, nearly all preschool-­age children in the United States
had BLLs above the current reference value of 3.5 μg/dL. Over the next
25 years, government regulations resulted in the significant reduction
of three main contributors to lead exposure by means of (1) the elimination of the use of tetraethyl lead as a gasoline additive, (2) the banning of lead-­containing solder to seal food-­and beverage-­containing
cans, and (3) the application of a federal rule that limited the amount of
lead allowed in paint intended for household use to less than 0.06% by
weight (further reduced by the Consumer Product Safety Commission
to 0.009% in 2008). Factors identified by the CDC in the late 1970s that
indicate increased risk of lead poisoning, in addition to preschool age,
include low socioeconomic status; living in older housing, built primarily before 1960; urban location; and Black race. Another high-­risk
group that has been identified consists of recent immigrants from less
wealthy countries, including adoptees. These risk factors largely persist
currently, as indicated by an analysis of over 1 million BLLs obtained
from U.S. children between October 2018 and February 2020 and analyzed in a commercial lab. In addition, these data indicated that over
half of the children still have measurable BLLs, i.e., ≥1 μg/dL.
Progress is also being made globally. In Mexico, the introduction of
unleaded gasoline in 1990 was associated with a decline in BLLs among
first-­grade students, from 17 μg/dL in 1990 to 6.2 μg/dL in 1997. Algeria, the last country to use leaded gasoline for cars and trucks, phased
out its use in 2021. In Malta, after the import of red lead paint was
banned and the use of lead-­treated wood for fuel in bakeries was prohibited, mean BLLs of pregnant women and newborns decreased by
45%. After it was documented that children living in the neighborhood
of a battery factory in Nicaragua had a mean BLL of 17.2 μg/dL, but
children in the control community had a mean BLL of 7.4 μg/dL, the
factory was closed. Despite these advances, in 2021 the World Health
Organization (WHO), citing research for UNICEF by the Institute for
Health Metrics and Evaluation, estimated that 815 million children
globally may have elevated BLLs above 5 mg/dL. The majority live
in developing countries, where in some regions BLLs may be 10- to
20-fold higher than in developed countries.

Unfortunately, local lead-­related harms continue to occur. When the
water source for Flint, Michigan, was changed (2014) to the Flint River
and utilized a water treatment plant with poor corrosion control, the
lead level of Flint tap water increased, as did the BLLs of children <5
years of age. Flint is not unique; many other cities have lead pipes that
can result in water contamination. In 2021 the US government allocated $15 billion for lead pipe removal.
In 2010, the CDC and WHO identified numerous lead-­contaminated
villages in northern Nigeria. The grinding of ore to extract gold caused
widespread leaded dust dissemination. It is likely that hundreds of children died because of this activity, and all remaining children in some
of the villages assessed were lead poisoned, with 97% having a BLL ≥45
μg/dL, the threshold for chelation therapy in the United States. Unfortunately, such disasters continue to occur in Nigeria and neighboring
countries from similar metal extraction activities.

SOURCES OF EXPOSURE

Lead poisoning may occur in utero because lead readily crosses the
placenta from maternal blood. The spectrum of toxicity is similar to
that experienced by children after birth. The source of maternal blood
lead content is either redistribution from endogenous stores (i.e., the
mother’s skeleton) or lead newly acquired from ongoing environmental exposure.
Several hundred products contain lead, including paint, batteries,
cable sheathing, cosmetics, mineral supplements, plastics, toys (Table
761.1), and traditional medicines (Table 761.2). Major sources of exposure vary among and within countries; the major source of exposure
in the United States remains old lead-­based paint. Approximately 34.6
million homes, mainly built before 1950, have lead-­based paint (2021
estimate), of which the CDC has estimated that 22.3 million are in a hazardous state. As paint deteriorates, it chalks, flakes, and turns to dust.
Improper rehabilitation work of painted surfaces (e.g., sanding) can
result in dissemination of lead-­containing dust throughout a home. The
dust can coat all surfaces, including children’s hands. All of these forms
of lead can be ingested. If heat is used to strip paint, then lead vapor concentrations in the room can reach levels sufficient to cause lead poisoning via inhalation. There is an increased awareness that tap water in both
homes and schools may have substantial amounts of lead. The latter arose
from the discovery of contaminated water in most New York City public
schools. Moreover, this occurrence raised questions about the safety of
the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) lead-­in-­water-­standard
of 15 parts per billion (ppb; μg of Pb/L of water) that water distribution
companies must meet in at least 90% of homes in their service areas. This
standard was not based on achieving health safety but rather on what the
water companies felt was financially feasible. After review, in 2021 the
EPA recommended lowering the “trigger” level to 10 ppb. Breaching this
value requires water companies to prepare an intervention plan should
the level subsequently go over 15 ppb. It does not require action to reduce
the amount of lead in that water supply. Even 10 ppb is still much greater
than the 1 ppb recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics
as the limit for allowable lead in drinking water. It should be noted that
the EPA lead in water standard does not apply to schools, although many
states have set their own standards.
In other parts of the world, especially in poorer countries, additional
sources can be found. These include contaminated neighborhoods
as the result of car/truck battery lead recycling, aluminum cookware
made with recycled metals, spices, and traditional medicines.

METABOLISM

The nonnutritive hand-­to-­mouth activity of young children is the most
common pathway for lead to enter the body. In most cases, lead is
ingested either as a component of dust licked off of surfaces or in swallowed paint chips, through water contaminated by its flow through lead
pipes or brass fixtures, or from otherwise contaminated foods or liquids. Cutaneous contamination with inorganic lead compounds, such
as those found in pigments, does not result in a substantial amount
of absorption. Organic lead compounds, such as tetraethyl lead, may
penetrate through skin; however, these are rarely encountered.
The percentage of lead absorbed from the gut depends on several factors: particle size, pH, other material in the gut, and nutritional status of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 761 u Lead Poisoning
Table 761.1  Sources of Lead
Paint chips
Dust
Soil
Parent’s or household contact’s occupational exposure (auto repair,
smelting, construction, remodeling, plumbing, gun/bullet (firing
range) exposure, painting, e-­scrap)
Glazed ceramics
Herbal remedies (e.g., Ayurvedic medications)
Home remedies, including antiperspirants, deodorants (litargirio)
Jewelry (toys or parents’)
Stored battery casings or recycling (or living near a battery smelter)
Lead-­based gasoline (in aviation fuel for propeller planes)
Moonshine alcohol
Mexican candies; Ecuadorian chocolates
Ceremonial spices
Indoor firing ranges
Retained bullet fragments
Imported spices (svanuri marili, zafron, kuzhambu)
Lead-­based cosmetics (kohl, surma, kajal)
Lead plumbing (water)
Imported foods in lead-­containing cans
Domestic foods (applesauce pouches, others)
Imported toys
Home renovations
Antique toys or furniture
Kratom

Table 761.2  Cases of Lead Encephalopathy Associated
with Traditional Medicines by Type of
Medication

TRADITIONAL
MEDICAL SYSTEM

NO. (%) CASES
OF LEAD
ENCEPHALOPATHY

NO. (%) PEDIATRIC
CASES WITHIN
CAM SYSTEM OR
MEDICATION

Ayurveda

5 (7)

1 (20)

Ghasard

1 (1)

1 (100)

Traditional Middle
Eastern practices

66 (87)

66 (100)

Azarcon and Greta

2 (3)

2 (100)

Traditional Chinese
medicine

2 (3)

2 (100)

Total

76 (100)

72 (95)

CAM, Complementary and alternative medicines.
From Karri SK, Saper RB, Kales SN. Lead encephalopathy due to traditional medicines.
Curr Drug Saf. 2008;3:54–59.

essential elements. Large paint chips are difficult to digest and are mainly
excreted; this chemical characteristic of lead compounds is fortunate, as
a single chip may contain a potentially lethal dose of lead. Fine dust can
be dissolved more readily, especially in an acid medium. Lead eaten on
an empty stomach is better absorbed than that taken with a meal. The
presence of calcium and iron may decrease lead absorption by direct
competition for binding sites; iron (and probably calcium) deficiency
results in enhanced lead absorption, retention, and toxicity.
After absorption, lead is disseminated throughout the body via
blood. It circulates bound to erythrocytes; approximately 97–99% of
lead in blood is bound on or in the red blood cells. The plasma fraction is too small to be measured by conventional techniques employing
atomic absorption spectroscopy or anodic stripping voltammetry; it is
presumably the plasma portion that may leave the blood compartment
to enter cells and induce toxicity. Thus clinical laboratories report the
BLL, not the serum or plasma lead level. The increasing availability
and decreasing cost of inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry,
which is capable of measuring lead in ng/dL quantities, may eventually

4437

result in clinical availability of tools to measure plasma lead, a more
proximal measure to where toxicity is actually occurring.
Most retained lead accumulates in bone, where it resides for years.
But in all cells, lead has multiple effects. It binds to enzymes, particularly
those with available sulfhydryl groups, changing the contour and diminishing function. For example, three of eight enzymes in the ubiquitously
distributed heme pathway are susceptible to lead inhibitory effects. The
accumulation of excess amounts of heme precursors is also toxic. The
last enzyme in this pathway, ferrochelatase, enables protoporphyrin to
chelate iron, thus forming heme. Erythrocyte protoporphyrin (EP) levels higher than 35 μg/dL (laboratory dependent) are abnormal and are
consistent with lead poisoning, iron deficiency, or recent inflammatory
disease. Measurement of the EP level is thus a useful tool for monitoring
biochemical lead toxicity. EP levels begin to rise several weeks after BLLs
have reached 20 μg/dL in a susceptible portion of the population and are
elevated in nearly all children with BLLs higher than 50 μg/dL. A drop in
EP levels also lags behind a decline in BLLs by several weeks because it
depends on both cell turnover and cessation of further overproduction
by marrow red blood cell precursors. The test can be ordered either as
the free EP or the zinc protoporphyrin. Results are reported in μg/dL.
When reported in μmol/mmol this likely indicates that the analysis has
been standardized to a hematocrit of 45, an unwarranted assumption in
young children.
A second mechanism of lead toxicity works via its competition with
calcium. Many calcium-­binding proteins have a higher affinity for lead
than for calcium. Lead bound to these proteins may alter function,
resulting in abnormal intracellular and intercellular signaling. Neurotransmitter release is, in part, a calcium-­dependent process that is
adversely affected by lead.
Although these two mechanisms of toxicity may be reversible, a
third mechanism prevents the development of the normal tertiary
brain structure. In immature mammals the normal neuronal pruning process that results in elimination of multiple intercellular brain
connections is affected by lead. Failure to construct the appropriate
tertiary brain structure during infancy and childhood may result
in a permanent abnormality. In a longitudinal study of childhood
lead poisoning, MRI examinations of the participants when in their
20s found smaller areas of brain in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus regions, areas involved in decision-­making and memory
formation.

CLINICAL EFFECTS

The BLL is the best-­studied measure of the lead burden in children.
Although subclinical and clinical findings correlate with BLLs in populations, there is considerable interindividual variability in this relationship. Lead encephalopathy is more likely to be observed in children
with BLLs higher than 100 μg/dL; however, one child with a BLL of 300
μg/dL may have no symptoms, whereas another with the same level may
be comatose. Susceptibility may be associated with polymorphisms in
genes coding for lead-­binding proteins, such as Δ-­aminolevulinic acid
dehydratase, an enzyme in the heme pathway.
Several subclinical effects of lead have been demonstrated in cross-­
sectional epidemiologic studies. Hearing and height are inversely
related to BLLs in children; in neither case, however, does the lead
effect reach a level that would bring an individual child to medical
attention. As BLLs increase in the study populations, more sound (at
all frequencies) is needed to reach the hearing threshold. Children with
higher BLLs are shorter than those with lower levels; for every 10 μg
increase in the BLL, the children are 1 cm shorter. Chronic lead exposure also may delay puberty.
Several longitudinal studies have followed cohorts of children for
decades after birth and examined the relationship between BLLs and
cognitive test scores over time. In general, there is agreement that BLLs,
expressed either as levels obtained concurrently with cognitive testing
or as a measure that integrates multiple BLLs drawn from subjects over
time, are inversely related to cognitive test scores. From these studies, no BLL above 0 μg/dL appears safe. On average, for each 1 μg/dL
elevation in BLL, the cognitive score is approximately 0.25-­0.50 points
lower, though the relationship is not linear across the BLL spectrum.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4438 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Because the BLLs from early childhood are predictors of the cognitive
test results performed years later, this finding implies that the effects of
lead can be permanent.
The effect of in utero lead exposure is less clear. Scores on the Bayley
Scale of Mental Development were obtained repeatedly every 6 months
for the first 2 years of life in a cohort of infants born to middle-­class
families. Results correlated inversely with cord BLLs, a measure of in
utero exposure. However, after 2 years of age, all other cognitive tests
performed on the cohort over the next 10 years correlated with the
BLLs at age 2 years but not with cord BLLs, indicating that the effects
of prenatal lead exposure on brain function were superseded by early
childhood events and later BLLs. Later studies, performed in cohorts
of Mexican children monitored from the prenatal period, confirm the
association between in utero lead exposure and later cognitive outcomes. In these studies, maternal plasma lead levels, obtained especially during the first trimester, were more strongly associated with
cognitive scores in the offspring than with the traditionally measured
maternal whole BLLs.
Behavior also is adversely affected by lead exposure. Hyperactivity is noted in young school-­age children with histories of lead
poisoning or with concurrent elevations in BLL. Older children
with higher bone lead content are more likely to be aggressive and
to have behaviors that are predictive of later juvenile delinquency.
One report supports the concept of long-­term effects of early lead
exposure. In this longitudinal study, the mothers of a cohort were
enrolled during their pregnancies. BLLs were obtained early in
pregnancy, at birth, and then multiple times in the offspring during the first 6 years. The investigators report that the later relative
rate of arrests, especially for violent crimes, increased significantly
in relationship to the presence of these BLLs early in life. For every
5 μg/dL increase in BLL, the adjusted arrest rate was 1.40 for prenatal BLLs and 1.27 for 6-­year BLLs. Epidemiologic data support
the findings in this observational study. In an analysis that combined two national datasets, total annual leaded gasoline use (U.S.
Geological Survey) and total reported violent criminal acts (U.S.
Department of Justice), the amount of leaded gasoline used yearly
was found to be strongly associated with violent criminal behavior
with a lag time of 23 years; that is, early childhood exposure was
followed two decades later by violent behavior rising and falling in
close tandem. A similar association was found, this time between
urban air lead levels and later violent crime, with a similar best-­fit
model employing a lag of approximately 22 years.
An intervention study, in which children with moderate lead poisoning and initial BLLs of 20-­55 μg/dL were aggressively managed over
6 months, addressed the issue of the effects of treatment on cognitive
development. Components of treatment included education regarding sources of lead and its abatement, nutritional guidance, multiple
home and clinic visits, and for a subset, chelation therapy. Average
BLLs declined, and cognitive scores were inversely related to the
change in BLLs. For every 1 μg/dL fall in BLLs, cognitive scores were
0.25 point higher. A randomized placebo-­controlled treatment study
of 2-­year-­old children with initial BLLs of 20-­44 μg/dL that employed
the chelating agent succimer administered over 6 months found no
difference in mean cognitive scores at age 4 years. However, as in the
earlier treatment study, regression analysis did find an inverse relation
between change scores; that is, a change in BLLs was associated with an
inverse change in cognitive scores.
Whether the behavioral effects of lead are reversible is unclear. In
one small, short-­term study, 7-­year-­old hyperactive children with
BLLs in the 20s were randomly allocated to receive a chelating agent
(penicillamine), methylphenidate, or placebo. Teacher and parent
ratings of behavior improved for the first two groups but not the placebo group. BLLs declined only in the chelated group. Two-­year-­old
lead-­poisoned children enrolled in a placebo-­controlled trial of the
chelating agent succimer showed no mean difference in behavior at 4
or 7 years of age. However, mean BLLs were also not different in the
two groups at those ages.
These studies support the concept that early exposure to lead can
result in long-­term deficits in cognition and behavior; they also hold

out the possibility that reductions in lead burden may be associated
with improvement in cognitive test scores.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS

Gastrointestinal symptoms of lead poisoning include anorexia,
abdominal pain, vomiting, and constipation, often occurring and
recurring over a period of weeks. Children with BLLs higher than 20
μg/dL are twice as likely to have gastrointestinal complaints as those
with lower BLLs. Central nervous system symptoms are related to
worsening cerebral edema and increased intracranial pressure. Headaches, change in mentation, lethargy, papilledema, seizures, and coma
leading to death are rarely seen at levels lower than 100 μg/dL but have
been reported in children with a BLL as low as 70 μg/dL. The last-­
reported death directly attributable to lead toxicity in the United States
was in 2006 in a child with a BLL of 180 μg/dL. There is no clear cutoff
BLL value for the appearance of hyperactivity, but it is more likely to be
observed in children who have levels higher than 20 μg/dL.
Other organs also may be affected by lead toxicity, but symptoms
usually are not apparent in children. At high levels (>100 μg/dL), renal
tubular dysfunction is observed. Lead may induce reversible Fanconi
syndrome. In addition, at high BLLs, red blood cell survival is shortened, possibly contributing to a hemolytic anemia, although most
cases of anemia in lead-­poisoned children are a result of other factors,
such as iron deficiency and hemoglobinopathies. Older patients may
develop peripheral neuropathy leading to wrist drop and foot drop, as
well as hypertension.

DIAGNOSIS
Screening

It is estimated that 99% of lead-­poisoned children are identified by
screening procedures rather than through clinical recognition of lead-­
related symptoms. Until 1997, universal screening by blood lead testing
of all children at ages 12 and 24 months was the standard in the United
States. Given the national decline in the prevalence of lead poisoning,
the recommendations have been revised to target blood lead testing
of high-­risk populations. High risk is based on an evaluation of the
likelihood of lead exposure. Departments of health are responsible for
determining the local prevalence of lead poisoning, as well as the percentage of housing built before 1950, the period of peak leaded paint
use. When this information is available, informed screening guidelines
for practitioners can be issued. For instance, in New York State, where
a large percentage of housing was built before 1950, the Department of
Health mandates that all children be tested for lead poisoning via blood
analyses. In the absence of such data, the practitioner should continue to
test all children at both 12 and 24 months. In areas where the prevalence
of lead poisoning and old housing is low, targeted screening may be
performed on the basis of a risk assessment. Three questions form the
basis of most published questionnaires (Table 761.3), and items that
are pertinent to the locale or individual may be added. If there is a
lead-­based industry in the child’s neighborhood, the child is a recent
immigrant from a country that until recently still permitted the use
of leaded gasoline, or the child has pica (pattern of eating non-­food
materials) or developmental delay, blood lead testing would be appropriate. All Medicaid-­eligible children should be screened by blood lead
testing. Venous sampling is preferred to capillary sampling because
the chances of false-­positive and false-­negative results are less with the
former. However, capillary screening can be performed rapidly in the
office with a point of care (POC) instrument; use of such instruments
in primary care offices substantially increases screening rates. Other
screening guidelines vary by federal, state, and even local governmental agencies. Contacting your local Department of Health is one way to
determine local primary care obligations.
The threshold for lead effects and the reference level for risk management purposes are not the same. Laboratory issues make the interpretation of values more difficult at low levels. Most labs achieve quality
control of ±2 μg/dL for reports of BLL, but federal regulations allow
laboratories that perform BLL testing to operate with an allowable error
of ±4 μg/dL. A capillary screening value ≥3.5 μg/dL requires a venous
sample for confirmation (Table 761.4). If the diagnostic (venous) test

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 761 u Lead Poisoning
Table 761.3  Minimum Personal Risk Questionnaire
1.	Does the child live in or regularly visit a house that was built
before 1950? (Include settings such as daycare, babysitter’s, or
relative’s home.)
2.	Does the child live in or regularly visit a house built before
1978 with recent (past 6 months) or ongoing renovations or
remodeling?
3.	Does the child have a sibling or playmate who has or did have
lead poisoning?
From Screening young children for lead poisoning. Guidance for state and local public
health officials. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1997.

Table 761.4  Recommended Schedule for Obtaining a
Confirmatory Venous Sample
BLOOD LEAD LEVEL (µg/dL)

TIME TO CONFIRMATION
TESTING*

≥3.5-­9

Within 3 mo

10-­19

Within 1 mo

20-­44

Within 2 wk

≥45

Within 48 hr

4439

Table 761.5  Schedule for Follow-­Up Blood Lead Testing

VENOUS BLOOD LEAD
CONCENTRATIONS
(µg/dL)

EARLY FOLLOW-­UP
TESTING (2-­4 TESTS
AFTER INITIAL TEST
ABOVE SPECIFIC
VENOUS BLLs)

LATER FOLLOW-­
UP TESTING
AFTER BLL
DECLINING

≥3.5-­9

3 mo*

6-­9 mo

10-­19

1-­3 mo*

3-­6 mo

20-­44

2 wk to 1 mo

1-­3 mo

≥45

As soon as possible

As soon as
possible

BLL, Blood lead level.
Courtesy Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/l
ead/advisory/acclpp/actions-­blls.htm

*The higher the blood lead level is on the initial screening capillary test, the more
urgent it is to get a venous sample for confirmatory testing.
Courtesy Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/l
ead/advisory/acclpp/actions-­blls.htm#anchor_86654

confirms that the BLL is elevated, then further testing is required by the
recommended schedule (Table 761.5). A confirmed venous BLL of 45
μg/dL or higher requires prompt chelation therapy.

Other Tools for Assessment

BLL determinations remain the gold standard for evaluating children
because of ready availability and its correlation with health outcomes
in populations. Techniques are available to measure lead in other tissues and body fluids. Experimentally, the method of x-­ray fluorescence
(XRF) allows direct and noninvasive assessment of bone lead stores.
XRF methodology was used to evaluate a population that had long-­
term exposure to lead from a polluting battery-­recycling factory. The
study found that the school-­age children had elevated lead levels in
bone but not in venous blood, a finding that is consistent with our
understanding of the slow turnover of lead in bone, which is measurable in years, in contrast to that in blood, which is measurable in weeks.
It also indicates that children may have substantial lead in their bodies
that is not detected by routine blood lead testing. This stored lead may
be released to toxic levels if bone resorption rates suddenly increase,
as occurs with prolonged immobilization of longer than a week and
during pregnancy. Thus children with histories of elevated BLLs are
potentially at risk for recrudescence of lead toxicity long after ingestion
has stopped and may pass this lead to the next generation. XRF methodology is not available for clinical use in children.
Lead also can be measured in urine. Spontaneous excretion, even in
children with high BLLs, is usually low. Lead excretion may be stimulated by treatment with chelating agents, and this property of these
drugs forms the basis of their use as a component of lead treatment.
It also has been used to develop a test that differentiates children with
lead burdens responsive to chelation therapy, the lead mobilization
test. In this test, a timed urine collection follows one or two doses of
chelating agent, and the lead content is determined. However, this test
is no longer recommended.
Lead in hair, nails, and saliva also is measurable but has problems of
contamination and interpretability; thus these have no clinical utility.
Radiographs of long bones may show dense bands at the metaphyses
(“lead lines”), which may be difficult to distinguish from growth arrest

Fig. 761.1 Anteroposterior radiograph of the abdomen demonstrates
retention of radiopaque lead-­based paint chips within bowel, predominantly clustered in the ascending colon. Other etiologies resembling
“paint chips” include certain medications, eggshells, other heavy metals including iron-­and calcium-­containing supplements. Dense “lead
lines” are noted in the proximal femoral metaphyses. (From Swenson
DW, Walters MM. Musculoskeletal imaging. In: Walters MM, Robertson
RL, eds. Pediatric Radiology: The Requisites, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 7.50, p. 214.)

lines but, if caused by lead, are indicative of months to years of exposure (Fig. 761.1). For children with acute symptoms, when a BLL result
is not immediately available, a kidneys-­ureters-­bladder (KUB) radiograph may reveal radiopaque flecks in the intestinal tract, a finding
that is consistent with recent ingestion of lead-­containing plaster or
paint chips (see Fig. 761.1). However, the absence of radiographic findings does not rule out lead poisoning.
Because BLLs reflect recent ingestion or redistribution from other tissues but do not necessarily correlate with the body burden of lead or lead
toxicity in an individual child, tests of lead effects also may be useful.
After several weeks of lead accumulation and a BLL higher than 20 μg/
dL, increases in EP values to more than 35 μg/dL may occur. An elevated
EP value that cannot be attributed to iron deficiency or recent inflammatory illness is both an indicator of lead effect and a useful means of
assessing the success of the treatment; the EP level will begin to fall a
few weeks after successful interventions that reduce lead ingestion and
increase lead excretion. Because EP is light sensitive, whole blood samples should be covered in aluminum foil (or equivalent) until analyzed.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4440 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
TREATMENT

All BLLs ≥3 μg/dL should be reported to state or local health departments. Once lead is in bone, it is released slowly and is difficult to
remove even with chelating agents. Because the cognitive/behavioral
effects of lead may be irreversible, the main effort in treating lead poisoning is to prevent it from occurring and to prevent further ingestion by already-­poisoned children. The main components in the effort
to eliminate lead poisoning are universally applicable to all children
(and adults) and are as follows: (1) identification and elimination of
environmental sources of lead exposure, (2) behavioral modification to
reduce nonnutritive hand-­to-­mouth activity, and (3) dietary counseling to ensure sufficient intake of the essential elements calcium and
iron and their supporting vitamins, D and C. For the small minority of
children with more severe lead poisoning, drug treatment is available
that enhances lead excretion. How effective these interventions may be
at reducing BLLs or improving cognitive function remains unclear at
the lower BLLs commonly observed currently in young children in the
United States.
During health maintenance visits a limited risk assessment is warranted, which includes questions pertaining to the most common
sources of lead exposure: the condition of old paint, secondary occupational exposure via an adult living in the home, and/or proximity
to an industrial source of pollution. If such a source is identified, its
elimination usually requires the assistance of public health and housing agencies as well as education for the parents. It would be safest for
the family to move out of a lead-­contaminated apartment until repairs
are completed. During repairs, repeated washes of surfaces and the
use of high-­efficiency particle accumulator (HEPA) vacuum cleaners
help reduce exposure to lead-­containing dust. Careful selection of a
contractor who is certified to perform lead abatement work is necessary. Sloppy work can cause dissemination of lead-­containing dust and
chips throughout a home or building and result in further elevation of
a child’s BLL. After the work is completed, dust wipe samples should
be collected from floors and windowsills or wells to verify that the risk
from lead has abated. The standards for what are considered acceptable
lead dust levels have recently been modified by the EPA to lower limits
that are more protective.
A single case of lead poisoning is often discovered in a household
with multiple family members, including other young children, and
even in a household with a common source of exposure such as peeling
lead-­based paint. The mere presence of lead in an environment does
not produce lead poisoning. Parental efforts at reducing the hand-­to-­
mouth activity of the affected child are necessary to reduce the risk of
lead ingestion. Handwashing with soap and water effectively removes
lead, but in a home with lead-­containing dust, lead rapidly begins to
reaccumulate on the child’s hands after washing. Therefore handwashing is best limited to the period immediately before nutritive hand-­to-­
mouth activity occurs.
Because there is competition between lead and essential metals, it is
reasonable to promote a healthy diet that is sufficient in calcium and
iron. The recommended daily intakes of these metals vary somewhat
with age. In general, for children 1 year of age and up, a calcium intake
of about 1 g/day is sufficient and convenient to remember (roughly the
calcium content of a quart of milk [∼1,200 mg/qt] or calcium-­fortified
orange juice). Calcium absorption is vitamin D dependent; milk is fortified with vitamin D, but other nutritional sources of calcium often are
not. A multivitamin containing vitamin D may be prescribed for children who do not drink sufficient milk or who have inadequate sunlight
exposure. Iron requirements also vary with age, ranging from 6 mg/
day for infants to 12 mg/day for adolescents. For children identified
biochemically as being iron deficient, therapeutic iron at a daily dose of
up to 5-­6 mg/kg/day for 3 months is appropriate. Iron absorption from
vegetables is enhanced when iron is ingested with vitamin C (ascorbic
acid), which is found in citrus juices. Giving additional calcium or iron
above the recommended daily intake to mineral-­sufficient children has
not been shown to be of therapeutic benefit in the treatment of lead
poisoning.

For children with BLLs of ≥20 μg/dL, an abdominal x-­ray should be
considered to check for lead-­based paint chips or leaded foreign bodies, if not already obtained. If radiopaque fragments are visualized on
imaging, bowel decontamination (typically with whole bowel irrigation) should be initiated (see Chapter 94).
Drug treatment to remove lead is lifesaving for children with lead
encephalopathy. In nonencephalopathic children, it prevents symptom progression and further toxicity. Guidelines for chelation are
based on the BLL. A child with a venous BLL of 45 μg/dL or higher
should be treated. Four drugs have been used in the United States:
2,3-­dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA [succimer]), CaNa2EDTA (versenate), British anti-lewisite (BAL [dimercaprol]), and penicillamine.
DMSA and penicillamine can be given orally, whereas CaNa2EDTA
and BAL can be administered only parenterally. The choice of agent
is guided by the severity of the lead poisoning, the effectiveness of the
drug, and the ease of administration (Table 761.6). Children with BLLs
of 44-­70 μg/dL may be treated with a single drug, preferably DMSA.
Those with BLLs of 70 μg/dL or greater require two-­drug treatment:
CaNa2EDTA in combination with either DMSA or BAL for those without evidence of encephalopathy, or CaNa2EDTA and BAL for those
with encephalopathy. Published data on the combined treatment with
CaNa2EDTA and DMSA for children with BLLs higher than 100 μg/
dL are very limited. However, anecdotal information derived from the
treatment of hundreds of severely lead-­poisoned children in northern
Nigeria indicates that single-­drug treatment with DMSA is lifesaving,
although the degree of long-­term residual damage in survivors has not
been reported.
Drug-­related toxicities are minor and reversible. These include gastrointestinal distress, transient elevations in transaminases, active urinary
sediment, and neutropenia. These types of events are least common for
CaNa2EDTA and DMSA, and more common for BAL and penicillamine. All of the drugs are effective in reducing BLLs when given in sufficient doses and for the prescribed time. These drugs also may increase
lead absorption from the gut and should be administered to children in
lead-­free environments. Some authorities also recommend the administration of a cathartic immediately before or concomitant with the initiation of chelation to eliminate any lead already in the gut.
None of these agents removes all lead from the body. Within days
to weeks after completion of a course of therapy, the BLL rises, even
in the absence of new lead ingestion. The source of this rebound in the
BLL is believed to be release from bone. Serial examinations of bone
lead content have shown that chelation with CaNa2EDTA is associated
with a decline in bone lead levels, but that residual bone lead remains
detectable even after multiple courses of treatment.
Repeat chelation is indicated if the BLL rebounds to 45 μg/dL or higher.
Children with initial BLLs higher than 70 μg/dL are likely to require
more than one course. A minimum of 3 days between courses is recommended to prevent treatment-­related toxicities, especially in the
kidney.
The indication for chelation therapy for children with BLLs <45 μg/dL
is less clear. Although use of these drugs in children with BLLs from 20-­
45 μg/dL will result in transiently lowered BLLs, and in some cases reversal of lead-­induced enzyme inhibition, few such children increase their
excretion of lead significantly during chelation, raising the question of
whether any long-­term benefit is achieved. A study of 2-­year-­old children
with BLLs of 20-­44 μg/dL who were randomized to receive either DMSA
or placebo found that the drop in BLLs was greater in the first 6 months
after enrollment in the DMSA-­treated group, but the levels converged by
1 year of follow-­up. Mean cognitive test scores obtained at 4 and 7 years
of age were not statistically different between the groups. Chelation with
DMSA (and CaNa2EDTA) is not recommended for all children with
BLLs <45 μg/dL. Further work needs to be done to determine whether
there are subgroups of children with BLLs <45 μg/dL who might benefit
from chelation. It also remains to be demonstrated whether other chelating agents available in the United States or elsewhere are effective at
either substantially reducing body stores (bone) of lead or reversing the
cognitive deficits attributable to lead at these BLLs.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 762 u Nonbacterial Food Poisoning

4441

Table 761.6  Chelators Used for Lead Poisoning
DOSAGE

INDICATIONS

CONTRAINDICATIONS

ADVERSE EFFECTS

Succimer
(DMSA)

1050 mg/m2/day divided into 3 doses for 5
days, then 700 mg/m2/day divided into 2
doses for 14 days (maximum 500 mg per
dose for children)

BLL >45 g/dL

None

Nausea, vomiting
Diarrhea
Metallic taste
Transient increase in AST/ALT

CaNa2EDTA

1,500 mg/mm2/day continuous intravenous
(IV) infusion for encephalopathy
Otherwise:
1,000 mg/m2/day divided in 2 to 4 doses
for up to 5 days, IV or IM

BLL >70 g/dL
(starting after first
dose of BAL or
succimer)
May substitute
for succimer if
that drug is not
tolerated

Severe renal disease
Hepatitis

Nephrotoxicity
Transient increase in AST/ALT
Arrythmia (bradycardia)

Dimercaprol
(BAL)

4 mg/kg deep IM injection every 4 hours for
5 days in children and adults

BLL >70 g/dL and
encephalopathy
Consider succimer as
alternative

Peanut allergy
Organic mercury
poisoning
Hepatic insufficiency

Pain at injection site
Hypertension and
tachycardia
Nausea, vomiting
Headache
Fever (especially in children)
Nephrotoxicity in the setting
of an acidic urine

d-­Penicillamine

1-1.5 g/day (children: 20-30 mg/kg/day), in 3
or 4 divided doses for 1-6 months
To minimize adverse reactions, start at 250
mg/day (children: 10 mg/kg/day) and
increase to 50% during week 2 and to a
full dose by week 3
Maximum adult daily dose is 2 g

BLL of 45 to 69 g/dL
AND succimer not
tolerated

Penicillin allergy

Leukopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Enuresis
Abdominal pain
Rashes

µ

µ

µ

µ

CHELATOR

Note: Indications for chelation and dosing regimens may change. Consult with a medical toxicologist or regional poison center for the most up-to-date recommendations.
BAL, British antilewisite; BLL, blood lead level; CaNa2EDTA, calcium disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; DMSA, 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid; IM, intramuscular; AST, alanine
transaminase; ALT, aspartate transaminase.
Modified from Theobald JL, Mycyk MB. Iron and heavy metals. In: Walls RM, ed. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 146.5.

With successful intervention, BLLs decline, with the greatest fall
in BLL occurring in the first 2 months after therapy is initiated. Subsequently, the rate of change in BLL declines slowly, so that by 6-­12
months after identification, the BLL of the average child with moderate lead poisoning (BLL >20 μg/dL) will be 50% lower. Children with
more markedly elevated BLLs may take years to reach the current CDC
reference level, 3.5 μg/dL, even if all sources of lead exposure have been
eliminated, behavior has been modified, and nutrition has been maximized. Early screening remains the best way of avoiding and therefore
obviating the need for the treatment of lead poisoning.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 762

Nonbacterial Food
Poisoning
762.1 Mushroom Poisoning
Diane P. Calello and Katherine Baranowski
Mushrooms are an ideal food. They are low in calories, fat free, and
high in protein, making them a great source of nutrition. Unfortunately, some are highly toxic if ingested. Picking (foraging) and consumption of wild mushrooms are increasingly popular in the United

States. This rise in popularity has led to increased reports of severe and
fatal mushroom poisonings.
The clinical syndromes produced by mushroom poisoning are
divided according to the rapidity of onset of symptoms and the predominant system involved (Table 762.1). The symptoms are caused
by the principal toxin present in the ingested mushrooms. The eight
major toxins produced by mushrooms are categorized as cyclopeptide (amatoxin and phallotoxin), gyromitrin, muscarine, coprine, ibotenic acid and muscimol, psilocybin, orellanine, and gastrointestinal
tract–specific irritants. The edible wild mushroom Tricholoma equestre
is associated with delayed rhabdomyolysis, and Clitocybe amoenolens
and Clitocybe acromelalga have been reported to cause erythromelalgia, although toxins responsible for these effects are unknown.
Symptoms after eating mushrooms may not be the direct effect of
a toxin but may be an allergic reaction or a toxic effect of pesticides
or other contaminants. In addition, all who ate the same mushroom
may not become sick, or if they do, they may become sick at different
intervals. Table 762.2 lists general principles of management. Wherever
possible, identification of the implicated mushroom is encouraged via
mycologist or regional Poison Control Center.

GASTROINTESTINAL
Rapid Onset

Many mushrooms from various genera (such as Chlorophyllum species) produce local gastrointestinal manifestations. The causative
toxins are diverse and largely unknown. Within 1 hour of ingestion,
patients experience acute abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Symptoms may last hours to days, depending on the species of
mushroom.
Treatment is mainly supportive. Children with large fluid losses
may require parenteral fluid therapy. It is imperative to differentiate
ingestion of mushrooms of this class from ingestion of Amanita and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4442 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 762.1  Summary of Common Mushroom-­Associated Syndromes
TYPICAL CAUSATIVE
MUSHROOM(S)

TOXIN

SYNDROME

CLINICAL COURSE

Cyclopeptides,
principally amatoxins

Delayed gastroenteritis
followed by hepatic failure

Stage 1: 6-­24 hr after ingestion: onset of
nausea, vomiting, profuse cholera-­like
diarrhea, abdominal pain, hematuria
Stage 2: 12-­48 hr after ingestion: apparent
recovery; levels of hepatic enzymes are
rising during this stage
Stage 3: 24-­72 hr after ingestion: progressive
hepatic and renal failure, coagulopathy,
cardiomyopathy, encephalopathy,
convulsions, coma, death

“Deadly Amanitas,” (A. phalloides,
A. bisporigera)
Galerina species

General gastrointestinal
irritants

Early gastroenteritis, may be
severe

30 min to 2 hr after ingestion: nausea,
vomiting, abdominal cramping, diarrhea;
may recover without treatment

Chlorophyllum molybdites,
backyard mushrooms (“little brown
mushrooms”), many others

Gyromitrin

Delayed gastroenteritis with
central nervous system
toxicity, seizures

6-­24 hr after ingestion: nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, abdominal pain, muscle cramps,
delirium, convulsions, coma; hemolysis, and
methemoglobinemia may occur

Gyromitra esculenta (“false morel”)

Orellanine

Delayed onset gastroenteritis
and renal failure

Abdominal pain, anorexia, vomiting starting
over 30 hr after ingestion, followed by
progressive renal failure 3-­14 days later

Cortinarius species

Muscarine

Cholinergic syndrome

30 min to 2 hr after ingestion: bradycardia,
bronchorrhea, bronchospasm, salivation,
perspiration, lacrimation, convulsions, coma

Clitocybe species, Inocybe species,
Boletus species, some Amanita
species

Coprine

Disulfiram-­like reaction with
ethanol

30 min after drinking ethanol (may occur up
to 1 week after eating coprine-­containing
mushrooms): flushing of skin of face and
trunk, hypotension, tachycardia, chest
pain, dyspnea, nausea, vomiting, extreme
apprehension

Coprinus atramentarius

Ibotenic acid and
muscimol

Hyperactivity, delirium, coma

30 min to 2 hours after ingestion: delirium,
hallucinations, and coma

Amanita muscaria, Amanita
pantherina

Psilocybin

Hallucinations

30 min to 3 hr after ingestion: hallucinations,
euphoria, drowsiness, compulsive behavior,
agitation

Psilocybe species

Modified from Brent J, Palmer RB: Mushrooms. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds. Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 4th
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2007: Table 23-­1.

Table 762.2  General Management of Mushroom
Ingestion

Galerina species containing cyclopeptide toxins, which present with
symptoms after 6 hours of ingestion.

1.	Determine history of ingestion: how many types of mushrooms
ingested, what time, if anyone else ate them, and what symptoms
are present.
2.	Attempt to determine which of the possible syndromes (see
Table 762.1) the patient may have. For example, gastrointestinal
symptoms occurring more than 6 hr after ingestion strongly
suggest cyclopeptide, gyromitrin, or Cortinarius poisoning.
3.	Administer activated charcoal. If the patient has diarrhea, do
not give a cathartic. If a cathartic is used, give it only with the
first dose of activated charcoal. Use repeated doses of activated
charcoal for suspected amatoxin poisonings.
4.	If feasible and when indicated, send gastric aspirate or emesis,
along with any remaining mushrooms, to a mycologist for
identification.
5.	Try to perform a preliminary identification of mushroom and
spores. Start to develop a spore print as soon as possible.
6.	Maintain supportive measures, including airway support,
intravenous fluids, and vasopressors (if needed). Monitor volume
status.
7.	Avoid antispasmodics for gastrointestinal symptoms.
8.	Anticipate the clinical course.

Delayed Onset
Cyclopeptide (Amatoxin) Poisoning

From Brent J, Palmer RB: Mushrooms. In: Shannon MW, Borron SW, Burns MJ, eds.
Haddad and Winchester’s Clinical Management of Poisoning and Drug Overdose, 4th
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2007: Box 23.1.

Poisonings by species of Amanita (death cap mushroom) and Galerina account for 95% of the fatalities from mushroom intoxication;
the mortality rate for this group is 5–10%. Most species produce two
classes of cyclopeptide toxins: (1) phallotoxins, which are heptapeptides believed to be responsible for the early symptoms of Amanita
poisoning, and (2) amatoxins, octapeptides that inhibit nuclear RNA
polymerase II and subsequent production of messenger RNA leading
to impaired protein synthesis and cell death. Cells with high turnover
rates, such as those in the gastrointestinal mucosa, kidneys, and liver,
are the most severely affected. Other suggested toxin effects are induction of apoptosis, glutathione depletion in the liver, and oxygen free
radical formation. Acute yellow atrophy of the liver and necrosis of the
proximal renal tubules are found in lethal cases.
The clinical course of poisoning with Amanita or Galerina species is biphasic. Nausea, vomiting, and severe abdominal pain
ensue 6-­24 hours after ingestion. Profuse watery diarrhea follows
shortly thereafter and may last for 12-­24 hours or longer. During
this time, patients become severely dehydrated. From 24 to 48 hours

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 762 u Nonbacterial Food Poisoning
after poisoning, jaundice, hypertransaminasemia (peaking at 72-­96
hours), renal failure, and coma occur. Death occurs 4-­7 days after
the ingestion. A prothrombin time less than 10% of control is a poor
prognostic factor. Of note, there are species of Amanita mushrooms
that may present with earlier onset of symptoms and confound
diagnosis, such as Amanita smithiana, which grows in the Pacific
Northwest.

Treatment

Treatment for Amanita poisoning is both supportive and specific. Fluid
loss from severe diarrhea during the early course of the illness is profound, requiring aggressive correction of fluid loss, electrolytes, and
acid-­base disturbances. In the late phase of the disease, management of
renal and hepatic failure is also necessary.
Specific therapy for Amanita poisoning is designed to remove the
toxin rapidly and to block binding at its target site. Oral activated
charcoal is recommended as part of the initial treatment for children with Amanita poisoning. For significant ingestions, intravenous silibinin or intravenous penicillin G may be considered after
discussion with a toxicologist or Poison Control Center. Silibinin
and penicillin G inhibit binding of both toxins, interrupt enterohepatic recirculation of amatoxin, and protect the liver from further
injury, although their effectiveness is controversial. N-­acetylcysteine
should be given for hepatoprotective effect. Hemodialysis or hemoperfusion may be beneficial in removing toxin. Orthotopic liver
transplantation may be required for children with severe hepatic
failure.

Gyromitrin Poisoning

Species of Gyromitra contain gyromitrin, which decomposes in
the stomach to form monomethylhydrazine (CH3NHNH2) and
inhibits central nervous system (CNS) enzymatic production of γ-­
aminobutyric acid (GABA). Monomethylhydrazine also oxidizes
iron in hemoglobin, resulting in methemoglobinemia. Children
with Gyromitra poisoning often experience vomiting, diarrhea, and
abdominal pain within 6-­24 hours of ingestion of the toxin. CNS
symptoms such as vertigo, diplopia, headache, ataxia, and seizures
develop later in the clinical course. Hemolysis and methemoglobinemia (see Chapter 511.6) are rare but potential life-­threatening complications of gyromitrin poisoning.

Treatment

Hypovolemia from gastrointestinal fluid losses and seizures require
supportive intervention. Pyridoxal phosphate, the coenzyme that catalyzes the production of GABA, can reverse the effects of monomethylhydrazine when administered in high doses. Pyridoxine hydrochloride
(25 mg/kg infused over 30 minutes) is given at a frequency that is
dependent on clinical improvement. Diazepam is given for persistent
seizures. Parenteral administration of methylene blue is indicated if the
methemoglobin concentration exceeds 30%. Blood transfusions may
be required for significant hemolysis.

RENAL
Orellanine Poisoning

Species of Cortinarius mushrooms contain the heat-­stable toxin bipyridyl orellanine, which causes severe nonglomerular renal injury characterized by interstitial fibrosis and acute tubular necrosis. Although the
exact mechanism of injury is not fully understood, a metabolite of orellanine is thought to inhibit renal protein synthesis. Cortinarius poisoning
is characterized by delayed onset of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea that
manifest 36-­48 hours after ingestion. Although the initial symptoms may
be trivial, more serious renal toxicity occurs in several days. Acute renal
failure occurs in 30–50% of those affected, beginning with polyuria and
progressing to renal failure (see Chapter 572).

Treatment

Treatment for orellanine poisoning is supportive. Early presentation,
within 4-­6 hours after ingestion, can be treated with activated charcoal
and gastric lavage. Hemodialysis may be needed in patients suffering
from renal failure. Most patients recover within 1 month, but chronic

4443

renal insufficiency develops in one third to one half of patients who
subsequently require renal transplantation.

AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Muscarine Poisoning

Mushrooms of the genera Inocybe and, to a lesser degree, Clitocybe
contain muscarine or muscarine-­related compounds. These quaternary ammonium derivatives bind to postsynaptic receptors, producing
an exaggerated cholinergic response.
The onset of symptoms is rapid (30 minutes to 2 hours after consumption), and intoxication is characterized by symptoms of cholinergic excess: diaphoresis, excessive lacrimation, salivation, miosis,
bradycardia, hypotension, urinary and fecal incontinence, and vomiting. Respiratory distress caused by bronchospasm and increased
bronchopulmonary secretions is the most serious complication. The
symptoms subside spontaneously within 6-­24 hours.

Treatment

Atropine sulfate, the specific antidote, is administered intravenously
(0.01 mg/kg; maximum: 2 mg). This is repeated until the pulmonary
symptoms resolve or the patient becomes overtly tachycardic.

Coprine Poisoning

Coprinus atramentarius and Clitocybe clavipes contain coprine. Like
disulfiram (Antabuse; Odyssey Pharmaceuticals, Inc.), coprine inhibits the metabolism of acetaldehyde after ethanol ingestion. The clinical
manifestations result from accumulation of acetaldehyde.
Coprine intoxication becomes apparent after ethanol ingestion and
may be delayed up to 5 days after consumption of the mushroom.
Hyperemia of the face and trunk, tingling of the hands, metallic taste,
tachycardia, and vomiting occur acutely. Hypotension may result from
intense peripheral vasodilation.
The syndrome typically is self-­limited and lasts only several hours.
No specific antidote is available. If hypotension is severe, vascular reexpansion with isotonic parenteral solutions may be required.

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Ibotenic acid and Muscimol Poisoning

Although Amanita muscaria and Amanita pantherina may contain
muscarine, the toxins responsible for the CNS symptoms after ingestion of these mushrooms are primarily muscimol and ibotenic acid,
the heat-­stable derivatives of the isoxazoles. Muscimol, a hallucinogen,
and ibotenic acid, an insecticide, act as GABA agonists. From 30 minutes to 3 hours after ingestion, CNS symptoms appear: obtundation,
alternating lethargy and agitation, and occasionally seizures. Nausea and vomiting are uncommon. If large amounts of muscarine are
contained in the mushroom, symptoms of cholinergic crisis also may
occur.
Specific therapy must be carefully selected, and in most cases supportive care will suffice. If an exaggerated cholinergic response is
observed, atropine should be administered. Conversely, because ingestions of A. muscaria or A. pantherina may cause anticholinergic findings, the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor physostigmine can be used
to reverse the delirium and coma. Benzodiazepines also are used for
the agitation and delirium. Seizures can be controlled with diazepam.
In the majority of patients, however, early supportive care and close
observation are all that is required.

Psilocybin Intoxication

Mushrooms belonging to the genus Psilocybe (“magic mushrooms”)
contain psilocybin and psilocin, two psychotropic compounds.
Within 30 minutes after ingestion, patients experience euphoria and
hallucinations, often accompanied by tachycardia and mydriasis. Fever
and seizures have also been observed in children with psilocybin poisoning. These symptoms are short-­lived, usually lasting for 6 hours
after consumption of the mushroom. Treatment consists of rest and
observation in a quiet environment. Severely agitated patients may
respond to diazepam.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4444 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

762.2 Solanine Poisoning
Katherine Baranowski and Diane P. Calello
Solanine is an alkaloid found in plants of the nightshade family (Solanaceae), specifically tomatoes, eggplant, paprika and pepper-­based spices,
and most significantly, white potatoes. The majority of solanine poisoning reported has arisen from the ingestion of greened potatoes. When
exposed to light and allowed to turn green and/or sprout, potatoes produce several alkaloid glycosides containing the cholesterol derivative
solanidine. Two of these glycosides, α-­solanine and α-­chaconine, are
found in highest concentration in the peels and sprouts. Some solanine
can be removed by boiling but not by baking. The major effect of α-­
solanine and α-­chaconine is the reversible inhibition of cholinesterase.
Cardiotoxic and teratogenic effects have also been reported.
Clinical manifestations of solanine and chaconine poisoning occur
within 7-­19 hours after ingestion. The most common symptoms are
vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea; in more severe instances of
poisoning, neurologic symptoms, including drowsiness, apathy, confusion, weakness, and vision disturbances, are rarely followed by coma
or death.
Treatment of solanine poisoning is largely supportive. In the most
severe cases, symptoms resolve within 1-­2 weeks.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for a Bibliography.

762.3 Seafood Poisoning
Diane P. Calello and Katherine Baranowski

CIGUATERA FISH POISONING

The most frequently reported seafood toxin illness in the world is
ciguatera fish poisoning. Grouper is the most commonly identified
source of the toxin, followed by snapper, kingfish, amberjack, dolphin,
eel, and barracuda. Poisoning has also been associated with farm-­
raised salmon.
The dinoflagellate Gambierdiscus toxicus, a microscopic unicellular organism found along coral reefs, produces high concentrations of
ciguatoxin and maitotoxin. The toxins are passed along the food chain
from small herbivorous fish that consume the dinoflagellate to larger
predatory fish and then to humans. These toxins are harmless in fish
but produce distinct clinical symptoms in humans.
Ciguatoxins are odorless, colorless, and tasteless and are not
destroyed by cooking or freezing. Ciguatoxins increase the sodium
ion permeability of excitable membranes and depolarize nerve cells,
actions that are inhibited by calcium and tetrodotoxin.
Between 2 and 30 hours after ingestion, ciguatera fish poisoning
typically produces a biphasic illness. The initial symptoms are nonspecific and are of gastrointestinal origin (diarrhea, vomiting, nausea,
and abdominal pain). The second phase occurs within a few days of
ingestion and consists of intense itching, anxiety, myalgias, painful
intercourse, feeling of loose teeth, and rash on palms and soles; the
neurologic symptoms of circumoral dysesthesias and cold allodynia
(reversal of hot and cold sensation) are characteristic of this disease and
may last for months. Tachycardia, bradycardia, hypotension, and death
occur very infrequently. Eating fish organs, roe, or viscera is associated
with greater symptom severity. The diagnosis of ciguatera fish poisoning is based on clinical presentation and a compatible epidemiologic
history; the diagnosis is confirmed by testing the ingested fish for toxin.
There is no human biomarker to confirm ciguatera fish poisoning.

Treatment

Treatment of ciguatera fish poisoning is supportive. Intravenous fluids may be required for severe diarrhea, and careful observation for
hypovolemic shock is advised. Once adequate hydration is established,
mannitol (0.5-­1.0 g/kg intravenously over 30-­45 minutes), given within
48-­72 hours of the toxic fish ingestion, is recommended for reduction

of acute symptoms (especially neurologic symptoms) and possible prevention of chronic neurologic symptoms. Various other medications
and herbal remedies have been tried, with variable results. Most cases
are self-­limited with a favorable prognosis.

SCOMBROID (PSEUDOALLERGIC) FISH POISONING

Ingestion of members of the Scombridae families, including albacore,
mackerel, tuna, bonito, and kingfish, have been linked to major outbreaks of pseudoallergic fish poisoning. Non-­scombroid fish such as
mahi-­mahi (dolphin fish), swordfish, and bluefish also are associated
with poisoning.
The bacterial transformation of histidine to histamine is responsible
for the clinical syndrome. Histidine is found in high concentrations
in the flesh of scombroid fish; if refrigeration is inadequate, the action
of bacterial decarboxylases during putrefaction converts histidine to
histamine. Fish containing more than 20 mg of histamine per 100 g
of flesh are toxic. In patients receiving isoniazid, a potent histaminase
blocker, ingestion of fish flesh containing a lower concentration of histamine may be toxic.
The onset of clinical manifestations is acute and occurs within 10
minutes to 2 hours of ingestion. The most common symptoms and
signs are diarrhea, erythema, sweating, flushing, diaphoresis, urticaria,
nausea, and headache (Fig. 762.1). Abdominal pain, tachycardia, oral
burning or numbness, dizziness, respiratory distress, hives, and facial
swelling also occur. The illness is usually self-­limited, terminating
within 8-­24 hours.

Treatment

Treatment is mainly supportive. With severe diarrhea, fluid replacement may be necessary. Antihistamines and antiemetics have been
variably successful.

PARALYTIC SHELLFISH POISONING

Mussels, clams, oysters, scallops, and other filter-­feeding mollusks may
become contaminated during dinoflagellate blooms or “red tides.”
During periods of contamination, water in coastal areas can be colored red by the algae; this sign is the origin of the term red tide. (Such
discoloration does not necessarily indicate the presence of toxin, and
toxin may be present in high quantities without discoloration. Nonetheless, discolored water should be regarded with suspicion.) The dinoflagellates Alexandrium spp. and Gymnodinium catenatum often are
responsible for these red tides and contain several potent neurotoxins.
Paralytic shellfish poisoning is a distinctive neurologic illness caused
by 20 closely related heat-­stable paralytic shellfish toxins, generally
referred to as saxitoxins. These compounds prevent nerve conduction
by inhibiting the sodium-­potassium pump. Consumption of bivalves,
such as mussels, scallops, and clams, is the usual pathway of intoxication, although crustaceans and fish have been implicated as well.
The onset of clinical manifestations of paralytic shellfish poisoning
occurs rapidly, 30 minutes to 2 hours after ingestion. Abdominal pain
and nausea are common. Paresthesias are common and occur circumorally or in a stocking-­glove distribution, or both. Perioral numbness
or tingling, diplopia, ataxia, dysarthria, and the sensation of floating
are seen less commonly. In severe cases, respiratory failure from diaphragmatic paralysis may result. Swimming in the water during a red
tide episode does not appear to have neurologic sequelae, although
skin or mucosal irritation may result.

Treatment

No antidote for paralytic shellfish poisoning is known. Supportive care,
including mechanical ventilation, may be needed. Although the symptoms are usually self-­limited and short-­lived, weakness and malaise
may persist for weeks after ingestion.

NEUROTOXIC SHELLFISH POISONING

Neurotoxic shellfish poisoning is a rare disease that occurs after consumption of molluscan shellfish contaminated with brevetoxins. Shellfish harvested along the Gulf of Mexico during or right after a red
tide are at risk of contamination with brevetoxins produced by the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 762 u Nonbacterial Food Poisoning

A

B

4445

C

Fig. 762.1 Scombroid fish poisoning. A and B, Widespread erythematous rash predominantly on the face (not shown) and trunk of patient 1. C,

Close-­up view of the upper chest area. Note the absence of wheals. (Modified from Jantschitsch C, Kinaciyan T, Manafi M, et al. Severe scombroid
fish poisoning: an underrecognized dermatologic emergency. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2011;65[1]:246–247. Fig. 1.)

dinoflagellate Karenia brevis; some raphidophytes (Chattonella spp.)
also produce brevetoxins. Brevetoxins are a group of more than 10
lipid-­soluble neurotoxins that activate sodium ion channels, causing
nerve membrane depolarization. Shellfish are not affected by brevetoxins. Rinsing, cleaning, cooking, and freezing do not destroy the toxins,
which also cannot be detected by taste or smell.
The onset of clinical manifestations of neurotoxic shellfish poisoning occurs from within a few minutes up to 18 hours after consumption. Most symptoms are gastrointestinal (nausea, vomiting, and
diarrhea) or neurologic (numbness and tingling of the lips, mouth,
face, and extremities, ataxia, partial limb paralysis, reversal of hot
and cold sensation, slurred speech, headache, and fatigue). Neurotoxic shellfish poisoning is similar to a mild case of paralytic shellfish
poisoning.

Treatment

There are no specific antidotes for brevetoxins. Treatment involves
mostly supportive care. Brevenal, a natural antagonist of brevetoxin
produced by K. brevis, may be used as a form of treatment in the future.

DIARRHETIC SHELLFISH POISONING

Several outbreaks of diarrhetic shellfish poisoning have been reported
in Europe after consumption of mussels, cockles, and other shellfish.
The dinoflagellates Dinophysis and Prorocentrum produce okadaic acid
and its derivatives, the dinophysistoxins. These compounds inhibit
protein phosphatases. The intracellular accumulation of phosphorylated proteins causes increased fluid secretion by gut cells via calcium
influx, which is mediated by cyclic adenosine monophosphate and
prostaglandins.
Patients have severe diarrhea. Care is supportive and directed at
rehydration. The illness is self-­limited, and recovery occurs in 3-­4 days;
few patients require hospitalization.

AMNESIC SHELLFISH POISONING

Amnesic shellfish poisoning has been identified after consumption of
shellfish from the United States, Spain, and the United Kingdom. The
responsible toxin, domoic acid, comes from a diatom, Pseudonitzschia
multiseries, and is a potent glutamate agonist, disrupting neurochemical transmission in the brain. It also binds to glutamate receptors,
which increase calcium influx, producing neuronal swelling in the hippocampal area of the brain and death.

The initial clinical manifestations are gastrointestinal with nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal cramps within 24 hours of ingestion. Neurologic symptoms may follow including headache, confusion, and short-­term memory loss. Memory loss is closely related to
advanced age with those >50 years more likely to suffer from memory
loss lasting months to years.

PUFFERFISH POISONING

The consumption of pufferfish (blowfish) in certain geographic areas
such as Japan and the Indo-­Pacific Ocean is associated with a lethal
neurotoxic illness due to tetrodotoxin. Fugu, a Japanese delicacy, is
sought after in part because of the subtle neurotoxic effects experienced upon eating, including perioral paresthesias and a dissociative
feeling. While a trained fugu chef will remove the most toxic parts of
the fish, the toxin is still found in varying degrees.
Tetrodotoxin, which is also found in the blue-­ringed octopus, causes
a paralytic illness due to the blockade of voltage-­dependent sodium
channels. Early symptoms include paresthesias, nausea, and dizziness,
which progresses to weakness, numbness, and incoordination. Autonomic compromise may also occur with bradycardia and hypotension.
In the most severe of cases, respiratory compromise requires assisted
ventilation.
There is no specific antidote for tetrodotoxin pufferfish poisoning.

AZASPIRACID POISONING

The azaspiracids are a class of algal toxins associated with harmful
algal blooms (HABs). Azaspiracid poisoning results from ingestion of
contaminated bivalve shellfish, especially mussels. Azaspiracid toxins
are distributed throughout the muscle tissue in the shellfish. Azaspiracid is cytotoxic to cells and an inhibitor of Ca2+ channels in plasma
membranes. Symptoms start 6-­18 hours after ingestion and include
nausea, vomiting, severe stomach cramps, and diarrhea, which often
persist up to 5 days.
Cyanobacteria (blue-­green algae) also produce HABs; exposure is
usually during recreational water sports and may be cutaneous or gastrointestinal. Symptoms include rash, cough, abdominal pain, diarrhea,
nausea, emesis, muscle aches, watery eyes, weakness, or sore throat.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4446 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

762.4 Melamine Poisoning
Katherine Baranowski and Diane P. Calello
Melamine (1,3,5-­triazine-­2,4,6-­triamine, or C3H6N6) is found in
many plastics, adhesives, laminated products, cement, cleansers, fire
retardant paint, and more. Melamine poisoning from food products
was unheard of until 2007, when melamine-­tainted pet food caused
the death of many dogs and cats in the United States. In 2008, feeding of melamine-­tainted infant formula to more than 300,000 children
resulted in urolithiasis and resultant kidney injuries, 50,000 hospitalizations, and 6 deaths in China. This was the first reported epidemic of
melamine-­tainted milk products.
Melamine contains 66% nitrogen by mass. The illegal addition of
melamine to infant formula can give the formula a milky appearance
and falsely raise the protein content as measured by nitrogen testing.
Melamine, combined with cyanuric acid, forms cyanurate crystals in
the kidneys. Along with protein, uric acid, and phosphate, melamine
forms renal calculi. The melamine stones and gravel can be treated with
hydration, alkalinization, or lithotripsy. Acute renal failure requires
supportive care and dialysis if needed.
Clinical manifestations are initially subtle and nonspecific. The
severity is dose related. The first symptoms in affected infants are unexplained crying (especially when urinating), vomiting, and discolored
urine caused by the formation of stones and gravel in the urinary tract.
Urinary obstruction and acute renal failure follow. In the absence of
a specific diagnosis, death from renal failure may occur. Whether
children with melamine-­induced renal failure will have chronic renal
sequelae is currently unknown.
In addition to the more well-­known renal toxicity, cognitive defects
can be seen after acute, chronic, or prenatal exposure. Dissolved and
insoluble melamine and its insoluble metabolites all have the potential
to cause neurotoxicity.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 763

Biological and Chemical
Terrorism
Theodore J. Cieslak, Jonathan Newmark,
and Mark G. Kortepeter*
In April of 2017, an attack on the town of Khan Shaykhun in Syria
employed a poisonous “nerve agent” (likely sarin) that resulted in the
deaths of at least 92 civilians, many of them young children. The attack
intentionally targeted civilian neighborhoods at the time children were
getting ready for school, which is strong evidence that its purpose was
terror, not warfare. Terrorist actions targeting children are not novel.
Brought to the forefront of American consciousness by Timothy

* The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
position of the University of Nebraska, the U.S. Department of Defense, Health and Human
Services, and Veterans’ Affairs, or their component entities.

McVeigh’s references to child fatalities as “collateral damage” during
the Oklahoma City bombing in April 1995, the intentional targeting of
children became a global reality with the attack upon a school in Beslan,
Russia, in September 2004. The attack, which left 334 dead (including
186 children), presaged additional attacks specifically directed against
children. School shootings have become an all too frequent occurrence
in the United States with over 175 children dying from mass shootings
on school grounds since 1999.
Paralleling the targeting of children is an apparent trend toward the
use of “unconventional” weapons of terror. In 1984, members of the
Rajneeshee cult employed Salmonella typhi in a wave of intentional
poisonings that affected 751 persons, including 142 teenage patrons
of a popular pizza parlor. In 1995, the Aum Shinrikyo cult killed 12
and sickened thousands by intentionally releasing sarin nerve agent in
the Tokyo subway system. A disgruntled scientist allegedly deployed
anthrax spores via the U.S. mail in October 2001, killing 5 and injuring
17 in an attack upon a nation already reeling in the wake of the 9/11
attacks. Conflicts in Afghanistan, Syria, and Iraq from 2012 to 2016 led
to another spike in chemical attacks.
These developments remind us that terrorists can strike at any time,
utilizing any number of unconventional weapons, including biologic
and chemical agents. Children will not be spared in these attacks on
civilians, and indeed schools and daycare sites may be the targets of
these actions.

ETIOLOGY

Although terrorists may choose to use weapons of opportunity,
agents that are readily available to some member of the terrorist
group, the motives of terrorists often are obscure and difficult to predict. Prevention and response strategies should thus concentrate not
on those agents most likely to be used but, rather, on those agents
that, if used, would constitute the gravest potential threats to public
health and security.
Biologic threat agents, including pathogens and toxins, have been
divided by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
into three categories, with category A including diseases caused
by those six agents posing the greatest threat: anthrax, plague (see
Chapter 249.3), tularemia (see Chapter 252), smallpox, botulism (see
Chapter 256), and the viral hemorrhagic fevers, including Ebola (see
Chapter 317).
Terrorists could also procure and release a vast array of potentially
harmful chemicals. The Chemical Threat Risk Assessment prepared
by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security lists over 170 chemical
compounds as potential threats in accidental or deliberate scenarios.
Tank cars full of flammable industrial gases and liquids, corrosive
industrial acids and bases, poisonous compounds such as cyanides and
nitrites, pesticides, dioxins, and explosives traverse our railways and
roads daily. Four classes of “military-­grade” chemicals with a history of
use in warfare or manufactured specifically for use as weapons include
the organophosphate-­based nerve agents, vesicants, cyanides (misleadingly referred to as “blood agents”), and certain pulmonary irritants or
“choking agents.”

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND PEDIATRIC-­SPECIFIC
CONCERNS

Large-­scale attacks on civilian targets will likely involve pediatric
victims. Children may be more susceptible than adults to the effects
of certain biologic and chemical agents (see Chapter 759). A thinner and less-­keratinized epidermis makes dermally active agents,
such as mustard or trichothecene mycotoxins, a greater risk to children than to adults. A larger surface area per unit volume further
increases the problem. A small relative blood volume makes children more susceptible to the volume losses associated with enteric
infections such as cholera and to gastrointestinal intoxications such
as might be seen with exposure to the staphylococcal enterotoxins. The high minute ventilation of children, compared with that
of adults, increases the threat of agents delivered via the inhalational route. The fact that children live “closer to the ground” compounds this effect when heavier-­than-­air chemicals are involved.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 763 u Biological and Chemical Terrorism
An immature blood-­brain barrier may heighten the risk of central
nervous system toxicity from nerve agents. Developmental considerations make it less likely that a child would readily flee an area
of danger, thereby increasing exposure to these various adverse
effects. Moreover, children are more likely to be terrified at the sight
of responders in personal protective ensembles.
Children appear to have a unique susceptibility to certain agents
that might be used by terrorists. Although adults generally suffer
only a brief, self-­limited incapacitating illness after infection with
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, young children are more
likely to experience seizures, permanent neurologic sequelae, and
death. In the case of smallpox, waning herd immunity may disproportionately affect children. Vaccine-­induced immunity to smallpox diminishes significantly after 3-­10 years. Although most adults
are considered susceptible to smallpox given that routine civilian
immunization ceased in the early 1970s, older adults may have
some residual protection from death, if not from the development
of disease. Today’s children are among the first to grow up in a
world without any individual or herd immunity to smallpox.
Children also may experience unique disease manifestations not
seen in adults. Suppurative parotitis is a common characteristic
finding among children with melioidosis but is not generally seen
in adults with Burkholderia pseudomallei infection (see Chapter
251.2). Seizures, often the presenting symptom of cyanide or nerve
agent poisoning, may be much more difficult to recognize clinically
in children than in adults, more likely presenting as unresponsiveness or change in mental status than tonic-­clonic episodes.
Pediatricians are likely to experience unique problems in managing childhood victims of a biologic or chemical attack. Many of the
drugs useful in treating such casualties are unfamiliar to pediatricians or have relative contraindications in childhood. The fluoroquinolones and tetracyclines are commonly cited as agents of choice
in the treatment and prophylaxis of anthrax, plague, tularemia, brucellosis, and Q fever. Both drug classes are often avoided in children,
although the risk of morbidity and mortality from diseases induced
by agents of bioterrorism far outweighs the minor risk associated
with short-­term use of these agents. Ciprofloxacin received, as its
first licensed pediatric indication, approval from the FDA for use in
the prophylaxis of anthrax after inhalational exposure during a terrorist attack; doxycycline and levofloxacin are licensed specifically
in children for the same indication. Levofloxacin is also licensed for
postexposure prophylaxis of children against plague, and moxifloxacin is considered an acceptable alternative to first-­line therapies
for the treatment of plague in those less than 18 years of age. Immunizations potentially useful in preventing biologic agent–induced
diseases are often not approved for use in pediatric patients. The
available anthrax vaccine is licensed only for those between 18
and 65 years. The plague vaccine, currently out of production and
probably ineffective against inhalational exposures, was approved
only for individuals ages 18-­61 years. The live replicating smallpox
vaccine (ACAM2000), a live vaccine employing vaccinia virus, can
cause fetal demise when given to pregnant women. A nonreplicating smallpox (and mpox) vaccine (Jynneos) was introduced in 2019.
Many otherwise useful pharmaceutical agents are not available
in pediatric dosing regimens. The military distributes nerve agent
antidote kits consisting of prefilled autoinjectors designed for the
rapid administration of atropine and pralidoxime. Many emergency
departments and some ambulances stock these kits. The doses of
agents contained in the nerve agent antidote kit are calculated for
soldiers and thus are inappropriate for young children, and pediatric pralidoxime autoinjectors are not yet available. Atropine autoinjectors specifically formulated for children are approved by the
FDA, although their availability is limited. Unfortunately, there
is no pediatric combination autoinjector containing atropine and
pralidoxime, the backbone of acute nerve agent treatment in adults.
Moreover, children smaller than 7 kg (15 pounds) are too small for
safe use of atropine autoinjectors, while obtaining venous access
may be time-­consuming and extremely difficult in a contaminated
environment.

4447

Although physical protective measures and devices (e.g., “gas
masks”) are likely to be of little utility in a civilian terrorism setting,
such commercially available devices are not often available in pediatric sizes. The Israeli experience during the first Gulf War suggests that
frightened parents may improperly use such masks on their children,
resulting in inadvertent suffocation.
In the event of a large-­scale terrorist attack, there may be an
insufficient number of pediatric hospital beds. In any large disaster,
excess bed capacity might potentially be provided at civilian and
veterans hospitals under the auspices of the National Disaster Medical System. Although that system now specifically tracks pediatric
beds, none of these would be found in the Veterans Administration
system and few are likely to exist elsewhere. The situation is even
more dire regarding burn unit beds, which may be needed in an
attack with vesicants such as sulfur mustard.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Should a terrorist attack occur, clinicians may be called on to make
prompt diagnoses and render rapid lifesaving treatments before the
results of confirmatory diagnostic tests are available. Although each
potential agent of terrorism produces its own unique clinical manifestations, it is useful for the frontline clinician to consider their
effects in terms of a limited number of distinct clinical syndromes.
This approach helps clinicians make prompt, rational decisions
regarding empirical therapy. Casualties resulting from a terrorist
attack would either experience symptoms immediately upon exposure to an agent (or within the first several hours after exposure) or
would see their symptoms develop slowly over a period of days to
weeks. In the former case, the sinister nature of the event is often
obvious and the etiology more likely to be conventional or chemical
in nature.
Biologic agents differ from conventional, chemical (see Chapter 759), and nuclear (see Chapter 758) weapons in that they have
inherent incubation periods. Consequently, patients are likely to
present distant in time and place from the point of an unannounced
and unnoticed exposure to a biologic agent. Whereas traditional
first responders, such as firefighters and paramedics, may be at the
forefront of a conventional or chemical terrorism response, the primary care physician or emergency room is likely to constitute the
first line of defense against the effects of a biologic agent.
Casualties can thus be categorized as either immediate or delayed
in presentation. Within each of these categories, patients can be
further classified as having primarily respiratory, neuromuscular,
or dermatologic manifestations (Table 763.1). A limited number of
agents may cause each particular syndrome, permitting institution
of empiric therapy targeted at a short list of potential etiologies.
The viral hemorrhagic fevers might manifest as fever and a bleeding diathesis; these agents are considered separately in Chapter
317. In most cases, supportive care is the mainstay of hemorrhagic
fever treatment, although two drugs (Inmazeb, Ebanga) have
recently been licensed for the treatment of adults and children with
Ebola.

Sudden-­Onset Neuromuscular Syndrome: Nerve
Agents

The very rapid onset of neuromuscular symptoms after an exposure
should lead the clinician to consider nerve agent intoxication. The
nerve agents (tabun, sarin, soman, and VX) are organophosphate
analogs of common pesticides that act as potent inhibitors of the
enzyme acetylcholinesterase. The so-­called “Novichok” agents, used
in deliberate attacks upon Russian targets in Salisbury, UK (2018)
and Tomsk, Russia (2020), also belong to this agent class. The nerve
agents are hazardous via ingestion, inhalation, or cutaneous absorption (see Chapter 94).
The inhibition of cholinesterase by these compounds results in
the accumulation of acetylcholine at neural and neuromuscular
junctions, causing excess stimulation. The resultant cholinergic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4448 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 763.1  Diseases Caused by Agents of Chemical and Biologic Terrorism, Classified by Syndrome
NEUROMUSCULAR SYMPTOMS
PROMINENT

RESPIRATORY SYMPTOMS
PROMINENT

DERMATOLOGIC FINDINGS
PROMINENT

Sudden-­onset or intermediate-­
onset

Nerve agents

Chlorine
Phosgene
Cyanide

Mustard
Lewisite

Delayed-­onset

Botulism

Anthrax
Plague
Tularemia
Ricin

Smallpox

syndrome involves central, nicotinic, and muscarinic effects. Central effects are both muscarinically and nicotinically mediated and
include altered mental status progressing rapidly to lethargy and
coma, as well as ataxia, convulsions, and central respiratory depression. Studies on pesticide exposure suggest that children may be
more prone to central neurologic dysfunction with organophosphate toxicity than adults. The most lethal effects are respiratory,
which result not only from central effects but also from direct
paralysis of the diaphragm and other respiratory muscles (nicotinic effects), as well as bronchospasm and bronchorrhea (muscarinic effects). Nicotinic effects include muscle fasciculations and
twitching, followed by weakness, which can progress to flaccid
paralysis as muscles fatigue. Importantly, flaccid paralysis is not
present initially, as in a patient with botulinum toxin poisoning. In
botulinum toxin poisoning, neurotransmitter cannot be released
from the presynaptic terminal, whereas in nerve agent poisoning,
excess neurotransmitter accumulates because acetylcholinesterase,
the enzyme that turns off the transmitter, is inhibited. Muscarinic
effects include miosis (the clinical hallmark of a patient who has
suffered a non–life-­threatening nerve agent challenge), visual blurring, profuse lacrimation, and watery rhinorrhea. Bronchospasm
and increased bronchial secretions lead to cough, wheezing, dyspnea, and cyanosis. Cardiovascular manifestations include bradycardia, hypotension, and atrioventricular block. Flushing, sweating,
salivation, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, and urinary incontinence are also seen. In the absence of prompt intervention, death can quickly result from a combination of central effects
and respiratory muscle paralysis.
The classic neuromuscular syndrome of extremely acute symptoms most commonly results from an aerosol or vapor exposure,
the most likely route in a terrorist attack. But nerve agents are liquids at standard temperature and pressure and do not cause immediate irritation to skin. Liquid nerve agent may thus pass through
the skin and enter the systemic circulation, causing cholinergic crisis. This can be delayed by minutes to hours, depending upon dose
and body site. In children, because the stratum corneum of the skin
forms only gradually, skin transit time will be reduced. Miosis may
be a late development. If the clinician suspects that the child may
have been exposed to nerve agent via the cutaneous route, they should
immediately treat, even if miosis has not yet developed.
Cyanide poisoning is a major differential diagnosis of nerve
agent poisoning in an attack scenario. Cyanide poisons cytochrome
a3 in the mitochondrial electron transport chain and can cause
an almost immediate and rather similar syndrome of loss of consciousness, immediate rapid breathing, status epilepticus, and rapid
progression to cardiac arrest. Important clinical differential points
include miosis, which is usually absent in cyanide poisoning, and
the usual lack of cyanosis (ironically) due to the tissues’ inability to
use oxygen from the blood, causing venous blood to retain oxygen
and remain red. In an emergency, it may be necessary to treat for
both nerve agent and cyanide poisoning until the cause is definitively identified.

Delayed-­Onset Neuromuscular Syndrome: Botulism

The delayed onset (hours to days after exposure) of neuromuscular symptoms is characteristic of botulism. Botulism, an intoxication rather than an infection, occurs after exposure to one of eight
related neurotoxins produced by certain strains of Clostridium botulinum, a strictly anaerobic, spore-­forming, gram-­positive bacillus
commonly found in soil. Naturally occurring botulism (see Chapter
256) usually follows ingestion of preformed toxin (food poisoning)
or results from intestinal toxin production (infantile botulism). An
aerosol exposure to the toxin would likely result in a case of clinical
botulism indistinguishable from that caused by natural exposures.
Following exposure to botulinum toxin, clinical manifestations
typically begin with bulbar palsies, causing patients to complain of
ptosis, photophobia, and blurred vision resulting from difficulty in
accommodation. Symptoms can progress to include dysarthria, dysphonia, dysphagia, and finally, a descending symmetric paralysis.
Sensation and sensorium are typically not affected. In the absence
of intervention, death often results from respiratory muscle failure.
The mechanism of action of botulinum toxin is, in many ways, the
opposite of that of nerve agent intoxication. Seizures, loss of consciousness, and peripheral twitching and fasciculations, typical of
nerve agent poisoning, are not seen in botulism.

Sudden-­Onset Respiratory Syndrome: Chlorine,
Phosgene, and Cyanide

The acute onset of respiratory symptoms shortly after exposure should
prompt the clinician to consider a range of potential chemical agents. Of
note, nerve agents, discussed previously, may affect respiration via massive
bronchial hypersecretion, bronchospasm, and respiratory muscle paresis. However, the nerve agent casualty will likely have generalized muscle
involvement and central nervous system manifestations. In contrast, the
toxic inhalants chlorine and phosgene produce respiratory distress without neuromuscular involvement or other features of cholinergic crisis. Several other pulmonary toxicants may produce similar clinical toxidromes.
Chlorine is a dense, acrid, yellow-­green gas that is heavier than air.
After mild to moderate exposure, ocular and nasal irritation occurs,
followed by cough, a choking sensation, bronchospasm, and substernal
chest tightness. Pulmonary edema, mediated by hydrochloric acid and
free oxygen radical generation, follows moderate to severe exposures
within 30 minutes to several hours. Hypoxemia and hypovolemia secondary to noncardiogenic pulmonary edema are the factors responsible for death.
Phosgene, like chlorine, is a common industrial compound that
was used as a weapon on the battlefields of World War I. Its odor has
been described as similar to “new-­mown hay.” Like chlorine, phosgene exposure also is thought to result in the generation of hydrochloric acid, contributing particularly to upper airway, nasal, and
conjunctival irritation. Acylation reactions caused by the effects
of phosgene on the pulmonary alveolar-­capillary membrane lead
to pulmonary edema. Phosgene lung injury also may be mediated,
in part, by an inflammatory reaction associated with leukotriene
production. Patients with mild to moderate exposures to phosgene

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 763 u Biological and Chemical Terrorism
may be asymptomatic, a fact that may cause victims to remain in a
contaminated area. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema or “dry land
drowning” occurs 4-­24 hours after exposure and is dose dependent,
with heavier exposures causing earlier symptoms. Dyspnea may
precede radiologic findings. In severe exposures, pulmonary edema
may be so marked as to result in hypovolemia and hypotension. As
in the case of chlorine, death results from hypoxemia and asphyxia.
Cyanide, by contrast, is a cellular poison capable of causing protean clinical manifestations, not a pulmonary toxicant. Initially, cyanide toxicity is most likely to manifest as tachypnea and hyperpnea,
progressing rapidly to apnea in cases with significant exposure (see
Chapter 94). The efficacy of cyanide as a chemical terrorism agent
is limited by its volatility in open air and relatively low lethality
compared with nerve agents. Released in a closed room, however,
cyanide could have devastating effects, as evidenced by its use in
the Nazi gas chambers during World War II. Cyanide inhibits cytochrome a3, interfering with normal mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and leading to cellular anoxia and lactic acidosis. In addition
to respiratory distress, early findings among cyanide victims include
tachycardia, flushing, dizziness, headache, diaphoresis, nausea, and
vomiting. With greater exposure, seizures, coma, apnea, and cardiac
arrest may follow within minutes. An elevated anion gap metabolic
acidosis is typically present and decreased peripheral oxygen utilization leads to an elevated mixed venous oxygen saturation value.

Delayed-­Onset Respiratory Syndrome: Anthrax,
Plague, Tularemia, and Ricin

A delayed onset of respiratory symptoms (days after exposure) is
characteristic of several infectious diseases and at least one toxin that
might be adapted for sinister purposes by terrorists. Among the most
threatening and problematic of these are anthrax, plague, tularemia,
and ricin.
Anthrax is caused by infection with the gram-­
positive spore-­
forming rod Bacillus anthracis. Its ability to form a spore enables the
anthrax bacillus to survive for long periods in the environment and
enhances its potential as a weapon.
The vast majority of naturally occurring anthrax cases are cutaneous, acquired by close contact with the hides, wool, bone, and
other by-­products of infected ruminants (principally cattle, sheep,
and goats). Cutaneous anthrax is amenable to therapy with a variety
of antibiotics and is readily recognizable to experienced clinicians
in endemic areas; consequently, it is rarely fatal. Although it is common in parts of Asia and sub-­Saharan Africa, only two cases of cutaneous anthrax had occurred in the United States in the 9 years that
preceded the attacks of 2001 (when 11 cutaneous cases were seen).
Gastrointestinal anthrax has been described only once in the United
States, in a drum circle participant whose drum heads were made
from imported animal hides. In general, however, it occurs after the
ingestion of contaminated meat. In the past, inhalational anthrax,
or woolsorters’ disease, was an occupational hazard of abattoir and
textile workers. Now eliminated as a naturally occurring disease in
the United States, it is this inhalational form of anthrax that poses
the greatest terror threat. Following an inadvertent release in 1979
from a bioweapons facility at Sverdlovsk in the former Soviet Union,
66 of 77 (86%) known adult victims of inhalational anthrax died. In
the 2001 attacks involving contaminated mail in the United States,
5 of 11 (46%) patients with inhalational anthrax died. Whether better intensive care modalities, changes in antibiotic therapy, or earlier recognition accounted for this improved mortality rate remains
unknown.
Symptomatic inhalational anthrax typically begins 1-­6 days after
exposure, although incubation periods of up to several weeks have
been reported. The disease begins as a flulike illness, characterized
by fever, myalgia, headache, and cough. A brief intervening period
of improvement sometimes follows, but rapid deterioration then
ensues; high fever, dyspnea, cyanosis, and shock mark this second

4449

phase. Hemorrhagic meningitis occurs in up to 50% of cases. Chest
radiographs obtained late in the course of illness may reveal a widened mediastinum or prominent mediastinal lymphadenopathy;
pleural effusions also may be seen. Bacteremia is often so profound
that Gram stains of peripheral blood may demonstrate the organism at this stage. Prompt treatment is imperative. Death occurs in
as many as 95% of inhalational anthrax cases if such treatment is
begun more than 48 hours after the onset of symptoms.
Whereas inhalational anthrax is a disease primarily of mediastinal
lymphatic tissue, exposure to aerosolized plague bacilli typically leads
to a primary pneumonia. Endemic plague is usually transmitted via
the bites of fleas and is discussed in Chapter 249.3. The causative organism of all forms of human plague, Yersinia pestis, is a bipolar-­staining,
gram-­negative facultative intracellular bacillus. An ability to survive
within the macrophage aids its dissemination to distant sites following
inoculation or inhalation. “Buboes,” markedly swollen, exquisitely tender regional lymph nodes in the distribution of a bite, are the hallmark
feature of bubonic plague. Fever and malaise are typically present, and
septicemia often develops as bacteria gain access to the circulation.
Petechiae, purpura, and overwhelming disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy commonly occur, and 80% of bubonic plague victims
ultimately have positive blood cultures. Plague is extremely lethal, as
illustrated by the fact that the “Black Death” eliminated one-­third of the
population of Europe during the Middle Ages.
Intentional aerosol dissemination of Y. pestis would likely result in
a preponderance of pneumonic plague cases. Pneumonic plague may
also arise secondarily after seeding of the lungs of septicemic patients.
Symptoms include fever, chills, malaise, headache, and cough. Chest
radiographs may reveal a patchy consolidation, and the classic clinical
finding is blood-­streaked sputum. Disseminated intravascular coagulation and overwhelming sepsis typically develop as the disease progresses. Untreated pneumonic plague has a fatality rate approaching
100%.
Tularemia is a highly infectious disease caused by the gram-­negative
coccobacillus Francisella tularensis. Naturally occurring tularemia is
discussed in Chapter 252. The high degree of infectivity of F. tularensis
(<10 organisms are thought to be necessary to produce infection via
inhalation), as well as its survivability in the environment, contributes
to its inclusion on the CDC’s list of Category A agents. Several clinical forms of endemic tularemia are known, but inhalational exposure
resulting from a terrorist attack would likely lead to a plaguelike primary pneumonia or to typhoidal tularemia, manifesting as a variety of
nonspecific symptoms, including fever, malaise, and abdominal pain.
Ricin is a protein toxin derived from the castor bean plant (Ricinus
communis) that inhibits ribosomal protein synthesis. It is highly toxic
in animal studies when inhaled and may result in the delayed onset of
respiratory distress, pulmonary edema, and acute respiratory failure.
If injected, it may cause a sepsis-­like syndrome that may progress to
multiorgan system failure; ingestion can lead to severe gastroenteritis.
Ricin-­containing letters were mailed to a U.S. Senate office building
in 2004, to President Obama and New York City Mayor Bloomberg
in 2013, and to President Trump in 2020, although no persons were
sickened in any of the attacks.

Intermediate-­Onset Dermatologic Syndrome:
Mustard and Lewisite

The development of skin lesions within hours to days of exposure is characteristic of the chemical vesicants. These compounds, often referred to
as blistering agents, are cellular poisons and include the alkylating agent
mustard and the organic arsenical agent lewisite. Injury to rapidly reproducing cells begins within minutes of contact with these agents. Clinical
effects typically become evident several hours after exposure to mustard,
whereas patients exposed to lewisite feel immediate pain. Both mustard
and lewisite affect the eyes and respiratory tract, and their inadvertent
ingestion may produce significant gastrointestinal symptoms. Mustard
exposure may lead, several days later, to bone marrow suppression. With

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4450 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
a large inhalational challenge, mustard may also cause an acute respiratory syndrome, particularly affecting the upper airway and presenting with
laryngospasm and stridor.

Delayed-­Onset Dermatologic Syndrome: Smallpox

The appearance of an exanthem days to weeks after exposure is likely
to be a presenting feature of smallpox. Caused by infection with variola
virus, a member of the Orthopoxvirus family, smallpox has an incubation period of 7-­17 days. This would likely permit the wide dispersal
of asymptomatic exposed persons, thus contributing to the spread of
an outbreak. During the incubation period, the virus replicates in the
upper respiratory tract. A primary viremia ensues, during which time
seeding of the liver and spleen occurs. A secondary viremia then develops, the skin is seeded, and the classic exanthem of smallpox appears.
Symptoms of smallpox begin abruptly during the phase of secondary viremia and include fever, rigors, vomiting, headache, backache,
and extreme malaise. Within 2-­4 days, macules appear on the face
and extremities and then progress in synchronous fashion to papules,
pustules, and finally scabs. As the scabs separate, survivors often are
left with disfiguring, depigmented scars. The synchronous nature of
the rash and its centrifugal distribution distinguish smallpox from
chickenpox, which has a centripetal distribution. Historically, smallpox had a 30% mortality rate, with death typically resulting from visceral organ involvement.

DIAGNOSIS

In some cases, the terrorist nature of a chemical or biologic attack
may be obvious; for example, a chemical attack in which victims
succumb in close temporal and geographic proximity to a dispersal
device or when terrorists announce their attack. In other instances,
the clinician may need to rely on epidemiologic clues to suspect
an intentional release of chemical or biologic agents. The presence
of large numbers of victims clustered in time and space should
raise the index of suspicion, as should cases of unexpected death or
unexpectedly severe disease. Diseases unusual in a given locale, in
a given age group, or during a certain season likewise may warrant
further investigation. Simultaneous outbreaks of a disease in noncontiguous areas should cause one to consider an intentional release
(as in the 2001 mail-­borne anthrax attacks), as should outbreaks of
multiple diseases in the same area. Even a single case of a rare disorder such as anthrax or certain viral hemorrhagic fevers would be
suspicious, and a single case of smallpox would almost certainly be
the result of an intentional dissemination. Large numbers of dying
animals might provide evidence of an unnatural aerosol release, as
would evidence of disparate attack rates between those known to be
indoors and outdoors at a given time.
In a mass casualty setting, diagnoses may be made largely on clinical
grounds. The diagnosis of nerve agent intoxication is based primarily on clinical recognition and patient response to antidotal therapy.
Several simple rapid detection devices developed for military use can
detect the presence of nerve agents in the environment. Some of these
are now commercially available and are stocked in certain emergency
departments and public safety vehicles. Measurements of acetylcholinesterase in plasma or erythrocytes of nerve agent victims may be
helpful in long-­term prognostication, but the correlation between cholinesterase levels and clinical effects is often poor, and the test is rarely
available on an emergency basis.
Botulism should be suspected clinically among patients presenting
with a symmetric, descending, flaccid paralysis. Although the differential diagnosis of botulism includes other uncommon neurologic disorders, such as myasthenia gravis and the Guillain-­Barré syndrome, the
presence of multiple casualties with similar symptoms should aid in the
determination of a botulism outbreak. Electromyography is useful in
supporting the diagnosis.
Initially the diagnosis of cyanide poisoning also will likely
be made on clinical grounds in the presence of the appropriate

toxidrome. An unusually high anion gap metabolic acidosis with
elevated serum lactate and an oxygen concentration greater than
expected in mixed venous blood lend support to the clinical diagnosis. Elevated blood cyanide concentrations can confirm the clinical suspicion.
Of all the chemical and biological agents, the only ones for which
immediate therapy without waiting for definitive diagnosis is potentially lifesaving and mandatory are nerve agents and cyanide poisoning. If these are suspected, they should be treated before waiting for
further diagnostic certainty.
Anthrax should be suspected upon finding gram-­positive bacilli
in skin biopsy material (in the case of cutaneous disease), blood
smears, pleural fluid, or spinal fluid. Chest radiographs demonstrating a widened mediastinum in the context of fever and constitutional signs and, in the absence of another obvious explanation
(e.g., blunt trauma or postsurgical infection), should also lead one
to consider the diagnosis. Confirmation can be obtained by blood
culture.
A diagnosis of plague can be suspected on finding bipolar “safety-­
pin”–staining bacilli in Gram or Wayson stains of sputum or aspirated
lymph node material; confirmation is obtained by culturing Y. pestis
from blood, sputum, or lymph node aspirate. The organism grows on
standard blood or MacConkey TRA agars, but it is often misidentified
by automated systems. F. tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia,
grows poorly on standard media; its growth is enhanced on media containing cysteine. Because of its extreme infectivity, however, many laboratories prefer to make a diagnosis via polymerase chain reaction or
serologically using an enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay or serum
agglutination assay.
Smallpox should be suspected on clinical grounds and can be confirmed by culture or electron microscopy of scabs or vesicular fluid,
although the manipulation of clinical material from suspected smallpox victims should be attempted only at public health laboratories able
to employ maximum biocontainment (Biosafety Level 4) precautions.
Similar caution should be exercised with specimens from patients with
various viral hemorrhagic fevers.

PREVENTION

Preventive measures can be considered in both a preexposure and
a postexposure context. Preexposure protection against a chemical
or biologic attack may consist of physical, chemical, or immunologic measures. Physical protection against primary attack often
involves gas masks and protective suits; such equipment is used by
the military and by certain hazardous materials response teams, but
it is unlikely to be available to civilians at the precise moment that
a release occurs. Medical personnel need to understand the principles of physical protection as they apply to infection control and
the spread of contamination.
Pneumonic plague is spread through respiratory droplets. Droplet precautions, including the use of simple surgical masks, are thus
warranted for providers caring for patients with plague. Smallpox
is transmitted by droplet nuclei. Airborne precautions, including
(ideally) a high-­efficiency particulate air filter mask, are thus warranted with smallpox victims. Patients with certain viral hemorrhagic fevers, such as those caused by filoviruses (Ebola, Marburg)
and arenaviruses, should be managed using a combination of droplet and contact precautions, ideally in a specialized biocontainment unit. Most other biologic agent victims can be safely cared
for with the use of standard precautions. In the case of chemical
agents, residual mustard or nerve agent on the skin or clothing of
victims might potentially pose a hazard to medical personnel. For
such victims, whenever possible, clothing should be removed, and
the patients decontaminated using copious amounts of water before
extensive medical care is rendered. Most other chemical agents are
volatile enough that spread of an agent among patients or from
patient to caregiver is unlikely.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 763 u Biological and Chemical Terrorism
Preexposure chemical prophylaxis might be used on the basis
of credible intelligence reports. Should officials deem that the
threatened release of a specific biologic agent appears imminent,
antibiotics might be distributed to a population before exposure.
Opportunities to employ such a strategy are likely to be limited,
although federal and state officials are examining various mechanisms for such employment. In military settings, pyridostigmine is
FDA-­approved as pretreatment against expected nerve agent attack.
It is not approved for use in children, and it is not likely to be recommended in civilian settings.
Although licensed vaccines (preexposure immunologic measures) against anthrax and smallpox have been developed, widespread use of either vaccine is likely to be problematic, especially in
children. The anthrax vaccine is licensed only for those persons age
18 years and older, is given as a five-­dose series over 18 months, and
requires annual booster doses. These considerations make civilian
employment of the current anthrax vaccine on a large scale unlikely,
although recombinant anthrax vaccines requiring fewer doses are in
development.
Significant obstacles to the widespread employment of smallpox
vaccine also exist, although public health officials have contemplated
the resumption of a smallpox vaccination campaign. Whereas in the
past, the live replicating smallpox vaccine (prepared from vaccinia
virus, an Orthopoxvirus related to variola) was used safely and successfully in young infants, it has a relatively high rate of serious complications in certain patients. Fetal vaccinia and demise can occur when
pregnant women are vaccinated. Vaccinia gangrenosa, an often fatal
complication, can occur when immunocompromised persons are vaccinated. Eczema vaccinatum occurs in those with preexisting dermatoses (atopic dermatitis). Severe vaccine-­related encephalitis was well
known during the era of widespread vaccination; because it occurs
only in primary vaccines, it would disproportionately affect pediatric
patients. Autoinoculation can occur when the virus present at the site
of vaccination is manually transferred to other areas of skin or to the
eye. Young children would presumably be at greater risk for such inadvertent transmission. Myocarditis has been reported following vaccinations of military recruits. A new nonreplicating vaccine may alleviate
some of these concerns.
To manage complications associated with use of the replicating vaccine, vaccinia immune globulin should be available when one is undertaking a vaccination campaign. Vaccinia immune globulin (6000 U/kg
intravenously) may be given to vaccine recipients who experience
severe complications or to significantly immunocompromised individuals exposed to smallpox and in whom vaccination would be unsafe.
In 2018, tecovirimat was approved by the FDA for the treatment of
persons (including children) experiencing severe complications from
vaccine. Vaccine, as well as vaccinia immune globulin and tecovirimat,
can be obtained as needed upon consultation with officials at the CDC.
In addition to a potential role in preexposure prophylaxis, vaccination
may be effective in postexposure prophylaxis if given within the first 4
days after exposure.
Anthrax vaccine might similarly be employed in a postexposure setting. Some authorities recommend three doses of this vaccine as an
adjunct to postexposure chemoprophylaxis after documented exposure to aerosolized anthrax spores. Nonetheless, postexposure administration of oral antibiotics constitutes the mainstay of management for
asymptomatic victims believed to have been exposed to anthrax as well
as to other bacterial agents such as plague and tularemia. Table 763.2
lists appropriate prophylactic regimens for various biologic exposures.

TREATMENT

Although Tables 763.2, 763.3, and 763.4 provide recommended
therapies for overt diseases caused by various chemical and biologic
agents, it is likely that the clinician attending to victims will need to
make therapeutic decisions before the results of confirmatory diagnostic tests are available and in situations in which the diagnosis is

4451

not known with certainty. In particular, decontamination by hospital
personnel in appropriate personal protective equipment is required
for patients exposed to chemical agents who have not been adequately
decontaminated in the prehospital setting (see Table 763.4). In such
cases, it is useful to note that many diseases and symptoms caused by
chemical and biologic agents will resolve with supportive care. Most
cases of chlorine or phosgene exposure can be successfully managed
by providing meticulous attention to oxygenation and fluid balance.
Mustard victims may require intensive multisystem support, but no
specific antidote or therapy is available. Many viral diseases, including
most viral hemorrhagic fevers, as well as equine encephalitides, are also
managed supportively.
In addition to ensuring adequate oxygenation, ventilation, and
hydration, the clinician may need to provide specific empiric therapies on an urgent basis. Patients suffering from the sudden onset of
severe neuromuscular symptoms may have nerve agent intoxication
and should be given atropine (0.05-0.1 mg/kg) promptly for its antimuscarinic effects. Although atropine relieves bronchospasm and
bradycardia, reduces bronchial secretions, and ameliorates the gastrointestinal effects of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, it does not improve
skeletal muscle paralysis. 2-­Pralidoxime chloride (2-­PAM) cleaves the
organophosphate moiety from cholinesterase and regenerates intact
enzyme if “aging” has not occurred. The effect is most prominent at
the neuromuscular junction and leads to improved muscle strength.
Its prompt use (at a dose of 25-50 mg/kg) as an adjunct to atropine is
recommended in all serious cases.
Ideally, both atropine and pralidoxime should be administered
intravenously (IV) in severe cases, although the intraosseous route is
acceptable. In the field, as time is of the essence in treating nerve agent
poisoning, first responders are trained to administer atropine IM via
autoinjector. Some experts also recommend that atropine be given IM
in the presence of hypoxia to avoid arrhythmias associated with IV
administration. Many emergency management services stock military-­
style autoinjector kits consisting of atropine and 2-­PAM for IM injection. Pediatric atropine autoinjectors containing 0.5 or 1 mg of atropine
are licensed and held in the Strategic National Stockpile, although kits
intended for adults (with 2 mg of atropine and 600 mg of pralidoxime)
may be used in children >2-­3 years of age (Table 763.5). Autoinjectors
cannot easily be used in the smallest infants.
Animal studies support the routine prophylactic administration
of anticonvulsant doses of benzodiazepines, even in the absence of
observable convulsive activity. Although diazepam has long been
employed for this purpose, midazolam was recently granted FDA
approval, and animal studies have shown it to have superior efficacy in treating acute nerve agent poisoning. Military and civilian
stocks of diazepam autoinjectors are being replaced by midazolam
autoinjectors.
Delayed neuromuscular symptoms in the setting of terrorism might
be due to botulism. Supportive care, with meticulous attention to ventilatory support, is the mainstay of botulism treatment. Such support
may be necessary for several months, making the management of a
large-­scale botulism outbreak especially problematic in terms of medical resources. A licensed heptavalent antitoxin (types A-­G) is available
through the CDC (1-­800-­232-­4636). Administration of this antitoxin
is unlikely to reverse disease in symptomatic patients but may prevent further progression. In addition, a pentavalent product (containing antibody against toxin types A-­E but licensed only for treatment
of type A or B intoxication), Botulism Immune Globulin Intravenous
(Human; BabyBIG), is available through the California Department
of Health Services (1-­510-231-­7600) specifically for the treatment of
infant botulism.
The rapid onset of respiratory symptoms may signal an exposure to
chlorine, phosgene, cyanide, or a number of other toxic industrial chemicals. Although the mainstay of therapy in virtually all of these exposures
consists of removal to fresh air and intensive supportive care, cyanide
intoxication often requires the administration of specific antidotes.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4452 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 763.2  CDC Category A Agents of Bioterrorism
CLINICAL
FINDINGS

INCUBATION
PERIOD (DAYS)

ISOLATION
PRECAUTIONS

INITIAL TREATMENT

PROPHYLAXIS

Anthrax
(inhalational)
Patients who
are clinically
stable after
14 days can
be switched
to a single
oral agent
(as described
in the
prophylaxis
section of
this table) to
complete a
60-­day course

Febrile prodrome
with rapid
progression
to mediastinal
lymphadenitis
and mediastinitis,
sepsis, shock, and
meningitis

1-­5

Standard

See Table 763.3.

Ciprofloxacin 30 mg/
kg/day PO divided
q12h* (max 500 mg/
dose) or doxycycline
4.4 mg/kg/day PO
divided q12h (max
100 mg/dose) or
clindamycin 30 mg/kg
/day PO divided q8h
(max 900 mg/dose) or
levofloxacin 16 mg/kg/
day PO divided q12h
(max 250 mg/dose) or
amoxicillin 75 mg/kg/
day PO divided q8h†
(max 1 g/dose) or
penicillin VK 50-­75 mg/
kg/day divided q6-­8h

Plague
(pneumonic)

Febrile prodrome
with rapid
progression
to fulminant
pneumonia,
hemoptysis, sepsis,
disseminated
intravascular
coagulation

2-­3

Droplet (for first 3 days
of therapy)

Gentamicin** 1.25- 2.5 mg/kg IV Doxycycline 2.2 mg/kg
q8h or doxycycline 2.2 mg/kg
PO q12h or
IV q12h or ciprofloxacin 15 mg/kg
ciprofloxacin 20 mg/kg
IV q12h or levofloxacin 8 mg/kg
PO q12h or
IV/PO q12h
levofloxacin 8 mg/kg
PO q12h

Tularemia

Pneumonic: abrupt
onset of fever
with fulminant
pneumonia
Typhoidal: fever,
malaise, abdominal
pain

2-­10

Standard

Options same as for plague‡,
gentamicin preferred

Same as for plague‡

Smallpox

Febrile prodrome
with synchronous,
centrifugal,
vesiculopustular
exanthema

7-­17

Airborne (+ contact)

Tecovirimat
Oral dosage by body weight:
13 kg to <25 kg: 200 mg q12h
25 kg to <40 kg: 400 mg q12h
40 kg to <120 kg: 600 mg q12h
≥120 kg: 600 mg q8h
Intravenous infusion dosage by
body weight:
3 kg to <35 kg: 6 mg/kg q12h by
IV infusion over 6 hr
35 kg to <120 kg: 200 mg q12h
by IV infusion over 6 hr
≥120 kg: 300 mg q12h by IV
infusion over 6 hr

Vaccination may be
effective if given
within the first several
days after exposure

Botulism

Afebrile descending
symmetric flaccid
paralysis with
cranial nerve
palsies

1-­5

Standard

Supportive care; antitoxin (see
text) may halt the progression
of symptoms but is unlikely to
reverse them

No licensed
preexposure
prophylaxis
is available;
postexposure
administration of
antitoxin may prevent
the development of
symptoms

Viral
hemorrhagic
fevers

Febrile prodrome
with rapid
progression to
shock, purpura,
and bleeding
diatheses

4-­21

Contact (consider
airborne in
cases of massive
hemorrhage)

Supportive care; ribavirin may
be beneficial in treating Lassa
fever, and perhaps other
arenaviral hemorrhagic fevers

Ribavirin has been
shown to be
efficacious in the
postexposure
prophylaxis of Lassa
fever

DISEASE

*Preferred drugs are shown in bold.
**Some experts say 4.5-7.5 mg/kg/day.
†Penicillin and amoxicillin should only be used when the strain of Bacillus anthracis is known to be susceptible.
‡Levofloxacin (as well as moxifloxacin) is licensed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the prophylaxis and treatment of plague in the setting of a bioterror attack, but not tularemia.
PO, By mouth; IV, intravenously.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 763 u Biological and Chemical Terrorism

4453

Table 763.3  Treatment of Inhalational Anthrax in Children
WHEN MENINGITIS PRESENT OR HAS NOT RULED OUT*

WHEN MENINGITIS CAN BE RULED OUT*

1.	A bactericidal fluoroquinolone:
Ciprofloxacin 30 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h† (max 400 mg/dose) or
Levofloxacin 24 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (max 250 mg/dose) or
Moxifloxacin 12 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (max 200 mg/dose; for
children 3 mo to 2 yr); 10 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (for children 2-­5
yr); 8 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (for children 6-­11 yr); 400 mg IV qd
(for children >12 yr and >45 kg)

1.	A bactericidal antimicrobial:
Ciprofloxacin 30 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (max 400 mg/dose) or
Levofloxacin 20 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (max 250 mg/dose) or
Imipenem 100 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h (max 1 g/dose) or
Vancomycin 60 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h or
Penicillin G 400,000 U/kg/day IV divided q4h (max 4 MU/dose) [if PCN
sensitive] or
Ampicillin 200 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h (max 3 g/dose)

2.	A second bactericidal antimicrobial:
Meropenem 120 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (max 2 g/dose) or
Imipenem 100 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h (max 1 g/dose) or
Doripenem 120 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (max 1 g/dose) or
Vancomycin 60 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h or
Penicillin G** 400,000 U/kg/day IV divided q4h‡ (max 4 MU/dose) [if
PCN sensitive] or Ampicillin 400 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h (max
3 g/dose)
3.	A protein synthesis inhibitor:
Linezolid 30 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (for children <12 yr); 30 mg/
kg/day IV divided q12h (for children >12 yr; max 600 mg/dose) or
Clindamycin 40 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (max 900 mg/dose) or
Rifampin 20/mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (max 300 mg/dose) or
Chloramphenicol 100 mg/kg/day IV divided q6h

2.	A protein synthesis inhibitor:
Clindamycin 40 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (max 900 mg/dose) or
Linezolid 30 mg/kg/day IV divided q8h (for children <12 yr); 30 mg/kg/
day IV divided q12h (for children >12 yr; max 600 mg/dose) or
Rifampin 20/mg/kg/day IV divided q12h (max 300 mg/dose) or
Doxycycline 4.4 mg/kg/day IV loading dose (for children <45 kg; max
200 mg), followed by 4.4 mg/kg/day IV divided q12h; 200 mg IV
loading dose, followed by 100 mg IV q12h (for children >45 kg)

*Meningitis occurs in approximately 50% of patients with inhalational anthrax.
**Some experts provide a range of 400,000–600,000 U/kg/d.
†Preferred drugs are shown in bold.

‡Penicillin and amoxicillin should only be used when the strain of Bacillus anthracis is known to be susceptible.

IV, Intravenous; qd, every day; PCN, penicillin.
Data from Bradley JS, Peacock G, Krug SE, et al. Pediatric anthrax clinical management. Pediatrics. 2014;133:e1411–e1436. Appendices 3 & 4.

The classic cyanide antidote utilizes a nitrite along with sodium
thiosulfate and is given in two stages. The methemoglobin-­forming
agent (e.g., sodium nitrite) is administered first, because methemoglobin has a high affinity for cyanide and causes it to dissociate from cytochrome oxidase. Nitrite dosing in children should be
based on body weight to avoid excessive methemoglobin formation
and nitrite-­induced hypotension. For the same reasons, nitrites
should be infused slowly over 5-­10 minutes. A sulfur donor, such as
sodium thiosulfate, is given next. This compound is used as a substrate by the hepatic enzyme rhodanese, which converts cyanide to
thiocyanate, a less toxic compound excreted in the urine. Thiosulfate treatment itself is efficacious and relatively benign and may be
used alone for mild to moderate cases. Sodium nitrite and sodium
thiosulfate are packaged together in standard antidote kits, along
with amyl nitrite, a sodium nitrite substitute that can be inhaled in
prehospital settings in which IV access is not available.
Many first responder agencies in the United States have replaced
the traditional two-­part cyanide antidote kit with hydroxocobalamin,
which exchanges its hydroxy group for cyanide, forming harmless cyanocobalamin (vitamin B12) that is subsequently excreted by the kidneys. Hydroxocobalamin use is not complicated by the potential for
nitrite-­induced hypotension or methemoglobinemia, and it has low
toxicity. The recommended dose is 5 g in adults or 70 mg/kg in children, administered IV over 15 minutes. A second dose (5 g in adults; 70
mg/kg in children) may be repeated in severely affected patients. Side
effects include modest hypertension and reddening of skin, mucous
membranes, and urine that may last several days. Although no human
controlled trials are currently available to compare hydroxocobalamin
with nitrite/thiosulfate-­based therapies, many authorities believe that
hydroxocobalamin’s efficacy and safety profile favor it as the cyanide
antidote of choice, especially for children in the mass casualty context.
To use hydroxocobalamin, however, the solution must be mixed immediately before use, in the field if need be, so first responders need to be
properly trained to employ it.

Animal research suggests a modest benefit of steroid therapy in
mitigating lung injury after chlorine inhalation; thus steroids may be
considered for patients with chlorine exposure, especially as an adjunct
to bronchodilators in those with bronchospasm and/or a history of
asthma. Symptomatic relief has also been reported following chlorine
exposure with nebulized 3.75% sodium bicarbonate therapy, though
the impact of this regimen on pulmonary damage is unknown. Animal
models have also suggested a benefit from antiinflammatory agents,
including ibuprofen and N-­acetylcysteine, which appear to ameliorate
phosgene-­induced pulmonary edema, as well as the utilization of low
tidal volume ventilation (protective ventilation), although the results of
such interventions have not yet been reported in clinical trials.
In cases in which the delayed onset of respiratory symptoms may
be the result of a terrorist attack, consideration should be given
to the empirical administration of an antibiotic effective against
anthrax, plague, and tularemia. Ciprofloxacin (10-­15 mg/kg IV
q12 hours), levofloxacin (8 mg/kg IV q12 hours), or doxycycline
(2.2 mg/kg IV q12 hours) is a reasonable choice. Although naturally occurring strains of B. anthracis usually are quite sensitive to
penicillin G, these agents are chosen because penicillin-­resistant
strains of B. anthracis exist. Moreover, ciprofloxacin and doxycycline are effective against almost all known strains of Y. pestis and
F. tularensis. Concerns about inducible β-­lactamases in B. anthracis have led experts to recommend one to two additional antibiotics in patients with inhalational anthrax. Rifampin, vancomycin,
penicillin or ampicillin, clindamycin, and imipenem are reasonable
choices based on in vitro sensitivity data. Because B. anthracis relies
on the production of two protein toxins, edema toxin and lethal
toxin, for its virulence, drugs that act at the ribosome to disrupt
protein synthesis (e.g., clindamycin, the macrolides) provide a theoretical advantage. Frequent meningeal involvement among inhalational anthrax victims makes agents with superior central nervous
system penetration desirable. The treatment of anthrax is detailed
in Table 763.3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4454 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 763.4  Critical Chemical Agents of Terrorism
AGENT

TOXICITY

NERVE AGENTS
Tabun, sarin,
Anticholinesterase:
soman, VX
muscarinic,
nicotinic, central
nervous system
effects

VESICANTS
Mustard

Alkylation

Lewisite

Arsenical

PULMONARY AGENTS
Chlorine,
Liberate
phosgene
hydrochloric acid,
alkylation

CLINICAL
FINDINGS

ONSET

DECONTAMINATION*

MANAGEMENT

Vapor: miosis,
rhinorrhea, dyspnea
Liquid: diaphoresis,
vomiting
Both: coma, paralysis,
seizures, apnea

Seconds: vapor
Minutes to
hours: liquid

Vapor: fresh air, remove
clothes, wash hair
Liquid: remove clothes,
wash skin, hair with
copious soap and
water, ocular irrigation

ABCs. Atropine: 0.05-0.1 mg/kg
IV†, IM‡ (min: 0.1 mg, max: 5 mg),
repeat q2-­5 min prn for marked
secretions, bronchospasm
AND
Pralidoxime: 25-50 mg/kg IV, IM§
(max: 1 g IV; 2 g IM), may repeat
within 30-­60 min prn, then again
q1h for one or two doses prn for
persistent weakness, high atropine
requirement
AND
Diazepam: 0.3 mg/kg (max: 10 mg)
IV or Lorazepam: 0.1 mg/kg IV, IM
(max: 4 mg) or Midazolam: 0.2 mg/
kg (max: 10 mg) IM prn for seizures
or severe exposure

Skin: erythema,
vesicles
Eye: inflammation
Respiratory tract:
inflammation

Hours

Skin: soap and water
Eyes: water (effective
only if done within
minutes of exposure)

Symptomatic care

Immediate pain

Skin: soap and water
Eyes: water (effective
only if done within
minutes of exposure)

Possibly British antilewisite (BAL)
3 mg/kg IM q4-­6h for systemic
effects of lewisite in severe cases

Eye, nose, and throat
irritation (especially
chlorine)
Respiratory:
bronchospasm,
pulmonary
edema (especially
phosgene)

Minutes:
eye, nose,
and throat
irritation,
bronchospasm
Hours:
pulmonary
edema

Fresh air
Skin: water

Symptomatic care (see text)

Tachypnea, coma,
seizures, apnea

Seconds

Fresh air

ABCs, 100% oxygen

Skin: soap and water

Na bicarbonate prn metabolic
acidosis; hydroxocobalamin
70 mg/kg IV (max: 5 g) or nitrite/
thiosulfate, given as follows (see
text):

CYANIDE
Cytochrome
oxidase
Inhibition: cellular
anoxia, lactic
acidosis

Na nitrite (3%):
dose (mL/kg)
(max: 10 mL)

Estimated
hemoglobin
concentration
(g/dL)

0.27

10

0.33

12 (estimated
for average
child)

0.39

14

Followed by
Na thiosulfate
(25%): 1.65 mL/
kg (max: 50 mL)
*Decontamination, especially for patients with significant nerve agent or vesicant exposure, should be performed by healthcare providers garbed in adequate personal protective
equipment. For emergency department staff, this equipment consists of a nonencapsulated, chemically resistant body suit, boots, and gloves with a full-­face air-­purifier mask/hood.
†Intraosseous route is likely equivalent to intravenous.
‡Atropine might have some benefit via endotracheal tube or inhalation, as might aerosolized ipratropium. See also Table 741.5.
§Pralidoxime is reconstituted to 50 mg/mL (1 g in 20 mL water) for IV administration, and the total dose infused over 30 min, or may be given by continuous infusion (loading dose
25 mg/kg over 30 min, and then 10 mg/kg/hr). For IM use, it might be diluted to a concentration of 300 mg/mL (1 g added to 3 mL water—by analogy to the U.S. Army’s Mark 1
autoinjector concentration) to effect a reasonable volume for injection. See also Table 741.5.
ABCs, Airway, breathing, and circulatory support; IM, intramuscularly; IV, intravenously; max, maximum; min, minimum; prn, as needed.
Adapted from Henretig FH, Cieslak TJ, Eitzen EM. Biological and chemical terrorism. J Pediatr. 2002;141:311–326.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 763 u Biological and Chemical Terrorism

4455

Table 763.5  Pediatric Autoinjector Recommendations for Mass Casualties or Prehospital Care*
ATROPINE AUTOINJECTOR THERAPY
APPROXIMATE AGE

APPROXIMATE WEIGHT (KG)

AUTOINJECTOR SIZE (MG)

<6 mo

<7.5

0.25

6 mo to 4 years

7.5-­18

0.5

5-­10 years

18-­30

1.0

>10 years

>30

2.0

APPROXIMATE WEIGHT (KG)

NUMBER OF AUTOINJECTORS

PRALIDOXIME DOSE (MG/KG)

3-­7

13-­25

1

24-­46

8-­14

26-­50

2

24-­46

>14

>50

3

<35

PRALIDOXIME AUTOINJECTOR THERAPY
APPROXIMATE AGE (YEARS)

*Consider adult pralidoxime autoinjector use for severely affected mass casualties when intravenous (IV) access or more precise mg/kg intramuscular (IM) dosing is logistically
impractical. The initial dose using atropine autoinjectors is one autoinjector of each recommended size. The initial dose using pralidoxime autoinjectors is the recommended number
of (adult-­intended, 600 mg) autoinjectors. These latter may also be injected into an empty sterile vile; the contents redrawn through a filter needle into a small syringe may then
provide a ready source of concentrated (300 mg/mL) pralidoxime solution for IM injection to infants. Autoinjectors may become available that provide adult doses of both atropine
and pralidoxime in one injector; these could be used in children ≥3 years in lieu of two individual injectors and dosed as noted above for pralidoxime alone.

Raxibacumab, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits anthrax antigen
binding to cell receptors, thus preventing toxins from entering cells,
is approved for the treatment of inhalation anthrax in combination
with antibiotics, as is obiltoxaximab, which neutralizes anthrax toxins.
The adult dose of raxibacumab is 40 mg/kg given IV over 2 hours and
15 minutes. The dose for children is weight based: ≤15 kg, 80 mg/kg;
>15-­50 kg, 60 mg/kg; >50 kg, 40 mg/kg. Premedication with diphenhydramine IV or by mouth (PO) is recommended 1 hour before the
infusion.
In patients with an established diagnosis of tularemia, gentamicin
(5 mg/kg IV/IM divided 2 or 3 times/day) is the preferred choice for
therapy due to the limited availability of streptomycin (15 mg/kg
IM q12 hours). Bioterrorism-­related plague should be treated with
two distinct antibiotic classes until sensitivity patterns are known;
gentamicin, streptomycin, ciprofloxacin, and levofloxacin are all
approved agents for treatment of pneumonic plague in children (see
Table 763.2). To be effective, therapy for pneumonic plague must
be initiated within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms. There is
little clinical experience with ricin-­induced pulmonary injury. The
mainstay of therapy is expected to be supportive care.
The management of vesicant-­induced injury is similar to that
for burn victims and is largely symptomatic (see Chapter 89). The
major difference between thermal burns and vesicant burns is that
vesicant casualties do not need the large volumes of fluid required
by thermal burn victims, as their epidermis remains intact. These
patients are at risk of overhydration if treated using thermal burn
protocols. Mustard victims will benefit from the application of
soothing skin lotions such as calamine and the administration of
analgesics. Early intubation of severely exposed patients is warranted to guard against edematous airway compromise. Oxygen and
mechanical ventilation may be needed, and meticulous attention to
hydration is of paramount importance. Ongoing research suggests
a role for oral N-­acetylcysteine in mitigating chronic pulmonary
effects due to mustard injury. Lewisite victims can be managed in
much the same manner as mustard victims. Dimercaprol (British

antilewisite) in peanut oil, given IM, may help ameliorate the systemic effects of lewisite, although few hospitals or pharmacies are
likely to have this drug on hand.
The management of symptomatic smallpox victims also is largely
supportive, with attention to pain control, hydration status, and
respiratory sufficiency of primary importance. The parenteral
antiviral compound cidofovir, licensed for the treatment of cytomegalovirus retinitis in HIV-­infected patients, has in vitro efficacy
against variola and other orthopoxviruses. Its utility in treating
smallpox victims is untested. Moreover, in the face of a large outbreak of disease, wide parenteral use of this drug would be problematic. Tecovirimat demonstrates excellent in vitro activity against
orthopoxviruses, but its utility in treating patients with smallpox is
likewise untested.
In all chemical casualties, but especially if a liquid agent such as
VX or mustard is suspected, decontamination is crucial and should
be considered a primary medical intervention. Although this has
been part of casualty doctrine in the civilian and military environments for decades, a 2016 study showed that disrobing eliminated
90% of contamination in normal volunteers; following this with
showering using water or soap and water eliminated 99% of contamination. This has huge implications for the hospital management of possibly contaminated casualties, including children, and
hospitals must plan to execute the decontamination mission at all
levels.
For those faced with an acute chemical emergency, especially a mass
casualty situation, a useful resource is the Chemical Hazard Emergency
Medical Management website (https://chemm.hhs.gov), maintained by
the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response within the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Among its features is a
decision support tool, CHEMM-­IST, which aids in identification of the
chemical a patient was exposed to.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4456 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

Chapter 764

Mass Psychogenic Illness
Jonathan W. Mink
Mass psychogenic illness refers to the rapid spread of illness signs and
symptoms affecting members of a cohesive group, originating from
a nervous system disturbance involving excitation, loss, or alteration
of function, whereby physical complaints that are exhibited unconsciously have no corresponding organic etiology. Mass psychogenic illness shares features in common with conversion disorder (functional
neurologic system disorder) (see Chapter 35) in that the symptoms
are not consciously produced and are typically sensorimotor in nature.
The physical symptoms are associated with significant distress and
impairment; they commonly interfere with function at school or home
and affect peer relationships. Some experts have argued that “functional” is a better used term than “psychogenic” because it does not
imply etiology and does not reinforce dualist thinking about the mind
being separate from the brain.
Much less is known about the biologic underpinnings and clinical
features of mass psychogenic illness than is known about conversion
disorder and other somatic symptom disorders. However, there are
some important features in common with conversion disorder. These
include sudden abrupt onset, inconsistency with known anatomy and
physiology, atypical features, and inconsistency of symptoms over
time. Specific features of mass psychogenic illness are the occurrence of
these symptoms in a cohesive group; the presence of increased anxiety;
spread of symptoms via sight, sound, or oral communication (including social media); and a high female:male ratio.

CLINICAL FEATURES AND DIAGNOSIS

There are many examples of mass psychogenic illness throughout
history. The best known is perhaps that of the Salem “witches.” Most
widely reported examples of mass psychogenic illness are in adults,
but there are several reports in children as well. In 2004, 10 teenage
females from a school in rural North Carolina developed paroxysmal
episodes resembling epilepsy or syncope. These females were from a
cohesive social group (school-­age students in a small school) and had
similar symptoms. The symptoms were shown not to be consistent
with either syncope or epilepsy, and they eventually resolved after a
two-­week holiday break from school. Another episode in Le Roy, New
York, was an outbreak of a “tic-­like” illness among high school students. The symptoms were atypical for tics because they were not preceded by a premonitory urge and could not be suppressed with effort.
In addition, the symptoms were remarkably similar across the affected
patients. Symptoms resolved over time. In the Le Roy example, there
was likely an exacerbating role of both social media and mass media,
which amplified the cohesiveness of the group. There has been a surge
of cases of “tic-­like” symptoms in adolescents during the COVID-­19
pandemic. It has been suggested that social media, especially videos
presented on the TikTok platform, has played an important role in the
spread of these symptoms.
In a study of 280 environmental chemical incidents in the United
Kingdom between 2007 and 2008, 7% were classified as mass psychogenic illness according to five diagnostic criteria: (1) presence of
somatic (bodily) symptoms, (2) preexisting social connection between

two or more of the affected people, (3) epidemic spread of symptoms,
(4) attribution of symptoms by affected individuals (or by their parents or caregivers) to a threatening external agent of a physical (usually
chemical, biologic, or radiologic) or spiritual nature, and (5) symptoms
and signs that are not compatible with the environmental exposure
specified by the affected individuals nor with any other environmental
exposure that could reasonably be expected to have been present at the
time of (or shortly before) the onset of symptoms.
One study has examined experimentally induced mass psychogenic
illness. In a randomized controlled experiment, participants were
assigned to one of three groups to study the effects of a simulated biologic threat and elements of social contagion. The three groups were
(1) no-­intervention control group, (2) psychogenic illness induction
group, and (3) psychogenic illness induction plus media group. Groups
2 and 3 were told that the purpose of the study was to test the side
effects of a carrier compound for an antiinfluenza medication. They
were told that the compound did not produce serious side effects but
was being evaluated with regard to mild side effects. In groups 2 and 3,
professional actors were placed among the participants to feign illness
during the study with symptoms of nausea, dizziness, and headache.
Group 3 was also shown a documentary about the 1918 flu pandemic.
The video contained interviews with survivors and vivid images of
death and illness. The two psychogenic induction groups had 11 times
more symptoms than did the control group. If a subject had a lifetime
history of a traumatic event or depression, he or she was more likely to
have symptoms. The documentary viewing was not associated with a
higher rate of symptoms. This study confirmed the role of “social contagion” in mass psychogenic illness and provided a model for future
studies of factors leading to such contagion.

TREATMENT STRATEGIES

Mass psychogenic illness is usually self-­limited, but treatment requires
careful reassurance and communication between physician and
patient. Explanation models should be communicated in a sensitive
manner so as not to appear dismissive of symptoms. When doctors
and patients do not agree on the “reality” of the illness, the prognosis is
worse. Thus media attention, medical and scientific disagreement, and
legal proceedings must be managed in a way that does not exacerbate
the symptoms or the illness.
In the Le Roy illness, treatment varied across individuals. The treatment strategies included cognitive-behavioral therapy, supportive psychotherapy, education, pharmacotherapy for coexisting anxiety, and
alteration of social setting. Many of the patients sought multiple medical opinions. There were frequent discussions among public health and
other medical officials and the local media outlets. Reduced media
attention seemed to lead to more rapid improvement of symptoms in
some patients.
It is helpful for healthcare providers to avoid the dichotomy of
approaching illness using a medical model in which diseases are considered as being either physically or psychologically based. In contrast,
a biobehavioral continuum of disease better characterizes illness as
occurring across a spectrum ranging from a predominantly biologic
etiology on one end to a predominantly psychosocial etiology on the
other. It is beneficial to the patient for the treating physician to try to
shift the emphasis from understanding the etiology to a path toward
recovery.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 765 u Animal and Human Bites

Chapter 765

Animal and Human Bites
David A. Hunstad
Many animals, besides domestic and stray dogs and cats, inflict bites on
humans. The profile of such bites varies by country and region, based
on community and living conditions, indigenous species, and opportunity for encounter.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Worldwide there are tens of millions of dog bites each year, resulting in nearly 60,000 deaths annually from rabies (see Chapter 320).
Dog bites represent approximately 80–90% of all bites in the United
States, while 5–15% are from cats, 2–5% from rodents, and the
remainder from rabbits, ferrets, farm animals, monkeys, and reptiles. An estimated 4.5 million persons in the United States are bitten by dogs annually; over 800,000 of those seek medical care. Bites
from dogs are also most common in Bangladesh, India, Pakistan,
and Myanmar, whereas in Nepal cattle and buffalo account for more
than half of bites, followed by dogs, pigs, and horses. Approximately
1% of dog bite wounds and 6% of cat bite wounds in the United
States require hospitalization. During the past three decades, there
have been several dozen deaths per year in the United States from
dog-­inflicted injuries; the majority of these occurred in children
under 11 years of age. Various studies have examined the incidence
of dog bite injuries by dog breed. Compared with other breeds, bites
by pit bull terriers and mixed-­breed dogs account for higher rates
of hospital admission, lower Glasgow Coma Scores at admission,
and an increased risk of death. Unaltered male dogs account for
approximately 75% of attacks, while nursing female dogs may inflict
injury when humans attempt to handle their puppies.
The majority of dog attacks on children in the United States occur
between the ages of 6 and 11 years, with a slight predominance in
males. Approximately 65% of attacks occur around the home, 75%
of biting animals are known by the children, and 50% of attacks are
said to be unprovoked. Similar statistics apply in Canada, where
70% of all bites reported in one study were sustained by children age
2-­14 years; 65% of dogs involved in biting were part of the family
or extended family.
Of the approximately 450,000 reported cat bites per year occurring
in the United States, nearly all are inflicted by known household animals. Because rodent bites (rat, mouse, gerbil) do not represent reportable conditions, little is known about the epidemiology of these injuries
or the incidence of infection after rodent-­inflicted bites or scratches.
Few data exist on the incidence and demographics of human bite
injuries in pediatric patients; however, preschool and early school-­
age children appear to be at greatest risk of sustaining an injury from
a human bite, often in daycare or preschool settings. In some series,
the proportion of human bites is highest among adolescents, an age
group in which fist-­to-­teeth injuries (so-­called “fight bites”) become
more common.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Dog bite–related injuries can be divided into three categories of
almost equal incidence: abrasions, puncture wounds, and lacerations with or without an associated avulsion of tissue. Bites from
larger dogs may also involve crush injury to tissues. In contrast, the
most common type of injury from cat bites is a puncture wound,
often penetrating deep into tissue or joint spaces. Human bite injuries are of two types: an occlusion injury that is incurred when the

4457

upper and lower teeth come together on a body part, or a clenched-­
fist injury that occurs when the injured fist, usually on the dominant hand, strikes the teeth of another individual.

DIAGNOSIS

Management of the bite victim should begin with a thorough history and physical examination. Careful attention should be paid
to the circumstances surrounding the bite event (e.g., species and
number of animals, type of animal [domestic or wild], whether
the attack was provoked or unprovoked, location of the attack), a
history of drug allergies, and the immunization status of the child
(tetanus) and animal (rabies). During physical examination, meticulous attention should be paid to the type, size, and depth of the
injury; the presence of any foreign material in the wound; the status of underlying structures; and, when the bite is on an extremity,
the exact location of the injury, an assessment of possibly involved
structures, and the range of motion of the affected area. Photographs of the injury should be recorded in the patient’s medical
record. Radiographs of the affected part should be considered if it
is likely that a bone or joint was penetrated or fractured or if foreign material is present in the wound. The possibility of a fracture
or penetrating injury of the skull should particularly be considered
in infants who have sustained dog bite injuries to the face or head.

COMPLICATIONS

Infection is the most common complication of bite injuries regardless of the species of biting animal. In most cases, culture specimens
from a fresh dog bite wound are not likely to be clinically useful.
Although potentially pathogenic bacteria have been isolated from
up to 80% of dog bite wounds that are brought to medical attention
within 8 hours of the bite, the infection rate for wounds receiving
medical attention in <8 hours is relatively low (2.5–20%). Cultures
should be obtained from the wound if there is clinical evidence of
infection or if the patient is immunocompromised. Capnocytophaga
canimorsus is isolated from approximately 5% of infected wounds in
immunocompromised patients (especially asplenia) and can cause
serious systemic infection in these individuals. In contrast to dogs,
the infection rate in cat bite wounds, even those that receive prompt
medical attention, is >50%; therefore cat bites should be closely
monitored for signs of infection.
The rate of infection after rodent bite injuries is not known. Most of
the oral flora of rats is similar to that of other mammals; however, up to
50% of rats, depending on worldwide geography, may harbor strains of
Streptobacillus moniliformis and Spirillum minus, both of which cause
rat bite fever (see Chapter 766).
All human bite wounds, regardless of the mechanism of injury,
should be considered high risk for infection. Current recommendations do not support obtaining cultures at the time of the bite as it does
not change empiric antibiotic therapy; however, any infected wounds
should be cultured.
Table 765.1 lists common causes of soft tissue bacterial infections after dog, cat, or other animal bites. Bites of humans or cats,
those in which treatment is delayed, those in immunocompromised
patients, and those associated with deep puncture wounds or significant crush injury carry a higher risk for infection. An elevated
risk for infection is also present if the bite is to certain anatomic
regions (e.g., hand, foot, or genitals) or there is penetration of bone
or tendons.

TREATMENT

Table 765.2 outlines the management of human or animal bite
wounds to reduce risk for infection. The wound should be anesthetized, cleaned, and irrigated with sterile saline using moderate
pressure. Irrigation with antibiotic-­containing solutions provides
no advantage over saline alone and may cause local irritation of
the tissues. Puncture wounds should be thoroughly cleansed and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4458 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 765.1  Microorganisms Associated with Animal
Bites
DOG BITES
Staphylococcus species
Streptococcus species
Eikenella species
Pasteurella species
Proteus species
Klebsiella species
Haemophilus species
Enterobacter species
Capnocytophaga canimorsus
Bacteroides species
Moraxella species
Corynebacterium species
Neisseria species
Fusobacterium species
Prevotella species
Porphyromonas species
CAT BITES
Pasteurella species
Actinomyces species
Propionibacterium species
Bacteroides species
Fusobacterium species
Clostridium species
Wolinella species
Peptostreptococcus species
Staphylococcus species
Streptococcus species
HERBIVORE BITES
Actinobacillus lignieresii
Actinobacillus suis
Pasteurella multocida
Pasteurella caballi
SWINE BITES
Pasteurella aerogenes
Pasteurella multocida
Bacteroides species
Proteus species
Actinobacillus suis
Streptococcus species
Flavobacterium species
Mycoplasma species
RODENT BITES
Streptobacillus moniliformis
Spirillum minus (in Asia)
PRIMATE BITES
Bacteroides species
Fusobacterium species
Eikenella corrodens
Streptococcus species
Enterococcus species
Staphylococcus species
Enterobacterales
Herpes B virus
LARGE REPTILE (CROCODILE, ALLIGATOR) BITES
Aeromonas hydrophila
Pseudomonas pseudomallei (in Asia)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Proteus species
Enterococcus species
Clostridium species
Adapted from Perkins Garth A, Harris NS, Spanierman CS. Animal bites in emergency
medicine. Available at: http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/768875-­overview,
updated October 7, 2021; accessed November 27, 2021. Reprinted with permission
from eMedicine.com.

Table 765.2  Initial Management of Bite Wounds
HISTORY
Animal bite: Ascertain the type of animal, whether the bite was
provoked or unprovoked, and the situation/environment in which
the bite occurred. Follow rabies guidelines (see Chapter 320) for
details on management of bites that carry a risk of rabies.
Patient: Obtain information on antimicrobial allergies, current
medications, splenectomy, liver disease, or immunosuppressive
conditions.
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
If possible, photograph the wound and record its location, type,
and approximate depth; range of motion; possibility of joint
penetration; presence of edema or crush injury; nerve and tendon
function; and signs of infection.
CULTURE
Aerobic and anaerobic cultures should be taken from infected
wounds (not from fresh wounds).
IRRIGATION AND DEBRIDEMENT
Irrigate with water or sterile saline and debride devitalized or
necrotic tissue.
RADIOGRAPHS
Plain radiographs should be obtained if bony penetration is possible
or suspected; radiographs can also provide a baseline for future
evaluation of osteomyelitis.
WOUND CLOSURE
Primary wound closure is usually not advocated unless wounds
are extensive and closure is necessary for cosmetic or functional
reasons, especially large facial or neck wounds or those overlying
the joints. When possible, delayed primary closure or allowing the
wound to close by secondary intention is recommended.
ANTIMICROBIAL THERAPY
Early presenting (uninfected) wounds: provide prophylactic
antimicrobials for (1) moderate-­to-­severe injuries, especially
if preexisting edema or significant crush injury is present; (2)
bone or joint space penetration; (3) deep hand wounds; (4)
immunocompromised patients; (5) wounds adjacent to prosthetic
material; and (6) wounds in close proximity to the genital area.
In most cases, coverage should include Pasteurella (Eikenella in
human bites), Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and anaerobes
including Fusobacterium, Porphyromonas, Prevotella, and
Bacteroides spp. See Table 765.3 for recommended antibiotics.
Infected wounds: See Table 765.3 for oral antibiotic
recommendations. In cases where intravenous antibiotics are
deemed necessary, antimicrobial choices include ampicillin/
sulbactam, piperacillin-­tazobactam, cefoxitin, or ertapenem.
HOSPITALIZATION
Indications include signs and symptoms of systemic toxicity and
worsening infection.
IMMUNIZATIONS
Provide tetanus and rabies immunization, if indicated.
ELEVATION
Elevation may be required if edema is present. Lack of elevation is a
common cause of therapeutic failure.
IMMOBILIZATION
For significant injuries, immobilize the extremity, especially the
hands, with a splint.
FOLLOW-­UP
Patients should be reminded to follow up within 48 hours or sooner
for worsening or unresolved infections and continued pain.
REPORTING
Reporting the incident to a local health department may be
required.
Adapted from Goldstein EJC, Abrahamian FM. Bites. In: Bennett JE, Dolin R, Blaser MJ,
eds. Mandell, Douglas, and Bennett’s Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases, 9th
ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2020: Table 315-­3.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 765 u Animal and Human Bites

4459

Table 765.3

Recommended Empirical Oral Antibiotics for Bite Wound Prophylaxis and Treatment

ANTIBIOTIC

RECOMMENDED ADULT DOSE

RECOMMENDED CHILD DOSE *

AGENT OF CHOICE
(A) Amoxicillin-clavulanate

875/125 mg twice daily

45 mg/kg per dose (amoxicillin component)
twice daily

ALTERNATE COMBINATION THERAPY: B OR C (WITH ANAEROBIC ACTIVITY) PLUS E, F, G, H, OR I
(B) Metronidazole

500 mg three times daily

10 mg/kg per dose three times daily

(C) Clindamycin

450 mg three times daily

10 mg/kg per dose three times daily

PLUS, ONE OF THE FOLLOWING:
(D) Doxycycline

100 mg twice daily

Not for use in children <8 yr old

(E) Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

160/800 mg (1 DS tab) twice daily

4 to 5 mg/kg (trimethoprim component) per
dose* twice daily

(F) Penicillin V potassium

500 mg four times daily

12.5 mg/kg per dose four times daily

(G) Cefuroxime

500 mg twice daily

10 mg/kg per dose twice daily

(H) Moxifloxacin

400 mg once daily

Use with caution in children

Or:

*Child dose should not exceed recommended adult dose.
From Phillips LL, Semple J: Bites and injuries inflicted by wild and domestic animals. In Auerbach PS, Cushing TA, Harris NS (editors): Auerbach’s Wilderness Medicine, 7th ed, vol 1.
Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2017; Table 30.3, p. 623.

gently irrigated with a catheter or blunt-­tipped needle; blind, high-­
pressure irrigation should not be employed. Avulsed or devitalized tissue should be debrided and any fluctuant areas incised and
drained.
Surgical approaches to management of bite wounds may include
primary closure, delayed primary closure (i.e., in 3-­5 days), or healing by secondary intention. Factors to be considered are the type,
size, and depth of the wound; the anatomic location; the presence of
infection; the time since the injury; and the potential for cosmetic
disfigurement. Appropriate surgical consultation (e.g., general
pediatric surgery; plastic, hand, or orthopedic surgery) should be
obtained promptly for all patients with deep or extensive wounds;
wounds involving the hands, face, or bones and joints; and infected
wounds that require open drainage. Although there is general agreement that visibly infected wounds and those that are more than 24
hours old should not be sutured, there is a spectrum of practice
regarding the closing of wounds <8 hours old with no evidence of
infection. Because all bite wounds to the hand are at high risk for
infection, particularly if there has been disruption of the tendons
or penetration of the bones, surgical consultation is almost always
indicated, and delayed primary closure is recommended for many
bite wounds of the hands. Facial lacerations are at lower risk for
secondary infection because of the excellent blood supply to this
region. Given this fact and cosmetic considerations, many plastic
surgeons advocate primary closure of facial bite wounds that have
been brought to medical attention within 8 hours.
Similarly, there are few comparative trials addressing the efficacy and selection of antimicrobial agents for prophylaxis of bite
injuries. The bacteriology of bite wound infections is more often a
reflection of the oral flora of the biting animal than the skin flora
of the victim (see Table 765.1). Because many aerobic and anaerobic bacterial species colonizing the oral cavity of the biting animal
have the potential to invade local tissue, multiply, and cause tissue
destruction, most bite wound infections are polymicrobial.
Despite substantial homology in the oral bacterial flora of
humans, dogs, and cats, important differences exist among the biting species, reflected in the types of wound infections that occur.
The predominant bacterial species isolated from infected dog bite
wounds are Staphylococcus aureus (20–30%), Pasteurella multocida

(20–30%), Staphylococcus intermedius (25%), and C. canimorsus;
approximately one-­half of dog bite wound infections also contain
mixed anaerobes. Similar species are isolated from infected cat bite
wounds; however, P. multocida is the predominant species in at
least 50% of cat bite wound infections. At least 50% of rats harbor
S. moniliformis in the oropharynx, and approximately 25% in Asia
harbor S. minus, a small, uncultivatable gram-­negative organism.
In infected human bite wounds, nontypable strains of Haemophilus
influenzae, Eikenella corrodens, S. aureus, α-­hemolytic streptococci,
and β-­lactamase–producing aerobes (∼50%) are the predominant
species. Clenched-­fist injuries are particularly prone to infection by
Eikenella spp. (25%) and other anaerobes (50%).
The choice between oral and parenteral antimicrobial therapy
should be based on the severity of the wound, the presence and
degree of overt infection, signs of systemic toxicity, and the patient’s
immune status. Amoxicillin-­clavulanate is an excellent choice for
empiric oral therapy for human and animal bite wounds because
of its activity against most bacteria that are isolated from infected
bites (Table 765.3). Similarly, ampicillin-­sulbactam or piperacillin-­
tazobactam is preferred for patients who will receive empiric parenteral therapy. Penicillin G is the drug of choice for prophylaxis
and treatment of rat bite injuries, as this agent has excellent activity
against S. moniliformis and S. minus. Because first-­generation cephalosporins have limited activity against P. multocida and E. corrodens,
they should not be used for prophylaxis or empiric therapy of bite
wound infections. Therapeutic alternatives for bite wound infections in penicillin-­allergic patients are limited; clindamycin plus
trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole is the most commonly suggested
regimen for these patients. Tetracycline is the drug of choice for
penicillin-­allergic patients who have sustained rat bite injuries.
Although tetanus occurs only rarely after human or animal bite
injuries, it is important to obtain a detailed immunization history
and to provide tetanus toxoid to all patients who are incompletely
immunized or who received their most recent tetanus immunization more than five years prior. The need for postexposure rabies
vaccination in victims of dog and cat bites depends on whether the
biting animal is known to have been vaccinated and, most importantly, on local experience with rabid animals in the community.
Bites from bats, foxes, skunks, and raccoons should be considered

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4460 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
high risk for rabies, and postexposure prophylaxis is uniformly
indicated. For dogs, cats, and other animals that are known or captured, observation for 7-­10 days by the local animal control department is indicated, and rabies prophylaxis can be delayed as long as
the animal remains asymptomatic. If a biting dog or cat has escaped,
a decision about rabies prophylaxis can be based on the circumstances surrounding the bite and advice from local infectious disease specialists and/or health department officials. Worldwide,
animal bites and contacts result annually in more than 10 million
courses of rabies postexposure prophylaxis.
In human bites where the biter’s blood may have contaminated the
wound, risk for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and HIV infections should be
considered (see Chapters 322 and 406).

PREVENTION

It is possible to reduce the risk of animal bite injury with anticipatory guidance. Parents should be routinely counseled during prenatal visits and routine health maintenance examinations about the
risks of having potentially biting pets in the household. All patients
should be cautioned against harboring exotic animals as pets. All
young children should be closely supervised, particularly when in
the presence of animals, and from a very early age should be taught
to respect animals and to be aware of their potential to inflict injury.
Reduction of the rate of human bite injuries, particularly in daycare
centers and schools, can be achieved by good surveillance of the
children and adequate teacher-­to-­child ratios.

A

B

Fig. 766.1 Morbilliform rash on the hands/palms (A) and feet (B) of a
patient with rat bite fever. (From Vetter NM, Feder HM Jr, Ratzan RM.
Rat bite fever caused by a kiss. Am J Emer Med. 2015;34:1190.e3–
1190.e4. Figs. 1 and 3.)

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 766

Rat Bite Fever
David A. Hunstad
Fig. 766.2 Hemorrhagic vesicles on the first and third toes of a pa-

ETIOLOGY

Rat bite fever is a generic term that has been applied to at least two
distinct clinical syndromes, each caused by a different microbial agent.
Rat bite fever caused by Streptobacillus moniliformis is most commonly
reported in the United States as well as in Brazil, Canada, Mexico,
Paraguay, Great Britain, and France; it has been identified elsewhere
in Europe and in Australia. S. moniliformis is a gram-­negative bacillus
that is present in the nasopharyngeal flora of many laboratory and wild
rats. Infection with S. moniliformis most commonly occurs following
the bite of a rat; however, infection has also been reported in individuals who have been scratched by rats, in those who have handled dead
rats, and in those who have ingested milk contaminated with the bacterium (termed Haverhill fever). Rat bite fever may also be transmitted
by bites from wild mice. Rat bite fever caused by Spirillum minus, called
sodoku (after the Japanese for “rat” and “poison”), is most commonly
reported in Asia. S. minus is a small, spiral, aerobic gram-­negative
organism. Reports of rat bite fever from Africa are rare, suggesting
under recognition rather than absence of the disease.

CLINICAL COURSE

The incubation period for the streptobacillary form of rat bite fever
is variable, ranging from 3-­10 days. The illness is characterized by an
abrupt onset of fever up to 41°C (105.8°F) in over 90% of reported cases,
as well as severe throbbing headache, intense myalgias, chills, and vomiting. In virtually all instances, the lesion at the cutaneous inoculation

tient with advanced rat bite fever. (From Elliott SP. Rat bite fever and
Streptobacillus moniliformis. Clin Microbiol Rev. 22007;20:13–22. Fig.
3.)

site has healed by the time that systemic systems first appear. Shortly
after the onset of the fever, a polymorphous rash occurs in up to 75%
of patients. In most patients, the rash consists of blotchy red maculopapular lesions that often have a petechial component; the distribution
of the rash is variable, but it is typically most dense on the extremities
(Fig. 766.1). Hemorrhagic vesicles may develop on the hands and feet
and are very tender to palpation (Fig. 766.2).
Approximately 50% of patients have arthritis, which first manifests
toward the end of the first week of disease; early on, the arthritis may
be migratory. If untreated, fever, rash, and arthritis last from 14-­21
days, often with a biphasic pattern to the fever and arthritis. A wide
range of complications are reported in patients with rat bite fever,
the most common being pneumonia, persistent arthritis, brain and
soft tissue abscesses, and, less commonly, myocarditis or endocarditis. The mortality rate in untreated rat bite fever is estimated to be
10–15%.
The incubation period of sodoku is longer (14-­21 days) than that of
the streptobacillary form of disease. The hallmark of Spirillum-­induced
disease is fever associated with an indurated, often suppurative, nonhealing lesion at the bite site. Lymphadenitis and lymphadenopathy are
invariably present in the regional nodes that drain the inoculation site,
and many patients have a generalized macular rash most prominent

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 767 u Mpox (Monkeypox)
when fever is present. In untreated patients, sodoku has a relapsing and
remitting course; symptoms abate after 5-­7 days of chills and fever but
recur 7-­10 days later. There may be multiple cycles if the disease is not
recognized and treated.

DIAGNOSIS

Diagnosis of the streptobacillary form of rat bite fever is difficult
because the disease is uncommon and can be confused with Rocky
Mountain spotted fever or (less commonly) meningococcemia. Furthermore, S. moniliformis is difficult both to isolate and to identify
with classic bacteriologic techniques. The organism is fastidious and
is inhibited by sodium polyanethol sulfonate, an additive present in
many commercial blood culture bottles. Therefore the clinical microbiology laboratory should be notified when this infection is suspected so
that additional media can be inoculated. A definitive diagnosis is made
when S. moniliformis is recovered from blood or joint fluid or is identified in human samples by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which has
been used successfully in humans.
Diagnosis of sodoku is made on clinical grounds because there are no
diagnostic serologic tests and culture of S. minus has not been achieved
in laboratory media. Rarely, the organism may be visualized in Gram-­
stained smears of pus from the inoculation site. Approximately 50% of
patients exhibit a false-­positive Venereal Disease Research Laboratory
(VDRL) test.

TREATMENT

Penicillin is the drug of choice for both forms of rat bite fever. Intravenous penicillin G or intramuscular penicillin G procaine is recommended for 7-­10 days; a regimen of IV penicillin G for 5-­7 days
followed by oral penicillin V for an additional 7 days has also been
used. Doxycycline, gentamicin, or streptomycin represent effective
alternatives for penicillin-­allergic patients. Patients with endocarditis
caused by S. moniliformis require high-­dose penicillin G for 4 weeks;
the addition of streptomycin or gentamicin might be helpful.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

4461

bite or by human contact with an infected animal’s blood, wound
discharge, or other body fluids. Human-­to-­human transmission was
previously thought to be uncommon, but a global outbreak in 2022
was linked to a shift to human-­to-­human transmission.
As of early 2023, nearly 87,000 cases were documented globally.
Although children have comprised up to 40% of cases in previous outbreaks, the epidemiology of the current outbreak is different; less than 700
cases (<2%) have been reported in children and adolescents ≤20 years old.
Mpox is currently spread predominantly through close human-­to-­human
contact. The most recent outbreak has affected mostly gay, bisexual, and
other men who have sex with men. Patients living with advanced HIV
(with low CD4 counts) are at increased risk for severe disease. Although
children typically acquire mpox from household contact, sexual contact is
the primary route of transmission for adolescents. Mpox virus can persist
on surfaces in households with an affected person.

CLINICAL COURSE

The classic clinical signs, symptoms, and course of mpox are similar to those of smallpox, although typically milder. After an incubation period of 10-­14 days, during which the mpox virus replicates
in lymphoid tissues, humans experience an abrupt onset of malaise,
fever, myalgia, headache, and severe backache. Nonproductive cough,
nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain may be present. Generalized
lymphadenopathy, a finding unusual in smallpox, is invariably present
during the acute stages of mpox illness. After a prodrome of 2-­4 days,
an exanthem appears on the face and progresses inferiorly, including
the palms and soles. As the rash spreads, fevers begin to abate. The rash
is initially macular but transforms within hours to firm papules that
rapidly vesiculate and become pustular over 2-­3 days (Table 767.1).
Unlike smallpox lesions but similar to chickenpox lesions, the lesions
of mpox tend to occur in crops (Fig. 767.1). Late into the second week
of illness, the lesions begin to desiccate, crust, scab, and fall off. During the 2022 global outbreak, lesions often occurred in the genital and
anorectal areas and in the mouth (Fig. 767.2); cutaneous lesions are
Table 767.1  Mpox: Lesion Progression Through the Scab
Stage
STAGE

STAGE DURATION
(DAYS)*

CHARACTERISTICS

Chapter 767

Enanthem

Sometimes, lesions first form on
the tongue and in the mouth.

Mpox (Monkeypox)

Macules

1-­2

Macular lesions appear.

Papules

1-­2

Lesions typically progress
from macular (flat) to papular
(raised).

Vesicles

1-­2

Lesions then typically become
vesicular (raised and filled with
clear fluid).

Pustules

5-­7

Lesions then typically become
pustular (filled with opaque
fluid) – sharply raised, usually
round, and firm to the touch
(deep seated).
Finally, lesions typically develop
a depression in the center
(umbilication).
The pustules will remain for
approximately 5-­7 days before
beginning to crust.

Scabs

7-­14

By the end of the second week,
pustules have crusted and
scabbed over.
Scabs will remain for about a
week before beginning to fall
off.

David A. Hunstad
Since the eradication of smallpox (variola), mpox (formerly known as
monkeypox) virus has, for humans, become the most important member
of the genus Orthopoxvirus. Monkeys are the predominant host for the
virus; however, it may be endemic in African rainforest squirrels and is
present in African rats, mice, domestic pigs, hedgehogs, and opossums.
It has also been identified in and transmitted by imported prairie dogs in
the United States and has affected elephants in zoos. Severity of infection
varies by viral strain and by host; for example, disease is relatively mild in
cynomolgus monkeys but severe in orangutans.
Mpox was first observed in humans from West and Central Africa
in the 1970s at the time that smallpox had been eradicated from the
area. In the 1970s, the secondary attack rate was around 3% (a stark
comparison to the 80% seen in unvaccinated smallpox contacts).
Few cases were observed over the next 2 decades; however, during
a subsequent outbreak in the 1990s, when immunity to smallpox
was no longer prevalent in the population, the secondary attack rate
exceeded 75%. Mpox was introduced into the United States in 2003,
presumably through rodents from Ghana that infected prairie dogs
that were subsequently distributed as pets. Before 2022, primary
transmission of the disease was from infected animal to human by

*This is a typical timeline, but timelines can vary.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Key Characteristics for identifying
Mpox. https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/clinicians/clinical-­recognition.html

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

A

B

Fig. 767.1 A, Legs and feet of an mpox (endemic) patient. B, Legs and feet of a smallpox patient at an analogous stage of rash (pustular). (A,
Courtesy Joseph M. Harvey, MD. B, Courtesy J. Nobel, Jr., MD, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

Fig. 767.2 Clinical presentation of mpox. A, Pustules in the genital and pubic region, in which the initial umbilication has progressed to necrotic crust

with central depression. B, Three semiconfluent pustular lesions with a depressed center located on the left side of the tongue dorsum. C, Pearly acral
vesicles embedded in the thick stratum corneum of the palmar skin, shotty on palpation. D, Scattered papules, pustules, and umbilicated pustules
surrounded by an erythematous halo on the lateral aspect of the chest and left arm. E, Pustules circumferentially distributed on the anal margin and
perianal skin. F, A pustular lesion with a crusted center on the semimucosa of the lower lip, close to the right oral commissure. G, Primary inoculation
site with a large, crusted lesion on the right cheek. H, The right palatine tonsil is reddened and enlarged and has a fibrin-­covered ulcer. I, The penile
glans and foreskin have lesions of varying sizes and stages of evolution, with edema surrounding the larger ulcer. (From Tarín-­Vicente EJ, Alemany A,
Agud-­Dios M, et al. Clinical presentation and virological assessment of confirmed human monkeypox virus cases in Spain: a prospective observational
cohort study. Lancet. 2022;400[10353]:661–669. Fig. 1; Photos A–C, E–G, I taken by Eloy José Tarín-Vicente, MD; Photos D, H by Maria Ubals, MD.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 767 u Mpox (Monkeypox)

4463

A

Peripheral
keratitis

Conjunctival
ulcer

B
Fig. 767.3 Left eye in a patient with HIV-­associated immunocompromise and ocular mpox, with conjunctivitis and conjunctival lesion earlier in the

course of mpox illness (A), and with conjunctival ulcer and peripheral keratitis later in the course of mpox illness (B) — United States, August–September 2022. (A courtesy Nathanael Adjei-­Kyeremeh. B courtesy Dharmendra R. Patel; From Cash-­Goldwasser S, Labuda SM, McCormick DW, et al.
Ocular monkeypox – United States, July–September 2020. MMWR. 2022;71:1343–1347. Fig. 2.)

less often disseminated with occasionally only a single lesion noted.
Additionally, fever and other systemic symptoms may occur before the
rash, after the rash, or not at all. Disseminated systemic or focal disease
may include encephalitis, pharyngitis, myocarditis, arthritis, proctitis,
lymphadenopathy, pneumonia, and ocular involvement (Fig. 767.3).
Mpox should be suspected in any child or adolescent who has the
characteristic prodrome associated with a poxlike eruption and a
history of close contact with someone who has been diagnosed with
mpox, residence in Africa, or contact with prairie dogs or exotic
mammals such as Gambian rats and rope squirrels. Diagnosis is by
isolation of mpox viral DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
from a skin lesion, including exudate or lesion crust. Oropharyngeal
swabs may be considered in high-­risk contacts of known or probable cases who have not yet developed a rash that can be swabbed
(Table 767.2).
Cowpox, another Orthopoxvirus, often acquired from a pet rat, may
produce similar cutaneous lesions. Regional lymphadenopathy and
mild system features may also be present. Diagnosis is confirmed by a
specific cowpox virus PCR.

PREVENTION AND TREATMENT

In 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved
a new live-­
attenuated, replication-­
deficient vaccinia virus vaccine (branded Jynneos in the United States and Imvamune in the

European Union [EU]; Bavarian Nordic) for use in patients ≥18
years old who are at risk for mpox acquisition. Despite evidence
that preexposure administration of classical smallpox vaccine is
85% effective in preventing or attenuating mpox disease, the rarity
of mpox infection does not warrant universal vaccination. However,
following the recent 2022 outbreak, the U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention recommends vaccinating high-­risk patients
(Table 767.3). This vaccine has a very low side effect profile and
can be safely used in immunocompromised individuals, a significant advantage over classical (replication-­competent) live smallpox
vaccines.
For most immunocompetent patients with mild to moderate disease, supportive care is recommended. However, treatment should
be considered for those with severe disease (hemorrhagic disease,
large number of confluent lesions, necrotic lesions, severe lymphadenopathy that is necrotic or obstructing, involvement of multiple
organ systems and comorbidities, or those who require hospitalization) or those with involvement of anatomic areas where scarring
or stricture might cause serious sequelae (Fig. 767.4). In addition,
treatment may be considered in patients at high risk for severe disease, including children less than 1 year old, immunocompromised
or pregnant patients, or those with reduced skin integrity (e.g.,
eczema). Treatment options include tecovirimat, brincidofovir,
cidofovir, or trifluridine ophthalmic solution; these medications
were originally developed for treatment of other viral infections and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4464 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 767.2  Mpox Case Definitions
CLINICAL AND
LABORATORY
CLASSIFICATION

CRITERIA

Suspected

New characteristic rash* OR
Meets one of the epidemiologic criteria and has high clinical suspicion† for mpox

Probable

No suspicion of other recent Orthopoxvirus exposure (e.g., vaccinia virus in ACAM2000 vaccination) AND demonstration of
the presence of
• Orthopoxvirus DNA by polymerase chain reaction testing of a clinical specimen OR
• Orthopoxvirus using immunohistochemical or electron microscopy testing methods OR
• Demonstration of detectable levels of anti-­Orthopoxvirus IgM antibody during the period of 4-­56 days after rash onset

Confirmed

Demonstration of the presence of mpox virus DNA by polymerase chain reaction testing or next-­generation sequencing of a
clinical specimen OR
Isolation of mpox virus in culture from a clinical specimen

EPIDEMIOLOGIC CLASSIFICATION
Within 21 days of
Reports having contact with a person or persons with a similar appearing rash or with a person who has received a
illness onset:
diagnosis of confirmed or probable mpox OR
Had close or intimate in-­person contact with persons in a social network experiencing mpox infections. This includes MSM
who meet partners through an online website, digital application (“app”), or social event (e.g., a bar or party) OR
Traveled, within 21 days of illness onset outside the United States to a country with confirmed cases of mpox or where mpox
virus is endemic OR
Had contact with a dead or live wild animal or exotic pet that is an African endemic species, or used a product derived from such
animals (e.g., game meat, creams, lotions, powders, etc.)
EXCLUSIONS
A case might be
excluded as
a suspected,
probable or
confirmed case if:

An alternative diagnosis* can fully explain the illness OR
A person with symptoms consistent with mpox does not develop a rash within 5 days of illness onset OR
A case where high-­quality specimens do not demonstrate the presence of Orthopoxvirus or mpox virus or antibodies to
Orthopoxvirus

*The characteristic rash associated with mpox lesions involves the following: deep-­seated and well-­circumscribed lesions, often with central umbilication; and lesion progression
through specific sequential stages: macules, papules, vesicles, pustules, and scabs. The rash can sometimes be confused with other diseases that are more commonly encountered
in clinical practice (e.g., syphilis, herpes, and varicella-­zoster). Historically, sporadic accounts of patients co-infected with mpox virus and other infectious agents (e.g., varicella-­
zoster, syphilis) have been reported; so patients with a characteristic rash should be considered for Mpox virus testing, even if tests for other infectious agents are positive.
†Clinical suspicion may exist if lesions consistent with those from more common infections (e.g., syphilis, herpes, and varicella-­zoster) coexist with lesions that may be characteristic of
mpox.
From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Updated case-­finding guidance: Mpox outbreak – United States, 2022. https://emergency.cdc.gov/han/2022/han00468.asp#:∼text

Table 767.3  Mpox Vaccination Basics
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends vaccination
against mpox if:
• You had known or suspected exposure to someone with mpox
• You had a sex partner in the past 2 weeks who was diagnosed
with mpox
• You are a gay, bisexual, or other man who has sex with men or a
transgender, nonbinary, or gender-­diverse person who in the past
6 months has had any of the following:
• A new diagnosis of one or more sexually transmitted diseases
(e.g., chlamydia, gonorrhea, or syphilis)
• More than one sex partner
• You have had any of the following in the past 6 months:
• Sex at a commercial sex venue (like a sex club or bathhouse)
• Sex related to a large commercial event or in a geographic area
(city or county for example) where mpox virus transmission is
occurring
• Sex in exchange for money or other items
• You have a sex partner with any of the above risks
• You anticipate experiencing any of the above scenarios
• You have HIV or other causes of immune suppression and have
had recent or anticipate future risk of mpox exposure from any of
the above scenarios
• You work in settings where you may be exposed to mpox:
• You work with orthopoxviruses in a laboratory
• You are part of an Orthopoxvirus and healthcare worker
response team

are thought to complement the immune response by reducing replication, maturation, and spread of mpox. Vaccinia immune globulin
intravenous (VIGIV) may be considered in immunocompromised
patients who cannot mount an appropriate immune response to
clear the virus. In addition to antiviral medications, careful attention should be paid to skin hygiene, maintenance of adequate
nutrition and hydration, and prompt implementation of local or
systemic therapy for secondary bacterial infection that may occur.
Pain management is a common reason for hospitalization because
both cutaneous and mucosal lesions can be very painful. For prevention of human-­to-­human spread of disease, a combination of
contact, droplet, and airborne infection control procedures should
be implemented.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

From Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Mpox Vaccination Basics. https://www.
cdc.gov/poxvirus/mpox/vaccines/index.html

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 767 u Mpox (Monkeypox)
Suspected, probable, or
confirmed mpox case

HIV-positive
OR
Other immunocompromising
condition
OR
On immunosuppressive
medications

Yes

Optimize immune function (e.g.,
defer chemo-/immunotherapy,
ensure effective ARV)

No
• Standard supportive therapies
including pain control
• Potential enrollment in available
clinical trials involving MCMs

No

Severe disease or at risk for
severe disease
Yes
Concern for altered oral drug
absorption, inability of a
patient to reliably take oral
therapy, or diffuse and
disseminated infection
No

Oral
tecovirimat

Yes
Might change as clinical
status changes

Intravenous
tecovirimat

Yes
Severe immunocompromise

+/- Brincidofovir or cidofovir
+/- VIGIV

No
Ocular lesions or at risk for
ocular lesions

Yes

Refer to management
of ocular infections

+/- Topical trifluridine

No
Complications involving other
specific organ systems (e.g.,
neurologic, cardiac
[myopericarditis], mucosal,
dermatologic) or disseminated
infection and uncontrolled viral
spread from severe
immunocompromise

Yes

Refer to management
of severe mpox cases and
other clinical considerations

No
Worsening clinical illness (e.g.,
new hemodynamic instability,
organ dysfunction, or eruption of
new lesions in multiple locations)
despite initial treatment

Yes

If not previously given or additional doses needed:
+/- Brincidofovir or cidofovir
+/- VIGIV
+/- Intravenous tecovirimat

No
At 14 days of antivirals, reassess
clinical status, and
discontinue if clinical improvement
and no new lesion formation

No

Formation of new lesions
≥7 days after antiviral initiation

Yes

+/- Orthopoxvirus PCR testing of new lesions
+/- Testing for other etiologies (e.g., bacterial
superinfection)
+/- Serology to evaluate IgM immune response
+/- Tecovirimat pharmacokinetic testing
+/- Tecovirimat resistance testing

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4465

4466 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Fig. 767.4 Algorithmic approach to treatment*,†,‡ of patients with severe§ or at risk¶ for severe manifestations of mpox** : United States, February

2023.††
* Treatment includes MCMs (i.e., tecovirimat, brincidofovir, cidofovir, VIGIV, and trifluridine) and supportive therapies, including pain management.
https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/clinicians/pain-­management.html
† Most immunocompetent patients should display signs of clinical improvement within 4 days of antiviral initiation (i.e., tecovirimat, brincidofovir,
cidofovir, and trifluridine). Tecovirimat is expected to reach steady-­state concentrations by day 6 of dosing in healthy volunteers; therefore worsening
clinical illness after 7 days of treatment in patients with severe illness could prompt additional evaluations.
‡ Concern for altered drug absorption includes the inability to tolerate or take oral therapy (e.g., nothing by mouth), or possibility that the oral drug
absorption might be altered because of inability to consume a high-­fat meal, severity of symptoms (e.g., systemic illness), comorbidities (e.g., history
of gastric bypass or underlying GI disease), or other factors that might alter oral drug absorption.
§ Hemorrhagic disease, a large number of confluent or necrotic lesions, severe lymphadenopathy that is necrotizing or obstructing (e.g., of the upper airway causing airway compromise or of the GI tract necessitating parenteral feeding), edema that is obstructing (e.g., of the lower GI tract),
extradermatologic manifestations (e.g., pulmonary nodules, encephalitis, myopericarditis, or ocular infections), and sepsis. Detailed characteristics
of severe disease are available at https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/clinicians/treatment.html#anchor_1655488137245.
¶ Persons with underlying medical conditions (e.g., severe or moderate immunocompromise [https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/clinicians/
people-­with-­HIV.html]); bacterial superinfections; or complications, including strictures, edema, and infections of the penile foreskin, vulva, urethral
meatus, or anorectum, which could require procedural intervention (e.g., urethral catheterization, colostomy, or surgical debridement). This also includes those with or at risk for ocular lesions (i.e., presence of eyelid lesions, facial lesions near the eyes, or finger or hand lesions in patients unable
to avoid touching their eyes [for whom autoinoculation is a concern]). Detailed characteristics of persons at risk for severe disease are available at ht
tps://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/clinicians/treatment.html#anchor_1655488137245.
** https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/clinicians/case-­definition.html
†† This figure is a comprehensive synthesis of heterogeneous evidence and is intended to foster strategic decision-­making rather than serve as a
prescriptive treatment guideline.
ARV, Antiretroviral medications; GI, gastrointestinal; IgM, immunoglobulin M; MCM, medical countermeasure; PCR, polymerase chain reaction;
VIGIV, vaccinia immune globulin intravenous. (From Rao AK, Schrodt CA, Minhaj FS, et al. Interim clinical treatment considerations of severe manifestations of Mpox – United States, February 2023. MMWR. 2023;72:232–243.)

Chapter 768

Envenomations
Sing-­Yi Feng
Envenomations due to snakes, spiders, scorpions, and other venomous animals can cause significant morbidity and mortality, although
the majority cause only localized pain and swelling. In the 2020 report
of the American Association of Poison Control Centers, approximately
42,800 out of 2.1 million phone consultations were related to bites and
stings of various creatures, with approximately 14,000 involving children <20 years of age.
Not every bite from a venomous creature is harmful. In many cases,
no venom is injected; these are called dry bites. A dry bite may occur
for many reasons, including failure of the venom delivery mechanism
and depletion of venom. Up to 20% of pit viper, 80% of coral snake, and
approximately 50% of all venomous snake bites are dry.

GENERAL APPROACH TO THE ENVENOMATED
CHILD

Children may be bitten or stung as they play and explore their environment. The evaluation may be hampered by an unclear history of the
circumstances and the possible offending organism, particularly with
preverbal children. The overall effects of some venomous bites and
stings may be relatively more severe in children than in adults because
children generally receive a similar venom load from the offending animal yet have less circulating blood volume to dilute its effects.

General Management

The majority of envenomations require local wound care, pain control,
and reassurance. However, the severely envenomated child may require
advanced life support interventions including endotracheal intubation
and mechanical ventilation. Intravenous access should be obtained in
an unaffected extremity if possible (see Chapters 91 and 92) to provide fluids and vasopressors as needed. Early hypotension is usually
due to vasodilation and should be treated with volume expansion using

appropriate infusion of intravenous crystalloid solution (normal saline
boluses of 20 mL/kg; repeated as needed up to three times). Shock
unresponsive to volume repletion may require addition of a vasopressive agent such as epinephrine or norepinephrine (in addition to antivenom administration if appropriate). If the presentation is suspicious
for an anaphylactic reaction to venom, treatment (including epinephrine) should be initiated as soon as possible (see Chapter 190) along
with the appropriate antivenom.
The affected body part should be immobilized in a position of function and any areas of edema should be marked, measured, and monitored. If antivenom is available for the envenomation, efforts should be
initiated to locate and secure an adequate amount to treat the patient.
In the United States, regional poison control centers are available via
the national phone number 1-­800-­222-­1222 to facilitate this effort,
especially if the species is exotic. Guidance in dosing the antivenom
should be obtained from experienced toxicologists via the regional poison center.

General Wound Care

Bites and stings require basic wound care, including copious tap water
or normal saline irrigation under pressure when possible. For small
puncture wounds, this is impractical, but the skin should still be thoroughly cleansed with soap and water. Tetanus immunization should
be updated as needed. Intact bullae should be left to act as a natural
sterile dressing to prevent infection, whereas ruptured bullae should
be debrided. Exposed tissue should be covered with wet to dry dressings. Necrotic wounds, as seen in some snake and spider bites, should
be judiciously debrided, with removal of only clearly necrotic tissue.
Reconstructive surgery with skin grafts or muscle/tendon grafts may
be necessary later. Prophylactic antibiotics are usually not necessary because venom is bacteriostatic. Antibiotics should generally be
reserved for signs of established secondary infection.

SNAKE BITES

Most snake bites are inflicted by nonvenomous species and are of no more
consequence than a potentially contaminated puncture wound. Anatomic
features including head shape, pupil shape, and anal plate arrangement can
be used to differentiate venomous and nonvenomous snakes (Fig. 768.1).
Medically important venomous snakes in the United States belong to two
families: Crotalinae and Elapidae (Table 768.1). Most snakebites occur

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 768 u Envenomations 4467
Venomous
Pit vipers

Nonvenomous
Rat snakes, etc.

Corals

Triangular head

Round head
Ovate shaped head

Keeled scales
Elliptical pupil
Nostril

Pit
Northern Pacific Rattlesnake
(Crotalus viridis oreganus)
Anal plate
Rattlesnakes
Rattles
Copperheads and
Cottonmouths
No rattles

Eastern Coral Snake
(Micrurus fulvius)

Double row of subcaudal scales
Single row of subcaudal scales

Nostril
Split anal plate

Round pupil
Nostril
Trans-Pecos Rat Snake
(Bogertophis subocularis)

Double row of subcaudal scales

Split anal plate

Anal plate

Fig. 768.1 Anatomic comparison of pit vipers, coral snakes, and nonvenomous snakes of the United States. (Modified from Adams JG, ed. Emergency Medicine. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2008. Drawing by Marlin Sawyer.)

Table 768.1  Important Venomous Snake Families in the United States
FAMILY

EXAMPLES

TOXIN EFFECTS/OTHER COMMENTS

ANTIVENOM

Crotalinae (pit
vipers)

Rattlesnakes (Crotalus and
Sistrurus spp.), cottonmouths and
copperheads (Agkistrodon spp.)

Heat-­sensing “pit” between each eye and
nostril
Toxins cause tissue damage, coagulopathy,
cardiovascular collapse
Exception: Mojave rattlesnake (Crotalus
scutulatus) – neurotoxic venom

Crotalinae polyvalent immune Fab

Elapidae

Coral snakes (Micrurus spp.)

Venom is neurotoxic

Antivenin (Micrurus fulvius)

from April through September, when snakes are at their most active. Males
sustain 75% of bites and children <5 years of age account for 10–15%. Bites
are usually located on extremities, although other parts of the body have
been reported. In the United States, approximately 98% of venomous
snake bites are inflicted by pit vipers (Crotalinae). A small fraction of bites
are caused by coral snakes (Elapidae) in the southern and southwestern
states and by exotic pet snakes that have been imported.

Venoms and Effects

Snake venoms are complex mixtures of proteins including enzymes that
cause local tissue destruction and other enzymes that have potentially
lethal systemic effects including coagulopathy and neurotoxicity. The
symptoms and severity of an envenomation vary according to the type of
snake, the amount of venom injected, and the location of the bite. About
25% of snakebites are “dry bites,” where the patient has fang marks and
puncture wounds but no pain, swelling, or systemic effects as no venom
was injected. Most pit viper bites cause significant local pain, swelling,
and ecchymosis and may result in necrosis of the affected extremity
(Fig. 768.2). Pain and swelling typically begin quickly after the bite and
may progress over hours to days. Serious envenomation may result in

a consumptive coagulopathy, hypotension, and respiratory distress. In
contrast, venom from the Elapidae is neurotoxic with little or no local
tissue damage. These bites cause variable local pain, and the onset of
systemic effects can be delayed for hours. Manifestations of neurotoxicity generally are caused by curare-­like blockade at the neuromuscular junction. Symptoms usually begin with cranial nerve palsies such as
ptosis, dysarthria, and dysphagia and may progress to respiratory failure
and complete paralysis. Some pit vipers, including the Southern Pacific
rattlesnake (Crotalus oreganus helleri), western diamondback rattlesnake
(Crotalus atrox), timber rattlesnake (Crotalus horridus), and Mojave
rattlesnake (Crotalus scutulatus), can also cause significant neurotoxicity, like the Elapidae. Regional poison control centers and toxicologists
should be consulted early in the course of treatment.

Management

Prehospital care should focus on rapid transport to the emergency
department while providing supportive care. Constrictive clothing, jewelry, and watches should be removed, and the injured body
part should be immobilized in a position of function at the level of
the heart. Many popularized field treatments for snake bites, such as

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4468 Part XXXII u Environmental Health

Fig. 768.2 Southern Pacific rattlesnake bite (Crotalus oreganus hel-

leri) in a 2-­yr-­old child. Note the fang marks, swelling, and bruising of
the tissues (photograph taken 2 hours following the bite). (Courtesy
Sean Bush, MD.)

tourniquets, ice, electric shock, incision, and suction, have proven ineffective or deleterious.
At the hospital, supportive care should be continued as an effort is
made to identify the offending snake and secure the appropriate antivenom (if applicable). In severe envenomations, advanced respiratory support may be required, including endotracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation. Intravenous access should be established in
an unaffected extremity, intravenous fluids administered as needed,
and standard laboratory specimens obtained, including complete
blood count, coagulation studies, fibrinogen concentration, and serum
chemistry analysis including total creatine kinase. Laboratory studies
should initially be repeated every 4-­6 hours to monitor the patient’s
progress and response to therapy. If tourniquets are placed in the field,
they should be cautiously removed after venous access is obtained due
to possible adverse effects that may follow from a sudden release of
venom into the systemic circulation. The bitten extremity should be
marked with the leading edge of the erythema and edema as well as the
time to monitor progression of the swelling.
Assessment of the severity of the envenomation in the field and at the
hospital is essential in determining the appropriateness of antivenom
therapy for the snakebite victim (Table 768.2). Antivenoms are relatively specific for the genus of snake whose venom they are designed
to neutralize. If it is determined that the patient requires antivenom,
appropriating the correct antivenom should begin as soon as possible
by discussing the matter with the hospital pharmacy, regional poison
control center, and perhaps local zoos and museums that keep captive
snakes because they often stock exotic snake antivenom.
Table 768.3 lists the indications for administering antivenom. CroFab, a Crotalinae polyvalent immune Fab antivenom (FabAV), is
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in
crotalid envenomations. FabAV is derived from sheep (ovine) antibodies to crotalid snake venom, and side effects include both immediate
and delayed hypersensitivity reactions. FabAV is derived from four
snakes, three from the genus Crotalus (the eastern diamondback rattlesnake, the western diamondback rattlesnake, and the Mojave rattlesnake) and one from the genus Agkistrodon (the cottonmouth or water
moccasin). It is effective against the venoms of all Crotalinae snakes in
the United States. There is cross reactivity with FabAV against venom
from copperhead snakes (Agkistrodon contortrix). However, copperhead bites often do not require treatment with antivenom because they
cause fewer systemic effects and less severe local tissue damage. Most
copperhead envenomations cause only local tissue swelling, ecchymosis, and pain and generally do well with good supportive care and pain
control. Any child with evidence of systemic toxicity should receive
FabAV.

Initial dosing of FabAV is aimed at control of symptoms (progressive tissue swelling, thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy, neurotoxicity, or systemic toxicity). The dose is repeated until initial control
of toxicity is achieved (see Table 768.3). Subsequent maintenance
dosing may be needed to prevent or treat recurrence of venom
effects because, due to its small molecular size, the half-­life of
FabAV is considerably shorter than that of crotalid venom constituents. Patients with significant envenomation should be followed for
late hematologic abnormalities (coagulopathy) that can occur up
to 2 weeks after the bite. Although these tend to be mild laboratory coagulopathies without clinical bleeding, rare cases of severe
delayed bleeding have been reported. Further antivenom therapy
should be considered for such delayed or recurrent coagulopathy as
outlined in Table 768.4.
In April 2021, the U.S. FDA approved a crotaline immune Fab2
antivenin (Fab2AV) to treat adult and pediatric patients with North
American Crotaline envenomations marketed as AnaVIP. This antidote is an equine-­derived antivenin and, due to it being a Fab2 fragment, has a longer half-­life than the FabAV. It has a similar side
effect profile as the FabAV including anaphylactoid and hypersensitivity reactions. Initial dosing is 10 vials given intravenously over 60
minutes. If the symptoms continue to progress, then 10 vials can be
given every hour until there is no further progression of symptoms.
Patients should be observed for a minimum of 18 hours after the
Fab2AV infusion. If a patient has reemerging symptoms including
coagulopathies, then an additional four vials of the Fab2AV can be
infused (Table 768.5).
Envenomation of the extremities can mimic compartment syndrome, with severe pain and swelling. It is important to treat these
patients aggressively with FabAV or Fab2AV and pain control to
control the severe pain and swelling. Although fasciotomy was once
advocated for the treatment of crotalid snakebites of the extremities,
it is now a treatment of last resort only if aggressive FabAV or Fab2AV
treatment is unable to stop the progression of pain and swelling and
true compartment syndrome is documented with measurement of
intracompartmental pressure.
The antivenom for coral snakes (Micrurus fulvius) has been the
recommended treatment for envenomation by the eastern coral
snake (M. fulvius) and the Texas coral snake (Micrurus tener). Indications for this antivenom are the development of any neurologic signs
and symptoms of coral snake envenomation including paresthesias,
slurred speech, respiratory difficulties, muscle weakness, and fasciculations. Due to it being equine in origin, its side effect profile includes
anaphylaxis and allergic reactions. Most hospitals do not carry this
antivenom and local poison centers should be notified to help locate
supplies. Respiratory supportive care including endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation for respiratory failure remains the
mainstay of treatment.

Disposition

If, after observation for 6-­8 hours, a patient exhibits only fang-­
induced puncture marks with no local or systemic symptoms, the
wounds can be considered dry bites and the patient can be safely discharged home. Patients with significant toxicity and those requiring
treatment with antivenom should be admitted to the hospital. Patients
with a history of eastern or Texas coral snakebite should be admitted
to a monitored setting for 24 hours to observe for neurologic toxicity so that respiratory support can be provided as needed. Children
should be admitted to an intensive care setting if they develop severe
and progressive local tissue toxicity or evidence of systemic toxicity
including coagulopathy, neurotoxicity, hemodynamic instability, or
respiratory difficulties.

SPIDER BITES

In the United States, 18 genera of spiders have been identified that
cause clinically significant envenomation. The spiders of importance in
the United States include the Latrodectus species (the widow spiders)
and the Loxosceles species (the recluse spiders).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 768 u Envenomations 4469
Table 768.2  Pit Viper Envenomation Classification
GRADE

CLINICAL FEATURES

0 (None)

No evidence of envenomation. A fang wound may be present. Pain is
minimal, with less than 1 inch of surrounding edema and erythema. No
systemic manifestations are present during the first 12 hr after the bite.
No laboratory changes occur.

No

ANTIVENOM

Observe for 8-­12 hr. May be
discharged if repeat labs
are normal and no signs of
envenomation develop.

DISPOSITION

I (Minimal)

Pain is moderate or throbbing and localized to the fang wound,
surrounded by 1-­5 inches of edema and erythema. No evidence of
systemic involvement is present after 12 hr of observation. No laboratory
changes occur.

No

Admission for 12-­24 hr. Repeat
labs every 6 hr.
May be discharged if repeat
labs are normal and no signs
of envenomation develop.

II (Moderate)

There is more severe and widely distributed pain, edema spreading toward
the trunk, and petechiae and ecchymoses limited to the area of edema.
Nausea, vomiting, and a mild elevation in temperature are usually present.

Yes

Admission to intensive care
unit.

III (Severe)

This may initially resemble a grade I or II; however, within 12 hr, edema
spreads up the extremity and may involve part of the trunk. Petechiae
and ecchymoses may be generalized. Systemic manifestations may
include tachycardia and hypotension. Laboratory abnormalities may
include an elevated white blood cell count, creatine phosphokinase,
prothrombin time, and partial thromboplastin time, as well as elevated
fibrin degradation products and D-­dimer. Decreased platelets and
fibrinogen are common. Hematuria, myoglobinuria, increased bleeding
time, and renal or hepatic abnormalities may also occur.

Yes

Admission to intensive care
unit.

IV (Very severe)

Sudden pain, rapidly progressive swelling that may reach and involve the
trunk within a few hours, ecchymoses, bleb formation, and necrosis.
Systemic manifestations, often commencing within 15 min of the bite,
usually include weakness, nausea, vomiting, vertigo, and numbness
or tingling of the lips or face. Muscle fasciculations, painful muscular
cramping, pallor, sweating, cold and clammy skin, rapid and weak
pulse, incontinence, convulsions, and coma may also be observed. An
intravenous bite may result in cardiopulmonary arrest soon after the bite.

Yes

Admission to intensive care
unit.

From Curtis AM, Erickson TB. Venomous animal injuries. Walls RM, ed. Rosen’s Emergency Medicine, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 53.2, p. 696.

Table 768.3  Crotaline Fab Antivenom Dosing Guidelines
DOSE

RECOMMENDATIONS

Initial dose:
four to six vials IV

Maintenance dose:
two vials IV every
6 hr × 3 doses

• Reconstitute each vial of FabAV in 18 mL
normal saline for injection and mix with
continuous manual inversion at the rate of
one to two inversions per second until no
solid material is visible in the vial.
• Further dilute four to six vials of reconstituted
FabAV in 250 mL normal saline.
• Infuse FabAV over 1 hr IV.
• Start with slow infusion rate of 25-­50 mL/hr
for 10 min.
• If no acute allergic reaction occurs, increase
rate to 250 mL/hr to complete infusion.
• The volume of the infusion may be
decreased for the very small child or
volume-­sensitive patient.
• Observe 1 hr after initial dose to assess for
control of envenomation.
• Repeat four to six vials of FabAV as needed
to gain initial control.
• Monitor for delayed or recurrent toxicity
requiring additional FabAV.
• Antivenom dose requirements vary
depending on the individual patient’s
response and clinical course.
• Patients with mild envenomation may not
require maintenance dosing beyond the
initial dose.

Adapted from Goto CS, Feng SY. Crotalidae polyvalent immune Fab for the treatment
of pediatric crotaline envenomations. Ped Emerg Care. 2009;25(4):273–279; and from
Crofab Package Insert (revised 2018).

Table 768.4  Indications for Administration of Additional
Antivenom in Patients with Recurrent
Coagulopathy or Thrombocytopenia After
Initial Control
• Evidence of clinically significant bleeding
• Platelet count below 25,000/mm3
• International normalized ratio (INR) >3
• Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) >50 seconds
• Fibrinogen <50 mg/dL
• Presence of multicomponent coagulopathy
• Worsening trend in a patient with prior severe coagulopathy
• High-­risk behavior for trauma
• Certain comorbid conditions (e.g., systemic vasculitis, seizure
disorders, prior stroke)
From Norris RL, Bush SP, Cardwell MD. Bites by venomous reptiles in Canada, the U.S.
and Mexico. In: Auerbach PS, ed. Wilderness Medicine, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2017.

Latrodectus Spiders

The Latrodectus species are found throughout the United States and
include L. mactans (Fig. 768.3; black widow spider), L. hesperus (western black widow), L. bishop (red widow spider), L. variolus, and L.
geometricus (brown widow spider). They are indigenous to every state
except Alaska. The classic hourglass-­shape marking is found only in L.
mactans. They like to live close to the ground in secluded and dimly lit
areas such as barns, sheds, and garages.

Venoms and Effects

Latrodectus spiders possess venoms that act at neuromuscular and
autonomic nervous system synapses, resulting in excessive release of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4470 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Table 768.5  Crotaline Fab2 Antivenom Dosing
Guidelines
Initial Dose:
10 vials (*no known
maximum dose
of Crotaline Fab2
antivenom)

• Reconstitute 10 vials for less than 1 min
each using 10 mL sterile normal saline
per vial
• Combine all vials and dilute to a total
volume of 250 mL sterile normal saline
• Infuse at 25-­50 mL/hr for 10 min; if
tolerated at 250 mL/hr to completion

Evaluate for control

60 minutes after infusion, check for:
• Local injury not progressing
• Coagulation parameters improving
• Systemic effects resolved

Observe

• Observe for at least 18 hr after initial
control
• If symptoms reemerge, can administer
four vials in 250 mL

Adapted from AnaVIP package insert.

Fig. 768.4 Male recluse spider (Loxosceles spp.). Note the distinct

violin-­shaped marking on the dorsum of the cephalothorax. (Courtesy
Michael Cardwell/Extreme Wildlife Photography)

infused slowly with continuous monitoring and preparation to treat
anaphylaxis should it occur.

Loxosceles Spiders
Venoms and Effects

Fig. 768.3 Female black widow spider (Latrodectus mactans). Note

the red hourglass-­shaped marking on the underside of her abdomen.
(From The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Public Health
Image Library, Image #5449.)

neurotransmitters. All of the widow spiders possess similar venoms,
with the most important neurotoxin being α-­latrotoxin.
Bites by the neurotoxic spiders tend to be very painful, and the
offending spider is often seen. Systemic effects may include hypertension, tachycardia, bradycardia, hypersalivation, diaphoresis, and
diffuse muscle spasm. Nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and abdominal rigidity may mimic appendicitis or another acute abdominal
emergency.

Management

The management of a neurotoxic spider envenomation centers on
sound supportive care. Generous doses of opioid analgesics and benzodiazepines should be utilized to ease severe pain and muscle spasm.
Latrodectus antivenom (Wyeth) is equine-­derived and may be considered to reverse severe systemic effects of widow spider envenomation.
Although effective, it is associated with anaphylaxis, serum sickness,
and anaphylactoid reactions and should be reserved for high-­risk
patients such as pregnant women at risk of spontaneous abortion due
to the severe pain. One vial is administered via intravenous infusion.
Efficacy is usually noted within 1 hour of administration, with reversal
of systemic toxicity and relief of pain. Occasionally a second vial is necessary. Due to the possibility of severe or life-­threatening reactions, the
risks and benefits should be carefully considered and the antivenom

The spiders most notorious for their dermonecrotic potential are
the recluse spiders of the genus Loxosceles. The best-­known member
of this genus is the brown recluse (Loxosceles reclusa; Fig. 768.4),
found in the midwestern and southern regions of the United States.
The venom of Loxosceles spiders contains a phospholipase enzyme,
sphingomyelinase D, as well as hyaluronidase. Hyaluronidase is
the spreading factor that enables the venom to penetrate tissues,
but it does not induce tissue damage. Sphingomyelinase D causes
necrosis, red blood cell hemolysis, and platelet serotonin release.
The bite of this spider is generally painless and initially goes unnoticed. A few hours after the bite, the area begins to blister and bleed
and become painful. Within a day or two, the site will ulcerate and
develop violaceous necrosis with surrounding ecchymosis and a
rim of pale ischemia (“red, white, and blue” reaction). The lesion
may gradually expand over a period of days to weeks until necrotic
tissue sloughs and healing begins (Fig. 768.5).
Rare cases of systemic loxoscelism appear to be more common in
young children. Patients present with systemic toxicity, including
fever, chills, nausea, malaise, diffuse macular rash, and petechiae;
they may experience hemolysis, coagulopathy, and renal failure.
In cases of necrotic dermal lesions with no identified spider as
the culprit, a broad differential diagnosis must be considered to
ensure appropriate management. The differential diagnosis includes
skin infections (particularly methicillin-­
resistant Staphylococcus
aureus; see Chapter 227), pyoderma gangrenosum, or ecthyma
gangrenosum.

Management

The management of necrotizing spider bites includes good wound care,
updating of tetanus status, and administration of antibiotics if there is
secondary bacterial infection. Daily wound cleansing and splinting of
the affected area should be provided until the wound has healed.
No therapy has been definitively proven effective in limiting the
extent of necrosis after a recluse spider bite, including steroids, dapsone, colchicine, cyproheptadine, nitroglycerin, hyperbaric oxygen,
and early excision of tissue. Meticulous wound care is the mainstay
of treatment, and large lesions may require delayed secondary closure with skin grafting after clear tissue demarcation has occurred.
Patients with signs and symptoms of systemic loxoscelism should
be admitted to the hospital for supportive treatment of hypovolemia,
coagulopathy, hemolysis, and acute kidney injury. There is no commercially available antivenom in the United States for the management of
necrotizing spider bites such as those from Loxosceles species.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 768 u Envenomations 4471

B

A

C

D

Fig. 768.5 Progression of cutaneous loxoscelism in a Brazilian patient who was bitten inside a house while putting on a shirt. Ulceration and ne-

crosis at day 1 (A), day 9 (B), day 16 (C), and day 25 (D). (From Isbister G, Fan HW. Spider bite. Lancet. 2011;378:2039–2046. Fig. 3. Photographs
by Ceila MS Malaque.)

Disposition

Victims with necrotic skin lesions should be monitored with frequent
outpatient wound checks to determine progression of the lesion.
Children with rapidly progressive dermonecrosis or systemic toxicity
should be admitted to the hospital for supportive therapy, which may
include intensive care admission for hemolysis, coagulopathy, renal
failure, or hypotension.

SCORPION STINGS

There are more than 650 species of scorpions worldwide, some of
which are capable of causing severe or lethal envenomation. In the
United States, there are two clinically significant scorpions: Centruroides exilicauda (the bark scorpion) and Centruroides vittatus. Most
scorpion envenomations occur in the southwestern United States, and
fatalities are rare. In other regions of the world, especially Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia, a number of scorpions regularly
cause fatalities.

Venoms and Effects

Centruroides scorpion venom contains phospholipase, acetylcholinesterase, hyaluronidase, serotonin, and neurotoxins, resulting in
severe pain and paresthesia as well as systemic symptoms of excessive nerve depolarization and release of acetylcholine and catecholamines. The manifestations of scorpion stings in children vary from
mild to severe and can include autonomic and somatic toxicity. Autonomic toxicity includes hypertension, tachycardia, hypersalivation,
emesis, diaphoresis, and bronchoconstriction, although respiratory
failure is rare. Somatic motor toxicity includes ataxia, fasciculations,
myoclonus, and opsoclonus. Patients are often restless or agitated,
and cranial nerve dysfunction may occur.

Management

Most scorpion stings do not produce severe effects and require only
wound care and orally administered pain medications. However,
patients with more severe symptoms may require intravenous opioids for analgesia and benzodiazepines for severe muscle spasm or
agitation.
A bark scorpion–specific antivenom, Anascorp (Bioclon, Mexico), is
approved by the FDA. This antivenom is recommended for critically ill
patients with neurotoxicity or other severe symptoms, including intractable pain that is not responsive to adequate doses of opioid analgesics.
Small children are more likely than adults to develop such severe symptoms. It is best to discuss antivenom therapy with the regional poison
control center for guidance.

Disposition

Patients who have had mild scorpion stings with only local effects can
be safely discharged home with wound care instructions, analgesics,
and close outpatient follow-­
up. Patients with evolving symptoms,
intractable pain, neurotoxicity, or other systemic toxicity should be
admitted to the hospital, especially if scorpion antivenom is being considered. Those with severe toxicity should be admitted to an intensive
care unit.

HYMENOPTERA STINGS

The insect order Hymenoptera includes the stinging ants, bees, and
wasps, which are characterized by the presence of a modified ovipositor (the “sting” or “stinger”) at the end of the abdomen through
which venom is injected. Various members of the order can be found
throughout the world.

Venoms and Effects

Hymenoptera venom is a complex mixture of proteins, enzymes, and
vasoactive substances that result in local tissue injury and inflammation. Most stings cause only local pain, redness, and swelling followed
by itching and resolution. Some patients experience a large local reaction in which swelling progresses beyond the sting site, possibly involving the entire extremity. Approximately 0.4–0.8% of children and 3% of
adults are at risk for acute, life-­threatening allergic reactions as a result
of Hymenoptera venom sensitivity; anaphylaxis due to Hymenoptera
envenomation causes an average of 62 deaths annually in the United
States (see Chapter 187). Rare cases of delayed serum sickness can follow Hymenoptera stings (see Chapter 191). Africanized honeybees
(Apis mellifera scutellata), an aggressive hybrid of western honeybee
species with African bee species, can cause massive stinging episodes
resulting in systemic venom toxicity with hypotension, respiratory failure, shock, hemolysis, and renal failure.

Management

Patients with typical local reactions can be treated with supportive care
including analgesics and antihistamines as needed. Patients with large
local reactions should also receive a course of oral corticosteroids and
a prescription for an epinephrine autoinjection kit including instructions in its use before discharge. Patients presenting with urticaria,
angioedema, wheezing, or hypotension should be treated with aggressive supportive care including standard therapy for anaphylaxis such
as intramuscular epinephrine, corticosteroids, antihistamines, intravenous fluids, oxygen, and airway management as needed (see Chapter
190). Patients suffering massive stinging episodes may also require
critical care resuscitation.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472 Part XXXII u Environmental Health
Disposition

Patients with local reactions can be discharged with continued outpatient care that may include analgesia and antihistamines. More difficult disposition decisions are involved for children with systemic
manifestations. Children with only diffuse urticaria who are stable
after a period of observation can be discharged home to continue a
short course of antihistamines and steroids and to carry an epinephrine
self-­administration kit. These children are at low risk for progressing to
systemic anaphylaxis with future stings. Children suffering more than
simple urticaria (e.g., wheezing, evidence of laryngeal edema or cardiovascular instability) should be treated aggressively and admitted for at
least 24 hours of observation. They should receive a referral to allergy/
immunology to test for Hymenoptera venom sensitivity and possible
immunotherapy. Immunotherapy reduces the risk of systemic anaphylaxis from future stings in high-­risk patients from 30–60% to <5%.

the spine, often with retained debris (spine fragments, glandular tissue,
and sand). The venom has vasoconstrictive properties that can result in
tissue necrosis and poor wound healing. Stingray envenomations are
noteworthy for immediate and intense pain at the site of injury that
lasts 24-­48 hours. Some patients experience nausea, vomiting, and
muscle cramps. Rarely, hypotension or seizures occur.
The Scorpaenidae have venomous dorsal, pelvic, and anal spines that
become erect when the animal is threatened. The venom glands associated with these spines contain multiple toxins, enzymes, and vasoactive
substances. Envenomation causes immediate severe pain that may persist for hours or days. Victims may experience local tissue destruction,
and superinfections are common. Systemic symptoms include diaphoresis, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, muscle cramping,
and headache. In severe cases, paralysis, respiratory failure, hypotension, dysrhythmias, and cardiovascular collapse have been reported.

MARINE ENVENOMATION

Management

The classes of venomous marine animals that cause the most morbidity
and mortality in humans are the Cnidaria (including jellyfish, the Portuguese man-­of-­war, Pacific blue bottle, fire coral, sea nettles, anemones, and others), Mollusca (blue-­ringed octopus and cone snails),
Chondrichthyes (stingrays), and members of the family Scorpaenidae
(lionfish, scorpionfish, and stonefish).

Venoms and Effects

All members of the Cnidaria have unique stinging cells called nematocysts. These cells contain a highly folded tubule that discharges on
contact, penetrates the skin, and injects venom. The venom is antigenic
and can be dermonecrotic, hemolytic, cardiotoxic, or neuropathic,
depending on the species. The Pacific box jellyfish (Chironex fleckeri)
of Australia, with its cardiotoxic venom, is known to cause stings that
are rapidly fatal due to cardiac arrest and pulmonary edema. Although
fatal anaphylaxis to jellyfish stings has been reported in coastal waters
of the United States, these events are rare. For clinicians in the Americas, the primary concern with Cnidaria envenomation is localized pain
that may be associated with paresthesias or pruritus. Occasionally, victims may have systemic symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, headache,
and chills.
The phylum Mollusca includes octopi and cone snails (Conus sp.).
The octopus of toxicologic significance is the Hapalochlaena maculosa
(blue-­ringed octopus), which is primarily found in Australian waters.
The blue-­ringed octopus secretes tetrodotoxin (the same toxin found
in pufferfish) in its salivary gland. The beak of the octopus punctures
the skin and delivers the tetrodotoxin. Tetrodotoxin blocks sodium
channels in neurons, leading to paralysis. The venom also contains
other toxins, including vasoactive agents and enzymes that cause local
tissue injury. Cone snails have a hollow proboscis with a tooth that can
be extended to inject venom into the victim. Venom of the Conus species contains conotoxins that target multiple receptors, including voltage, ligand, and G-­mediated receptors. Conotoxins cause a variety of
symptoms including severe pain, weakness, tissue ischemia, cyanosis,
and numbness. Systemic symptoms are usually neurologic and include
aphonia, aphasia, weakness, paralysis, respiratory failure, cardiovascular collapse, and ultimately death.
The stingray has a sharp, retroserrated spine and associated venom
gland at the base of its tail. Envenomation often occurs when the victim
steps on the animal hidden in the surf and the tail is whipped around to
puncture the lower extremity. Injuries involve jagged lacerations from

Treatment of Cnidaria stings should begin immediately after envenomation. Dousing the sting site with vinegar has been shown to inhibit
nematocyst discharge. If vinegar is not immediately available, the area
should be washed with seawater; freshwater should be avoided as it
is thought to stimulate firing of remaining nematocysts. Visible tentacle fragments should be removed with a gloved hand or forceps, and
microscopic fragments may be removed by gently shaving the affected
area. Folk remedies such as rubbing the sting with sand and applying
urine are not helpful and cause more irritation. Meat tenderizer is usually not effective. Antihistamines and corticosteroids are indicated for
swelling and urticaria. An acute anaphylactic reaction should be treated
with intramuscular epinephrine. Antibiotics are usually not necessary.
Patients who have been envenomated by Mollusca are treated supportively. There are no antivenoms available for either the blue-­ringed
octopus or the cone snails. Adequate pain control should be provided
as needed. Cardiovascular support may be required, and severe neurologic toxicity such as respiratory failure should be managed via airway
management and mechanical ventilation.
Treatment of stingray and Scorpaenidae stings is similar. These
toxins are heat-­labile, and immersion in hot water (approximately
42°C [107.6°F]) for 30-­60 minutes denatures the protein constituents
and decreases pain significantly. The wounds should be thoroughly
cleansed and explored with use of local or regional anesthesia to rule
out retention of spine or integument fragments. Stingray spines are
radiopaque and may be seen on radiographs or identified by ultrasonography. Lacerations should be treated with delayed primary closure
or allowed to heal by secondary intention. Systemic analgesia should
be provided as needed. Because of the risk of secondary bacterial infection, there should be a low threshold for administering prophylactic
antibiotics to cover Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Vibrio species,
and wounds should be rechecked at 3 and 7 days postinjury. An equine
Fab stonefish antivenom is available for severe stonefish envenomation
with systemic toxicity or intractable pain.

Disposition

After wound care and effective analgesia, most victims can be discharged home. If there are significant systemic effects, the patient
should be admitted for monitoring and further care as needed.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Laboratory Medicine
Chapter 769

Laboratory Testing in
Infants and Children
Stanley F. Lo and Stephen M. Roper
Normal values (reference intervals) are difficult to establish within
the pediatric population. Differences in genetic composition,
physiologic development, environmental influences, and subclinical disease are variables that need to be considered when developing reference intervals. Other considerations for further defining
reference intervals include partitioning based on sex and age. The
most commonly used reference range is generally given as the mean
of the reference population ±2 standard deviations (SD). This is
acceptable when the distribution of results for the tested population
is essentially gaussian (normal). The serum sodium concentration
in children, which is tightly controlled physiologically, has a distribution that is essentially gaussian; the mean value ±2 SD gives a
range very close to that actually observed in 95% of children (Table
769.1). However, not all analytes have a gaussian distribution. The
serum creatine kinase level, which is subject to diverse influences
and is not actively controlled, does not show a gaussian distribution, as evidenced by the lack of agreement between the range actually observed and that predicted by the mean value ±2 SD. In these
cases, a reference interval defining the 2.5-­97.5 percentiles is typically used.
Reference cutoffs are typically established from large studies
with a healthy reference population. Examples of these cutoffs are
illustrated by reference cutoffs established for cholesterol, lipoproteins, and neonatal bilirubin. Patient results exceeding these cutoffs
have a future risk of acquiring disease. A final modification needed
for reporting reference intervals is referencing the Tanner stage of
sexual maturation (sexual maturity rating scale), which is most useful in assessing pituitary and gonadal function.
The establishment of common reference intervals remains an elusive target. Although some patient results are directly comparable
between laboratories and methods, most are not. Careful interpretation of patient results must consider when testing was performed
and what method was used. Higher-­order methods, methods that
are more accurate and precise, continue to be slowly developed.
These will be critical to the standardization of tests and the establishment of common reference intervals.

COMMON CHALLENGES IN PEDIATRIC
LABORATORY MEDICINE

There are several challenges in pediatric lab medicine that are
encountered infrequently, are less consequential, or do not apply
to adult populations. For example, the rate of in-­vitro hemolysis
is increased in children because of the use of inappropriate needle
or tubes sizes, applying too much pressure to the site of a finger or
heel-­stick collection, or simply drawing a specimen rapidly to minimize the discomfort of the child. Hemolyzed specimens can lead to

PART

XXXIII

inaccurate results for several analytes because of spectrophotometric interference caused by hemoglobin, dilution effects, or because
of the release of other red blood cell components (e.g., lactate dehydrogenase [LDH]). A related issue is the frequent occurrence of
physiologic jaundice. Like hemoglobin, bilirubin can absorb light
and influence with spectrophotometric analyses. Although many
chemistry analyzers can detect these interferences and suppress
affected results, specimens frequently must be recollected. Likewise,
the increased hematocrit common in the first month of life can lead
to decreased amount of plasma/serum from a given blood volume.
This phenomenon can result in the need for repeat phlebotomy or
larger starting volumes of whole blood. In addition to blood, urine
is another difficult fluid to work with in children. Noninvasive urine
collections from infants often require special collection techniques
(bags, cotton balls) that may only capture small volumes. Coupled
with the relatively dilute urine typically produced by newborns,
urine specimens may require concentration, or analyzer measurement ranges may need to be adjusted to provide useful information. Other challenges in pediatric lab medicine include, but are not
limited to, the use of small (“bullet”) blood collection tubes that are
incompatible with automated sample handlers, the need for specialized testing (e.g., sweat test, newborn screening), and working with
specimens drawn from indwelling catheters that may be contaminated with IV or total parenteral nutrition (TPN) fluid.

ACCURACY AND PRECISION OF LABORATORY TESTS

Technical accuracy, or trueness, is an important consideration in interpreting the results of a laboratory test. Because of improvements in
methods of analysis and elimination of analytic interference, the accuracy of most tests is limited primarily by their precision. Accuracy is
a measure of the nearness of a test result to the actual value, whereas
precision is a measure of the reproducibility of a result. No test can
be more accurate than it is precise. Analysis of precision by repetitive
measurements of a single sample gives rise to a gaussian distribution
with a mean and an SD. The estimate of precision is the coefficient of
variation (CV):
SD
CV =
× 100
Mean
The CV is not likely to be constant over the full range of values
obtained in clinical testing, but it is approximately 5% in the normal range. The CV is generally not reported but is always known
by the laboratory. It is particularly important in assessing the significance of changes in laboratory results. For example, a common
situation is the need to assess hepatotoxicity incurred because of
the administration of a therapeutic drug and reflected in the serum
alanine transaminase (aminotransferase) (ALT) value. If serum
ALT increases from 25 units/L to 40 units/L, is the change significant? The CV for ALT is 7%. Using the value obtained ±2 × CV to
express the extremes of imprecision, a value of 25 units/L is unlikely
to reflect an actual concentration of >29 units/L, and a value of 40
units/L is unlikely to reflect an actual concentration of <34 units/L.
Therefore the change in the value as obtained by testing is likely to
reflect a real change in circulating ALT levels. Continued monitoring of serum ALT is indicated, even though both values for ALT are
within normal limits. Likely in this case is only a probability. Inherent biologic variability is such that the results of two successive tests
may suggest a trend that will disappear on further testing.

4472.e3
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e4 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 769.1  Gaussian and Nongaussian Laboratory
Values in 458 Normal Schoolchildren 7-­14
Years Old
SERUM SODIUM
(MMOL/L)

SERUM CREATINE
KINASE (UNITS/L)

Mean

141

68

Standard
deviation (SD)

1.7

34

Mean ±2 SD

138-­144

0-­136

Actual 95% range

137-­144

24-­162

The precision of a test may also be indicated by providing confidence
limits for a given result. Usually, 95% confidence limits are used, indicating that it is 95% certain that the value obtained lies between the two
limits reported. Confidence limits are calculated using the mean and
SD of replicate determinations:
95 % confidence limits = Mean ± t × SD

where t is a constant derived from the number of replications. In
most cases, t = 2.
Accuracy is expressed by determining the difference, or bias,
between results from a comparative method and a definitive or reference method. A definitive or reference method provides results
with increased precision and accuracy compared with the clinical
laboratory. When these methods are used, along with highly purified materials (i.e., Standard Reference Materials from the National
Institute of Standards and Technology) to establish values for assay
calibrators used in the clinical laboratory, the accuracy of patient
results is improved. Creatinine, hemoglobin A1c, and neonatal bilirubin are examples in which the accuracy of these tests has been
improved.

SENSITIVITY, ACCURACY, AND ANALYTIC TESTING

In some circumstances, the sensitivity and accuracy of an analysis are
reduced or increased as functions of clinical purpose. For example, ion
exchange chromatography of plasma amino acids for the diagnosis of
inborn errors of metabolism is usually performed at an analytic sensitivity that allows measurement of all the amino acids with a single set
of standards. The range of values is approximately 20-­800 μmol/L, and
accuracy is poor at values ≤20 μmol/L. The detection of homocysteine
in this type of analysis suggests an inborn error of methionine metabolism. If the analysis is adjusted to achieve greater analytic sensitivity,
it is possible to measure homocysteine accurately in normal plasma
(3-­12 μmol/L). This more sensitive test is used to assess cobalamin and
folate status.

PREDICTIVE VALUE OF LABORATORY TESTS

Predictive value (PV) theory deals with the usefulness of tests as
defined by their clinical sensitivity (ability to detect a disease) and
specificity (ability to define the absence of a disease).
Sensitivity =
Specificity =

Number positive by test
Total number positive

× 100

Number negative by test
Total number without disease

PV of
positive test result

PV of
negative test result

× 100

True-positive results
Total positive results

 100

True-negative results
Total negative results

 100

The problems addressed by PV theory are false-­negative and false-­
positive test results. Both are major considerations in interpreting the
results of screening tests in general and neonatal screening tests in
particular.
Testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) seroreactivity illustrates some of these considerations. If it is assumed that
approximately 1,100,000 of 284,000,000 residents of the United States
are infected with HIV (prevalence = 0.39%) and that 90% of those
infected demonstrate antibodies to HIV, then we can consider the
usefulness of a simple test with 99% sensitivity and 99.5% specificity
(see Chapter 322). If the entire population of the United States were
screened, it would be possible to identify most of those infected with
HIV:
1,100,000 × 0.9× 0.99 = 980,100  89.1% 
However, there will be 119,900 false-­negative test results. And even
with 99.5% specificity, the number of false-­positive test results would
be larger than the number of true-­positive results:
284,000,000  0.005 
1,420,000

In addition, there will be 281,480,000 true-­negative results:
PV of positive test result =
PV of negative test result =

980,100

 980,100  1, 420,000 
281, 480,000

 281, 480,000  119,900 

×100  41%
×100  99.96%

Given the high cost associated with follow-­up and the anguish produced by a false-­positive result, it is easy to see why universal screening for HIV seropositivity received a low priority immediately after the
introduction of testing for HIV infection.
By contrast, we can consider the screening of 100,000 individuals from groups at increased risk for HIV in whom the overall
prevalence of disease is 10%, with all other considerations being
unchanged.
True
-positive results 0.9

× 0.99 ×10,000 8,910
False-positive

results 0.005×

90,000 450
False-negative results  10,000  8,910  1,090
PV of positive

test result

8,910

×100 95%
8,910  450

PV of 
negative test result

89,500
×100 99%

89,550 +1,090

These two hypothetical testing strategies show that the diagnostic
efficiency of testing depends heavily on the prevalence of the disease being tested for, even with a superior test, such as the test for
HIV antibodies. Because the treatment of pregnant women infected
with HIV is effective in preventing vertical transmission, screening
has now been expanded to all pregnant women. The proven effectiveness of current therapy in preventing neonatal infection has
intensified screening for HIV early in pregnancy.
However, because of the long time needed to test for HIV antibodies, it was difficult to screen women during labor and provide
the necessary therapy. Rapid HIV antibody testing procedures
using a fingerstick or venipuncture to obtain whole blood, plasma,
or serum, and tests using oral fluid were approved (Table 769.2).
The HIV test results are usually obtained in <20 minutes. The collection of oral fluid samples provides an alternative for individuals who avoid HIV testing because of their dislike of needlesticks.
HIV testing using whole blood or oral fluid is classified as a waived
test under the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 769 u Laboratory Testing in Infants and Children

4472.e5

Table 769.2  Rapid HIV Antibody Tests and Status Under CLIA
TIME FOR PERFORMING ASSAY

WAIT TIME TO
READ RESULTS

<5 min

20-­40 min

OraSure Technologies
www.orasure.com

<5 min

10-­12 min

Trinity Biotech
www.trinitybiotech.com

Moderate complexity

<5 min

Read result
immediately

MedMira
www.medmira.com

Serum and plasma

Moderate complexity

10-­15 min

Result can
be read
immediately or
up to 4 hr later

BioRad Laboratories
www.bio-­rad.com

Clearview
HIV 1/2 STAT-­PAK
and Clearview
COMPLETE HIV 1/2

Whole blood (fingerstick
or venipuncture)

Waived

5 min

15-­20 min

Alere
www.alere.com

Serum and plasma

Waived

5 min

15-­20 min

Alere

Clearview Determine
HIV1/2 Ag/Ab
Combo

Whole blood (fingerstick
or venipuncture)

Waived

5 min

20 min

Alere

Serum and plasma

Waived

5 min

20 min

Chembio Diagnostic
Systems; distributed by
Alere

RAPID HIV TEST

SPECIMEN TYPE

CLIA CATEGORY

OraQuick ADVANCE
Rapid HIV-­1/2
Antibody Test

Oral fluid
Whole blood (fingerstick
or venipuncture)

Waived
Waived

Plasma

Moderate complexity

Whole blood (fingerstick
or venipuncture)

Waived

Serum and plasma

Moderate complexity

Reveal G4 Rapid
HIV-­1 Antibody Test

Serum and plasma

MultiSpot HIV-­1/HIV-­2
Rapid Test

Uni-­Gold
Recombigen HIV-­1

MANUFACTURER

Ag/Ab, Antigen/antibody; CLIA, Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments of 1988; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus.

1988 (CLIA), and these tests are allowed in a point-­of-­care setting.
Waived tests are laboratory procedures that use methodologies that
are so simple and accurate as to render the likelihood of an erroneous result by the user negligible. A positive rapid HIV test result is
then confirmed by nucleic acid amplification testing or immunofluorescence assay.
According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 174 infants were born with HIV in 2014 in the United
States. Rapid HIV testing during labor allows for implementation of
antiretroviral therapy for HIV-­infected women who have not been
tested or are unaware of their HIV status. The initiation of therapy
at the time of labor or within the first 12 hours of an infant’s birth
significantly reduces the risk of mother-­to-­child transmission. In
the mother–infant rapid intervention at delivery study, it was shown
that the sensitivity and specificity of a rapid whole blood test for
HIV during labor were 100% and 99.9%, respectively, with a positive PV of 90%. The median turnaround time for obtaining results
from blood collection to patient notification was only 66 minutes.
The performance of the rapid blood test was better than that of the
standard HIV enzyme immunoassay, which had a sensitivity and
specificity of 100% and 99.8%, respectively, with a positive PV of
76%. In addition, the median turnaround time from blood collection to patient notification was 28 hours. As a result, rapid whole
blood HIV testing is now the standard of care for women in labor
with undocumented HIV status.
Rapid HIV testing can also be used in developing countries. In
resource-­poor settings, because of the lack of properly equipped laboratories, skilled technologists, and basic resources, such as electricity and water, these self-­contained, point-­of-­care HIV tests are very
attractive. In areas of Asia and Africa where HIV is epidemic, screening pregnant women with rapid HIV tests and offering antiretroviral

therapy can significantly reduce the transmission of HIV to hundreds
of thousands of infants.

NEONATAL SCREENING TESTS

Almost all the diseases detected in neonatal screening programs
have a very low prevalence, and for the most part, the tests are quantitative rather than qualitative. In general, the strategy is to use the
initial screening test to separate a highly suspect group of patients
from normal infants (i.e., to increase the prevalence) and then to
follow this suspect group aggressively. Two common strategies
are used to detect congenital hypothyroidism (see Chapter 603):
one uses thyroid-­stimulating hormone for the initial screen, and
the other uses thyroxine. In the thyroxine strategy for congenital
hypothyroidism, which has a prevalence of 25 in 100,000 liveborn
infants, the initial test performed is for thyroxine in whole blood.
Infants with the lowest 10% of test results are considered suspect. If
all infants with hypothyroidism were included in the suspect group,
the prevalence of disease in this group would be 250 in 100,000
infants. The original samples obtained from the suspect group are
retested for thyroxine and are tested for thyroid-­stimulating hormone. This second round of testing results in an even more highly
suspect group composed of 0.1% of the infants screened and having a prevalence of hypothyroidism of 25,000 in 100,000 individuals. This final group is aggressively pursued for further testing and
treatment. Even with a 1,000-­fold increase in prevalence, 75% of
the aggressively tested population is euthyroid. The justifications
advanced for the program are that treatment is easy and effective
and that the alternative if congenital hypothyroidism is undetected
and untreated—long-­term custodial care—is both unsatisfactory
and expensive.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e6 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
At its inception, newborn screening was driven by the selection of
genetic diseases whose clinical manifestations developed postnatally,
such as phenylketonuria, galactosemia, and hypothyroidism. Diseases
selected for screening typically had to meet certain criteria. The prevalence of disease had to meet a minimum, typically 1 in 100,000. Disease
selection required demonstrated reduction in morbidity and mortality
in the neonatal period. Effective therapies needed to be available, and
the cost of screening and the feasibility of laboratory testing were also
considerations in this selection process.
More common diseases have also become targets for neonatal
screening programs. Sickle cell disease (see Chapter 511.1), easily
detected using liquid chromatography or isoelectric focusing, can
be treated more effectively if it is diagnosed before clinical signs
appear. In addition, the results of neonatal screening for cystic
fibrosis (CF; see Chapter 454) show clear benefits associated with
preclinical diagnosis but also some inherent difficulties associated
with genetic screening for complex autosomal recessive diseases
that are common and are caused by a rather large number of pathogenic variants (>1,500) of a single gene. The definitive diagnostic
test for CF is the measurement of concentrations of chloride in
sweat, a test that is not practical during the first week of life. Neonates with CF generally have elevations in whole blood trypsinogen. This test allows the identification of a group of neonates at risk
for CF. Unfortunately, trypsinogen as an initial screening test has a
high false-­positive rate, an unfavorable characteristic that creates
unnecessary anxiety among newborn parents and families and is
costly because of the time and expense for medical follow-­up. Performing DNA analysis for common variants that cause CF reduces
the size of the suspect group and identifies neonates with a higher
likelihood of disease. This two-­tiered strategy identifies a manageable number of infants for whom to perform sweat tests. Problems
include the following: (1) uncommon variants are not included in
the screening panel, and cases of CF caused by these variants can be
missed; (2) common variants that cause clinically innocent elevations of whole blood trypsinogen in heterozygous neonates cause
potentially alarming false-­positive findings; and (3) CF in patients
with normal sweat test results is rare but is likely to be missed.
Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) is a technically advanced
method in which many compounds are initially ionized and separated by molecular weight. Each compound is then fragmented,
and the identification of compounds is based on characteristic fragments. The process requires approximately 2 minutes per sample
and can detect 20 or more inborn errors of metabolism. The effects
of prematurity, neonatal illness, and intensive neonatal management on metabolites in blood complicate the interpretation of
results. The PV of a positive screening result is likely to be <10%;
that is, 90% of positive results are not indicative of a genetic disorder of metabolism. Nonetheless, MS/MS permits a diagnosis to
be made before clinical illness develops and has revolutionized the
purpose and ability of newborn screening. MS/MS is not directed
toward diseases defined as treatable, but it is directed toward all the
diseases, each of which is rare, that the technique can identify.
MS/MS permits the detection of rare inborn errors of metabolism
and has been introduced as a newborn screening tool worldwide.
Since 1998, when mass spectrometry was implemented in Australia,
the rate of detection per 100,000 births has been 15.7, significantly
higher than the rate of 8.6-­9.5 in the six preceding 4-­year periods. Disorders of fatty acid oxidation, particularly medium-­chain acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency (see Chapter 106.1), accounted for
the majority of increased diagnoses. Expanded newborn screening
programs using MS/MS increase the detection of inherited metabolic
disorders. All states in the United States use MS/MS in their neonatal
screening programs; the metabolic conditions screened range from
31 to >50.
In an attempt to standardize newborn screening programs, the
American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) recommended that
every baby born in the United States be screened for a core panel

of 29 disorders (Table 769.3). An additional 25 conditions were
recommended as secondary targets because they may be identified
while screening for the core panel disorders. The March of Dimes
and the American Academy of Pediatrics also endorse the ACMG
recommendations. However, expansion of the screening test menu
raises several issues. The cost of implementation can be significant
because many states will need multiple MS/MS systems. Staffing
the laboratory with qualified technical personnel to run the MS/
MS system and qualified clinical scientists to interpret the profiles
can be a challenge. A number of false-­positive results will also be
obtained with these newborn screening programs. Many of these
findings are the result of parenteral nutrition, biologic variation, or
treatment and are not the result of an inborn error of metabolism.
Consequently, qualified staff will be needed to ensure that patients
with abnormal results are contacted and receive follow-­up testing
and counseling, if needed. Even with these concerns, the ACMG
report is a step in the right direction toward standardizing guidelines for state newborn screening programs.

TESTING IN REFINING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The use of laboratory tests in refining a differential diagnosis satisfies PV theory because a correct differential diagnosis should result
in a relatively high prevalence of the disease under consideration.
An example of testing in refining a differential diagnosis is the measurement of urinary vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) for the diagnosis
of neuroblastoma (see Chapter 547). A simple spot test for VMA is
not useful in general screening programs because of the low prevalence of neuroblastoma (3 cases/100,000) and the low sensitivity
of the test (69%). Even though the specificity of urinary VMA is
99.6%, testing of 100,000 children would produce 2 true-­positive
test results, 400 false-­positive results, and 1 false-­negative result.
The PV of a positive result in this setting is 0.5%, and the PV of a
negative result is 99.99%, not much different from the assumption

Table 769.3  American College of Medical Genetics Core
Panel of Neonatal Screening Tests
Isovalericacidemia
Glutaric aciduria type 1
3-­Hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaricaciduria
Multiple coenzyme A (CoA) carboxylase deficiency
Methylmalonic acidemia (mutase deficiency)
3-­Methylcrotonyl CoA carboxylase deficiency
Methylmalonic acidemia (cobalamin [Cbl] A, B)
Propionic acidemia
β-­Ketothiolase deficiency
Medium-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Very-­long-­chain acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Long-­chain l-­3-­hydroxy acyl-­CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
Trifunctional protein deficiency
Carnitine uptake deficiency
Phenylketonuria
Maple syrup urine disease
Homocystinuria (because of cystathionine β-­synthase deficiency)
Citrullinemia
Argininosuccinic acidemia
Tyrosinemia type 1
Sickle cell anemia (Hb SS disease)
Hemoglobin (Hb) S/β-­thalassemia
Hb S/C disease
Congenital hypothyroidism
Biotinidase deficiency
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (21-­hydroxylase deficiency)
Classic galactosemia
Hearing loss
Cystic fibrosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 769 u Laboratory Testing in Infants and Children
that neuroblastoma is not present. Testing for urinary VMA in a
3-­year-­old child with an abdominal mass, however, gives a useful
result because the prevalence of neuroblastoma is at least 50% in
3-­year-­old children with abdominal masses. If 100 such children are
tested and the prevalence of neuroblastoma in the group is assumed
to be 50%, a satisfactory PV is obtained.
PV of positive test result =
PV of negative test result =

0.69 × 50
0.69 × 50 + (0.004 × 50)
0.996 × 50
0.996 × 50 + (0.31 × 50)

× 100 = 99 %
× 100 = 76 %

Thus, in this situation, a test with low sensitivity is powerful
in refining the differential diagnosis because the PV of a positive
result is almost 100% in the setting of high prevalence.

Serologic Testing

Using laboratory testing to refine a differential diagnosis poses
problems, as exemplified by serologic testing for Lyme disease,
which is a tick-­borne infection by Borrelia burgdorferi that has various manifestations in both early and late stages of infection (see
Chapter 268). Direct demonstration of the organism is difficult, and
serologic test results for Lyme disease are not reliably positive in
young patients presenting early with erythema chronicum migrans.
These results become positive after a few weeks of infection and
remain positive for a number of years. In an older population being
evaluated for late-­stage Lyme disease, some individuals will have
recovered from either clinical or subclinical Lyme disease, and
some will have active Lyme disease, with both groups having true-­
positive serologic test results. Of individuals without Lyme disease,
some will have true-­negative serologic test results, but a significant
percentage will have antibodies to other organisms that cross-­react
with B. burgdorferi antigens.
This set of circumstances gives rise to a number of problems.
First, the protean nature of Lyme disease makes it difficult to
ensure a high prevalence of disease in persons to be tested. Second, the most appropriate antibodies to be detected are imperfectly
defined, leading to a wide variety of tests with varying false-­positive
and false-­negative rates. Third, the natural history of the antibody
response to infection and the difficulty of showing the causative
organism directly combine to make laboratory diagnosis of early
Lyme disease difficult. Fourth, in the diagnosis of late-­stage Lyme
disease in older individuals, the laboratory diagnosis is plagued by
misleading positive (either false-­positive or true-­positive, but not
clinically relevant) results, typically an enzyme-­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) that uses whole B. burgdorferi organisms. In a
review of 788 patients referred to a specialty clinic with the diagnosis of Lyme disease, the diagnosis was correct in 180 patients, 156
patients had true seropositivity without active Lyme disease, and
452 had never had Lyme disease, even though 45% of them were
found to be seropositive by at least one test before referral.
A two-­step approach, similar to that used in HIV testing, is often
used: a screening test that has high sensitivity (e.g., ELISA) and
excellent negative PV, followed by a very specific confirmatory test
for verification of positive screening test results (e.g., Western blot
to detect antibodies to selected bacterial antigens). Negative screening test results and negative verification test results are reported
as negative. Positive verification test results are reported as positive. However, standardization of the testing procedures is difficult
in North America, where only one pathogenic strain of B. burgdorferi is found, and is more difficult elsewhere in the Northern
hemisphere, where as many as three pathogenic strains are present.

4472.e7

Table 769.4  Laboratory Profile as a Review of Systems
LABORATORY TEST

ASSESSMENT FACILITATED BY
TESTS

Complete blood cell count and
platelets

Nutrition, status of formed
elements

Complete urinalysis

Renal function/genitourinary
tract inflammation

Albumin and cholesterol

Nutrition

ALT, bilirubin, GGT

Liver function

BUN, creatinine

Renal function, nutrition

Sodium, potassium, chloride,
bicarbonate

Electrolyte homeostasis

Calcium and phosphorus

Calcium homeostasis

ALT, Alanine transaminase; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; GGT, γ-­glutamyltransferase.

Identification of microbial DNA in body fluids by polymerase chain
reaction is definitive but invasive.

Laboratory Screening

Screening profiles are used as part of a complete review of systems, to
establish a baseline value, or to facilitate patient care in specific circumstances, such as (1) when a patient clearly has an illness, but a specific
diagnosis remains elusive; (2) when a patient requires intensive care;
(3) for postmarketing surveillance and evaluation of a new drug; and
(4) when a drug is used that is known to have systemic adverse effects.
Laboratory screening tests should be used in a targeted manner to supplement, not supplant, a complete history and physical examination
(Table 769.4).

Bibliography
American Academy of Pediatrics. American Thyroid Association: newborn screening
for congenital hypothyroidism. Pediatrics. 1987;80:745–749.
Bulterys M, Jamieson DJ, O’Sullivan MJ, et al. Rapid HIV-­1 testing during labor: a
multicenter study. JAMA. 2004;292:219–223.
Clayton EW. Issues in state newborn screening programs. Pediatrics. 1992;90:641–
646.
Farrell PM, Kosrok MR, Rock MJ, et al. Early diagnosis of cystic fibrosis through
neonatal screening prevents severe malnutrition and improves long-­term growth.
Pediatrics. 2001;107:1–13.
Galen RS, Gambino SR. Beyond Normality. New York: Academic Press; 1975.
Hu LT, Klempner MS. Update on the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of Lyme
disease. Adv Intern Med. 2001;46:247–275.
Minamitani K, Inomata H. Neonatal screening for congenital hypothyroidism in Japan. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2012;10(suppl 1):79–88.
National Newborn Screening and Genetic Resource Center. Newborn screening information. http://genes-­r-­us.uthscsa.edu.
Rinaldo P, Tortorelli S, Matern D. Recent developments and new applications of tandem mass spectrometry in newborn screening. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2004;16:427–
433.
Steere AC, Taylor E, McHugh GL, et al. The overdiagnosis of Lyme disease. JAMA.
1993;269:1812–1826.
Sun A, Lam C, Wong DA. Expanded newborn screening for inborn errors of metabolism: overview and outcomes. Adv Pediatr. 2012;59(1):209–245.
Watson MS, Mann MJ, Lloyd-­Puryear MA, et al. Newborn screening: towards a uniform screening panel and system. Genet Med. 2006;8(Suppl):S12–S252.
Wilcken B, Wiley V, Hammond J, et al. Screening newborns for inborn errors of
metabolism by tandem mass spectrometry. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2304–2312.
Zytkovicz TH, Fitzgerald EF, Marsden D, et al. Tandem mass spectrometric analysis
for amino, organic, and fatty acid disorders in newborn dried blood spots: a two-­
year summary from the New England Newborn Screening Program. Clin Chem.
2001;47:1945–1955.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e8 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine

Chapter 770

Table 770.2  Abbreviations Used in Table 770.5

Reference Intervals for
Laboratory Tests and
Procedures

Ab

Absorbance

AU

Arbitrary unit

BB

Brain isoenzyme of
creatine kinase

cap
CH50

mm3

Cubic millimeter,
microliter (μL)

mm Hg

Millimeters of mercury

mmol

Millimole

Capillary

mo

Month, months

Dilution required
to lyse 50% of
indicator red blood
cells; indicates
complement activity

mol

Mole

mOsm

Milliosmole

MW

Relative molecular
weight

Cr

Creatinine

ND

Not detected

CSF

Cerebrospinal fluid

nm

F

Female

Nanometer
(wavelength)

g

Gram, grams

Pa

Pascal(s)

G6PD

Glucose-­6-­phosphate
dehydrogenase

pc

Postprandial

RBC

Hb

Hemoglobin

Red blood cell(s),
erythrocyte(s)

HbCO

Carboxyhemoglobin

RT

Room temperature

hpf

High-­power field

SD

Standard deviation

hr

Hour, hours

sec

Second, seconds

IU

International unit(s) of
hormone activity

Tr

Trace

U

L

Liter

International unit(s) of
enzyme activity

M

Male

V

Volume

MB

Heart isoenzyme of
creatine kinase

WBC

White blood cell(s)

WHO

mEq/L

Milliequivalents per
liter

World Health
Organization

wk

Week, weeks

min

Minute, minutes

yr

Year, years

Stanley F. Lo and Stephen M. Roper
In Tables 770.1-­770.5, the reference intervals apply to infants, children,
and adolescents when possible. For many analyses, separate reference
intervals for children and adolescents are not well delineated. When
interpreting a test result, the reference interval supplied by the laboratory performing the test should always be used because these intervals
are instrument and/or method dependent. Figures 770.1 and 770.2
provide estimations related to dosages. Figure 770.3 is a nomogram for
risk assessment of hyperbilirubinemia.

Table 770.1  Prefixes Denoting Decimal Factors in Table
770.5
PREFIX

SYMBOL

FACTOR

mega-­

M

106

kilo-­

k

103

Table 770.3  Abbreviations for Specimens in Table 770.5

hecto-­

h

102

S

Serum

deka-­

da

101

P

Plasma

d

10−1

(H)

Heparin

centi-­

c

10−2

(LiH)

Lithium heparin

milli-­

m

10−3

(E)

Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)

μ

10−6

(C)

Citrate

nano-­

n

10−9

(O)

Oxalate

pico-­

p

10−12

W

Whole blood

femto-­

f

10−15

(NH4H)

Ammonium heparinate

deci-­

micro-­

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures

4472.e9

Table 770.4  Key to Comments Section of Table 770.5
30°C, 37°C

Temperature of enzymatic analysis (Celsius)

l

Fluorometric method

a

Values obtained are significantly method dependent

m

Fluorescence-­activated cell sorting (FACS)

b

Values in older males are higher than those in older
females

n

Fluorescence polarization

c

Values in older females are higher than those in
older males

o

Gas chromatography

p

High-­performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)

d

Atomic absorption

q

Indirect fluorescence antibody (IFA) assay

e

Borate affinity chromatography

r

Ion-­selective electrode

f

Cation-­exchange chromatography

s

Nephelometry

g

Vitros, a proprietary analytic system of Ortho Clinical
Diagnostics

t

Optical density

u

Radial immunodiffusion (RID)

i

Electrophoresis

v

Radioimmunoassay (RIA)

j

Enzymatic assay

w

Spectrophotometry

k

Enzyme-­amplified immunoassay

Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

SPECIMEN

COMPLETE BLOOD COUNT
Hematocrit (HCT, Hct) W(E)

Calculated from mean
corpuscular volume
(MCV) and RBC
count (electronic
displacement or
laser)

Hemoglobin (Hb)

% of packed red
cells (V red cells/V
whole blood cells
× 100)

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

COMMENTS

Volume fraction (V red
cells/V whole blood)

0-­30 days

44-­70%

1-­23 mo

32-­42%

0.32-­0.42

2-­9 yr

33-­43%

0.33-­0.43

10-­17 yr M

36-­47%

0.36-­0.47

F

35-­45%

0.35-­0.45

>18-­99 yr M

42-­52%

0.42-­0.52

F

37-­47%

0.37-­0.47

g/dL

mmol/L

W(E)

P(H)

CONVERSION
FACTOR

×0.01

×0.155

0.44-­0.70

0-­30 days

15.0-­24.0

2.32-­3.72

1-­23 mo

10.5-­14.0

1.63-­2.17

2-­9 yr

11.5-­14.5

1.78-­2.25

10-­17 yr M

12.5-­16.1

1.93-­2.50

F

12.0-­15.0

1.86-­2.32

>18-­99 yr M

13.5-­18.0

2.09-­2.79

F

12.5-­16.0

1.93-­2.48

MW Hb =
64,500

See Chemical Elements

Erythrocyte indices
(RBC indices)
Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e10 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

SPECIMEN

Mean corpuscular
hemoglobin (MCH)

W(E)

Mean corpuscular
hemoglobin
concentration (MCHC)
Mean corpuscular
volume (MCV)

pg/cell
1-­23 mo

24-­30

0.37-­0.46

2-­9 yr

25-­31

0.39-­0.48

10-­17 yr M

26-­32

0.26-­0.32

F

26-­32

0.26-­0.32

>18-­99 yr M

27-­31

0.27-­0.31

F

27-­31

0.27-­0.31

% Hb/cell or
g Hb/dL RBC

mmol Hb/L RBC

32-­36

Leukocyte differential

W(E)

×0.0155

×0.155

μm3

0.51-­0.60

4.96-­5.58
fL

0-­30 days

99-­115

×1

1-­23 mo

72-­88

72-­88

2-­9 yr

76-­90

76-­90

10-­17 yr

78-­95

78-­95

>18-­99 yr

78-­100

78-­100

×1,000 cells/mm3 (μL)

99-­115

×109 cells/L

0-­30 days

9.1-­34.0

1-­23 mo

6.0-­14.0

×1

6.0-­14.0

2-­9 yr

4.0-­12.0

45.0-­12.0

10-­17 yr

4.0-­10.5

4.0-­10.5

18-­99 yr

4.0-­10.5

4.0-­10.5

%

9.1-­34.0

Number fraction

Myelocytes

0%

Neutrophils (“bands”)

3-­5%

0.03-­0.05

Neutrophils (“segs”)

54-­62%

0.54-­0.62

Lymphocytes

25-­33%

0.25-­0.33

Monocytes

3-­7%

0.03-­0.07

Eosinophils

1-­3%

0.01-­0.03

Basophils

0-­0.75%

0-­0.0075

Cells/mm3 (μL)

×106 cells/L

×0.01

0

Neutrophils (“bands”)

150-­400

150-­400

Neutrophils (“segs”)

3,000-­5,800

3,000-­5,800

Lymphocytes

1,500-­3,000

1,500-­3,000

Monocytes

285-­500

285-­500

Eosinophils

50-­250

50-­250

Basophils

15-­50

15-­50

W(E)

×1

0

Myelocytes

Platelet count
(thrombocyte count)

×103/mm3 (μL)
Newborn 84-­478 (after 1 wk, same
as adult)
Adult 150-­400

COMMENTS

fmol/cell

33-­39

W(E)

W(E)

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

0-­30 days

W(E)

Leukocyte count
(WBC count)

CONVERSION
FACTOR

0

×109/L
×106

84-­478

(Buck, 1996)

150-­400

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures

4472.e11

Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

CONVERSION
FACTOR

Reticulocyte count

W(E,H,O)

Adults 0.5-­1.5% of erythrocytes or
25,000-­75,000/mm3 (μL)

W(cap)

1 day

0.4-­6.0

7 days

<0.1-­1.3

<0.001-­0.013

1-­4 wk

<1.0-­1.2

<0.001-­0.012

5-­6 wk

<0.1-­2.4

<0.001-­0.024

7-­8 wk

0.1-­2.9

0.001-­0.029

9-­10 wk

<0.1-­2.6

<0.001-­0.026

11-­12 wk

0.1-­1.3

0.001-­0.013

0-­7 days

6-­40 U/L

8-­30 days M

10-­40

10-­40

F

8-­32

8-­32

1-­12 mo

12-­45

12-­45

1-­19 yr

5-­45

5-­45

Premature 1
day

1.8-­3.0 g/dL

Full term <6
days

2.5-­3.4

25-­34

8 days-­1 yr

1.9-­4.9

19-­49

1-­3 yr

3.4-­4.2

34-­42

4-­19 yr

3.5-­5.6

35-­56

×0.01
×106

%

Alanine transaminase
(aminotransferase)
(ALT, SGPT)

Albumin (BCG)

S

P

Ammonia

P

Amylase

S,P

1-­19 yr

S,P(H)

×1

×10

0.004-­0.060

6-­40 U/L

18-­30 g/dL

×1

11-­35 μmol/L

g

30-­100 U/L

×1

30-­100 U/L

(Lockitch
Halstead,
Albersheim,
1988; Gillard
et al, 1983)

% pancreatic fraction

Cord-­8 mo

0-­34%

×0.01

9 mo-­4 yr

5-­56%

0.05-­0.56%

5-­19 yr

23-­59%

0.23-­0.59%
×1

0-­0.34%

P(H)

7-­16 mEq/L

Antideoxyribonuclease
B titer (anti-­DNase B
titer)

S

Age

Upper limit of
normal

4-­6 yr

240-­480 U

7-­12 yr

480-­800 U

480-­800 U

Plasma
osmolarity
(mOsm/kg)

Plasma ADH (pg/
mL)

Plasma ADH ng/L

270-­280

<1.5

280-­285

<2.5

<2.5

285-­290

1-­5

1-­5

290-­295

2-­7

2-­7

295-­300

4-­12

4-­12

P(E)

37°C,bgw
(Soldin,
Savwoir, Guo,
1997; Lockitch
Halstead,
Albersheim,
1988)g
(Meites, 1989;
Soldin and
Morse, 1998;
Lockitch
Halstead,
Albersheim,
1988)

11-­35 μmol/L

Anion gap (sodium
− [chloride +
bicarbonate])

Antidiuretic hormone
(hADH, vasopressin)

COMMENTS

0.005-­0.015 (number
fraction) or 25,000-­75,000 ×
106/L
Number fraction

×0.01

% pancreatic
fraction
Amylase isoenzymes

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

7-­16 mEq/L

Upper limit of normal
×1

×1

240-­480 U

(Kaplan et al,
1998)

<1.5

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e12 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

SPECIMEN

Antistreptolysin-­O
titer (ASO titer)

S

Aspartate
transaminase
(aminotransferase)
(AST, SGOT)

Upper limit of
normal

2-­5 yr

120-­160 Todd units

6-­9 yr

240 Todd units

240 Todd units

10-­12 yr

320 Todd units

320 Todd units

U/L

U/L

Bilirubin, total

×1

120-­160 Todd units

F

24-­95

24-­95

8-­30 days

22-­71

22-­71

1-­12 mo

22-­63

22-­63

1-­3 yr

20-­60

20-­60

3-­9 yr

15-­50

15-­50

10-­15 yr

10-­40

10-­40

16-­19 yr M

15-­45

15-­45

F

5-­30

5-­30

mmol/L

mmol/L
×1

(−10)-­(−2)

Infant

(−7)-­(−1)

(−7)-­(−1)

Child

(−4)-­(+2)

(−4)-­(+2)

Thereafter

(−3)-­(+3)

(−3)-­(−3)

mmol/L

mmol/L

21-­28

Venous

22-­29

22-­29

mg/dL

μmol/L

See Bhutani
nomogram (Fig.
770.3)

1 mo-­adult

<1.0

37°C,g (Soldin,
Savwoir, Guo,
1997; Lockitch
Halstead,
Albersheim,
1988)

(−10)-­(−2)

Arterial

Newborn

×1

(Kaplan et al,
1998)

35-­100

Newborn

S

C-­reactive protein
(high sensitivity)

×1

30-­100

S,P

21-­28

×17.1

(Bhutani et al,
1999)
<17

S

Calcium, ionized (Ca)

M (mg/dL)

F (mg/dL)

M (mg/L)

F (mg/L)

0-­90 days

0.08-­1.58

0.09-­1.58

0.8-­15.8

0.9-­15.8

91 days-­12 mo

0.08-­1.12

13 mo-­3 yr

0.08-­1.12

0.05-­0.79

0.8-­11.2

0.5-­7.9

0.08-­0.79

0.8-­11.2

0.8-­7.9

4-­10 yr

0.06-­0.79

0.5-­1.0

0.6-­7.9

0.5-­10.0

11-­14 yr

0.08-­0.76

0.06-­0.81

0.8-­7.6

0.6-­8.1

15-­18 yr

0.04-­0.79

0.06-­0.79

0.4-­7.9

0.6-­7.9

S,P(H),W(H)

COMMENTS

Upper limit of normal

0-­7 days M

W(H)

Bicarbonate

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

Age

S

Base excess

CONVERSION
FACTOR

mg/dL

×10

(Soldin et al,
2004)

mmol/L

Cord blood

5.0-­6.0

×0.25

Newborn,
3-­24 hr

4.3-­5.1

1.07-­1.27

24-­48 hr

4.0-­4.7

1.00-­1.17

Thereafter

4.8-­4.92

1.12-­1.23

or

2.24-­2.46 Eq/L

×0.5

1.25-­1.50

1.12-­1.23

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures

4472.e13

Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

Calcium, total

S

Carbon dioxide,
partial pressure (Pco2)

Carbon monoxide
(carboxyhemoglobin)

Chloride

W(E)

Cortisol

CONVERSION
FACTOR

mg/dL

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

9.0-­11.5

Newborn,
3-­24 hr

9.0-­10.6

2.3-­2.65

24-­48 hr

7.0-­12.0

1.75-­3.00

4-­7 days

9.0-­10.9

2.25-­2.73

Child

8.8-­10.8

2.20-­2.70

Thereafter

8.4-­10.2

2.10-­2.55

×0.25

mm Hg

2.25-­2.88

kPa

Newborn

27-­40

Infant

27-­41

3.6-­5.5

Thereafter M

35-­48

4.7-­6.4

F

32-­45

4.3-­6.0

Nonsmoker

<2% HbCO

Smoker

<10%

<0.10

Lethal

>50%

>0.5

Cord blood

96-­104 mmol/L

Newborn

97-­110

97-­110

Thereafter

98-­106

98-­106

Sweat

×0.1333

×0.01

×1

3.6-­5.3

HbCO fraction <0.02

96-­104 mmol/L

(Farrell et al,
2008)

mmol/L

S,P(H)

COMMENTS

mmol/L

Cord blood

W(H)

S,P(H)

Chloride, sweat

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

≤29

CF unlikely

30-­59

Intermediate

≥60

Indicative of CF

μg/dL

nmol/L

Newborn

1-­24

Adults, 8 am

5-­23

×27.59

138-­635

4 pm

3-­15

82-­413

8 pm

<50% of 8 am

×0.01

28-­662

Fraction of 8 am
≤0.50

Creatine kinase

S

Creatine kinase
isoenzymes

Cord blood

70-­380 U/L

5-­8 hr

214-­1,175

214-­1,175

24-­33 hr

130-­1,200

130-­1,200

72-­100 hr

87-­725

87-­725

Adult

5-­130

5-­130

S

×1

% MB

% BB

Cord blood

0.3-­3.1

0.3-­10.5

5-­8 hr

1.7-­7.9

3.6-­13.4

24-­33 hr

1.8-­5

2.3-­8.6

72-­100 hr

1.4-­5.4

5.1-­13.3

Adult

0-­2

0

70-­380 U/L

30°C,b (Jedeikin
et al, 1982)

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e14 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

SPECIMEN

CONVERSION
FACTOR

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

COMMENTS

μmol/L

g

Creatinine (IDMS)
Enzymatic

S,P

Creatinine clearance
(endogenous)

S,P,U

mg/dL
0-­4 yr

0.03-­0.50

4-­7 yr

0.03-­0.59

×88.4

2.65-­44.2
2.65-­52.2

7-­10 yr

0.22-­0.59

19.4-­52.2

10-­14 yr

0.31-­0.88

27.4-­77.8

>14 yr

0.50-­1.06

44.2-­93.7

Newborn 40-­65 mL/min/1.73 m2
<40 yr, M 97-­137
F 88-­128
Decreases <6.5 mL/min/decade

Ferritin

S

Folate

S

W(E)
Glucose

ng/mL

μg/L

0-­6 wk

0-­400

7 wk-­365 days

10-­95

×1

0-­400
10-­95

1-­9 yr

10-­60

10-­60

10-­18 yr M

10-­300

10-­300

F

10-­70

10-­70

Newborn 7.0-­32 ng/mL

×2.265

15.9-­72.4 nmol/L

Thereafter 1.8-­9.0

4.1-­20.4

150-­450 ng/mL RBCs

340-­1,020 nmol/L cells

S

mg/dL

mmol/L

Cord blood

45-­96

×0.0555

2.5-­5.3

Premature

20-­60

1.1-­3.3

Neonate

30-­60

1.7-­3.3

1 day

40-­60

2.2-­3.3

>1 day

50-­90

2.8-­5.0

Child

60-­100

3.3-­5.5

Adult

70-­105

3.9-­5.8

Adult

65-­95

3.6-­5.3

Newborn

W(H)
Glucose tolerance test S
(GTT) (see Chapter
629)

mg/dL

mmol/L

Oral dose
Adult: 75 g

Normal

Diabetic

Child: 1.75 g/kg of
ideal weight, up to a
maximum of 75 g

Fasting

70-­105

≥126

120 min

70-­120

≥200

G6PD in erythrocytes

W(E,H,C)

Bishop, modified

Adult

×0.0555

Normal

Diabetic

3.9-­5.8

≥7.0

3.9-­6.7

≥11

Adult

3.4-­8.0 U/g Hb

×0.0645

0.22-­0.52 mU/mol Hb

98.6-­232 U/1012 RBCs

×10−3

0.10-­0.23 nU/106 RBCs

1.16-­2.72 U/mL RBC

×1

1.16-­2.72 kU/L RBC

Newborn: 50% higher

(Diabetes Care,
2019)

Newborn: 50% higher

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures

4472.e15

Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

γ-­Glutamyl
transpeptidase (GGT,
GGTP)

Immunoglobulin A
(IgA)

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

S

U/L

S

Immunoglobulin E
(IgE)

S

37-­193

0-­1 mo

13-­147

13-­147

1-­2 mo

12-­123

12-­123

2-­4 mo

8-­90

8-­90

4 mo-­10 yr

5-­32

5-­32

10-­15 yr

5-­24

5-­24

mg/dL

mg/L

×1

×10

Immunoglobulin M
(IgM)

1.4-­3.6

1-­3 mo

1.3-­53

13-­530

4-­6 mo

4.4-­84

44-­840

7 mo-­1 yr

11-­106

110-­1,060

2-­5 yr

14-­159

140-­1,590

6-­10 yr

33-­236

330-­2,360

Adult

70-­312

700-­3,120

Newborn: none detected
×10

0-­80 mg/L

×1

0-­230 kIU/L

s (Meites, 1989)

0-­170
mg/dL

g/L

Cord blood

636-­1,606

1 mo

251-­906

2.51-­9.06

2-­4 mo

176-­601

1.76-­6.01

5-­12 mo

172-­1,069

1.72-­10.69

1-­5 yr

345-­1,236

3.45-­12.36

6-­10 yr

608-­1,572

6.08-­15.72

Adult

639-­1,349

6.39-­13.49

mg/dL

mg/L

S

37°C,b (Knight
and Haymond,
1981)

None detected

M 0-­230 IU/mL

×0.01

6.3-­25

1-­4 mo

17-­105

170-­1,050

5-­9 mo

33-­126

330-­1,260

10 mo-­1 yr

41-­173

410-­1,730

2-­8 yr

43-­207

430-­2,070

9-­10 yr

52-­242

520-­2,420

Adult

56-­352

All ages

22-­184 μg/dL

Iron-­binding capacity,
total (TIBC)

S

Infant 100-­400 μg/dL

l-­lactate (perchloric

W

×10

6.36-­16.06

Cord blood

P

d-­lactate

14-­36

Thereafter: 0-­8 mg/dL

Iron

acid)

37-­193

Cord blood

S

COMMENTS

U/L

F 0-­170
Immunoglobulin G
(IgG)

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

Cord blood

S

Immunoglobulin D
(IgD)

CONVERSION
FACTOR

63-­250

s (Meites, 1989)

s(Meites, 1989)

560-­3,520
×0.1791

4-­33 μmol/L

×0.179

17.90-­71.60 μmol/L

Thereafter 250-­400

44.75-­71.60

mg/dL

(Lockitch
Halstead,
Wadsworth,
1988)

mmol/L

1-­12 mo

10-­21

×1

1.1-­2.3

1-­7 yr

7-­14

0.8-­1.5

7-­15 yr

5-­8

0.6-­0.9

(Bonnefont et al,
1990)

j(Rosenthal and

P(H)
6 mo-­3 yr

0.0-­0.3

×1

0.0-­0.3

Pesce, 1985)

Continued
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e16 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

Lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH)

Isoenzymes

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

S

U/L

P,S

Magnesium

P(H)

×1

1-­9 yr

150-­500

150-­500

10-­19 yr

120-­330

120-­330

S

37°C,a (Meites,
1989)

170-­580

% of total activity
1-­6 yr

7-­19 yr

LD1

20-­38

20-­35

LD2

27-­38

31-­38

LD3

16-­26

19-­28

LD4

5-­16

7-­13

LD5

3-­13

5-­12

μg/dL

mmol/L

Child

<3.5*

Initiate
chelation
therapy

≥70

×0.0483

1-­18 yr

145-­216 U/L

×1

mg/dL
0-­6 days

1.2-­2.6

7 days-­2 yr

1.6-­2.6

2-­14 yr

1.5-­2.3

<0.0024
≥3.38

145-­216 U/L

(Ghoshal and
Soldin, 2003)

mmol/L
×0.411

gw(Meites, 1989)

0.48-­1.05
0.65-­1.05
0.60-­0.95

0.78 ± 0.37% of total Hb
Osmolality

COMMENTS

U/L

170-­580

W(H)

Lipase

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

<1 yr

S

Lead

CONVERSION
FACTOR

×0.01

0.0078 ± 0.0037 (mass fraction)

Child, adult
275-­295 mOsm/kg H2O

Phosphatase, alkaline

Phosphorus, inorganic

Potassium

S

U/L
1-­9 yr

145-­420

10-­11 yr

140-­560

37°C,aw

145-­420
140-­560

M

F

M

F

12-­13 yr

200-­495

105-­420

200-­495

105-­420

14-­15 yr

130-­525

70-­230

130-­525

70-­230

16-­19 yr

65-­260

50-­130

65-­260

50-­130

S,P(H)

mg/dL

mmol/L

0-­5 days

4.8-­8.2

1-­3 yr

3.8-­6.5

1.25-­2.10

4-­11 yr

3.7-­5.6

1.20-­1.80

12-­15 yr

2.9-­5.4

0.95-­1.75

16-­19 yr

2.7-­4.7

0.90-­1.50

S

P(H)

U/L
×1

×0.3229

mmol/L

1.55-­2.65

mmol/L

0-­1 wk

3.2-­5.5

1 wk-­1 mo

3.4-­6.0

3.4-­6.0

1-­6 mo

3.5-­5.6

3.5-­5.6

6 mo-­1 yr

3.5-­6.1

3.5-­6.1

>1 yr

3.3-­4.6

3.3-­4.6

3.5-­
4.5 mmol/L

w(Meites, 1989)

×1

3.3-­5.5

(Greeley et al,
1993)
Increased by
hemolysis;
serum values
systematically
higher than
plasma values

3.5-­4.5 mmol/L

*https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/prevention/blood-lead-levels.htm

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures

4472.e17

Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

Prealbumin
(transthyretin)

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†

S

Protein, total

mg/dL

W

Sodium

S,P (LiH,
NH4H)

Thyroid-­stimulating
hormone (TSH)

P

1-­5 yr

14.0-­30.0

140-­300

6-­9 yr

15.0-­30.0

150-­300

10-­13 yr

20.0-­36.0

200-­360

14-­19

22.0-­45.0

220-­450

Thyroxine-­binding
globulin (TBG)

S

Thyroxine (T4), total

×10

g/dL

60-­210

4.3-­7.6

Newborn

4.6-­7.4

46-­74

1-­7 yr

6.1-­7.9

61-­79

8-­12 yr

6.4-­8.1

64-­81

13-­19 yr

6.6-­8.2

66-­82

7-­17 yr

0.076 ±
0.026 mmol/L

×10

×1

mmol/L

43-­76

0.076 ± 0.026 mmol/L

Halstead,
Quigley, 1988)

(Meites, 1989)

(Pianosi et al,
1995)

mmol/L

Newborn

133-­146

Infant

134-­144

134-­144

Child

134-­143

134-­143

Thereafter

135-­145

135-­145

mIU/L

mIU/L

×1

×1

133-­146

0-­3 days

1.00-­20.00

4-­30 days

0.5-­6.5

0.50-­6.50

1-­5 mo

0.5-­6.0

0.5-­6.0

6 mo-­18 yr

0.5-­4.5

0.5-­4.5
×2.759

mg/dL

1.0-­20.00

g(Greeley et al,

1993)

g(Dugaw et al,

2001)

14-­165 pmol/L
mg/L

Cord blood

1.4-­9.4

1-­4 wk

1.0-­9.0

10-­90

1-­12 mo

2.0-­7.6

20-­76

1-­5 yr

2.9-­5.4

29-­54

5-­10 yr

2.5-­5.0

25-­50

10-­15 yr

2.1-­4.6

21-­46

Adult

1.5-­3.4

15-­34

μg/dL

nmol/L

S

s(Lockitch,

g/L

Premature

5-­60 pg/mL

COMMENTS

mg/L

6.0-­21.0

S

Thyrotropin-­releasing
hormone (TRH)

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

0-­5 days

S

Pyruvate (perchloric
acid)

CONVERSION
FACTOR

×10

×12.9

14-­94

0-­3 days

8.0-­20.0

103-­258

3-­30 days

5.0-­15.0

64-­193

31-­365 days

6.0-­14.0

77-­180

1-­5 yr

4.5-­11.0

58-­142

6-­18 yr

4.5-­10.0

58-­129

g(Dugaw et al,

2001)

Continued

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e18 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Table 770.5  Reference Intervals*—cont’d
ANALYTE OR
PROCEDURE

SPECIMEN

Thyroxine (T4), free

S

Thyroxine (T4), total

W

Triiodothyronine (T3),
free

S

Triiodothyronine (T3),
total

REFERENCE VALUES (U.S.)†
ng/dL

Uric acid

REFERENCE VALUES (SI)†

2.00-­5.00

3-­30 days

0.90-­2.20

11.6-­28.3

31 days-­18 yr

0.7-­2.00

9.0-­25.7

Newborn
screen (filter
paper)
6.2-­22.0 μg/
dL

×12.9

×12.9

pg/dL

25.7-­64.3

20-­240
200-­610

3.1-­9.4

6 wk

240-­560

3.7-­8.6

Adult (20-­
50 yr)

230-­660

3.5-­10.0

×0.01536

ng/dL
60-­300

0.3-­3.7

nmol/L
×0.0154

0.9-­4.7

90-­260

1.4-­4.0

1-­6 yr

90-­240

1.4-­3.7

7-­11 yr

90-­230

1.4-­3.6

12-­18 yr

100-­210

1.5-­3.3

mg/dL

mmol/L

S,P
Cord blood

21-­40

Premature
(1 wk)

3-­25

1.1-­9.0

Newborn

3-­12

1.1-­4.3

infant or child

5-­18

1.8-­6.4

Thereafter

7-­18

2.5-­6.4

mg/dL

μmol/L

S

2001)

pmol/L

1-­3 days

0-­3 days

g(Dugaw et al,

80-­283 nmol/L

Cord blood

S

COMMENTS

pmol/L

0-­3 days

4-­365 days

Urea nitrogen

CONVERSION
FACTOR

×0.357

×59.48

g(Dugaw et al,

2001)

7.5-­14.3

1-­3 yr

1.8-­5.0

100-­300

4-­6 yr

2.2-­4.7

130-­280

7-­9 yr

2.0-­5.0

120-­295

10-­11 yr M

2.3-­5.4

135-­320

10-­11 yr F

3.0-­4.7

180-­280

12-­13 yr M

2.7-­6.7

160-­400

14-­15 yr M

2.4-­7.8

140-­465

12-­15 yr F

3.0-­5.8

180-­345

16-­19 yr M

4.0-­8.6

235-­510

16-­19 yr F

3.0-­5.9

180-­350

(Lockitch
Halstead,
Albersheim,
1988)

*In preparing the reference range listings, a number of abbreviations, symbols, and codes were used (see Table 770.2).
†Reference values are shown in SI units (International System of Units) and U.S. units (Traditional Units).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 770 u Reference Intervals for Laboratory Tests and Procedures
Nomogram

200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110

90
85
80
75
70

35

70
60
50

40

30
28
26
24

.60
.55
.50
.45

20

.40
15

.35
.30

10
9
8

.25

7

22

6

20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13

5

.20

0.8
0.7

Weight
lb kg
180
160
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
45
40
35
30

0.6

25

0.5

20
18
16
14

0.4

12
0.3

0.2

4

.15

10
9
8
7
6
5
4

3

3
.10

12

30

.70

30

45
40

.80

40

50

2.0
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
0.9

.90

50

55

90

1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00

60

65
60

100

80

90
80
70

M2

Surface area in square meters

220

For children of
normal height
for weight

Weight in pounds

240

25

S.A.

60
50
40
30
25
20
15

10
9.0
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5

Fig. 770.1 Nomogram for the estimation of surface area. The sur-

face area is indicated where a straight line that connects the height
and weight levels intersects the surface area column, or if the patient is
roughly of average size, from the weight alone (enclosed area). (Nomogram modified from the data of E. Boyd by CD West. See also Briars
GL, Bailey BJ. Surface area estimation: pocket calculator v nomogram.
Arch Dis Child. 1994;70:246–247.)
2.0

Pounds to square meter (m2)

Surface area m2

1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0

20

40

60

80

Percent adult dose

105
100
94
88
82
76
71
65
59
53
47
41
35
30
24
18
12
6

1.6

High-risk zone

95th percentile

15
erm

nt
hi

Low-risk zone

5

0

le

one40th percenti

kz

-ris

ate
edi

Hig
rm
inte
Low

10

kz

ris

te-

ia
ed

tile
e
on 75th percen

0

12

24

36

48

60

72 84 96 108 120 132 144 156 168
Age (hr)

Fig. 770.3 Nomogram for risk assessment of hyperbilirubinemia.

(From Bhutani VK, Johnson L, Sivieri EM. Predictive ability of a predischarge hour-­specific serum bilirubin for subsequent significant hyperbilirubinemia in healthy term and near-­term newborns. Pediatrics.
1999;103:6−14. Fig 2.)

Bibliography (for Table 770.5)

Alternative (Mosteller’s formula):
Surface area (m2)  Height (cm)  Weight (kg)
3600

1.8

20

1.0

0.1

2

80
70

Total serum bilirubin (mg/dL)

Height
cm in

4472.e19

100 120 140 160

Body weight—pounds

Fig. 770.2 Relationships between body weight (lb), body surface
area, and adult dosage. The surface area values correspond with those
set forth by Crawford JD, Terry ME, Rourke GM. Simplification of drug
dosage calculation by application of the surface area principle. Pediatrics. 1950;5:783–790. Note that the 100% adult dose is for a patient
weighing approximately 140 lb and having a surface area of approximately 1.7 m2. (From Talbot NB, Richie RH, Crawford JH. Metabolic
homeostasis: a syllabus for those concerned with the care of patients.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1959.)

American Diabetes Association. Classification and diagnosis of Diabetes: Standards
of Medical care in Diabetes -­2019. Diabetes Care. 2019;42:S13–S28.
Bhutani VK, Johnson L, Sivieri EM. Predictive ability of a predischarge hour-­specific
serum bilirubin for subsequent significant hyperbilirubinemia in healthy term and
near-­term newborns. Pediatrics. 1999;103:6–14.
Bonnefont JP, Specola NB, Vassault A, et al. The fasting test in children: application to the diagnosis of pathological hypo-­and hyperketotic state. Eur J Pediatr.
1990;150:80–85.
Buck ML. Anticoagulation with warfarin in infants and children. Ann Pharmacother.
1996;30:1316–1322.
Diaz J, Tornel PL, Martinez P. Reference intervals for blood ammonia in healthy subjects, determined by microdiffusion. Clin Chem. 1995;41:1048.
Dugaw KA, Jack RM, Rutledge J. Pediatric reference ranges for TSH, free T4, total
T4, total T3 and T3 uptake on the VitrosECi analyzer. Clin Chem. 2001;47:A108.
E. Endocrinology, C. Hills, CA 91301.
Farrell PM, Rosenstein BJ, White TB, et al. Guidelines for diagnosis of cystic fibrosis
in newborns through older adults: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Consensus Report.
J Pediatr. 2008;153:S4–S14.
Ghoshal A, Soldin S. Evaluation of the Dade Behring dimension R × L: integrated
chemistry system, pediatric reference ranges. Clin Chim Acta. 2003;331:135–146.
Gillard BK, Simbala JA, Goodglick L. Reference intervals for amylase isoenzymes in
serum and plasma of infants and children. Clin Chem. 1983;29:1119–1123.
Greeley C, Snell J, Colaco A, et al. Pediatric reference ranges for electrolytes and creatinine. Clin Chem. 1993;39:1172.
Jedeikin R, Makela SK, Shennan AT, et al. Creatine kinase isoenzymes in serum from
cord blood and the blood of healthy full-­term infants during the first three postnatal days. Clin Chem. 1982;28:317–322.
Kaplan EL, Rothermel CD, Johnson DR. Antistreptolysin O and anti-­
deoxyribonuclease B titers: normal values for children ages 2 to 12 in the United
States. Pediatrics. 1998;101:86–88.
Knight JA, Haymond RE. γ-­Glutamyltransferase and alkaline phosphatase activities
compared in serum of normal children and children with liver disease. Clin Chem.
1981;27:48–51.
Lockitch G, Halstead AC, Albersheim S, et al. Age-­and sex-­specific pediatric reference intervals for biochemistry analytes as measured with the Ektachem-­700
analyzer. Clin Chem. 1988;34:1622–1625.
Lockitch G, Halstead AC, Quigley G, et al. Age-­and sex-­specific pediatric reference
intervals: study design and methods illustrated by measurement of serum proteins
with the Behring LN nephelometer. Clin Chem. 1988;34:1618–1621.
Lockitch G, Halstead AC, Wadsworth L, et al. Age-­and sex-­specific pediatric reference intervals and correlations for zinc, copper, selenium, iron, vitamins A and E,
and related proteins. Clin Chem. 1988;34:1625–1628.
Meites S, ed. Pediatric Clinical Chemistry, Reference (normal) Values. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: American Association for Clinical Chemistry; 1989.
Muntau A, Streiter M, Kappler M, et al. Age-­related reference values for serum selenium concentrations in infants and children. Clin Chem. 2002;48:555–560.
Nichols I. Diagnostics. San Juan Capistrano, CA 92675.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

4472.e20 Part XXXIII u Laboratory Medicine
Nir A, Bar-­Oz B, Perles Z, et al. N-­terminal pro-­B-­type natriuretic peptide: reference
plasma levels from birth to adolescence: elevated levels at birth and in infants and
children with heart diseases. Acta Paediatr. 2004;93:603–607.
Pianosi P, Seargeant L, Haworth JC. Blood lactate and pyruvate concentrations, and
their ratio during exercise in healthy children: developmental perspective. Eur J
Appl Physiol Occup Physiol. 1995;71:518–522.
Rosenthal P, Pesce MA. Long-­term monitoring of d-­lactic acidosis in a child. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1985;4:674–676. 1985.
Sherry B, Jack RM, Weber A, et al. Reference interval for prealbumin for children 2 to
36 months old. Clin Chem. 1988;34:1878–1880.
Soldin SJ, Morse AS. Pediatric reference ranges for albumin and total protein in children <1 year old using the Vitros 500 analyzer. Clin Chem. 1998;44:A15.

Soldin SJ, Savwoir TV, Guo Y. Pediatric reference ranges for alkaline phosphatase,
aspartate aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase in children less than 1
year old on the Vitros 500. Clin Chem. 1997;43:S199.
Soldin SJ, Brugnara C, Wong ED, eds. Pediatric Reference Intervals. 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Association for Clinical Chemistry; 2005.
Soldin O, Bierbower L, Choi J, et al. Serum iron, ferritin, transferrin, total iron binding capacity, hs-­CRP, LDL cholesterol and magnesium in children: new reference
intervals using the Dade Dimension Clinical Chemistry System. Clin Chim Acta.
2004;342:211–217.
Soldin SJ, Hicks JM, Bailey J, et al. Pediatric reference ranges for 25-­hydroxy vitamin
D during the summer and winter. Clin Chem. 1997;43:S200.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 23, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

