Rheumatic Diseases of
Childhood (Connective
Tissue Disease, Collagen
Vascular Diseases)
Chapter 194

Evaluation of Suspected
Rheumatic Disease
C. Egla Rabinovich
Rheumatic diseases are defined by the constellation of results of the
physical examination, autoimmune markers and other serologic
tests, tissue pathology, and imaging. Defined diagnostic criteria exist
for most rheumatic diseases. Recognition of clinical patterns remains
essential for diagnosis because there is no single diagnostic test, and
tests may be positive in the absence of disease. Further complicating
diagnosis, children sometimes present with partial criteria that evolve
over time or with features of more than one rheumatic disease (overlap syndromes). The primary mimics of rheumatic diseases are infection and malignancy but also include metabolic, orthopedic, immune
deficiencies, autoinflammatory diseases, and chronic pain conditions.
Exclusion of possible mimicking disorders is essential before initiation
of treatment for a presumptive diagnosis, especially corticosteroids.
After careful evaluation has excluded nonrheumatic causes, referral to
a pediatric rheumatologist for confirmation of the diagnosis and treatment should be considered.

SYMPTOMS SUGGESTIVE OF RHEUMATIC DISEASE

There are no classic symptoms of rheumatic diseases, but common
symptoms include joint pain, fever, fatigue, and rash. Presenting signs
and symptoms help direct the evaluation and limit unnecessary testing.
Once a differential diagnosis is developed based on history and physical findings, a directed assessment assists in determining the diagnosis.
Arthralgias are common in childhood and are a frequent reason
for referral to pediatric rheumatologists. Arthralgias without physical
findings for arthritis suggest infection, malignancy, orthopedic conditions, benign syndromes, or pain syndromes such as fibromyalgia
(Table 194.1). Although rheumatic diseases may manifest as arthralgias, arthritis is a stronger predictor of the presence of rheumatic
disease and a reason for referral to a pediatric rheumatologist. The
timing of joint pain along with associated symptoms, including poor
sleep and interference with normal activities, provides important clues.
Poor sleep, debilitating generalized joint pain that worsens with activity, school absences, and normal physical and laboratory findings in
an adolescent suggest an amplified pain syndrome (see Chapter 212).
If arthralgia is accompanied by a history of dry skin, hair loss, fatigue,
growth disturbance, or cold intolerance, testing for thyroid disease
is merited. Nighttime awakenings because of severe pain along with
decreased platelet or white blood cell (WBC) count or, alternatively, a
very high WBC count, may lead to the diagnosis of malignancy, especially marrow-­occupying lesions such as acute lymphocytic leukemia

PART

XIV

and neuroblastoma. Pain with physical activity suggests a mechanical problem such as an overuse syndrome or orthopedic condition.
An adolescent presenting with knee pain aggravated by walking up
stairs and on patellar distraction likely has patellofemoral syndrome.
Children age 3-­10 years with a history of episodic pain occurring
at night, especially after increased daytime physical activity, that is
relieved by rubbing but who have no limp or complaints in the morning likely have growing pains. There is often a positive family history
for growing pains, which may aid in this diagnosis. Intermittent pain
in a child, especially a girl 3-­10 years old, that is increased with activity
and is associated with hyperextensible joints on examination likely has
benign hypermobility syndrome. Many febrile illnesses cause arthralgias that improve when the temperature normalizes, and arthralgias
are part of the diagnostic criteria for acute rheumatic fever (ARF; see
Chapter 229.1).
Arthralgia may also be a presenting symptom of pediatric systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and chronic childhood arthritis such as
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). Interestingly, many children with
JIA do not complain of joint symptoms at presentation. Other symptoms more suggestive of arthritis include morning stiffness, joint swelling, limited range of motion, pain with joint motion, gait disturbance,
fever, and fatigue or stiffness after physical inactivity (gelling phenomenon). A diagnosis of JIA cannot be made without the finding of arthritis on physical examination (see Chapters 196 and 197). No laboratory
test is diagnostic of JIA.
Fatigue is a nonspecific symptom that may point to the presence of a
rheumatic disease but is also common in nonrheumatic causes, such as
viral infections, pain syndromes, depression, and malignancy. Fatigue,
rather than the specific complaints of muscle weakness, is a common
presenting complaint in juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM). It is also
frequently present in SLE, vasculitis, and chronic childhood arthritis.
Overwhelming fatigue with inability to attend school is more suggestive of chronic fatigue syndrome, pediatric fibromyalgia, or other
amplified pain syndrome.

SIGNS SUGGESTIVE OF RHEUMATIC DISEASE

A complete physical examination is essential in any child with suspected rheumatic disease, because subtle physical findings may further
refine the differential diagnosis. In addition, many rheumatic diseases
have multisystem effects, and a stepped assessment should focus on
delineating the extent of organ system involvement (e.g., skin, joints,
muscle, hepatic, renal, cardiopulmonary).
Presence of a photosensitive malar rash that spares the nasolabial
folds is suggestive of SLE (Table 194.2; see Fig. 199.1A). Diffuse facial rash
is more indicative of JDM. A hyperkeratotic rash on the face or around
the ears may represent discoid lupus (see Fig. 199.1D). A palpable purpuric rash on the extensor surfaces of the lower extremities points to IgA
vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein purpura) (see Fig. 210.2A). Less localized purpuric rashes and petechiae are present in systemic vasculitis or
blood dyscrasias, including coagulopathies. Nonblanching erythematous
papules on the palms are seen in vasculitis, SLE, and endocarditis. Gottron papules (see Fig. 200.3) and heliotrope rashes (see Fig. 200.2) along
with erythematous rashes on the elbows and knees are pathognomonic

1460
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 194 u Evaluation of Suspected Rheumatic Disease

1461

Table 194.1  Symptoms Suggestive of Rheumatic Disease
SYMPTOM

RHEUMATIC DISEASE(S)

POSSIBLE NONRHEUMATIC DISEASES CAUSING SIMILAR SYMPTOMS

Fevers

Systemic JIA, SLE, vasculitis, acute rheumatic
fever, sarcoidosis, MCTD

Malignancies, infections and postinfectious syndromes, inflammatory bowel
disease, periodic fever (autoinflammatory) syndromes, Kawasaki disease, HSP*

Arthralgias

JIA, SLE, rheumatic fever, JDM, vasculitis,
scleroderma, sarcoidosis

Hypothyroidism, trauma, endocarditis, other infections, pain syndromes,
growing pains, malignancies, overuse syndromes

Weakness

JDM, myositis secondary to SLE, MCTD, and
deep localized scleroderma

Muscular dystrophies, metabolic and other myopathies, hypothyroidism

Chest pain

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis, SLE (with associated
pericarditis or costochondritis)

Costochondritis (isolated), rib fracture, viral pericarditis, panic attack,
hyperventilation

Back pain

Enthesitis-­related arthritis, juvenile ankylosing
spondylitis

Vertebral compression fracture, diskitis, intraspinal tumor, spondylolysis,
spondylolisthesis, bone marrow–occupying malignancy, pain syndromes,
osteomyelitis, muscle spasm, injury

Fatigue

SLE, JDM, MCTD, vasculitis, JIA

Pain syndromes, chronic infections, chronic fatigue syndrome, depression

HSP, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura; JDM, juvenile dermatomyositis; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; MCTD, mixed connective tissue disease; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
*Also know as IgA vasculitis.

Table 194.2  Signs Suggestive of Rheumatic Disease
SIGN

RHEUMATIC DISEASES

COMMENTS

NONRHEUMATIC CAUSES

Malar rash

SLE, JDM

SLE classically spares nasolabial folds

Sunburn, parvovirus B19 (fifth
disease), Kawasaki disease

Oral ulcers

SLE, Behçet disease

Behçet disease also associated with genital
ulcers

HSV infection, PFAPA syndrome

Purpuric rash

Vasculitis (e.g., ANCA-­associated
vasculitis), HSP*

HSP* typically starts as small lesions on lower
extremities and buttocks that coalesce

Meningococcemia, thrombocytopenia,
clotting disorders

Gottron papules

JDM

Look for associated heliotrope rash, periungual
telangiectasias

Psoriasis, eczema

Arthritis

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis,
SLE, vasculitis, HSP*, MCTD,
scleroderma, acute rheumatic
fever, reactive arthritis

Chronic joint swelling (>6 wk) required for
diagnosis of JIA; MCTD associated with
diffuse puffiness of hands

Postviral arthritis, reactive arthritis,
trauma, infection, Lyme disease,
Kawasaki disease, malignancy,
overuse syndromes

ANCA, Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; HSP, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura; HSV, herpes simplex virus; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; JDM, juvenile dermatomyositis; MCTD,
mixed connective tissue disease; PFAPA, periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenitis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
*Also know as IgA vasculitis.

of JDM. Dilated capillary loops in the nail beds (periungual telangiectasias; see Fig. 200.4) are common in JDM, scleroderma, and secondary Raynaud phenomenon. An evanescent macular rash associated with
fever is part of the diagnostic criteria for systemic-­onset arthritis (see Fig.
196.12). Sun sensitivity or photosensitive rashes are indicative of SLE or
JDM but can also be caused by antibiotics.
Mouth ulcers are part of the diagnostic criteria for SLE and Behçet
disease (see Fig. 199.1C); painless nasal ulcers and erythematous
macules on the hard palate are also common in SLE. Cartilage loss
in the nose, causing a saddle nose deformity, is classically present in
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis;
see Fig. 210.8) but is also seen in relapsing polychondritis and syphilis. Alopecia can be associated with SLE but is also found in localized
scleroderma (see Fig. 201.4) and JDM. Raynaud phenomenon may be
a primary benign idiopathic disorder or can be a presenting complaint
in the child with scleroderma, lupus, mixed connective tissue disease
(MCTD), or an overlap syndrome. Diffuse lymphadenopathy is present in many rheumatic diseases, including SLE, polyarticular JIA, and
systemic JIA. Irregular pupils may represent the insidious and unrecognized onset of uveitis associated with JIA. Erythematous conjunctivae may be a result of uveitis or episcleritis associated with JIA, SLE,
sarcoidosis, spondyloarthropathies, or vasculitis.
A pericardial rub and orthopnea are suggestive of pericarditis, often
seen in systemic JIA, SLE, and sarcoid. Coronary artery dilation is
strongly suggestive of Kawasaki disease and multisystem inflammatory
syndrome in children (MIS-­C) but may also be a finding in systemic
arthritis and other forms of systemic vasculitis. Interstitial lung disease,

suggested by dyspnea on exertion or the finding of basilar rales with
decreased carbon monoxide diffusion capacity, occurs in SLE, MCTD,
and systemic sclerosis. Signs consistent with pulmonary hemorrhage
point to granulomatosis with polyangiitis, microscopic angiitis, or SLE.
Pulmonary vascular aneurysms are indicative of Behçet disease.
Arthritis is defined by the presence of intraarticular swelling or
two or more of the following findings on joint examination: pain on
motion, loss of motion, erythema, and heat. Arthritis is present in
all the chronic childhood arthritis syndromes, along with SLE, JDM,
vasculitis, Behçet disease, sarcoidosis, Kawasaki disease, and Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura. Nonrheumatic causes of arthritis include malignancy, septic arthritis, Lyme disease, osteomyelitis, viral infections
(e.g., rubella, hepatitis B, parvovirus B19, chikungunya), and postinfectious etiologies such as Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV), ARF, and reactive
arthritis. ARF typically involves a migratory (lasting hours to days),
painful arthritis. Pain on palpation of long bones is suggestive of malignancy. Specific muscle testing for weakness should be performed in a
child presenting with fatigue or difficulty with daily tasks, because both
these symptoms may be manifestations of muscle inflammation.

LABORATORY TESTING

There are no specific screening tests for rheumatologic disease. Once
a differential diagnosis is determined, appropriate testing can be performed (Tables 194.3 and 194.4). Initial studies are generally performed
in standard local laboratories. Screening for specific autoantibodies can
be performed in commercial laboratories, but confirmation of results
in a tertiary care center immunology laboratory is often necessary.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1462 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 194.3  Autoantibody Specificity and Disease Associations
ANTIBODY

DISEASE

PREVALENCE (%)

SPECIFICITY

Antinuclear antibody (ANA)

SLE, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis,
dermatomyositis, scleroderma,
psoriatic arthritis, MCTD

—

Associated with increased risk of uveitis in JIA
and psoriatic arthritis
Up to 30% of children testing positive for ANAs
have no underlying rheumatic disease

Double-­stranded DNA (dsDNA)

SLE

60-­70

High specificity for SLE; associated with lupus
nephritis

Smith (Sm)

SLE

20-­30

Highly specific for SLE; associated with lupus
nephritis

Smooth muscle (Sm)

Autoimmune hepatitis

—

—

Pm-­Scl (polymyositis-­scleroderma)

Sclerodermatomyositis

—

—

SSA (Ro)

SLE, Sjögren syndrome

25-­30

Associated with neonatal lupus syndrome,
subacute cutaneous lupus, thrombocytopenia

SSB (La)

SLE, Sjögren syndrome

25-­30

Usually coexists with anti-­SSA antibody

Ribonuclease protein (RNP)

MCTD, SLE

30-­40

Suggestive of MCTD unless meets criteria for
SLE

Histone

Drug-­induced lupus, SLE

—

—

Centromere

Limited cutaneous systemic
sclerosis

70

Nonspecific for systemic sclerosis

Topoisomerase I (Scl-­70)

Systemic sclerosis

—

Rare in childhood

Antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (ANCAs)

Vasculitis

—

—

Cytoplasmic (cANCAs)/PR3-­ANCA

—

cANCAs associated with granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (Wegener), cystic fibrosis

Perinuclear (pANCAs)/MPO-­ANCA

—

pANCAs associated with microscopic polyangiitis,
polyarteritis nodosa, SLE, inflammatory bowel
disease, cystic fibrosis, primary sclerosing
cholangitis, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura,
Kawasaki disease, Churg-­Strauss syndrome

50-­90

Specific for JIA (RF+), may be positive before RF

Anticitrullinated protein (ACPA);
also called anti–cyclic citrullinated
protein (anti-­CCP)

RF-­positive JIA

MCTD, Mixed connective tissue disease; MPO-­ANCA, antimyeloperoxidase; PR3-­ANCA, antiproteinase 3; RF, rheumatoid factor; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Adapted from Aggerwal A. Clinical application of tests used in rheumatology. Indian J Pediatr 2002;69:889–892.

For initial workup of rheumatic disease, a CBC with differential,
alanine transaminase/aspartate transaminase (ALT/AST), albumin,
BUN/creatinine, urinalysis, creatine phosphokinase/lactate dehydrogenase (CPK/LDH), and inflammatory markers (sedimentation rate
and CRP) are recommended. Further appropriate testing depends on
clinical concern (see Table 194.4).
One essential laboratory test for rheumatic disease assessment is
the complete blood count (CBC), because it yields many diagnostic
clues. Elevated WBC count is compatible with malignancy, infection,
systemic JIA, and vasculitis. Leukopenia can be postinfectious, especially viral, or caused by SLE or malignancy. Lymphopenia is more
specific for SLE than is leukopenia. Platelets are acute-­phase reactants
and are therefore elevated with inflammatory markers. Exceptions
are a bone marrow–occupying malignancy, such as leukemia or neuroblastoma, SLE, and early Kawasaki disease. Anemia is nonspecific
and may be caused by any chronic illness, but hemolytic anemia (positive Coombs test result) may point to SLE or MCTD. Rheumatoid
factor (RF) is present in <10% of children with JIA and thus has poor
sensitivity as a diagnostic tool; RF may be elevated by infections such
as endocarditis, tuberculosis, syphilis, and viruses (parvovirus B19,
hepatitis B and C, mycoplasma), as well as primary biliary cirrhosis
and malignancies. In a child with chronic arthritis, RF serves as a
prognostic indicator.
Inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP, ferritin, procalcitonin) are nonspecific and are elevated in infections,

malignancies, and rheumatic diseases (Table 194.5). Their levels
may also be normal in rheumatic diseases such as arthritis, scleroderma, and dermatomyositis. The advantages of a CRP include rapid
response to inflammatory stimuli, wide range of clinically relevant
values, the fact that it is unaffected by age or gender, it is precise
and reproducible, and it can be measured on stored sera. Sedimentation rates have classically been used as markers of inflammation,
but they can be affected by anemia, red cell morphology, and drugs
such as intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG); they require a fresh
blood sample; and they are slow to respond to clinical changes.
Inflammatory marker measurements in general are more useful
in rheumatic diseases for following response to treatment than as
diagnostic tests.
Muscle enzymes include AST, ALT, CPK, aldolase, and LDH, any of
which may be elevated in JDM and in other diseases causing muscle
breakdown. Muscle-­building supplements, medications, and extreme
physical activity may also cause muscle breakdown and enzyme elevations. AST, ALT, and aldolase may also be elevated in liver disease, and
a γ-­glutamyltransferase (GGT) measurement may help differentiate
muscle or liver source.
The use of an antinuclear antibody (ANA) measurement as a screening test is not recommended because it has low specificity. A positive
ANA test result may be induced by infection, especially EBV infection, endocarditis, and parvovirus B19 infection. The ANA test result
is also positive in up to 30% of normal children, and ANA level is

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 194 u Evaluation of Suspected Rheumatic Disease

1463

Table 194.4  Evaluation Based on Suspected Diagnosis of Rheumatic Disease
SUSPECTED RHEUMATIC
DISEASE(S)

INITIAL EVALUATION

FURTHER EVALUATION

SUBSPECIALTY EVALUATION

Systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE)
Mixed connective tissue disease
(MCTD)

CBC, ESR, ANA, ALT, AST, CPK,
creatinine, albumin, total protein,
urinalysis, BP, thyroid profile

If ANA test result is positive:
anti-­SSA (Ro), anti-­SSB (La),
anti-­Smith, and anti-­RNP
Abs; anti-­dsDNA Ab, C3, C4,
Coombs, spot urine protein/
creatinine ratio, CXR

Antiphospholipid Abs, lupus
anticoagulant, anti–β2-­glycoprotein,
echocardiogram; consider renal
biopsy, PFTs, bronchoscopy with
lavage, HRCT of chest; consider
lung biopsy

Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM)

CBC, CPK, ALT, AST, LDH, aldolase,
ANA; check gag reflex

Consider MRI of muscle

Consider electromyography and
possible muscle biopsy, PFTs,
swallowing study, serum neopterin

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)

CBC, ESR, creatinine, ALT, AST,
consider anti–streptolysin O/
anti–DNAase B for streptococcus-­
induced arthritis, Epstein-­Barr
virus titers, Lyme titer, parvovirus
B19 titer, plain radiograph of joints

Consider Ab titers to unusual
infectious agents, purified
protein derivative, RF, ANA,
HLA-­B27, anti-­CCP

MRI

Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(Wegener granulomatosis)

CBC, ANCA, AST, ALT, albumin,
creatinine, ESR, urinalysis, CXR, BP

Spot urine protein/creatinine
ratio, anti–myeloperoxidase
and anti–proteinase-­3 Abs,
PFTs

Bronchoscopy with lavage, HRCT
chest; consider lung and kidney
biopsies

Sarcoidosis

CBC, electrolytes, AST, ALT,
albumin, creatinine, calcium,
phosphorous, ACE, BP

CXR, PFTs

Consider testing for Blau syndrome
in infants (see Chapter 200); HRCT
of chest; consider renal and lung
biopsy

Localized scleroderma

Skin biopsy, CBC, ESR

Systemic scleroderma

ANA, CBC, ESR, BP, AST, ALT, CPK,
creatinine, CXR

Serum IgG, ANA, RF, single-­stranded
DNA Ab, antihistone Ab, CPK
Anti-­Scl70, PFTs

HRCT of chest, echocardiogram,
upper GI radiography series

Ab, Antibody; ACE, angiotensin-­converting enzyme (normally elevated in childhood; interpret with caution); ALT, alanine transaminase; ANA, antinuclear antibody; anti-­dsDNA Ab,
anti–double-­stranded DNA antibody; AST, aspartate transaminase; BP, blood pressure; CBC, complete blood count; CCP, cyclic citrullinated protein; CPK, creatine phosphokinase;
CXR, chest x-­ray; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; GI, gastrointestinal; HRCT, high-­resolution CT; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PFTs, pulmonary function tests; RF, rheumatoid
factor; RNP, ribonucleoprotein.

Table 194.5  Conditions Associated with Elevated
C-­Reactive Protein Levels
NORMAL OR MINOR ELEVATION (<1 mg/dL)
Vigorous exercise
Common cold
Pregnancy
Gingivitis
Seizures
Depression
Insulin resistance and diabetes
Several genetic polymorphisms
Obesity
MODERATE ELEVATION (1-­10 mg/dL)
Myocardial infarction
Malignancies
Pancreatitis
Mucosal infection (bronchitis, cystitis)
Most systemic autoimmune diseases
Rheumatoid arthritis
Influenza and adenovirus infections
MARKED ELEVATION (>10 mg/dL)
Acute bacterial infection (80–85%)
Major trauma, surgery
Systemic vasculitis
MIS-­C
MIS-­C, Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.
From Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al., eds. Kelley & Firestein’s Textbook of
Rheumatology, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017, Table 57-­4, p. 849.

increased in those with a first-­degree relative with a known rheumatic
disease. In the majority of children with a positive ANA without signs
of a rheumatic disease on initial evaluation, autoimmune disease does
not develop over time, so this finding does not necessitate referral
to a pediatric rheumatologist. A positive ANA test result is found in
many rheumatic diseases, including JIA, in which it serves as a predictor of the risk for inflammatory eye disease (see Chapter 196). Once a
positive ANA test result is discovered in a child, the need for specific
autoantibody testing is directed by the presence of clinical signs and
symptoms (see Table 194.3).

IMAGING STUDIES

Plain radiographs are useful in evaluation of arthralgias and arthritis,
as they offer reassurance in benign pain syndromes and their findings
may be abnormal in malignancies, osteomyelitis, and long-­standing
chronic juvenile arthritis. Musculoskeletal ultrasound can be useful
in evaluation of synovitis and joint effusion. MRI findings are abnormal in inflammatory myositis and suggest the optimal site for biopsy.
MRI is more sensitive than plain radiographs in detecting the presence
of early erosive arthritis and demonstrates increased joint fluid, synovial
enhancement, and sequela of trauma with internal joint derangement.
MRI is also helpful in ruling out infection or malignancy. Cardiopulmonary evaluation is suggested for diseases commonly affecting the
heart and lung, including SLE, systemic scleroderma, MCTD, JDM,
and sarcoid, as clinical manifestations may be subtle. This evaluation,
which may include echocardiogram, pulmonary function tests, and
high-­resolution CT of the lungs along with consideration of bronchoalveolar lavage, is generally performed by a pediatric rheumatologist to
whom the patient is referred (see Table 194.4).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 195 u Treatment of Rheumatic Diseases
Table 195.1  Multidisciplinary Treatment of Rheumatic
Diseases in Childhood
Accurate diagnosis
and education of
family

Pediatric rheumatologist
Pediatrician
Nurse

• D
 isease-­related education
• Medication administration (injection
­teaching)
• Safety monitoring

Social worker

• F
 acilitation of school services
• Resource identification (community,
government, financial, advocacy groups,
vocational rehabilitation)

Physical medicine and
rehabilitation

Physical therapy

Leflunomide

Dermatology

Sulfasalazine

Ophthalmology

• E
 ye screening for uveitis
• Screening for medication-­related
ocular toxicity (hydroxychloroquine,
glucocorticoids)

Nephrology

Gastroenterology
Nutrition

• A
 ddressing undernourishment
from systemic illness and obesity/
overnourishment from glucocorticoids

School integration

• Individualized educational plan (IEP) or 504
plan

Peer-­group relationships
Individual and family counseling
Coordination of care

Hydroxychloroquine sulfate is an antimalarial drug important in the treatment of SLE and dermatomyositis, particularly cutaneous manifestations
of disease and to reduce lupus flares. It is not indicated to treat JIA because
of lack of efficacy. The most significant potential adverse effect is retinal
toxicity, which occurs rarely but results in irreversible color blindness or
loss of central vision. Complete ophthalmologic examinations, including
assessment of peripheral vision and color fields, are conducted at baseline
and every 6-­12 months to screen for retinal toxicity. Retinal toxicity is rare
(1/5,000 patients) and is associated with weight-­based dosing exceeding 6.5 mg/kg/day; therefore recommended dosing is 5 mg/kg/day, not
to exceed 400 mg/day. Other potential adverse effects include rash, skin
discoloration, gastric irritation, bone marrow suppression, central nervous
system (CNS) stimulation, and myositis.

Orthopedics

• S
 plinting to reduce joint contractures/
deformities and lessen stress on joints;
adaptive devices for activities of daily living

Physical and
psychosocial growth
and development

Hydroxychloroquine

Leflunomide is a DMARD approved for treatment of RA and also offers an
alternative to MTX for treatment of JIA. MTX outperformed leflunomide
for treatment of JIA in a randomized trial (at 16 weeks, 89% of patients
receiving MTX achieved a 30% response rate vs 68% of those receiving
leflunomide), although both drugs were effective. Dosing is oral, once
daily, and weight based: 10 mg for children 10 to <20 kg, 15 mg for children 20-­40 kg, and 20 mg for children >40 kg. Adverse reactions include
paresthesias and peripheral neuropathy, GI intolerance, elevated liver
transaminases and hepatic failure, cytopenias, alopecia, and teratogenesis.
Leflunomide has a long half-­life, and in cases in which discontinuation
of the agent is required, a drug elimination protocol with cholestyramine
may be indicated. Avoidance of pregnancy is essential. Laboratory tests
(e.g., CBC, LFTs) are monitored every 4 weeks for the first 6 months of
treatment, then every 8-­12 weeks.

• A
 ddressing deficits in joint or muscle
mobility, limb-­length discrepancies, gait
abnormalities, and weakness

Occupational therapy

Consultant team

1465

Involvement of patient and family as active
team members
Communication among healthcare
­providers
Involvement of school (school nurse) and
community (social worker) resources

qualitatively different from that observed with treatment of neoplasms. Adverse effects include elevated liver enzyme values (15%);
GI toxicity (13%); stomatitis (3%); headache (1–2%); and leukopenia, interstitial pneumonitis, rash, and alopecia (<1%). Hepatotoxicity observed among adults with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) treated
with MTX has raised concern about similar problems in children.
Analysis of liver biopsy specimens in children with JIA undergoing
long-­term MTX treatment has revealed occasional mild fibrosis but
no evidence of even moderate liver damage. Patients receiving MTX
should be counseled to avoid alcohol, smoking, and pregnancy. Folic
acid (1 mg daily) is given as an adjunct to minimize adverse effects.
Lymphoproliferative disorders have been reported in adults treated
with MTX, primarily in association with Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV)
infection. Regression of lymphoma may follow withdrawal of MTX.
Monitoring laboratory tests for MTX toxicity include CBC and LFTs
at regular intervals, initially every 8-­12 weeks for the first 3-­6 months of
treatment, then every 12 weeks, with more frequent intervals after dosing
adjustments or in response to abnormal values.

Sulfasalazine is used to treat children with polyarticular JIA, oligoarticular JIA, and the peripheral arthritis and enthesitis associated with juvenile
ankylosing spondylitis. In JIA, sulfasalazine 50 mg/kg/day (adult maximum: 3,000 mg/day, divided bid) achieves greater improvement in joint
inflammation, global assessment parameters, and laboratory parameters
than placebo. More than 30% of sulfasalazine-­treated patients withdraw
from the treatment because of adverse effects, primarily GI irritation and
skin rashes. Sulfasalazine is associated with severe systemic hypersensitivity reactions, including Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome. Sulfasalazine is
generally considered contraindicated in children with active systemic JIA
because of increased hypersensitivity reactions. Sulfasalazine should not
be used in patients with sulfa or salicylate hypersensitivity or porphyria.
Monitoring laboratory tests for sulfasalazine toxicity include CBC,
LFTs, serum creatinine/blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and urinalysis, every
other week for the first 3 months of treatment, monthly for 3 months, then
every 3 months.

Mycophenolate Mofetil

Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) is an immunosuppressive drug approved
by the FDA for organ transplant rejection. MMF is used primarily for
treatment of lupus, uveitis, and autoimmune skin manifestations. In adult
clinical trials, MMF was noninferior to cyclophosphamide for induction
therapy of lupus nephritis, with a potential for fewer adverse effects (infection, gonadal toxicity). Dosing is based on body surface area (BSA): 600
mg/m2 orally twice daily, with maximum dosage limits varying by formulation and BSA. The most common adverse reaction is GI intolerance;
infections, cytopenias, and secondary malignancies are also reported.

Glucocorticoids

Glucocorticoids are given through oral, intravenous (IV), ocular, topical, and intraarticular administration as part of treatment of rheumatic
disease. Oral corticosteroids are foundational treatment for moderate
to severe lupus, dermatomyositis, and most forms of vasculitis; their
long-­term use is associated with many well-­described, dose-­dependent
complications, including linear growth suppression, cushingoid features, osteoporosis, avascular necrosis, hypertension, impaired glucose
tolerance, mood disturbance, and increased infection risk. Glucocorticoids should be tapered to the lowest effective dose over time and
DMARDs introduced as steroid-­sparing agents.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

CLASSIFICATION
Nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs)‡
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Disease-­modifying
antirheumatic drugs
(DMARDs)

Janus kinase inhibitor

THERAPEUTIC†

INDICATION†

DOSE

Etodolaca

PO once-­daily dose:
20-­30 kg: 400 mg
31-­45 kg: 600 mg
46-­60 kg: 800 mg
>60 kg: 1,000 mg

Ibuprofena

40 mg/kg/day PO in 3 divided
doses
Max 2,400 mg/day

Naproxena

15 mg/kg/day PO in 2 divided
doses
Max 1,000 mg/day

Celecoxiba

10-­25 kg: 50 mg PO bid
>25 kg: 100 mg PO bid

Meloxicama

0.125 mg/kg PO daily
Max 7.5 mg

Methotrexatea

ADVERSE REACTIONS

MONITORING

JIA
Spondyloarthropathy
Pain
Serositis
Cutaneous vasculitis
Uveitis

GI intolerance (abdominal
pain, nausea), gastritis,
hepatitis, tinnitus, anemia,
pseudoporphyria, aseptic
meningitis, headache, renal
disease

CBC, LFTs, BUN/creatinine,
urinalysis at baseline, then
every 6-­12 mo

10-­20 mg/m2/wk (0.35-­0.65 mg/kg/
wk) PO
20-­30 mg/m2/wk (0.65-­1 mg/kg/wk)
SC; higher doses better absorbed
by SC injection

JIA
Uveitis

GI intolerance (nausea, vomiting),
hepatitis, myelosuppression,
mucositis, teratogenesis,
lymphoma, interstitial
pneumonitis

CBC, LFTs at baseline,
monthly ×3, then every
8-­12 wk

Leflunomide

PO once daily:
10 to <20 kg: 10 mg
20-­40 kg: 15 mg
>40 kg: 20 mg

JIA

Hepatitis, hepatic necrosis,
cytopenias, mucositis,
teratogenesis, peripheral
neuropathy

CBC, LFTs, at baseline,
monthly ×6, then every
8-­12 wk

Hydroxychloroquine

5 mg/kg PO daily; do not exceed
5 mg/kg/daily
Max 400 mg daily

SLE
JDMS
Antiphospholipid
antibody syndrome

Retinal toxicity, GI intolerance,
rash, skin discoloration, anemia,
cytopenias, myopathy, CNS
stimulation, death (overdose)

Ophthalmologic screening
every 6-­12 mo

Sulfasalazinea

30-­50 mg/kg/day in 2 divided doses
Adult max 3 g/day

Spondyloarthropathy,
JIA

GI intolerance, rash,
hypersensitivity reactions,
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome,
cytopenias, hepatitis, headache

CBC, LFTs, BUN/creatinine,
urinalysis at baseline,
every other wk ×3 mo,
monthly ×3, then every
3 mo

Tofacitiniba

Oral solution (1 mg/mL)
Use for ≥2 yr and ≥10 kg;
10 to <20 kg: 3.2 mg twice daily
20 to <40 kg: 4 mg twice daily
≥40 kg: 5 mg twice daily or
Immediate-­release tablet (5 mg),
5 mg twice daily

Polyarticular JIA

Infection, headache, increased
HDL, cytopenias, potential
increased malignancy risk,
potential increased thrombosis
risk

CBC, LFTs at baseline, then
every 3 mo; lipids 4-­8
wk after initiation, then
periodically

1466 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Table 195.2  Therapeutics for Childhood Rheumatic Diseases*

Table 195.2  Therapeutics for Childhood Rheumatic Diseases*—cont’d
CLASSIFICATION
Tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-­α antagonists

INDICATION†

DOSE

ADVERSE REACTIONS

MONITORING

JIA
Spondyloarthropathy
Psoriatic arthritis
Uveitis

Injection site reaction, infection,
rash, cytopenias, lupus-­like
syndrome, potential increased
malignancy risk

TB test; anti-­dsDNA, CBC

0.8 mg/kg SC once weekly (max
50 mg/dose) or 0.4 mg/kg SC
twice weekly (max 25 mg/dose)

JIA

Injection site reactions, infections,
rash, demyelinating disorders,
cytopenias, potential increased
malignancy risk

TB test; CBC

Golimumaba

80 mg/m2 IV at 0 and 4 wk, then
every 8 wk

Polyarticular JIA
Spondyloarthropathy
Psoriatic arthritis

Infusion reactions, hepatitis,
potential increased malignancy
risk

TB test; anti-­dsDNA, LFTs

Infliximab

5-­10 mg/kg IV every 4-­8 wk

JIA
Spondyloarthropathy
Uveitis
Sarcoidosis

Infusion reactions, hepatitis,
potential increased malignancy
risk

TB test; anti-­dsDNA, LFTs

Abatacepta

IV every 2 wk ×3 doses, then
monthly for ≥6 yr of age:
<75 kg: 10 mg/kg
75-­100 kg: 750 mg
>100 kg: 1,000 mg

JIA

Infection, headache, potential
increased malignancy risk

Adalimumaba

SC once every other wk:
10 to <15 kg: 10 mg
15 to <30 kg: 20 mg
≥30 kg: 40 mg

Etanercepta

SC once weekly:
10 to <25 kg: 50 mg
≥25 to <50 kg: 87.5 mg
≥50 kg: 125 mg
Rituximab

575 mg/m2, max 1,000 mg, IV on
days 1 and 15

SLE

Infusion reactions, lymphopenia,
reactivation hepatitis B, rash,
serum sickness, arthritis, PML

Anti-­BLyS antibody

Belimumabe

10 mg/kg IV every 2 wk ×3 doses,
then every 4 wk

SLE

Infusion reactions, infection,
depression

Interleukin (IL)-­1 antagonist

Anakinra

1-­2 mg/kg/daily
Adult max 100 mg

Systemic JIA
CAPS

Injection site reactions, infection

Canakinumabb

Given SC every 8 wk (CAPS) every
4 wk (systemic JIA):
15-­40 kg: 2 mg/kg (up to 3 mg/kg
if needed)
>40 kg: 150 mg

CAPS
Systemic JIA

Injection site reaction,
infection, diarrhea, nausea,
vertigo, headache

IV:
<30 kg: 10 mg/kg/dose every 4 wk
≥30 kg: 8 mg/kg/dose every 4 wk;
maximum dose: 800 mg/dose
SC:
<30 kg: 162 mg/dose once every
3 wk
≥30 kg: 162 mg/dose once every
2 wk

Polyarticular JIA

CBC, BMP; consider
monitoring quantitative
IgG

CBC

Continued

1467

Anti-­CD20 (B-­cell) antibody

Chapter 195 u Treatment of Rheumatic Diseases

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Modulate T-­cell activation

THERAPEUTIC†

THERAPEUTIC†

CLASSIFICATION

INDICATION†

DOSE

ADVERSE REACTIONS

MONITORING

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

IL-­6 antagonist

Tocilizumaba

≥2 yr and ≥30 kg: 8 mg/kg/dose
every 2 wk
≥2 yr and ≤30 kg: 12 mg/kg/dose
every 2 wk

Systemic JIA

Infusion reactions, elevated
LFTs, elevated lipids,
thrombocytopenia, infections

CBC, LFTs, platelet count,
serum lipid profile

Intravenous immune
globulin

IVIGc

1,000-­2,000 mg/kg IV infusion
For JDMS, give monthly

Kawasaki disease
JDMS
SLE

Infusion reaction, aseptic
meningitis, renal failure

Serum creatinine, BUN, IgG
level

Cytotoxic

Cyclophosphamide

0.5-­1 g/m2 IV (max 1.5 g) monthly
for 6 mo induction, then every
2-­3 mo
Oral regimen: 1-­2 mg/kg/daily; max
150 mg/daily

SLE
Vasculitis
JDMS
Pulmonary hemorrhage

Nausea, vomiting,
myelosuppression, mucositis,
hyponatremia, alopecia,
hemorrhagic cystitis, gonadal
failure, teratogenesis, secondary
malignancy

CBC

Immunosuppressive

Mycophenolate mofetil

Oral suspension: max 1,200 mg/m2/
day PO (up to 2 g/day) divided
bid
Capsules: max 1,500 mg/day PO
for BSA 1.25-­1.5 m2, 2 g/day PO
for BSA >1.5 m2 divided bid

SLE
Uveitis

GI intolerance (diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting), renal impairment,
neutropenia, teratogenesis,
secondary malignancy, PML

CBC, BMP

Glucocorticoids

Prednisonea,d-­f

0.05-­2 mg/kg/day PO given in 1-­4
divided doses; max varies by
individual (80 mg/daily)
Adverse effects are dose
dependent; lowest effective dose
should be used

SLE
JDMS
Vasculitis
JIA
Uveitis
Sarcoidosis

Cushing syndrome, osteoporosis,
increased appetite, weight gain,
striae, hypertension, adrenal
suppression, hyperglycemia,
infection, avascular necrosis

Blood glucose, potassium
Blood pressure

Methylprednisolonea,d-­g

0.5-­1.7 mg/kg/day or 5-­25 mg/m2/
day IM/IV in divided doses every
6-­12 hr
For severe manifestations: 30 mg/
kg/dose (max 1 g) daily for 1-­5
days

SLE
JDMS
Vasculitis
Sarcoidosis
Localized scleroderma

Intraarticular

Dose varies by joint and
formulation

JIA

Subcutaneous atrophy, skin
hypopigmentation, calcification,
infection

Prednisolone ophthalmic
suspension

1-­2 drops into eye up to every hr
while awake
Needs monitoring by
ophthalmologist

Uveitis

Ocular hypertension, glaucoma,
nerve damage, cataract,
infection

Ophthalmologic exam

*Consult a clinical pharmacology reference for current dosing and monitoring guidelines and complete list of known adverse effects.
†Therapeutics used in practice may not have an FDA-­approved indication. Individual therapeutics annotated with FDA-­approved indication as follows: a, JIA; b, CAPS; c, Kawasaki disease; d, sarcoidosis; e, SLE; f, uveitis; g, dermatomyositis.
‡Many more products are available in this class.
bid, Twice daily; BLys, B-­lymphocyte stimulator; BMP, basic metabolic panel; BSA, body surface area; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CAPS, cryopyrin-­associated periodic syndrome; CBC, complete blood count; CNS, central nervous system;
dsDNA, double-­stranded DNA; GI, gastrointestinal; IM, intramuscular(ly); IV, intravenous(ly); IVIG, intravenous immune globulin; JDMS, juvenile dermatomyositis; JIA, juvenile idiopathic arthritis; LFTs, liver function tests; PML, progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy; PO, by mouth; SC, subcutaneous(ly); SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; TB, tuberculosis

1468 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Table 195.2  Therapeutics for Childhood Rheumatic Diseases*—cont’d

Chapter 195 u Treatment of Rheumatic Diseases
Intravenous corticosteroids have been used to treat severe, acute
manifestations of systemic rheumatic diseases such as SLE, dermatomyositis, and vasculitis. The IV route allows for higher doses to obtain
an immediate, profound antiinflammatory effect. Methylprednisolone
10-­30 mg/kg/dose up to a maximum of 1 g, given over 1 hour daily for
1-­5 days is the IV preparation of choice. Although generally associated with fewer adverse effects than oral corticosteroids, IV steroids are
associated with significant and occasionally life-­threatening toxicities,
such as cardiac arrhythmia, acute hypertension, hypotension, hyperglycemia, shock, pancreatitis, and avascular necrosis.
Ocular corticosteroids are prescribed by ophthalmologists as ophthalmologic drops or injections into the soft tissue surrounding the
globe (sub–Tenon capsule injection) for active uveitis. Long-­
term
ocular corticosteroid use leads to cataract formation and glaucoma.
Current ophthalmologic management with methotrexate and biologic
therapy, especially TNF inhibitors, have significantly decreased the frequency of eye complications of JIA-­associated uveitis.
Intraarticular corticosteroids are frequently used as initial therapy
for children with oligoarticular JIA or as bridge therapy while awaiting efficacy of a DMARD in polyarticular disease. Most patients have
significant clinical improvement within 3 days. Duration of response
depends on steroid preparation used, joint affected, and arthritis subtype; the anticipated response rate to knee injection is 60–80% at 6
months. Intraarticular administration may result in subcutaneous
atrophy and hypopigmentation of the skin at the injection site, as well
as subcutaneous calcifications along the needle track.

JANUS KINASE INHIBITORS

Another effective class of DMARDs is the Janus kinase inhibitors, collectively known as JAKinibs. In immune cells, these drugs inhibit intracellular signaling through the JAK-­STAT pathway in immune cells by
binding to various Janus kinases (in humans, JAK 1, JAK 2, JAK 3, and
TYK2), thereby negating the response to extracellular cytokine ligation of immune cell receptors. Inhibition affects lymphocyte activation,
function, and survival. Many JAKinibs are currently available, including tofacitinib, baricitinib, ruxolitinib, and upadacitinib. Currently, only
tofacitinib has FDA approval in pediatric rheumatic disease.
Tofacitinib is a small-­molecule, oral JAKinib of the JAK1, JAK3, and,
to a lesser extent, JAK2 enzymes. Tofacitinib has FDA approval for
treatment of polyarticular JIA (age ≥2 years and weight ≥10 kg) with
twice-­daily dosing: 3.2 mg bid for 10-­20 kg, 4 mg bid for 20-­40 kg, and
5 mg bid for >40 kg. It is available as an oral solution (1 mg/mL) and as
oral tablets (5 mg). Adverse reactions include increased risk of serious
infections, thrombosis including pulmonary and deep venous/arterial,
and gastrointestinal perforations; the most common adverse reactions
are upper respiratory infections, diarrhea, and headache.

Biologic Agents

Biologic agents are proteins that have been engineered to target and
modulate specific components of the immune system, with the goal of
decreasing the inflammatory response. Antibodies have been developed
to target specific cytokines such as IL-­1 and IL-­6 or to interfere with
specific immune cell function through depletion of β cells or suppression of T-­cell activation (Table 195.3). Biologic agents have increased
the therapeutic options for treating rheumatic disease recalcitrant to
nonbiologic therapies, and in some cases biologics are first-­line interventions. A primary concern is the increased risk of malignancy when
biologics are combined with other immunosuppressants.

Tumor Necrosis Factor-­α Antagonists

Three TNF antagonists have an FDA indication for treatment of children
with moderate to severe polyarticular JIA (etanercept, adalimumab, and
golimumab). Etanercept is a genetically engineered fusion protein consisting of two identical chains of the recombinant extracellular TNF receptor
monomer fused with the Fc domain of human immunoglobulin G1. Etanercept binds both TNF-­α and lymphotoxin-­α (formerly called TNF-­β) and
inhibits their activity. Three fourths of children with active polyarticular
JIA that fails to respond to MTX demonstrate response to etanercept after
3 months of therapy. Dosing is 0.8 mg/kg subcutaneously weekly (max 50
mg/dose) or 0.4 mg/kg SC twice weekly (max 25 mg/dose). Adalimumab

1469

Table 195.3  Method of Action of Biologic Therapies
Studied in Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
DRUG

METHOD OF ACTION

Etanercept

Soluble TNF p75 receptor fusion protein that
binds to and inactivates TNF-­α

Infliximab

Chimeric human/mouse monoclonal antibody
that binds to soluble TNF-­α and its membrane-­
bound precursor, neutralizing its action

Adalimumab

A humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody that
binds to TNF-­α

Abatacept

Soluble, fully human fusion protein of the
extracellular domain of CTLA-­4, linked to a
modified Fc portion of the human IgG1. It acts
as a costimulatory signal inhibitor by binding
competitively to CD80 or CD86, where it
selectively inhibits T-­cell activation

Tocilizumab

A humanized anti–human IL-­6 receptor
monoclonal antibody

Anakinra

An IL-­1 receptor antagonist (IL-­1RA)

CTLA, Cytotoxic T lymphocyte–associated antigen; IL, interleukin; TNF, tumor necrosis
factor.
From Beresford MW, Baildam EM. New advances in the management of juvenile
idiopathic arthritis. Part 2. The era of biologicals. Arch Dis Child Educ Pract Ed.
2009;94:151–156.

is a fully human anti-­TNF monoclonal antibody (mAb) used alone or in
combination with MTX. In a placebo-­controlled withdrawal-­design study,
children continuing to receive adalimumab were less likely to experience
disease flares (43% vs 71%) even if they were also taking MTX (37% vs
65%). Adalimumab is administered subcutaneously every other week at
a dose of 10 mg for children weighing 10 to <15 kg, 20 mg for children
weighing 15 to <30 kg, and 40 mg for those weighing ≥30 kg. Golimumab
is a human mAb that binds to both soluble and transmembrane bioactive
forms of TNF. It has FDA approval for use in polyarticular JIA at dosing
of 80 mg/m2 IV with initial doses at 0 and 4 weeks and then every 8 weeks
thereafter. Non-­FDA approved uses include psoriatic arthritis.
Infliximab, a chimeric mouse-­human mAb, was tested in a randomized
controlled trial (RCT) for use in JIA but did not achieve study end-­points.
However, it is FDA approved for pediatric inflammatory bowel disease and
has been used “off label” for treatment of polyarticular JIA, uveitis, Behçet
syndrome, and sarcoidosis. Certolizumab pegol, a pegylated humanized
antibody against TNF, is approved by the FDA for RA, psoriatic arthritis,
and ankylosing spondylitis in adults and is currently in pediatric trials for
treatment of polyarticular JIA.
The most common adverse effects are injection site reactions that
diminish over time. TNF blockade is associated with an increased frequency of serious systemic infections, including sepsis, dissemination of
latent tuberculosis (TB), and invasive fungal infections in endemic areas.
TNF blockade should not be initiated in patients with a history of chronic
or frequent recurrent infections. TB testing should be done before initiation of therapy with TNF antagonists. If test results are positive, antitubercular treatment must be administered before anti-­TNF treatment can be
started. Theoretically, the risk of malignancy increases with TNF-­α antagonists. Case reports describe the development of lupus-­like syndromes, leukocytoclastic vasculitis, interstitial lung disease, demyelinating syndromes,
antibody formation to the drug, rashes, cytopenias, anaphylaxis, serum
sickness, and other reactions. The benefit/risk profile appears favorable
after a decade of experience with this therapeutic class; the safety of longer-­
term suppression of TNF function is unknown.

Modulator of T-­Cell Activation

Abatacept is a selective inhibitor of T-­cell costimulation resulting in T-­cell
anergy. It is FDA approved for treatment of moderate to severe polyarticular JIA. In a double-­blind withdrawal RCT in children whose disease
had not responded to DMARDs, 53% of placebo-­treated patients vs 20%
of abatacept-­treated patients experienced disease flares during the withdrawal period. The frequency of adverse events did not differ between the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1470 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
groups. Abatacept is administered IV every other week for three doses
(<75 kg: 10 mg/kg/dose; 75-­100 kg: 750 mg/dose; >100 kg: 1,000 mg/dose;
maximum 1,000 mg/dose at 0, 2, and 4 weeks) and then monthly thereafter. Abatacept administered by SC injection was given FDA approval in
March 2017 for children ≥4 years old for treatment of polyarticular JIA at
doses given weekly: 50 mg for 10-­25 kg, 87.5 mg for ≥25 to <50 kg, and
125 mg for ≥50 kg.

B-­Cell Depletion

Rituximab is a chimeric mAb to the antigen CD20, a transmembrane protein on the surface of B-­cell precursors and mature B lymphocytes. This
antibody induces B-­cell apoptosis and causes depletion of circulating and
tissue-­based B cells. Antibody production is not completely abrogated
because plasma cells are not removed. Rituximab has FDA approval for
treatment of granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) and microscopic
polyangiitis (MPA) in children greater than 2 years of age. It is approved
for treatment of adult RA and may also have a role in treatment of SLE,
particularly its hematologic manifestations. Adverse events include serious infusion reactions, cytopenias, hepatitis B virus reactivation, hypogammaglobulinemia, infections, serum sickness, vasculitis, and a rare but
fatal side effect, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Resistance to
rituximab may develop over time in patients being treated for lymphoma.
Belimumab is a human mAb to B-­lymphocyte stimulator (BLys) that
negatively affects B-­cell proliferation, differentiation, and long-­term survival by inhibiting binding of BLys to its receptors on B cells. It is FDA
approved for treatment of pediatric SLE in children age 5 years and older.
For this indication, it is given as an IV infusion (10 mg/kg) every 2 weeks
for the first three doses, then every 4 weeks thereafter. Side effects associated with belimumab include increased risk of serious infections, allergic
(hypersensitivity) reactions, and changes in mood.

Table 195.4  Predisposing Factors for Immunoglobulin-­
Induced Adverse Effects
ADVERSE EFFECT

PREDISPOSING FACTORS

Flulike symptoms

High dose, rapid infusion rate,
accompanying infection, previous
adverse effects

Dermatologic adverse
effects

High dose, rapid infusion rate,
accompanying infection, male
patients with chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy

Arrhythmia and
hypotension

History of heart disease

Transfusion-­related acute
lung injury

Rapid infusion rate

Thrombotic events

High dose, rapid infusion
rate, advanced age, being
bedridden, diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, dyslipidemia, prior/
current thrombosis, preexisting
atherosclerotic disease, elevated
serum viscosity, oral contraceptive
use, hereditary hypercoagulable state,
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura

Aseptic meningitis

High dose

Renal impairment

Rapid infusion rate, advanced age,
renal insufficiency, nephrotic
syndrome, diabetes mellitus,
dehydration, sepsis paraproteinemia,
nephrotoxic drugs, hemolysis,
sucrose-­containing preparations

Hemolysis

High dose, rapid infusion rate,
non-­O blood group, underlying
inflammatory state

Interleukin-­1 Antagonists

Anakinra, a recombinant form of the human IL-­1 receptor antagonist,
competitively inhibits binding of IL-­1α and IL-­1β to the natural receptor, interrupting the cytokine proinflammatory cascade. Anakinra has
been approved for RA in adults. In meta-­analyses of treatments for RA,
anakinra was outperformed by TNF-­α antagonists but has a special niche
in pediatric rheumatology for treatment of systemic JIA (sJIA) and other
autoinflammatory syndromes, such as cryopyrin-­associated periodic syndrome (CAPS). The medication is dosed SC, 1-­2 mg/kg, once daily. An IL-­
1β mAb, canakinumab, is FDA approved for use in CAPS, dosed SC every
8 weeks, and sJIA, dosed SC every 4 weeks. Adverse reactions include significant injection site reactions and increased bacterial infections.

Interleukin-­6 Receptor Antagonist

Tocilizumab is an anti–IL-­6 receptor antibody binding to both soluble and
membrane-­associated receptors. Tocilizumab has FDA approval for treatment of sJIA and polyarticular JIA. Adverse reactions include transaminase and lipid elevations. Tocilizumab is given as an IV infusion every 2
weeks (sJIA) to 4 weeks (polyarticular JIA), and SC for polyarticular JIA
162 mg every 3 weeks for those <30 kg and every 2 wk for ≥30 kg.

Intravenous Immune Globulin

Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) is thought to be beneficial in
various clinical conditions. IVIG significantly improves the short-­and
long-­term natural history of Kawasaki disease. Open studies have supported benefit for juvenile dermatomyositis, lupus-­associated thrombocytopenia, and polyarticular JIA. IVIG is given as 1-­2 g/kg/dose,
administered once monthly. It has been occasionally associated with
severe, systemic allergy-­like reactions and postinfusion aseptic meningitis (headache, stiff neck) (Table 195.4).

Cytotoxics
Cyclophosphamide

Cyclophosphamide requires metabolic conversion in the liver to its active
metabolites, which alkylate the guanine in DNA, leading to immunosuppression by inhibition of the S2 phase of mitosis. The subsequent decrease
in numbers of T and B lymphocytes results in diminished humoral and
cellular immune responses. Cyclophosphamide infusions (500-­1,000 mg/
m2) given monthly for 6 months, then every 3 months for 12-­18 months,

From Guo Y, Tian X, Wang X, Xiao Z. Adverse effects of immunoglobulin therapy.
Frontiers Immunol. 2018;9:1299, Table 2.

have been shown to reduce the frequency of renal failure in patients with
lupus and diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis. Open trials suggest
efficacy in severe CNS lupus. Oral cyclophosphamide (1-­2 mg/kg/day)
is effective as induction treatment of severe antineutrophilic cytoplasmic
antibody (ANCA)–associated vasculitis and other forms of systemic vasculitis, as well as interstitial lung disease or pulmonary hemorrhage associated with rheumatic disease.
Cyclophosphamide is a potent cytotoxic drug associated with significant toxicities. Potential short-­term adverse effects include nausea,
vomiting, anorexia, alopecia, mucositis, hemorrhagic cystitis, and bone
marrow suppression. Long-­term complications include an increased
risk for sterility and cancer, especially leukemia, lymphoma, and bladder cancer. In adult women with lupus treated with IV cyclophosphamide, 30–40% become infertile; the risk of ovarian failure appears to
be significantly lower in adolescent and premenarchal girls. Ovarian
suppression with an inhibitor of gonadotropin-­releasing hormone to
preserve fertility is currently being studied.

Other Drugs

Azathioprine is sometimes used to treat ANCA-­associated vasculitis
after induction therapy or to treat SLE. Cyclosporine has been used
occasionally in the treatment of dermatomyositis on the basis of
uncontrolled studies and is helpful in the treatment of macrophage
activation syndrome complicating sJIA (see Chapter 207). Case reports
describe the successful use of thalidomide, or its analog lenalidomide,
as treatment for sJIA, inflammatory skin disorders, and Behçet disease.
Several drugs commonly used in the past to treat arthritis are no longer part of standard treatment, including salicylates, gold compounds, and
d-­penicillamine.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1471

Chapter 196

Juvenile Idiopathic
Arthritis
Eveline Y. Wu and C. Egla Rabinovich
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is the most common rheumatic
disease in children and one of the more common chronic illnesses of
childhood. JIA represents a heterogeneous group of disorders sharing
the clinical manifestation of arthritis. The etiology and pathogenesis
of JIA are largely unknown, and the genetic component is complex,
making clear distinction among various subtypes difficult. As a result,
several classification schemes exist, each with its own limitations.
The former classification of the American College of Rheumatology
(ACR) uses the term juvenile rheumatoid arthritis and categorizes the
disease into three onset types (Table 196.1). Attempting to standardize
nomenclature, the International League of Associations for Rheumatology (ILAR) proposed a different classification using the term
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (Table 196.2), inclusive of all subtypes of
chronic juvenile arthritis. We refer to the ILAR classification criteria;
see Chapter 197 for enthesitis-­related arthritis (ERA) and psoriatic JIA
(Tables 196.3 and 196.4).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The worldwide incidence of JIA ranges from 0.8 to 22.6 per 100,000
children per year, with prevalence ranges from 7 to 401 per 100,000.
These wide-­ranging numbers reflect population differences, particularly environmental exposure and immunogenetic susceptibility,
along with variations in diagnostic criteria, difficulty in case ascertainment, and lack of population-­based data. An estimated 300,000
U.S. children have arthritis, including 100,000 with a form of JIA.
Oligoarthritis is the most common subtype (40–50%), followed by
polyarthritis (25–30%) and systemic JIA (5–15%) (see Table 196.4).
More females than males are affected in both oligoarticular (3:1) and
polyarticular (5:1) JIA but are equally affected in systemic JIA (sJIA).
The peak age at onset is 2-­4 years for oligoarticular disease. Age of
onset has a bimodal distribution in polyarthritis, with peaks at 2-­4
years and 10-­14 years. sJIA occurs throughout childhood, with a peak
at 1-­5 years.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology and pathogenesis of JIA are not completely understood,
although both immunogenetic susceptibility and an external trigger
are considered necessary. Twin and family studies suggest a substantial

Table 196.1  Criteria for the Classification of Juvenile
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Age at onset: <16 yr
Arthritis (swelling or effusion, or the presence of two or more of the
following signs: limitation of range of motion, tenderness or pain
on motion, increased heat) in one or more joints
Duration of disease: ≥6 wk
Onset type defined by type of articular involvement in the first 6 mo
after onset:
Polyarthritis: five or more inflamed joints
Oligoarthritis: four or fewer inflamed joints
Systemic-­onset disease: arthritis with rash and a characteristic
quotidian fever
Exclusion of other forms of juvenile arthritis
Adapted from Cassidy JT, Levison JE, Bass JC, et al. A study of classification criteria for
a diagnosis of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 1986;29:274–281.

role for genetic factors. JIA is a complex genetic trait in which multiple
genes may affect disease susceptibility. Variants in major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II regions have indisputably
been associated with different JIA subtypes. Non-­HLA candidate loci
are also associated with JIA, including polymorphisms in the genes
encoding protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor 22 (PTPN22),
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α, macrophage inhibitory factor, interleukin (IL)-­6 and its receptor, and IL-­1α. Possible nongenetic triggers
include bacterial and viral infections, enhanced immune responses to
bacterial or mycobacterial heat shock proteins, abnormal reproductive
hormone levels, and joint trauma.

PATHOGENESIS

JIA is an autoimmune disease associated with alterations in both
humoral and cell-­mediated immunity. T lymphocytes have a central
role, releasing proinflammatory cytokines favoring a type 1 helper
T-­lymphocyte response. Studies of T-­cell receptor expression confirm
recruitment of T lymphocytes specific for synovial non–self-­antigens.
B-­cell activation, immune complex formation, and complement activation also promote inflammation. Inheritance of specific cytokine alleles
may predispose to upregulation of inflammatory networks, resulting in
systemic disease or more severe articular disease.
sJIA is characterized by dysregulation of the innate immune system
with a lack of autoreactive T cells and autoantibodies. It therefore may
be more accurately classified as an autoinflammatory disorder, which
may transition to an autoimmune process once actual arthritis develops (Fig. 196.1). The IL-­1 family of cytokines is key to disease pathogenesis, which is strongly supported by the marked responsiveness to
IL-­1 inhibitors. IL-­18 in particular is a central driver, and serum IL-­18
levels are markedly elevated in children with sJIA.
All these immunologic abnormalities cause inflammatory synovitis,
characterized pathologically by villous hypertrophy and hyperplasia
with hyperemia and edema of the synovial tissue. Vascular endothelial
hyperplasia is prominent and is characterized by infiltration of mononuclear and plasma cells with a predominance of T lymphocytes (Fig.
196.2). Advanced and uncontrolled disease leads to pannus formation
and progressive erosion of articular cartilage and contiguous bone
(Figs. 196.3 and 196.4).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Arthritis must be present ≥6 weeks to make a diagnosis of any JIA
subtype. Arthritis is defined by intraarticular swelling or the presence
of two or more of the following signs: limitation in range of motion
(ROM), tenderness or pain on motion, and warmth. Initial symptoms
may be subtle or acute and often include morning stiffness with a limp
or gelling after inactivity. Easy fatigability and poor sleep quality may
be present. Involved joints are often swollen, warm to the touch, and
uncomfortable on movement or palpation with reduced ROM, but
usually are not erythematous. Arthritis in large joints, especially knees,
initially accelerates linear growth and causes the affected limb to be
longer, resulting in a discrepancy in limb lengths. Continued inflammation stimulates rapid and premature closure of the growth plate,
resulting in shortened bones.
Oligoarthritis is defined as involving four or fewer joints within the
first 6 months of disease onset, and often only a single joint is involved
(see Table 196.4). It predominantly affects the large joints of the lower
extremities, such as the knees and ankles (Fig. 196.5). Isolated involvement of upper-­extremity large joints is less common. Those in whom
disease never develops in four or more joints are regarded as having
persistent oligoarticular JIA, whereas evolution of disease in five
or more joints after 6 months changes the classification to extended
oligoarticular JIA and is associated with a worse prognosis. Isolated
involvement of the hip is almost never a presenting sign and suggests
ERA (see Chapter 197) or a nonrheumatic cause. The presence of a
positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) test confers increased risk for
asymptomatic anterior uveitis, requiring periodic slit-­lamp examination (Table 196.5). ANA positivity may also be correlated with younger
age at disease onset, females, asymmetric arthritis, and fewer involved
joints over time.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 196.2
 International
League
of Associations
for Rheumatology
Classification
of Juvenile
Idiopathic
Arthritis
(JIA)
1472
Part XIV
u Rheumatic
Diseases
of Childhood
(Connective
Tissue Disease,
Collagen
Vascular
Diseases)
CATEGORY

DEFINITION

EXCLUSIONS

Systemic JIA

Arthritis in one or more joints with, or preceded by, fever of ≥2 wk
in duration that is documented to be daily (quotidian*) for at
least 3 days and accompanied by one or more of the following:
1.	Evanescent (nonfixed) erythematous rash
2.	Generalized lymph node enlargement
3.	Hepatomegaly or splenomegaly or both
4.	Serositis†

a.	Psoriasis or a history of psoriasis in patient or first-­
degree relative
b.	Arthritis in an HLA-­B27–positive male beginning
after the sixth birthday
c.	Ankylosing spondylitis, enthesitis-­related arthritis,
sacroiliitis with IBD, Reiter syndrome, or acute
anterior uveitis, or history of one of these disorders
in a first-­degree relative
d.	Presence of IgM RF on at least two occasions at
least 3 mo apart

Oligoarthritis

Arthritis affecting one to four joints during the first 6 mo of
disease; two subcategories are recognized:
1.	Persistent oligoarthritis—affecting four or fewer joints
throughout the disease course
2.	Extended oligoarthritis—affecting five or more joints after the
first 6 mo of disease

a, b, c, d (above)
plus
e. Presence of systemic JIA in the patient

Polyarthritis
(RF negative)

Arthritis affecting five or more joints during the first 6 mo of
disease; a test for RF is negative

a, b, c, d, e

Polyarthritis
(RF positive)

Arthritis affecting five or more joints during the first 6 mo of
disease; two or more tests for RF at least 3 mo apart during the
first 6 mo of disease are positive

a, b, c, e

Psoriatic arthritis

Arthritis and psoriasis or arthritis and at least two of the following:

b, c, d, e

1.	Dactylitis‡

2.	Nail pitting§ and onycholysis
3.	Psoriasis in first-­degree relative
Enthesitis-­related
arthritis

Arthritis and enthesitis¶ or arthritis or enthesitis with at least two of
the following:

a, d, e

1.	Presence of or history of sacroiliac joint tenderness or
inflammatory lumbosacral pain, or both**
2.	Presence of HLA-­B27 antigen
3.	Onset of arthritis in a male >6 yr old
4.	Acute (symptomatic) anterior uveitis
5.	History of ankylosing spondylitis, enthesitis-­related arthritis,
sacroiliitis with IBD, Reiter syndrome, or acute anterior uveitis in
first-­degree relative
Undifferentiated
arthritis

Arthritis that fulfills criteria in no category or two or more of the
above categories

*Quotidian fever is defined as a fever that rises to 39°C (102.2°F) once daily and returns to 37°C (98.6°F) between fever peaks.
†Serositis refers to pericarditis, pleuritis, or peritonitis or some combination of the three.
‡Dactylitis is swelling of one or more digit(s), usually in an asymmetric distribution, that extends beyond the joint margin.
§A minimum of two pits on any one or more nails at any time.
¶Enthesitis is defined as tenderness at the insertion of a tendon, ligament, joint capsule, or fascia to bone.
**Inflammatory lumbosacral pain refers to lumbosacral pain at rest with morning stiffness that improves on movement.
IBD, Inflammatory bowel disease; RF, rheumatoid factor.
From Firestein GS, Budd RC, Harris ED Jr, et al., eds. Kelley’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2009.

Table 196.3  Characteristics of ACR and ILAR Classifications of Childhood Chronic Arthritis
PARAMETER

ACR (1977)

ILAR (1997)

Term

Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA)

Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)

Minimum duration

≥6 wk

≥6 wk

Age at onset

<16 yr

<16 yr

Four or fewer joints in first 6 mo after presentation

Pauciarticular

Oligoarthritis:
Persistent: four or fewer joints for course of disease
Extended: four or more joints after 6 mo

Four or more joints in first 6 mo after presentation

Polyarticular

Polyarthritis, RF negative
Polyarthritis, RF positive

Fever, rash, arthritis

Systemic onset

Systemic

Other categories included

Exclusion of other forms

Psoriatic arthritis
Enthesitis-­related arthritis
Undifferentiated:
Fits no other category
Fits more than one category

Inclusion of psoriatic arthritis, inflammatory bowel
disease, ankylosing spondylitis

No (see Chapter 197)

Yes

ACR, American College of Rheumatology; ILAR, International League of Associations for Rheumatology; RF, rheumatoid factor.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PEAK AGE AT
ONSET (yr)

FEMALE:MALE
RATIO

% OF ALL JIA
CASES

ARTHRITIS
PATTERN

EXTRAARTICULAR
FEATURES

LABORATORY
INVESTIGATIONS

Systemic
arthritis

1-­5

1:1

5-­15

Polyarticular, often
affecting knees,
wrists, and ankles;
also fingers, neck,
and hips

Daily fever;
evanescent rash;
pericarditis;
pleuritis

Anemia; WBC ↑↑; ESR ↑↑; CRP
↑↑; ferritin ↑; platelets ↑↑
(normal or ↓ in MAS)

Less responsive to standard treatment
with MTX and anti-­TNF agents;
consider IL-­1 or IL-­6 inhibitors in
resistant cases or as first-­line therapy

Oligoarthritis

2-­4

3:1

40-­50 (but ethnic
variation)

Knees ++; ankles,
fingers +

Uveitis in 30% of
cases

ANA positive in 60%; other
test results usually normal;
may have mildly ↑ ESR/CRP

NSAIDs and intraarticular
corticosteroids; MTX occasionally
required

RF negative

2-­4 and 10-­14

3:1 and 10:1

20-­35

Symmetric or
asymmetric; small
and large joints;
cervical spine;
temporomandibular
joint

Uveitis in 10%

ANA positive in 40%; RF
negative; ESR ↑ or ↑↑; CRP ↑
or normal; mild anemia

Standard therapy with MTX and
NSAIDs; then, if nonresponsive,
anti-­TNF agents or other biologics,
including abatacept, indicated as
first-­line therapy

RF positive

9-­12

9:1

<10

Aggressive symmetric
polyarthritis

Rheumatoid nodules
in 10%; low-­grade
fever

RF positive; ESR ↑↑; CRP ↑/
normal; mild anemia

Long-­term remission unlikely; early
aggressive therapy is warranted

Psoriatic
arthritis

2-­4 and 9-­11

2:1

5-­10

Asymmetric arthritis
Uveitis in 10%;
of small or medium-­
psoriasis in 50%
sized joints

ANA positive in 50%; ESR
↑; CRP ↑ or normal; mild
anemia

NSAIDs and intraarticular
corticosteroids; MTX, anti-­TNF
agents

Enthesitis-­
related
arthritis

9-­12

1:7

5-­10

Predominantly
lower limb joints
affected; sometimes
axial skeleton
(but less than in
adult, ankylosing
spondylitis)

80% of patients positive for
HLA-­B27

NSAIDs and intraarticular
corticosteroids; consider
sulfasalazine as alternative to MTX;
anti-­TNF agents

ILAR SUBTYPE

NOTES ON THERAPY

Polyarthritis:

Acute anterior
uveitis; association
with reactive
arthritis and
inflammatory
bowel disease

ILAR, International League of Associations for Rheumatology; ANA, antinuclear antibody; CRP, C-­reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; MAS, macrophage activation syndrome; MTX, methotrexate; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs; RF, rheumatoid factor; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; WBC, white blood cell count.
From Firestein GS, Budd RC, Harris ED Jr, et al., eds. Kelley’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2009.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1473

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Table 196.4  Overview of Main Features of Subtypes of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA)

1474 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
IFNγlow

NK cell
IFNγlow
IFNγlow
environment?

3
IL-18R
3

DAMPs 1
(S100A8/A9/A12)

(i)NKT cells

6

7

IFNγlow
environment?

γδTCR

*

2

IL-18R

Proliferation 2
IL-17 expression

IL-17
Th17 fate/role?

IL-1β

1

DAMPs
(S100A8/A9/A12)

IL-18

7

γδT cells

IL-1R
2

PAMPs
1

Th1 fate/role?

4

i.e. IPP
IL-18

Granulocyte

4

X

Necrotic
granulocyte

HLA-DRB1*11
*
DAMPs
(S100A8/A9)

IL-6
others

Ag

Intracellular
5
role?

*
Presentation?

7
CD4+ T cell fate?

5
αβTCR

Monocyte

Innately
adaptive

Innate

Adaptive

Arthritic sJIA

Febrile sJIA
Disease progression

Fig. 196.1 Innately adaptive or truly autoimmune: a pathophysiologic model for disease progression in systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA).
Innate immune cells, such as myeloid cells (granulocytes, monocytes) and natural killer (NK) cells, are relevant during the acute febrile phase of
systemic JIA. (1) Myeloid cells release interleukin-­1 (IL-­1) family cytokines (IL-­1β, IL-­18) and other proinflammatory cytokines, which can either be triggered by infection (pathogen-­associated molecular patterns [PAMPs]) or result from pattern-­recognition receptor activation by damage-­associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs) released from stressed or necrotic cells. (2) Together with γδ T-­cell receptor (γδ TCR) activation by endogenous ligands
(i.e., isopentenyl pyrophosphate [IPP]) or bacterial ligands, IL-­1 and IL-­18 can trigger IL-­17 expression from γδ T cells, while (3) IL-­18 fails to trigger
interferon-­γ (IFNγ) expression from NK cells because of a defective IL-­18 receptor (IL-­18R). (4) Similarly, systemic JIA Th1 cells express only low levels
of IFNγ. Both cell types may contribute to hypophysiologic IFNγ levels, potentially promoting IL-­17 expression in disease. Although a genetic association or alterations in frequencies have been reported, the pathomechanistic roles of (5) HLA-­DRB1*11 (whether antigen [Ag] presentation or
intracellular function) or (6) invariant NKT (iNKT) and (7) CD4+ T cells in disease progression are yet largely unclear. Thus current data imply that innately adaptive immune cells bridging innate and adaptive immunity, rather than classic B or T lymphocytes, play a central role in promoting disease
progression in systemic JIA. (From Kessel C, Hedrich CM, Foeil D. Innately adaptive or truly autoimmune: is there something unique about systemic
juvenile idiopathic arthritis? Arth Rheumatol. 2020;72:210–219, Fig. 2, p. 214)

Polyarthritis is characterized by inflammation of five or more joints
in both upper and lower extremities (Figs. 196.6 and 196.7). Rheumatoid factor (RF)–positive polyarthritis resembles the characteristic
symmetric presentation of adult rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatoid

nodules on the extensor surfaces of the elbows, spine, and over the
Achilles tendons, although unusual, are associated with a more severe
course and almost exclusively occur in RF-­positive individuals (Fig.
196.8). Micrognathia reflects chronic temporomandibular joint

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1475

Fig. 196.2 Synovial biopsy specimen from a 10-­yr-­old child with oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis. There is a dense infiltration of
lymphocytes and plasma cells in the synovium.

Fig. 196.4 MRI with gadolinium of a 10-­yr-­old child with juvenile idi-

opathic arthritis (same patient as in Fig. 196.2). The dense white signal
in the synovium near the distal femur, proximal tibia, and patella reflects
inflammation. MRI of the knee is useful to exclude ligamentous injury,
chondromalacia of the patella, and tumor.

Fig. 196.3 Arthroscopy in the shoulder of a child with juvenile idi-

opathic arthritis showing pannus formation and cartilage erosions.
(Courtesy Dr. Alison Toth.)

disease (Fig. 196.9). Cervical spine involvement (Fig. 196.10), manifesting as decreased neck extension, occurs with a risk of atlantoaxial
subluxation and neurologic sequelae. Hip disease may be subtle, with
findings of decreased or painful ROM on examination (Fig. 196.11).
Systemic JIA is characterized by arthritis (may not be evident on
initial presentation), fever, rash, and prominent visceral involvement,
including hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and serositis (pericarditis). The characteristic fever, defined as spiking temperatures to
≥39°C (102.2°F), occurs on a daily or twice-­daily basis for at least 2
weeks, with a rapid return to normal or subnormal temperatures (Fig.
196.12). The fever is often present in the evening and is frequently
accompanied by a characteristic faint, erythematous, macular rash. The
evanescent salmon-­colored lesions, classic for sJIA, are linear or circular and are usually distributed over the trunk and proximal extremities
(Fig. 196.13). The classic rash is nonpruritic and migratory with lesions
lasting <1 hour. Koebner phenomenon, a cutaneous hypersensitivity
in which classic lesions are brought on by superficial trauma, is often
present. Heat can also evoke rash. Fever, rash, hepatosplenomegaly, and
lymphadenopathy are present in >70% of affected children. Without
arthritis, the differential diagnosis includes the episodic fever (autoinflammatory) syndromes (see Chapter 204), infection (endocarditis,
rheumatic fever, brucellosis, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in
children [MIS-­C]), other rheumatic disorders (systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE], vasculitis syndromes, serum sickness, Kawasaki

Fig. 196.5 Oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis with swelling and
flexion contracture of the right knee.

disease, sarcoidosis, Castleman disease), inflammatory bowel disease,
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis syndromes, and malignancy
(leukemia, neuroblastoma, lymphoma). Some children initially present with only systemic features and evolve over time, but definitive

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1476 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 196.5  Frequency of Ophthalmologic Examination in
Patients with Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis
REFERRAL
• Patients should be referred at the time of diagnosis, or suspicion,
of JIA
INITIAL SCREENING EXAMINATION
• Should occur as soon as possible and no later than 6 wk from
referral
• Symptomatic ocular patients should be seen within a week of
referral
ONGOING SCREENING
• Screening at 2-­monthly intervals from onset of arthritis for 6 mo
• Followed by 3-­4 monthly screening for time outlined below
OLIGOARTICULAR JIA, PSORIATIC ARTHRITIS, AND
ENTHESITIS-­RELATED ARTHRITIS IRRESPECTIVE OF ANA
STATUS, ONSET UNDER 11 YR
AGE AT ONSET (YR)

LENGTH OF SCREENING (YR)

<3

8

3-­4

6

5-­8

3

9-­10

1

Fig. 196.6 Hands and wrists of a child with polyarticular juvenile idi-

opathic arthritis, rheumatoid factor negative. Notice the symmetric involvement of the wrists, metacarpophalangeal joints, and proximal and
distal interphalangeal joints. In this photograph, there is cream with
occlusive dressing on the patient’s right hand in preparation for placement of an intravenous line for administration of a biologic agent.

POLYARTICULAR, ANA-­POSITIVE JIA, ONSET <10 YR
AGE AT ONSET (YR)

LENGTH OF SCREENING (YR)

<6

5

6-­9

2

Polyarticular, ANA-­negative JIA, onset <7 yr
5-­yr screening for all children
Systemic JIA and rheumatoid factor–positive polyarticular JIA
• Uveitis risk very low; however, diagnostic uncertainty in the early
stages and overlap of symptoms may mean initial screening is
indicated
All categories, onset >11 yr
• 1-­yr screening for all children
After stopping immunosuppression (e.g., methotrexate)
• Two-­monthly screening for 6 mo, then revert to previous
screening frequency as above
After discharge from screening
• Patients should receive advice about regular self-­monitoring
by checking vision uniocularly once weekly and when to seek
medical advice
• Screening may need to continue indefinitely in situations where
a young person may be unable to detect a change in vision or
be unwilling to seek re-­referral
• Annual check by optometrist as a useful adjunct
Data from Clarke SLN, Sen ES, Ramanan AV. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis-­associated
uveitis. Pediatr Rheumatol. 2016;14:27.

diagnosis requires the presence of arthritis. Arthritis may affect any
number of joints, but the course is classically polyarticular; may be very
destructive; and can include hip, cervical spine, and temporomandibular joint involvement.
Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS; see Chapter 207) is a rare
but potentially fatal complication of sJIA that can occur at any time
(onset, medication change, active or remission) during the disease
course. It is also referred to as secondary hemophagocytic syndrome or
hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) (see Chapter 556.2). There
is increasing evidence that sJIA/MAS and HLH share similar functional defects in granule-­
dependent cytotoxic lymphocyte activity.
In addition, sJIA-­associated MAS and HLH share genetic variants in
approximately 35% of patients with sJIA/MAS. MAS classically manifests as acute onset of high-­spiking fevers, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and encephalopathy. Laboratory evaluation shows

A

B

Fig. 196.7 Progression of joint destruction in a child with polyarticular

juvenile idiopathic arthritis, rheumatoid factor positive, despite doses
of corticosteroids sufficient to suppress symptoms in the interval between radiographs. A, Radiograph of the hand at onset. B, Radiograph
taken 4 years later, showing a loss of articular cartilage and destructive changes in the distal and proximal interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints as well as destruction and fusion of wrist bones.

thrombocytopenia and leukopenia with elevated liver enzymes, lactate
dehydrogenase, ferritin, and triglycerides. Patients may have purpura
and mucosal bleeding, as well as elevated fibrin split product values and
prolonged prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times. The ESR falls
because of hypofibrinogenemia and hepatic dysfunction, a feature useful in distinguishing MAS from a flare of systemic disease (Table 196.6).
An international consensus panel developed a set of classification criteria for sJIA-­associated MAS, including hyperferritinemia (>684 ng/
mL) and any two of the following: thrombocytopenia (≤181 × 109/L),
elevated liver enzymes (aspartate transaminase >48 U/L), hypertriglyceridemia (>156 mg/dL), and hypofibrinogenemia (≤360 mg/dL) (see
Table 196.6). These criteria apply to a febrile patient suspected of sJIA
and in the absence of disorders such as immune-­mediated thrombocytopenia, infectious hepatitis, familial hypertriglyceridemia, or visceral
leishmaniasis. A relative change in laboratory values is likely more relevant in making an early diagnosis than are absolute normal values. A
bone marrow aspiration and biopsy may be helpful in diagnosis, but

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1477

Fig. 196.8 Rheumatoid nodules overlying bony prominences in an
adolescent with rheumatoid factor–positive polyarthritis. (From Rosenberg AM, Oen KG. Polyarthritis. In: Cassiday JT, Petty RE, Laxer RM,
et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2011: Fig 15-­5, p. 257.)

Fig. 196.10 Radiograph of the cervical spine of a child with active

juvenile idiopathic arthritis showing fusion of the neural arch between
joints C2 and C3, narrowing and erosion of the remaining neural arch
joints, obliteration of the apophyseal space, and loss of the normal lordosis.

Fig. 196.11 Severe hip disease in 13-­yr-­old male with active systemic

juvenile idiopathic arthritis exhibiting destruction on the right.

evidence of hemophagocytosis is not always evident. Emergency treatment with high-­dose intravenous methylprednisolone, cyclosporine,
or anakinra may be effective. Severe cases may require therapy similar
to that for primary HLH (see Chapter 556.2).
An inflammatory lung disease has also recently been recognized as
a rare but life-­threatening complication in children with sJIA. Children can present with little to no respiratory symptoms; acute clubbing
can be an early indicator. The predominant pathology is pulmonary
alveolar proteinosis and/or endogenous lipoid pneumonia. Compared
with children without lung disease, children with sJIA and lung disease
are younger at diagnosis, have a history of MAS, have higher serum
IL-­18 levels, and have higher exposure and adverse reaction rates to
cytokine inhibitors. Given the more severe disease course, lung disease
in children with sJIA requires a high index of suspicion and prompt
evaluation.
Bone mineral metabolism and skeletal maturation are adversely
affected in children with JIA, regardless of subtype. Children with JIA
have decreased bone mass (osteopenia), which appears to be associated
with increased disease activity. Increased levels of cytokines such as
TNF-­α and IL-­6, both key regulators in bone metabolism, have deleterious effects on bone both within the joint and systemically in the axial

41
Temperature (°C)

Fig. 196.9 CT scan of the temporomandibular joint of a child with

juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Radiograph shows destruction of the femoral head and acetabula, joint space narrowing, and subluxation of left
hip. The child had received corticosteroids systemically for 9 years.

40
39
38
37
36
35

0

2

4

6

8

10

12 14
Days

16

18

20

22

24

Fig. 196.12 High-­spiking intermittent fever in a 3-­yr-­old child with
systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis. (From Ravelli A, Martini A. Juvenile
idiopathic arthritis. Lancet 2007;369:767–778.)

and appendicular bones. Abnormalities of skeletal maturation become
most prominent during the pubertal growth spurt.

DIAGNOSIS

JIA is a clinical diagnosis without any diagnostic laboratory tests. The
meticulous clinical exclusion of other diseases and many mimics is
therefore essential. Laboratory studies, including tests for ANA and RF,

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1478 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Fig. 196.13 The rash of systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis is

salmon-­colored, macular, and nonpruritic. Individual lesions are transient and occur in crops over the trunk and extremities. (From American
College of Rheumatology. Clinical Slide Collection on the Rheumatic
Diseases. Atlanta, GA: ACR. Copyright 1991, 1995, 1997.)

Table 196.6  Macrophage Activation Syndrome (MAS)
LABORATORY FEATURES*
1.	Cytopenias
2.	Abnormal liver function tests
3.	Coagulopathy (hypofibrinogenemia)
4.	Decreased erythrocyte sedimentation rate
5.	Hypertriglyceridemia
6.	Hyponatremia
7.	Hypoalbuminemia
8.	Hyperferritinemia
9.	Elevated sCD25 and sCD163
CLINICAL FEATURES*
1.	Nonremitting fever
2.	Hepatomegaly
3.	Splenomegaly
4.	Lymphadenopathy
5.	Hemorrhages
6.	Central nervous system dysfunction (headache, seizures, lethargy,
coma, disorientation)
HISTOPATHOLOGIC FEATURES*
1.	Macrophage hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow aspirate
2.	Increased CD163 staining of the bone marrow
PROPOSED CRITERIA FOR MAS IN SJIA†
1.	Serum ferritin >684 ng/mL and
2.	Any two of the following:
•
•
•
•

 hrombocytopenia (≤181 × 109/L)
T
Elevated liver enzymes (aspartate transaminase >48 U/L)
Hypertriglyceridemia (>156 mg/dL)
Hypofibrinogenemia (≤360 mg/dL)

*From Ravelli A, Grom A, Behrens E, Cron R. Macrophage activation syndrome as part
of systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis: Diagnosis, genetics, pathophysiology and
treatment. Genes Immun. 2012;13:289–298.
†From Ravelli A, Minoia F, Davì S, et al. 2016 Classification criteria for macrophage
activation syndrome complicating systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis: a European
League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology/Paediatric
Rheumatology International Trials Organisation collaborative initiative. Arthritis
Rheumatol. 2016;68:566–576.

are only supportive or prognostic, and their results may be normal in
patients with JIA (see Tables 196.1, 196.3, and 196.4).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis for arthritis is broad, and a careful,
thorough investigation for other underlying etiology is imperative
(Table 196.7). History, physical examination, laboratory tests, and

radiography may help exclude other possible causes. Arthritis can
be a presenting manifestation for any of the multisystem rheumatic
diseases of childhood, including SLE (see Chapter 199), juvenile
dermatomyositis (see Chapter 200), sarcoidosis (see Chapter 209),
and the vasculitic syndromes (see Chapter 210). In scleroderma
(see Chapter 201), limited ROM caused by sclerotic skin overlying a joint may be confused with sequelae from chronic inflammatory arthritis. Acute rheumatic fever is characterized by exquisite
joint pain and tenderness, remittent fever, and migratory polyarthritis. Autoimmune hepatitis can also be associated with an acute
arthritis.
Many infections are associated with arthritis, and a recent history
of infectious symptoms may help make a distinction. Viruses, including parvovirus B19, rubella, Epstein-­Barr virus, hepatitis B virus, and
HIV, can induce a transient arthritis. Arthritis may follow enteric infections (see Chapter 198). Lyme disease should be considered in children with oligoarthritis living in or visiting endemic areas (see Chapter
268). Although a history of tick exposure, preceding flulike illness, and
subsequent rash should be sought, these are not always present. Monoarticular arthritis unresponsive to antiinflammatory treatment may be
the result of chronic mycobacterial or other infection, such as Kingella
kingae, and the diagnosis is established by synovial fluid analysis (polymerase chain reaction [PCR]) or biopsy. Acute onset of fever and a
painful, erythematous, hot joint suggests septic arthritis (see Chapter
726). Isolated hip pain with limited ROM suggests suppurative arthritis, osteomyelitis (see Chapter 725), toxic synovitis, Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes
disease, slipped capital femoral epiphysis, and chondrolysis of the hip
(see Chapter 719).
Lower-­extremity arthritis and tenderness over insertion of ligaments and tendons, especially in a male child, suggest ERA (see Chapter 197). Psoriatic arthritis can manifest as limited joint involvement
in an unusual distribution (e.g., small joints of the hand and ankle)
years before the onset of cutaneous disease. Inflammatory bowel disease may manifest as oligoarthritis, usually affecting joints in the lower
extremities, as well as gastrointestinal symptoms, elevations in ESR,
and microcytic anemia.
Many conditions present solely with arthralgia (i.e., joint pain).
Hypermobility may cause joint pain, especially in the lower extremities. Growing pains should be suspected in a child age 4-­12 years
complaining of leg pain in the evening with normal investigative
studies and no morning symptoms. Nocturnal pain that awakens
the child also alerts to the possibility of a malignancy. An adolescent with missed school days may suggest a diagnosis of fibromyalgia (see Chapter 211.3).
Children with leukemia or neuroblastoma may have joint or bone
pain resulting from malignant infiltration of the bone, synovium, or
more often the bone marrow, sometimes months before demonstrating
lymphoblasts on peripheral blood smear. Physical examination may
reveal no tenderness, a deeper pain with palpation of the bone, or pain
out of proportion to exam findings. Malignant pain often awakens the
child from sleep and may cause cytopenias. Because platelets are an
acute-­phase reactant, a high ESR with leukopenia and a low-­normal
platelet count may also be a clue to underlying leukemia. In addition,
the characteristic quotidian fever of sJIA is absent in malignancy. Bone
marrow examination is necessary for diagnosis. Some diseases, such
as cystic fibrosis, diabetes mellitus, and the glycogen storage diseases,
have associated arthropathies. Swelling that extends beyond the joint
can be a sign of lymphedema or IgA vasculitis (formerly Henoch-­
Schönlein purpura; see Chapter 210.1). A peripheral arthritis indistinguishable from JIA occurs in the humoral immunodeficiencies
(see Chapter 165), such as common variable immunodeficiency and
X-­
linked agammaglobulinemia. Skeletal dysplasias associated with
a degenerative arthropathy are diagnosed from their characteristic
radiologic abnormalities.
Systemic onset of JIA often presents as a fever of unknown origin
(see Chapter 222). Important considerations in the differential diagnosis include infections (endocarditis, brucellosis, cat-­scratch disease,
Q fever, mononucleosis), autoinflammatory disease (see Chapter 204),
malignancy (leukemia, lymphoma, neuroblastoma), and HLH.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1479
Table 196.7  Conditions Causing Arthritis or Extremity Pain
RHEUMATIC AND INFLAMMATORY DISEASES
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Juvenile dermatomyositis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Scleroderma
Sjögren syndrome
Behçet disease
Overlap syndromes
Antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)–associated vasculitis
Sarcoidosis
Kawasaki syndrome
IgA vasculitis (formerly Henoch-­Schönlein purpura)
Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis
SERONEGATIVE SPONDYLOARTHROPATHIES
Juvenile ankylosing spondylitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Psoriatic arthritis
Reactive arthritis associated with urethritis, iridocyclitis, and
mucocutaneous lesions
INFECTIOUS ILLNESSES
Bacterial arthritis (septic arthritis, Staphylococcus aureus, Kingella
kingae, pneumococcal, gonococcal, Haemophilus influenzae)
Lyme disease
Viral illness (parvovirus, rubella, mumps, Epstein-­Barr, hepatitis B,
chikungunya)
Fungal arthritis
Mycobacterial infection
Spirochetal infection
Endocarditis
REACTIVE ARTHRITIS
Acute rheumatic fever
Reactive arthritis (postinfectious caused by Shigella, Salmonella,
Yersinia, Chlamydia, post-streptococcal, or meningococcus)
Serum sickness
Toxic synovitis of the hip
Postimmunization
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
Hypogammaglobulinemia
Immunoglobulin A deficiency
Common variable immunodeficiency disease (CVID)
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
CONGENITAL AND METABOLIC DISORDERS
Gout
Pseudogout
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Thyroid disease (hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism)
Hyperparathyroidism
Vitamin C deficiency (scurvy)
Hereditary connective tissue disease (Marfan syndrome,
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome)
Fabry disease
Farber disease
Fucosidosis
Amyloidosis (familial Mediterranean fever)

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Hematologic abnormalities often reflect the degree of systemic or articular inflammation, with elevated white blood cell (WBC) and platelet
counts and a microcytic anemia. Inflammation may also cause elevations in ESR and CRP, although it is not unusual for both to be normal
in children with JIA.

BONE AND CARTILAGE DISORDERS
Trauma
Patellofemoral syndrome
Hypermobility syndromes
Osteochondritis dissecans
Avascular necrosis (including Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease)
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Osteolysis
Benign bone tumors (including osteoid osteoma)
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Rickets
Idiopathic multicentric osteolysis
Camptodactyly-­arthropathy-­coxa vara-­pericarditis syndrome
Progressive pseudorheumatoid dysplasia
Pachydermodactyly
NEUROPATHIC DISORDERS
Peripheral neuropathies
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Charcot joints
NEOPLASTIC DISORDERS
Leukemia
Neuroblastoma
Lymphoma
Bone tumors (osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma)
Histiocytic syndromes
Synovial tumors
HEMATOLOGIC DISORDERS
Hemophilia
Hemoglobinopathies (including sickle cell disease)
MISCELLANEOUS DISORDERS
Autoinflammatory diseases
Recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis
Pigmented villonodular synovitis
Plant-­thorn synovitis (foreign body arthritis)
Myositis ossificans
Eosinophilic fasciitis
Tendinitis (overuse injury)
Raynaud phenomenon
Hemophagocytic syndromes
PAIN SYNDROMES
Fibromyalgia
Growing pains
Depression (with somatization)
Complex regional pain syndrome

Elevated ANA titers are present in 40–85% of children with oligoarticular or polyarticular JIA but are rare with sJIA. ANA seropositivity
is associated with increased risk of chronic uveitis in JIA. Approximately 5–15% of patients with polyarticular JIA are seropositive for RF.
Anti–cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, as with RF, is a marker of
more aggressive disease. Both ANA and RF seropositivity can occur in
association with transient events, such as viral infection.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1480 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Children with sJIA usually have striking elevations in inflammatory markers and WBC and platelet counts. Hemoglobin levels are low,
typically 7-­10 g/dL, with indices consistent with anemia of chronic
disease. The ESR is usually high, except in MAS. Although immunoglobulin levels tend to be high, ANA and RF are uncommon. Ferritin
values are typically elevated and can be markedly increased in MAS
(>10,000 ng/mL). In the setting of MAS, all cell lines have the potential
to decline precipitously because of the consumptive process. A low or
normal WBC count and/or platelet count in a child with active sJIA
should raise concerns for MAS.

Fig. 196.14 Early (6 month duration) radiographic changes of juve-

nile idiopathic arthritis. Soft tissue swelling and periosteal new bone
formation appear adjacent to the second and fourth proximal interphalangeal joints.

A

Early radiographic changes of arthritis include soft tissue swelling,
periarticular osteopenia, and periosteal new-­bone apposition around
affected joints (Fig. 196.14). Continued active disease may lead to
subchondral erosions, loss of cartilage with varying degrees of bony
destruction, and fusion. Characteristic radiographic changes in the
cervical spine, most frequently in the neural arch joints at C2-­C3 (see
Fig. 196.10), may progress to atlantoaxial subluxation. MRI is more
sensitive than radiography to detect early changes (Fig. 196.15).

TREATMENT

The goals of treatment are to achieve disease remission, prevent or halt
joint damage, and foster normal growth and development. All children with JIA need individualized treatment plans, and management
is tailored according to disease subtype and severity, presence of poor
prognostic indicators, and response to medications. Disease management also requires monitoring for potential medication toxicities (see
Chapter 195).
Children with oligoarthritis often show partial response to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), with improvement in
inflammation and pain (Table 196.8). Those who have no or partial
response after 4-­6 weeks of treatment with NSAIDs or who have functional limitations such as joint contracture or leg-­length discrepancy
benefit from injection of intraarticular corticosteroids. Triamcinolone
hexacetonide is a long-­lasting preparation that provides a prolonged
response. A substantial fraction of patients with oligoarthritis show
no response to NSAIDs and injections and therefore require treatment
with disease-­modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), including conventional synthetic DMARDs (csDMARDs) like methotrexate, and, if
no response, biologic DMARDs (bDMARDs) like TNF inhibitors.
NSAIDs alone rarely induce remission in children with polyarthritis
or sJIA. Methotrexate is the oldest and least toxic of the csDMARDs
available for adjunctive therapy. It may take 6-­12 weeks to see the
effects of methotrexate. Failure of methotrexate monotherapy warrants
the addition of a bDMARD. bDMARDs that inhibit proinflammatory
cytokines, such as TNF-­α, IL-­1, and IL-­6, demonstrate excellent disease
control. TNF-­α antagonists (e.g., etanercept, adalimumab, golimumab)
are used to treat children with an inadequate response to methotrexate, poor prognostic factors, or severe disease onset. Early aggressive
therapy with a combination of methotrexate and a TNF-­α antagonist
may result in earlier achievement of clinically inactive disease. Abatacept, a selective inhibitor of T-­cell activation, and tocilizumab, an IL-­6

B

Fig. 196.15 MRI of the wrist in a child with wrist arthritis. A, Multiple erosions of carpal bones. B, After administration of gadolinium contrast agent,
uptake is consistent with active synovitis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 196 u Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis 1481
Table 196.8  Pharmacologic Treatment of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA)
TYPICAL
MEDICATIONS

TYPICAL DOSES

NONSTEROIDAL ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUGS
Naproxen
15 mg/kg/day PO divided bid (maximum
dose 500 mg bid)
Ibuprofen
Meloxicam

Leflunomide*

Initial 12.5 mg/kg PO daily; increase by
10 mg/kg/day
Maintenance: 40-­50 mg/kg divided bid
(maximum dose 2 g/day)
10-­20 mg PO daily

BIOLOGIC AGENTS
Anti–Tumor Necrosis Factor-­α
Etanercept
0.8 mg/kg SC weekly or 0.4 mg/kg SC twice
weekly (maximum dose 50 mg/wk)
Infliximab*
Adalimumab
Golimumab

Polyarthritis
Systemic
Oligoarthritis
Same as above

40 mg/kg/day PO divided tid (maximum
dose 800 mg tid)
0.125 mg/kg PO once daily (maximum dose Same as above
15 mg daily)

DISEASE-­MODIFYING ANTIRHEUMATIC DRUGS
Methotrexate
0.5-­1 mg/kg PO or SC weekly (maximum
dose 25 mg/wk)
Sulfasalazine

JIA SUBTYPE

3-­10 mg/kg IV q4-­8wk
10 to <15 kg: 10 mg SC every other week
15 to <30 kg: 20 mg SC every other week
>30 kg: 40 mg SC every other week
80 mg/m2 IV wk 0 and 4 and then q8 wk

750 mg/m2 IV 2 wk × 2 (maximum dose
1,000 mg)

Gastritis, renal and hepatic toxicity,
pseudoporphyria
Same as above
Same as above

Polyarthritis
Systemic
Persistent or extended oligoarthritis
Polyarthritis

Nausea, vomiting, oral ulcerations, hepatic
toxicity, blood count dyscrasias,
immunosuppression, teratogenicity
GI upset, allergic reaction, pancytopenia,
renal and hepatic toxicity,
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome

Polyarthritis

GI upset, hepatic toxicity, allergic rash,
alopecia (reversible), teratogenicity
(needs washout with cholestyramine)

Polyarthritis
Systemic
Persistent or extended oligoarthritis
Same as above
Same as above

Immunosuppressant, concern for
malignancy, demyelinating disease, lupus-­
like reaction, injection site reaction
Same as above, infusion reaction
Same as above

Same as above

Same as above

Anticytotoxic T-­Lymphocyte–Associated Antigen-­4 Immunoglobulin
Abatacept
<75 kg: 10 mg/kg/dose IV q4wk
Polyarthritis
75-­100 kg: 750 mg/dose IV q4wk
>100 kg: 1,000 mg/dose IV q4wk
SC once weekly:
10 to <25 kg: 50 mg
≥25 to <50 kg: 87.5 mg
≥50 kg: 125 mg
Anti-­CD20
Rituximab*

SIDE EFFECT(S)

Immunosuppressant, concern for
malignancy, infusion reaction

Polyarthritis

Immunosuppressant, infusion reaction,
progressive multifocal encephalopathy

Interleukin-­1 Inhibitors
Anakinra*
1-­2 mg/kg SC daily

Systemic

Canakinumab

Systemic

Immunosuppressant, GI upset, injection
site reaction
Immunosuppressant, headache, GI upset,
injection site reaction
Immunosuppressant, allergic reaction,
dyslipidemia, injection site reaction

Rilonacept*

4 mg/kg/dose SC q4wk (maximum dose
300 mg)
2.2 mg/kg/dose SC weekly (maximum dose
160 mg)

Systemic

Interleukin-­6 Receptor Antagonist
Tocilizumab
<30 kg:
Systemic
12 mg/kg/dose IV q2wk (maximum dose
800 mg)
162 mg SC q2wk
≥30 kg:
8 mg/kg/dose IV q2wk (maximum dose 800 mg)
162 mg SC weekly
<30 kg:
Polyarthritis
10 mg/kg/dose IV q4wk (maximum dose
800 mg)
162 mg SC q3wk
≥30 kg:
8 mg/kg/dose IV q4wk
162 mg SC q2wk
Janus Kinase Inhibitors
Tofacitinib
10 to <20 kg: 3.2 mg PO bid
20 to <40 kg: 4 mg PO bid
≥ 40 kg = 5 mg PO bid

Polyarthritis

*Not indicated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use in JIA as of 2021.

Immunosuppressant, hepatic toxicity,
dyslipidemia, cytopenias, GI upset,
infusion reaction

Immunosuppressant, GI perforation,
thrombosis

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1482 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
receptor antagonist, have demonstrated efficacy in and are approved
for treatment of polyarticular JIA (see Table 196.8).
TNF inhibition is not as effective for the systemic symptoms found in
sJIA. When systemic symptoms dominate, systemic corticosteroids are
started, followed by the initiation of IL-­1 or IL-­6 antagonist therapy, which
often induces a dramatic and rapid response. Patients with severe disease
activity may go directly to anakinra. Canakinumab, an IL-­1β inhibitor,
and tocilizumab are Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved
treatments for sJIA in children older than 2 years (see Table 196.8). Standardized consensus guiding therapy for sJIA provide four treatment plans
based on glucocorticoids, methotrexate, anakinra, or tocilizumab, with
optional glucocorticoid use in the latter three plans as clinically indicated.
With the use of DMARDs, the use of systemic corticosteroids can
often be avoided or minimized. Systemic corticosteroids are recommended only for management of severe systemic illness, for bridge
therapy during the wait for therapeutic response to a DMARD, and for
control of uveitis. Steroids impose risks of severe toxicities, including
Cushing syndrome, growth retardation, and osteopenia, and they do
not prevent joint destruction.
Small molecule drugs, including Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors, are
an alternative to csDMARDs and bDMARDs. Oral JAK inhibitors
(tofacitinib, ruxolitinib) inhibit JAK signaling pathways involved in
immune activation and inflammation. Tofacitinib is FDA approved for
children older than 2 years with polyarticular JIA.
Management of JIA must include periodic slit-­lamp ophthalmologic
examinations to monitor for asymptomatic uveitis (Figs. 196.16 and
196.17; see Table 196.4). Optimal treatment of uveitis requires collaboration between the ophthalmologist and rheumatologist; initial management may include mydriatics and corticosteroids used topically,
systemically, or through periocular injection. DMARDs allow for a
decrease in exposure to steroids, and methotrexate and TNF-­α inhibitors (adalimumab and infliximab) are effective in treating severe uveitis.
Dietary evaluation and counseling to ensure appropriate calcium,
vitamin D, protein, and caloric intake are important for children with
JIA. Physical therapy and occupational therapy are invaluable adjuncts
to any treatment program. A social worker and nurse clinician can be
important resources for families to recognize stresses imposed by a
chronic illness, to identify appropriate community resources, and to
aid compliance with the treatment protocol.

Fig. 196.16 Chronic anterior uveitis demonstrating posterior synechi-

ae and absence of significant scleral inflammation. (From Firestein GS,
Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al., eds. Kelley & Firestein’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig. 107-­5, p. 1838.)

PROGNOSIS

Although the course of JIA in an individual child is unpredictable, some
prognostic generalizations can be made on the basis of disease type and
course. Studies analyzing management of JIA in the pre–TNF-­α era
indicate that up to 50% of JIA patients had active disease persisting
into early adulthood, often with severe limitations of physical function.
Children with persistent oligoarticular disease fare well, with a majority
achieving disease remission. Those with extended oligoarticular disease have
a poorer prognosis. Children with oligoarthritis, particularly females who are
ANA positive and with onset of arthritis before 6 years of age, are at greatest
risk for development of chronic uveitis. There is no association between the
activity or severity of arthritis and uveitis. Persistent, uncontrolled anterior
uveitis (see Fig. 196.16) can cause posterior synechiae, cataracts, glaucoma,
and band keratopathy, with resultant blindness. Morbidity can be averted
with early diagnosis and implementation of systemic therapy.
The child with polyarticular JIA often has a more prolonged course
of active joint inflammation and requires early and aggressive therapy.
Predictors of severe and persistent disease include young age at onset,
RF seropositivity or rheumatoid nodules, presence of anti–cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies, and many affected joints. Disease involving
the hip and hand/wrist is also associated with a poorer prognosis and
may lead to significant functional impairment.
sJIA is often the most difficult to control in terms of both articular inflammation and systemic manifestations. Poorer prognosis is related to polyarticular distribution of arthritis, fever lasting >3 months, and increased
inflammatory markers, such as platelet count and ESR, for >6 months. IL-­1
and IL-­6 inhibitors have changed the management and improved the outcomes for children with severe and prolonged systemic disease.
Orthopedic complications include leg-­length discrepancy and flexion
contractures, particularly of the knees, hips, and wrists. Discrepancies

Fig. 196.17 Slit-­lamp examination shows “flare” in the fluid of the
anterior chamber (caused by increased protein content) and keratic
precipitates on the posterior surface of the cornea, representing small
collections of inflammatory cells. (Courtesy Dr. H.J. Kaplan. From Petty
RE, Rosenbaum JT. Uveitis in juvenile idiopathic arthritis. In Cassidy JT,
Petty RE, Laxer RM, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011: Fig. 20-­3, p. 309.)

in leg length can be managed with a shoe lift on the shorter side to prevent secondary scoliosis. Joint contractures require aggressive medical
control of arthritis, often in conjunction with intraarticular corticosteroid injections, appropriate splinting, and stretching of the affected
tendons. Popliteal cysts may require no treatment if they are small or
respond to intraarticular corticosteroids in the anterior knee.
Psychosocial adaptation may be affected by JIA. Studies indicate
that, compared with controls, a significant number of children with JIA
have problems with lifetime adjustment and employment. Disability
not directly associated with arthritis may continue into young adulthood in as many as 20% of patients, together with continuing chronic
pain syndromes at a similar frequency. Psychological complications,
including problems with school attendance and socialization, may
respond to counseling by mental health professionals.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 197 u Ankylosing Spondylitis and Other Spondyloarthritides

1483

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Chapter 197

Spondyloarthritides are complex diseases in which susceptibility is
largely genetically determined. Only 30% of heritability has been
defined, with HLA-­B27 responsible for two thirds of the total, and
>100 additional genetic loci accounting for only one third. Genes that
influence interleukin (IL)-­23 responses (e.g., CARD9, IL23R, JAK2,
TYK2, STAT3) and the function of HLA-­B27 (ERAP1) are particularly
important. Unusual properties of HLA-­B27, such as its tendency to
misfold and form abnormal cell surface structures, may have a role.
Infection with certain GI or GU pathogens can trigger reactive arthritis (see Table 197.2 and Chapter 198). Altered gut microbiota and an
abnormal immune response to normal microbiota may also play a role
in pathogenesis. Inflamed joints and entheses in spondyloarthritis contain T and B cells, macrophages, osteoclasts, proliferating fibroblasts,
and osteoblasts, with activation of the IL-­23/IL-­17 pathway. Bone loss
and osteoproliferation in and around vertebral bodies and facet joints
in long-­standing AS contribute to significant morbidity.

Ankylosing Spondylitis and
Other Spondyloarthritides
Pamela F. Weiss

The diseases collectively referred to as spondyloarthritides include
ankylosing spondylitis (AS), arthritis associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) or psoriasis, and reactive arthritis after
gastrointestinal (GI) or genitourinary (GU) infections (Table 197.1
and Table 197.2). Spondyloarthritis is more common in adults,
but all forms can present during childhood with varying symptoms
and signs. Many children with spondyloarthritis are classified in
the juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) categories of enthesitis-­
related arthritis (ERA) or psoriatic arthritis. Children and adolescents with spondyloarthritis who may not meet JIA criteria include
arthritis associated with IBD, juvenile ankylosing spondylitis (JAS),
and reactive arthritis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

Clinical manifestations that help distinguish spondyloarthritis
from other forms of juvenile arthritis include arthritis of the axial
skeleton (sacroiliac joints or spine) and hips, enthesitis (inflammation at the site of a tendon, ligament, or joint capsule attachment to
bone), symptomatic eye inflammation (acute anterior uveitis), and
GI inflammation (even in the absence of IBD) (Table 197.3, but see
also Table 197.1).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

JIA is diagnosed in 90 per 100,000 U.S. children every year (see
Chapter 196). ERA accounts for 10–20% of JIA and has a mean age
at onset of 12 years. In India, ERA is the most common category
of JIA, accounting for 35% of cases. Unlike other JIA categories,
males are affected more often than females, accounting for 60% of
ERA cases. AS occurs in 0.2–0.5% of adults, with approximately
15% of cases beginning in childhood. These disorders can be familial, largely as a result of the influence of human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-­B27, which is found in 90% of JAS and 50% of ERA patients
compared to 7% of healthy individuals. Approximately 20% of children with ERA have a family history of HLA-­B27–associated disease, such as reactive arthritis, AS, or IBD with sacroiliitis.

Enthesitis-­Related Arthritis

Children fulfill classification criteria for ERA if they have either
arthritis and enthesitis or arthritis or enthesitis with at least two
of the following characteristics: (1) sacroiliac joint tenderness or
inflammatory lumbosacral pain, (2) presence of HLA-­B27, (3) onset
of arthritis in a male older than 6 years, (4) acute anterior uveitis,
and (5) a family history of an HLA-­B27–associated disease (ERA,
sacroiliitis with IBD, reactive arthritis, or acute anterior uveitis)
in a first-­degree relative. Patients with psoriasis (or a family history of psoriasis in a first-­degree relative), a positive–rheumatoid
factor (RF) test result, or systemic arthritis are excluded from this
group. During the first 6 months of disease the arthritis is typically

Table 197.1  Overlapping Characteristics of the Spondyloarthritides*
JUVENILE ANKYLOSING
SPONDYLITIS

JUVENILE PSORIATIC
ARTHRITIS

INFLAMMATORY
BOWEL DISEASE

REACTIVE ARTHRITIS

Enthesitis

+++

+

+

++

Axial arthritis

+++

++

++

+

CHARACTERISTIC

Peripheral arthritis

+++

+++

+++

+++

HLA-­B27 positive

+++

+

++

+++

Antinuclear antibody
positive

−

++

−

−

Rheumatoid factor positive

−

−

−

−

SYSTEMIC DISEASE
Eyes

+

+

+

+

Skin

−

+++

+

+

Mucous membranes

−

−

+

+

Gastrointestinal tract

−

−

++++

+++

*Frequency of characteristics: −, absent; +, <25%; ++, 25–50%; +++, 50–75%; ++++, ≥75%.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1484 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 197.2  Etiologic Microorganisms of Reactive Arthritis
POSSIBLE
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Mycoplasma fermentans
Mycoplasma genitalium
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Escherichia coli
Cryptosporidium
Entamoeba histolytica
Giardia lamblia
Brucella abortus
Clostridium difficile
Streptococcus pyogenes
Chlamydia pneumoniae
Chlamydia psittaci

PROBABLE
Chlamydia trachomatis
Shigella species
Salmonella enteritidis
Salmonella typhimurium
Yersinia enterocolitica
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
Campylobacter jejuni and coli

From Kim PS, Klausmeier TL, Orr DP. Reactive arthritis: a review. J Adolesc Health. 2009;44:309–315, Table 2, p. 311.

Table 197.3  Assessment in SpondyloArthritis International Society (ASAS) Classification Criteria for Spondyloarthritis (SpA)
AXIAL SpA

PERIPHERAL SpA

In patients with ≥3 months back pain and age at onset <45 years

In patients with peripheral symptoms ONLY

Sacroiliitis on imaging* plus one
or more SpA feature(s)

Arthritis or enthesitis or dactylitis plus

or HLA-­B27 plus two or more other
SpA features

SpA features
• Inflammatory back pain (IBP)
• Arthritis
• Enthesitis (heel)
• Uveitis
• Dactylitis
• Psoriasis
• Crohn disease/ulcerative colitis
• Good response to NSAIDs
• Family history for SpA
• HLA-­B27
• Elevated CRP

One or more SpA feature(s):
• Uveitis
• Psoriasis
• Crohn disease/ulcerative colitis
• Preceding infection
• HLA-­B27
• Sacroiliitis on imaging*
or
Two or more other SpA features:
• Arthritis
• Enthesitis
• Dactylitis
• IBP ever
• Family history for SpA

*Active (acute) inflammation on MRI highly suggestive of sacroiliitis associated with SpA. Definite radiographic sacroiliitis according to modified NY criteria.
CRP, C-­reactive protein; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
Adapted from Rudwaleit M, van der Heijde D, Landewé R, et al. The development of Assessment of Spondyloarthritis International Society classification criteria for axial
spondyloarthritis. Part II. Validation and final selection. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009;68(6):777–783; and The Assessment of Spondyloarthritis International Society classification criteria for
peripheral spondyloarthritis and for spondyloarthritis in general. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011;70(1):25–31.

Table 197.4  Symptoms Characteristic of Inflammatory
Back Pain
Pain at night with morning stiffness (and improvement on arising)
No improvement with rest
Improvement with exercise
Insidious onset
Good response to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs

asymmetric and involves fewer than four joints, most frequently the
knees, ankles, and hips. Inflammation of the small joints of the foot,
or tarsitis, is highly suggestive of ERA. Enthesitis is typically symmetric and affects the lower limbs. Up to 40% of children develop
clinical or radiographic evidence of sacroiliac joint arthritis as part
of their disease; approximately 20% have evidence of sacroiliac joint
arthritis at diagnosis. When the sacroiliac or other axial joints are
involved, children may experience inflammatory back pain (Table
197.4), hip pain, and alternating buttock pain. Patients may also

experience pain with palpation of the lower back or with pelvic
compression. The risk of sacroiliac joint arthritis is highest in children who are HLA-­B27 positive and have an elevated C-­reactive
protein (CRP). Untreated sacroiliitis may, but does not always,
evolve into AS; additional risk factors for progression are unclear.

Psoriatic Arthritis

Psoriatic arthritis accounts for approximately 5% of JIA. Common
clinical features of psoriatic arthritis are nail pitting (Fig. 197.1), onycholysis, and dactylitis (sausage-­like swelling of fingers or toes).
Children fulfill classification criteria for psoriatic arthritis if they
have arthritis and psoriasis or arthritis and at least two of the following: (1) dactylitis, (2) nail pitting or onycholysis, and (3) psoriasis in
a first-­degree relative. The presence of psoriasis aids in diagnosis but
is not required. Disease onset peaks during the preschool and early
adolescent years. Children with onset during the preschool years are
more often female, antinuclear antibody (ANA) positive, and at risk
for asymptomatic ocular inflammation. Disease onset during adolescence is equally common among males and females. In the majority

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 197 u Ankylosing Spondylitis and Other Spondyloarthritides

1485

Table 197.5  Entheseal Sites Studied in Historical JSpA
Cohorts
ENTHESEAL SITES

Fig. 197.1 Nail pitting in a 9-­year-­old with JPsA. (From Srinivasalu

H, Sikora KA, Colbert RA. Recent updates in juvenile spondyloarthritis.
Rheum Dis Clin N Am. 2021;47:565–583, Fig. 2, p. 569.)

of children, the arthritis is asymmetric and affects four or fewer joints
at presentation. Large (knees and ankles) and small (fingers and toes)
joints may be involved. Although distal interphalangeal joint involvement is uncommon, it is highly suggestive of the diagnosis. Enthesitis
is detectable in ∼20–75% of patients and seems to be more frequent
in those who present at an older age (Table 197.5, Fig. 197.2). Axial
(sacroiliac) and root (hip) joints may be affected in up to 30% of children; the risk of axial arthritis is highest in those who are HLA-­B27
positive.

Juvenile Ankylosing Spondylitis

JAS frequently begins with oligoarthritis and enthesitis. The arthritis occurs predominantly in the lower extremities and often involves
the hips. In comparison to adult-­
onset AS, axial disease and
inflammatory back pain are less frequent at disease onset, whereas
enthesitis and peripheral arthritis are more common. AS is diagnosed according to the modified New York (NY) criteria if there is
sufficient radiographic evidence of sacroiliitis (sacroiliitis of grade
2 or greater bilaterally or at least grade 3 unilaterally) and if the
patient meets at least one clinical criterion involving inflammatory
back pain, limitation of motion in the lumbar spine (Fig. 197.3), or
limitation of chest expansion. JAS is present if the patient is <16
years old. Juvenile-­onset AS is frequently used to describe adult AS
when the symptoms began before 16 years of age but full criteria
were not met until later.
To fulfill the modified NY criteria for AS, patients must have
radiographic changes in the sacroiliac joints and clinical sequelae
of axial disease. Because radiographic sacroiliitis can take many
years to develop in adults and even longer in children, and clinical sequelae may lag further behind, criteria to identify preradiographic axial spondyloarthritis were developed by the Assessment
of SpondyloArthritis International Society. To meet criteria for
axial spondyloarthritis (SpA), patients must have at least 3 months
of back pain and sacroiliitis on imaging (acute inflammation on
MRI or definite radiographic sacroiliitis by NY criteria) plus one
feature of SpA (inflammatory back pain, arthritis, enthesitis [heel],
uveitis, dactylitis, psoriasis, Crohn disease/ulcerative colitis, good
response to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], family
history for SpA, HLA-­B27, or elevated CRP). Alternatively, patients
can fulfill axial SpA criteria if they are HLA-­B27 positive and have
at least two SpA features. These criteria have low sensitivity and
specificity in the pediatric population but, in the absence of alternative pediatric criteria, may be useful as a guide to evaluating preradiographic axial SpA.

Arthritis with Inflammatory Bowel Disease

The presence of erythema nodosum, pyoderma gangrenosum, oral
ulcers, abdominal pain, diarrhea, fever, weight loss, or anorexia in a

PERCENTAGE

Insertion of infrapatellar tendon
on patella

27-­44

Achilles tendon

21-­74

Interosseous ligaments of the
sacroiliac joint

30.3

Plantar fascia insertion to
calcaneus

12-­39

Tibial tuberosity

23-­30

Quadriceps insertion to upper
poles of patella

22-­46

Second MTP

21

Third MTP

16

First MTP

14

Greater trochanter

14

Iliac crest

14

JSpA, Juvenile spondyloarthritis; MTP, metatarsophalangeal.
From Srinivasalu H, Sikora KA, Colbert RA. Recent updates in juvenile spondyloarthritis.
Rheum Dis Clin N Am. 2021;47:565–583, Table 1, p. 567.

child with chronic arthritis should raise suspicion of IBD. Two patterns
of arthritis complicate IBD. Polyarthritis affecting large and small
joints is most common and often reflects the activity of the intestinal
inflammation. Less frequently, arthritis of the axial skeleton, including the sacroiliac joints, occurs. As with psoriatic arthritis, the presence
of HLA-­B27 is a risk factor for the development of axial disease. The
severity of axial involvement is independent of the activity of the GI
inflammation.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Laboratory evidence of systemic inflammation with elevation of
the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and/or CRP value is variable in most spondyloarthritides and may or may not be present
at the onset of disease. RF and ANAs are absent, except in children with psoriatic arthritis, as many as 50% of whom are ANA
positive. HLA-­B27 is present in approximately 90% of children with
JAS, compared with 7% of healthy individuals, but is less frequent
in ERA and other SpA types.

Imaging

Conventional radiographs detect chronic bony changes and damage
but not active inflammation and are unreliable in the assessment
of pediatric disease. Early radiographic changes in the sacroiliac
joints include indistinct margins and erosions. Sclerosis typically
starts on the iliac side of the joint (Fig. 197.4). Peripheral joints may
exhibit periarticular osteoporosis, with loss of sharp cortical margins in areas of enthesitis, which may eventually show erosions or
bony spurs (enthesophytes). Squaring of the corners of the vertebral
bodies and syndesmophyte formation resulting in the classic “bamboo spine” characteristic of advanced AS are rare in early disease,
particularly in childhood. CT, like radiographs, can detect chronic
bony changes but not active inflammation and has the disadvantage
of more radiation exposure. The gold standard for early visualization of sacroiliitis is evidence of bone marrow edema adjacent to
the joint on MRI with fluid-­sensitive sequences such as short-­T1
inversion recovery (STIR) (Figs. 197.5 and 197.6). Gadolinium does
not add value to the study of the sacroiliac joints if STIR is used.
MRI will reveal abnormalities before the plain radiograph. Whole

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1486 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Anatomic
region

Enthesitis exam

Foot and
ankle

Achilles tendon insertion to calcaneus
Plantar fascia insertion to calcaneus
Plantar fascia insertion to metatarsal heads
Plantar fascia insertion to base of fifth
metatarsal

Knee

Quadriceps tendon insertion to patella (2 and
10 o’clock)
Infrapatellar ligament insertion to patella (6
o’clock) and tibial tuberosity

Pelvis

Hip extensor insertion at greater trochanter of
femur
Sartorius insertion at anterior superior iliac
spine
Posterior superior iliac spine
Abdominal muscle insertions to iliac crest
Gracilis and adduction insertion to pubis
symphysis
Hamstrings insertion to ischial tuberosity
5th lumbar spinous process
Common flexor insertion at medial
epicondyle of humerus

Spine

Fig. 197.2 Anatomic sites for as-

sessment of enthesitis in ERA and
JAS. (From Petty RE, Laxer RM,
Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook
of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig.
20.1, p. 254.)

Upper
extremity

Common extensor insertion at lateral
epicondyle of humerus
Supraspinatus insertion into greater
tuberosity of humerus
Chest

Costosternal junctions (1st and 7th)

Fig. 197.4 Well-­developed sacroiliitis in a boy with ankylosing spon-

dylitis. Both sacroiliac joints show extensive sclerosis, erosion of joint
margins, and apparent widening of the joint space.

Fig. 197.3 Loss of lumbodorsal spine mobility in a boy with anky-

losing spondylitis. The lower spine remains straight when the patient
bends forward.

body MRI may also be used to evaluate the axial skeleton in adults
with early disease because it can detect vertebral lesions in addition
to sacroiliac changes.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The onset of arthritis after a recent history of diarrhea or symptoms
of urethritis or conjunctivitis may suggest reactive arthritis (see
Chapter 198). Lower back pain can be caused by strain, infectious

arthritis of the sacroiliac joint, osteomyelitis of the pelvis or spine,
chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis (CNO) of the pelvis or spine,
osteoid osteoma of the posterior elements of the spine, pelvic muscle
pyomyositis, or malignancies. In addition, mechanical conditions
such as spondylolysis, spondylolisthesis, and Scheuermann disease
should be considered. Back pain secondary to fibromyalgia usually
affects the soft tissues of the upper back in a symmetric pattern
and is associated with well-­localized tender points and sleep disturbance (see Chapter 211.3). Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes disease (avascular
necrosis of the femoral head), slipped capital femoral epiphysis, and
chondrolysis may also manifest as pain over the inguinal ligament
and loss of internal rotation of the hip joint, but without other SpA
features, such as involvement of other entheses and/or joints. Radiography and MRI are critical for distinguishing these conditions.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 197 u Ankylosing Spondylitis and Other Spondyloarthritides

1487

Fig. 197.5 Coronal MRI (STIR) of the pelvis in a 14-­year-­old boy with

ERA (HLA-­B27 positive). Fluid and pathology appear bright, spinal fluid
also appears bright. Increased signal abnormality is observed around
bilateral triradiate cartilages and greater trochanteric apophyses (arrowheads), common areas of involvement for ERA. Also, signal abnormality
appears on the iliac side of the sacroiliac joints bilaterally around more
curvilinear, dark, sclerotic subchondral areas representing erosions and
sacroiliitis (arrows). (From Tse SM, Laxer RM. New advances in juvenile
spondyloarthritis. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2012;10;8:269–279.)

TREATMENT

The goals of therapy are to control inflammation, minimize pain,
preserve function, and prevent ankylosis (fusion of adjacent bones)
using a combination of antiinflammatory medications, physical
therapy, and education. Treatment regimens for SpA include monotherapy or combination therapy with NSAIDs, disease-­modifying
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), or biologic agents. NSAIDs, such
as naproxen (15-­20 mg/kg/day), are frequently used to help relieve
symptoms and may slow the progression of structural damage
(syndesmophyte formation and growth) if used continually. With
relatively mild monoarticular disease, intraarticular corticosteroids
(e.g., triamcinolone acetonide/hexacetonide) may also help to control peripheral joint inflammation. DMARDs such as sulfasalazine
(up to 50 mg/kg/day; maximum 3 g/day) or methotrexate (10 mg/
m2) may be beneficial for peripheral arthritis, but these medications
have not been shown to improve axial disease in adults. For axial
arthritis, it is typically necessary to add a biologic therapy. Tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitors (e.g., etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab) have been efficacious in reducing symptoms and improving function in adults with AS. It remains unclear whether TNF
inhibitors have an impact on structural damage in established AS,
underscoring the need for earlier recognition and better therapies.
Drugs that target IL-­17 (secukinumab/ixekizumab), IL-­23/IL-­12

Fig. 197.6 Short T1 inversion recovery image from whole body MRI

of a 15-­yr-­old boy with HLA-­B27–negative JSpA. The MRI shows active corner inflammatory lesions of vertebral end plates at multiple
levels (straight arrows) and more chronic-­appearing discovertebral unit
changes (curved arrow). (From Srinivasalu H, Sikora KA, Colbert RA.
Recent updates in juvenile spondyloarthritis. Rheum Dis Clin N Am.
2021;47:565–583, Fig. 7, p. 574.)

(ustekinumab), and the JAK/STAT pathway (tofacitinib/upadacitinib) reduce clinical disease activity in adults with AS.
Physical therapy and low-­impact exercise should be included in the
treatment program for all children with spondyloarthritis. Exercise
to maintain range of motion in the back, thorax, and affected joints
should be instituted early in the disease course. Custom-­fitted insoles
and heel cups are particularly useful in the management of painful
entheses around the feet, and the use of pillows to position the lower
extremities while the child is in bed can be helpful.

PROGNOSIS

Observational studies suggest that ongoing disease activity for >5
years in juvenile spondyloarthritis predicts disability. Disease remission occurs in <20% of children with spondyloarthritis 5 years after
diagnosis. Factors associated with disease progression include tarsitis,
HLA-­B27 positivity, hip arthritis within the first 6 months, and disease onset after age 8. Important questions, such as which patients with
ERA will go on to have JAS/AS, have yet to be addressed. Outcomes
for JAS compared with adult-­onset AS suggest that hip disease requiring replacement is more common in children but axial disease is more
severe in adults.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1488 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 198

Reactive and Postinfectious
Arthritis
Pamela F. Weiss
In addition to causing arthritis by means of direct microbial infection (i.e., septic arthritis; see Chapter 726), microbes activate innate
and adaptive immune responses, which can lead to the generation
and deposition of immune complexes and antibody or T-­cell–mediated cross-­reactivity with self. Furthermore, microbes may influence
the immune system in ways that promote immune-­mediated inflammatory diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), and
spondyloarthritis. Reactive arthritis and postinfectious arthritis are
defined as joint inflammation caused by a sterile inflammatory reaction after a recent infection. The term reactive arthritis is used to refer
to arthritis that occurs after enteropathic or urogenital infections and
postinfectious arthritis to describe arthritis that occurs after infectious
illnesses not classically considered in the reactive arthritis group, such
as infection with group A streptococcus or viruses. In some patients,
nonviable components of the initiating organism have been demonstrated in affected joints, and the presence of viable, yet nonculturable,
bacteria within the joint remains an area of investigation.
The course of reactive arthritis is variable and may remit or progress
to a chronic spondyloarthritis, including ankylosing spondylitis (see
Chapter 197). In postinfectious arthritis, the pain or joint swelling is
usually transient, lasting <6 weeks, and does not necessarily share the
typical spondyloarthritis pattern of joint involvement. The distinction
between postinfectious arthritis and reactive arthritis is not always
clear, either clinically or pathophysiologically.

is relatively uncommon in children. The arthritis is typically asymmetric and oligoarticular, with a predilection for the lower extremities.
Dactylitis may occur, and enthesitis is common, affecting as many as
90% of patients (Fig. 198.1). Cutaneous manifestations can occur and
may include circinate balanitis, ulcerative vulvitis, erythematous oral
macules or plaques or erosions, erythema nodosum, paronychia, painful erosions or pustules on fingertips, and keratoderma blennorrhagica, which is similar in appearance to pustular psoriasis (Fig. 198.2).
Systemic symptoms may include fever, malaise, and fatigue. Less common features may include conjunctivitis, optic neuritis, aortic valve
involvement, sterile pyuria, and polyneuropathy. Early in the disease
course, markers of inflammation—erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR), C-­reactive protein, and platelets—may be greatly elevated. The
clinical manifestations may last for weeks to months.
Familiarity with other causes of postinfectious arthritis is vital when
a diagnosis of reactive arthritis is being considered. Numerous viruses
are associated with postinfectious arthritis and may result in particular patterns of joint involvement (Table 198.1). Rubella and hepatitis
B virus typically affect the small joints, whereas mumps and varicella
often involve large joints, especially the knees. Hepatitis B arthritis–
dermatitis syndrome is characterized by urticarial rash and a symmetric migratory polyarthritis resembling that of serum sickness.
Rubella-­associated arthropathy may follow natural rubella infection
and, infrequently, rubella immunization. It typically occurs in young
women, with an increased frequency with advancing age, and is
uncommon in preadolescent children and in males. Arthralgia of the
knees and hands usually begins within 7 days of onset of the rash or 10-­
28 days after immunization. Parvovirus B19, which is responsible for
erythema infectiosum (fifth disease), can cause arthralgia, symmetric

PATHOGENESIS

Reactive arthritis typically follows enteric infection with Salmonella
species, Shigella flexneri, Yersinia enterocolitica, Campylobacter jejuni,
or genitourinary (GU) tract infection with Chlamydia trachomatis. Escherichia coli and Clostridium difficile are also causative enteric
agents, although less common (see Table 197.2). Acute rheumatic
fever caused by group A streptococcus (see Chapters 229 and 229.1),
arthritis associated with infective endocarditis (see Chapter 486), and
the tenosynovitis associated with Neisseria gonorrhoeae are similar in
some respects to reactive arthritis.
Approximately 75% of patients with reactive arthritis are HLA-­B27
positive. Incomplete elimination of bacteria and bacterial products, such
as DNA, has been proposed as a factor in reactive arthritis. A relationship with clinical characteristics of specific infectious disorders is not
present. In postinfectious arthritis, several viruses (rubella, varicella-­
zoster, herpes simplex, cytomegalovirus) have been isolated from the
joints of patients. Antigens from other viruses (e.g., hepatitis B, adenovirus) have been identified in immune complexes from joint tissue.
Patients with reactive arthritis who are HLA-­B27 positive have
an increased frequency of acute and symptomatic uveitis and other
extraarticular features. In addition, HLA-­B27 is a risk factor for persistent gastrointestinal (GI) inflammation after enteric infections, even
after resolution of the initial infection, and significantly increases the
risk that the individual will develop chronic spondyloarthritis. Nevertheless, reactive arthritis also occurs in HLA-­B27–negative patients,
emphasizing the importance of other genes in disease susceptibility.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS

Symptoms of reactive arthritis begin approximately 3 days to 6 weeks
after infection. The classic triad of arthritis, urethritis, and conjunctivitis

Fig. 198.1 Enthesitis—swelling of the posterior aspect of the left heel

and lateral aspect of the ankle. (Courtesy Dr. Nora Singer, Case Western
Reserve University and Rainbow Babies’ Hospital.)

Fig. 198.2 Keratoderma blennorrhagica. (Courtesy Dr. MF Rein and
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Public Health Image
Library, 1976. Image #6950.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 198 u Reactive and Postinfectious Arthritis
Table 198.1  Viruses Associated with Arthritis
TOGAVIRUSES
RUBIVIRUS
Rubella
ALPHAVIRUSES
Ross River
Chikungunya
O’nyong-­nyong
Mayaro
Sindbis
Ockelbo
Pogosta
ORTHOPOXVIRUSES
Variola virus (smallpox)
Vaccinia virus
Parvoviruses
ADENOVIRUSES
Adenovirus 7

HERPESVIRUSES
Epstein-­Barr
Cytomegalovirus
Varicella-­zoster
Herpes simplex
PARAMYXOVIRUSES
Mumps
FLAVIVIRUS
Zika virus
HEPADNAVIRUS
Hepatitis B
ENTEROVIRUSES
Echovirus
Coxsackievirus B
CORONAVIRUSES
SARS-­CoV-­2

Adapted from Infectious arthritis and osteomyelitis. In: Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB,
et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021.

joint swelling, and morning stiffness, particularly in adult women and
less frequently in children. Arthritis occurs occasionally during cytomegalovirus infection and may occur during varicella infections but
is rare after Epstein-­Barr virus infection. Varicella may also be complicated by suppurative arthritis, usually secondary to group A streptococcus infection. HIV is associated with an arthritis that resembles
psoriatic arthritis more than JIA (see Chapter 196).
Poststreptococcal arthritis may follow infection with either group
A or group G streptococcus. It is typically oligoarticular, affecting
lower-­extremity joints, and mild symptoms can persist for months.
Poststreptococcal arthritis differs from rheumatic fever, which typically manifests with painful migratory polyarthritis of brief duration.
Because valvular lesions have occasionally been documented by echocardiography after the acute illness, some clinicians consider poststreptococcal arthritis to be an incomplete form of acute rheumatic
fever (see Chapter 229.1). Certain HLA-­DRB1 types may predispose
children to development of either poststreptococcal arthritis (HLA-­
DRB1*01) or acute rheumatic fever (HLA-­DRB1*16).
Transient synovitis (toxic synovitis), another form of postinfectious arthritis, typically affects the hip, often after an upper respiratory
tract infection (see Chapter 719.2). Males 3-­10 years of age are most
often affected and have acute onset of severe pain in the hip (groin),
with referred pain to the thigh or knee, lasting approximately 1 week.
ESR and white blood cell count are usually normal. Radiologic or ultrasound examination may confirm widening of the joint space secondary
to an effusion. Aspiration of joint fluid is often necessary to exclude
septic arthritis and typically results in dramatic clinical improvement.
The trigger is presumed to be viral, although responsible microbes have
not been identified.
Nonsuppurative arthritis has been reported in children, usually
adolescent males, in association with severe truncal acne. Patients
often have fever and persistent infection of the pustular lesions. Pyogenic (sterile) arthritis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and acne (cystic)
syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder caused by a pathogenic
variant in the PSTPIP1 gene, is a difficult-­to-­treat but rare autoinflammatory disorder that has responded to anakinra or anti–tumor
necrosis factor antibody therapy in a few patients (see Chapter 710).
Recurrent episodes of erosive arthritis begin in childhood; cystic acne
and the painful ulcerating lesions of pyoderma gangrenosum begin
during adolescence. Recurrent episodes may also be associated with a
sterile myopathy and may last for several months.
Infective endocarditis can be associated with arthralgia, arthritis,
or signs suggestive of vasculitis, such as Osler nodes, Janeway lesions,

1489

and Roth spots. Postinfectious arthritis, perhaps because of immune
complexes, also occurs in children with N. gonorrhoeae, Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae type b, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae
infections.

DIAGNOSIS

A recent GU or GI infection may suggest the diagnosis of reactive
arthritis, but there is no diagnostic test. A complete blood count,
acute-­phase reactants, complete metabolic panel, and urinalysis may
be helpful to exclude other etiologies. Although stool or urogenital
tract cultures can be performed in an attempt to isolate it, the triggering organism is not typically found at the time arthritis presents.
Imaging findings are nonspecific or normal. Documenting previous
streptococcal infection with antibody testing (anti-­streptolysin O and
anti-­DNAse B) may help to diagnose postinfectious arthritis. Serum
sickness associated with the antibiotic treatment of preceding infection
must be excluded.
Because the preceding infection can be remote or mild and often
not recalled by the patient, it is also important to rule out other causes
of arthritis. Acute and painful arthritis affecting a single joint suggests
septic arthritis, mandating joint aspiration. Osteomyelitis may cause
pain and an effusion in an adjacent joint but is more often associated
with focal bone pain and tenderness at the site of infection. Arthritis
affecting a single joint, particularly the knee, may also be secondary to
Lyme disease in endemic areas. The diagnosis of postinfectious arthritis is often established by exclusion and after the arthritis has resolved.
Arthritis associated with GI symptoms or abnormal liver function
test results may be triggered by infectious or autoimmune hepatitis.
Arthritis or spondyloarthritis may occur in children with IBD, such
as Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis (see Chapters 382.1 and 382.2).
Parvovirus infection, macrophage activation (hemophagocytic) syndrome, and leukemia should be strongly considered when two or
more blood cell lines are low or progressively decrease in a child with
arthritis. Persistent arthritis (>6 weeks) suggests the possibility of a
chronic rheumatic disease, including JIA (see Chapter 196) and SLE
(see Chapter 199).

TREATMENT

Specific treatment is unnecessary for most cases of reactive or postinfectious arthritis. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
are often needed for management of pain and functional limitation.
Unless ongoing Chlamydia infection is suspected, attempts to treat
the offending organism are not warranted. If swelling or arthralgia
recurs, further evaluation may be necessary to exclude active infection
or evolving rheumatic disease. Intraarticular corticosteroid injections
may be given for refractory or severely involved joints once acute infection has been ruled out. Systemic corticosteroids or disease-­modifying
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) are rarely indicated but may be considered for chronic disease. Participation in physical activity should
be encouraged, and physical therapy may be needed to maintain normal function and prevent muscle atrophy. For postinfectious arthritis caused by streptococcal disease, current recommendations include
penicillin prophylaxis for at least 1 year. Long-­term prophylaxis is often
recommended, but the duration is controversial and may need to be
individualized.

COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

Postinfectious arthritis after viral infections usually resolves without
complications unless it is associated with involvement of other organs,
such as encephalomyelitis. Children with reactive arthritis after
enteric infections occasionally experience IBD months to years after
onset. Both uveitis and carditis have been reported in children diagnosed with reactive arthritis. Reactive arthritis, especially after bacterial enteric infection or GU tract infection with C. trachomatis, has the
potential for evolving to chronic arthritis, particularly spondyloarthritis (see Chapter 197). The presence of HLA-­B27 or significant systemic
features increases the risk of chronic disease.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1490 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 199

Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus
Rebecca E. Sadun and Stacy P. Ardoin
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune
disease characterized by multisystem inflammation and the presence of circulating autoantibodies directed against self-­antigens.
SLE occurs in both children and adults, disproportionately affecting females of reproductive age. Although nearly every organ may
be affected, most commonly involved are the skin, joints, kidneys,
blood-­forming cells, blood vessels, and the central nervous system.
Systemic signs of inflammation such as fever and lymphadenopathy
can also be seen. Compared with adults, children and adolescents
with SLE have more severe disease and more widespread organ
involvement.

ETIOLOGY

The pathogenesis of SLE remains largely unknown, but several factors
likely influence risk and severity of disease, including genetics, hormonal milieu, and environmental exposures.
A genetic predisposition to SLE is suggested by the association with
specific genetic variants, including congenital deficiencies of C1q, C2,
and C4, as well as several polymorphisms (e.g., interferon regulatory
factor 5 and protein tyrosine phosphatase N22) and familial clustering
of SLE or other autoimmune disease (Table 199.1). In addition, certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA) types (including HLA-­B8, HLA­DR2, and HLA-­DR3) occur with increased frequency in patients with
SLE. Although SLE clearly has a genetic component, its occurrence is
sporadic in families and its concordance is incomplete (estimated at
2–5% among dizygotic twins and 25–60% among monozygotic twins),
suggesting nonmendelian genetics and involvement of epigenetic and
environmental factors. Patients with SLE often have family members—
especially mothers and sisters—with SLE or various other autoimmune
diseases.
Because SLE preferentially affects females, especially during their
reproductive years, it is suspected that hormonal factors are important in pathogenesis. Of individuals with SLE, 90% are female, making
female sex the strongest risk factor for SLE. Estrogens are likely to play
a role in SLE, and both in vitro and animal model studies suggest that
estrogen exposure promotes B-­cell autoreactivity. Estrogen-­containing
oral contraceptives do not appear to induce flares in quiescent SLE,
though the risk of flares may be increased in postmenopausal women
receiving hormone replacement.
Environmental exposures that may trigger the development of
SLE remain largely unknown; certain viral infections (including
Epstein-­Barr virus) may play a role in susceptible individuals, and
ultraviolet light exposure is known to trigger SLE disease activity.
Environmental influences also may induce epigenetic modifications to DNA, increasing the risk of SLE and drug-­induced lupus;
in mouse models, drugs such as procainamide and hydralazine
can promote lymphocyte hypomethylation, causing a lupus-­like
syndrome.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The reported prevalence of SLE in children and adolescents (1-­
6/100,000) is lower than that in adults (20-­70/100,000). Prevalence
of SLE is highest among patients of African, Asian, Hispanic, Native
American, and Pacific Island ancestry for both adult and pediatric
populations. SLE predominantly affects females, with a reported
2-­5:1 ratio before puberty, 9:1 ratio during reproductive years, and

return to near-­prepubertal ratios in the postmenopausal period.
Childhood SLE is rare before 5 years of age and is usually diagnosed
in adolescence, with a median age at diagnosis of 11-­12 years. Up to
20% of all individuals with SLE are diagnosed before age 16 years.
Pediatric-­onset SLE (pSLE) is defined as onset of symptoms before
age 16 or 18 years.

PATHOLOGY

Histologic features most suggestive of SLE include findings in the
kidney and skin. Renal manifestations of SLE are classified histologically according to the criteria of the International Society of
Nephrology (see Chapter 560.2). The finding of diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis (class IV) significantly increases the risk
for renal morbidity. Renal biopsies are helpful to establish the diagnosis of SLE and to stage disease. Immune complexes are commonly
found with “full house” deposition of immunoglobulin and complement. The characteristic discoid rash depicted in Figure 199.1D is
characterized on biopsy by hyperkeratosis, follicular plugging, and
infiltration of mononuclear cells into the dermal-­epidermal junction. The histopathology of photosensitive rashes can be nonspecific, but immunofluorescence examination of both affected and
nonaffected skin may reveal deposition of immune complexes
within the dermal-­epidermal junction. This finding is called the
lupus band test, which is specific for SLE.

PATHOGENESIS

A hallmark of SLE is the generation of autoantibodies directed
against self-­antigens, particularly nucleic acids. These intracellular
antigens are ubiquitously expressed but are usually inaccessible and
cloistered within the cell. During cell necrosis or apoptosis, the antigens are released. SLE skin cells are highly susceptible to damage
from ultraviolet light, and the resulting cell death leads to release
of cell contents, including nucleic antigens. Individuals with SLE
may have impaired apoptosis or impaired ability to clear cell debris,
causing prolonged exposure to nucleic antigens in the bloodstream
and increased opportunity for recognition by immune cells, leading to B-­cell stimulation and autoantibody production. Circulating
autoantibodies form immune complexes and deposit in tissues, leading to local complement activation, initiation of a proinflammatory
cascade, and, ultimately, tissue damage. Antibodies to double-­
stranded DNA (dsDNA) can form immune complexes, deposit in
glomeruli, and initiate inflammation leading to glomerulonephritis.
However, many individuals with SLE have circulating antibodies to
dsDNA yet do not have nephritis, suggesting that autoantibodies
are not the only pathway leading to end-­organ damage in SLE.
Both the innate and adaptive arms of the immune system have been
implicated in the dysregulation of the immune system seen in SLE.
High levels of interferon-­α production by plasmacytoid dendritic
cells promote expression of other proinflammatory cytokines and
chemokines, maturation of monocytes into myeloid dendritic cells,
promotion of autoreactive B and T cells, and loss of self-­tolerance.
Nearly 85% of patients with SLE exhibit this cytokine profile, known
as the type I interferon signature. Other cytokines with increased
expression in SLE include interleukin (IL)-­1, IL-­2, IL-­6, IL-­10, IL-­
12, IL-­17, and IL-­21; anti–tumor necrosis factor-­α; interferon-­γ; and
B-­lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS), also known as B-­cell–activating factor (BAFF). Both B and T cells demonstrate functional impairments
in SLE. In active SLE, B-­cell populations have impaired tolerance and
increased autoreactivity, enhancing B cells’ ability to produce autoantibodies after exposure to self-­antigen. In addition, cytokines such
as BLyS/BAFF may promote abnormal B-­cell number and function.
T-­cell abnormalities in SLE include increased numbers of memory T
cells and decreased number and function of T-­regulatory cells. SLE
T cells display aberrant signaling and increased autoreactivity. As a
result, they are resistant to attrition by normal apoptosis pathways. In
addition, a neutrophil signature can be identified in 65% of adult SLE
patients and has recently been recognized as a potential biomarker
for active lupus nephritis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 199 u Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 1491
Table 199.1  Reviewed Proteins and Genes Associated with Monogenic Forms of Systemic Lupus Erythematosus and
Lupus-­Like Phenotypes

INHERITANCE

MECHANISM

FEMALE-­TO-­
MALE PATIENT
RATIO

PROTEIN

GENE

ASSOCIATED SYMPTOMS

C1q

C1QA, C1QB,
C1QC

Autosomal recessive

Complement
deficiency

1:1

SLE (cutaneous, renal, CNS,
arthritis, ANA), young age
onset, recurrent bacterial
infections

C1r/s

C1R, C1S

Autosomal recessive

Complement
deficiency

1:1

SLE (fever, cutaneous,
arthritis, renal, ANA, ENA),
recurrent infections,
encapsulated bacteria,
Hashimoto thyroiditis

C2

C2

Autosomal recessive

Complement
deficiency

7:1

SLE (cutaneous, arthritis),
young age onset, type 1
diabetes

C3

C3

Autosomal recessive

Complement
deficiency

1:1

Recurrent sinopulmonary
infections, lupus-­like
syndrome,
glomerulonephritis

C4

C4A, C4B

Autosomal recessive

Complement
deficiency

1:1

SLE (severe photosensitive
rash, renal, ANA, Ro), young
age onset

TREX1/DNASE III

TREX1

Autosomal dominant
(FCL), autosomal
recessive and
dominant (AGS)

Abnormal DNA
clearance leading to
IFN activation

Likely 1:1

FCL, AGS, SLE

MDA5

IFIH1

Autosomal dominant

Activation of IFN
production

Likely 1:1

AGS, SLE, FCL, IgA
deficiency

SAMHD1

SAMHD1

Autosomal recessive
and dominant

Abnormal DNA or RNA
clearance leading to
IFN production

Likely 1:1

AGS, SLE, FCL,
photosensitivity

RNaseH2

RNASH2

Autosomal dominant
and recessive

Abnormal RNA
clearance leading to
IFN production

Likely 1:1

AGS, SLE

ADAR1

ADAR1

Mainly autosomal
dominant

Abnormal RNA
clearance leading to
IFN production

Likely 1:1

AGS, SLE

STING

TMEM173

Autosomal dominant

Activation of IFN
production

1:1

SAVI, FCL, SLE

DNase I

DNASE1

Autosomal dominant

Abnormal DNA
clearance-­break
intolerance

Likely 1:1

SLE (dsDNA), adolescent
onset, Sjögren syndrome

DNase 1-­like-­3

DNASE1L3

Autosomal recessive

Abnormal DNA
clearance-­break
intolerance

1:2

SLE (hypocomplementemia,
dsDNA, cANCA, renal),
HUVS

DNASE2

DNASE2

Possible autosomal
recessive

Abnormal DNA
clearance

1:1

Neonatal-­onset cytopenias,
hepatosplenomegaly,
arthritis, nephritis

Protein kinase
C-­delta

PRKCD

Autosomal recessive;
dominant

Disrupts B-­cell
proliferation and
apoptosis, NK-­cell
activity

1:1

Early onset SLE nephritis,
lymphoproliferation
autoimmunity

Ras/MAPK Pathway

KRAS GoF

Somatic mutation

Altered cell proliferation,
differentiation,
apoptosis

Likely 1:1

Pancytopenia, autoantibodies,
arthritis, hepatosplenomegaly,
pericarditis

Noonan syndrome

NRAS GoF

Somatic mutation

Altered cell proliferation,
differentiation apoptosis

Likely 1:1

Chilblain lupus, pancytopenia,
autoantibodies

AGS, Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome; ANA, antinuclear antibody; ANCA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; CNS, central nervous system; dsDNA, double-­stranded DNA; ENA,
extractable nuclear antigen antibody; FCL, familial chilblain lupus; GOF, gain of function; HUVS, hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis syndrome; IFN, interferon; IgA,
immunoglobulin A; SAVI, STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Modified from Hiraki LT, Silverman ED. Genomics of systemic lupus erythematosus: insights gained by studying monogenic young-­onset systemic lupus erythematosus. Rheum Dis
Clin N Am. 2017;43:415–434, Table 1, p. 417.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1492 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

A

B

C

D

Fig. 199.1 Mucocutaneous manifestations of SLE. A, Malar rash. B, Vasculitic rash on toes. C, Oral mucosal ulcers. D, Discoid rash in malar distribution.
Table 199.2  Potential Clinical Manifestations of Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus
TARGET ORGAN

POTENTIAL CLINICAL
MANIFESTATIONS

Constitutional

Fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, fever,
lymphadenopathy

Musculoskeletal

Arthritis, myositis, tendonitis, arthralgias,
myalgias, avascular necrosis, osteoporosis

Skin

Malar rash, discoid (annular) rash,
photosensitive rash, cutaneous vasculitis
(petechiae, palpable purpura, digit ulcers,
gangrene, urticaria), livedo reticularis,
periungual capillary abnormalities, Raynaud
phenomenon, alopecia, oral and nasal
ulcers, panniculitis, chilblains, alopecia

Renal

Hypertension, proteinuria, hematuria,
edema, nephrotic syndrome, renal failure

Cardiovascular

Pericarditis, myocarditis, conduction system
abnormalities, Libman-­Sacks endocarditis

Neurologic

Seizures, psychosis, cerebritis, stroke,
transverse myelitis, depression, cognitive
impairment, headaches, migraines,
pseudotumor, peripheral neuropathy
(mononeuritis multiplex), chorea, optic
neuritis, cranial nerve palsies, acute
confusional states, dural and cerebral
venous sinus thrombosis

Pulmonary

Pleuritis, interstitial lung disease, pulmonary
hemorrhage, pulmonary hypertension,
pulmonary embolism

Hematologic

Immune-­mediated cytopenias (hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia or leukopenia),
anemia of chronic inflammation,
hypercoagulability, thrombocytopenic
thrombotic microangiopathy, macrophage
activation syndrome

Gastroenterology

Hepatosplenomegaly, pancreatitis,
vasculitis affecting bowel, protein-­losing
enteropathy, peritonitis

Ocular

Retinal vasculitis, scleritis, episcleritis,
papilledema, dry eyes, optic neuritis

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Any organ system can be involved in SLE, so the potential clinical manifestations are myriad (Table 199.2). The presentation of SLE in childhood
or adolescence differs somewhat from that seen in adults. The most common presenting complaints of children with SLE include fever, fatigue,

PSYCHOSIS

COGNITIVE
DYSFUNCTION

MOOD
DISORDER

CEREBROVASCULAR
DISEASE

SEIZURES
CHOREA

HEADACHE

Fig. 199.2 Overlapping neuropsychiatric symptoms in pediatric SLE.

Patients with pediatric SLE most commonly have more than one neuropsychiatric symptom—in particular for seizures. (From Silverman E,
Eddy A. Systemic lupus erythematosus. In Cassidy JT, Petty RE, Laxer
RM, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011: Fig. 21-­17, p. 329.)

hematologic abnormalities, arthralgia, and arthritis. Arthritis is usually
present in the first year of diagnosis; arthritis may be painful or painless
swelling, often with stiffness in the morning, and is usually a symmetric
polyarthritis affecting large and small joints. Tenosynovitis is often present, but joint erosions or other radiographic changes are rare.
Renal disease in SLE is often asymptomatic, underscoring the need
for careful monitoring of blood pressure and urinalyses; in adolescents,
SLE can present with nephrotic syndrome and/or renal failure, with the
predominant symptoms being edema, fatigue, changes in urine color, and
nausea/vomiting. Because SLE symptoms and findings may develop serially over several years and not all be present simultaneously, the diagnosis
may require longitudinal follow-­up. SLE is often characterized by periods
of flare and disease quiescence but may follow a more smoldering disease
course. The neuropsychiatric complications of SLE may occur with or
without apparently active SLE, posing a particularly difficult diagnostic
challenge in adolescents, who are already at high risk for mood disorders
(Fig. 199.2). Long-­term complications of SLE and its therapy, including
accelerated atherosclerosis and osteoporosis, become clinically evident in
early to middle adulthood. SLE is a disease that evolves over time in each
affected individual, and new manifestations arise even many years after
diagnosis.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 199 u Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 1493
Table 199.3  Comparison of 1997 American College of Rheumatology and 2012 Systemic Lupus International Collaborating
Clinics (SLICC) Classification Criteria for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus*
1997 ACR CRITERIA*

2012 SLICC CRITERIA*

CLINICAL CRITERIA
Acute cutaneous lupus

• Malar rash†

• Malar rash, bullous lupus, toxic epidermal
necrolysis variant of SLE, maculopapular
lupus rash, photosensitive lupus rash, or
subacute cutaneous lupus†

Chronic cutaneous lupus

• Discoid rash

• Classic discoid rash, hypertrophic
(verrucous) lupus, lupus panniculitis
(profundus), mucosal lupus, lupus
erythematous tumidus, chilblains lupus, or
discoid lupus/lichen planus overlap

Mucosal ulcers

• Oral or nasal ulcers

• Oral (palate, buccal, tongue) or nasal ulcers

Other cutaneous

• Photosensitivity

• Nonscarring alopecia

Arthritis

• Nonerosive arthritis in ≥ two peripheral
joints

• Synovitis in ≥ two peripheral joints

Serositis

• Pleuritis or pericarditis

• Pleurisy or pericardial pain ≥1 day, pleural
effusion or rub, pericardial effusion or rub,
or ECG evidence of pericarditis

Renal

• Persistent proteinuria representing > 500
mg/24 hr or cellular casts

• Urine protein/creatinine ratio representing
>500 mg protein/24 hr or red blood cell
casts

Neurologic

• Seizure or psychosis

• Seizures, psychosis, mononeuritis multiplex,
myelitis, peripheral or cranial neuropathy, or
acute confusional state

Hematologic

• Hemolytic anemia, leukopenia (<4,000/
mm3, lymphopenia (<1,500/mm3), or
thrombocytopenia (<100,000/mm3)

• Hemolytic anemia
• Leukopenia (<4,000/mm3) or lymphopenia
(<1,000/mm3)
• Thrombocytopenia (<100,000/mm3)

• Positive anti-­double-­stranded antibody or
positive anti-­Smith antibody
• Positive antiphospholipid antibody (false-­
positive rapid plasma reagin test, positive
lupus anticoagulant test result, or elevated
anticardiolipin antibody level [IgG or IgM])
• Positive ANA

• Positive anti-­double-­stranded DNA
antibody
• Positive anti-­Smith antibody
• Positive antiphospholipid antibody (false-­
positive rapid plasma regain test, positive
lupus anticoagulant test, medium to high
titer anticardiolipin antibody level [IgA,
IgG, IgM], or positive anti-­B2-­glycoprotein I
antibody [IgA, IgG, IgM])
• Low C3, C4, or Ch50 level
• Positive direct Coombs test (in the absence
of hemolytic anemia)
• Positive ANA

IMMUNOLOGIC

*For the 1997 ACR Criteria, the presence of 4 of 11 cumulative criteria establishes the classification of SLE. For the 2012 SLICC criteria, the presence of 4 cumulative criteria also
establishes the classification of SLE; however, at least 1 clinical criterion and at least 1 immunologic criterion are required. In addition, the presence of biopsy-­proven lupus nephritis
with positive ANA or anti–double-­stranded DNA satisfies the 2012 SLICC criteria. For both sets of classification criteria, all items must be attributable to lupus and not an alternate
cause (e.g., medication side effect).
†Each bullet point counts as a single criterion whether 1 or more definitions are satisfied.
Adapted from Hochberg MC: Updating the American College of Rheumatology revised criteria for the classification of systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum 1997;40:1725;
and from Petri M, et al: Derivation and validation of the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics classification criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum
2012;64:2677-­2686.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of SLE requires a comprehensive clinical and laboratory
assessment revealing characteristic multisystem disease and excluding
other etiologies, including infection and malignancy. Classification criteria

for SLE were developed to identify appropriate subjects for clinical trials
but are often used as guideposts for SLE diagnosis. Over the past several
decades, SLE classification criteria have undergone serial updates. Both the
American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 1997 Revised Classification

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1494 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Entry criterion
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) at a titer of ≥1:80 on HEp-2 cells or an equivalent positive test (ever)

If absent, do not classify as SLE
If present, apply additive criteria

Additive criteria

.Do not count a criterion if there is a more likely explanation than SLE.
.Occurrence of a criterion on at least one occasion is sufficient.
.SLE classification requires at least one clinical criterion and ≥10 points.
.Criteria need not occur simultaneously.
.Within each domain, only the highest weighted criterion is counted toward the total score.*
Clinical domains and criteria

Weight

Immunology domains and criteria

Weight

Antiphospholipid antibodies

Constitutional
Fever

2

Anti-cardiolipin antibodies OR
Anti-β2GP1 antibodies OR
Lupus anticoagulant

Hematologic
Leukopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Autoimmune hemolysis

3
4
4

Complement proteins
Low C3 OR low C4
Low C3 AND low C4

Neuropsychiatric
Delirium
Psychosis
Seizure

2
3
5

2
3
4

SLE-specific antibodies
Anti-dsDNA antibody† OR
Anti-Smith antibody

6

Mucocutaneous
Non-scarring alopecia
Oral ulcers
Subacute cutaneous OR discoid lupus
Acute cutaneous lupus

2
2
4
6

Serosal
Pleural or pericardial effusion
Acute pericarditis

5
6

Musculoskeletal
6

Joint involvement
Renal
Proteinuria >0.5 g/24hr
Renal biopsy class II or V lupus nephritis
Renal biopsy class Ill or IV lupus nephritis

4
8
10
Total score:

Classify as systemic lupus erythematosus with a score of 10 or more if entry criterion fulfilled.

Fig. 199.3 Classification criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). *Additional criteria items within the same domain will not be counted. †In

an assay with ≥90% specificity against relevant disease controls. (From Aringer M, Costenbader K, Daikh D, et al. 2019 European League Against
Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology classification criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum. 2019;71[9]:1400–1412.)

Criteria for SLE and the 2012 Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC) Classification Criteria (Table 199.3) are validated in
childhood onset SLE populations, with the SLICC Criteria achieving higher
sensitivity and the 1997 ACR Criteria achieving better specificity. In both
the 1997 ACR and 2012 SLICC Criteria, a positive antinuclear antibody
(ANA) test result is not required for the diagnosis of SLE; however, ANAnegative lupus is extremely rare. The ANA test is very sensitive for SLE
(95-99%) but is not very specific (∼50%). The ANA may become positive
many years before a diagnosis of SLE is established; however, most asymptomatic ANA-positive patients will never develop SLE. More recently, the
2019 European League Against Rheumatism/American College of

Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR) SLE Classification Criteria (Fig. 199.3)
provided a different approach by requiring a positive antinuclear antibody
(ANA) test result at a titer ≥1:80. Allthough the 2019 EULAR/ACR criteria
have excellent sensitivity and specificity in the adult SLE population, they
are still being validated in pediatric populations.
Anti-­dsDNA and anti-­Smith antibodies are specific for SLE (∼98%) but
not as sensitive (40–65%) as the ANA. Hypocomplementemia was not
included in earlier classification criteria, but has been added to the two most
recent classification criteria. The 2012 SLICC Criteria also added as criteria
nonscarring alopecia, additional cutaneous and neurologic manifestations,
and a positive direct Coombs test in the absence of hemolytic anemia.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 199 u Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 1495
Table 199.4  Main Differential Diagnoses of SLE
(SLE Mimickers)

Table 199.5  Medications Associated with Drug-­Induced
Lupus

OTHER CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASES
Sjögren (SSA+), dermatomyositis (rash), mixed connective tissue
disease

DEFINITE ASSOCIATION
Minocycline, procainamide, hydralazine, isoniazid, penicillamine,
diltiazem, interferon-­α, methyldopa, chlorpromazine, etanercept,
infliximab, adalimumab

INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Endocarditis; hepatitis A, B, C, E; parvovirus B19; HIV; EBV; CMV;
Lyme; disseminated gonococcal arthritis; toxoplasmosis;
histoplasmosis; mycobacterial diseases; tinea faciei; visceral
leishmaniasis; Whipple disease
HEMATOLOGIC MALIGNANCIES
Hodgkin lymphoma, myelodysplastic syndromes,
angioimmunoblastic T-­cell lymphoma
SOLID TUMORS AND PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
Thymoma, carcinoma of the lung, breast, and ovary with
paraneoplastic syndromes
OTHER DISEASES
Meigs and Pseudo-­Meigs syndrome
Multiple sclerosis
Castleman disease
Interferonopathies (monogenic SLE)
Still disease (and other autoinflammatory diseases)
Evans syndrome (with primary immune deficiency)
Complement deficiency
Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
Schizophrenia and other psychoses
Kikuchi disease
IgG4-­related disease
Chilblains (cold-­induced)
Ackerman syndrome and erythema elevatum diutinum with
polyarthritis
Drug-­induced lupus and drug-­induced polyarthritis
Graft-­versus-­host disease
Systemic manifestations of atrial myxoma
Prolidase deficiency
From Chasset F, Richez C, Martin T, et al. Rare diseases that mimic systemic lupus
erythematosus (lupus mimickers). Joint Bone Spine. 2019;86:165–171, Table 1, p. 166
Copyright Elsevier Masson SAS.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Multiorgan disease is the hallmark of SLE, and given its wide array of
potential clinical manifestations, SLE is in the differential diagnosis
of many clinical scenarios, including unexplained fevers, joint pain
or arthritis, rash, cytopenias, nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, pleural
or pericardial effusions or other cardiopulmonary abnormalities, and
new-­onset psychosis or seizures. For patients ultimately diagnosed with
pediatric SLE, the initial differential diagnosis often includes infections
(sepsis, Epstein-­Barr virus, parvovirus B19, endocarditis), malignancies (leukemia and lymphoma), poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis,
other rheumatologic conditions (juvenile idiopathic arthritis, vasculitides), and drug-­induced lupus (Table 199.4).
Drug-­induced lupus refers to the presence of SLE manifestations
triggered by exposure to specific medications, including hydralazine, minocycline, many anticonvulsants, sulfonamides, antiarrhythmic agents, and other drugs (Table 199.5). In individuals prone
to SLE, these agents may act as a trigger for true SLE, but more
commonly these agents provoke a reversible lupus-­like syndrome.
Unlike SLE, drug-­induced lupus affects males and females equally.
A genetic predisposition toward slow drug acetylation may increase
the risk of drug-­induced lupus. Circulating antihistone antibodies
are often present in drug-­induced SLE; these antibodies are only
detected in up to 20% of individuals with SLE. Hepatitis, which is
rare in SLE, is more common in drug-­induced lupus. Individuals
with drug-­induced lupus are less likely to demonstrate antibodies
to dsDNA, hypocomplementemia, and significant renal or neurologic disease. In contrast to SLE, manifestations of drug-­induced

PROBABLE ASSOCIATION
Phenytoin, ethosuximide, carbamazepine, sulfasalazine, amiodarone,
quinidine, rifampin, nitrofurantoin, β blockers, lithium, captopril,
interferon-­γ, hydrochlorothiazide, glyburide, docetaxel, penicillin,
tetracycline, statins, gold, valproate, griseofulvin, gemfibrozil,
propylthiouracil

Table 199.6  Autoantibodies Commonly Associated with
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE)
ANTIBODY

CLINICAL ASSOCIATION

Anti–double-­stranded DNA
(anti-­dsDNA)

Correlates with disease activity,
especially nephritis, in some with SLE

Anti-­Smith antibody
(anti-­Sm)

Specific for the diagnosis of SLE

Anti-­ribonucleoprotein
antibody (anti-­RNP)

Increased risk for Raynaud
phenomenon, interstitial lung disease,
and pulmonary hypertension

Anti-­Ro antibody (anti-­SSA)
Anti-­La antibody (anti-­SSB)

Associated with sicca syndrome
May suggest diagnosis of Sjögren
syndrome
Increased risk of neonatal lupus in
offspring (congenital heart block)
May be associated with cutaneous
and pulmonary manifestations of
SLE
May be associated with isolated
discoid lupus

Antiphospholipid antibodies
(including lupus
anticoagulant and anti-­
cardiolipin or anti-­beta-­2
glycoprotein antibodies)

Increased risk for venous and arterial
thrombotic events

Antihistone antibodies

Present in a majority of patients with
drug-­induced lupus
May be present in SLE

lupus typically resolve after withdrawal of the offending medication; however, complete recovery may take several months to years,
requiring treatment, often with hydroxychloroquine, NSAIDs, and/
or corticosteroids.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

A positive ANA test is present in 95–99% of individuals with SLE.
The ANA has poor specificity for SLE, as up to 20% of healthy individuals also have a positive ANA test result, making the ANA a poor
screen for SLE when used in isolation. After diagnosis, ANA titers
are not reflective of disease activity; therefore repeat ANA testing in
SLE patients is not helpful. Antibodies to dsDNA are specific for SLE,
and in many individuals, anti-­dsDNA levels correlate with disease
activity, particularly in those with significant nephritis. Anti-­Smith
antibody, although found specifically in patients with SLE, does not
correlate with disease activity. Serum levels of total hemolytic complement (CH50), C3, and C4 are typically decreased in active disease
and often improve with treatment. Table 199.6 lists autoantibodies

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1496 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
found in SLE along with their clinical associations. Hypergammaglobulinemia is a common but nonspecific finding. Inflammatory
markers, particularly the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, are often
elevated in active disease. C-­reactive protein (CRP) correlates less
well with disease activity; significantly elevated CRP values often
reflect infection, whereas chronic mild elevation of CRP may indicate
increased cardiovascular risk.
Antiphospholipid antibodies, which increase clotting risk, can be
found in up to 66% of children and adolescents with SLE. The primary
antiphospholipid antibodies are lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin,
and anti–beta-­2 glycoprotein antibodies. When an arterial or venous
clotting event occurs in the presence of an antiphospholipid antibody,
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome is diagnosed. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome can occur in the context of SLE (secondary)
or independent of SLE (primary) (see Chapter 528). Rarely, antiphospholipid antibodies can result in catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome, a condition in which clots affect three or more organs/tissues
simultaneously; this condition has a very high mortality rate.

TREATMENT

Treatment of SLE is tailored to the individual and is based on specific
disease manifestations and medication tolerability. For all patients,
sunscreen and avoidance of prolonged direct sun exposure and other
ultraviolet light may help control disease and should be reinforced at
every visit with the patient. Hydroxychloroquine is recommended for
all individuals with SLE when tolerated. In addition to treating mild
SLE manifestations such as rash and mild arthritis, hydroxychloroquine
prevents SLE flares, improves lipid profiles, and may have a beneficial
impact on mortality and renal outcomes. Potential toxicities include
retinal pigmentation that leads to vision impairment; therefore annual
ophthalmology exams are recommended for patients taking hydroxychloroquine, including automated visual field testing and spectral-­domain
optical coherence tomography (SD-­OCT). Given that risk factors for
ocular toxicity include duration of use and dose, hydroxychloroquine
in SLE should not be prescribed at doses greater than 5 mg/kg to a
maximum of 400 mg daily.
Corticosteroids are a treatment mainstay for significant manifestations of SLE and work quickly to improve acute deterioration; side
effects often limit patient adherence, especially in adolescence, and
potential toxicities are worrisome. It is important to limit the dose
and length of exposure to corticosteroids whenever possible. Potential
consequences of corticosteroid therapy include growth disturbance,
weight gain, striae, acne, hyperglycemia, hypertension, cataracts, avascular necrosis, and osteoporosis. The optimal dosing of corticosteroids
in children and adolescents with SLE remains unknown; severe disease is often treated with high doses of intravenous methylprednisolone (e.g., 30 mg/kg/day to a maximum of 1,000 mg for each of 3
days, sometimes followed by a period of weekly pulses) and/or high
doses of oral prednisone (often starting at 1 mg/kg/day). As disease
manifestations improve, corticosteroid dosages are gradually tapered
over months. For most patients it is necessary to introduce a steroid-­
sparing immunosuppressive medication in order to limit cumulative
steroid exposure.
Steroid-­sparing immunosuppressive agents for the treatment of
pediatric SLE include methotrexate, leflunomide, azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, tacrolimus, cyclophosphamide, rituximab, and belimumab. Methotrexate, leflunomide, and azathioprine are often used to
treat persistent moderate disease, including arthritis, significant cutaneous or hematologic involvement, and pleural disease. Cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, and azathioprine are appropriate for
the treatment of lupus nephritis, whereas mycophenolate mofetil and
rituximab are often used for the treatment of significant hematologic
manifestations, including severe leukopenia, hemolytic anemia, or
thrombocytopenia.
Cyclophosphamide, usually administered intravenously, is reserved
for the most severe, potentially life-­threatening SLE manifestations,
such as renal, neurologic, and cardiopulmonary disease. Although

cyclophosphamide is highly effective in controlling disease, the potential toxicities are significant, including cytopenias, infection, hemorrhagic cystitis, premature gonadal failure, and increased risk of future
malignancy. Attention to adequate hydration can attenuate the risk of
hemorrhagic cystitis. Fortunately, young females are at much lower
risk of gonadal failure than older women, and the use of gonadotropin-­
releasing hormone agonists, such as leuprolide acetate, may help prevent gonadal failure.
The Childhood Arthritis Rheumatology Research Alliance
(CARRA) has developed a consensus treatment plan for induction
therapy of newly diagnosed proliferative lupus nephritis (class III
and IV) that is specific to the pSLE population; the treatment plan
is considered necessary for class III and IV lupus nephritis but also
appropriate for certain patients with other classes of lupus nephritis.
The CARRA treatment plan advises 6 months of induction therapy
with either cyclophosphamide (given per the National Institutes of
Health [NIH] protocol as 500-­1,000 mg/m2 IV monthly) or mycophenolate mofetil (dosed as 600 mg/m2 bid up to 1,500 mg bid), used
in combination with one of three standardized glucocorticoid regimens. For patients who fail to achieve a partial response in 6 months,
it is appropriate to switch agents. For adult-­weight adolescents, the
cyclophosphamide dosing regimen used in the Euro-­Lupus Nephritis
Trial can be considered in lieu of the previous 6-­month therapy in an
effort to reduce toxicity from cyclophosphamide exposure. Per this
protocol, a fixed dose of 500 mg is given every 2 weeks for 3 months;
in adults, this regimen is althought to reduce adverse effects while
maintaining comparable efficacy for lupus nephritis, though this regimen has not been studied specifically in pediatric lupus. It should be
noted that oral medication adherence is very poor in pSLE, and this
must be taken into consideration when weighing the benefits of an IV
infusion versus a twice daily oral medication such as mycophenolate
mofetil. After the 6-­month induction therapy, maintenance therapy
for lupus nephritis consists of quarterly IV cyclophosphamide (dosed
500-­1,000 mg/m2 once every 3 months), mycophenolate, or azathioprine, with mycophenolate generally being the preferred agent. Maintenance therapy is typically continued for a minimum of 30 months
after the completion of induction therapy, but in many circumstances,
it is continued longer.
Calcineurin inhibitors such as tacrolimus are often adjunct therapy
in the treatment of refractory lupus nephritis. Voclosporin, Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)–approved for adults with lupus nephritis, awaits pediatric study. Clinical trial data on the use of rituximab
in SLE with treatment-­resistant glomerulonephritis has been largely
disappointing, but post hoc analysis from the LUNAR study suggests
there may be benefit for subpopulations of SLE patients. The FDA has
approved the use of belimumab, a monoclonal antibody against BLyS/
BAFF, for the treatment of lupus in adults and children; when added to
standard SLE therapy, belimumab improves markers of disease activity
in renal and nonrenal lupus. Belimumab has been shown to improve
renal outcomes in adults, and while it is not used as monotherapy to
treat lupus nephritis, it can be used in addition to standard therapy
to help achieve renal remission without substantial increase in risk of
infectious complications. Anifrolumab (a monoclonal antibody to the
interferon-­α receptor), achieved 2021 FDA approval for treatment of
adult nonrenal SLE, and studies in lupus nephritis and pediatric lupus
are forthcoming. Several novel therapies are in the pipeline for the
treatment of SLE and lupus nephritis, including Janus kinase inhibitors.
Given the lifelong nature of SLE, optimal care of children and adolescents with this disease also involves preventive practices. Owing to the
enhanced risk of atherosclerosis in SLE, attention to cholesterol levels,
smoking status, body mass index, blood pressure, and other traditional
cardiovascular risk factors is warranted. Even though the Atherosclerosis Prevention in Pediatric Lupus Erythematosus (APPLE) study
failed to support placing all children with SLE on a statin, post hoc
analyses suggest that statins can be considered for primary prevention
of atherosclerotic disease in certain clinical circumstances, particularly
pubertal patients with an elevated CRP.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 199 u Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 1497
Table 199.7  Morbidity in Childhood Lupus
Renal

Hypertension, dialysis, transplantation

Central nervous system

Organic brain syndrome, seizures,
psychosis, neurocognitive dysfunction

Cardiovascular

Atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction,
cardiomyopathy, valvular disease

Immune

Recurrent or severe infection, functional
asplenia, malignancy

Musculoskeletal

Table 199.8  A Summary of Signs and Symptoms Indicative
of Lupus Emergencies
SIGNS/SYMPTOMS

DIFFERENTIAL CONSIDERATIONS

Fever

Evaluate for infection
Consider disease flare
Consider macrophage activation
syndrome

Thrombosis/hemoptysis

Osteopenia, compression fractures,
avascular necrosis

May be arterial or venous
Evaluate for antiphospholipid
syndrome

Chest pain

Ocular

Cataracts, glaucoma, retinal detachment,
blindness

Pleurisy, pericarditis, pulmonary
infarction/embolus

Dyspnea

Endocrine

Diabetes, obesity, growth failure,
infertility, fetal wastage

Pneumonitis, alveolar hemorrhage,
pleural effusions, congestive heart
failure

Headache

Vascular headaches, meningitis,
thrombus, cerebrovascular accident,
hypertensive crisis

Altered mental status

Cerebritis, hypertensive crisis, macrophage activation syndrome, stroke,
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura,
and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome

Rash

Vasculitis lesions, palpable purpura,
infarction

Icterus

Autoimmune hemolysis
Autoimmune hepatitis

Petechiae

Thrombotic thrombocytopenia purpura

Seizure

Cerebritis, infection, metabolic causes,
hypertensive crisis

From Cassidy JT, Petty RE, Laxer RM, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology,
6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011.

SLE patients with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (antiphospholipid antibodies and a history of arterial or venous clot or pregnancy morbidity) are treated with long-­term anticoagulation to prevent
thrombotic events; for SLE patients who are antiphospholipid antibody
positive without a history of clots, many pediatric rheumatologists prescribe aspirin 81 mg daily.
For all SLE patients, adequate intake of calcium and vitamin D is necessary to prevent future osteoporosis, particularly as vitamin D levels are
lower in pSLE patients compared with age-­matched healthy controls. It
is worth noting recent studies suggest a link between hypovitaminosis
D and SLE susceptibility and also offer an emerging role for vitamin D
in immunomodulation.
Infections, particularly pneumococcal disease, commonly complicate SLE, so routine immunization is recommended, including
the annual influenza vaccination, SARS-­C oV-­2 vaccination, and
vaccination against human papilloma virus (HPV). In addition,
pSLE patients age 6 or older should receive a dose of PPSV23 at
least 8 weeks after completing all recommended pneumococcal vaccine series with PCV13 or PCV15. Many of the immunosuppressant
medications used in SLE contraindicate administration of live vaccines. Prompt attention to febrile episodes should include an evaluation for serious infections. Because pSLE patients are at high risk
for developing anxiety and depression, screening for depression is
important. Peer support and cognitive-­behavioral therapy interventions reduce pain and enhance resilience in pSLE.
Pregnancy can worsen SLE, and obstetric complications are common. In addition, many medications used to treat SLE are teratogenic. As a consequence, it is important to counsel adolescent girls
about these risks and facilitate access to appropriate contraceptive
options. Hydroxychloroquine is recommended throughout pregnancy for all SLE patients, whereas other medications may need to
be adjusted.

COMPLICATIONS

Within the first several years of diagnosis, the most common
causes of death in individuals with SLE include infection and
complications of glomerulonephritis and neuropsychiatric disease
(Table 199.7). Over the long term, the most common causes of
mortality are atherosclerosis and malignancy. The increased risk
of premature atherosclerosis in SLE is not explained by traditional
risk factors and is partly a result of the chronic immune dysregulation and inflammation associated with SLE. Increased malignancy
rates may be caused by immune dysregulation and exposure to

From Harry O, Yasin S, Brunner H. Childhood-­onset systemic lupus erythematosus: a
review and update. J Pediatr. 2018;196:22–30, Table IV.

medications with carcinogenic potential. Potential lupus emergencies are noted in Table 199.8.

PROGNOSIS

SLE disease severity is higher in childhood-­onset SLE compared with
adult-­onset SLE. Fortunately, advances in the diagnosis and treatment of SLE have led to dramatically improved survival over the past
50 years. The 5-­year and 10-­year survival rates for pSLE are 99% and
97%, respectively, in high-­income countries, although these survival
rates are 85% and 79%, respectively, in low-­and middle-­income countries. Infection contributes significantly to mortality in pediatric lupus.
In addition, early in the disease course, lupus nephritis, lupus cerebritis, and complications such as macrophage activation syndrome are
primary causes of mortality, whereas later in the disease course, atherosclerosis and malignancy become larger contributors to mortality.
Given their long burden of disease, children and adolescents with SLE
face high risks of future morbidity and mortality from the disease and
its complications, as well as medication side effects. Because pSLE is a
complex, chronic disease with a high risk for morbidity and mortality,
optimal care for children and adolescents with SLE includes treatment
by pediatric rheumatologists in a multidisciplinary clinic with access
to a full complement of pediatric subspecialists. Furthermore, because
SLE is a lifelong disease, it is critically important to ensure an appropriate transition to an adult model of care, which helps avoid interruptions in rheumatology care.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1498 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

199.1 Neonatal Lupus
Deborah M. Friedman, Jill P. Buyon,
Rebecca E. Sadun, and Stacy P. Ardoin
Neonatal lupus erythematosus (NLE), an entity distinct from SLE, is one
of the few rheumatic disorders manifesting in the neonate. NLE is not
an autoimmune disease of the fetus, but instead results from passively
acquired autoimmunity, when maternal immunoglobulin G autoantibodies cross the placenta and enter the fetal circulation. In contrast to
SLE, neonatal lupus is not characterized by ongoing immune dysregulation, although infants with neonatal lupus may be at some increased risk
for development of future autoimmune disease. The vast majority of NLE
cases are associated with maternal anti-­Ro (also known as SSA), anti-­La
antibodies (also known as SSB), or anti-­RNP autoantibodies.
Despite the clear association with maternal autoantibodies, their
presence alone is not sufficient to cause disease, as only ∼2% of offspring
born to mothers with anti-­Ro and anti-­La antibodies develop neonatal lupus. Increasing evidence supports the observation that generally
high maternal anti-­Ro titers are necessary for fetal clinical disease.
In the prospective evaluation of fetuses with autoimmune-­associated
congenital heart block followed in the PR Interval and Dexamethasone
Evaluation (PRIDE) study, the median anti-­Ro titer for pregnancies
resulting in heart block was 5 times as high as the median anti-­Ro titer
in unaffected pregnancies. Another group identified heart block in 8%
of cases with very high anti-­Ro antibody titers, with no cases among
women with low or moderate titers.
Siblings of infants with NLE have a 15–20% chance of developing NLE. Neonatal lupus seems to be independent of the maternal
health because many mothers are asymptomatic and only identified to
have anti-­Ro/anti-­La antibodies subsequent to the diagnosis of NLE.
Roughly half of the infants with NLE are born to the mothers with a
defined rheumatic disease such as Sjogren syndrome or SLE.
Clinical manifestations of neonatal lupus include a characteristic
annular or macular rash typically affecting the face (especially the
periorbital area), trunk, and scalp (Fig. 199.4). The rash can be present at birth but more often appears within the first 6-­8 weeks of life,
after exposure to ultraviolet light, and typically lasts 3-­4 months.
Infants may also have cytopenias and hepatitis, each occurring in
∼25% of cases, but the most concerning complication is congenital
heart block.
Conduction system abnormalities range from prolongation of the
PR interval to complete heart block, with development of progressive
cardiomyopathy in the most severe cases. The noncardiac manifestations of neonatal lupus are usually reversible, whereas third-­degree
congenital heart block is permanent. Conduction system abnormalities
can be detected in utero by fetal echocardiogram beginning at 16 weeks
of gestational age. Neonatal lupus cardiac disease has a mortality rate
of ∼20%. Cardiac NLE can manifest as heart block, cardiomyopathy,
valvular dysfunction, and endocardial fibroelastosis. Fetal bradycardia
from heart block can lead to hydrops fetalis.
In vitro studies suggest that during cardiac development via apoptosis, Ro and La antigens may be exposed on the surface of cardiac
cells in the proximity of the atrioventricular node, making the antigens
accessible to maternal autoantibodies. Binding incites a local immune
response, resulting in fibrosis within the conduction system and more
extensive disease in fatal cases. In the skin, exposure to ultraviolet light
results in cell damage and the subsequent exposure of Ro and La antigens, inducing a similar local inflammatory response that produces the
characteristic rash.
Although the scant clinical trial data have been mixed, fluorinated corticosteroids (dexamethasone or betamethasone), intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) at 1-­
2 g/kg maternal weight,
plasmapheresis, hydroxychloroquine, and terbutaline (combined
with steroids) have been used in pregnant women with anti-­Ro or
anti-­L a antibodies to prevent occurrence or progression of fetal cardiac abnormalities.

Fig. 199.4 Neonatal lupus syndrome. Typical rash, often photosensitive with a malar distribution, appearing as annular plaques with erythema and scaling. (From Pain C, Beresford MW. Neonatal lupus syndrome. Paediatr Child Health. 2007;17:223–227.)

Most encouraging are retrospective cohort studies suggesting maternal treatment with hydroxychloroquine may reduce the frequency and
recurrence of congenital heart block. In a multicenter, single-­arm,
open-­label clinical trial assessing the efficacy of hydroxychloroquine
to prevent recurrent autoantibody-­associated congenital heart block,
hydroxychloroquine treatment reduced the risk of recurrent heart
block compared to historical controls by over 50%, from 17.5% to less
than 8% of pregnancies.
Significant conduction system abnormalities after birth are treated
with cardiac pacing and occasionally IVIG and steroids, whereas severe
cardiomyopathy may require cardiac transplantation. If the conduction
defect is not addressed, affected children are at risk for exercise intolerance, arrhythmias, and death. With cardiac pacing, however, children
with conduction system disease in the absence of cardiomyopathy have
an excellent prognosis. In a long-­term follow-­up study of 239 subjects
enrolled in the Research Registry for Neonatal Lupus, 22% of subjects
had cardiac dysfunction in the first year of life. Cardiac dysfunction
often regressed; nevertheless, some dysfunction did appear later in
childhood. Risk factors for cardiac dysfunction were being male or
of low socioeconomic status and having low fetal heart rates, a longer
period of pacing, or extranodal cardiac disease. In a Swedish cohort of
119 children with congenital heart block, 16.8% developed cardiomyopathy ± congestive heart failure. Congenital heart block increased the
risk of cerebral infarctions and infections. Pacemaker treatment was
associated with decreased risk of developing cerebral infarction but
increased risk of infection and cardiomyopathy.
Noncardiac manifestations are typically transient and are conservatively managed, often with supportive care alone. Topical steroids can be used to treat moderate to severe NLE rash. Cytopenias
may improve over time but severe cases occasionally require IVIG.
Supportive care is usually appropriate for hepatic and neurologic
manifestation. When the neonate clears maternal autoantibodies
over the first 6 months of life, these inflammatory manifestations
gradually resolve.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 199 u Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 1499
One Approach to the Management of Anti-Ro ± Anti-La Pregnancy
Counseling by rheumatologist and cardiologist for high-titer antibodies;
consider maternal hydroxychloroquine (especially if prior AV block)
Home fetal Doppler monitor + fetal
echocardiography weekly/biweekly from
pregnancy week 17 – week 26

Normal fetal
echocardiograms

Postnatal EKG and echocardiogram:
1st month of life (all) and
1 year of age (optional)

PR interval ≥140 msec (2SD),
and/or moderate tricuspid
regurgitation

In 24–48 hr, repeat fetal
echocardiogram

PR interval >150 msec
(3SD)

Consider dexamethasone
4–8 mg daily for 1 week

2° or alternating 2°/3° AV block
AV block with signs of EFE,
myocarditis, CHF, and/or hydrops
3° (complete) AV block,
no hydrops fetalis
3° (complete) AV block,
severe hydrops fetalis

Dexamethasone
4–8 mg daily plus
IVIG

Dexamethasone 4–8 mg
daily plus IVIG;
? apheresis;
consider termination

Because maternal autoantibodies begin to gain access to the fetus
through the placenta via FcRn at about 12 weeks gestation, all pregnant women with circulating anti-­Ro and/or anti-­La antibodies, or
those with a history of offspring with neonatal lupus or congenital
heart block, are generally advised to be monitored by a pediatric cardiologist, with screening fetal echocardiography performed weekly
or biweekly from 17-­26 weeks of gestation. The period of greatest
vulnerability is usually 18-­24 weeks. If fetal bradycardia is found during routine in utero monitoring in a mother never evaluated for the
putative antibodies and if fetal echocardiography confirms a conduction defect, screening for maternal anti-­Ro and anti-­La antibodies is
warranted. In pregnancies at risk for congenital heart block, maternal
home monitoring of fetal heart rate using a handheld fetal heart rate
monitor 2-­3 times daily allows for accurate and early detection of
heart rate abnormalities.
A proposed management algorithm is presented in Figure 199.5.
A multicenter retrospective study concluded that maternal treatment with dexamethasone and/or intravenous gamma globulin should
be initiated in all cases of anti-SSA/Ro antibody cardiac manifestations,
including significant first-degree or any higher atrioventricular block,
isolated endocardial fibroelastosis, or sinus bradycardia. However,
other studies suggest that treatment should be individualized to fetuses
at high risk and not universally instituted for isolated complete thirddegree block, which is generally considered immutable.
The negative predictive value of antibody titers to identify pregnancies at low risk of fetal atrioventricular block has also been studied.

Fig. 199.5 Suggested algorithm
for the management of anti-­Ro ±
anti-­
La pregnancy. All such pregnancies should include counseling
and serial fetal echocardiograms.

Excluding women with previously affected children, leveraging samples obtained from anti-SSA/Ro exposed pregnancies with and without
fetal atrioventricular block, no case of heart block developed among
subjects with anti-Ro52 and anti-Ro60 titers of <110 arbitrary units
per milliliter using the multiplex bead assay of the Associated Regional
and University Pathologists Laboratories (n=141). Applying these
100% negative predictive value thresholds, approximately 50% of the
anti-Ro/SSA antibody pregnancies that ultimately had no fetal atrioventricular block could be excluded from surveillance.
Emerging data suggest that not all mothers with anti-SSA/Ro antibodies require surveillance. Based on review of the literature, the
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine published guidelines that recommended “…that serial fetal echocardiograms for assessment of the
PR interval not be routinely performed in patients with anti-SSA/SSB
antibodies outside of a clinical trial setting” but rather that, “Doppler
assessment of fetal heart rate during routine prenatal visits can be used
to screen for fetal complete heart block. Once complete heart block
develops, management is expectant, with weekly ultrasound examinations recommended to assess for hydrops.”
Guidelines in this domain continue to evolve as new data advances
our approach to risk stratification
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1500 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 200

Juvenile Dermatomyositis
Jeffrey A. Dvergsten and Ann M. Reed
Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM) is the most common of the juvenile
idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (JIIMs), representing up to 85% of
all patients with these rare vasculopathic diseases. It is characterized
by proximal muscle weakness and distinctive rashes of the face and
extensor joint surfaces.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

The incidence of JDM is approximately 3 cases/1 million children/yr,
with an incidence similar in White and Black non-­Hispanics and an
apparent lower incidence in Hispanics. The peak age of onset is 7 years
with a second peak of onset in late adulthood (45-­64 years); however,
adult-­onset dermatomyositis appears to be a distinctly separate entity,
both in prognosis and etiology. In the United States the ratio of females
to males with JDM is 2:1. Multiple cases of myositis in a single family
are rare, but familial autoimmune disease may be increased in families
with children who have JDM when compared to families of children
without autoimmune disease. Reports of seasonal association have not
been confirmed, although clusters of cases may occur.

ETIOLOGY

A precise understanding of the etiology and pathogenesis of JDM
remains elusive; many factors that affect elements of innate and adaptive immunity have been identified as contributing to onset and perpetuation of disease. Evidence suggests that the etiology of JDM is
multifaceted, with a genetic predisposition influenced by an environmental factor triggering events leading to disease pathogenesis.
Genetic factors that are associated with increased susceptibility to
JDM include human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles DRB1*0301,
DQA1*0501, and DQA1*0301. Additionally, HLA-­
DQA1*0501 is
found on maternal cells present in blood and tissue samples of children with JDM, an example of maternal microchimerism, which has
been proposed to play an etiologic role in JDM by creating an immune
response comparable to graft-­
versus-­
host disease (GVHD). Other
polymorphisms implicated in JDM include those affecting cytokine
genes such as the tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α promoter and the
variable-­number tandem repeats of the interleukin (IL)-­1 receptor
antagonist A1 gene. An increase in TNF-­α may be associated with
persistent immune activation leading to a longer disease course. The
IL-­1 receptor antagonist A1 allele is associated with the development
of JIIM in White but not in Black persons, in whom the A3 allele,
instead, is a possible risk factor. Environmental factors may also play
a contributing role, with geographic and seasonal clustering reported.
Short-­term increases in ultraviolet (UV) index before the onset of
disease have been reported; however, no clear theory of etiology has
emerged. A history of infection in the 3 months before disease onset
is usually reported; multiple studies have failed to produce a causative
organism. Constitutional signs and upper respiratory symptoms predominate, but one third of patients report preceding gastrointestinal
(GI) symptoms. Group A streptococcus, upper respiratory infections,
GI infections, coxsackievirus B, toxoplasma, enteroviruses, parvovirus
B19, and multiple other organisms have been postulated as possible
pathogens in the etiology of JDM. Despite these concerns, results of
serum antibody testing and polymerase chain reaction amplification
of the blood and muscle tissue for multiple infectious diseases have not
been revealing.

PATHOGENESIS

JDM and related immune myositis syndromes are believed to be an
autoimmune vasculopathic inflammatory disease affecting capillaries
of multiple organs, but most notably, the skin, muscles, and GI tract

(Table 200.1). Pathogenic mechanisms are both immune and nonimmune with cellular and soluble constituents of the innate and adaptive immune systems and pathways of cellular injury involved. Type
I interferons (IFNs), principally α and β, are cytokines of the innate
immune system that play a significant role in the pathogenesis of
JDM by modulating several immune mechanisms, including upregulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules
on muscle cells; induction of proinflammatory cytokine, chemokine,
and adhesion molecule production; and supporting cytotoxic effects of
innate and adaptive immune cells. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs)
play an important role in JDM and are principal producers of type I
IFN upon activation of Toll-­like receptor (TLR) 9 on their surface by
viruses. Cells involved in the inflammatory cascade include monocytes/macrophages (CD14), T-­cell subsets (CD4, CD8, Th17), natural
killer (NK) cells (CD56), and dendritic cells (DCs). MHC class I upregulation induces endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which results in the
degradation of contractile proteins; additional downstream effects of
type I IFN include autoantibody production and B-­cell proliferation.
Galectin-­9 and CXCL10 (IP-­10) are two IFN-­related proteins that have
been validated as sensitive and specific peripheral biomarkers of disease activity in JDM.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Children with JDM present with either rash, insidious onset of weakness, or both. Fevers, dysphagia or dysphonia, arthritis, muscle tenderness, and fatigue are also commonly reported at diagnosis (Tables
200.2 and 200.3). Certain myositis-­specific antibodies are associated
with different phenotypic patterns of disease (Fig. 200.1).
Rash develops as the first symptom in 50% of patients and appears
concomitant with weakness only 25% of the time. Children often
exhibit extreme photosensitivity to UV light exposure with generalized erythema in sun-­exposed areas. If seen over the chest and neck,
this erythema is known as the shawl sign. Erythema is also commonly
seen over the knees and elbows. The characteristic heliotrope rash is
a blue-­violet discoloration of the eyelids that may be associated with
periorbital edema (Fig. 200.2). Facial erythema crossing the nasolabial
folds is also common, in contrast to the malar rash without nasolabial
involvement typical of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Classic
Gottron papules are bright-­pink or pale, shiny, thickened, or atrophic
plaques over the metacarpal phalangeal joints, proximal interphalangeal joints, and distal interphalangeal joints and occasionally on the
knees, elbows, small joints of the toes, and ankle malleoli (Fig. 200.3).
The rash of JDM is sometimes mistaken for eczema or psoriasis. Rarely,
a thickened erythematous and scaly rash develops in children over the
palms (known as mechanic’s hands) and soles along the flexor tendons, which is associated with anti–Jo-­1 antibodies.
Evidence of small vessel inflammation is often visible in the nail
folds and gums as individual capillaries display changes including
loops, thickening, tortuosity, or loss (Fig. 200.4C). Telangiectasias may
be visible to the naked eye but are more easily visualized under capillaroscopy or with another magnifier (e.g., ophthalmoscope). Severe
vascular inflammation causes cutaneous ulcers on toes, fingers, axillae,
or epicanthal folds.
Early in disease, weakness associated with JDM is often insidious
and difficult to differentiate from fatigue. It is typically symmetric,
affecting proximal muscles such as the neck flexors, shoulder girdle,
and hip flexors. Parents may report difficulty climbing stairs, combing
hair, and getting out of bed. Examination reveals inability to perform a
sit-­up, head lag in a child after infancy, and Gower sign (use of hands
climbing on thighs to help stand from a sitting position). Patients with
JDM may roll to the side rather than sit straight up from lying to compensate for truncal weakness. Approximately half of children exhibit
muscle tenderness because of muscle inflammation.
Esophageal and respiratory muscles are also affected, resulting in
aspiration or respiratory failure. It is essential to assess for dysphonia or
nasal speech, palatal elevation with gag, dysphagia, and gastroesophageal reflux by means of history and physical examination. If any of these
are abnormal, a swallow study should be pursued. Respiratory muscle
weakness can be a medical emergency and lead to respiratory failure.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 200 u Juvenile Dermatomyositis

1501

Table 200.1  Clinical Associations: Myositis-­Specific Antibodies (MSA) and Myositis-­Associated Antibodies (MAA) in
Juvenile-­Onset Myositis (JOM)
AUTOANTIBODY

TARGET AUTOANTIGEN

PREVALENCE (%)
IN PATIENTS WITH
JOM

CLINICAL ASSOCIATIONS

Common myositis-­specific autoantibodies are found in 45–55% of patients with juvenile-­onset myositis
Anti-­Mi2

Nucleosome remodeling
deacetylase complex (NuRD)

3–4

• “Classic” dermatomyositis
• Responds well to standard therapies
• Favorable prognosis

Anti-­TIF1g (p155/140,
TRIM33)

Transcriptional intermediary
factor 1 gamma (TIF1-­γ)

18–35

• Severe cutaneous disease
• Rashes in photoexposed pattern
• Chronic disease course
• Lipodystrophy

Anti-­NXP2 (p140, MJ)

Nuclear matrix protein 2 (NXP2)

15–22

• Calcinosis
• More severe muscle disease
• Gastrointestinal bleeding, ulcers, and dysphagia
• Worse disease outcome and functional status

Anti-­MDA5 (CADM-­140)

Melanoma differentiation–
associated gene 5 (MDA5)

6

• More common in East Asia, where associated with
clinically amyopathic myositis, rapidly progressive
interstitial lung disease, and a high mortality rate
• In White populations associated with mild muscle disease,
interstitial lung disease, arthritis, and ulceration

Rare but clinically important myositis-­specific autoantibodies are found in 5–8% of patients with juvenile-­onset myositis antisynthetases
(Jo-­1, PL12, PL7, OJ, EJ, KS, Zo, and Ha)
ANTISYNTHETASES

• Antisynthetase syndrome: myositis, interstitial
lung disease, fever, mechanic’s hands, Raynaud
phenomenon, and arthritis
• Occurs in older children
• Increased mortality

-­ Jo-­1

-­ Histidyl

2–3

-­ PL12

-­ Alanyl

2–3

-­ PL7

-­ Threonyl

2–3

-­ OJ

-­ Isoleucyl

2–3

-­ EJ

-­ Glycyl

2–3

-­ KS

-­ Asparaginyl

2–3

-­ Zo

-­ Phenylalanyl

2–3

-­ Ha

-­ Tyrosyl

2–3

Anti-­SRP

Signal recognition particle (SRP)

2

• Necrotizing autoimmune myositis
• Severe weakness, muscle necrosis, high CK
• Cardiac involvement
• Occurs in older children
• No rash
• May be refractory to standard treatment

Anti-­HMGCR

HMGCR

1

• Necrotizing autoimmune myositis, muscle necrosis,
high CK, dysphagia, no statin exposure

Anti-­SAE

Small ubiquitin-­like modifier–
activating enzyme (SAE)

1

• Initially amyopathic disease with muscle involvement
occurring later

Myositis-­associated autoantibodies are found in 16–20% of patients with juvenile-­onset myositis. Some may occur in conjunction with a
myositis-­specific autoantibody.
Anti-­PmScl

Exosome-­associated PM-­ Scl-­75;
PM-­Scl-­100; C1D

5

• Overlap syndromes

Anti-­U1RNP

U1RNP

2

• Overlap syndromes

Anti-­Ro52

Ro52

5

• Overlap syndromes
• May be found in conjunction with other MSA,
particularly antisynthetases

Common MSAs are present in 45–55% of the U.S. pediatric population with juvenile-­onset myositis. Rare MSAs are present in 5–8%. Myositis-­associated autoantibodies (MAAs) are
found in 16–20% of juvenile-­onset myositis, with or without an accompanying MSA.
CK, Creatine kinase; HMGCR, 3-­hydroxy-­3-­methylglutaryl-­coenzyme reductase; MDA, melanoma differentiation-­associated; NuRD, nucleosome remodeling deacetylase; SAE, small
ubiquitin-­like modifier–activating enzyme; SRP, signal recognition particle; TIF, transcriptional intermediary factor.
Modified from Pachman LM, Khojah AM. Advances in juvenile dermatomyositis: myositis specific antibodies aid in understanding disease heterogeneity. J Pediatr. 2018;195:16–27.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1502 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Children with respiratory muscle weakness do not manifest typical
symptoms of impending respiratory failure with increased work of
breathing, instead demonstrating hypercarbia rather than hypoxemia.
Evaluation of respiratory muscle function by negative inspiratory force
(NIF) measurement can be performed in the clinic or at the bedside.

Table 200.2  Diagnostic Criteria for Juvenile
Dermatomyositis
Classic rash

Heliotrope rash of the eyelids
Gottron papules

Plus three of the following:

DIAGNOSIS

Weakness

Symmetric
Proximal

Muscle enzyme
elevation (≥1)

Creatine kinase
Aspartate transaminase
Lactate dehydrogenase
Aldolase

Electromyographic
changes

Short, small polyphasic motor unit
potentials
Fibrillations
Positive sharp waves
Insertional irritability
Bizarre, high-­frequency repetitive
discharges

Muscle biopsy

Necrosis
Inflammation

Data from Bohan A, Peter JB. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis (second of two parts).
N Engl J Med. 1975;292:403–407.

Table 200.3  Clinical Features of Juvenile Dermatomyositis
During Disease Course
FEATURE

%

Muscle weakness

90-­100

Dysphagia or dysphonia

13-­40

Muscle atrophy

10

Muscle pain and tenderness

30-­75

Skin lesions

85-­100

Heliotrope rash of eyelids

66-­95

Gottron papules

57-­95

Erythematous rash of malar/facial area

42-­100

Periungual (nail fold) capillary changes

80-­90

Photosensitive rash

5-­42

Ulcerations

22-­30

Calcinosis

12-­30

Lipodystrophy

11-­14

Raynaud phenomenon

2-­15

Arthritis and arthralgia

22-­58

Joint contractures

26-­27

Fever

16-­65

Gastrointestinal signs and symptoms

8-­37

Restrictive pulmonary disease

4-­32

Interstitial lung disease

1-­7

Cardiac involvement

0-­3

From Rider LG, Lindsley CB, Cassidy JT. Juvenile dermatomyositis. In: Cassidy JT, Petty
RE, Laxer RM, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 2011: Table 24.20, p. 410.

Diagnosis of dermatomyositis requires the presence of a characteristic rash and at least three signs of muscle inflammation and weakness
(see Table 200.2). Diagnostic criteria developed in 1975 predate the
use of MRI and have not been validated in children. Diagnosis is often
delayed because of the insidious nature of disease onset.
Electromyography (EMG) shows signs of myopathy (increased
insertional activity, fibrillations, sharp waves) and muscle fiber necrosis (decreased action potential amplitude and duration). Nerve conduction studies are typically normal unless severe muscle necrosis and
atrophy are present. It is important that EMG be performed in a center with experience in pediatric EMG and its interpretation. Muscle
biopsy is typically indicated when the diagnosis is in doubt or for grading disease severity (see Fig. 200.4A). Biopsy of involved muscle reveals
focal necrosis and phagocytosis of muscle fibers, fiber regeneration,
endomysial proliferation, inflammatory cell infiltrates and vasculitis,
and tubuloreticular inclusion bodies within endothelial cells. Findings
of lymphoid structures and vasculopathy may portend more severe
disease.
Some children present with classic rash but no apparent muscle
weakness or inflammation; this variation is called amyopathic JDM
or dermatomyositis sine myositis. It is unclear whether these children
have isolated skin disease or mild undetected muscle inflammation,
risking progression to more severe muscle involvement with long-­term
sequelae such as calcinosis and lipodystrophy if untreated.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis depends on the presenting symptoms. If
the presenting complaint is solely weakness without rash or atypical disease, other causes of myositis or myopathy should be considered, including polymyositis, infection-­related myositis (influenza
A and B, coxsackievirus B, and other viral illnesses), muscular dystrophies (e.g., Duchenne, Becker), myasthenia gravis, Guillain-­Barré
syndrome, endocrinopathies (hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism,
Cushing syndrome, Addison disease, parathyroid disorders), mitochondrial myopathies, TNF receptor–associated periodic syndrome
(TRAPS), and metabolic disorders (glycogen and lipid storage diseases). Infections associated with prominent muscular symptoms
include trichinosis, Bartonella infection, toxoplasmosis, staphylococcal pyomyositis, and SARS-­CoV-­2. Blunt trauma and crush injuries
may lead to transient rhabdomyolysis with myoglobinuria. Myositis
in children may also be associated with vaccinations, drugs, growth
hormone, and GVHD. The rash of JDM may be confused with dyshidrotic eczema, psoriasis, erythema nodosa, malar rash from SLE,
capillary telangiectasias from Raynaud phenomenon, and other rheumatic diseases. Muscle inflammation is also seen in children with
SLE, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, mixed connective tissue disease,
inflammatory bowel disease, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody–positive vasculitides. Necrotizing immune-­mediated myopathies are characterized by muscle necrosis without lymphocytic
infiltration. Antibodies to signal recognition particle (SRP) or 3-­hydr
oxy-­3-­methylglutaryl-­coenzyme A (HMG-­CoA) distinguish the two
types from each other and from JDM. Table 200.4 compares other
juvenile idiopathic inflammatory myositis disorders: JDM, juvenile
polymyositis, and juvenile connective tissue myositis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Elevated serum levels of muscle-­derived enzymes (creatine kinase
[CK], aldolase, aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase [ALT],
lactate dehydrogenase) reflect muscle inflammation. Not all enzyme
levels rise with inflammation in a specific individual; ALT is usually
elevated on initial presentation, whereas CK level may be normal.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 200 u Juvenile Dermatomyositis
Anti-p155/140

Anti-MJ-(NXP-2)

1503

Anti-MDA-5

severe cutaneous
involvement

rash

interstitial lung
disease

calcinosis

proximal
myopathy

rash

myopathy

generalized
lipodystrophy

GI bleed, ulcers,
dysphagia
ulceration
arthritis

ulceration

photosensitive
rash

A

B

C

Fig. 200.1 Phenotypes associated with the three most common myositis specific antibodies in children with myositis: anti-­p155/140, anti-­MJ, and

antiMDA-­5. A, Anti-­p155/140, present in 18–30% of idiopathic juvenile inflammatory myopathies, displays an extensive photosensitive rash that
ulcerates, a chronic disease course, and generalized lipodystrophy. B, Fifteen to twenty-­three percent of children positive for anti-­MJ (nuclear matrix
protein 2 in the United Kingdom) may have disease onset at a younger age and have dysphonia, muscle cramps, atrophy, and contractures, with
increased weakness, and they are more likely to develop calcifications and gastrointestinal symptoms; their rash often spares the truncal area. C,
Anti–MDA-­5 is increased in the Japanese population (33%) vs the United Kingdom (6%) and is associated with inflammatory lung disease, oral and
cutaneous ulcers, arthritis, and a milder form of muscle involvement. GI, gastrointestinal. (Modified from Rider LG, Nistala K. The juvenile idiopathic
inflammatory myopathies: Pathogenesis, clinical and autoantibody phenotypes, and outcomes. J Intern Med. 2016;280:24–38, Fig 3.)

Fig. 200.3 The rash of juvenile dermatomyositis. The skin over the

metacarpal and proximal interphalangeal joints may be hypertrophic
and pale red (Gottron papules).

Fig. 200.2 The facial rash of juvenile dermatomyositis. There is ery-

thema over the bridge of the nose and malar areas with violaceous
(heliotropic) discolorations of the upper eyelids.

The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is often normal, and the
rheumatoid factor (RF) test result is typically negative. There may
be anemia consistent with chronic disease. Antinuclear antibody
(ANA) is present in >80% of children with JDM. Serologic testing
results are divided into two groups: myositis-­associated antibodies

(MAAs) and myositis-­specific antibodies (MSAs) (see Table 200.1).
MAAs are associated with JDM but are not specific and can be seen
in both overlap conditions and other rheumatic diseases. The presence of MAAs such as SSA, SSB, Sm, ribonucleoprotein (RNP), and
double-­stranded (ds) DNA may increase the likelihood of overlap
disease or connective tissue myositis. Antibodies to Pm/Scl identify
a small, distinct subgroup of myopathies with a protracted disease
course, often complicated by pulmonary interstitial fibrosis and cardiac involvement. MSAs are specific for myositis and are identified in

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1504 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 200.4 Features of juvenile dermatomyositis. A, Perivascular and perifascicular inflammatory infiltrates with necrotic fibers, perifascicular atro-

phy, and regeneration in a muscle biopsy. B, MRI is a sensitive indicator of myositis. Inflamed areas appear bright on short-­tau inversion recovery–
weighted images (arrows). C, Capillaries are most often abnormal when viewed at the nail fold. Typical changes of dilation with adjacent dropout
(arrow) are seen. D, About 30% of juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM) patients have dystrophic calcinosis. E, Cutaneous ulceration with central necrosis,
crust, and surrounding erythema at the elbow of 10-­year-­old boy with severe JDM. F, Lipoatrophy of the forearm (arrow) in a boy with JDM. (From
Feldman BM, Rider LG, Reed AM, Pachman LM. Juvenile dermatomyositis and other idiopathic inflammatory myopathies of childhood. Lancet.
2008;371:2201–2212, Fig. 3, p. 2205.)

approximately 40–60% of children with JIM. These antibodies suggest a diagnosis of myositis, and their presence may define distinct
clinical subsets and may predict prognosis. Anti-­TIF-­1-­γ antibodies are reported in 23–30% of children with JDM and are associated
with photosensitive rashes, ulceration, and lipodystrophy. Unlike in
adults, this antibody is not associated with malignancy in children
with JDM. Anti-­NXP2 antibodies are reported in 12–23% of children
with JDM and are associated with cramps, muscle atrophy, contractures, and dysphonia. Anti-­MDA5 antibodies are found in approximately 7% of children with JDM and may predict the development
of interstitial lung disease (ILD). Because certain MSAs have defined
clinical phenotypes in JDM and IFN-­related biomarkers that may
correlate with disease activity, there is interest in assessing IFN signature by MSA type.
Radiographic studies aid both diagnosis and medical management.
MRI using T2-­weighted images and fat suppression (see Fig. 200.4B)
identifies active sites of disease, reducing sampling error and increasing the sensitivity of muscle biopsy and EMG, results of which are
nondiagnostic in 20% of cases if the procedures are not directed by
MRI. Extensive rash and abnormal MRI findings may be found despite
normal serum levels of muscle-­derived enzymes. Muscle biopsy often
demonstrates evidence of disease activity and chronicity that is not suspected from the levels of the serum enzymes alone.
A contrast swallow study may document palatal dysfunction and risk
of aspiration. Pulmonary function testing detects a restrictive defect
consistent with respiratory weakness and reduced diffusion capacity
of carbon monoxide from alveolar fibrosis associated with other connective tissue diseases. Serial measurement of vital capacity or negative
inspiratory force can document changes in respiratory weakness, especially in an inpatient setting. Calcinosis is seen easily on radiographs,
along the fascial planes, and within muscles (see Figs. 200.4D and E
and Fig. 200.5).

TREATMENT

The aid of an experienced pediatric rheumatologist is invaluable in
outlining an appropriate course of treatment for a child with JDM.
Before the advent of corticosteroids, one third of patients spontaneously improved; a third had a chronic, lingering course; and a third
died from the disease. Corticosteroids have altered the course of the

disease, lowering morbidity and mortality. Methotrexate decreases the
length of treatment with corticosteroids, thereby reducing morbidity
from steroid toxicity. Intravenous (IV) gamma globulin is frequently
used as an adjunct for the treatment of severe disease and can be given
at 2 g/kg (maximum 70 g) every 2 weeks for three doses, then every 4
weeks as needed. The efficacy and safety have been reported in open-­
label studies. In the 2010 Childhood Arthritis and Rheumatology
Research Alliance (CARRA) treatment utilization report, IVIG was
used most frequently for initial treatment of severe disease and treatment of refractory disease. It is also a steroid-­sparing agent. Consensus
treatment plans for guiding treatment of children with JDM are available from CARRA online through PubMed and Figure 200.6.
Corticosteroids remain the mainstay of treatment. In a clinically
stable child without debilitating weakness, oral prednisone at 2 mg/
kg/day (maximum 60 mg daily) is recommended. Children with GI
involvement may have decreased absorption of oral corticosteroids
and require IV administration. In more severe cases with respiratory
or oropharyngeal weakness, high-­dose pulse methylprednisolone is
used (30 mg/kg/day for 3 days, maximum dose 1 g/day) with ongoing
weekly or monthly IV dosing along with daily oral corticosteroids as
needed. Corticosteroid dosage is slowly tapered over 12 months, after
indicators of inflammation (muscle enzymes) normalize and strength
improves.
Weekly oral, IV, or subcutaneous methotrexate (the lesser of 1 mg/kg
or 15 mg/m2) is often used as a steroid-­sparing agent in JDM. The concomitant use of methotrexate halves the cumulative dosage of steroids
needed for disease control. Risks of methotrexate include immunosuppression, blood count dyscrasias, chemical hepatitis, pulmonary toxicity, nausea/vomiting, and teratogenicity. Folic acid is typically given
with methotrexate starting at a dose of 1 mg daily to reduce toxicity and
side effects of folate inhibition (oral ulcers, nausea, anemia). Children
who are taking immunosuppressive medications such as methotrexate should avoid live-­virus vaccination, although inactivated influenza
vaccination is recommended yearly. An international trial found the
combination of methotrexate plus corticosteroids to perform better
than corticosteroids alone and with fewer side effects than corticosteroids plus cyclosporine A.
Hydroxychloroquine has little toxicity risk and is used as a secondary disease-­modifying agent to reduce rash and maintain remission.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 200 u Juvenile Dermatomyositis

1505

Table 200.4  Frequency of Manifestations of Juvenile Dermatomyositis (JDM), Juvenile Polymyositis (JPM), and Overlap
Myositis
FREQUENCY AT ONSET (%)
MANIFESTATION

JDM

JPM

OVERLAP MYOSITIS

Progressive proximal muscle weakness

82-­100

100

100

Easy fatigue

80-­100

85

84

Gottron papules

57-­91

0

74-­80

Heliotrope rash

66-­87

0

40-­59

Erythematous rash of malar/facial area

42-­100

0-­6

20-­51

Periungual nailfold capillary changes

35-­91

33

67-­80

Muscle pain or tenderness

25-­83

61-­66

55

Weight loss

33-­36

52

53

Falling episodes

40

59

29

Arthritis

10-­65

0-­45

69-­80

Fever

16-­65

0-­41

0-­49

Lymphadenopathy

8-­75

0-­12

20-­22

Dysphagia or dysphonia

15-­44

39

40

Joint contractures

9-­55

17-­42

57-­60

V-­or shawl-­sign rashes

19-­29

3-­6

8-­14

Dyspnea on exertion

5-­43

17-­42

40

Gastrointestinal symptoms

5-­37

9-­33

6-­53

Photosensitive rashes

5-­51

0-­6

22-­40

Raynaud phenomenon

9-­28

0-­24

41-­60

Edema

11-­34

15

20

Gingivitis

6-­30

9

0-­37

Cutaneous ulceration

5-­30

3

20-­22

Calcinosis

3-­34

6

24

Cardiac involvement

2-­13

36

19

Interstitial lung disease

5

15

26

Lipodystrophy

4-­14

3

0-­6

Gastrointestinal bleeding or ulceration

3-­4

3

4-­10

From Rider LG, Lindsley CB, Miller FW. Juvenile Dermatomyositis. In: Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, Wedderburn L, eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 7th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2016: Table 26.4.

Typically, it is administered at doses of 4-­6 mg/kg/day orally in either
tablet or liquid form. Ophthalmologic follow-­up one time per year to
monitor for rare retinal toxicity is recommended. Other side effects
include hemolysis in patients with glucose-­6-­phosphate deficiency, GI
intolerance, and skin/hair discoloration.
The use of rituximab in a trial of steroid-­dependent patients with
resistant inflammatory myopathies, including JDM, did not meet the
primary study end-­point showing a difference in time to improvement
between individuals given rituximab at baseline or at 8 weeks, but overall, 83% of all patients met the definition of improvement in the trial.
Additionally, rituximab was noted to have a significant steroid-­sparing
effect.
Other medications used to treat severe refractory disease include
mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine, and cyclophosphamide. Given
the strong type I IFN signal in JDM and that these cytokines activate
intracellular signaling through the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) pathway, consideration of
JAK inhibitors, including tofacitinib, baricitinib, and ruxolitinib, as
potential therapeutic candidates has been bolstered by case reports and

case series that report generally promising results with these drugs in
off-­label treatment of JDM.
Children with pharyngeal weakness may need nasogastric or gastrostomy feedings to avoid aspiration, whereas those with GI vasculitis
require full bowel rest. Rarely, children with severe respiratory weakness require ventilator therapy and even tracheostomy until the respiratory weakness improves.
Physical therapy and occupational therapy are integral parts of the
treatment program, initially for passive stretching early in the disease
course and then for direct reconditioning of muscles to regain strength
and range of motion. Therapy may improve muscle strength measures
and cardiovascular fitness. Bed rest is not indicated, because weight
bearing improves bone density and prevents contractures. Social work
and psychology services may facilitate adjustment to the frustration
of physical impairment in a previously active child and aid with sleep
disturbances associated with rheumatic disease.
All children with JDM should avoid sun exposure and apply high–
sun protection factor (SPF) sunscreen daily, even in winter and on
cloudy days. Vitamin D and calcium supplements are indicated for all

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1506 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

A

B

Fig. 200.5 Calcifications in dermatomyositis. A, Skin effects of calcification. B, Radiographic evidence of calcification.

MODERATE JDM
Plan 1
Methotrexatea 15 mg/m2 or 1 mg/kg weekly
AND
Prednisoneb 2 mg/kg/d for 4 wk then decrease by 20%
Plan 2
Plan 1 AND
IV methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg for 3 d, then weeklyc
Plan 3
Plan 2 AND
IVIG 2 g/kgd q2wk × 3 doses then monthIy
SKIN PREDOMINANT JDM
Plan 1
Hydroxychloroquine 5 mg/kg/de
Plan 2
Plan 1 AND
Methotrexatea 15 mg/m2 or 1 mg/kg weekly
Plan 3
Plan 2 AND
Prednisoneb 2 mg/kg/d for 4 wk then decrease by 20%
SKIN RESISTANT JDM
Plan 1
IVIG 2 g/kgd q2wks × 3 doses then monthly
Plan 2
Plan 1 AND
Mycophenolate mofetilf BID 10 mg/kg/dose OR 600 mg/m2
Plan 3
Cyclosporine 3 mg/kgg

Fig. 200.6 Recommended consensus treatment plans from CARRA

for JDM patients with moderate, skin-­predominant, and skin-­resistant
disease. IV, intravenous; IG, immunoglobulin. aLesser of 15 mg/m2 or
1 mg/kg (max 40 mg), bmax 60 mg, coptional, dmax 70 g, emax 400
mg, fmax 1,500 mg bid, ghigher doses based on toxicity, efficacy. (From
Kim H, Huber AM, Kim S. Updates on juvenile dermatomyositis from
the last decade: classification to outcomes. Rheum Dis Clin N Am.
2021;47:669–690, Fig. 1, p. 679.)

children undergoing long-­term corticosteroid therapy to reduce drug-­
induced osteopenia and osteoporosis.

COMPLICATIONS

Most complications from JDM are related to prolonged and severe
weakness from muscle atrophy to cutaneous calcifications and scarring

or atrophy to lipodystrophy. Secondary complications from medical
treatments are also common. Children with acute and severe weakness are at risk for aspiration pneumonia and respiratory failure and
occasionally require nasogastric feeding and mechanical ventilation
until weakness improves. Rarely, vasculitis of the GI tract develops
in children with severe JDM. Crampy abdominal pain and occult GI
bleeding may indicate bowel wall vasculitis and lead to ischemia, GI
bleeding, and perforation if not treated with complete bowel rest and
aggressive treatment for the underlying inflammation. Surgery should
be avoided, if possible, because the GI vasculitis is diffuse and not easily
amenable to surgical intervention. Contrast-­enhanced CT may show
dilation or thickening of the bowel wall, intraluminal air, or evidence
of bowel necrosis.
Involvement of the cardiac muscle with pericarditis, myocarditis, and
conduction defects with arrhythmias has been reported, as has reduced
diastolic and systolic function related to ongoing disease activity.
Lipodystrophy and calcinosis are thought to be associated with
long-­standing or undertreated disease (see Fig. 200.4D-­F). Dystrophic
deposition of calcium phosphate, hydroxyapatite, or fluoroapatite crystals occurs in subcutaneous plaques or nodules, resulting in painful
ulceration of the skin with extrusion of crystals or calcific liquid. Calcification is found in up to 40% of large cohorts of children with JDM.
Pathologic calcifications may be related to severity of disease and prolonged delay to treatment and potentially to genetic polymorphisms of
TNF-­α-­308. Calcium deposits tend to form in subcutaneous tissue and
along muscle. Some ulcerate through the skin and drain a soft calcific
liquid, and others manifest as hard nodules along extensor surfaces or
embedded along muscle. Draining lesions serve as a nidus for cellulitis or osteomyelitis. Nodules cause skin inflammation that may mimic
cellulitis. Spontaneous regression of calcium deposits may occur, but
there is no evidence-­based recommendation for treatment of calcinosis. Some experts recommend aggressive treatment of underlying myositis. Others have recommended bisphosphonates, TNF inhibitors, and
sodium thiosulfate, but no evidence-­based trials have been conducted
for this condition.
Lipodystrophy manifests in 10–40% of patients with JDM and can
be difficult to recognize. Lipodystrophy results in progressive loss of
subcutaneous and visceral fat, typically over the face and upper body,
and may be associated with a metabolic syndrome similar to polycystic ovarian syndrome with insulin resistance, hirsutism, acanthosis,
hypertriglyceridemia, and abnormal glucose tolerance. Lipodystrophy
may be generalized or localized.
Children receiving prolonged corticosteroid therapy are prone to
complications such as cessation of linear growth, weight gain, hirsutism, adrenal suppression, immunosuppression, striae, cushingoid fat
deposition, mood changes, osteoporosis, cataracts, avascular necrosis,
and steroid myopathy. Families should be counseled on the effects of
corticosteroids and advised to use medical alert identification and to
consult a nutritionist regarding a low-­salt, low-­fat diet with adequate
vitamin D and calcium supplementation.
An association with malignancy at disease onset is observed in
adults with dermatomyositis but very rarely in children.

PROGNOSIS

The mortality rate in JDM has decreased since the advent of corticosteroids, from 33% to currently approximately 1%; little is known
about the long-­term consequences of persistent vascular inflammation. The period of active symptoms has decreased from about 3.5
years to <1.5 years with more aggressive immunosuppressive therapy; the vascular, skin, and muscle symptoms of children with JDM
generally respond well to therapy. At 7 years of follow-­up, 75% of
patients have little to no residual disability, but 25% continue to have
chronic weakness and 40% have chronic rash. Up to one-­third may
need long-­term medications to control their disease. Children with
JDM appear able to repair inflammatory damage to vasculature and
muscle, but there is some emerging concern about long-­term effects
on cardiovascular risk.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 201 u Scleroderma and Raynaud Phenomenon

Chapter 201

Scleroderma and Raynaud
Phenomenon
Heather A. Van Mater and
C. Egla Rabinovich
Juvenile scleroderma encompasses a range of conditions unified by
the presence of fibrosis of the skin. Juvenile scleroderma is divided
into two major categories, juvenile localized scleroderma (JLS,
also known as morphea), which is largely limited to the skin, and
juvenile systemic sclerosis (JSSc), with multisystem organ involvement. Localized disease is the predominant type seen in pediatric
populations (>95%), but systemic sclerosis is associated with mortality and severe multiorgan morbidity.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of scleroderma is unknown, but the mechanism of disease appears to be a combination of a vasculopathy, autoimmunity,
immune activation, and fibrosis. Triggers, including trauma, infection, and, possibly, subclinical graft versus host reaction from persistent maternal cells (microchimerism), injure vascular endothelial
cells, resulting in increased expression of adhesion molecules. These
molecules entrap platelets and inflammatory cells, resulting in vascular changes with manifestations such as Raynaud phenomenon and
pulmonary hypertension. Inflammatory cells infiltrate the area of initial vascular damage, causing further vascular damage and resulting
in thickened artery walls and reduction in capillary numbers. Macrophages and other inflammatory cells then migrate into affected tissues and secrete cytokines that induce fibroblasts to reproduce and

1507

synthesize excessive amounts of collagen, resulting in fibrosis and
subsequent lipoatrophy and dermal fibrosis, with loss of sweat glands
and hair follicles. In late stages the entire dermis may be replaced by
compact collagen fibers.
Autoimmunity is believed to be a key process in the pathogenesis of
both localized and systemic scleroderma, given the high percentage of
affected children with autoantibodies (Table 201.1). Children with localized disease often have a positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) test result
(42%), and 47% of this subgroup have antihistone antibodies. Children
with JSSc have higher rates of ANA positivity (80.7%) and may have anti–
Scl-­70 antibody (34%, antitopoisomerase I). The relationship between
specific autoantibodies and the various forms of scleroderma is not well
understood, and all antibody test results may be negative, especially in JLS.

CLASSIFICATION

Localized scleroderma is distinct from systemic scleroderma and rarely
progresses to systemic disease. The category of JLS includes several
subtypes differentiated by both the distribution of the lesions and the
depth of involvement (Tables 201.2 and 201.3). Up to 15% of children
have a combination of two or more subtypes.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Juvenile scleroderma is rare, with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 100,000
children. Localized scleroderma (LS) is much more common than systemic sclerosis (SSc) in children, by a 10:1 ratio, with linear scleroderma
being the most common subtype. LS is predominantly a pediatric condition, with 65% of patients diagnosed before age 18 years. After age 8
years the female/male ratio for both LS and SSc is approximately 3:1,
whereas in patients younger than 8 years, the prevalence is equal.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS
Localized Scleroderma

The onset of scleroderma is generally insidious, and manifestations
vary according to disease subtype. The initial skin manifestations of
localized disease usually include erythema or a bluish hue seen around
an area of waxy induration; subtle erythema may be the only presenting

Table 201.1  Clinical Subtypes of Systemic Sclerosis: Associated Organ Manifestations and Autoantibody Association
SUBTYPE

ORGAN SYSTEM

ORGAN SYSTEM FEATURES

Diffuse cutaneous (dc)

Skin

Thickness proximal to elbows and knees
Rapid progressive thickening

Cardiac

Congestive heart failure
Conduction abnormalities

Renal

Scleroderma renal crisis

Pulmonary

Interstitial lung disease

Skin

Thickness limited to distal extremities (and face)
Restricted and nonprogressive thickening

Gastrointestinal

Esophageal dysmotility
GI strictures
Malabsorption

Pulmonary

Pulmonary arterial hypertension

Skin

Either dcSSc or lcSSc pattern
Skin manifestations of other CTD, such as Gottron papules
(DM) and malar rash (SLE)

Musculoskeletal

Arthritis

Limited cutaneous (lc)

Overlap syndrome

ANTIBODY ASSOCIATION
Topoisomerase (Scl-­70)
RNA Polymerase III
U3-RNP (fibrillarin)

Centromere
Th/To

PM-­Scl
U1-­RNP
Ku

Myositis
Cardiac
Renal

Can have any of the dcSSc or lcSSc manifestations
Additional organ involvement in association with other CTD
feature, such as lupus nephritis

Pulmonary
Gastrointestinal
CTD, Connective tissue disease; DM, dermatomyositis; PM-­Scl, polymyositis-­scleroderma antibody; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; U1-­RNP, U1 ribonucleoprotein antibody.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Table 27.3, p. 382.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1508 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 201.2  Classification of Pediatric Scleroderma
(Morphea)

Table 201.3  Provisional Criteria for Classification of
Juvenile Systemic Sclerosis (JSSc)

LOCALIZED SCLERODERMA

MAJOR CRITERION (REQUIRED)*

Plaque morphea

Proximal skin sclerosis/induration of the skin proximal to
metacarpophalangeal or metatarsophalangeal joints

Confined to dermis, occasionally superficial panniculus
Well-­circumscribed circular area of induration, often a central waxy,
ivory-­colored area surrounded by a violaceous halo; unilateral
Generalized morphea
Involves dermis primarily, occasionally panniculus
Defined as confluence of individual morphea plaques or lesions in
three or more anatomic sites; more likely to be bilateral

MINOR CRITERIA (AT LEAST TWO REQUIRED)
Cutaneous: Sclerodactyly
Peripheral vascular: Raynaud phenomenon, nail fold capillary
abnormalities (telangiectasias), digital tip ulcers
Gastrointestinal: Dysphagia, gastroesophageal reflux
Cardiac: Arrhythmias, heart failure

Bullous morphea

Renal: Renal crisis, new-­onset arterial hypertension

Bullous lesions that can occur with any of the subtypes of morphea

Respiratory: Pulmonary fibrosis (high-­resolution CT/radiography),
decreased diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide, pulmonary
arterial hypertension

Linear scleroderma
Linear lesions can extend through the dermis, subcutaneous tissue,
and muscle to underlying bone; more likely unilateral
Limbs/trunk:
One or more linear streaks of the extremities or trunk
Flexion contracture occurs when lesion extends over a joint; limb-­
length discrepancies
En coup de sabre:
Involves the scalp and/or face; lesions can extend into the central
nervous system, resulting in neurologic sequelae, most
commonly seizures and headaches
Parry-­Romberg syndrome:
Hemifacial atrophy without a clearly definable en coup de sabre
lesion; can also have neurologic involvement
Deep Morphea
Involves deeper layers, including panniculus, fascia, and muscle;
more likely to be bilateral
Subcutaneous morphea:
Primarily involves the panniculus or subcutaneous tissue
Plaques are hyperpigmented and symmetric
Eosinophilic fasciitis:
Fasciitis with marked blood eosinophilia
Fascia is the primary site of involvement; typically involves
extremities
Classic description is “peau d’orange,” or orange peel texture, but
early disease manifests as edema (see Fig. 201.2)
Morphea profunda:
Deep lesion extending to fascia and sometimes muscle, but may
be limited to a single plaque, often on the trunk
Disabling pansclerotic morphea of childhood:
Generalized full-­thickness involvement of skin on the trunk, face,
and extremities, sparing fingertips and toes
SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS
Diffuse
Most common type in childhood
Symmetric thickening and hardening of the skin (sclerosis) with
fibrous and degenerative changes of viscera
Limited
Rare in childhood
Previously known as CREST (calcinosis cutis, Raynaud phenomenon,
esophageal dysfunction, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia) syndrome

Neurologic: Neuropathy, carpal tunnel syndrome
Musculoskeletal: Tendon friction rubs, arthritis, myositis
Serologic: Antinuclear antibodies—SSc-­selective autoantibodies
(anticentromere, antitopoisomerase I [Scl-­70], antifibrillarin,
anti-­PM/Scl, antifibrillin, or anti-­RNA polymerase I or III)
*Diagnosis requires at least one major and at least two minor criteria.
From Zulian F, Woo P, Athreya BH, et al. The Pediatric Rheumatology European Society/
American College of Rheumatology/European League against Rheumatism provisional
classification criteria for juvenile systemic sclerosis. Arthritis Rheum. 2007;57:203–212.

sign (Fig. 201.1). Edema and erythema are followed by indurated,
hypopigmented or hyperpigmented atrophic lesions (Fig. 201.2). LS
varies in size from a few centimeters to the entire length of the extremity, with varying depth. Patients may present with arthralgias, synovitis, or flexion contractures (Fig. 201.3). Children also experience
limb-­length discrepancies as a result of growth impairment caused by
involvement of muscle and bone. Children with en coup de sabre may
have symptoms unique to central nervous system (CNS) involvement,
such as seizures, hemifacial atrophy, ipsilateral uveitis, and learning/
behavioral changes (Fig. 201.4). Up to 25% of children with LS have
extracutaneous manifestations, most frequently arthritis (47%) in linear disease and neurologic symptoms (17%) associated with en coup
de sabre.

Systemic Scleroderma

SSc is a severe disease in children, starting with an insidious onset followed by a prolonged course characterized by periods of remission and
exacerbation, commonly resulting in chronic disability and death, with
a 5-­year mortality rate of 7.5%.
The skin manifestations of SSc include an early phase of edema
that spreads proximally from the dorsum of the hands and fingers and
includes the face. An eventual decrease in edema is followed by induration and fibrosis of skin, ultimately resulting in loss of subcutaneous fat,
sweat glands, and hair follicles. Later, atrophic skin becomes shiny and
waxy in appearance. As lesions spread proximally, flexion contractures
develop at the elbows, hips, and knees associated with secondary muscle weakness and atrophy. In the face, this process results in a small oral
stoma with decreased mouth aperture. Skin ulceration over pressure
points, such as the elbows, may be associated with subcutaneous calcifications. Severe Raynaud phenomenon (RP; Fig. 201.5) causes ulceration of the fingertips with subsequent loss of tissue pulp and tapered
fingers (sclerodactyly) (Fig. 201.6). Resorption of the distal tufts of the
distal phalanges may occur (acroosteolysis). Hyperpigmented postinflammatory changes surrounded by atrophic depigmentation give a
salt-­and-­pepper appearance to skin. Over years, remodeling of lesions
sometimes results in focal improvement in skin thickening.
Pulmonary disease is the most common visceral manifestation of SSc
and includes both arterial and interstitial involvement (alveolitis). Symptoms range from asymptomatic disease to exercise intolerance, dyspnea at

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 201 u Scleroderma and Raynaud Phenomenon

1509

Fig. 201.1 Child with generalized morphea. Note the active circular
lesion (arrowheads) with a surrounding rim of erythema. The largest lesion has areas of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation and depression
with an area of erythema on the right. The small lesion (arrow) demonstrates depression caused by lipoatrophy.

Fig. 201.4 Child with en coup de sabre lesion on scalp extending

down to forehead. Before treatment, the skin on the scalp was bound
down with chronic skin breakdown. Note the area of hypopigmentation
extending down the forehead (arrows).

Fig. 201.2 Inactive linear scleroderma demonstrating hyperpigmented lesion with areas of normal skin (skip lesions).

Fig. 201.5 Active Raynaud phenomenon with well-­demarcated pallor
Fig. 201.3 Child with untreated linear scleroderma resulting in knee

contracture, immobility of ankle, chronic skin breakdown of scar on the
lateral knee, and areas of hypopigmentation and hyperpigmentation.
The affected leg is 1 cm shorter.

rest, and right-­sided heart failure. Pulmonary arterial hypertension is a
poor prognostic sign, developing because of lung disease or independently
as part of the vasculopathy. Clinical manifestations of pulmonary arterial
hypertension in children appear late in the course, are subtle, and include
cough and dyspnea on exertion. Pulmonary evaluation should include
pulmonary function tests (PFTs) such as diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide (DLco), bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), and high-­resolution chest
computed tomography (HRCT). PFTs reveal decreased vital capacity and
decreased DLco, whereas neutrophilia or eosinophilia on BAL suggests
active alveolitis. Chest CT is much more sensitive than chest radiographs,
which are often normal, showing typical basilar ground-­glass abnormalities, reticular linear opacities, nodules, honeycombing, and mediastinal
adenopathy.
Gastrointestinal tract disease is seen in 25% of children with SSc.
Common manifestations include esophageal and intestinal dysmotility
resulting in dysphagia, reflux, dyspepsia, gastroparesis, bacterial overgrowth, dilated bowel loops and pseudoobstruction, and dental caries,
as well as malabsorption and failure to thrive. Renal arterial disease can
cause chronic or severe episodic hypertension; unlike adult disease, renal

at the fingertips in a patient with scleroderma. (From Firestein GS, Budd
RC, Gabriels SE, et al., eds. Firestein & Kelley’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 11th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig. 89.2, p. 1507.)

Fig. 201.6 Sclerodactyly and finger ulcerations in a patient with systemic sclerosis who is poorly compliant with treatment.

crisis is rare. Cardiac fibrosis is associated with arrhythmias, ventricular
hypertrophy, and decreased cardiac function. Mortality from JSSc is usually a result of cardiopulmonary disease. A scoring system helps identify
the severity of the multiorgan involvement (Table 201.4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1510 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 201.4  Medsger Systemic Sclerosis Severity Scale*
ORGAN SYSTEM
General

0 (NORMAL)

1 (MILD)

2 (MODERATE)

3 (SEVERE)

4 (END STAGE)

Wt loss <5%

Wt loss 5–10%

Wt loss 10–15%

Wt loss 15–20%

Wt loss 20%+

Hct 37%+

Hct 33–37%

Hct 29–33%

Hct 25–29%

Hct 25%

Hb 12.3+ g/dL

Hb 11.0-­12.2 g/dL

Hb 9.7-­10.9 g/dL

Hb 8.3-­9.6 g/dL

Hb <8.3 g/dL

Peripheral
vascular

No RP; RP not requiring
vasodilators

RP requiring vasodilators

Digital pitting
scars

Digital tip ulcerations

Digital gangrene

Skin

TSS 0

TSS 1-­14

TSS 15-­29

TSS 30-­39

TSS 40+

Joint/tendon

FTP 0-­0.9 cm

FTP 1.0-­1.9 cm

FTP 2.0-­3.9 cm

FTP 4.0-­4.9 cm

FTP 5.0+ cm

Muscle

Normal proximal muscle
strength

Proximal weakness, mild

Proximal weakness,
moderate

Proximal weakness,
severe

Ambulation aids
required

Gastrointestinal
tract

Normal esophagogram;
normal small bowel
series

Distal esophageal
hypoperistalsis; small
bowel series abnormal

Antibiotics
required for
bacterial
overgrowth

Malabsorption
syndrome; episodes
of pseudoobstruction

Hyperalimentation
required

Lung

DLco 80%+
FVC 80%+
No fibrosis on radiograph
sPAP <35 mm Hg

DLco 70–79%
FVC 70–79%
Basilar rales; fibrosis on
radiograph sPAP 35-­49
mm Hg

DLco 50–69%
FVC 50–69% sPAP
50-­64 mm Hg

DLco <50%
FVC <50% sPAP 65+
mm Hg

Oxygen required

Heart

ECG normal

ECG conduction defect

ECG arrhythmia

ECG arrhythmia
requiring therapy

CHF

LVEF 50%+

LVEF 45–49%

LVEF 40–44%

LVEF 30–40%

LVEF <30%

No history of SRC with
serum creatinine
<1.3 mg/dL

History of SRC with serum
creatinine <1.5 mg/dL

History of SRC
with serum
creatinine 1.5-­
2.4 mg/dL

History of SRC with
serum creatinine
2.5-­5.0 mg/dL

History of SRC with
serum creatinine
>5.0 mg/dL or
dialysis required

Kidney

*If two items are included for a severity grade, only one is required for the patient to be scored as having disease of that severity level.
CHF, Congestive heart failure; DLco, diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide, % predicted; ECG, electrocardiogram; FTP, fingertip-­to-­palm distance in flexion; FVC, forced vital
capacity, % predicted; Hb, hemoglobin; Hct, hematocrit; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; RP, Raynaud phenomenon; sPAP, estimated pulmonary artery pressure by Doppler
echo; SRC, scleroderma renal crisis; TSS, total skin score; Wt, weight.
Modified from Medsger TA Jr, Bombardieri S, Czirjak L, et al. Assessment of disease severity and prognosis, Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2003;21(3 Suppl 29):S51, Table 1, p. S-­43.

Raynaud Phenomenon

Raynaud phenomenon is the most frequent initial symptom in pediatric
SSc, present in 70% of affected children months to years before other
manifestations and seen in nearly all over the course of the disease. RP
refers to the classic triphasic sequence of blanching, cyanosis, and erythema of the digits induced by cold exposure and/or emotional stress
(see Fig. 201.5). RP is typically independent of an underlying rheumatic
disease (Raynaud disease) but can result from rheumatic diseases such
as scleroderma, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and mixed connective tissue disease (Fig. 201.7). The color changes are brought about
by (1) initial arterial vasoconstriction, resulting in hypoperfusion and
pallor (blanching), (2) venous stasis (cyanosis), and (3) reflex vasodilation caused by the factors released from the ischemic phase (erythema).
The color change is classically reproduced by immersing the hands in
iced water and reversed by warming. During the blanching phase, there
is inadequate tissue perfusion in the affected area, associated with pain
and paresthesias and resulting in ischemic damage only when associated
with a rheumatic disease. The blanching usually affects the distal fingers
but may also involve thumbs, toes, ears, and tip of the nose. The affected
area is usually well demarcated and uniformly white. Digital ulcers associated with RP are indicative of underlying rheumatic disease.
Raynaud disease often begins in adolescence and is characterized by symmetric occurrence, the absence of digital ulcers, tissue
necrosis and gangrene, and the lack of manifestations of an underlying rheumatic disease. Children have normal nail fold capillaries
(absence of periungual telangiectasias). RP should be distinguished
from acrocyanosis and chilblains. Acrocyanosis is a vasospastic disorder resulting in cool, painless, bluish discoloration in the hands
and feet despite normal tissue perfusion. It may be exacerbated by
stimulant medications used to treat attention-­deficit disorder. Chilblains is a condition with episodic color changes and the development of nodules related to severe cold exposure and spasm-­induced

vessel and tissue damage; it has been associated with SLE and is also
referred to as lupus pernio, but the majority of children with chilblains do not have lupus.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of JLS is based on the distribution and depth of characteristic lesions. Biopsy is helpful to confirm the diagnosis. The diagnosis of JSSc requires proximal sclerosis/induration of the skin and the
presence of 2 of 20 minor criteria (see Table 201.3).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The most important condition to differentiate from JLS is JSSc. Contractures and synovitis from juvenile arthritis can be differentiated from those
caused by LS by the absence of skin changes. Other conditions to consider
include chemically induced scleroderma-­
like disease, diabetic cheiroarthropathy, pseudoscleroderma, and scleredema. Pseudoscleroderma
comprises a group of unrelated diseases characterized by patchy or diffuse
cutaneous fibrosis without the other manifestations of scleroderma. These
include phenylketonuria, syndromes of premature aging, and localized
idiopathic fibrosis. Scleredema is a transient, self-­limited disease of both
children and adults that has sudden onset after a febrile illness (especially
streptococcal infections) and is characterized by patchy sclerodermatous
lesions on the neck and shoulders and extending to the face, trunk, and
arms.

Laboratory Findings

No laboratory studies are diagnostic of either localized or systemic
scleroderma. Although the results of complete blood counts, serum
chemistry analyses, and urinalysis are normal, children may have
elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, eosinophilia, or hypergammaglobulinemia, all of which normalize with treatment. Elevations
of muscle enzymes, particularly aldolase, can be seen with muscle

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 201 u Scleroderma and Raynaud Phenomenon

The diagnosis of Raynaud
phenomenon is confirmed by a
positive response to all three
questions

Exclude potential causative or
aggravating factors:
• Occupational and environmental
factors
Polyvinyl chloride, frostbite,
hand-arm vibration, and
hypothenar hammer syndrome
• Drugs
Chemotherapeutic agents,
interferon, estrogen, nicotine,
narcotics, sympathomimetic
agents, ergotamines, β-blockers
(nonselective), clonidine
• Neuropathy
Carpal tunnel syndrome

Normal medical history and physical
examination (no digital lesions or
gangrene, normal nail-fold
capillaries): Patients do not need to
undergo specialized studies and can
be considered to have primary
Raynaud phenomenon

Ask the following screening
questions:
• Are your fingers unusually sensitive
to cold?
• Do your fingers change color when
they are exposed to cold
temperatures?
• Do they turn white, blue, or both?

History of single digit - asymmetric
attacks, absent peripheral pulses,
asymmetry of blood pressure, or
evidence of critical ischemia: Patients
should undergo arterial Doppler
ultrasonography, MRI/MRA, or
angiography

1511

The diagnosis of Raynaud
phenomenon is excluded if responses
to second and third questions are
negative

Abnormal findings indicate presence
of obstructive vascular disease:
• Atherosclerosis
• Thromboangiitis obliterans
• Embolic disease
• Thoracic outlet syndrome

Symptoms or signs suggestive of
systemic disease (myalgias,
arthralgias, fever, weakness,
weight loss, rash, arthritis, sicca
syndrome, or symptoms of heart or
lung disease) with or without
abnormal nail-fold capillaries:
Patients should undergo the
following studies:
• Complete blood cell count
• General blood chemical analyses
• Urinalysis
• Test for anti-nuclear antibodies
• Test for rheumatoid factor
• Test for disease-specific
autoantibodies
• C3 and C4 complement levels

Patients with positive results have
rheumatic disease:
• Scleroderma
• Systemic lupus erythematosus
• Mixed connective-tissue disease
• Dermatomyositis
• Polymyositis
• Sjögren syndrome
• Vasculitis
• Anti-phospholipid syndrome
• Undifferentiated CTD

Patients with negative results should
have the following studies:
• Thyroid-function test
• Serum protein electrophoresis
• Test for cryoglobulins and
cryofibrinogen

Patients with positive results have
other systemic diseases:
• Hypothyroidism
• Cancer
• Cold agglutinin syndrome
• POEMS syndrome
• Cryoglobulinemia
• Cryofibrinogenemia
• Hyperviscosity syndrome

Fig. 201.7 Diagnostic algorithm for Raynaud phenomenon. CTD, Connective tissue disease; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; POEMS,
polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, and skin changes. (From Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, et al., eds.
Kelley & Firestein’s Textbook of Rheumatology, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017: Fig 84-­3.)

involvement. Patients with JSSc may have anemia, leukocytosis, and
eosinophilia and autoantibodies (ANA, anti–Scl-­70). Imaging studies
delineate the affected area and can be used to follow disease progression. MRI is useful in en coup de sabre and Parry-­Romberg syndrome
(facial hemiatrophy) for determination of CNS or orbital involvement.
Infrared thermography uses the temperature variation between areas
of active and inactive cutaneous disease to help differentiate active disease from damage. The role of ultrasound to examine lesion activity is
evolving. HRCT, PFTs, echocardiography, and manometry are useful
tools for diagnosing and monitoring visceral involvement in JSSc.

TREATMENT

Treatment for scleroderma varies according to the subtype and severity. Superficial morphea may benefit from topical corticosteroids

or ultraviolet therapy. For lesions involving deeper structures, systemic therapy is recommended. A combination of methotrexate and
corticosteroids is effective in treating JLS by preventing lesion extension and resulting in significant skin softening and improved range
of motion of affected joints. The Childhood Arthritis and Rheumatology Research Alliance (CARRA) consensus treatment plans for
JLS include (1) weekly subcutaneous (SC) methotrexate at 1 mg/kg
(maximum dose 25 mg); (2) weekly SC methotrexate (1 mg/kg; max
25 mg) plus either 3 months of high-­dose intravenous (IV) corticosteroids (30 mg/kg; max 1,000 mg) for 3 consecutive days a month
or weekly corticosteroids at the same dose for 3 months; or (3) high-­
dose daily oral corticosteroids (2 mg/kg/day, max 60 mg) with a slow
taper over 48 weeks (Fig. 201.8). Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and
abatacept have shown promise as second-­line agents for recalcitrant

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Clinical diagnosis of localized scleroderma

Active disease?

Cutaneous activity
- Disease extension or existent lesion(s) with active signs
- Erythema
- Violaceous color
- Skin thickening
- White or yellow waxy appearance
- Tactile warmth
- Biopsy showing active disease

AND/OR

Extracutaneous activity
- Progressive deep tissue involvement (by exam or imaging)
- New onset or persistent inflammatory arthritis
- New onset seizures, severe headaches, or CNS vasculitis
- Uveitis or visual disturbance
- Progressive joint contractures
- Progressive growth defects

Yes, active

Not active
No, low risk

Moderate to high
risk for severe
disease?

No

Cosmetic or
functional
issues?

Yes, moderate or high risk
- Subtype
- All except circumscribed superficial morphea
- Rapidly progressive or extensive disease
- Presence of extracutaneous involvement
- Craniofacial involvement

Systemic therapy

Reassess and
observe

- Subtype
- Circumscribed superficial morphea
(excludes craniofacial involvement)
- No extracutaneous involvement

Yes

- Methotrexate
CARRA dosing: 1 mg/kg/wk SC, max 25 mg
PReS dosing: 15 mg/m2/wk PO or SC, max 25 mg
OR
- Mycophenolate mofetil PO
<1.25 m2 = 600 mg/m2 twice a day
40–50 kg or 1.25–1.5 m2 = 750 mg twice a day
>50 kg or 1.5 m2 = 1,000 mg twice a day
WITH OR WITHOUT
- Corticosteroids IV or PO
CARRA dosing
Methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg/dose IV (max 1 gm)
3 consecutive daily doses/month × 3 mo (9 doses) or,
1 dose/week × 12 wk (12 doses)
Prednisone 2 mg/kg/d PO, max 60 mg
Gradual taper over 48 wk
PReS dosing
Prednisone 1–2 mg/Kg/d PO for 2–3 mo
Methylprednisolone 30 mg/Kg/dose IV for 3 mo

Yes

Topical therapy
- Topical corticosteroids
- Vitamin D derivatives
- Tacrolimus
- Imiquimod
- Phototherapy

- Physical/occupational therapy
- Mental health support
- Consider corrective or cosmetic
surgery

New
extracutaneous
disease?

- Long-term monitoring
- Relapse occurs in
14%–45% of patients
- Mean time to relapse:
1–2 y but may occur
several years later

No

Not better by 3
mo or worse
by 6 mo?

Improving

Continue regimen for min
12 mo from time of
disease quiescence

No improvement/worsening
Add or adjust therapy
Adjunctive therapy
Topical therapy, physical/occupational therapy, mental health support

Fig. 201.8 LS treatment recommendations. This algorithm outlines factors to consider when deciding upon treatment and CARRA-­and PReS-­
recommended treatments. Careful and long-­term monitoring for both cutaneous and extracutaneous activity is important. The algorithm is based
upon the authors’ experiences and not intended to serve as prescriptive instructions. CARRA, Childhood Arthritis and Rheumatology Research Alliance; IV, intravenous; max, maximum; min, minimum; PO, by mouth; PReS, Pediatric Rheumatology European Society; SC, subcutaneous. (From
Vasquez-­Canizares N, Li SC. Juvenile localized scleroderma – updates and differences from adult-­onset disease. Rheum Dis Clin N Am. 2021;47:737–
755, Fig. 5, p. 749.)
Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 201 u Scleroderma and Raynaud Phenomenon
disease. Physical and occupational therapy are important adjuncts to
pharmacologic treatment. Eosinophilic fasciitis often responds well
to corticosteroids and methotrexate. Close follow-­up is necessary in
JLS given high rates of relapse—up to 40%.
Treatments for JSSc target specific disease manifestations (Tables
201.5 and 201.6). RP is treated with cold avoidance, and pharmacologic interventions are reserved for severe disease. Calcium channel
blockers (nifedipine 30-­60 mg sustained-­release form daily; amlodipine 2.5-­10 mg daily) are the most common pharmacologic interventions. Additional potential therapies for RP include losartan,
prazosin, bosentan, and sildenafil. Angiotensin-­converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors (captopril, enalapril) are recommended for hypertension associated with renal disease. Methotrexate or MMF may
be beneficial for skin manifestations. Cyclophosphamide and MMF
are used to treat pulmonary alveolitis and prevent fibrosis. Corticosteroids should be used cautiously in SSc because of an association with renal crisis. Adults with SSc have been successfully treated
with high-­dose cyclophosphamide, antithymocyte globulin, and
autologous stem cell transplantation. Systemic sclerosis–associated
interstitial lung disease has been managed with nintedanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, which has antiinflammatory and antifibrotic
effects. Nintedanib combination therapy with MMF is also effective
as an initiation therapy or when escalation of therapy is needed.
The treatment of RP begins with avoiding cold stimuli, using
hand and foot warmers, and avoiding carrying bags by their handles
(impairs circulation). Nifedipine (10-­20 mg three times daily—adult

1513

dose) reduces, but does not eliminate, the number and severity of
episodes. Side effects include headache, flushing, and hypotension.
Topical nitrates may result in digital vasodilation and may reduce the
severity of an episode.

PROGNOSIS

JLS is ultimately generally self-­limited, with the initial inflammatory
stage followed by a period of stabilization and then softening, for an
average disease duration of 3-­5 years, although there are reports
of active disease lasting up to 20 years. Prolonged disease activity
is associated primarily with linear and deep disease subtypes. JLS,
especially linear and deep subtypes, can result in significant morbidity, disfigurement, and disability as a result of joint contractures,
muscle atrophy, limb shortening, facial asymmetry, and hyperpigmentation and hypopigmentation. Death from an en coup de sabre
lesion with progressive neurologic decline has been reported.
JSSc has a more variable prognosis. Although many children have
a slow, insidious course, others demonstrate a rapidly progressive
form with early organ failure and death. Skin manifestations reportedly soften years after disease onset. Overall, the prognosis of JSSc
is better than that of the adult form, with 5-­, 10-­, and 15-­year survival rates, respectively, in children of 89%, 80–87%, and 74–87%.
The most common cause of death is heart failure caused by myocardial and pulmonary fibrosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 201.5  Organ-­Specific Treatment of Systemic Sclerosis
MANIFESTATION

FIRST-­LINE

SECOND-­LINE

VERY SEVERE

Raynaud phenomenon

Calcium channel blockers*

PDE-­5 inhibitors†
Fluoxetine
Angiotensin II receptor antagonists‡
Topical nitrates§

Prostacyclins (iloprost)¶
Sympathectomy
Botulism toxin
Fat grafting

Digital ulcers

PDE-­5 inhibitors†

Endothelin receptor antagonists#

Prostacyclins (iloprost)

Pulmonary hypertension

PDE-­5 inhibitors†
Endothelin receptor
antagonists

Prostacyclins (epoprostenol)¶
Riociguat

Interstitial lung disease

Cyclophosphamide
Mycophenolate mofetil
Corticosteroids

Rituximab

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation

Skin

Methotrexate
Mycophenolate mofetil
Corticosteroids (low dose)

Abatacept
Immune globulin

Cyclophosphamide
Rituximab

Renal crisis

ACE inhibitors**

Musculoskeletal

NSAIDs
Hydroxychloroquine
Methotrexate
Corticosteroids (low dose)

Rituximab
Abatacept
Tocilizumab

*Calcium channel blockers (nifedipine, amlodipine).
†PDE-­5 inhibitors (sildenafil, tadalafil).
‡Angiotensin receptor antagonists (losartan).
§Topical nitrates (glyceryl trinitrate).
¶Prostacyclins (iloprost, epoprostenol).
#Endothelin receptor antagonist (bosentan, ambrisentan, macitentan).

**ACE inhibitors (captopril, enalapril).
ACE, Angiotensin converting enzyme; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; PDE-­5, phosphodiesterase-­5.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Table 27.8, p. 395.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1514 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 201.6  Treatment of Gastrointestinal Manifestations of Juvenile SSc
ORGAN

MANIFESTATION

TREATMENT

Oral

Buccal, lingual fibrosis
Tooth decay
Mandibular resorption
Gingival recession
Dysphagia

Dental hygiene
Fluoride treatments every 3 months
Dental sealant
Soft foods, small portions, adequate fluids
Gingival mucosa grafting
Dietary restriction (low sugar, soft foods)

Esophageal

Dysmotility
Reflux
Constriction

Metoclopramide, erythromycin
Weight loss; small, frequent meals; avoid eating 3 hr before bed; raise head of
bed 6 inches
Avoid tight clothes, heavy lifting, bending
Proton pump inhibitors, H2 blockers
Dilatation

Stomach

GAVE (watermelon stomach)
Fructose intolerance

Metoclopramide
Erythromycin*
Octreotide

Small intestines

Bacterial overgrowth
Bezoars
Malabsorption leading to malnutrition
Pseudoobstruction

FODMAP diet
Vitamin supplementation
Low-­residue, elemental diet
Metoclopramide
Antibiotics
Octreotide

Colon

Fibrosis of lymphatics
Ischemia

Erythromycin
Metamucil
High-­fiber diet

Anorectal

Internal anal sphincter atrophy

Biofeedback
Pelvic floor exercises
Sacral nerve stimulation

*Side effects of erythromycin can be avoided by using low doses (rather than antibiotic-­level doses).
FODMAP, Fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyol; GAVE, gastric antrum vascular ectasia; SSc, systemic sclerosis.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Table 27.9, p. 398.

Chapter 202

Behçet Disease

Mediterranean countries; boys and girls are equally affected. A family history of BD is present in approximately 20% of the cases. Onset
in children is usually 8-­12 years of age. Newborns of affected mothers have demonstrated symptoms of BD.

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Seza Ozen
Behçet disease (BD) is classified as a primary multisystem variable vessel vasculitis because of the involvement of any size and type (arterial,
venous) of blood vessel. BD is probably underdiagnosed in children
as a result of the heterogeneity in clinical features, the large spectrum
of differential diseases, and lack of specific tests. Originally described
with recurrent oral ulcerations, uveitis, and skin abnormalities, the BD
spectrum is much broader.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

BD has a high prevalence in countries along the Silk Road, extending from Japan to the Eastern Mediterranean. It is increasingly
recognized among people of European ancestry as well. BD has a
prevalence of 5-­7 per 100,000 adults. The increased disease recognition might have had a role in the rising prevalence of BD as
well as the migrations of the 20th century. Prevalence in children
is probably not more than 10% of the adult counterparts in Eastern

The etiology of BD is unknown. It is a polygenic disorder with autoinflammatory features. The autoinflammatory nature of BD is suggested by its episodic nature, the prominent innate immune system
activation, the absence of identifiable autoantibodies, and the co-­
association with the MEFV gene. However, there is evidence supporting the role of the adaptive immune system as well. BD has also been
considered to be an MHC-­I-­opathy because of the strong association
with HLA-­B51. Genetic contribution to BD is evident through this
well-­known association with HLA-­B5101, the familial cases, the sibling and twin recurrence rate, the specific frequency of the disease
among people along the Silk Road, evidence for genetic anticipation,
and genome-­wide analysis. Genome-­wide analysis studies among
Turkish and Japanese BD patients confirm the marked association
with HLA-­B5101. Other significant associations include interleukin
(IL)-­10 and IL-­23R/IL-­12Rβ2 genes. Other possible susceptibility
loci demonstrate associations with STAT4 (a transcription factor in
a signaling pathway related to cytokines such as IL-­12, type I interferons, and IL-­23) and ERAP1 (an endoplasmic reticulum–expressed

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 202 u Behçet Disease
aminopeptidase that functions in the processing of peptides onto
major histocompatibility complex class I).
An infectious agent may be responsible for inducing the aberrant
innate immune system attacks in the genetically predisposed host. A
number of infectious agents have been implicated and include streptococci and herpes simplex virus type 1. A microbiome study in BD
proposed a distinct salivary signature.
BD has some genetic and immune similarities to periodic fever,
aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, cervical adenitis (PFAPA) syndrome
and recurrent aphthous stomatitis, suggesting a spectrum of these
disorders.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS AND DIAGNOSIS

The course of BD is characterized by exacerbations and remissions.
There is marked heterogeneity in disease manifestations.
The mean age of the first symptom is between 8 and 12 years. The
most frequent initial symptom is a painful oral ulcer (Fig. 202.1).
The oral ulcers are often recurrent, may be single or multiple, range
from 2 to 10 mm, and may be in any location in the oral cavity.
They are often very painful. The oral ulcers last 3-­10 days and heal
without scarring. In contrast, the genital ulcers heal with scars.
Genital scars are noted in 60–85% of the patient, usually occur after
puberty, and are seen on the labia, scrotum, penis, or anal area.
Another key feature of BD that has significant morbidity is the
bilateral eye involvement seen in 30–60% of pediatric patients. The
main symptoms of anterior uveitis are blurred vision, redness,
periorbital or global pain, and photophobia. Although it is often
in the form of panuveitis, anterior uveitis may be seen in females.
Uveitis in general is more common in males. Vitritis and retinal
vasculitis are the most prominent features of posterior involvement.
Complications of uveitis include blindness (unusual with treatment), glaucoma, and cataracts. Retinal vasculitis, retinal detachment, and retrobulbar neuritis (optic neuritis) are less common eye
manifestations of BD.
The skin lesions are the third most common symptom of BD.
They range from erythema nodosum (seen in approximately 50%
of patients) to papulopustular acneiform lesions (85%), folliculitis,
purpura, and ulcers. Pathergy (seen in 50%) is another skin feature
associated with BD and is a pustular reaction occurring 24-­48 hours
after a sterile needle puncture or saline injection; it is not pathognomonic of BD.
The vasculitis of BD involves both arteries and veins, thrombosis
and aneurysm formation, occlusions, or stenosis in arteries of any
size. In children, deep venous thrombosis of the lower limbs is the
most frequent vasculitic feature. If the hepatic vein is thrombosed,
Budd-­Chiari syndrome may occur. Pulmonary artery aneurysms

are the most severe feature of pediatric BD, associated with the
highest mortality. Coronary artery aneurysms may confuse BD
with Kawasaki or multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
(MIS-­C) disease. Microvascular involvement may be noted in the
nail bed capillaries.
Central nervous system (CNS) manifestations (approximately
10%) in children include meningoencephalitis (headache, meningismus, cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis), encephalomyelitis, pseudotumor cerebri, dural sinus thrombosis, and organic psychiatric
disorders (psychosis, depression, dementia). Dural sinus thrombosis is the most common CNS manifestation in children.
Gastrointestinal (GI) involvement (seen in 10–30%) manifests
with abdominal pain, diarrhea, and intestinal ulcerations, most
often in the ileocecal region. Gastrointestinal BD may be difficult
to distinguish from inflammatory bowel disease. Oligoarticular
arthritis/arthralgia is present in >50% of patients and can be recurrent, but is nondeforming. Other rare manifestations include orchitis, renal vasculitis, glomerulonephritis, or amyloidosis and cardiac
involvement.
The International Study Group for Behçet Disease (ISG) criteria
used to be the most widely used and require the presence of oral
ulcers (at least 3 times per year) along with two other major features, including genital ulcers, a positive pathergy test, uveitis, and
the characteristic skin lesions. If only one of the criteria is present
along with oral ulcerations, the term incomplete or partial Behçet
disease is applied. The revised International Criteria for Behçet Disease (ICBD) have been reported to have a much better performance
than the 1990 ISG criteria.
Additional classification criteria for children have been suggested by
the use of an international prospective observational cohort. According
to these criteria, BD is diagnosed when three of the following criteria
are present: recurrent oral aphthosis, genital ulcers, skin involvement
(necrotic folliculitis, acneiform lesions, erythema nodosum), ocular involvement, neurologic involvement, and vascular involvement
(venous thrombosis, arterial thrombosis, arterial aneurysm). These
criteria performed better than the ISG criteria in the pediatric cohort
(Table 202.1).
There are no specific laboratory tests. Acute-­phase reactants are
often mildly elevated. The diagnosis relies on the constellation of symptoms and excluding other causes.
Hughes-­Stovin syndrome is characterized by thrombophlebitis and
multiple bronchial or pulmonary artery aneurysms. This vasculitic

Table 202.1  Consensus Classification of Pediatric Behçet
Disease
ITEM

Fig. 202.1 A deep aphthous ulcer in a patient with Behçet disease.

1515

DESCRIPTION

Recurrent oral aphthosis

At least three attacks/year

Genital ulceration or aphthosis

Typically with scar

Skin involvement

Necrotic folliculitis, acneiform
lesions, erythema nodosum

Ocular involvement

Anterior uveitis, posterior uveitis,
retinal vasculitis

Neurologic signs

With the exception of isolated
headaches

Vascular signs

Venous thrombosis, arterial
thrombosis, arterial aneurysm

From Koné-­Paut I, Shahram F, Darce-­Bello M, et al, for PEDBD group. Consensus
classification criteria for paediatric Behçet’s disease from a prospective observational
cohort: PEDBD. Ann Rheum Dis. 2016;75:958–964.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1516 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
process is regarded as a clinical variant of BD (partial or incomplete)
but without ulcerations.

disease, which usually precedes the associated autoimmune disease
by years.

TREATMENT AND PROGNOSIS

ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Azathioprine is highly recommended to treat inflammatory eye
disease. Anti–tumor necrosis factor (TNF) treatment and interferon (IFN)-­α should be considered for refractory eye disease. For
oral and genital ulcers, topical treatment and colchicine are recommended (sucralfate, corticosteroids). Apremilast, an oral phosphodiesterase-­4 inhibitor, is effective in treating the oral ulcers of BD. In
patients without major organ involvement, colchicine significantly
improves oral and genital ulcers, skin features, and disease activity. There is no evidence-­based treatment for GI disease, but 5-­ASA
derivatives, corticosteroids, azathioprine, and anti-­TNF agents have
been recommended. For CNS disease and venous thrombosis, corticosteroids, azathioprine, and anti-­TNF agents are recommended.
Patients treated with anti-­TNF drugs have had persistent responses
in 90%, 89%, 100%, and 91% of patients with resistant mucocutaneous, ocular, GI, and CNS involvement, respectively. There is no
consensus about the benefit of anticoagulation in the management
of vein thrombosis in BD.
In patients with pulmonary arterial or cardiac involvement, cyclophosphamide is typically used initially.
Mortality in children with BD is low except for the pulmonary aneurysms. However, BD is a chronic disease associated with significant
morbidity. Early diagnosis and effective treatment improve the outcome of BD.

The etiology of Sjögren syndrome is complex and includes genetic
predisposition and possibly an infectious trigger. Lymphocytes and
plasma cells infiltrate salivary glands, forming distinct periductal and
periacinar foci that become confluent and may replace epithelial structure. Several genes regulating apoptosis influence the chronicity of
lymphocytic infiltration.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

International classification criteria have been developed for the
diagnosis of Sjögren syndrome in adult patients, but these criteria
apply poorly to children. Although diagnostic criteria in children
have been proposed, they have not been validated (Table 203.1).
Recurrent parotid gland enlargement and parotitis are the most
common manifestations in children (>70%), whereas sicca syndrome (dry mouth, painful mucosa, halitosis, widespread dental caries) predominates in adults. Children tend to have a higher
prevalence of systemic symptoms, including fevers and adenopathy, compared to adults. In a cross-­sectional study of children with
Sjögren syndrome, manifestations included recurrent parotitis
(72%), sicca symptoms (38%), polyarthritis (18%), vulvovaginitis
(12%), hepatitis (10%), Raynaud phenomenon (10%), fever (8%),
renal tubular acidosis (9%), lymphadenopathy (8%), and central
nervous system (CNS) involvement (5%).

Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Table 203.1  Proposed Pediatric Criteria for Diagnosis of
Sjögren Syndrome (SS)
JUVENILE SS

Chapter 203

Sjögren Syndrome
C. Egla Rabinovich

Sjögren syndrome is a chronic, inflammatory autoimmune disease
characterized by progressive lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration
of the exocrine glands, especially salivary and lacrimal (parotid being
prototypical), with potential for systemic manifestations. It is rare in
children and has classic symptoms of dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis
sicca) and dry mouth (xerostomia).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Sjögren syndrome typically manifests at 35-­45 years of age, with
90% of cases among females, but it is underrecognized in children
because symptoms often start in childhood. The mean age at diagnosis in children is 9-­10 years; 75% are female. The disease can
occur as an isolated disorder, referred to as primary Sjögren syndrome (sicca complex), or as a secondary Sjögren syndrome in
association with other rheumatic disorders, such as systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), scleroderma, or mixed connective tissue

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS
1.	Recurrent parotitis or parotid enlargement
2.	Recurrent conjunctivitis (nonallergic and noninfectious)
3.	Recurrent vaginitis
4.	Systemic: fever of unknown origin, arthralgias, hypokalemic
paralysis, or abdominal pain
OBJECTIVE
5.	Ocular dryness (ocular staining or a Schirmer test)
6.	Abnormal sialography
7.	Elevated serum amylase
8.	Leukopenia or elevated ESR
9.	Hyperimmunoglobulinemia (polyclonal)
10. Renal tubular acidosis
SEROLOGY
11. At least one of anti-­SSA, anti-­SSB, high titer ANA (speckled
pattern), RF
HISTOPATHOLOGY
12. Lymphocytic infiltration of salivary glands or other organs
DIAGNOSIS OR CLASSIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
13. Diagnosis requires at least 4 of 12 items
Modified from Yokogawa N, Lieberman SM, Sherry DD, Vivino FB. Features
of childhood Sjögren’s syndrome in comparison to adult Sjögren’s syndrome:
considerations in establishing child-­specific diagnostic criteria. Clin Exper Rheumatol.
2016;34:343–351, Table 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 203 u Sjögren Syndrome 1517
Subjective symptoms of xerostomia complaints are relatively
rare in juvenile cases, perhaps indicating that Sjögren syndrome
is a slowly progressive disease; however, increased dental caries is
seen clinically in children. Serologic markers (antinuclear antibodies [ANAs], antibodies to Ro [SSA] and La [SSB]) and articular
manifestations are significantly more common in adults. Reported
frequencies of ANAs and SSA and SSB antibodies in children are
78%, 75%, and 65%, respectively, with rheumatoid factor present
in 67%. Additional clinical manifestations from a variety of organ
involvement patterns include a decreased sense of smell; hoarseness; chronic otitis media; leukocytoclastic vasculitis (purpura);
and internal organ exocrine disease involving the lungs (diffuse
interstitial lymphocytosis), pancreas, hepatobiliary system, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys (renal tubular acidosis), musculoskeletal
(arthritis and arthralgia), hematologic (cytopenias), peripheral nervous system (sensory and autonomic neuropathy), and CNS (optic
neuritis, transverse myelitis, meningoencephalitis).
Nonexocrine disease manifestations of Sjögren syndrome may be
related to inflammatory vascular disease (skin, muscle and joints,
serosal surfaces, CNS, peripheral nervous system), noninflammatory
vascular disease (Raynaud phenomenon), mediator-­induced disease
(hematologic cytopenias, fatigue, fever), and autoimmune endocrinopathy (thyroiditis).

DIAGNOSIS

Clinical presentation of recurrent parotitis and/or recurrent parotid
gland swelling in a child or adolescent is characteristic and should
raise the suspicion for Sjögren syndrome. The diagnosis is based on
clinical features supported by biopsy of salivary or parotid glands
demonstrating foci of lymphocytic infiltration, the current gold
standard for diagnosis. Children are more likely to have normal
minor salivary gland but abnormal parotid gland biopsies. Supporting laboratory abnormalities include cryoglobulinemia, elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate, hypergammaglobulinemia, positive
rheumatoid factor, and presence of SSA and SSB antibodies. The
Schirmer test detects abnormal tear production (≤5 mm of wetting
of a filter paper strip in 5 minutes). Special dyes (e.g., fluorescein,
Lissamine green) detects damaged ocular epithelial conjunctival
and corneal cells. Imaging studies, including MRI, technetium
(99mTc) scintigraphy, parotid ultrasound, and sialography, are useful in the diagnostic evaluation for Sjögren syndrome (Fig. 203.1).

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The differential diagnosis of Sjögren syndrome in children includes
juvenile recurrent parotitis, characterized by intermittent unilateral
parotid swelling typically lasting only a few days; it is frequently associated with fever and may undergo remission with puberty. Unlike
in Sjögren syndrome, there is a male predominance, juvenile recurrent parotitis is seen in the younger children (3-­6 years), and there is
a lack of focal lymphocytic infiltrates on biopsy. Other conditions in
the differential diagnosis include eating disorders, infectious parotitis
(mumps, streptococcal and staphylococcal infections, Epstein-­
Barr
virus, cytomegalovirus, HIV, parainfluenza, influenza enterovirus), and
local trauma to the buccal mucosa. Rarely, polycystic parotid disease,
tumors, and sarcoidosis may present with recurrent parotid swelling.

Fig. 203.1 T2-­weighted MRI of a child with Sjögren syndrome showing
parotitis (arrows).

In these conditions, sicca complex, rash, arthralgia, and ANAs are usually absent.

TREATMENT

Symptomatic treatment of Sjögren syndrome includes the use of artificial tears, massage of the parotids, oral lozenges, and fluids to limit the
damaging effects of decreased secretions. Corticosteroids, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs, and hydroxychloroquine are among the more
commonly used agents for treatment, with reports of methotrexate and
etanercept used for treatment of arthritis. Stronger immunosuppressive agents, such as cyclosporine and cyclophosphamide, are reserved
for severe manifestations (e.g., lung involvement) and life-­threatening
complications.

COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

The symptoms of Sjögren syndrome develop and progress slowly.
Diminished salivary flow typically remains constant for years. Because
monoclonal B-­lymphocyte disease originates chiefly from lymphocytic
foci within salivary glands or from parenchymal internal organs, there
is increased risk for mucosa-­associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma.
Maternal Sjögren syndrome can be an antecedent to neonatal lupus
syndrome (see Chapter 199.1).
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1530 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 205

Interferonopathies
Sara E. Sabbagh and James W. Verbsky
Type I interferonopathies refer to a group of inherited autoinflammatory disorders that are characterized by dysregulation of the type I
interferon (IFN) pathway (Table 205.1). Type I interferonopathies were
recognized when a report described the phenotypic overlap between
Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome (AGS) encephalopathy, congenital viral
infections, and monogenic systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The
clinical similarities of these diseases stimulated the theory of a shared
pathologic mechanism. Pathogenic variants involved in type I IFN signaling were identified to be causative for AGS and monogenic forms
of SLE. Several other novel monogenic disorders with aberrant IFN
signaling have been identified.

Type I IFNs are ubiquitously expressed inflammatory polypeptides that are induced by microbial and viral nucleic acids. During
viral replication, accumulation of viral nucleic acids is sensed by
several different cellular mechanisms, which leads to downstream
IFN production (Fig. 205.1). Type I IFNs are released from the cell
and bind to IFN receptors (IFNRs) through autocrine and paracrine
action. The IFNR then activates signal translation through Janus
kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK-­
STAT) pathways, which promotes the expression of IFN-­simulated
genes (ISGs), which stops cell replication and protein translation of
the infected cell. There are several molecular mechanisms that lead
to altered regulation of IFN signaling: (1) loss-­of-­function variants
of genes that encode enzymes responsible for DNA or DNA-­RNA
hybrid molecule degradation; (2) variants that lead to constitutive
activation or reduction of the activation threshold of intracytosolic
nucleic acid sensors; (3) gain-­of-­function variants of positive IFN
signaling regulators; (4) loss-­of-­function variants of negative IFN
signaling regulators; and (5) proteasomal dysfunction leading to the
unfolded protein response and downstream IFN pathway activation.
Examples of these altered molecular mechanisms and the associated

Table 205.1  Mutated Gene, Protein Function, Pattern of Inheritance, and Main Symptoms of Known Type 1
Interferonopathies
DISEASE

GENE

PROTEIN FUNCTION
′
′
3 -­5 DNA exonuclease

INHERITANCE

SYMPTOMS

Aicardi-­Goutières syndrome
(AGS) type 1

TREX-­1

AGS2

RNASEH2B

AGS3

RNASEH2C

Classical AGS

AGS4

RNASEH2A

Classical AGS with dysmorphic features

AGS5

SAMHD1

Restricts the availability of
cytosolic deoxynucleotides

AR

Mild AGS, mouth ulcer, deforming
arthropathy, cerebral vasculopathy with
early-­onset stroke

AGS6

ADAR

Deaminates adenosine to
inosine in endogenous dsRNA,
preventing recognition by
MDA5 receptor

AR and AD

Classical AGS, bilateral striatal necrosis

AGS7

IFIH1

AD

Classic or mild AGS, asymptomatic

Retinal vasculopathy with
cerebral leukodystrophy
(RVCL)

TREX-­1

Cytosolic receptor for dsRNA
3′-­5′ DNA exonuclease

AD

Adult-­onset loss of vision, stroke, motor
impairment, cognitive decline, Raynaud,
and liver involvement

Spondyloenchondrodysplasia
(SPENCD)

ACP5

Lysosomal phosphatase activity

AR

Spondyloenchondrodysplasia, immune
disregulation, and in some cases
combined immunodeficiency

STING-­associated
vasculopathy with onset in
infancy (SAVI)

TMEM173

Transduction of cytoplasmic
DNA-­induced signal

AD

Systemic inflammation, cutaneous
vasculopathy, pulmonary inflammation

Proteasome-­associated
autoinflammatory syndrome
(PRAAS)

PSMB8

Part of the proteasome complex

AR

Autoinflammation, lipodystrophy,
dermatosis, hyperimmunoglobulinemia,
joint contractures, short stature

ISG15 deficiency

ISG15

Stabilizes USP18, a negative
regulator of type 1 interferon

AR

Brain calcifications, seizures, mycobacterial
susceptibility

Singleton-­Merten
syndrome (SMS)

IFIH1

Cytosolic receptor for dsRNA

AD

Dental dysplasia, aortic calcifications, skeletal
abnormalities, glaucoma, psoriasis

Atypical SMS

DDX58

Cytosolic receptor for dsRNA

AD

Aortic calcifications, skeletal abnormalities,
glaucoma, psoriasis

Trichohepatoenteric
syndrome (THES)

SKIV2L

RNA helicase

AR

Severe intractable diarrhea, hair abnormalities
(trichorrhexis nodosa), facial dysmorphism,
immunodeficiency in most cases

Components of RNase
H2 complex. Removes
ribonucleotides from RNA-­
DNA hybrids

AR and AD

Classical AGS

AR

Classical AGS

From Volpi S, Picco P, Caorsi R, Candotti F, Gattorno M. Type I interferonopathies in pediatric rheumatology. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2016;14(1):35.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 205 u Interferonopathies

1531

1
5

P

3

Nucleus

K1

STING

JA

IRF3 IRF7

TBK1

IFN

MAVS

ER-GIC

IFIH1

RIG-1

2

dsRNA

2

IF
NA
NA R1
R2

1
AR R2
N
IF NA
IF

P

P

P

STAT3

TREX 1

P

STAT3

RNASEH2

Proteasome

STAT1

DNA-RNA
hybrids

STAT1

1

IRF9

STAT2

1

dsDNA

ISRE

?

STAT1

SAMHD1

NTPs

P

K2

TY

USP18
ISG15

4

IF

ADAR

Fig. 205.1 Schematic representation of various pathways affected in genetic interferonopathies. Purple rectangles indicate variant proteins in

type I interferonopathies. Numbered yellow circles indicate the common mechanistic defect. 1. Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants of genes that
encode enzymes responsible for DNA or DNA-­RNA hybrid molecule degradation. 2. Pathogenic variants that lead to constitutive activation or
reduction of activation threshold of intracytosolic nucleic acid sensors. 3. Gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants of positive IFN signaling regulators;
4. Loss-­of-­function pathogenic variants of negative IFN signaling regulators; and 5. Proteasomal dysfunctional leading to the unfolded protein response and downstream IFN pathway activation. STING: stimulator of interferon genes; SAMHD1: SAM domain and HD domain deoxynucleoside
triphosphate triphosphohydrolase 1; NTPs: nucleoside triphosphates; TREX1: DNA 3′ repair exonuclease 1; ISG15: interferon-­stimulated gene 15;
MAVS: mitochondrial antiviral-­signaling protein; RIG-­I: retinoic acid-­inducible gene I; TBK1: TANK-­binding kinase 1; USP18: ubiquitin-­specific peptidase 18; RNASEH2, ribonuclease H domain 2; IFIH1: IFN-­induced helicase C domain-­containing protein 1; ADAR: RNA adenosine deaminase; IRF3:
interferon regulatory factor 3; IRF7: interferon regulatory factor 7; IRF9: interferon regulatory factor 9; ERGIC: endothelial reticulum–Golgi intermediate compartment; IFNAR: interferon-­α receptor; ISGF3: the transcriptional activator induced by interferon-­α; ISRE: interferon-­sensitive response
element; JAK1: Janus kinase 1; TYK2: tyrosine kinase 2; STAT: signal transducer and activator of transcription. P indicates phosphorylation.

genetic variants are depicted in Figure 205.1. Each genetic variant
that leads to dysregulation of IFN signaling is causative of a unique
clinical syndrome or subtype of a clinical syndrome that has been
classified as a type I interferonopathy. Despite some disease heterogeneity, interferonopathies have a characteristic clinical phenotype,
which may include recurrent fevers, early onset of skin vasculopathy with chilblains, livedo reticularis, panniculitis, lipodystrophy,
interstitial lung disease with fibrosis, and encephalopathic CNS
involvement (Fig. 205.2 and Table 205.2).

AUTOINFLAMMATORY INTERFERONOPATHIES
Aicardi-­Goutières Syndrome

AGS is a clinically heterogeneous disease with a spectrum of associated phenotypes. AGS is characterized by an early-­onset progressive
encephalopathy with basal ganglia calcifications, leukoencephalopathy, and cerebral atrophy with elevated type I IFN cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels and CSF pleocytosis. Cutaneous features,
seen in about 30% of patients, include chilblains, or cold-­induced
acral dermatosis of the digits and auricles secondary to peripheral
inflammatory vasculopathy. Other common manifestations include
thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, transaminitis, psoriasis,
interstitial lung disease, and intermittent fever. Most frequently,
AGS has an infantile onset in which patients develop abrupt irritability, sterile pyrexias, and developmental regression within the

first few months of life. Neurologic symptoms may include limb
hypertonia with truncal hypotonia, dystonia, excessive startle,
abnormal eye movements, epileptic seizures, and slowing of head
growth. RNASEH2B variants are commonly seen in this context;
however, variants of any associated AGS-­related genes may present
with this clinical scenario. AGS may also present prenatally with a
striking similarity to transplacentally acquired infections (pseudo-­
TORCH), with onset of disease in utero. At birth, patients may have
irritability, feeding difficulties, jitteriness, microcephaly, abnormal
movements, epileptic seizures, thrombocytopenia, anemia, and
liver dysfunction. This presentation is most frequently associated
with TREX1 pathogenic variants and leads to profound developmental sequelae and increased risk of death in infancy. In both
clinical presentations, neuroimaging shows a highly characteristic
pattern of diffuse abnormal white matter, intracranial calcifications, swelling of temporal or frontal lobes, and cerebral atrophy,
similar to radiologic findings seen in congenital infections. Patients
may also develop autoimmunity, including type 1 diabetes mellitus,
hypothyroidism, hypergammaglobulinemia, and hemolytic anemia.
Rarely, AGS can have a later onset with abrupt profound neurologic
regression after an extended period of normal development.
There are seven recognized genetic variants and corresponding disease subtypes of AGS (AGS 1-­7), all of which are responsible for RNA/DNA degradation or detection, resulting in type I

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1532 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Fig. 205.2 Characteristic clinical

A

phenotypes of interferonopathies.
Chilblain lesions typical of monogenic type I interferonopathies,
seen most frequently on the toes,
fingers (A), ears (B), and nose. The
lesions are generally worse in the
cold months. C, Representative
brain CT scan of intracranial calcifications seen in a patient with
Aicardi-­
Goutières syndrome due
to TREX1 homozygous pathogenic
variants. D, Chest CT scan of a SAVI
patient (performed at the age of
12.5 years) showing evidence of
interstitial lung disease (interlobular
septal thickening, intralobular lines,
cystic lesions, and some ground-­
glass lesions) and fibrosis (honeycombing). (Modified from Melki I,
Fremond ML. Type I interferonopathies: from a novel concept to targeted therapeutics. Curr Rheum
Reports. 2020;22:32, Fig. 1.)

B

C

D

IFN production and upregulation of ISGs. These include variants
of 3′-­5′ DNA exonuclease-­TREX1 (AGS1); ribonucleases including
RNASEH2B (AGS2), RNASEH2C (AGS3), and RNASEH2A (AGS4);
SAM and HD domain-­containing deoxynucleoside triphosphate triphosphohydrolase 1-­SAMHD1 (AGS5); adenosine deaminase acting
on RNA 1-­ADAR1 (AGS6); and IFN-­induced helicase C domain–
containing protein-­IFIH1 (AGS7). The majority of AGS subtypes
are autosomal recessive; however, heterozygous gain-­of-­function
variants can also occur in AGS1 and AGS6, and variants causing
AGS7 are autosomal dominant.
There are several manifestations that are strongly associated with
distinct AGS subtypes. Bilateral striatal necrosis with severe dystonia is associated with variants in ADAR1 (AGS6), and spastic paraparesis has been associated with variants in ADAR1 (AGS6), IFIH1
(AGS7), and RNASEH2B (AGS2). Variants involving SAMHD1
(AGS5) have the most variable phenotype with cutaneous involvement, glaucoma, progressive contractures, stroke, and cerebral
aneurysms. Beyond the phenotype diversity between different AGS
variants, there are descriptions of marked intrafamilial variation
in siblings harboring identical homozygous variants, which raises
questions regarding how environmental factors influence disease
expression and penetrance.

D

o
A

w
p

n
r

l
i

o
l

a

d
2

e
1

,

d

2

f

o
0

Spondyloenchondrodysplasia

Spondyloenchondrodysplasia (SPENCD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder best characterized as a skeletal dysplasia with sclerosis,
enchondromas, short stature, platyspondyly, and irregularity of vertebral end plates. Patients may also develop intracranial calcifications,
spasticity, and a spectrum of autoimmunity that bears resemblance to
SLE, including hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, glomerulonephritis, malar rash, myositis, antiphospholipid syndrome, and autoantibody positivity. Patients have also developed hypothyroidism,
Raynaud phenomenon, Sjögren syndrome, and vitiligo. SPENCD is
caused by variants of the ACP5 gene on chromosome 19p13, which
encodes tartrate-­resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP). Loss of TRAP
expression impairs inactivation of osteopontin (Opn), a protein
involved in bone metabolism and Th1 differentiation, via signaling
through TLR9 in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). Increased levels of Opn thus leads to increased IFN-­α production.

STING-­Associated Vasculopathy with Onset in
Infancy

STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI) is a rare
disorder that presents with systemic inflammation, fevers, and elevated
inflammatory markers in the first months of life.

r
2

4

m
.

o

F

h

o

a

r

m

e

p

d

e

r

a

s

h

o

m
n

e

a

d
l

(
u

d
s

r
e

.

m
o

m
n

Chapter 205 u Interferonopathies

1533

Table 205.2  Suggestive Features of Type I Interferonopathies
Familial history

Several affected individuals, even if phenotypic spectrum might be variable within the same family

Age of onset

• Young age at onset, in favor of monogenic disease
• Later onset also reported

Neurologic phenotypes

Clinical signs:
• Spasticity, spastic paraparesis
• Acute or subacute dystonia
• Encephalopathy with seizures and progressive microcephaly
• Cortical blindness
• Variable developmental delay
• Ataxia
• Psychosis
• Vascular neurologic disease (Moyamoya)/strokes
• Rare demyelinating or multifocal neuropathies
Lumbar puncture:
• Meningitis (inconstant)
• Elevated pterins/neopterins in the CSF
• Elevated IFN-­α activity or protein in the CSF
Morphologic imaging features:
• CT scans: ICC, basal ganglia calcifications or progressive cerebral atrophy
• Cerebral MRI: leukoencephalopathy, white matter rarefaction, delayed myelination, bilateral
striatal necrosis, deep white matter cysts, or intracranial aneurysms

Cutaneous features

• Chilblains/FCL; necrotizing vasculitis of fingers, toes, helix, cheeks, and nose, telangiectasia,
cutaneous ulcerations
• Livedo reticularis
• Panniculitis, violaceous periorbital rash
• Lentigines
• Psoriasis
• Nail dystrophy, sparse hair

Failure to thrive/short stature

• Secondary to osseous dysplasia (ACP5)
• Secondary to the inflammatory status (TMEM173)

Systemic inflammation and immune
features

• Recurrent fevers
• Autoimmune features/SLE/autoantibodies (not necessarily specific)
• Inconstant immune deficiency
• Elevated IFN I pathway in whole blood/serum/plasma

Hematologic

• AI anemia, dyserythropoiesis
• Thrombocytopenia or thrombocytosis
• Malignancies (chronic lymphocytic leukemia, cutaneous T cell lymphoma, SAMHD1)

Lung features

• Interstitial lung disease (isolated or not)
• Lung fibrosis
• Intraalveolar hemorrhage
• Macrophagic alveolitis

Vascular features

• Calcification of the aorta or blood vessels

Musculoskeletal features

• Joint pain, arthritis
• Contractures and joint retractions
• Jaccoud arthropathy, tendon rupture
• Muscle weakness and pain/myositis
• Calcinosis
• X-­rays: acro-­osteolysis, wide medullar cavities phalange, deforming arthropathies/joint
subluxation with conserved interarticular space, calcinosis

Ophthalmologic features

• Glaucoma
• Papillary edemaa

Kidney features

• Lupus nephritis

Gastrointestinal features

• VEO-­IBD (very severe protein-­losing enteropathy)

Dental anomalies

• Retained primary teethb
• Early loss of permanent teeth

aReported in one SAVI patient treated with JAK1/2 inhibitor.
bData not published.

Ab, Autoantibodies; AI, autoimmune; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computerized tomography; FCL, familial chilblain lupus; ICC, intracranial calcifications; IFN, interferon; IFN I, type I
interferon; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; VEO-­IBD, very-­early-­onset inflammatory bowel disease.
From Melki I, Fremond ML. Type I interferonopathies: From a novel concept to targeted therapeutics. Curr Rheum Reports. 2020;22:3, Table 2.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1534 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Fig. 205.3 Clinical manifestations

A

C

B

D

of stimulator of interferon genes
(STING)–associated
vasculopathy with onset in infancy (SAVI). A,
Typical facial distribution of telangiectatic lesions on the nose and
cheeks with atrophy and scarring
of the skin with loss of deep tissue
of the nose. B, Violaceous, scaling,
atrophic plaques on both hands
and progressive autoamputations
of several fingers. C, Hilar lymphadenopathy and bilateral interstitial
infiltrates on high-­
resolution computed tomography (CT) image.
D, Ulcerated lesions on the pinna
of the ear with scales and crusts.
(Courtesy Dr. Raphaela Goldbach-­
Mansky. From Petty RE, Laxer RM,
Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook
of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Fig.
39.11, p. 541.)

Cutaneous involvement is characterized by vasculopathic rashes
in acral areas (Fig. 205.3). These lesions present as violaceous
plaques or nodules on the face, ears, or nose or as distal ulceration
and may become necrotic. Lesional skin biopsy reveals leukocytoclastic vasculitis, microthrombotic angiopathy, neutrophilia, and
occasional immune complex deposition. As STING is expressed
in alveolar macrophages, type 2 pneumocytes, and bronchial epithelium, patients with SAVI also develop pulmonary complications. Paratracheal adenopathy, interstitial lung disease, and lung
fibrosis have been described to a variable extent. Patients may also
develop myositis, arthritis, arthralgia, oral ulcers, aphthosis, and
nasal septum perforation. Low-­titer autoantibodies (e.g., antinuclear antibody, anticardiolipin antibodies, and antibodies against
β2 glycoprotein I) may be seen. Notably, the presence of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (cANCA) may lead to misdiagnosis
of childhood granulomatosis with polyangiitis. SAVI is caused by
a dominant gain-­of-­function variant in TMEM173, which encodes
the stimulator of interferon genes (STING). Working as both a
direct cytosolic DNA sensor and as an adaptor protein in type I IFN
signaling, STING mediates the production of IFN-­α/β.

neutrophilic dermatosis, annular erythema, violaceous eyelid swelling, and erythema nodosum–like panniculitis. Histology reveals
a characteristic mononuclear interstitial infiltrate, which includes
“immature” neutrophils in the dermis. Lipodystrophy, usually of the
face, trunk, and upper limbs, begins in early childhood. Arthralgias,
without radiographic evidence of arthritis, are common in children,
and severe joint contractures may develop into adulthood. Acute
attacks of inflammatory myositis, aseptic meningitis, sterile epididymitis, conjunctivitis, nodular episcleritis, parotitis, pneumonitis,
nephritis, carditis, and otitis have been reported. Autoimmunity can
occur, including Coombs-­positive hemolytic anemia and hypothyroidism. Most commonly, CANDLE is due to loss-­of-­function variants in the PSMB8 gene, which encodes the proteasome β5i subunit.
More recently, variants in other genes encoding other proteasome-­
immunoproteasome subunits or the regulatory protein POMP have
been discovered in patients with CANDLE syndrome. The defective
proteasome function may lead to an accumulation of damaged proteins, resulting in cellular stress and type 1 IFN upregulation.

Chronic Atypical Neutrophilic Dermatosis with
Lipodystrophy and Elevated Temperature/
Proteasome-­Associated Autoinflammatory
Syndromes

Ubiquitin-­like protein IFN stimulated gene-­15 (ISG15) deficiency
has only been reported in a few individuals and leads to a phenotype similar to AGS, with intracranial calcifications and seizures.
ISG15 is an IFN-­induced protein that that plays a central role in
the host antiviral response, although, in humans, ISG15 deficiency
does not cause an increased susceptibility to viral infection. Rather,
the absence of intracellular ISG15 prevents the accumulation of
ubiquitin-­specific peptidase 18 (USP18), a potent negative regulator of IFN-­α/β signaling, which results in an unchecked IFN-­α/β

Chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and
elevated temperature (CANDLE) syndrome is a rare autoinflammatory disease caused by abnormal functioning of the proteasome-­
immunoproteasome. CANDLE presents in early infancy with fevers,
systemic inflammation, and cutaneous involvement including

ISG15 Deficiency/USP18 Deficiency

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 205 u Interferonopathies
response. Notably, loss-­of-­function recessive variants of USP18 have
been reported in five patients, all of whom had neonatal demise
soon after birth owing to the dysregulation of type 1 IFN responses.

Singleton-­Merten Syndrome

Singleton-­Merten syndrome (SMS) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by early-­onset severe aortic and valvular calcification, dental anomalies, acro-­osteolysis, osteoporosis, and glaucoma.
There is a broad spectrum of disease with variable expressivity, and
patients have been reported to have an SLE or AGS phenotype. SMS
is caused by gain-­of-­function variants in IFIH1 and DDX58, which
encode retinoic acid–inducible gene-­I (RIG-­I)–like receptor family
members melanoma differentiation-­associated gene 5 (MDA5) and
RIG-­I, respectively. MDA5 and RIG-­I are cytosolic pattern recognition receptors that detect viral RNA and promote type I and III IFN
expression. The phenotype variability of SMS suggests that other
genetic and/or environmental factors may influence the clinical
presentation.

X-­Linked Reticulate Pigmentary Disorder

X-­linked reticulate pigmentary disorder (XLPDR) is an X-­linked
dominant disorder that manifests in the first few months of life
in affected males with recurrent pneumonia, bronchiectasis, diarrhea, and failure to thrive. Diffuse skin hyperpigmentation occurs
in early childhood, and distinct facial features develop. Female carriers typically exhibit only pigmentary changes along the lines of
Blaschko. Hypohidrosis, corneal scarring, enterocolitis, and urethral strictures can develop. The defect in XLPDR is in an intron
of the POLA1 gene, which encodes the catalytic subunit of DNA
polymerase-­a. Although this defect does not affect DNA replication, it does appear to increase IFN production and IFN-­induced
genes as well as NF-­κB–induced genes in response to dsDNA, cytosolic dsRNA, and TNF-­α.

DNAse II Deficiency

Deoxyribonucleases (DNAses) degrade double-­
stranded DNA
molecules and exist in several forms. DNAse II degrades DNA
contained in lysosomes, and recently deficiency of DNAse II was
shown to cause a form of monogenic SLE. This autosomal recessive disease presents with severe anemia, thrombocytopenia, and
hepatosplenomegaly at birth that may resolve over time. In childhood patients may then develop membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, arthropathy, lipodystrophy, chilblain-­
like vasculitis,
and hypogammaglobulinemia. Laboratory testing shows high titer
ANA and dsDNA antibodies and high levels of serum IFNs and
IFN-­stimulated gene expression. In addition to DNAse II, there are
two extracellular DNAses (DNAse1 and DNAse1L3) that do cause
a monogenic form of SLE. Although these are likely to exhibit high
IFN signatures, no data are available on these two diseases, and thus
they are not classically considered interferonopathies.

AUTOIMMUNE INTERFERONOPATHIES
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

There were descriptions of increased levels of IFN in the serum of
patients with SLE. Further rationale for IFN contributing to SLE
pathogenesis was supported by observational studies of patients

1535

who developed a lupuslike disease with autoantibody formation
after treatment with IFN-­α. Several groups showed that the majority of patients with SLE have an increased expression of type I IFN–
regulated genes and that active SLE could be distinguished by an
IFN-­induced gene expression pattern. Many clinical features of SLE
are associated with increased production of IFN, and a high IFN
signature has been correlated with cytopenia, autoantibody formation, and cutaneous disease activity. There are a large number of
possible inducers of IFN production in SLE. Neutrophil extracellular TRAP formation, transposable elements, and immune complexes have all been associated with IFN production in SLE patients.
From a genetic standpoint, over 100 risk loci have been associated
with SLE, many of which encode proteins with functions linked
to type I IFN production or response. There are also several rare
forms of monogenic SLE that are due to pathogenic variants involving type I IFN signaling. Monogenic forms of SLE, including loss-­
of-­function variants in DNAse II, DNASE1L3, and DNASE1, are
classically grouped under the umbrella of interferonopathies and
are characterized by typical SLE clinical manifestations with autoantibody formation and immune complex deposition (see Chapter
199). Success of targeting the IFN pathway has been documented in
SLE, and multicenter phase 3 randomized placebo-­controlled trials
are currently underway in extrarenal disease.

Juvenile Dermatomyositis

Dermatomyositis has become recognized as a disease partly driven by
aberrant IFN signaling. An elevated IFN signature was first discovered
in muscle tissue and later identified in peripheral blood cells of patients
with adult and juvenile-­onset dermatomyositis (DM, JDM). Subsequently, multiple studies have shown an association between type I IFN
in the circulation and disease activity in myositis. Targeting the IFN
pathway has shown success in treatment of DM and JDM, and there are
several ongoing clinical trials evaluating small-­molecule Janus kinase
(JAK) inhibitors for the treatment of dermatomyositis.

Therapeutics Targeting the Interferon Pathway

Treatments for interferonopathies has been historically empiric.
Numerous immunosuppressive medications, including corticosteroids and a variety of biologics, have been tried in case reports with
variable results. However, because interferonopathies have a common pathway involving IFN signaling, the use of small-­molecule
JAK inhibitors (JAKinibs) has gained interest as a targeted therapy
for these disorders. Signaling through the IFN pathway involves
JAKs that phosphorylate signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) proteins that then dimerize and enter the nucleus
to drive transcription of IFN-­stimulated genes. JAKinibs block activation of JAK proteins and have been used to treat various autoimmune diseases. There is Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approval of several JAKinibs, including tofacitinib, baricitinib, and
upadacitinib, for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis; tofacitinib
is also approved for the treatment of psoriatic arthritis, ulcerative
colitis, and polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Clinical trials
are underway to test the utility of JAKinibs in interferonopathies.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1536 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 206

Amyloidosis
Deborah L. Stone and Karyl S. Barron
Amyloidosis is the result of extracellular deposition of insoluble,
fibrous amyloid proteins in various body tissues. It may be caused by
a hereditary abnormality in an amyloidogenic protein or occur as a
result of chronic inflammation associated with some infectious and
rheumatologic diseases.

ETIOLOGY

Amyloidosis is a result of protein misfolding. These misfolded proteins
aggregate and form insoluble fibrils that can affect the normal function
of several vital organs. In the amyloidosis nomenclature, a distinction
is made between amyloidosis that develops from pathogenic gene variants in the amyloid fibril proteins (hereditary amyloidoses) and amyloidosis associated with genetic mutation in nonamyloid proteins. The
hereditary amyloidoses include diseases caused by pathogenic variants
in the genes for transthyretin and apolipoprotein A and usually do not
present in childhood. However, children may be affected by amyloid
A (AA) amyloidosis, which develops in patients with chronic inflammatory states. It is estimated that approximately 45% of all amyloid
cases worldwide are AA amyloidosis. In the past, chronic infectious
diseases such as tuberculosis, malaria, leprosy, and chronic osteomyelitis accounted for most cases of AA amyloidosis. Since the development
of effective treatments for these infections, other causes of AA have
become more common.
Individuals with chronic inflammatory rheumatic diseases, such as
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), and
ankylosing spondylitis, as well as hereditary autoinflammatory diseases, have an increased risk for the development of AA amyloidosis.
AA amyloidosis has also been associated with sarcoidosis, cystic fibrosis, Crohn disease, malignancies (mesothelioma and Hodgkin disease),
intravenous drug use disorders, and HIV infection. Approximately 6%
of AA amyloidosis cases have no identified disease association.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Only AA amyloidosis affects children in appreciable numbers. The
factors that determine the risk for amyloidosis as a complication of
inflammation are not clear. Many individuals with long-­
standing
inflammatory disease do not demonstrate tissue amyloid deposition, but some children with relatively recent onset of disease may
develop amyloid. In developed countries, before therapy with disease-­
modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) and biologic agents was
available, rheumatoid arthritis was the most common inflammatory
disease associated with AA amyloidosis. Patients who had a long history of severe and poorly controlled disease with extraarticular manifestations were at the greatest risk of developing amyloidosis, and the
median time from first symptoms of their rheumatic condition to the
diagnosis of amyloidosis was 212 months. The use of DMARDs and
biologic therapy has resulted in a sustained decline in the number of
new cases of RA-­associated amyloidosis.
JIA may be associated with AA amyloidosis, with the highest prevalence occurring in patients with systemic JIA, followed by those with
polyarticular disease. AA amyloidosis has been observed in JIA patients
as soon as 1 year after diagnosis. Before the availability of DMARDs
and biologics, the prevalence of AA amyloidosis in JIA patients ranged
from 1% to 10%. Higher prevalence was seen in Northern European
patients, especially Polish patients, who had a prevalence of 10.6%; a
lower prevalence was observed in North American patients. The reasons for this discrepancy are not completely understood, although it
is speculated that selection bias, genetic background, and tendency
toward earlier, more aggressive therapy in North Americans may
have played a role. As with RA, the occurrence of new amyloid cases

in patients with JIA has significantly decreased in the past 20 years
because of the increased efficacy of treatment with DMARDs and
biologics.
The hereditary autoinflammatory diseases define a group of illnesses characterized by attacks of seemingly unprovoked recurrent
inflammation without significant levels of either autoantibodies or
antigen-­specific T cells, which are typically found in patients with autoimmune diseases. These attacks often appear to be initiated by stress,
immunizations, or trauma. Common findings of autoinflammatory
diseases include fevers, cutaneous rashes, arthritis, serositis, and ocular involvement. The inflammatory attacks are accompanied by intense
elevations in inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate
and C-­reactive protein) and high levels of serum amyloid A (SAA).
Amyloidosis AA is associated with some, but not all, hereditary autoinflammatory diseases.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common of the
Mendelian autoinflammatory diseases and is seen most frequently in
the Armenian, Arab, Turkish, and Sephardic Jewish populations. FMF
is an autosomal recessive disease that results from pathogenic variants
in the MEFV gene, which encodes the pyrin protein. MEFV pathogenic
variants affecting the M680 and M694 amino acid residues are associated with early onset of symptoms, severe disease, and an increased
risk of AA amyloidosis. Patients residing in Armenia, Turkey, and Arab
countries have an increased risk of developing AA amyloidosis compared with patients with the same MEFV mutations living in North
America. While one might assume that FMF patients who have frequent, severe attacks would be at the highest risk for the development
of AA amyloidosis, this is not always the case. Some patients with a
history of frequent attacks never develop amyloidosis, whereas others
develop amyloidosis at an early age.
Tumor necrosis factor receptor–associated periodic syndrome
(TRAPS) is associated with pathogenic variants in the TNFRSF1A
gene, which encodes the 55-­kDa tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor protein (TNFR1). It is estimated that 14–25% of untreated patients
with TRAPS will develop AA amyloidosis. The risk of amyloidosis
appears to be greater among patients with cysteine pathogenic variants
or the T50M pathogenic variant. These cysteine residues normally create disulfide bonds within the protein, and disruption of these bonds
by amino acid substitutions is thought to interfere with protein folding.
Pathogenic variants in the NLRP3 (NLR family pyrin domain containing 3) gene encoding the NLRP3 or cryopyrin protein cause three
clinically distinct diseases or cryopyrinopathies: familial cold autoinflammatory syndrome (FCAS, or NLRP3-­AID mild), Muckle-­Wells
syndrome (MWS, or NLRP3-­AID moderate), and neonatal-­onset
multisystem inflammatory disease (NOMID, or NLRP3-­AID
severe), also known as chronic infantile neurologic cutaneous and
articular (CINCA) syndrome. Pathogenic variants in NLRP3 are
inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion or as de novo variants in
patients with the most severe disease. A few patients have been found
to carry somatic variants in NLRP3.
FCAS is the least severe of the cryopyrinopathies and is rarely associated with AA amyloidosis. MWS presents with fevers, myalgias,
arthralgias, urticarial-­like rash, and progressive sensorineural hearing
loss. AA amyloidosis is quite common in MWS, affecting up to one
third of the patients. NOMID/CINCA is the most severe cryopyrinopathy. NOMID patients have not developed AA amyloidosis as often as
MWS patients, but this may be attributable to the fact that before the
availability of effective treatments, 20% of NOMID patients died before
reaching adulthood.
Mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD) – mild (formally known as
Hyper-­IgD syndrome, or HIDS) is an autoinflammatory disease that
presents in early childhood with high fevers, abdominal pain, lymphadenopathy, and occasional rash. MVK-­mild is an autosomal recessive disease that involves loss-­of-­function variants in the MVK gene
that encodes the mevalonate kinase enzyme. Patients with MVK-­mild
retain a low level of enzyme activity, whereas patients with MVK-­
severe (mevalonic aciduria) have severe MVK variants that completely
abolish enzyme activity, causing recurrent fevers, dysmorphic features,
and developmental delays. Inflammatory markers are high during

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 206 u Amyloidosis 1537
MVK-­mild attacks and may remain elevated between attacks. AA amyloidosis is rare in patients with MVK-­mild but has been reported, most
often associated with the V377I/I268T genotype.
Although seen less frequently than in the hereditary periodic fever
syndromes, AA amyloidosis occurs in an estimated 1% of U.S. patients
and up to 3% of Northern European patients with Crohn disease. Conversely, AA amyloidosis in patients with ulcerative colitis is extremely
rare, with an estimated prevalence of 0.07%. Patients with Crohn disease and AA usually have a long-­standing history of aggressive, poorly
controlled disease, although there are reports of amyloidosis in patients
with well-­controlled inflammatory markers.
Thirty-­six proteins have been identified as being amyloidogenic
in humans, but most of these rarely cause disease during childhood.
Transthyretin-­related hereditary amyloidosis is an autosomal dominant disorder with variable penetrance and onset in the second to third
decades of life. Manifestations include familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy, familial amyloid cardiomyopathy, nephropathy, and ocular
disease.

PATHOGENESIS

The deposition of AA amyloid fibrils is a result of a prolonged inflammatory state that leads to misfolding of the AA amyloid protein and
deposition into tissues. The precursor protein of the fibrils in AA amyloidosis is an apolipoprotein called serum amyloid A. SAA is expressed
by three different genes on chromosome 11p15.1. SAA1 and SAA2 are
two isoforms that are acute-­phase reactants synthesized by the liver.
SAA is produced in response to proinflammatory cytokines, such as
interleukin (IL)-­1, IL-­6, and TNF-­α, and can increase more than 1,000-­
fold during inflammation.
It has been speculated that SAA has a role as a chemoattractant and
in lipid metabolism. Supporting this theory is the finding that amyloid
deposition occurs initially in organs that are major sites of lipid and
cholesterol metabolism, such as the kidney, liver, and spleen. Approximately 80% of secreted SAA1 and SAA2 is bound to lipoproteins. Usually SAA secreted by the liver is completely degraded by macrophages.
The secreted SAA protein is 104 amino acids in length and is primarily
secreted in an α-­helix structure. For reasons not completely understood, patients with AA amyloidosis have incomplete degradation
and accumulation of intermediate SAA products. In these patients,
SAA is transferred to the lysosome where the c-­terminal portion of
the 104–amino acid SAA protein is cleaved, allowing the remaining
66-­76 amino acid proteins to fold into a β-­pleated sheet configuration.
These cleaved fragments polymerize, form fibrils that are deposited in
the extracellular space, and bind proteoglycans and other proteins such
as serum amyloid P. These fibrils are resistant to proteolysis and deposit
in organ tissues.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Although organ involvement may vary, AA amyloidosis most frequently affects the kidneys; 90% of patients have some degree of renal
involvement. Unexplained proteinuria may be the presenting feature
in some patients. Nephrotic syndrome and renal failure may develop
if the underlying inflammatory condition is not well-­
controlled.
Patients with higher SAA levels have a significantly higher risk of
death than those with lower SAA levels. Gastrointestinal (GI) involvement is seen in approximately 20% of patients and usually manifests
as chronic diarrhea, GI bleeding, abdominal pain, and malabsorption.
When biopsied, the testes are frequently discovered to be involved
(87%). Relatively uncommon findings associated with AA amyloidosis
include anemia, amyloid goiter, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, adrenal
involvement, and pulmonary involvement. The heart, tongue, and skin
are rarely involved.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of amyloidosis is established by a biopsy demonstrating
amyloid fibril proteins in affected tissues. The tissues tested may include
kidney, rectum, abdominal fat pad, and gingiva. Amyloid deposits are
composed of seemingly homogeneous eosinophilic material that stains
with Congo red dye and demonstrates the pathognomonic “apple-­green

birefringence” in polarized light. Tissue staining and genetic testing are
useful for diagnosing transthyretin amyloidosis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

In the United States, specific laboratory testing is not commercially
available for AA amyloid, but SAA levels are available in some other
countries and can be monitored to guide response to treatment.

TREATMENT

There is no established therapy for AA amyloidosis, and thus the primary approach is aggressive management of the underlying inflammatory or infectious disease. As newer therapies are developed to treat the
underlying conditions, emerging evidence shows that the incidence of
AA amyloidosis is decreasing. Colchicine is effective not only in controlling the attacks of FMF but also in preventing the development
of amyloidosis associated with FMF. AA amyloidosis associated with
other autoinflammatory diseases and chronic rheumatic diseases does
not respond to colchicine. Biologic agents against proinflammatory
cytokines used to treat RA, JIA, spondyloarthropathies, and the hereditary autoinflammatory diseases appear to decrease the risk of developing AA amyloidosis and may even reverse the deposition of amyloid.
The class of medications referred to as the TNF inhibitors have been
paramount in the management of RA and other autoimmune diseases,
and there are reports documenting the effectiveness of anti-­TNF agents
in blunting the progression of amyloidosis. Adverse effects of anti-­TNF
medications include reactivation of tuberculosis and hepatitis B, and
thus screening should be performed before instituting therapy. Caution should be used in prescribing anti-­TNF agents to patients with a
history of heart failure or demyelinating disease, because their use may
cause exacerbations of underlying cardiac and neurologic diseases.
The IL-­1 pathway is the target of three biologic medications used in
autoimmune and autoinflammatory diseases. The available IL-­1 antagonists are anakinra (IL-­1 receptor antagonist), rilonacept (soluble
IL-­1 receptor decoy), and canakinumab (long-­acting fully humanized
IgG1 anti–IL-­1β monoclonal antibody). A trial of canakinumab in
patients with colchicine-­resistant FMF, MKD, and TRAPS showed
that it was effective in controlling and preventing flares. The various IL-­1 inhibitors have been successful at slowing the progression of
AA amyloidosis, and in some cases treatment results in regression of
amyloid proteinuria.
Tocilizumab, an anti–IL-­6 receptor antibody, has been shown to
attenuate experimental AA amyloid and to reverse AA amyloidosis
complicating JIA and RA. A trial using eprodisate disodium in AA
amyloid patients failed to meet its primary end-­point of reducing progression to end-­stage renal disease and was halted in 2016.
Transthyretin amyloidosis has been treated with liver transplantation, which removes the source of mutated transthyretin molecules,
and several medications that inhibit the synthesis of the mutated protein, stabilize tetramers of the protein, or disrupt fibrils.

PROGNOSIS

End-­stage renal failure is the underlying cause of death in 40–60%
of patients with amyloidosis. According to a large-­scale study of 374
patients with AA amyloidosis, the factors associated with a poor prognosis include older age, a lower albumin serum level, end-­stage renal
disease at baseline, and prolonged serum elevation of SAA. An elevated
SAA value was the most powerful risk factor for end-­stage renal disease
and death from AA amyloidosis.

PREVENTION

The primary means of preventing AA amyloidosis is treatment of the
underlying inflammatory or infectious disease, resulting in decreases in
the level of SAA protein and the risk of amyloid deposition. Although
the period of latency between the onset of inflammation from the
underlying disease and the initial clinical signs of AA amyloidosis may
vary and is often prolonged, progression of the amyloid depositions
can be rapid.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1538 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 207

Macrophage Activation
Syndrome
Rebecca Trachtman and
Edward M. Behrens
Macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) is a potentially fatal complication of rheumatic diseases thought to be caused by excessive activation and expansion of macrophages and T cells. These events lead to an
overwhelming inflammatory reaction, involving fever, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, cytopenias, liver dysfunction, and coagulopathy resembling disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
Extreme hyperferritinemia is a characteristic laboratory feature that
separates MAS from primary disease flare.
Inflammatory infiltrates composed predominantly of T lymphocytes
and hemophagocytic macrophages are commonly seen in the bone
marrow; they are also found in the liver, spleen, or lymph nodes. These
hemophagocytic macrophages can infiltrate most organs in the body.
Both the systemic and local inflammation can cause severe organ damage, which can be life-­threatening and progress to multiple organ failure. The abundance of tissue macrophages exhibiting hemophagocytic
activity in inflammatory lesions in MAS suggests that MAS is related to
a group of histiocytic disorders collectively known as hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although MAS can occur in many rheumatic diseases, it is seen most
frequently in systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (SJIA) and in its
adult equivalent, adult-­onset Still disease (AOSD). The reasons for this
association remain unclear; elevated interleukin (IL)-­18 may be a causative factor. Approximately 7–17% of patients with SJIA develop severe
disease, whereas more mild subclinical MAS may be seen in as many as
30% of patients with SJIA.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Kawasaki disease are other
rheumatologic conditions in which MAS occurs somewhat more
frequently than in other rheumatic diseases. In SLE, MAS occurs in
approximately 1–9% of patients.
MAS most often occurs subsequent to the onset of rheumatologic
disease; MAS has also been known to occur at the initial presentation
of a rheumatic illness. Approximately 23% of episodes of MAS have
occurred at the onset of SJIA. MAS typically occurs in the setting of
active primary rheumatic disease. However, it can occur despite good
control of underlying rheumatic disease. Many cases occur in the setting of infections and/or modifications in drug therapy. Both of these
triggers are possibly related to subsequent active rheumatic disease.

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY AND OTHER
HYPERINFLAMMATORY SYNDROMES

The exact mechanisms behind MAS remain unclear; however, much
has been extrapolated from the pathogenesis of primary HLH (pHLH).
Consistent with parallels to pHLH, in MAS there is an abundance of
interferon-­gamma (IFN-­γ)–producing CD8+ T cells in inflammatory
lesions. Further suggesting a role for T-­cell–mediated inflammation,
cyclosporine A, a therapeutic agent that acts predominantly on T
cells, is very effective in the treatment of the majority of MAS patients.
CXCL9, a biomarker of IFN-­γ activity, is also elevated in patients during an MAS episode. Cytotoxic function appears to be impaired in certain subsets of SJIA patients, perhaps specifically in those at risk for
MAS, although this finding has been inconsistent. Some studies have
demonstrated an enrichment of heterozygous pathogenic variants in
known pHLH genes in MAS populations, suggesting that hypomorphic
lesions in cytolytic pathways may result in disease.

Translational studies in SJIA patients suggest that elevated serum IL-­
18 is a risk factor for the development of SJIA/MAS. A common link
to the “IFN-­γ-­centric” models is that IL-­18 is perhaps most noted for
its ability to stimulate IFN-­γ production by T cells and natural killer
cells. In the case of MAS caused by activating pathogenic variants in
the NLRC4 gene, IL-­18 has been shown to be highly elevated, and case
reports of IL-­18 blockade leading to resolution of both disease and
IFN-­γ activity suggest a causal link.

Cytokine Storm

A “cytokine storm” is the common pathophysiologic state in many
hyperinflammatory diseases. There is increasing interest in the relative
roles of cytokines in MAS pathophysiology, and the similarities and
differences to HLH, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
(MIS-­C) related to SARS-­CoV-­2 virus, and sepsis.

HLH

MAS belongs to a group of hemophagocytic disorders, which includes
HLH. The current classification of histiocytic disorders distinguishes
primary, or familial, HLH and secondary, or reactive, HLH (see Chapter
556.2). Clinically, they may be difficult to distinguish from each other.
pHLH is a constellation of rare autosomal recessive immune disorders
linked to genetic defects in various genes all affecting the cytolytic pathway. The clinical symptoms of pHLH usually become evident within the
first months of life. Secondary HLH tends to occur in older children or
adults. It may be associated with an identifiable infectious episode, most
often Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) or cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection.
However, when EBV-­associated HLH occurs as part of a genetic syndrome, such as the X-­linked proliferative disorders, it is more properly
considered pHLH. The group of secondary hemophagocytic disorders
also includes malignancy-­associated HLH. Some consider MAS to be a
form of secondary HLH, whereas others make a distinction and prefer
the moniker “Rheuma-­HLH” to separate MAS from other secondary
HLH conditions. The distinction between primary and secondary HLH
is becoming less distinct because of other genetic causes, some of which
are associated with less severe and more distinct clinical presentations.
Some of these may present later in life because heterozygous or compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in cytolytic pathway genes
that confer a partial dominant negative effect on the cytolytic function.
The exact relationship between HLH and MAS is an area of extensive
investigation, and some rheumatologists believe that MAS should be
categorized as secondary HLH occurring in a setting of a rheumatic
disease (or MAS-­HLH). Although there are multiple attempts to try
to standardize the nomenclature for these various syndromes, at this
point, best practice would be to use the term primary HLH for cases
with known molecular diagnoses or a clear genetic component. For
secondary cases, there is not yet a prescribed specific terminology, but
inclusion of known secondary causes can add clarity to the specific
syndromes being described (e.g., SJIA-­MAS, EBV-­HLH).

Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children
(MIS-­C)

Children may develop a postinfectious hyperinflammatory syndrome
after SARS-­CoV-­2 virus exposure that bears some resemblance to
MAS. Approximately 4-­8 weeks after infection, children developed
multiorgan dysfunction, frequently involving persistent fever, abdominal pain, and rash, and sometimes accompanied by abnormal cardiac
function or hypotension. Laboratory evaluation is significant for elevation of markers of inflammation and sometimes hyperferritinemia,
coagulopathy, and liver dysfunction. Similar to MAS, this phenomenon occurred after infectious trigger, and cytokine storm has been
invoked in multiple studies, especially involving IL-­18, IL-­10, IL-­6, and
the IFN-­γ–induced CXCL9.

CLINICAL AND LABORATORY MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical findings in overt MAS are dramatic and often evolve rapidly. High persistent fever, hepatosplenomegaly, generalized lymphadenopathy, liver dysfunction, and changes in mental status are common.
Coagulopathy resembling DIC can be associated with hemorrhagic

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 207 u Macrophage Activation Syndrome
skin rashes ranging from mild petechiae to extensive ecchymotic
lesions. These can progress to epistaxis and hematemesis secondary to
upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Mental status changes, seizures, and
coma are the most common manifestations of CNS disease. Cerebrospinal fluid examination in these patients usually reveals pleocytosis
with mildly elevated protein. Deterioration in renal function has been
noted in several series and may be associated with particularly high
mortality. Pulmonary infiltrates can occur, and hemophagocytic macrophages can be found in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
These clinical symptoms are associated with notable laboratory
features. A precipitous fall in at least two of three blood cell lines
(leukocytes, erythrocytes, or platelets) is one of the early findings,
caused in part by increased destruction of cells by phagocytosis
and consumption at inflammatory sites. Decreasing erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) despite persistently high CRP is another
characteristic laboratory feature. This parallels hypofibrinogenemia, likely secondary to fibrinogen consumption and liver dysfunction. Prolonged prothrombin and partial thromboplastin
times, fibrin degradation products, and moderate deficiency of
vitamin K–dependent clotting factors are usually present as well.
Liver involvement is common in MAS, and most patients develop
marked hepatomegaly, and sometimes mild jaundice. Liver function tests frequently reveal high serum transaminase activity and
mildly elevated levels of serum bilirubin. Serum ammonia levels
are typically normal or only mildly elevated. Additional laboratory
findings in MAS include hypertriglyceridemia, hypoalbuminemia,
and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH).
Perhaps the most striking laboratory change in MAS is the elevation of serum ferritin. Although diagnostic/classification criteria set
levels of 500 ng/mL and 684 ng/mL as cutoffs for HLH and SJIA-­MAS
respectively, levels are often greater than 10,000 ng/mL. The reasons for
this elevated ferritin are not clear and are likely multifactorial. Although
extremely high ferritin is often a good serologic marker of HLH and
MAS, high levels are not pathognomonic and can be seen in a wide variety of conditions. Thus ferritin needs to be interpreted in the context of
the other features of the disease to support a diagnosis. Further, serum
ferritin is usually 60–80% glycosylated, whereas intracellular ferritin is
not glycosylated. In hemophagocytic syndromes, the percentage of glycosylated ferritin in the serum is low, typically below 20%; assessment of
glycosylated ferritin may also be a useful tool for MAS diagnosis.
It has been recognized that as many as one third of patients with
active SJIA may have mild subclinical MAS. These patients typically
have moderate hyperferritinemia, highly increased CRP, moderately decreased hemoglobin, and relatively low platelet counts. These
patients may also have mild hepatosplenomegaly and mildly elevated
liver enzymes. Serum fibrinogen tends to remain in the normal range
despite highly increased CRP.

DIAGNOSIS

Recognition of MAS is crucial, but early diagnosis is often difficult.
There is no single clinical or laboratory feature that is specific for MAS,
including hemophagocytosis, and many clinical features of MAS overlap with those seen in the underlying rheumatic diseases. The MAS
clinical presentation also overlaps with sepsis-­like syndromes associated with infection. This is further complicated by the fact that MAS
may also be triggered by a flare of the underlying rheumatic disease or
infection. In a patient with active underlying rheumatologic disease,
persistent fevers and decrease in ESR and platelet count in combination with increasing serum ferritin and persistently high CRP should
raise suspicion for impending MAS. Increasing liver enzymes, aspartate aminotransferase in particular, is another characteristic laboratory
change. The diagnosis of MAS might be confirmed by bone marrow
biopsy, with the presence of increased hemophagocytosis. However,
demonstration of hemophagocytosis may be limited by sampling
error, particularly at the early stages of the syndrome. In such cases,
additional staining of the bone marrow with anti-­CD163 antibodies
may be helpful. Features consistent with MAS include massive expansion of highly activated histiocytes. The diagnosis of MAS is supported
by elevated levels of soluble IL2Rα and soluble CD163 in serum.

1539

Table 207.1  The Classification Criteria for Macrophage
Activation Syndrome in Systemic Juvenile
Idiopathic Arthritis
A febrile patient with known or suspected systemic juvenile
idiopathic arthritis is classified as having macrophage activation
syndrome if the following criteria are met:
Ferritin >684 ng/mL and any two of the following:
Platelet count ≤181 × 109/L
Aspartate aminotransferase >48 U/L
Triglycerides >156 mg/dL
Fibrinogen ≤360 mg/dL

Evidence is mounting that IFN-­γ is the pivotal cytokine in MAS;
however, peripheral measurement of IFN-­γ can be difficult because
of retention in tissues. Therefore the IFN-­induced chemokine CXCL9
may be a more reliable serum biomarker of MAS. Although substantial
elevation in the serum levels of soluble IL2Rα receptors and CXCL9 in
an SJIA patient is highly suggestive of MAS, these assessments remain
nonspecific, and elevation can be associated with some malignancies
and viral infections, such as viral hepatitis.
Striking clinical similarities between MAS and HLH have led some
to advocate for the use of the HLH-­2004 diagnostic guidelines developed by the HLH Study Group of the International Histiocyte Society
(see Chapter 556.2). However, the application of the HLH diagnostic criteria to SJIA patients with suspected MAS is problematic, both
because there is significant overlap with common features of active
rheumatic disease and because SJIA patients may reach some of the
criteria only later in the clinical course. NK function testing as a means
to assess cytotoxic activity is problematic, as defects in this pathway are
only variably associated with SJIA and MAS.
Criteria for the diagnosis of MAS complicating SJIA are noted in
Table 207.1. In cross-­validation analyses, the criteria revealed a sensitivity of 0.72-­0.76 and a specificity 0.97-­0.99. It should be noted
that these criteria were developed for classification for studies and
trials and were not optimized for clinical diagnostic purposes. One
limitation of the MAS classification criteria is that background treatment with biologics might modify the clinical presentation of MAS.
Although IL-­1 and IL-­6 inhibitors effectively control the disease in the
majority of SJIA patients, they do not provide full protection against
MAS and may impede diagnosis. Furthermore, the MAS classification criteria are less likely to classify tocilizumab-­treated patients
as having MAS compared with historical controls or canakinumab-­
treated patients.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

It is most important to distinguish MAS from a flare of an underlying
rheumatologic disease and from intercurrent infection. Further, one
must consider other clinical entities associated with hyperferritinemia,
hepatic dysfunction, coagulopathy, cytopenias, or encephalopathy,
specifically DIC, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), and
malignancy-­associated HLH. Some other important differential diagnoses include sepsis and drug reactions; a thorough infectious workup
is necessary for the majority of MAS patients. Hyperferritinemia is not
specific for hemophagocytic syndromes and may be observed in various liver and kidney diseases, hematologic malignancies, or conditions
requiring chronic blood transfusions.

TREATMENT

MAS is still associated with high mortality rates; therefore prompt
recognition and initiation of immediate therapeutic intervention are
critical. To achieve rapid reversal of coagulation abnormalities and
cytopenias, most clinicians start with intravenous methylprednisolone
pulse therapy (30 mg/kg for three consecutive days) followed by 2 to 3
mg/kg/day in four divided doses.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1540 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
If response to glucocorticoids is not satisfactory, cyclosporine A (2-­7
mg/kg/day) is usually added to the treatment regimen based on several
reports describing the rapid resolution of MAS features in response to
this medication. Cyclosporine is preferentially used orally, and careful
monitoring for toxicity is required, especially if it is administered intravenously. In many patients, administration of cyclosporine A not only
provides rapid control of symptoms but also avoids excessive use of
steroids. Case reports support the use of tacrolimus as an alternative to
cyclosporine A, as it is often effective and has a desirable safety profile.
There is also reported efficacy with the use of anakinra for MAS. Because
MAS episodes may be triggered by disease flare, biologics that neutralize
IL-­1 could extinguish the underlying inflammation driving the cytokine
storm. There are several case reports and two case series of anakinra treatment for MAS with promising results, particularly when used in higher
doses. However, in established SJIA, continuous treatment with standard
doses of anti–IL-­1 and anti-IL-­6 biologic therapies does not absolutely
protect against MAS even if the underlying disease responds well to the
treatment. In the phase 3 clinical trial of canakinumab, IL-­1 blockade did
not confer full protection from MAS even in patients with fully controlled
SJIA. These results suggest that IL-­1 inhibition effectively treats MAS in
many patients, but does not completely prevent the occurrence of MAS,
particularly in the setting of viral infection in treated subjects.
Intravenous immune globulin treatment has been successful in
virus-­associated reactive HLH. Rituximab—a treatment that depletes
B lymphocytes, the main type of cells harboring EBV virus—has been
successfully used in EBV-­
induced lymphoproliferative disease and
could be considered in EBV-­driven MAS.
If MAS remains active despite the use of corticosteroids, anakinra, and
cyclosporine A, the HLH-­2004 treatment protocol developed by the HLH
Study Group of the International Histiocyte Society may be considered. In
addition to steroids and cyclosporine A, this protocol includes etoposide
(or VP16), a podophyllotoxin derivative that inhibits DNA synthesis by
forming a complex with topoisomerase II and DNA. However, this protocol is limited by the toxicity of etoposide and its likelihood of causing
kidney and liver damage. In addition, severe bone marrow suppression,
overwhelming infection, and death have been reported. The use of lower
doses of etoposide (50-­100 mg/m2 range rather than 150 mg/m2, as suggested by the HLH-­2004 protocol) has been advocated by some groups.
It has also been suggested that antithymocyte globulin (ATG) might
be a safer alternative to etoposide, particularly in patients with renal
and hepatic impairment. ATG depletes both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells
through complement-­dependent cell lysis. Mild depletion of monocytes is noted in some patients as well. Although this treatment was tolerated well in reported cases, infusion reactions are frequently reported
with the use of ATG, and adequate laboratory and supportive medical
resources must be readily available if this treatment is used. Occasional
reports describe successful use of cyclophosphamide to control MAS,
mainly in patients with SLE.
The monoclonal antibody tocilizumab is very effective in treating
SJIA. However, in a phase 3 clinical trial of tocilizumab in SJIA, several
patients developed MAS. Similar to canakinumab, at the time of MAS
presentation, underlying SJIA in most of these patients was well controlled. Furthermore, tocilizumab can cause normalization of some of
the laboratory parameters of MAS, without actually altering the course
of MAS activity itself, providing false reassurance of disease control.
In a patient with an inflammasomopathy caused by gain-­of-­function
pathogenic variants in NLRC4, administration of the recombinant
IL-­18BP resulted in rapid and sustained improvement, including the
resolution of all MAS-­like features. It remains unclear whether a similar therapeutic intervention might be effective in MAS as well. Based
on their essential roles in transmitting cytokine-­induced signals, particularly from IFN-­γ, the JAK/STAT pathways have become a target for
pharmacologic manipulation in inflammatory diseases. Ruxolitinib, a
potent inhibitor of JAK1 and JAK2, has been shown to ameliorate the
disease-­influencing patterns of JAK/STAT-­dependent gene expression
in animal models of pHLH, but it remains to be determined whether
this treatment will be routinely effective in patients with MAS.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 208

Kawasaki Disease
Mindy S. Lo, Mary Beth F. Son, and
Jane W. Newburger
Kawasaki disease (KD), formerly known as mucocutaneous lymph node
syndrome and infantile polyarteritis nodosa, is an acute febrile illness
of childhood seen worldwide, with the highest incidence occurring in
Asian children. KD is a systemic inflammatory disorder manifesting as
a vasculitis with a predilection for the coronary arteries. Approximately
20–25% of untreated children develop coronary artery abnormalities
(CAAs), including aneurysms, whereas <5% of children treated with
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) develop CAA. Nonetheless, KD
is the leading cause of acquired heart disease in children in most developed countries, including the United States and Japan.

ETIOLOGY

The cause of KD remains unknown. Certain epidemiologic and clinical features support an infectious origin, including the young age-­
group affected; epidemics with wavelike geographic spread of illness;
the self-­limited nature of the acute febrile illness; and the clinical
features of fever, rash, enanthem, conjunctival injection, and cervical
lymphadenopathy. Further evidence of an infectious trigger includes
the infrequent occurrence of the illness in infants <3 months old, possibly the result of protective maternal antibodies, and the rarity of
cases in adults, possibly the result of prior exposures with subsequent
immunity. Furthermore, the number of hospitalizations per year for
KD significantly decreased during the COVID-­19 pandemic, both in
Japan and the United States, possibly due to low circulating causative
viruses. However, there are also features that are not consistent with
an infectious origin; it is unusual to have multiple cases present at the
same time within a family or daycare center. Furthermore, no single
infectious etiologic agent has been successfully identified, despite an
exhaustive search. Other environmental triggers such as airborne toxins and climate shifts have also been speculated to play a role.
Genetic factors clearly influence the pathogenesis of KD, as evidenced by the higher risk of KD in Asian children regardless of country
of residence and in siblings and children of individuals with a history of
KD. The concordance rate among identical twins is approximately 13%.
Linkage studies and genome-­wide association studies (GWAS) have
identified significant potential associations between polymorphisms in
the ITPKC gene, a T-­cell regulator, with increased susceptibility to KD
and more severe disease. Other candidate genes for KD identified by
GWAS include CASP3, BLK, and FCGR2A. Lastly, multiple alleles in
different human leukocyte antigen (HLA) regions have been reported
to influence risk for KD.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

For the majority of patients, KD is a disease of early childhood, and
nearly all epidemiologic studies show a higher susceptibility to KD in
males. Large database studies suggest that the hospitalization rate for
KD in the United States has been mostly stable over time, although the
proportion of hospitalizations complicated by “KD shock syndrome”
has increased over time. In 2017, the Kids’ Inpatient Database estimated 19.3 hospitalizations/100,000 children <4 years of age. Children
of Asian/Pacific Islander descent had the highest rates of KD among all
racial groups.
In other countries, such as the United Kingdom, South Korea, and
Japan, the rate of KD seems to be increasing. In Japan, nationwide surveys have been administered every 2 years to monitor trends in KD
incidence. In 2018 the highest recorded rate thus far of 359 per 100,000
children ages 0-­4 years was described, with the highest rate in young
children ages 9-­11 months. Fortunately, the proportion of Japanese

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 208 u Kawasaki Disease

1541

No coronary artery changes

Mild, transient dilation (resolves within 4–6 wk)
Possible progression to a
normal luminal dimension

Media
Intima

Necrotizing
arteritis

Aneurysm
formation

Elastica interna
Adventitia

1. Subacute/chronic vasculitis
2. Luminal myofibroblastic proliferation
3. Laminar nonocclusive thrombosis

Destruction of intima, elastica interna,
media and, variably, adventitia

Further progression and
? possible interaction with
atherosclerosis risk factors

Calcification

Occlusive thrombus
formation

Complex stenosis
Ischemic heart disease
Myocardial infarction

Organization of thrombus
and recanalization

Fig. 208.1 Natural history of coronary artery abnormalities. (Modified from Kato H. Cardiovascular complications in Kawasaki disease: coronary
artery lumen and long-­term consequences. Prog Pediatr Cardiol. 2004;19:137–145.)

patients with coronary aneurysms and myocardial infarction has
decreased over time, at 2.6% for the former in the most recent survey.
Several risk-­stratification models have been constructed to determine which patients with KD are at highest risk for CAA. Predictors
of poor outcome across several studies include young age; being male;
persistent prolonged fever; poor response to IVIG; and laboratory
abnormalities, including neutrophilia, thrombocytopenia, transaminitis, hyponatremia, hypoalbuminemia, elevated levels of N-­terminal
brain natriuretic protein, and elevated C-­reactive protein (CRP) levels.
Asian, Pacific Islander, and Hispanic ethnicity are also risk factors for
CAA. Three risk scores for IVIG resistance, which refers to incomplete response to the first treatment, have been constructed by Japanese researchers; of these, the Kobayashi score is the most widely used
and has high sensitivity and specificity. Unfortunately, when applied to
non-­Japanese populations, these scores do not appear to be as accurate
in identifying children at risk for IVIG resistance and CAA. Body surface area (BSA)–adjusted coronary artery dimensions on initial echocardiography are good predictors of CAA development. In a North
American cohort, coronary artery z scores ≥2.0 are predictive of CAA
development; similar findings have been reported in Japanese cohorts
as well. Accordingly, coronary artery z scores at initial presentation
are useful imaging biomarkers that can be used to guide adjunctive
therapy for high-­risk patients.

PATHOLOGY

KD is a vasculitis that predominantly affects medium-­size arteries.
The coronary arteries are most often involved, although other arteries (e.g., axillary, subclavian, femoral, popliteal, brachial) can also
develop dilation. A three-­phase process to the arteriopathy of KD has
been described. The first phase is a neutrophilic necrotizing arteritis

occurring in the first 2 weeks of illness that begins in the endothelium
and moves through the coronary wall. Saccular aneurysms may form
from this arteritis. The second phase is a subacute/chronic vasculitis
driven by lymphocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils, which may last
weeks to years and results in fusiform aneurysms. The vessels affected
by the subacute/chronic vasculitis then develop smooth muscle cell
myofibroblasts, which may cause diminution of internal lumen dimension and progressive stenosis in the third phase. Thrombi may form in
the lumen and obstruct blood flow (Fig. 208.1).

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Fever is characteristically high (≥38.3°C [101°F]), persistent, and unresponsive to antipyretics. The duration of fever without treatment is
generally 1-­2 weeks but may be as short as 5 days or may persist for 3-­4
weeks. In addition to fever, the five principal clinical criteria of KD
are (1) bilateral nonexudative conjunctival injection with limbal sparing; (2) erythema of the oral and pharyngeal mucosa with strawberry
tongue and red, cracked lips; (3) edema (induration) and erythema of
the hands and feet; (4) rash of various forms (maculopapular, urticarial,
erythema multiforme–like, scarlatiniform, and rarely, micropustular
or psoriatic-­like); and (5) nonsuppurative cervical lymphadenopathy,
usually unilateral, with node size >1.5 cm (Table 208.1 and Figs. 208.2-­
208.5). Superficial perineal desquamation is common in the acute
phase. Periungual desquamation of the fingers and toes begins 2-­3
weeks after the onset of illness and may progress to involve the entire
hand and foot (Fig. 208.6).
Additional symptoms other than the principal clinical criteria
are common in the 10 days before diagnosis of KD, which may be
explained in part by the finding that up to a third of patients with
KD have confirmed, concurrent infections. Gastrointestinal (GI)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1542 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 208.1  Clinical and Laboratory Features of Kawasaki Disease
EPIDEMIOLOGIC CASE DEFINITION (CLASSIC CLINICAL CRITERIA)*
Fever persisting at least 5 days†
Presence of at least four principal features:
Changes in extremities

• Acute: erythema of palms, soles; edema of hands, feet
• Subacute: periungual peeling of fingers, toes in wk 2 and 3

Polymorphous exanthem
Bilateral bulbar conjunctival injection without exudate
Erythema and cracking of lips, strawberry tongue, and/or erythema
of oral and pharyngeal mucosa
Cervical lymphadenopathy (>1.5 cm diameter), usually unilateral
Exclusion of other diseases with similar findings‡
These features do not have to occur concurrently.
OTHER CLINICAL AND LABORATORY FINDINGS
Cardiovascular System
Myocarditis, pericarditis, valvular regurgitation, cardiogenic
shock
Coronary artery abnormalities
Aneurysms of medium-­sized noncoronary arteries
Peripheral gangrene
Aortic root enlargement
Respiratory System
Peribronchial and interstitial infiltrates on chest
radiograph
Pulmonary nodules
Musculoskeletal System
Arthritis, arthralgias (pleocytosis of synovial fluid)
Gastrointestinal Tract
Diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain
Hepatitis, jaundice
Hydrops of gallbladder
Pancreatitis
Parotitis

Central Nervous System
Extreme irritability
Aseptic meningitis (pleocytosis of cerebrospinal
fluid)
Facial nerve palsy
Sensorineural hearing loss
Genitourinary System
Urethritis/meatitis, hydrocele
Other Findings
Desquamating rash in groin
Retropharyngeal phlegmon
Anterior uveitis by slit-­lamp examination
Erythema, induration at bacille Calmette-­Guérin inoculation site
LABORATORY FINDINGS IN ACUTE KAWASAKI
DISEASE
Leukocytosis with neutrophilia and immature forms
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Elevated C-­reactive protein
Elevated nitrogen-­terminal pro B-­type natriuretic peptide
(NT-­proBNP)
Anemia
Abnormal plasma lipids
Hypoalbuminemia
Hyponatremia
Thrombocytosis after wk 1§
Sterile pyuria
Elevated serum transaminase
Elevated serum γ-­glutamyl transpeptidase
Pleocytosis of cerebrospinal fluid
Leukocytosis in synovial fluid

*Patients with fever at least 5 days and fewer than four principal criteria can be diagnosed with Kawasaki disease when coronary artery abnormalities are detected by two-­dimensional
echocardiography or angiography.
†In the presence of four or more principal criteria, particularly when redness and swelling of the hands and feet are present, Kawasaki disease diagnosis can be made on day 4 of
illness. Experienced clinicians who have treated many patients with Kawasaki disease may establish a diagnosis before day 4 in rare cases.
‡See the differential diagnosis (Table 208.3).
§Rarely infants present with thrombocytopenia and disseminated intravascular coagulation.
From McCrindle BW, Rowley A, Newburger JW, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and long-­term management of Kawasaki disease: a scientific statement for health professionals from the
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135(17):e927–e999.

Fever
Strawberry tongue
Conjunctivitis
Desquamation
Polymorphous skin rashes
Induration
Pyuria
BCG
LAP
Diarrhea
CAD
Arthritis

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Percentage of Cases

Fig. 208.2 Clinical symptoms and signs of Kawasaki disease. Sum-

mary of clinical features from 110 cases of Kawasaki disease seen in Kaohsiung, Taiwan. LAP, Lymphadenopathy in head and neck area; BCG,
reactivation of bacille Calmette-­Guérin inoculation site; CAD, coronary
artery dilation, defined by an internal diameter >3 mm. (From Wang CL,
Wu YT, Liu CA, et al. Kawasaki disease: infection, immunity and genetics.
Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2005;24:998–1004.)

Fig. 208.3 Kawasaki disease. Strawberry tongue in patient with mu-

cocutaneous lymph node syndrome. (Courtesy Tomisaku Kawasaki, MD.
From Hurwitz S. Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders; 1993.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 208 u Kawasaki Disease

Fig. 208.4 Kawasaki disease. Congestion of bulbar conjunctiva in a

patient with mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. (Courtesy Tomisaku Kawasaki, MD. From Hurwitz S. Clinical Pediatric Dermatology,
2nd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1993.)

Fig. 208.5 Kawasaki disease. Indurative edema of the hands in a patient with mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. (Courtesy Tomisaku
Kawasaki, MD. From Hurwitz S. Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1993.)

Fig. 208.6 Kawasaki disease. Desquamation of the fingers in a patient with mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. (Courtesy Tomisaku
Kawasaki, MD. From Hurwitz S. Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders; 1993.)

symptoms (vomiting, diarrhea, or abdominal pain) occur in >60% of
patients, and at least one respiratory symptom (rhinorrhea or cough)
occurs in 35%. Other clinical findings can include significant irritability that is especially prominent in infants and likely caused by aseptic
meningitis, mild hepatitis, hydrops of the gallbladder, urethritis and
meatitis with sterile pyuria, uveitis, and arthritis. Arthritis may occur
early in the illness or may develop in the second or third week. Small or

1543

large joints may be affected, and the arthralgias may persist for several
weeks. Patients previously vaccinated with bacillus Calmette-­Guerin
(BCG) may show reactivation at the inoculation site. Clinical features
that are not consistent with KD include exudative/purulent conjunctivitis; exudative pharyngitis; generalized lymphadenopathy; discrete
oral lesions (e.g., ulceration); splenomegaly; and bullous, petechial, or
vesicular rashes.
Cardiac involvement is the most important manifestation of KD.
Myocarditis may occur in patients with acute KD and may manifest
as tachycardia disproportionate to fever, along with diminished left
ventricular systolic function. Occasionally, patients with KD present
in cardiogenic shock (KD shock syndrome), with hypotension and
greatly diminished left ventricular function. In addition, KD shock
syndrome may manifest with thrombocytopenia, a high band count,
and a high CRP. Case series of KD shock syndrome indicate that these
patients may be at higher risk for coronary artery dilation. Pericarditis
with a small pericardial effusion can also occur during the acute illness. Mitral regurgitation of at least mild severity is evident on echocardiography in 10–25% of patients at presentation but diminishes
over time, except among rare patients with coronary aneurysms and
ischemic heart disease. Up to 25% of untreated patients develop CAA
by Japanese Ministry of Health criteria in the second to third week of
illness; initially these are usually asymptomatic and detected by echocardiography. Almost all the morbidity and mortality in KD occur in
patients with large or giant coronary artery aneurysms, defined by
the 2017 American Heart Association (AHA) scientific statement on
the diagnosis and treatment of KD as having a z score ≥10 or an absolute dimension of ≥8 mm. Specifically, large or giant aneurysms are
associated with the greatest risk of later thrombosis or stenosis, angina,
and myocardial infarction (Figs. 208.7 and 208.8A). Rupture of a giant
aneurysm is a rare complication that generally occurs in the first month
after illness onset and may present as hemopericardium with tamponade. Axillary, popliteal, iliac, or other systemic medium-­sized muscular
arteries may also become aneurysmal, but always in the setting of giant
coronary aneurysms (see Fig. 208.8B); these usually regress.
Occasionally KD presents initially with only fever and lymphadenopathy (node-­first KD). This presentation may be confused with bacterial or viral cervical lymphadenitis and may delay the diagnosis and
treatment. Persistence of high fever, lack of response to antibiotics, and
subsequent development of other signs of KD suggest the diagnosis.
Children with node-­first KD tend to be older (4 vs 2 years) and have
more days of fever and higher CRP levels. In addition to cervical adenopathy, many node-­first patients had retropharyngeal and peritonsillar inflammation on CT scans (Fig. 208.9). Patients with node-­first KD
have a higher incidence of coronary aneurysms. Patients with infectious adenitis usually respond to antibiotics; they may have abscesses
noted on imaging studies (ultrasonography or CT).
KD can be divided into three clinical phases. The acute febrile phase
is characterized by fever and the other acute signs of illness and usually
lasts 1-­2 weeks. The subacute phase is associated with desquamation,
thrombocytosis, development of CAA, and the highest risk of sudden
death in patients who develop aneurysms; it generally lasts 3 weeks.
The convalescent phase begins when all clinical signs of illness have
disappeared and continues until the erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR) returns to normal, typically 6-­8 weeks after the onset of illness.

LABORATORY AND RADIOLOGY FINDINGS

There is no diagnostic test for KD, but patients usually have characteristic laboratory findings. The leukocyte count is often elevated, with a
predominance of neutrophils and immature forms. Normocytic, normochromic anemia is common. The platelet count is generally normal
in the first week of illness and rapidly increases by the second to third
week of illness, sometimes exceeding 1 million/mm3. An elevated ESR
or CRP value is universally present in the acute phase of illness. The
ESR may remain elevated for weeks, in part from the effect of IVIG.
Sterile pyuria, mild elevations of the hepatic transaminases, hyperbilirubinemia, and cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis may also be present. KD
is unlikely if the ESR, CRP, and platelet counts are normal after 7 days
of fever.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1544 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

LAD

RCA

Fig. 208.7 Coronary angiograms in 6-­yr-­old boy with Kawasaki dis-

ease. Left, Giant aneurysm of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) with obstruction. Right, Giant aneurysm of the right coronary
artery (RCA) with an area of severe narrowing. (From Newburger JW,
Takahashi M, Gerber MA, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and long-­term
management of Kawasaki disease. Pediatrics. 2004;114:1708–1733.)

Two-­dimensional echocardiography is the most useful test to monitor
for development of CAA. Although frank aneurysms are rarely detected
in the first week of illness, coronary arteries are commonly dilated. Coronary artery dimensions, adjusted for BSA (z scores), may increase over
the first 6 weeks of illness, and higher z scores at the time of diagnosis
are the strongest risk factor for the presence of coronary aneurysms 2-­8
weeks after illness onset. Children with non-­KD febrile illnesses also
have mildly increased z scores compared with nonfebrile controls, but
to a lesser degree than patients with KD. Aneurysms have been defined
with the use of absolute dimensions by the Japanese Ministry of Health
and are classified as small (≤4 mm internal diameter [ID]), medium (>4
to ≤8 mm ID), or giant (>8 mm ID). Some experts believe that a z score–
based system for classification of aneurysm size may be more discriminating, because it adjusts the coronary dimension for BSA. The AHA z
score classification system is noted in Table 208.2.
Echocardiography should be performed at diagnosis and again after
1-­2 weeks of illness. If the results are normal, a repeat study should be
performed 6-­8 weeks after onset of illness. If results of either of the
initial studies are abnormal or the patient has recurrent fever or symptoms, more frequent echocardiography or other studies may be necessary. In patients in whom CAA has not developed in the first 4-­6 weeks
of illness, the patient may be discharged from cardiology care, although
follow-­up through 12 months may be considered. Children and families should be counseled regarding healthy diet and the importance of
exercise at regular primary care visits. For patients with CAA, the type
of testing and the frequency of cardiology follow-­up visits are tailored
to the patient’s coronary artery status (see Table 208.2).

DIAGNOSIS

A

B

Fig. 208.8 MRI of coronary and peripheral artery aneurysms in Kawa-

saki disease. A, Image of left ventricular outflow tract showing a giant
right coronary artery (RCA) aneurysm with nonocclusive thrombus (yellow
arrow) and a giant left main coronary artery (LMCA) aneurysm. Ao, Aorta;
AoV, aortic valve; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. B, Aneurysms in
the axillary and subclavian arteries and the iliac and femoral arteries (arrows). (From McCrindle BW, Rowley A, Newburger JW, et al. Diagnosis,
treatment, and long-­term management of Kawasaki disease: a scientific
statement for health professionals from the American Heart Association.
Circulation 2017;135[17]:e927–e999, Fig. 2G and H, p. e935.)

A

B

Fig. 208.9 Contrast-­enhanced CT in 3-­yr-­old boy with Kawasaki dis-

ease. A, Right-­sided cervical lymphadenopathy (arrows), peritonsillar
hypodense area (curved arrow), and swelling of right palatine tonsil
(arrowhead). B, Right-­sided cervical lymphadenopathy with perinodal
infiltration (arrows) and intranodal focal low attenuation (arrowheads).
(From Kato H, Kanematsu M, Kato Z, et al. Computed tomographic
findings of Kawasaki disease with cervical lymphadenopathy. J Comput
Assist Tomogr. 2012;36[1]:138–142, Fig. 1, p. 139.)

The diagnosis of KD is based on the presence of characteristic clinical
signs. For classic KD, the diagnostic criteria require the presence of
fever for at least 5 days and at least four of five of the other principal characteristics of the illness (see Table 208.1). The diagnosis of KD
should be made within 10 days, and ideally within 7 days, of fever onset
to improve coronary artery outcomes. In incomplete KD, patients
have persistent fever but fewer than four of the five characteristic clinical signs. In patients with incomplete KD, laboratory and echocardiographic data can assist in the diagnosis (Fig. 208.10). Incomplete cases
occur most frequently in infants, who also have the highest likelihood
of development of CAA. Ambiguous cases should be referred to a center with experience in the diagnosis of KD. Establishing the diagnosis
with prompt initiation of treatment is essential to prevent potentially
devastating coronary artery disease. For this reason, it is recommended
that any infant age ≤6 months with fever for ≥7 days and signs of systemic
inflammation without explanation undergo echocardiography to assess
the coronary arteries.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Adenovirus, measles, and scarlet fever lead the list of common childhood infections that mimic KD (Table 208.3). Children with adenovirus typically have exudative pharyngitis and exudative conjunctivitis,
allowing differentiation from KD. A common clinical problem is the
differentiation of scarlet fever from KD in a child who is a group A
streptococcal carrier. Patients with scarlet fever typically have a rapid
clinical response to appropriate antibiotic therapy. Such treatment for
24-­48 hours with clinical reassessment generally clarifies the diagnosis.
Furthermore, ocular findings are quite rare in group A streptococcal
pharyngitis and may assist in the diagnosis of KD.
Features of measles that distinguish it from KD include exudative
conjunctivitis, Koplik spots, rash that begins on the face and hairline and
behind the ears, and leukopenia. Cervical lymphadenitis can be the initial
diagnosis in children who are ultimately recognized to have KD. Less common infections such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever and leptospirosis are
occasionally confused with KD. Rocky Mountain spotted fever is a potentially lethal bacterial infection, and appropriate antibiotics should not be
withheld if the diagnosis is under consideration. Its distinguishing features
include pronounced myalgias and headache at onset, centripetal rash, and
petechiae on the palms and soles. Leptospirosis can also be an illness of
considerable severity. Risk factors include exposure to water contaminated

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 208 u Kawasaki Disease

1545

Table 208.2  Classification of Coronary Artery Dilation or Aneurysms (after AHA Guidance with Modification)
FOLLOW-­UP
INTERVAL

IMAGING REQUIRED TO ASSESS
FOR INDUCIBLE ISCHEMIA
(STRESS ECHO OR STRESS MRI)

REGIONAL SPECIALIST
KAWASAKI DISEASE
CLINIC

CLASSIFICATION
OF RISK LEVEL

DESCRIPTION OF
CORONARY ARTERIES

1

No involvement at any
time point
(z score<2)

2 wk
6 wk
6 mo
12 mo
Discharge if normal
at 12 mo

None

No

No—annual cardiac
and general health
review with GP
recommended*

2

Dilation only
(2< z score ≤2.5): resolves
within 1 year

2 wk
6 wk
6 mo
12 mo
Discharge if normal
at 12 mo

None

No

No—annual cardiac
and general health
review with GP
recommended*

3

Small aneurysm
(2.5≤ z score <5):
(a) current or persistent
(b) decreased to normal
or z score <2.5

2 wk
6 wk
6 mo
12 mo
Annual review

Coronary angiography (preferably
CT) at 12 mo as baseline
Consider stress imaging for inducible
myocardial ischemia every 2 years
Imaging (echo) for coronary
surveillance annually

Yes

Yes

4

Medium aneurysm
(5 ≤z score <10):
(a) persistent aneurysm
(b) decreased to normal or
z score <2.5

2 wk
6 wk
6 mo
12 mo
Annual review

Coronary angiography (preferably
CT) at 12 mo as baseline
Consider stress imaging for inducible
myocardial ischemia annually
Imaging (echo, CT,† or MRI) for coronary
thrombus surveillance annually

Yes

Yes

5

Giant aneurysm
(z score ≥10 or ≥8 mm):
(a) persistent giant
aneurysm
(b) persistent aneurysm
(but regressed to medium
or small aneurysms)
(c) regressed to normal
dimensions

2 wk
6 wk
3 mo
6 mo
9 mo
12 mo
Then every 6 mo

Coronary angiography (preferably
CT) at 6-­12 mo as baseline
Consider stress imaging for inducible
myocardial ischemia annually
Imaging (echo, CT,† or MRI) for
coronary thrombus surveillance
every 6 mo

Yes

Yes

PSP

*GP review should include clinical examination, blood pressure measurement, general health discussion, and advice on avoidance of cardiovascular risk factors and lifestyle choices,
including maintaining a healthy weight, reducing the risk of diabetes, avoiding smoking, and taking regular exercise. This provides the opportunity to discuss any parent or patient
questions and concerns.
†CT should not be used repeatedly if possible. Use MRI or ultrasound where possible to reduce radiation exposure.
ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; AHA, American Heart Association; FBC, full blood count; GP, general practitioner; PSP, person-­specific protocol.
From McCrindle BW, Rowley AH, Newburger JW, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and long-term management of Kawasaki disease: A scientific statement for health professionals from the
American Heart Association [published correction appears in Circulation. 2019 Jul 30;140(5):e181-e184]. Circulation. 2017;135(17):e927–e999.).

with urine from infected animals. The classic description of leptospirosis
is of a biphasic illness with a few asymptomatic days between an initial
period of fever and headache and a late phase with renal and hepatic failure. In contrast, patients with KD have consecutive days of fever at diagnosis and rarely have renal or hepatic failure.
Drug hypersensitivity reactions, including Stevens-­
Johnson syndrome, share some characteristics with KD. Drug reaction features such
as the presence of oral ulcerations and a normal or minimally elevated
ESR are not seen in KD. Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) is
also characterized by fever and rash, but physical findings include diffuse lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Arthritis may or may
not be present in the initial illness. Fevers typically show a quotidian or
double-­quotidian pattern, in contrast to the unremitting fevers seen in
KD. Laboratory findings may include coagulopathy, elevated fibrin degradation product values, and hyperferritinemia. Interestingly, there are
reports of children with sJIA who have echocardiographic evidence of
CAA. Coronary aneurysms have also been reported in Behçet disease,
primary cytomegalovirus infection, granulomatosis with polyangiitis,
lupus, infantile polyarteritis nodosa, hyper-IgE syndrome, hyper-IgD
syndrome (mevalonic aciduria), and meningococcemia.

Children with KD may present with Kawasaki disease shock
syndrome, with a clinical picture similar to that of toxic shock syndrome or of the multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
associated with COVID-­19 (MIS-­C; see Chapter 311). Features
of toxic shock syndrome that are not usually seen in KD include
renal insufficiency, coagulopathy, pancytopenia, and myositis.
With COVID-­19 disease, some children developed a KD-­like illnesses presenting in cardiogenic shock. multisystem inflammatory
syndrome in children (MIS-C), also known as pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with SARS-­CoV-­2
(PIMS-­TS), occurs 2-­6 weeks after infection with SARS-­C oV-­2. The
initial infection may be asymptomatic. Children with MIS-­C may
show conjunctival injection, oropharyngeal changes, and rashes
similar to that seen in KD. CAAs have also been described in MIS-­
C, but the risk of CAA in MIS-­C does not strictly correlate with
criteria for incomplete or complete KD. Furthermore, patients are
often older and have a greater degree of myocardial dysfunction
as compared with KD; distinguishing laboratory features include
greater hyperferritinemia, more pronounced cytopenias, and elevated d-­dimer in MIS-­C (Table 208.4).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1546 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Evaluation of suspected incomplete Kawasaki disease1
Children with fever ≥5 days and 2 or 3 compatible clinical criteria2 OR
infants with fever for ≥7 days without other explanation3

Assess laboratory tests
CRP≥3.0 mg/dL and/or ESR≥40 mm/hr

CRP<3.0 mg/dL and ESR<40 mm/hr

3 or more laboratory findings:

Serial clinical and
laboratory re-evaluation if
fevers persist
Echocardiogram if typical
peeling6 develops

1) Anemia for age
2) Platelet count of ≥450,000 after the
7th day of fever
3) Albumin ≤3.0 g/dL
4) Elevated ALT level
5) WBC count of ≥15,000/mm3
6) Urine ≥10 WBC/hpf

NO

YES
Treat5

OR

Positive echocardiogram4

Fig. 208.10 Algorithm for the evaluation of suspected incomplete Kawasaki disease (KD). 1In the absence of a gold standard for diagnosis of KD,

this algorithm cannot be evidence based, but rather represents the informed opinion of the expert committee. Consultation with an expert should
be sought any time assistance is needed. 2Clinical findings of KD are listed in Table 208.1. Characteristics suggesting that another diagnosis should
be considered include exudative conjunctivitis, exudative pharyngitis, ulcerative intraoral lesions, bullous or vesicular rash, generalized adenopathy,
and splenomegaly. 3Infants ≤6 months of age are most likely to develop prolonged fever without other clinical criteria for KD; these infants are at
particularly high risk of developing coronary artery abnormalities. 4Echocardiography is considered positive for purposes of this algorithm if any of
three conditions are met: z score of left anterior descending coronary artery or right coronary artery ≥2.5; coronary artery aneurysm is observed; or
three or more other suggestive features exist, including decreased left ventricular function, mitral regurgitation, pericardial effusion, or z scores in the
left anterior descending coronary artery or right coronary artery of 2-­2.5. 5If the echocardiogram is positive, treatment should be given within 10 days
of fever onset or after the 10th day of fever in the presence of clinical and laboratory signs (C-­reactive protein [CRP], erythrocyte sedimentation rate
[ESR]) of ongoing inflammation. 6Typical peeling begins under the nail beds of fingers and toes. ALT, Alanine transaminase; WBC, white blood cell.
(From McCrindle BW, Rowley A, Newburger JW, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, and long-­term management of Kawasaki disease: A scientific statement
for health professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135:e927–e999, Fig. 2, p. e937.)

Table 208.3  Differential Diagnosis of Kawasaki Disease
VIRAL INFECTIONS*
Adenovirus
Enterovirus
Measles
Epstein-­Barr virus
Cytomegalovirus
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
Scarlet fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Leptospirosis
Bacterial cervical lymphadenitis ± retropharyngeal phlegmon
Meningococcemia
Urinary tract infection
RHEUMATOLOGIC DISEASE
Systemic-­onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Behçet disease
Rheumatic fever
Polyarteritis nodosa
Takayasu arteritis
OTHER
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-­C) associated
with COVID-­19
Toxic shock syndromes
Serum sickness
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
Macrophage activation syndrome (may also complicate Kawasaki disease)
Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Drug hypersensitivity reactions
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
Aseptic meningitis
Autoinflammatory diseases
*Detection of a virus does not exclude Kawasaki disease in the presence of the principal
clinical features (see Table 208.1).

Table 208.4  Comparing and Contrasting Multisystem
Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-­C)
with Kawasaki Disease
MIS-­C

KAWASAKI DISEASE

Mean age 8-­12 years

Mean age <5 years

Fever >24 hr

Fever >5 days

GI symptoms common (severe
abdominal pain) (50–90%)

GI complaints not common
(∼20%)

Myocarditis/myocardial dysfunction
(left ventricular dysfunction)

Myocardial function normal/
mildly reduced*

Coronary artery dilation or
aneurysms (25–50%)

Coronary artery abnormalities
such as aneurysms common if
untreated

Hypotension

Normal BP*

Renal involvement more common

Renal involvement rare

Proinflammatory state common

Proinflammatory state common

Lymphopenia common

Lymphopenia not common

Thrombocytopenia

Thrombocytosis

Elevated ferritin

Ferritin usually normal

*Except in Kawasaki shock syndrome (∼5%).
GI, Gastrointestinal.
Modified from Naka F, Melnick L, Gorelik M, et al. A dermatologic perspective on
multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children. Clin Dermatol. 2021;39(1):163–168, Table 5.

TREATMENT

Patients with acute KD should be treated with 2 g/kg of IVIG as a single
infusion, usually administered over 10-­12 hours within 10 days of disease onset, and ideally as soon as possible after diagnosis (Table 208.5).

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 208 u Kawasaki Disease
In addition, moderate-­dose (30-­50 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours)
aspirin should be administered until the patient is afebrile, then lowered to antiplatelet doses (3-­5 mg/kg/day). Other NSAIDs should not
be given during therapy with aspirin because they may block aspirin’s
antiplatelet effect. The mechanism of action of IVIG in KD is likely
multifaceted, but treatment results in defervescence and resolution of
clinical signs of illness in approximately 85% of patients. Using Japanese Ministry of Health criteria, the prevalence of coronary disease is
20–25% in children treated with aspirin alone and falls to <5% in those
treated with IVIG and aspirin within the first 10 days of illness. In children diagnosed after the 10th day of fever, IVIG should still be offered
to patients with persistent fever, abnormal dimensions of the coronary
arteries, or signs of systemic inflammation. Low-­dose aspirin is continued for its antithrombotic effect until 6-­8 weeks after illness onset and
is then discontinued in patients who have had normal echocardiography findings throughout the course of their illness. Patients with CAA
continue with aspirin therapy longer and may require anticoagulation,
depending on the degree of coronary dilation (see later).
Glucocorticoids have been used as primary therapy with the first dose
of IVIG in hopes of improving coronary outcomes. A North American
trial using a single pulse dose of intravenous methylprednisolone (30 mg/
kg) with IVIG as primary therapy did not improve coronary outcomes.
However, a trial in Japan using the Kobayashi score to identify high-­risk
children demonstrated improved coronary outcomes with a regimen of
Table 208.5  Treatment of Kawasaki Disease
ACUTE STAGE
Standard risk:
Intravenous immune globulin 2 g/kg over 10-­12 hr
and
Aspirin 30-­50 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hr orally until patient is
afebrile for at least 48 hr
High risk* for coronary artery abnormalities:
Intravenous immune globulin and aspirin as above, plus
methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg/d IV divided q12hr until afebrile, then
prednisolone orally until CRP normalized, then taper over 2-3 wk
CONVALESCENT STAGE
Aspirin 3-­5 mg/kg once daily orally until 6- after illness onset if normal
coronary findings throughout course
*High risk for coronary artery abnormalities is defined as age <6 months or baseline
left anterior descending (LAD) or right circumflex artery (RCA) z-score greater than or
equal to 2.5.

1547

methylprednisolone/prednisolone (2 mg/kg/day, divided every 12 hours)
plus IVIG as primary therapy. Furthermore, a systematic review and
meta-­analysis of 16 comparative studies demonstrated that early treatment with glucocorticoids improved coronary artery outcomes in children with KD. These data suggest that primary glucocorticoid therapy in
addition to standard of care (IVIG plus aspirin) may be helpful in children at high risk for CAA. Fewer data are available to support the use of
TNF alpha inhibitors for prevention of coronary artery aneurysms.
IVIG-­resistant KD (nonresponders) occurs in approximately 15%
of patients and is defined by persistent or recrudescent fever 36 hours
after completion of the initial IVIG infusion. Patients with IVIG resistance are at increased risk for CAA. Therapeutic options for the child
with IVIG resistance include a second dose of IVIG (2 g/kg), a tapering course of glucocorticoids, infliximab, or possibly anakinra (Table
208.6). For the most severely affected patients with enlarging coronary
aneurysms, additional therapies such as cyclosporine or cyclophosphamide may be administered, with consultation from specialists in pediatric rheumatology and cardiology.

COMPLICATIONS

Acute KD is complicated in 1–2% of patients by macrophage activation syndrome (MAS; see Chapter 207), a syndrome of life-­threatening
hyperinflammation on the spectrum of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. MAS may mimic MIS-­C. These patients may present with
hyperferritinemia, coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia, and shock, warranting more aggressive immunosuppressive therapy.
In all phases of KD, patients with giant coronary aneurysms may
experience myocardial infarction, angina, and sudden death due to
thrombosis. For this reason, aspirin is continued indefinitely in children with coronary aneurysms (Table 208.7). When aneurysms are
moderate-­sized, dual antiplatelet therapy (e.g., aspirin and clopidogrel) is
sometimes administered. For those with large or giant aneurysms, anticoagulation with warfarin or low-­molecular-­weight heparin is added to
aspirin. For acute thrombosis that occasionally occurs in an aneurysmal
or stenotic coronary artery, thrombolytic therapy may be lifesaving. In
very rare circumstances of severe, giant aneurysms, rupture can occur.
Long-­term follow-­up of patients with CAAs is tailored to the past (i.e.,
worst-­ever) and current coronary status, with a schedule of testing recommended in the 2017 AHA scientific statement on KD (see Table 208.2).
Testing may include echocardiography, assessment for inducible ischemia,
advanced imaging (CT, MRI, or invasive angiography), physical activity counseling, and cardiovascular risk factor assessment and management. Patients with coronary artery stenosis and inducible ischemia may
be managed with coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or catheter

Table 208.6  Treatment Options for IVIG-­Resistant Patients with Kawasaki Disease*
AGENT

DESCRIPTION

DOSE

MOST FREQUENTLY ADMINISTERED
IVIG: second infusion
Pooled polyclonal IG

2 g/kg IV

IVIG + methylprednisolone/
prednisolone

IVIG + glucocorticoid

IVIG: 2 g/kg IV + methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg/d IV divided every 12 hr
until afebrile, then oral prednisolone 2 mg/kg/d divided twice daily

Infliximab

Monoclonal antibody against TNF-­α

Single infusion: 5-­10 mg/kg IV

ALTERNATIVE TREATMENTS
Anakinra
Recombinant IL-­1β receptor antagonist

2-­8 mg/kg/day given by subcutaneous injection or IV infusion

Cyclosporine

Inhibitor of calcineurin-­NFAT pathway

IV: 3 mg/kg/d divided every 12 hr
PO: 4-­8 mg/kg/d divided every 12 hr
Adjust dose to achieve trough 50-­150 ng/mL; 2 hr peak level 300-­600 ng/mL

Cyclophosphamide

Alkylating agent blocks DNA replication

10-­15 mg/kg IV, 1 or 2 doses

Plasma exchange

Replaces plasma with albumin

1-5 cycles

*IVIG resistance is defined as persistent or recrudescent fever at least 36 hr and <7 days after completion of first IVIG infusion. The top three treatments have been most frequently
used, although no comparative effectiveness trial has been performed. Pulsed high-­dose corticosteroid treatment is not recommended. The alternative treatments have been used
in a limited number of patients with KD.
CRP, C-­reactive protein; IG, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; IV, intravenous(ly); IVIG, intravenous immune globulin; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells; PO, oral; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1548 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 208.7  Anticoagulation for Coronary Artery
Abnormalities in Kawasaki Disease

Chapter 209

LONG TERM THERAPY
Small aneurysms: Aspirin 3-5 mg/kg/d

Sarcoidosis

Medium aneurysms: Aspirin +/- clopidogrel 1 mg/kg/d
(max 75 mg/d)
Giant aneurysms: Aspirin + anticoagulation with warfarin, low molecular
weight heparin, or direct oral anticoagulants (e.g. apixaban)
ACUTE CORONARY THROMBOSIS
Prompt fibrinolytic therapy with tissue plasminogen activator or
other thrombolytic agent under the supervision of a pediatric
cardiologist

interventions, including percutaneous transluminal coronary rotational
ablation, directional coronary atherectomy, and stent implantation.
Patients undergoing long-­term aspirin therapy should receive annual
influenza vaccination to reduce the risk of Reye syndrome. A different
antiplatelet agent can be substituted for aspirin during the 6 weeks after
varicella vaccination. IVIG may interfere with the immune response
to live virus vaccines as a result of a specific antiviral antibody, so the
measles-­mumps-­rubella and varicella vaccinations should generally be
deferred until 11 months after IVIG administration. Nonlive vaccinations do not need to be delayed.

PROGNOSIS

The vast majority of patients with KD return to normal health;
timely treatment reduces the risk of coronary aneurysms to <5%.
Acute KD recurs in 1–3% of cases. Published fatality rates are very
low, generally <1%. The prognosis for patients with CAA depends
on the severity of coronary disease; therefore recommendations
for follow-­up and management are stratified according to coronary artery status. A 6-­week echocardiogram may be unnecessary
in patients with normal coronary artery measurements at baseline
and at 2 weeks of illness, as these children very rarely develop new
abnormalities over time. Overall, ∼50% of CAAs remodel to normal
lumen diameter by 1-­2 years after the illness, with smaller aneurysms being more likely to regress. Intravascular ultrasonography
has demonstrated that regressed aneurysms are associated with
marked myointimal thickening and abnormal vascular function.
Giant aneurysms are less likely to regress to normal lumen diameter
and are more likely to lead to thrombosis or stenosis. Bypass grafting may be required if there is inducible ischemia; it is best accomplished with the use of arterial grafts, which grow with the child and
are more likely than venous grafts to remain patent over the long
term. Heart transplantation has been required in rare cases where
revascularization is not feasible because of distal coronary stenoses,
distal aneurysms, or severe ischemic cardiomyopathy. A study from
Japan reported outcomes in adult patients with a history of KD and
giant aneurysms. These patients required multiple cardiac and surgical procedures, but the 30-­years survival rate approached 90%.
The long-­term outcomes of children who have had KD and never
had coronary artery abnormalities, based upon reliable echocardiograms performed early in the course of disease, appear to be similar
to those in the normative population. Although studies of endothelial
dysfunction in children with a history of KD and normal coronary
dimensions have produced conflicting results, reassuring data suggest
that the standardized mortality ratio among adults in Japan who had
KD in childhood without aneurysms is indistinguishable from that of
the general population. All children with a history of KD should be
counseled regarding a heart-­healthy diet, adequate amounts of exercise, tobacco avoidance, and intermittent lipid monitoring. Among
children with coronary aneurysms, the AHA recommends treatment
thresholds for risk factors for atherosclerotic heart disease that are
lower than those for the normal population.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Laura Cannon and Eveline Y. Wu
Sarcoidosis is a rare multisystem granulomatous disease of unknown
etiology. There appears to be two distinct, age-­dependent patterns of
disease among children with sarcoidosis. The clinical features in older
children are similar to those in adults (pediatric-­onset adult sarcoidosis), with frequent systemic features (fever, weight loss, malaise), pulmonary involvement, and lymphadenopathy. In contrast, early-­onset
sarcoidosis manifesting in children <4 years of age is characterized by
the triad of rash, uveitis, and polyarthritis.

ETIOLOGY

The etiology of sarcoidosis remains obscure but likely results from
exposure of a genetically susceptible individual to one or more unidentified antigens. This exposure initiates an exaggerated immunologic
response that ultimately leads to the formation of granulomas. The
human major histocompatibility complex is located on chromosome
6, and specific human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I and class II
alleles are associated with disease phenotype. Genetic polymorphisms
involving various cytokines and chemokines may also have a role in
development of sarcoidosis. Familial clustering supports the contribution of genetic factors to sarcoidosis susceptibility. Environmental
and occupational exposures are also associated with disease risk. There
are positive associations between sarcoidosis and agricultural employment, occupational exposure to insecticides, and moldy environments
typically associated with microbial bioaerosols.
Blau syndrome is an autosomal dominant, familial form of sarcoidosis and is typified by the early onset of granulomatous inflammation
involving the skin, eyes, and joints. Pathogenic genetic variants in the
CARD15/NOD2 gene have been found in affected family members
and appear to be associated with development of sarcoidosis. Similar
genetic variants have been found in individuals with a sporadic early-­
onset sarcoidosis (EOS) (rash, uveitis, arthritis), suggesting that this
nonfamilial form and Blau syndrome are genetically and phenotypically identical (see Chapter 204).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

A nationwide patient registry of childhood sarcoidosis in Denmark
estimated the annual incidence to be 0.22-­0.27 per 100,000 children.
The incidence increases with age, and peak onset occurs at 20-­39 years.
The most common age of reported childhood cases is 13-­15 years. In
comparison, an international registry and Spanish cohort of Blau syndrome and EOS reported the mean age of disease onset as 30 months
and 36 months, respectively. There is no clear gender predilection in
any form of childhood sarcoidosis. The majority of U.S. childhood sarcoidosis cases are reported in the southeastern and southcentral states.

PATHOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS

Noncaseating, epithelioid granulomatous lesions are a cardinal feature
of sarcoidosis. Activated macrophages, epithelioid cells, and multinucleated giant cells, as well as CD4+ T lymphocytes, accumulate and
become tightly packed in the center of the granuloma. The causative
agent that initiates this inflammatory process is unknown. The periphery of the granuloma contains a loose collection of monocytes, CD4+
and CD8+ T lymphocytes, and fibroblasts. The interaction between the
macrophages and CD4+ T lymphocytes is important in the formation
and maintenance of the granuloma. The activated macrophages secrete
high levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α and other proinflammatory mediators. The CD4+ T lymphocytes differentiate into type 1 helper
T cells and release interleukin (IL)-­2 and interferon (IFN)-­γ, promoting proliferation of lymphocytes. Granulomas may heal or resolve with
complete preservation of the parenchyma. In approximately 20% of the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 209 u Sarcoidosis 1549
lesions, the fibroblasts in the periphery proliferate and produce fibrotic
scar tissue, leading to significant and irreversible organ dysfunction.
The sarcoid macrophage is able to produce and secrete
1,25-­(OH)2-­vitamin D, or calcitriol, an active form of vitamin D typically produced in the kidneys. The hormone’s natural functions are
to increase intestinal absorption of calcium and bone resorption and
decrease renal excretion of calcium and phosphate. An excess of calcitriol may result in hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria in patients with
sarcoidosis.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Sarcoidosis is a multisystem disease, and granulomatous lesions may
occur in any organ of the body. The clinical manifestations depend
on the extent and degree of granulomatous inflammation and are
extremely variable. Children may present with nonspecific symptoms,
such as fever, weight loss, and general malaise. In adults and older children, pulmonary involvement is most frequent, with infiltration of the
thoracic lymph nodes and lung parenchyma. Isolated bilateral hilar
adenopathy on chest radiograph is the most common finding (Fig.
209.1), but parenchymal infiltrates and miliary nodules may also be
seen (Figs. 209.2, 209.3, and 209.4). Patients with lung involvement are
usually found to have restrictive changes on pulmonary function testing. Symptoms of pulmonary disease are seldom severe and generally
consist of a dry, persistent cough.
Extrathoracic lymphadenopathy and infiltration of the liver, spleen,
and bone marrow also occur often (Table 209.1). Infiltration of the liver
and spleen typically leads to isolated hepatomegaly and splenomegaly,
respectively, but actual organ dysfunction is rare. Cutaneous disease,
such as plaques, nodules, erythema nodosum in acute disease, or lupus
pernio in chronic sarcoidosis, appears in one quarter of cases and is usually present at onset. Red-­brown to purple maculopapular lesions <1
cm on the face, neck, upper back, and extremities are the most common skin finding (Fig. 209.5). Papulonodular granulomatous lesions
have been reported to develop in cosmetic (eyebrows) and decorative
tattoos (tattoo sarcoidosis). Ocular involvement is frequent and has
variable manifestations, including anterior or posterior uveitis, conjunctival granulomas, eyelid inflammation, and orbital or lacrimal gland
infiltration. The arthritis in sarcoidosis can be confused with juvenile
idiopathic arthritis (JIA). Central nervous system (CNS) involvement
is rare in early childhood but may manifest as seizures, cranial nerve
involvement, intracranial mass lesions, and hypothalamic dysfunction
(Fig. 209.6). Kidney disease occurs infrequently in children but typically

Fig. 209.2 Sarcoidosis. Chest radiograph of 10-­year-­old girl showing

widely disseminated peribronchial infiltrates, multiple small nodular
densities, hyperaeration of the lungs, and hilar lymphadenopathy.

A

B
Fig. 209.3 Typical features of lung sarcoidosis on CT. A, Usual peri-

lymphatic distribution of micronodules with fissural spreading. B, Typical nodules with irregular margins and satellite micronodules known as
the galaxy sign. (From Valerye D, Prasse A, Nunes H, et al. Sarcoidosis.
Lancet. 2014;383:1155–1167, Fig. 2, p. 1158.)

Fig. 209.1 Sarcoidosis. Chest radiograph demonstrating stage I dis-

ease with enlarged mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes. (From Iannuzzi
M. Sarcoidosis. In Goldman L, Schafer AI, eds. Goldman’s Cecil Medicine, 24th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012: Fig. 95-­1, p. 582.)

manifests as renal insufficiency, proteinuria, transient pyuria, or microscopic hematuria caused by early monocellular infiltration or granuloma
formation in kidney tissue. Only a small fraction of children have hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria. Sarcoid granulomas can also infiltrate the
heart and lead to cardiac arrhythmias and, rarely, sudden death. Other

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1550 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 209.1  Sarcoidosis: Extrapulmonary Localizations
SYMPTOMS
Skin

Papules, nodules, plaques, scar sarcoidosis,
lupus pernio, subcutaneous sarcoidosis,
granuloma annulare, lip granulomas, vitiligo,
erythema nodosum, Lofgren syndrome*

Peripheral
lymphadenopathy

Mostly cervical or supraclavicular; inguinal,
axillary, epitrochlear, or submandibular lymph
node sites also possible; painless and mobile

Eye

Anterior, intermediate, or posterior uveitis;
retinal vascular change; conjunctival nodules;
lacrimal gland enlargement

Liver

Often symptom free; abnormal liver function
tests in 20–30% of patients; hepatomegaly;
rarely hepatic insufficiency, chronic intrahepatic
cholestasis, or portal hypertension

Spleen

Splenomegaly; rarely, pain or pancytopenia;
very rarely, splenic rupture

Heart

Atrioventricular or bundle branch block; ventricular
tachycardia or fibrillation; congestive heart
failure; pericarditis; impairment of sympathetic
nerve activity; sudden death

rare sites of disease involvement include blood vessels of any size, the
gastrointestinal tract, parotid gland, muscles, bones, and testes.
In contrast to the variable clinical presentation of sarcoidosis in
older children, Blau syndrome and EOS (NOD2-­associated sarcoidosis) classically manifest as the triad of uveitis, arthritis, and rash (see
Chapter 204). Infantile-­onset panniculitis with uveitis and systemic granulomatosis is an uncommon manifestation of sarcoidosis.

Nervous system

Facial nerve palsy, optic neuritis, leptomeningitis,
diabetes insipidus, hypopituitarism, seizures,
cognitive dysfunction, deficits, hydrocephalus,
psychiatric manifestations, spinal cord disease,
polyneuropathy, small-­fiber neuropathy

Kidney

Rare symptoms; increased creatinine
sometimes associated with hypercalcemia;
nephrocalcinosis; kidney stones

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Parotitis

Symmetric parotid swelling; Heerfordt syndrome
when associated with uveitis, fever, and facial palsy

Nose

Nasal stuffiness, nasal bleeding, crusting, anosmia

Larynx

Hoarseness, breathlessness, stridor, dysphagia

Bones

Often asymptomatic; hands and feet classically most
involved, also large bones and axial skeleton

Skeletal
muscles

Proximal muscle weakness, amyotrophy,
myalgia, intramuscular nodules

Genitourinary tract

All organs can be involved, including breast,
uterus, epididymis, and testicle

Gastrointestinal
tract

Most often symptom free, but the esophagus,
stomach, small intestine, and colon can be
involved

Fig. 209.4 Confluent parenchymal lung nodules and mediastinal and

bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy with increased FDG uptake in a female
with biopsy-­proven sarcoidosis. PET/CT shows confluent parenchymal
lung nodules (yellow arrow) and mediastinal and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy (blue arrow). These abnormalities show increased FDG uptake on fused PET/CT. (Modified from Prabhakar HB, Rabinowitz CB,
Gibbons FK, et al. Imaging features of sarcoidosis on MDCT, FDG PET,
and PET/CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2008;190:S1–S6, Fig. 6, p. S4.)

There is no single standard laboratory test diagnostic of sarcoidosis.
Anemia, leukopenia, and eosinophilia may be seen. Other nonspecific
findings include hypergammaglobulinemia and elevations in acute-­
phase reactants, including ESR and CRP. Hypercalcemia and/or hypercalciuria occur in only a small proportion of children with sarcoidosis.
Angiotensin-­converting enzyme (ACE) is produced by the epithelioid
cells of the granuloma, and its serum value may be elevated, but this
finding lacks diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. ACE levels are estimated to be elevated in >50% of children with sarcoidosis. In addition,
ACE values may be difficult to interpret because reference values for
serum ACE are age dependent. Fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography (FDG-­PET) (with either CT or MRI) can help identify nonpulmonary (lymph nodes, bone, cardiac, liver, spleen) sites for
a diagnostic evaluation or biopsy (Fig. 209.7).

DIAGNOSIS

Definitive diagnosis ultimately requires demonstration of the characteristic noncaseating granulomatous lesions in a biopsy specimen (usually taken from the most readily available affected organ) and exclusion
of other known causes of granulomatous inflammation. Skin and transbronchial lung biopsies have higher yield, greater specificity, and fewer
associated adverse events than biopsy of mediastinal lymph nodes or
liver. Additional diagnostic testing includes chest radiography, pulmonary function testing with measurement of diffusion capacity, hepatic
enzyme measurements, and renal function assessment. Ophthalmologic slit-­lamp examination is essential because ocular inflammation is
frequently present and may be asymptomatic in sarcoidosis, and vision
loss is a sequela of untreated disease.
Bronchoalveolar lavage may be used to assess for disease activity, and
the fluid typically reveals an excess of lymphocytes with an increased
CD4+/CD8+ ratio of 2-­13:1. In addition to flexible bronchoscopy with
transbronchial biopsy, endosonographic-­
guided intrathoracic node
aspiration has been valuable in obtaining tissue to assess for noncaseating granulomas.

*Lofgren syndrome: acute arthritis, erythema nodosum, and hilar adenopathy.
Adapted from Valerye D, Prasse A, Nunes H, et al. Sarcoidosis. Lancet. 2014;383:1155–
1167, Table 1.

Fig. 209.5 Sarcoidosis nodules on the face. (From Shah BR, Laude TA.
Atlas of Pediatric Clinical Diagnosis. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 209 u Sarcoidosis 1551
Table 209.2  Granulomatous Disorders with Head and
Neck Manifestations
AUTOIMMUNE
GPA (Wegener granulomatosis)
Churg-­Strauss syndrome
Behçet disease
INFECTIOUS
Tuberculosis
Cat-­scratch fever
Syphilis
Leprosy
Fungal (blastomycosis, histoplasmosis)
Actinomycosis
IDIOPATHIC/INFLAMMATION
Sarcoidosis
Orofacial granulomatosis (Melkersson-­Rosenthal syndrome)
HEREDITARY
CGD

Fig. 209.6 Neurologic involvement in sarcoidosis. Typical involvement of hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and optic chiasm seen on a sagittal gadolinium-­enhanced T1-­weighted sequence MRI (small arrow).
Abnormal nodular enhancement of the fourth ventricle is seen (large
arrow). (Modified from Valerye D, Prasse A, Nunes H, et al. Sarcoidosis.
Lancet. 2014;383:1155–1167, Fig. 3D, p. 1160.)

OTHER DISEASES WITH SECONDARY GRANULOMATOUS
MANIFESTATIONS
Relapsing polychondritis
LCH
SLE
Rheumatoid arthritis
Chemical exposure (e.g., cocaine, talc, beryllium)
CGD, chronic granulomatous disease; GPA, Granulomatosis with polyangiitis;
LCH, Langerhans cell histiocytosis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Modified from Nwawka OK, Nadgir R, Fujita A, Sakai O. Granulomatous disease in the
head and neck: Developing a differential diagnosis. RadioGraphics. 2014;34(5):1240–
1256, Table 1.

lesions involving the head, neck, and orofacial regions are noted in Table
209.2. Immunodeficiencies that may manifest with granulomatous lesions
include common variable immunodeficiency, selective IgA deficiency,
chronic granulomatous disease, ataxia telangiectasia, and severe combined
immunodeficiency. Granulomas of the lung, skin, or lymph nodes have
been reported in patients treated with anti-­TNF agents. Lymphoma should
be ruled out in cases of hilar or other lymphadenopathy. Sarcoid arthritis
may mimic JIA. Evaluation for endocrine disorders is needed in the setting
of hypercalcemia or hypercalciuria.

TREATMENT

Fig. 209.7 Palpable submental lymph node with FDG uptake. Axial

fused contrast-­enhanced PET/CT image shows enlarged left submental
lymph node (arrow) with increased FDG uptake. Lesion was biopsied
and was consistent with sarcoidosis. (From Prabhakar HB, Rabinowitz
CB, Gibbons FK, et al. Imaging features of sarcoidosis on MDCT, FDG
PET, and PET/CT. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2008;190:S1–S6, Fig. 5, p. S3.)

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Because of its protean manifestations, the differential diagnosis of sarcoidosis is extremely broad and depends largely on the initial clinical manifestations. Granulomatous infections, including tuberculosis, cryptococcosis,
pulmonary mycoses (histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis),
brucellosis, tularemia, and toxoplasmosis, must be excluded. Other causes
of granulomatous inflammation are granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis), hypersensitivity pneumonia, chronic
berylliosis, and other occupational exposures to metals. Localized granulomatous lesions of the head and neck may be due to orofacial granulomatosis (Melkersson-­
Rosenthal syndrome). Other granulomatous

Treatment should be based on disease severity and the number and
type of organs involved. Corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment
for most acute and chronic disease manifestations. The optimal dose
and duration of corticosteroid therapy in children have not been established. Induction treatment typically begins with oral prednisone or
prednisolone (1-­2 mg/kg/day up to 40 mg daily) for 8-­12 weeks until
manifestations improve. Corticosteroid dosage is then gradually
decreased over 6-­12 months to the minimal effective maintenance
dose (e.g., 5-­10 mg/day) that controls symptoms, or discontinued if
symptoms resolve. Methotrexate or leflunomide may be effective as a
corticosteroid-­sparing agent. On the basis of the role of TNF-­α in the
formation of granulomas, there is rationale for the use of TNF-­α antagonists. Results of small clinical trials showed modest effects with infliximab and adalimumab treatment of selected disease manifestations
(CNS, lupus pernio, pulmonary, ocular), whereas etanercept does not
appear to be particularly effective. Other therapeutics used for sarcoidosis manifestations include topical corticosteroids (eye), inhaled corticosteroids (lung), azathioprine (CNS), cyclophosphamide (cardiac,
CNS), hydroxychloroquine (skin), mycophenolate mofetil (CNS, skin),
thalidomide or its analogs (skin), and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs (joints).

PROGNOSIS

The prognosis of childhood sarcoidosis is not well defined. The disease may be self-­limited with complete recovery or may persist with
a progressive or relapsing course. Outcome is worse in the setting of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1552 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
multiorgan or CNS involvement. Most children requiring treatment
experience considerable improvement with corticosteroids, although
a significant number have morbid sequelae, mainly involving the lungs
and eyes. Children with early-­onset sarcoidosis have a poorer prognosis and generally experience a more chronic, progressive disease course.
The greatest morbidity is associated with ocular involvement, including cataract formation, development of synechiae, and loss of visual
acuity or blindness. Long-­term systemic treatment may be required for
the eye disease. Progressive polyarthritis may result in joint destruction. The overall mortality rate in older children with sarcoidosis is low.
Serial pulmonary function tests and chest radiographs are useful in
following the course of lung involvement. Monitoring for other organ
involvement should also include electrocardiogram with consideration
of an echocardiogram, urinalysis, renal function tests, and measurements of hepatic enzymes and serum calcium. Other potential indicators of disease activity include inflammatory markers and serum
ACE, although changes in ACE level do not always correlate with other
indicators of disease status. Given the frequency of asymptomatic eye
disease and the ocular morbidity associated with pediatric sarcoidosis,
all patients should have an ophthalmologic examination at presentation with monitoring at regular intervals, perhaps every 3-­6 months, as
recommended in children with JIA.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Chapter 210

Vasculitis Syndromes
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and
Stacy P. Ardoin

INTRODUCTION

Childhood vasculitis encompasses a broad spectrum of diseases that
share inflammation of the blood vessels as the central pathophysiology.
The pathogenesis of the vasculitides is generally idiopathic. Some forms
of vasculitis are associated with infectious agents and medications,
whereas others may occur in the setting of preexisting autoimmune
or autoinflammatory diseases. The pattern of vessel injury provides
insight into the form of vasculitis and serves as a framework to delineate
the different vasculitic syndromes. The distribution of vascular injury
includes small vessels (capillaries, arterioles, and postcapillary venules),
medium vessels (renal arteries, mesenteric vasculature, and coronary
arteries), and large vessels (the aorta and its proximal branches) (Fig.
210.1). Additionally, some forms of small vessel vasculitis are characterized by the presence of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
(ANCAs), whereas others are associated with immune complex deposition in affected tissues. A combination of clinical features, histologic
appearance of involved vessels, and laboratory data is used to classify
vasculitis (Tables 210.1-­210.4). A nomenclature system from the 2012
International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference (see Table 210.1) has
proposed using the pathologic diagnosis rather than eponyms for vasculitis nomenclature. For example, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura would
be referred to as IgA vasculitis. Additionally, the classification criteria endorsed by the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR),
Pediatric Rheumatology International Trial Organization (PRINTO),
and Pediatric Rheumatology European Society (PRES) have been validated in childhood vasculitis (see Table 210.2).

Immune Complex Small Vessel Vasculitis
Cryoglobulinemic Vasculitis
IgA Vasculitis (Henoch-Schönlein)
Hypocomplementemic Urticarial Vasculitis
(Anti-C1q Vasculitis)
Medium Vessel Vasculitis
Polyarteritis Nodosa
Kawasaki Disease

Anti-GBM Disease

ANCA-Associated Small Vessel Vasculitis
Microscopic Polyangiitis
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (Wegener’s)
Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis
(Churg-Strauss)
Large Vessel Vasculitis
Takayasu Arteritis
Giant Cell Arteritis

Fig. 210.1 Distribution of vessel involvement in large, medium, and

small vessel vasculitis. There is substantial overlap with respect to arterial involvement, and all three major categories of vasculitis can affect
any size artery. Large vessel vasculitis affects large arteries more often
than other vasculitides. Medium vessel vasculitis predominantly affects
medium arteries. Small vessel vasculitis predominantly affects small
vessels, but medium arteries and veins may be affected, although immune complex small vessel vasculitis rarely affects arteries. Not shown
is variable vessel vasculitis, which can affect any type of vessel, from
aorta to veins. The diagram depicts (from left to right) aorta, large artery, medium artery, small artery/arteriole, capillary, venule, and vein.
ANCA, Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; GBM, glomerular basement membrane. (From Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon PA, et al. 2012
Revised International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference Nomenclature
of Vasculitides. Arthritis Rheum. 2013;65:1–11, Fig. 2, p. 4.)

Childhood vasculitis varies from a relatively benign and self-­limited
disease such as Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (IgA vasculitis) to catastrophic disease with end-­organ damage, as seen in granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (formerly Wegener granulomatosis). Vasculitis generally
manifests as a heterogeneous multisystem disease. Although some features, such as purpura, are easily identifiable, others, such as hypertension
secondary to renal artery stenosis or glomerulonephritis, can be subtler.
Ultimately, the key to recognizing vasculitis relies heavily on pattern recognition. Demonstration of vessel injury and inflammation on biopsy or
vascular imaging is required to confirm a diagnosis of vasculitis.
Clues to the diagnosis of a vasculitis disorder are noted in Table
210.3, and a broad diagnostic approach is noted in Table 210.5.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

210.1 Henoch-­Schönlein Purpura
(IgA Vasculitis)
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and Stacy P. Ardoin
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (HSP) is the most common vasculitis
of childhood and is characterized by leukocytoclastic vasculitis and
immunoglobulin A deposition in the small vessels in the skin, joints,
gastrointestinal tract, and kidney. HSP is also referred to as IgA vasculitis, based on the presence of vasculitis with predominance of IgA
deposits affecting small vessels.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

1553

Table 210.1  2012 Chapel Hill Consensus Conference on Nomenclature of Systemic Vasculitis
LARGE VESSEL VASCULITIS (LVV)*
Giant cell (temporal) arteritis (GCA)

Takayasu arteritis (TAK)
MEDIUM VESSEL VASCULITIS (MVV)*
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)
Kawasaki disease (KD)

SMALL VESSEL VASCULITIS (SVV)*
ANCA-­associated vasculitis (AAV)
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener)
(GPA)
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(Churg-­Strauss) (EGPA)
Microscopic polyangiitis (MPA)

Immune Complex Small Vessel Vasculitis
IgA vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein) (IgAV)
Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis (CPV)
Anti–glomerular basement membrane
(anti-­GBM) disease
Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
VARIABLE VESSEL VASCULITIS (VVV)
Behçet disease (BD)
Cogan syndrome (CS)
SINGLE-­ORGAN VASCULITIS (SOV)
Cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis
Cutaneous arteritis
Primary central nervous system vasculitis
Isolated aortitis
Others

Granulomatous arteritis of the aorta and its major branches with a predilection for the extracranial
branches of the carotid artery
Often involves the temporal artery
Usually occurs in patients older than 50 yr of age and often associated with polymyalgia rheumatica†
Granulomatous inflammation of the aorta and its major branches
Usually occurs in patients much younger than 50 yr of age
Necrotizing inflammation of medium-­sized or small arteries without glomerulonephritis or vasculitis
in arterioles, capillaries, or venules and not associated with ANCAs
Arteritis involving large, medium-­sized, and small arteries associated with mucocutaneous
lymph node syndrome
Coronary arteries are often involved
Aorta and veins may be affected
Usually occurs in children

Granulomatous inflammation involving the respiratory tract associated with necrotizing vasculitis
affecting small-­to medium-­sized vessels
Necrotizing glomerulonephritis is common
Eosinophilic and granulomatous inflammation involving the respiratory tract accompanied by
necrotizing vasculitis affecting small to medium-­sized vessels associated with asthma and eosinophilia
Necrotizing vasculitis with few or no immune deposits, affecting small vessels
Necrotizing arteritis involving small and medium-­sized arteries may be present
Necrotizing glomerulonephritis is common
Pulmonary capillaritis often occurs
Vasculitis characterized by immunoglobin A–dominant immune deposits affecting small vessels
Typically involves skin, gut, and glomeruli. Arthralgias and arthritis are common
Vasculitis with cryoglobulin immune deposits affecting small vessels associated with cryoglobulinemia
Skin and glomeruli are often involved
Vasculitis affecting pulmonary and renal capillaries with deposition of anti–glomerular basement
membrane antibodies
Associated with anti-­Clq antibodies
Affects kidney, joints, lungs, and eyes
Affects arteries and veins with thrombosis, arteritis, and arterial aneurysms
Oral and/or genital aphthous ulcers and can involve skin, eyes, joints, and central nervous system
Affects small, medium, or large arteries; aortitis, aortic, and mitral valvulitis
Vasculitis
Isolated cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis without systemic vasculitis or glomerulonephritis
Cutaneous vasculitis not associated with systemic vasculitis
CNS vasculitis not associated with systemic vasculitis
Aortitis not associated with systemic vasculitis

VASCULITIS ASSOCIATED WITH SYSTEMIC DISEASE
Lupus vasculitis
Rheumatoid vasculitis
Sarcoid vasculitis
Others
VASCULITIS ASSOCIATED WITH PROBABLE ETIOLOGY
Hepatitis C–associated cryoglobulinemia vasculitis
Hepatitis B–associated vasculitis
Syphilis-­associated vasculitis
Drug-­associated immune complex vasculitis
Drug-­associated ANCA associated vasculitis
Cancer-­associated vasculitis
Others
*Large vessels: aorta and its larger branches directed toward major anatomic regions; medium vessels: renal, hepatic, coronary, and mesenteric arteries; small vessels: venules,
capillaries, arterioles, and intraparenchymal distal arteries and arterioles.
†Essential components are in normal type; italicized type represents usual, but not essential, components.

Adapted from Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon P, et al. Arthritis Rheum. 2013;65(1):1–11.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1554 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 210.2  EULAR/PRES Classification of Childhood
Vasculitis
I. PREDOMINANTLY LARGE-­SIZED VESSEL VASCULITIS
• Takayasu arteritis
II. PREDOMINANTLY MEDIUM-­SIZED VESSEL VASCULITIS
• Childhood polyarteritis nodosa
• Cutaneous polyarteritis
• Kawasaki disease
III. PREDOMINANTLY SMALL-­SIZED VESSEL VASCULITIS
A. Granulomatous
• Wegener granulomatosis*
• Churg-­Strauss syndrome*
B. Nongranulomatous
• Microscopic polyangiitis
• Henoch-­Schönlein purpura
• Isolated cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis
• Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
IV. OTHER VASCULITIDES
• Behçet disease
• Vasculitis secondary to infection (including hepatitis B–associated
polyarteritis nodosa), malignancies, and drugs (including
hypersensitivity vasculitis)
• Vasculitis associated with connective tissue diseases
• Isolated vasculitis of the central nervous system
• Cogan syndrome
• Unclassified
*This classification predated the removal of eponyms and histopathologic
subclassification by the CHCC 2012.
From Ozen S, Ruperto N, Dillon MJ, Bagga A, Barron K, Davin JC, et al. EULAR/PReS
endorsed consensus criteria for the classification of childhood vasculitides. Ann Rheum
Dis. 2006;65:936–941.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

HSP occurs worldwide and affects all ethnic groups. The incidence
is estimated at 14-­20 per 100,000 children per year and affects males
more than females, with a 1.2-­1.8:1 male/female ratio. Approximately
90% of HSP cases occur in children, usually between ages 3 and 10
years. HSP is distinctly less common in adults, who often have severe
and chronic complications. HSP is more common in the winter and
spring and is unusual in summer months. Many cases of HSP follow a
documented upper respiratory infection.

PATHOLOGY

Skin biopsies demonstrate leukocytoclastic vasculitis of the dermal capillaries and postcapillary venules. The inflammatory infiltrate
includes neutrophils and monocytes. Renal histopathology typically
shows endocapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis, ranging from a
focal segmental process to extensive crescentic involvement. In all tissues, immunofluorescence identifies IgA deposition in walls of small
vessels (Fig. 210.2), accompanied to a lesser extent by deposition of C3,
fibrin, and IgM.

PATHOGENESIS

The exact pathogenesis of HSP remains unknown. Given the seasonality of HSP and the frequency of preceding upper respiratory infections,
infectious triggers such as group A β-­hemolytic streptococcus, Staphylococcus aureus, Mycoplasma, and adenovirus have been suspected.
The common finding of deposition of IgA, specifically IgA1, suggests
that HSP is a disease mediated by IgA and IgA immune complexes.
HSP occasionally clusters in families, suggesting a genetic component.
HLA-­B34 and HLA-­DRB1*01 alleles have been linked to HSP nephritis. Patients with familial Mediterranean fever, hereditary periodic
fever syndromes, and complement deficiencies are at increased risk for
developing HSP, suggesting that genetically determined immune dysregulation may contribute.

Table 210.3  Features that Suggest a Vasculitic Syndrome
CLINICAL FEATURES
Fever, weight loss, fatigue of unknown origin
Skin lesions (palpable purpura, fixed urticaria, livedo reticularis,
nodules, ulcers)
Neurologic lesions (headache, mononeuritis multiplex, focal central
nervous system lesions)
Arthralgia or arthritis, myalgia, or myositis, serositis
Hypertension, hematuria, renal failure
Pulmonary infiltrates or hemorrhage
Myocardial ischemia, arrhythmias
LABORATORY FEATURES
Increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate or C-­reactive protein level
Leukocytosis, anemia, thrombocytosis
Eosinophilia
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
Elevated factor VIII–related antigen (von Willebrand factor)
Cryoglobulinemia
Circulating immune complexes
Hematuria
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, Wedderburn LR. Textbook of Pediatric
Rheumatology, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2016.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The hallmark of HSP is its rash: palpable purpura starting as pink macules or wheals and developing into petechiae, raised purpura, or larger
ecchymoses. Occasionally, bullae and ulcerations develop. The skin
lesions are usually symmetric and occur in gravity-­dependent areas
(lower extremities), the extensor aspect of the upper extremities, or
on pressure points (buttocks) (Figs. 210.2 and 210.3). The skin lesions
often evolve in groups, typically lasting 3-­10 days, and may recur up to
4 months after initial presentation. Subcutaneous edema localized to
the dorsa of the hands and feet, periorbital area, lips, scrotum, or scalp
is also common.
Musculoskeletal involvement, including arthritis and arthralgias, is
common, occurring in up to 75% of children with HSP. The arthritis
tends to be self-­limited and oligoarticular, with a predilection for large
joints such as the knees and ankles, and does not lead to deformities.
Periarticular swelling and tenderness without erythema or effusions are
common. The arthritis usually resolves within 2 weeks but can recur.
Gastrointestinal (GI) manifestations occur in up to 80% of children
with HSP and include abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, paralytic
ileus, and melena. Intussusception, mesenteric ischemia, and intestinal
perforation are rare but serious complications. Endoscopic evaluation
is usually not needed but may identify vasculitis of the intestinal tract.
Renal involvement occurs in up to 30% of children with HSP, manifesting as microscopic hematuria, proteinuria, hypertension, frank
nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, and acute or chronic renal failure.
However, progression to end-­stage renal disease (ESRD) is uncommon
in children (1–2%) (see Chapter 560.3). Renal manifestations can be
delayed for several months after the initial illness, so close follow-­up
with serial urinalyses and blood pressure monitoring is necessary.
Neurologic manifestations of HSP, caused by hypertension (posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome) or central nervous system
(CNS) vasculitis, may also occur, including intracerebral hemorrhage, seizures, headaches, depressed level of consciousness, cranial or
peripheral neuropathies, and behavior changes. Other, less common
potential manifestations of HSP are inflammatory eye disease, carditis,
pulmonary hemorrhage, orchitis, and testicular torsion.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of HSP is clinical and often straightforward when the
typical rash is present. However, in at least 25% of cases, the rash
appears after other manifestations, making early diagnosis challenging.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

1555

Table 210.4  Clinicopathologic Characteristics of Vasculitides in Childhood
SYNDROME

FREQUENCY

VESSELS AFFECTED

CHARACTERISTIC PATHOLOGY

Rare

Medium-­size and small muscular
arteries and sometimes arterioles

Common

Coronary and other muscular
arteries

Focal segmental (often near bifurcations);
fibrinoid necrosis; gastrointestinal, renal
microaneurysms; lesions at various
stages of evolution
Thrombosis, fibrosis, aneurysms, especially
of coronary vessels

Common

Arterioles and venules, often small
arteries and veins
Arterioles and venules

Leukocytoclasis; mixed cells, eosinophils,
IgA deposits in affected vessels
Leukocytoclastic or lymphocytic, varying
eosinophils, occasionally granulomatous;
widespread lesions at same stage of
evolution

Rare

Small arteries and veins, occasionally
larger vessels

Rare

Small arteries and veins, often
arterioles and venules

Upper and lower respiratory tract,
necrotizing granulomata
glomerulo­nephritis
Necrotizing extravascular granulomata;
lung involvement; eosinophilia

GIANT CELL ARTERITIS
Takayasu arteries

Uncommon

Large arteries

Temporal arteritis

Rare

Medium-­size and large arteries

POLYARTERITIS
Polyarteritis nodosa

Kawasaki disease
LEUKOCYTOCLASTIC VASCULITIS
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura (IgA
vasculitis)
Hypersensitivity angiitis

GRANULOMATOUS VASCULITIS
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(Wegener granulomatosis)
Eosinophilic granulomatosis with
polyangiitis (Churg-­Strauss syndrome)

Rare

Granulomatous inflammation, giant cells;
aneurysms, dissection
Granulomatous inflammation, giant cell
arteries

Adapted from Cassidy JT, Petty RE. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2011.

Table 210.6 summarizes the EULAR/PRES classification criteria for
HSP. Most patients are afebrile.
The differential diagnosis for HSP depends on specific organ
involvement, but usually includes other small vessel leukocytoclastic
vasculitides (Table 210.7), infections, acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, hemolytic-­uremic syndrome, coagulopathies, and other
acute intraabdominal processes. Additional disorders in the differential include papular-­purpuric glove and sock syndrome, systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), other vasculitides (urticarial, hypersensitivity),
and thrombocytopenia.
Infantile acute hemorrhagic edema (AHE), an isolated cutaneous
leukocytoclastic vasculitis that affects infants <2 years of age, resembles
HSP clinically. AHE manifests as fever; tender edema of the face, scrotum, hands, and feet; and ecchymosis (usually larger than the purpura
of HSP) on the face and extremities (Fig. 210.4). The trunk is spared,
but petechiae may be seen in mucous membranes. The patient usually appears well except for the rash. The platelet count is normal or
elevated, and the urinalysis results are normal. The younger age, nature
of the lesions, absence of other organ involvement, and a biopsy may
help distinguish infantile AHE from HSP.

in atypical or severe cases, and characteristically show leukocytoclastic
vasculitis with IgA deposition in affected tissues.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

COMPLICATIONS

No laboratory finding is diagnostic of HSP. Common but nonspecific
findings include leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, mild anemia, and elevations of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-­reactive protein
(CRP). The platelet count is normal in HSP. Occult blood is frequently
found in stool specimens. Serum albumin levels may be low because
of renal or intestinal protein loss. Autoantibody testing such as antinuclear antibody (ANA) is not useful diagnostically except to exclude
other diseases. Serum IgA values are often elevated but are not routinely measured. Assessment of renal involvement with blood pressure,
urinalysis, and serum creatinine is necessary.
Ultrasound is often used in the setting of GI complaints to look for
bowel wall edema or the rare occurrence of an associated intussusception. Barium enema can also be used to both diagnose and treat intussusception. Although often unnecessary in typical HSP, biopsies of skin
and kidney can provide important diagnostic information, particularly

TREATMENT

Treatment for mild and self-­
limited HSP is supportive, with an
emphasis on ensuring adequate hydration, nutrition, and analgesia.
Corticosteroids are most often used to treat significant GI involvement or other life-­threatening manifestations. Glucocorticoids such
as oral prednisone (1-­2 mg/kg/day), or in severe cases, intravenous
(IV) methylprednisolone for 1-­2 weeks, followed by taper, reduce
abdominal and joint pain but do not alter the overall prognosis. Corticosteroids are not routinely recommended for prevention of complications such as nephritis. Rapid tapering of corticosteroids may lead
to a flare of HSP symptoms. Although few data are available to demonstrate efficacy, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and plasma
exchange are sometimes used for severe disease. In some patients,
chronic HSP renal disease is managed with a variety of immunosuppressants, including azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine,
and mycophenolate mofetil. ESRD develops in <5% of children with
HSP nephritis.
Acutely, serious GI involvement, including intussusception and intestinal perforation, imparts significant morbidity and mortality. Renal
disease is the major long-­term complication, occurring in 1–2% of
children with HSP. Renal disease can develop up to 6 months after
diagnosis but rarely does so if the initial urinalysis findings are normal.
Therefore, it is recommended that children with HSP undergo serial
monitoring of blood pressure and urinalysis for at least 6 months after
diagnosis to monitor for development of nephritis.

PROGNOSIS

Overall, the prognosis for childhood HSP is excellent, and most
children experience an acute, self-­limited course lasting on average
4 weeks. However, 15–60% of children with HSP experience one or
more recurrences, typically within 4-­6 months of diagnosis. With each
relapse, symptoms are usually milder than at presentation. Children

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1556 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 210.5  Recommendations on the Diagnosis of Rare Pediatric Systemic Vasculitides
RECOMMENDATION

RECOMMENDATION

1.	In any pediatric patient with ongoing or a history of unexplained
systemic inflammation, the diagnosis of systemic vasculitis should
be considered and referral to a pediatric rheumatologist should
be made, particularly in the presence of unexplained organ
involvement.
2.	Clinical features combined with laboratory evidence of inflammation
that suggest a vasculitic syndrome warranting referral to a pediatric
rheumatologist are included in the following nonexhaustive list:
• Pyrexia of unknown origin
• Vasculitic skin rash
• PNS or CNS involvement
• Unexplained arthritis, myalgia, serositis
• Unexplained pulmonary, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, or renal
disease
3.	When vasculitis is suspected, the diagnosis is often difficult and
differential diagnoses are broad. The general workup for diagnosis
of a specific vasculitic syndrome should include tissue histology,
imaging, and determination of ANCA.
4.	In every patient in whom a specific vasculitic syndrome is suspected,
basic screening investigations, along with blood pressure
measurement, should include:
• Hematology and acute-­phase reactants:
• Full blood count, ESR, CRP, clotting, prothrombotic screen (if
patchy ischemia of digits or skin)
• Peripheral blood smear
• Basic biochemistry:
• Renal function, liver function, CPK, LDH
• Urine dipstick test of urine with UA:UC ratio or UP:UC ratio

• Selective contrast visceral arteriography
• Tissue biopsy (e.g., skin, nasal or sinus, kidney, sural nerve,
lung, liver, gut, temporal artery, brain)
• Nail fold capillaroscopy
• Possible bone/joint involvement: radiograph of suspected sites
• Eye symptoms: ophthalmology screen
• Pulmonary symptoms: V/Q scan
• Renal involvement: Tc-­99m DMSA scan
• Peripheral vascular symptoms: ultrasound scan Doppler of
peripheral arteries
• Neuropathy: nerve conduction studies
• Cerebral involvement: MRI/MRA of brain and cerebral contrast
angiography
• Organ-­specific autoantibodies (e.g., ASCAs, brain/neuronal
specific autoantibodies)
• Cryoglobulins or cryoprecipitants (technical expertise required),
particularly if skin involved predominantly at peripheral sites
• The following may be useful when the differential diagnosis
includes malignancy:
• Lymph node excision biopsy
• Bone marrow analysis
• PET-­CT
• The following may be useful when the differential diagnosis
includes infection:
• Tuberculosis screen
• PCR for viral infection (e.g., CMV, EBV, enterovirus, adenovirus,
VZV, HBV, HCV)
• Serology for HIV, rickettsiae, Borrelia burgdorferi, Mycoplasma
• Viral serology for hepatitis B and C, parvovirus B19
• Cryoglobulins or cryoprecipitants (technical expertise required)
• The following may be useful when the differential diagnosis
includes autoinflammatory syndromes:
• DNA analysis for MEFV (familial Mediterranean fever),
TNFRSF1A (TNF-­α receptor–associated periodic fever syndrome
[TRAPS]), MVK (mevalonate kinase deficiency; previously
referred to as hyper-­IgD syndrome [HIDS]), NLRP3 (cryopyrin-­
associated periodic syndrome [CAPS]), NOD2 (Crohn/Blau/
juvenile sarcoid mutations), ADA2 (deficiency of ADA2), genetic
screening for SAVI (TMEM173) and CANDLE (PSMB8, 4, 9, and
other proteasome genes if available).
6.	In the clinical assessment of suspected systemic vasculitis,
a structured multiorgan assessment should take place.
7.	For suspected systemic vasculitis, the Pediatric Vasculitis Activity Score
(PVAS) may facilitate structured multiorgan assessment. The PVAS can
be found here: http://ard.bmj.com/content/72/10/1628.short
8.	At diagnosis and in ongoing follow-­up of systemic vasculitis, a
PVAS score should be performed to assess disease activity.
9.	At diagnosis and in ongoing follow-­up of systemic vasculitis, a
multiorgan assessment of damage should be undertaken.
10.	There is no currently validated tool to assess pediatric vasculitis
damage. This is an ongoing unmet need. The PVDI, while
unvalidated, can be assessed here: https://ard.bmj.com/content/73/
Suppl_2/696.4

• Infection:

• Routine pediatric infection screen
• Anti–streptolysin O antibody titer (ASOT) and/or anti–DNase b
• VZV antibody status
• Immunologic tests:
• ANA, ENA antibodies, ANCA, antiphospholipid antibodies
• Immunoglobulins IgG/IgA/IgM/IgE
• Complement (C3, C4)
• RF (if nephritis or interstitial lung disease)
• GBM antibody
• Radiologic/other:
• CXR
• Doppler abdominal ultrasound scan
• ECG; echocardiography
• Digital clinical photography of lesions
5.	When considering a specific vasculitic syndrome, depending on
presenting symptoms, tests with specific indications should be
considered:
• The following may be useful if blood pressure abnormalities:
• Four limb blood pressure measurements
• 24-­hr ambulatory blood pressure monitor
• The following may be useful if evidence/suspicion of specific
organ involvement:
• CT (e.g., thorax, abdomen, brain)
• MRI
• MRI/MRA of aorta and major branches

PNS, Peripheral nervous system; PVAS, pediatric vasculitis activity score; PVDI, pediatric vasculitis damage index; CNS, central nervous system; CPK, creatine phosphokinase;
LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; UA:UC, urine albumin to urinary creatinine ratio; UP:UC, urine protein to urinary creatinine ratio; VZV, varicella-zoster virus; CXR, chest x-­ray; ECG,
electrocardiogram; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; V/Q, ventilation/perfusion; DMSA, dimercaptosuccinic acid; ASCA, anti–Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies; SAVI,
STING-­associated vasculitis of infancy; CANDLE, chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis lipodystrophy and elevated temperature.
Modified from de Graeff N, Groot N, Brogan P, et al. European consensus-­based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of rare paediatric vasculitides – the SHARE
initiative. Rheumatology. 2019;58(4):656–671, Table 1.

with a more severe initial course are at higher risk for relapse. The long-­
term prognosis usually depends on the severity and duration of GI or
renal involvement. Chronic renal disease develops in 1–2% of children
with HSP, and <5% of those with HSP nephritis go on to have ESRD.

The risk of HSP recurrence and graft loss after renal transplantation is
estimated at 7.5% after 10 years.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

1557

Table 210.6  Classification Criteria for Henoch-­Schönlein
Purpura*
EUROPEAN LEAGUE AGAINST RHEUMATISM/PEDIATRIC
RHEUMATOLOGY EUROPEAN SOCIETY CRITERIA†
Palpable purpura (in absence of coagulopathy or thrombocytopenia)
and one or more of the following criteria must be present:
• Abdominal pain (acute, diffuse, colicky pain)
• Arthritis or arthralgia
• Biopsy of affected tissue demonstrating predominant IgA
deposition
• Renal involvement (proteinuria >0.3 g/24 hr), hematuria, or red
cell casts

A

B

Fig. 210.2 Henoch-­Schönlein purpura. A, Typical palpable purpura in
lower extremities. B, Skin biopsy of lesion shows direct immunofluorescence of IgA (arrows) within the walls of dermal capillaries.

*Classification criteria are developed for use in research and are not validated for
clinical diagnosis.
†Developed for use in pediatric populations only.
Adapted from Ozen S, Pistorio A, Iusan SM, et al. EULAR/PRINTO/PRES criteria for
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, childhood polyarteritis nodosa, childhood Wegener
granulomatosis and childhood Takayasu arteritis: Ankara 2008. Part II. Final classification
criteria. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69:798–806.

Table 210.7  Conditions Associated with Leukocytoclastic
Vasculitis
Immunoglobulin (Ig) A vasculitis (Henoch-­Schönlein)
Hypersensitivity vasculitis
Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
Mixed cryoglobulinemia
Cutaneous polyarteritis
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)–associated small-­vessel
vasculitis*
Goodpasture syndrome
Rheumatic disorders: systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), juvenile
dermatomyositis, mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD),
scleroderma, juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)
Mucha-­Habermann disease
Relapsing polychondritis
Köhlmeier-­Degos syndrome
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and
elevated temperature (CANDLE) syndrome
Malignancy-­associated disease
Sweet syndrome
Cronkhite-­Canada syndrome
Stevens-­Johnson syndrome
Erythema elevatum diutinum
COVID-­19/MIS-­C
*Leukocytoclastic vasculitis may occur in cutaneous lesions in some patients with
ANCA-­associated vasculitis and collagen vascular diseases.
Modified from Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric
Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Box 33.1, p. 457.

Fig. 210.3 Henoch-­Schönlein purpura. (From Korting GW. Hautkrankheiten bei Kindern und Jungendlichen, 3rd ed. Stuttgart: FK
Schattaur Verlag; 1982.)

210.2 Takayasu Arteritis
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and Stacy P. Ardoin
Takayasu arteritis (TA), also known as pulseless disease, is a chronic
large vessel vasculitis of unknown etiology that predominantly involves
the aorta and its major branches.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Although TA occurs worldwide and can affect all ethnic groups, the
disease is most common in those of Asian descent. Age of onset is
typically between 10 and 40 years. Most children are diagnosed as

adolescents, on average at age 13 years. Up to 20% of individuals with
TA are diagnosed before 19 years. Younger children may be affected,
but diagnosis in infancy is rare. TA preferentially affects females, with
a reported 2-­4:1 female/male ratio in children and adolescents and a
9:1 ratio among adults. Occlusive complications are more common in
the United States, Western Europe, and Japan, whereas aneurysms predominate in Southeast Asia and Africa.

PATHOLOGY

TA is characterized by inflammation of the vessel wall, starting in the
vasa vasorum. Involved vessels are infiltrated by T cells, natural killer
cells, plasma cells, and macrophages. Giant cells and granulomatous
inflammation develop in the media. Persistent inflammation damages the elastic lamina and muscular media, leading to blood vessel

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1558 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 210.8  Proposed Classification Criteria for Pediatric-­
Onset Takayasu Arteritis
Angiographic abnormalities (conventional, CT, or magnetic
resonance angiography) of the aorta or its main branches
and at least one of the following criteria:
• Decreased peripheral artery pulse(s) and/or claudication of
extremities
• Blood pressure difference between arms or legs of >10 mm Hg
• Bruits over the aorta and/or its major branches
• Hypertension (defined by childhood normative data)
• Elevated acute-­phase reactant (erythrocyte sedimentation rate or
C-­reactive protein)
Adapted from Ozen S, Pistorio A, Iusan SM, et al. EULAR/PRINTO/PRES criteria for
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, childhood polyarteritis nodosa, childhood Wegener
granulomatosis and childhood Takayasu arteritis: Ankara 2008. Part II. Final classification
criteria. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69:798–806.

valvular insufficiency. Other findings may include pericardial effusion,
pericarditis, pleuritis, splenomegaly, and arthritis.
Supradiaphragmatic (aortic arch) disease often manifests with CNS
(stroke, transient ischemic attack) and cardiac (heart failure, palpitations) symptoms. Infradiaphragmatic (midaortic syndrome) disease
may produce hypertension, abdominal bruits, and pain. Most patients
have involvement in both areas.
Fig. 210.4 Infantile acute hemorrhagic edema. Typical lesions on the

arm of an infant. (From Eichenfield LF, Frieden IJ, Esterly NB. Textbook
of Neonatal Dermatology. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2001.)

dilation and the formation of aneurysms. Progressive scarring and intimal proliferation can result in stenotic or occluded vessels. The subclavian, renal, and carotid arteries are the most commonly involved
aortic branches; pulmonary, coronary, and vertebral arteries may also
be affected.

PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of TA remains unknown. The presence of abundant T cells
with a restricted repertoire of T-­cell receptors in TA vascular lesions
points to the importance of cellular immunity and suggests the existence of a specific but unknown aortic tissue antigen. Expression of
interleukin (IL)-­1, IL-­6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-­α is reported
to be higher in patients with active TA than in patients with inactive TA
and in healthy controls. In some patient populations, IL-­1 genetic polymorphisms are linked to TA. Some individuals with TA have elevated
serum values of antiendothelial antibodies. The increased prevalence
of TA in certain ethnic populations and its occasional occurrence in
monozygotic twins and families suggest a genetic predisposition to the
disease.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The diagnosis of TA is challenging because early disease manifestations are often nonspecific. As a result, diagnosis can be delayed for
several months, and the time to diagnosis is usually longer in children than in adults. Fever, malaise, weight loss, headache, hypertension, myalgias, arthralgias, dizziness, and abdominal pain are common
early complaints in the prepulseless phase of the disease. Among children, hypertension and headache are particularly common presenting
manifestations and should prompt consideration of TA when present
without alternative explanation. Some individuals with TA report no
systemic symptoms and instead present with vascular complications.
It is only after substantial vascular injury that evidence of hypoperfusion becomes clinically evident. Later manifestations of disease include
diminished pulse, asymmetric blood pressure, claudication, Raynaud
phenomenon, renal failure, and symptoms of pulmonary or cardiac
ischemia. Inflammation can extend to the aortic valve, resulting in

DIAGNOSIS

Specific pediatric criteria for TA have been proposed (Table 210.8). The
2022 ACR/ EULAR classification criteria for Takayasu arteritis propose
a criterion-based scoring system in adults (Table 210.9). Radiographic
demonstration of large vessel vasculitis is necessary. A thorough physical examination is required to detect an aortic murmur, diminished
or asymmetric pulses, and vascular bruits. Four extremity blood pressures should be measured; >10 mm Hg asymmetry in systolic pressure
is indicative of disease.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

In the early phase of TA, when nonspecific symptoms predominate, the
differential diagnosis includes a wide array of systemic infections, autoimmune conditions, and malignancies. Although giant cell arteritis,
also known as temporal arteritis, is a common large vessel vasculitis
in older adults, this entity is rare in childhood. Noninflammatory
conditions that can cause large vessel compromise include fibromuscular dysplasia, Marfan syndrome, and Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

The laboratory findings in TA are nonspecific, and there is no specific
diagnostic laboratory test. ESR and CRP values are typically elevated, and
other nonspecific markers of chronic inflammation may include leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, anemia of chronic inflammation, and hypergammaglobulinemia. Autoantibodies, including ANA and ANCA, are
not useful in diagnosing TA except to help exclude other autoimmune
diseases.
Radiographic assessment is essential to establish large vessel arterial
involvement. Conventional arteriography of the aorta and major branches,
including carotid, subclavian, pulmonary, renal, and mesenteric branches,
can identify luminal defects, including dilation, aneurysms, and stenoses, even in smaller vessels such as the mesenteric arteries. Figure 210.5
shows a conventional arteriogram in a child with TA. Although not yet
thoroughly validated in TA, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA)
and computed tomographic angiography (CTA) also provide important
information about vessel wall thickness and enhancement, although they
may not image smaller vessels as well as conventional angiography. Positron emission tomography (PET) may detect vessel wall inflammation
but has not been studied extensively. Ultrasound with duplex color flow
Doppler imaging may identify vessel wall thickening and assesses arterial flow. Echocardiography is recommended to assess for aortic valvular

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

1559

Table 210.9  2022 American College of Rheumatology/
EULAR Classification Criteria for Takayasu
Arteritis
Considerations when applying these criteria:
• These classification criteria should be applied to classify the patient
as having Takayasu arteritis when a diagnosis of medium-vessel or
large-vessel vasculitis has been made.
• Alternate diagnoses mimicking vasculitis should be excluded
before applying the criteria.
ABSOLUTE REQUIREMENTS
Age ≤ 60 yr at time of diagnosis
Evidence of vasculitis on imaging1
ADDITIONAL CLINICAL CRITERIA
Female sex
Angina or ischemic cardiac pain
Arm or leg claudication
Vascular bruit2
Reduced pulse in upper extemity3
Carotid artery abnormality4
Systolic blood pressure difference in arms
≥20 mm Hg
ADDITIONAL IMAGING CRITERIA
Number of affected arterial territories (select one)5
One arterial territory
Two arterial territories
Three arterial territories
Symmetric involvement of paired arteries6
Abdominal aorta involvement with renal or
mesenteric involvement7

+1
+2
+2
+2
+2
+2
+1

+1
+2
+3
+1
+3
*TOTAL:

*Sum the scores for 10 items, if present. A score of ≥ 5 points is needed for the
classification of Takayasu arteritis.
1Evidence of vasculitis in the aorta or branch arteries must be confirmed by vascular
imaging (e.g., computed tomographic/catheter-based/magnetic resonance
angiography, ultrasonography, positron emission tomography).
2Bruit detected by auscultation of a large artery, including the aorta, carotid,
subclavian, axillary, brachial, renal, or iliofemoral arteries.
3Reduction or absence of pulse by physical examination of the axillary, brachial, or
radial arteries.
4Reduction or absence of pulse of the carotid artery or tenderness of the carotid
artery.
5Number of arterial territories with luminal damage (e.g., stenosis, occlusion, or
aneurysm) detected by angiography or ultrasonography from the following nine
territories: thoracic aorta, abdominal aorta, mesenteric, left or right carotid, left or
right subclavian, left or right renal arteries.
6Bilateral luminal damage (stenosis, occlusion, or aneurysm) detected by angiography
or ultrasonography in any of the following paired vascular territories: carotid,
subclavian, or renal arteries.
7Luminal damage (stenosis, occlusion, aneurysm) detected by angiography or
ultrasonography involving the abdominal aorta and either the renal or mesenteric
arteries.
From Grayson PC, Ponte C, Suppiah R, et al. 2022 American College of Rheumatology/
EULAR classification criteria for Takayasu arteritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2022;81(12):
1654–1660. Fig. 1.

involvement. Serial vascular imaging is usually necessary to assess response
to treatment and to detect progressive vascular damage.

TREATMENT

Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of therapy, typically starting with high
doses (1-­2 mg/kg/day of prednisone or methylprednisolone IV) followed
by gradual dosage tapering. When TA progresses or recurs, steroid-­
sparing therapy is often required, usually involving methotrexate or azathioprine. Cyclophosphamide is reserved for severe or refractory disease.
Results of small case series also suggest that mycophenolate mofetil or
anti–TNF-­α therapy may be beneficial in select patients. Anti–IL-­6 therapy with tocilizumab has shown promising results in a small case series

Fig. 210.5 Child with Takayasu arteritis. Conventional angiogram shows
massive bilateral carotid dilation, stenosis, and poststenotic dilation.

of children with TA. Antihypertensive medications are often necessary to
control blood pressure caused by renovascular disease.

COMPLICATIONS

Progressive vascular damage can result in arterial stenoses, aneurysms,
and occlusions, which produce ischemic symptoms and can be organ
or life threatening. Potential ischemic complications include stroke,
renal impairment or failure, myocardial infarction, mesenteric ischemia, and limb-­threatening arterial disease. When these complications
occur or are imminent, intervention with surgical vascular grafting or
catheter-­based angioplasty and stent placement may be necessary to
restore adequate blood flow. A high rate of recurrent stenosis has been
reported after angioplasty and stent placement. Aortic valve replacement may be required if significant aortic insufficiency develops.

PROGNOSIS

Although up to 20% of individuals with TA have a monophasic course
and achieve sustained remission, most suffer relapses. Survival for individuals with TA has improved considerably over the decades, although
higher mortality rates are reported in children and adolescents. The
overall estimated survival for individuals with TA is 93% at 5 years
and 87% at 10 years. However, morbidity from vascular complications
remains high, particularly when there is evidence of ongoing active
inflammation as detected by elevated CRP or ESR. Given the chronic
endothelial insult and inflammation, children and adolescents with TA
are probably at high risk for accelerated atherosclerosis. Early detection
and treatment are critical to optimizing outcomes in TA.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1560 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

210.3 Polyarteritis Nodosa and Cutaneous
Polyarteritis Nodosa
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and Stacy P. Ardoin
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) is a systemic necrotizing vasculitis affecting small and medium-­size arteries. Aneurysms and stenoses form at
irregular intervals throughout affected arteries. Cutaneous PAN is limited to the skin.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

PAN is rare in childhood. Males and females are equally affected, and
the mean age at presentation is 9 years. The cause is unknown, but the
development of PAN after infections, including group A streptococcus
and chronic hepatitis B, suggests that PAN may represent a postinfectious autoimmune response. Infections with other organisms, including
Epstein-­Barr virus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, and hepatitis C virus, have also been associated with PAN. There
is a possible association between PAN and familial Mediterranean fever.

PATHOLOGY

Biopsies show necrotizing vasculitis with granulocytes and monocytes
infiltrating the walls of small and medium-­size arteries. Involvement is
usually segmental and tends to occur at vessel bifurcations. Granulomatous
inflammation is not present, and deposition of complement and immune
complexes is rarely observed. Different stages of inflammation are found,
ranging from mild inflammatory changes to panmural fibrinoid necrosis
associated with aneurysm formation, thrombosis, and vascular occlusion.

PATHOGENESIS

Immune complexes are believed to be pathogenic, but the mechanism
is poorly understood. It is not known why PAN has a predilection for
small and medium-­size blood vessels. The inflamed vessel wall becomes
thickened and narrowed, impeding blood flow and contributing to
end-­organ damage characteristic of this disease. Although there is no
clear genetic association with PAN, PAN-­like vasculitis is a component
of three recently described monogenic autoinflammatory conditions.
Deficiency in adenosine deaminase 2 (DADA2), caused by mutations in the CECR1 gene, causes a familial form of vasculitis with an
autosomal recessive inheritance (see Chapter 204).

Fig. 210.6 Purpuric and necrotic lesions on the legs of a child with

polyarteritis nodosa. (From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds.
Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2021: Fig. 34.1, p. 468.)

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The clinical presentation of PAN is variable but generally reflects the
distribution of inflamed vessels. Constitutional symptoms are present
in most children at disease onset. Weight loss and severe abdominal
pain suggest mesenteric arterial inflammation and ischemia. Renovascular arteritis can cause hypertension, hematuria, or proteinuria,
although glomerulonephritis is not typical. Cutaneous manifestations
include purpura, livedo reticularis, ulcerations, digital ischemia, and
painful nodules (Fig. 210.6). Arteritis affecting the nervous system can
result in cerebrovascular accidents, transient ischemic attacks, psychosis, and ischemic motor or sensory peripheral neuropathy (mononeuritis multiplex). Myocarditis or coronary arteritis can lead to heart
failure and myocardial ischemia; pericarditis and arrhythmias have
also been reported. Arthralgias, arthritis, or myalgias are frequently
present. Less common symptoms include testicular pain that mimics
testicular torsion, bone pain, and vision loss as a result of retinal arteritis. The pulmonary vasculature is usually spared in PAN.

DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of PAN requires demonstration of vessel involvement
on biopsy or angiography (Table 210.10). Biopsy of cutaneous lesions
shows small or medium vessel vasculitis. Kidney biopsy in patients with
renal manifestations may show necrotizing arteritis. Electromyography
in children with peripheral neuropathy identifies affected nerves, and
sural nerve biopsy may reveal vasculitis. Conventional arteriography is
the gold-­standard diagnostic imaging study for PAN and reveals areas
of aneurysmal dilation and segmental stenosis, the classic “beads on a
string” appearance (Fig. 210.7). MRA and CTA, less invasive imaging

alternatives, are gaining acceptance but may not be as effective in identifying small vessel disease or in younger children.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

Early skin lesions may resemble those of HSP, although the finding of
nodular lesions and the presence of systemic features help distinguish
PAN. Because pulmonary vascular involvement is very rare in PAN,
pulmonary lesions suggest ANCA-­associated vasculitis or Goodpasture
disease. Other rheumatic diseases, including SLE, have characteristic
target-­organ involvement and associated autoantibodies distinguishing
them from PAN. Prolonged fever and weight loss should also prompt
consideration of inflammatory bowel disease or malignancy.
Deficiency of DADA2 is a mimic of PAN and should be suspected in
the presence of vasculitic rash (Fig. 210.8), hypogammaglobulinemia,
cytopenias, and strokes. In addition, SAVI (STING-­associated vasculopathy with onset in infancy) presents in infancy with ulcerating skin
lesions that form eschars, cytopenias, interstitial lung disease, and failure to thrive (see Chapter 204).

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Nonspecific laboratory findings include elevations of ESR and CRP,
anemia, leukocytosis, and hypergammaglobulinemia. Abnormal urine
sediment, proteinuria, and hematuria indicate renal disease. Laboratory findings may be normal in cutaneous PAN or similar to those of
systemic PAN. Elevated hepatic enzyme values may suggest hepatitis B
or C infection. Serologic tests for hepatitis (hepatitis B surface antigen
and hepatitis C antibody) should be performed in all patients.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

1561

Table 210.10  Proposed Classification Criteria for Pediatric-­
Onset Polyarteritis Nodosa*
CRITERION

FINDINGS

Histopathology

Necrotizing vasculitis in medium or
small arteries

Angiographic abnormalities

Angiography showing aneurysm,
stenosis, or occlusion of medium or
small artery not from noninflammatory
cause

Cutaneous findings

Livedo reticularis, tender
subcutaneous nodules, superficial
skin ulcers, deep skin ulcers, digital
necrosis, nail bed infarctions, or
splinter hemorrhages

Muscle involvement

Myalgia or muscle tenderness

Hypertension

Systolic or diastolic blood pressure
>95th percentile for height

Peripheral neuropathy

Sensory peripheral neuropathy, motor
mononeuritis multiplex

Renal involvement

Proteinuria (>300 mg/24 hr equivalent),
hematuria or red blood cell casts,
impaired renal function (glomerular
filtration rate <50% normal)

*The presence of five criteria provides 89.6% sensitivity and 99.6% specificity for the
diagnosis of childhood-­onset polyarteritis nodosa.
Adapted from Ozen S, Pistorio A, Iusan SM, et al: EULAR/PRINTO/PRES criteria for
Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, childhood polyarteritis nodosa, childhood Wegener
granulomatosis and childhood Takayasu arteritis: Ankara 2008. Part II. Final classification
criteria. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010;69:798–806.

Fig. 201.8 Retiform purpura in a child with deficiency of adenosine

deaminase type 2. (From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds.
Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier;
2021, Fig. 34.3, p. 469.)

be warranted for life-­threatening disease. If hepatitis B is identified,
appropriate antiviral therapy should be initiated (see Chapter 406).
Most cases of cutaneous PAN can be treated with less intense therapy
such as corticosteroids alone, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), and methotrexate. Azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil,
IVIG, thalidomide, cyclosporine, and anti-­TNF agents such as infliximab have all been reported as successful in the treatment of refractory
cutaneous or systemic PAN. If an infectious trigger for PAN is identified, antibiotic prophylaxis can be considered.

COMPLICATIONS

Cutaneous nodules may ulcerate and become infected. Hypertension
and chronic renal disease may develop from renovascular involvement
in PAN. Cardiac involvement may lead to decreased cardiac function or coronary artery disease. Mesenteric vasculitis can predispose
to bowel infarction, rupture, and malabsorption. Stroke and rupture
of hepatic arterial aneurysm are uncommon complications of this
disorder.

PROGNOSIS

The course of PAN varies from mild disease with few complications to a
severe, multiorgan disease with high morbidity and mortality. Poor prognostic factors in PAN include elevated serum creatinine, proteinuria,
severe GI involvement, cardiomyopathy, and CNS involvement. Early
and aggressive immunosuppressive therapy increases the likelihood of
clinical remission. Compared with disease in adults, childhood PAN is
associated with less mortality. Cutaneous PAN is unlikely to transition
to systemic disease. Early recognition and treatment of the disease are
important to minimizing potential long-­term vascular complications.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Fig. 210.7 Child with polyarteritis nodosa. Abdominal aortogram
shows bilateral renal artery aneurysms (arrows), superior mesenteric
artery aneurysm (asterisk), and left common iliac artery occlusion (arrowhead). (Courtesy Dr. M. Hogan.)

TREATMENT

Oral prednisone (1-­2 mg/kg/day) or IV pulse methylprednisolone (30
mg/kg/day) are the mainstay of therapy. Oral or IV cyclophosphamide is often used as adjunctive therapy, and plasma exchange may

210.4 Antineutrophilic Cytoplasmic
Antibody–Associated Vasculitis
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and Stacy P. Ardoin
The ANCA-­associated vasculitides are characterized by small vessel
involvement, circulating ANCAs, and a paucity of immune complex
deposition in affected tissues, thus the term pauci-­immune vasculitis. ANCA-­associated vasculitis is categorized into three distinct
forms: granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) (Table 210.11),

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1562 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 210.11  2022 American College of Rheumatology/
EULAR Classification Criteria for
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis
Considerations when applying these criteria:
• These classification criteria should be applied to classify a
patient as having granulomatosis with polyangiitis when a
diagnosis of small-vessel or medium-vessel vasculitis has been
made.
• Alternate diagnoses mimicking vasculitis should be excluded
before applying the criteria.
CLINICAL CRITERIA
Nasal involvement: bloody discharge, ulcers, crusting,
congestion, blockage, or septal defect / perforation
Cartilaginous involvement (inflammation of ear or nose
cartilage, hoarse voice or stridor, endobronchial
involvement, or saddle nose deformity
Conductive or sensorineural hearing loss
LABORATORY, IMAGING, AND BIOPSY CRITERIA
Positive test for cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (cANCA) or antiproteinase 3 (anti-PR3)
antibodies
Pulmonary nodules, mass, or cavitation on chest imaging
Granuloma, extravascular granulomatous inflammation, or
giant cells on biopsy
Inflammation, consolidation, or effusion of the nasal/
paranasal sinuses, or mastoiditis on imaging
Pauci-immune glomerulonephritis on biopsy
Positive test for perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (pANCA) or antimyeloperoxidase (anti-MPO)
antibodies
Blood eosinophil count ≥ 1 × 109/liter

+3
+2
+1
+5
+2
+2
+1
+1
–1
–4
*TOTAL:

*Sum the scores for 10 items, if present. A score of ≥ 5 points is needed for the
classification of granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
From Robson JC, Grayson PC, Ponte C, et al. 2022 American College of
Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology classification
criteria for granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2022;81(3):315–320.
Fig. 1.

formerly Wegener granulomatosis; microscopic polyangiitis (MPA)
(Table 210.12); and eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(Table 210.13), formerly Churg-­Strauss syndrome (CSS). The 2022
ACR/ EULAR classification criteria for adults with GPA, MPA and
EGPA employ a criterion-based scoring system for classification of
these vasculitides.

EPIDEMIOLOGY

GPA is a necrotizing, granulomatous, small and medium vessel vasculitis that occurs at all ages and targets the upper and lower respiratory
tracts and the kidneys. Most cases of GPA occur in adults; the disease
also occurs in children with a mean age at diagnosis of 14 years. There
is a female predominance of 3-­4:1, and pediatric GPA is most prevalent
in the White population.
MPA is a small vessel necrotizing vasculitis with clinical features
similar to those of GPA, but without granulomas and upper airway involvement. CSS is a small vessel necrotizing granulomatous
(allergic granulomatosis) vasculitis associated with a history of
refractory asthma and peripheral eosinophilia. MPA and CSS are
rare in children, and there does not appear to be a gender predilection in either disease.

PATHOLOGY

Necrotizing vasculitis is the cardinal histologic feature in both
GPA and MPA. Kidney biopsies typically demonstrate crescentic
glomerulonephritis with little or no immune complex deposition

Table 210.12  Presenting Manifestations (Reported as
Percentages) in Children with Granulomatosis
with Polyangiitis and Microscopic Polyangiitis
from the ARChiVe Cohort (n = 231)
CLINICAL FEATURE

GPA (n = 183)

MPA (n = 48)

CONSTITUTIONAL/GENERAL
Malaise, fatigue
Fever
Weight loss

88
83
53
44

85
77
52
31

RENAL
Proteinuria
Hematuria
Biopsy proven
glomerulonephritis
Elevated serum creatinine

83
72
72
94 (101 of 108)

75
69
60
94 (30 of 32)

54

58

PULMONARY
Hemoptysis/alveolar
hemorrhage
Nodules
Fixed pulmonary infiltrates
Oxygen dependency
Pleurisy
Requiring ventilation

74
42

44
15

54
36
22
14
12

0
0
13
8
4

EAR, NOSE, THROAT
Nasal involvement
Sinusitis
Otitis/mastoiditis
Subglottic involvement
Hearing loss
Oral ulcers

70
53
39
17
10
10
15

4
0
0
0
0
0
4

MUSCULOSKELETAL
Arthralgia/arthritis
Myalgia, muscle weakness, or
myositis

65
61*
14

52
42
19

CUTANEOUS
Palpable purpura/petechia

47
27

52
31

EYES
Nonspecific red eye
Conjunctivitis
Scleritis/episcleritis

43
10
11
8

31
2
6
4

GASTROINTESTINAL
Nonspecific abdominal pain
Chronic nausea

36
22
12

58
38
33

NERVOUS SYSTEM
Severe headache
Dizziness

20
11
7

21
13
4

CARDIOVASCULAR

5

6

*Arthralgias and arthritis at disease onset were not reported separately.
GPA, Granulomatosis with polyangiitis; MPA, microscopic polyangiitis.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology,
8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021: Table 36.2, p. 487.

(“pauci-­immune”), in contrast to biopsies from patients with SLE.
Although granulomatous inflammation is common in GPA and
CSS, it is typically not present in MPA. Biopsies showing perivascular eosinophilic infiltrates distinguish CSS from both MPA
and GPA.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes
Table 210.13  American College of Rheumatology
Criteria for Classification of Eosinophilic
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis Syndrome
CRITERION*

DESCRIPTION

Asthma

History of wheezing or diffuse high-­
pitched rales on expiration

Eosinophilia

Eosinophils >10% of differential
white blood cell count

History of allergy

History of seasonal allergy (e.g.,
allergic rhinitis) or documented
allergies, including food,
contactants, and others (except
for drug allergies)

Mononeuropathy or
polyneuropathy

Mononeuropathy, multiple mono­
neuropathies or polyneuropathy
(i.e., glove/stocking distribution)
attributable to a systemic vasculitis

Pulmonary infiltrates

Migratory or transitory pulmonary
infiltrates on radiographs
attributable to a systemic vasculitis

Paranasal sinus abnormality

History of acute or chronic
paranasal sinus pain or tenderness
or radiographic opacification of
the paranasal sinuses

Extravascular eosinophils

Biopsy including artery, arteriole, or
venule, showing accumulation of
eosinophils in extravascular areas

*For classification purposes, a patient is said to have EGPA if at least four of these
criteria are present. The presence of any four or more criteria has a sensitivity of 85%
and a specificity of 99.7%.
From Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB, et al., eds. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology,
8th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2021, Fig. 36.7, p. 495.

1563

organ system involvement throughout the disease course in GPA
are as follows: respiratory tract, 74%; kidneys, 83%; joints, 65%;
eyes, 43%; skin, 47%; sinuses, 70%; and nervous system, 20%. Table
210.11 lists the classification criteria for pediatric-­onset GPA.
The clinical presentation of MPA closely resembles that of GPA,
although sinus disease is less common; systemic features of fever, malaise, weight loss, myalgias, and arthralgias may be dominant. MPA predominantly affects the kidney and lungs; other organ systems include
skin, CNS, muscle, heart, and eyes (see Table 210.12).
CSS frequently causes inflammation of the upper and lower respiratory tracts, but cartilage destruction is rare. CSS may initially demonstrate chronic or recurrent rhinitis/sinusitis, nasal polyposis, nonfixed
pulmonary lesions, and difficult-­to-­treat asthma. Eosinophilia (>10%
of leukocytes) with pulmonary infiltrates may precede a vasculitic
phase. Other organ involvement includes skin, cardiac, peripheral neuropathy, GI tract, and muscle. Renal involvement in CSS is uncommon.

DIAGNOSIS

GPA should be considered in children who have recalcitrant sinusitis,
pulmonary infiltrates, and evidence of nephritis. Chest radiography
often fails to detect pulmonary lesions, and chest CT may show nodules, ground-­glass opacities, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, and cavitary lesions (Fig. 210.10). The diagnosis is confirmed by the presence of
c-­ANCA with anti-­PR3 specificity (PR3-­ANCAs) and the finding of necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis on pulmonary, sinus, or renal biopsy.
The ANCA test result is positive in approximately 90% of children with
GPA, and the presence of anti-­PR3 increases the specificity of the test.
In MPA, ANCAs are also frequently present (70% of patients) but
are usually p-­ANCA with reactivity to MPO (MPO-­ANCAs). MPA
can be distinguished from PAN by the presence of ANCAs and the
tendency for small vessel involvement. The ANCA test result is positive
in 50–70% of cases of CSS, and MPO-­ANCAs are more common than
PR3-­ANCAs. In addition, the presence of chronic asthma and peripheral eosinophilia suggests the diagnosis of CSS.

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
PATHOGENESIS

The etiology of ANCA-­associated vasculitis remains unknown,
although neutrophils, monocytes, and endothelial cells are
involved in disease pathogenesis. Neutrophils and monocytes are
activated by ANCAs, specifically by the ANCA-­associated antigens proteinase-­3 (PR3) and myeloperoxidase (MPO), and release
proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-­α and IL-­8 . Localization
of these inflammatory cells to the endothelium results in vascular
damage characteristic of the ANCA vasculitides. Why the respiratory tract and kidneys are preferential targets in GPA and MPA is
unknown.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The early disease course is characterized by nonspecific constitutional symptoms, including fever, malaise, weight loss, myalgias,
and arthralgias. In GPA, upper airway involvement can manifest as
sinusitis, nasal ulceration, epistaxis, otitis media, and hearing loss.
Lower respiratory tract symptoms in GPA include cough, wheezing, dyspnea, and hemoptysis. Pulmonary hemorrhage can cause
rapid respiratory failure. Compared with adults, childhood GPA
is more frequently complicated by subglottic stenosis (Fig. 210.9).
Inflammation-­induced damage to the nasal cartilage can produce
a saddle nose deformity (see Fig. 210.9). Ophthalmic involvement
includes conjunctivitis, scleritis, uveitis, optic neuritis, and invasive orbital pseudotumor (causing proptosis). Perineural vasculitis or direct compression on nerves by granulomatous lesions can
cause cranial and peripheral neuropathies. Hematuria, proteinuria,
and hypertension in GPA signal renal disease. Cutaneous lesions
include palpable purpura and ulcers. Venous thromboembolism is
a rare but potentially fatal complication of GPA. The frequencies of

ANCAs are absent in other granulomatous diseases, such as sarcoidosis and tuberculosis. Goodpasture syndrome is characterized by
antibodies to glomerular basement membrane. Medications such as
propylthiouracil, hydralazine, and minocycline are associated with
drug-­induced ANCA (usually perinuclear ANCA) vasculitis. SLE and
HSP can manifest as pulmonary hemorrhage and nephritis.

LABORATORY FINDINGS

Nonspecific laboratory abnormalities include elevated ESR and CRP
values, leukocytosis, and thrombocytosis, which are present in most
patients with an ANCA-­
associated vasculitis but are nonspecific.
Anemia may be caused by chronic inflammation or pulmonary hemorrhage. ANCA antibodies show two distinct immunofluorescence
patterns: perinuclear (p-­ANCA) and cytoplasmic (c-­ANCA). In addition,
ANCAs can be defined by their specificity for PR3 or MPO antigen. GPA
is strongly associated with c-­ANCAs/anti-­PR3 antibodies, whereas 75%
of patients with MPA have a positive p-­ANCA. There is no clear correlation between ANCA titers and disease activity or relapse.

TREATMENT

When the lower respiratory tract or kidneys are significantly involved,
initial induction therapy usually consists of prednisone (oral 2 mg/
kg/day oral or IV methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg/day × 3 days) in conjunction with daily oral or monthly IV cyclophosphamide. Rituximab,
a monoclonal antibody to CD20 on activated B cells, is an option for
induction therapy in ANCA-­positive vasculitides, although it has been
studied primarily in adults. Plasmapheresis in conjunction with methylprednisolone has a role in the therapy of patients with severe disease
manifestations such as pulmonary hemorrhage or ESRD, with the potential for reducing dialysis dependency. Patients are transitioned to a less
toxic maintenance medication (usually methotrexate, azathioprine, or

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1564 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

A

C

B

Fig. 210.9 Adolescent with granulomatosis with polyangiitis. A and B, Anterior and lateral views of saddle nose deformity. C, Segment of subglottic posterior tracheal irregularity (between arrows) on lateral neck radiograph.

A

B

Fig. 210.10 Radiographs of lower respiratory tract disease in granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA). A, Chest radiograph of 14-­yr-­old girl with

GPA and pulmonary hemorrhage. Extensive bilateral, fluffy infiltrates are visualized. B, Chest CT scan in 17-­yr-­old boy with GPA. Air space consolidation, septal thickening, and a single cavitary lesion are present. (A from Cassidy JT, Petty RE. Granulomatous vasculitis, giant cell arteritis and
sarcoidosis. In Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1995; B from Kuhn JP, Slovis TL, Haller JO. Caffey’s Pediatric
Diagnostic Imaging, 10th ed. Philadelphia: Mosby; 2004.)

mycophenolate mofetil) within 3-­6 months once remission is achieved.
The Childhood Arthritis and Rheumatology Research Alliance has published treatment guidelines for the induction and maintenance therapy of
children with severe ANCA-­associated vasculitides consisting of induction therapy with cyclophosphamide or rituximab and maintenance
therapy with rituximab, methotrexate, or azathioprine. Trimethoprim-­
sulfamethoxazole (one 160 mg/800 mg tablet 3 days/week) is often prescribed both for prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jirovecii infection and
to reduce upper respiratory bacterial colonization with S. aureus, which
may trigger disease activity. If disease is limited to the upper respiratory
tract, corticosteroids (1-­2 mg/kg/day) and methotrexate (0.5-­1.0 mg/kg/
week) may be first-­line treatment. Avacopan, a C5a receptor inhibitor,
has been shown to be effective in reducing the need for corticosteroids in
addition to standard therapy in adults with ANCA-­associated vasculitis
but has not been studied in children.
Mepolizumab, an anti–IL-­5 monoclonal antibody, may have a role
in the treatment of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(CSS).

COMPLICATIONS

Upper respiratory tract lesions can invade the orbit and threaten the
optic nerve, and lesions in the ear can cause permanent hearing loss.
Respiratory complications include potentially life-­threatening pulmonary hemorrhage and upper airway obstruction caused by subglottic
stenosis. Chronic lung disease secondary to granulomatous inflammation, cavitary lesions, and scarring can predispose to infectious complications. Chronic glomerulonephritis may progress to ESRD in a subset
of patients with advanced or undertreated disease.

PROGNOSIS

The course is variable, but disease relapse occurs in up to 60% of
patients. Mortality has been reduced with the introduction of cyclophosphamide and other immunosuppressive agents. Compared with
adults, children are more likely to develop multiorgan involvement,
renal involvement, and subglottic stenosis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 210 u Vasculitis Syndromes

210.5 Other Vasculitis Syndromes:
Hypersensitivity, CNS, and
COVID-­19 Related
Vidya Sivaraman, Edward C. Fels, and Stacy P. Ardoin
Other vasculitic conditions can occur in childhood; the most common
is Kawasaki disease (see Chapter 208). Behçet disease is a rare form of
vasculitis seen in children of Turkish and Mediterranean descent, characterized by the triad of recurrent aphthous stomatitis, genital ulcers,
and uveitis (see Chapter 202).
Hypersensitivity vasculitis is a cutaneous vasculitis triggered by
medication or toxin exposure. The rash consists of palpable purpura or other nonspecific rash. Skin biopsies reveal characteristic
changes of leukocytoclastic vasculitis (small vessels with neutrophilic perivascular or extravascular neutrophilic infiltration) (Table
210.14). Hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis involves
small vessels and manifests as recurrent urticaria that resolves over
several days but leaves residual hyperpigmentation. This condition
is associated with low levels of complement component C1q and
systemic findings that include fever, GI symptoms, arthritis, and
glomerulonephritis. Some patients with urticarial vasculitis have
normal complement levels. Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis can complicate mixed essential cryoglobulinemia and is a small vessel vasculitis affecting skin, joints, kidneys, and lungs.
Primary angiitis of the central nervous system represents vasculitis confined to the CNS and requires exclusion of other systemic
vasculitides. Large vessel disease (angiography positive) may be
progressive or nonprogressive and may manifest with focal deficits
similar to an occlusive stroke, with hemiparesis, focal gross or fine
motor deficits, language disorders, or cranial nerve deficits. Diffuse
cognitive, memory, and concentration deficits and behavioral disorders are seen in 30–40% of patients. Small vessel disease (angiography negative, biopsy positive) more often results in language
problems and diffuse deficits, such as cognitive, memory, behavior,
and concentration problems, as well as focal seizures. In both types

Table 210.14  Criteria for Diagnosis of Hypersensitivity
Vasculitis*
CRITERION

DEFINITION

Age at onset >16 yr

Development of symptoms after 16 yr
of age

Medication at disease
onset

Medication that may have been a
precipitating factor was taken at the
onset of symptoms

Palpable purpura

Slightly elevated purpuric rash over
one or more areas; does not blanch
with pressure and is not related to
thrombocytopenia

Maculopapular rash

Flat and raised lesions of various sizes
over one or more areas of the skin

Biopsy, including arteriole
and venule

Histologic changes showing
granulocytes in a perivascular or
extravascular location

*For purposes of classification, a patient is said to have hypersensitivity vasculitis if at
least three of these criteria are present. The presence of three or more criteria has
a diagnostic sensitivity of 71.0% and specificity of 83.9%. The age criterion is not
applicable for children.
Adapted from Calabrese LH, Michel BA, Bloch DA, et al. The American College of
Rheumatology 1990 criteria for the classification of hypersensitivity vasculitis. Arthritis
Rheum. 1990;33:1108–1113, Table 2, p. 1110; and Petty RE, Laxer RM, Lindsley CB,
Wedderburn LR. Textbook of Pediatric Rheumatology, 7th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders;
2016: Table 38.2, p. 511.

1565

of cerebral angiitis, patients may have an elevated ESR or CRP and
abnormal CSF findings (increased protein, pleocytosis), although
these are not consistent findings in all patients. Diagnosis remains
a challenge, and brain biopsy is often indicated to confirm the diagnosis and exclude vasculitis mimics such as infections that could
worsen with immunosuppressive therapy (Table 210.15).

Table 210.15  Differential Diagnosis of Small Vessel Primary
Central Nervous System (CNS) Vasculitis in
Children
CNS VASCULITIS COMPLICATING OTHER DISEASES
Infections
• Bacterial: Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae,
Streptococcus pneumoniae
• Viral: Epstein-­Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, enterovirus, varicella-­
zoster virus, hepatitis C virus, parvovirus B19, West Nile virus
• Fungal: Candida albicans, Actinomyces, Aspergillus
• Spirochetal: Borrelia burgdorferi, Treponema pallidum
Rheumatic and Inflammatory Diseases
• Systemic vasculitis such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis,
microscopic polyangiitis, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura, Kawasaki
disease, polyarteritis nodosa, Behçet disease
• Systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile dermatomyositis,
morphea
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Autoinflammatory syndromes
• Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
• Neurosarcoidosis
• Adenosine deaminase-­2 deficiency
Other
• Drug-­induced vasculitis
• Malignancy-­associated vasculitis
NONVASCULITIS INFLAMMATORY BRAIN DISEASES
Demyelinating Diseases
• Multiple sclerosis, acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis
(ADEM), optic neuritis, transverse myelitis
Antibody-­Mediated Inflammatory Brain Disease
• Anti–NMDA receptor encephalitis, neuromyelitis optica (NMO),
antibody-­associated limbic encephalitis (antibodies against
LGI, AMP, AMP-­binding protein), Hashimoto encephalopathy,
celiac disease, pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders
associated with streptococcal infections (PANDAS)
T-­Cell–Associated Inflammatory Brain Disease
• Rasmussen encephalitis
Other
• Febrile infection-­related epilepsy syndrome (FIRES)
NONINFLAMMATORY VASCULOPATHIES
• Hemoglobinopathies (sickle cell disease), thromboembolic
disease
• Radiation vasculopathy, graft versus host disease
• Metabolic and genetic diseases such as cerebral autosomal
dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL), mitochondrial encephalopathy
lactic acidosis and strokelike episodes (MELAS), cerebral
autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and
leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL), Moyamoya disease, Fabry disease
• Malignancy (lymphoma)
Modified from Gowdie P, Twilt M, Benseler SM. Primary and secondary central nervous
system vasculitis. J Child Neurol. 2012;27:1448–1459.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1566 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 210.16  Diagnostic Considerations for Other
Vasculitis Syndromes
VASCULITIS SYNDROME

APPROACH TO DIAGNOSIS

Hypersensitivity vasculitis

Skin biopsy demonstrating
leukocytoclastic vasculitis

Hypocomplementemic urticarial
vasculitis

Biopsy of affected tissue
demonstrating small vessel
vasculitis
Low levels of circulating C1q

Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis

Biopsy of affected tissue
demonstrating small vessel
vasculitis
Measurement of serum
cryoglobulins
Exclusion of hepatitides B and C
infections

Primary angiitis of CNS

Conventional, CT, or MRA
evidence of CNS vasculitis
Consideration of dura or brain
biopsy

Nonprogressive angiography-­
positive CNS vasculitis

Conventional, CT, or MRA
evidence of CNS vasculitis

Cogan syndrome

Ophthalmology and audiology
evaluations
Conventional, CT, or MRA
evidence of CNS or aortic
vasculitis

Table 210.17  Acral and Nonacral Potential Cutaneous
Manifestations of Pediatric COVID-­19
ACRAL

NONACRAL

Pernio-­like lesions
EM-­like lesions
Plantar papules
Retiform purpura
Ecchymotic-­like lesions
Livedo reticularis

Urticaria
Erythematous patches
EM-­like lesions
Vesicles/papulovesicles
Herpetiform oral eruption
Roseola-­like rash
Maculopapular rash
Macular eruption
Lingual papillitis
Eccrine hidradenitis
Erythema nodosum
Petechiae
Purpura

Nonprogressive angiography-­
p ositive CNS vasculitis, also
known as transient CNS angiopathy, represents a more benign variant and can be seen after varicella infection. Cogan syndrome is
rare in children; its potential clinical manifestations include constitutional symptoms; inflammatory eye disease such as uveitis,
episcleritis, or interstitial keratitis; vestibuloauditory dysfunction
(vertigo, hearing loss, tinnitus); arthritis; and large vessel vasculitis
or aortitis. Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is caused
by pathogenic variants in the NOTCH3 gene and manifests with
stroke, mood changes, cognitive decline, and migraines; it is a vasculitis mimic and demonstrates osmophilic granules in cerebral
arteries. Cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CARASIL) is another mimic of
angiitis caused by pathogenic variants in the HTRA1 gene. It manifests with early-­onset hair loss, spasticity, stroke, memory loss, and
personality changes.
Identification of these vasculitis syndromes requires a comprehensive history and physical examination. Table 210.16 outlines
other diagnostic considerations. Although tailored to disease severity, treatment generally includes prednisone (up to 2 mg/kg/day).
Potent immunosuppressive medications, such as cyclophosphamide, are often indicated, particularly in primary angiitis of the
CNS to prevent rapid neurologic decline. For hypersensitivity vasculitis, withdrawal of the triggering medication or toxin is indicated
if possible.
COVID-­19, including multisystem inflammatory syndrome in
children (MIS-­C), has been associated with a variety of cutaneous
lesions that resemble vasculitis, vasculopathy, and vasoocclusive
etiologies (see Chapter 311) (Table 210.17, Fig. 210.11). Lesions
include pernio (chilblain: COVID toes)–like lesions suggestive of a
vasculitis. Other cutaneous manifestations include urticarial vasculitis and livedo reticularis–like or livedo racemosa—both resemble
a pauci-­inflammatory occlusive vasculitis. Sweet syndrome and
erythema multiforme–like lesions have also been described. Most
cutaneous lesions associated with known COVID-­19 or MIS-­C do
not require a biopsy, but some of those that were biopsied have
demonstrated a leukocytoclastic vasculitis.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Modified from Neale H, Hawryluk EB. COVID-­19 pediatric dermatology. Dermatol Clin.
2021;39:505–519, Table 4, p. 513.

A

B

C

D

Fig. 210.11 Pernio-­like lesions in children. A, A child with purpuric papules on the first, second, fourth, and fifth right digits and second proxi-

mal left digit. B, Digits on the same child appearing with increased erythema. C, Right toes of a child appearing with pink and dusky papules and
plaques, also involving the child’s left digits (D). (From Neale H, Hawryluk EB. COVID-­19 pediatric dermatology. Dermatol Clin. 2021;39:505–519,
Fig. 3, p. 511.)

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 211 u Musculoskeletal Pain Syndromes

Chapter 211

Musculoskeletal Pain
Syndromes
James J. Nocton
Musculoskeletal pain is a frequent reason for children to visit a healthcare provider and is the most common problem referred to pediatric
rheumatology clinics. Prevalence estimates of persistent musculoskeletal pain in community samples range from 10% to 40%. Although
inflammatory diseases such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) and
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are associated with musculoskeletal pain, noninflammatory conditions such as trauma, hypermobility, overuse, and idiopathic pain syndromes are much more common
causes of musculoskeletal pain in children.

CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

Acute and subacute musculoskeletal pain in children is most commonly the result of trauma, overuse, hypermobility, or some combination of these. The history and physical findings of trauma are most
often readily apparent, and the pain associated with overuse or hypermobility is most often described as related to activities and improving
with rest. The physical examination of children with pain related to
overuse, hypermobility, and other mechanical causes of pain does not
reveal signs of inflammation such as warmth, swelling, or limited range
of motion and most often reveals hypermobility with perhaps mild tenderness over tendons and their insertion points.
Chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes are defined
by pain of at least 3 months duration in the absence of objective abnormalities on physical examination or laboratory screening (see Chapter
212). The prevalence of chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes increases with age and is higher in females. These syndromes
often persist despite treatment with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) and other analgesics. Chronic pain may occur anywhere and is most often diffuse and poorly localized, but may sometimes involve only a single extremity or part of an extremity. Pain may
start in one location before potentially developing in other areas over
time.
Psychologic and emotional distress, including anxiety, depression, stress, or a combination of these, is quite common in those with
chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes. Frequent crying, school and social stress, poor concentration, and excessive worry
are often described. Sleep disturbance in children with chronic pain
syndromes may include difficulty falling asleep, multiple night awakenings, disrupted sleep-­wake cycles with increased daytime sleeping,
nonrestorative sleep, and fatigue.
Children who are high achievers, excellent students, mature, and
responsible, with high expectations of themselves have a predisposition
to the development of pain syndromes in general, including chronic
musculoskeletal pain. As a result, headaches and abdominal pain or
other gastrointestinal symptoms are also frequently present in those
with chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes.
The constellation of chronic pain, psychologic distress, and sleep disturbance often leads to a high degree of functional impairment. Poor
school attendance is common, and children may struggle to complete
other daily activities relating to self-­care and participation in household
chores. Decreased physical fitness can also occur, along with changes in
gait and posture, as children avoid the use of the area affected by pain.
Peer relationships may also be disrupted by decreased opportunities
for social interaction because of pain. Loneliness and social isolation
characterized by few friends and lack of participation in extracurricular activities are common.

1567

DIAGNOSIS AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS

The diagnosis of a musculoskeletal pain syndrome is based primarily on history and physical examination. Children with pain require
a thorough clinical history, including a complete social history and
review of systems, and a careful, comprehensive physical examination.
The specific characteristics of the pain should be defined, evidence of
potential systemic disease should be sought, and any additional associated symptoms and signs should be elicited.
The need for laboratory testing and imaging studies should be individualized, depending on the information elicited in the history and
discovered with the physical examination. Possible indicators of an
inflammatory cause for musculoskeletal pain include objective joint
warmth, swelling, limited range of joint motion on physical examination, localized bone tenderness, and muscle weakness; potential indicators of a systemic disease include poor linear growth, weight loss, and
constitutional symptoms. The lack of these symptoms and objective
abnormalities on physical examination is more suggestive of a noninflammatory cause for pain (Table 211.1). The complete blood count
(CBC) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) are often abnormal
in children whose pain is secondary to a bone or joint infection, rheumatic disease, or a malignancy. Bone tumors, fractures, and other focal
pathology resulting from infection, malignancy, or trauma can often
be identified through imaging studies, including plain radiographs or
MRI.
The presence of chronic, persistent pain, accompanied by psychologic distress, sleep disturbance, and/or functional impairment, in the
absence of objective laboratory or physical examination abnormalities, suggests the diagnosis of an idiopathic musculoskeletal pain
syndrome. Table 211.2 outlines common causes of pediatric musculoskeletal pain according to anatomic location, including growing
pains (see Chapter 211.1), diffuse amplified pain syndromes and
chronic widespread pain (see Chapter 211.3), complex regional pain
syndrome (see Chapter 211.4), localized pain syndromes, low back
pain, and chronic overuse-­related pain (e.g., Osgood-­Schlatter disease). A differential diagnosis of more serious conditions is noted in
Table 211.3.

TREATMENT

The primary goal of treatment for acute and subacute musculoskeletal pain related to trauma, hypermobility, overuse, or other mechanical factors is to minimize the discomfort as much as possible and to
promote normal activities. Rest, topical analgesics, mechanical joint
support to be worn with activities, ice, oral analgesics, and physical
therapy may all be used. Education of children and families regarding pain related to these mechanical factors is critical in helping
them to understand what to expect. Although it is common for the
discomfort related to hypermobility and overuse to be recurrent, the
prognosis for these mechanical pains is excellent, and most children
learn to manage their discomfort with few, if any, restrictions on
activities.
The primary goal of treatment of chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes is to improve function and relieve pain; these
outcomes may not occur simultaneously or quickly. Pain may persist
even as children resume normal function (e.g., increased school attendance and participation in extracurricular activities). For all children
and adolescents with pediatric musculoskeletal pain syndromes whose
school attendance has been affected by their symptoms, regular school
attendance is a primary initial goal. The dual nature of treatment, targeting both function and pain, needs to be clearly explained. Children
and families need to be supported in disengaging from the sole pursuit
of pain relief and embracing the equally imperative goal of improved
functioning.
Recommended treatment modalities include physical and/or occupational therapy, pharmacologic interventions, and cognitive-­behavioral
and/or other psychotherapeutic interventions. The overarching goal of
physical therapy is to improve children’s physical function and should
emphasize participation in aggressive but graduated aerobic exercise.
Pharmacologic interventions should be used judiciously. Low-­dose

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1568 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 211.1  Potential Indicators of Inflammatory vs Noninflammatory Causes of Musculoskeletal Pain
CLINICAL FINDING

NONINFLAMMATORY

INFLAMMATORY

Effects of rest vs activity on pain

Relieved by rest and worsened by activity

Present at rest and may be relieved by activity

Time of day pain and/or stiffness occurs

End of the day and nights

Morning*

Objective joint swelling

No

Yes

Joint characteristics

Hypermobile/normal

Stiffness, limited range of motion

Bone tenderness

No

Possible

Muscle strength

Normal

Possible weakness

Gait

Normal

Limp

Growth

Normal growth pattern or weight gain

Poor growth and/or weight loss

Constitutional symptoms

Fatigue without other constitutional symptoms

Possible

Laboratory findings

Normal CBC, ESR, CRP

Abnormal CBC, raised ESR and CRP

Imaging findings

Normal

Effusion, osteopenia, radiolucent metaphyseal
lines, joint space loss, bone destruction

*Cancer pain is often severe and worst at night.
CBC, Complete blood count; CRP, C-­reactive protein level; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Data from Malleson PN, Beauchamp RD. Diagnosing musculoskeletal pain in children. CMAJ 2001;165:183–188.

Table 211.2  Common Musculoskeletal Pain Syndromes in
Children by Anatomic Region
ANATOMIC REGION

PAIN SYNDROMES

Shoulder

Impingement syndrome

Elbow

“Little League elbow”
Avulsion fractures
Osteochondritis dissecans
Tennis elbow
Panner disease

Arm

Localized hypermobility syndrome
Complex regional pain syndrome

Pelvis and hip

Avulsion injuries
Legg-­Calvé-­Perthes syndrome
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Congenital hip dysplasia

Knee

Osteochondritis dissecans
Osgood-­Schlatter disease
Sinding-­Larsen syndrome
Patellofemoral syndrome
Malalignment syndromes

Leg

Growing pains
Complex regional pain syndrome
Localized hypermobility syndrome
Shin splints
Stress fractures
Compartment syndromes

Foot

Plantar fasciitis
Tarsal coalition
Stress fractures
Achilles tendonitis
Juvenile bunion

Spine

Musculoskeletal strain
Spondylolisthesis
Spondylolysis
Scoliosis
Scheuermann disease (kyphosis)
Low back pain

Generalized

Hypermobility syndrome
Diffuse amplified pain syndrome
Chronic widespread pain

tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline 0.1 mg/kg at bedtime; can
increase to 0.5 to 2 mg/kg as tolerated) may improve sleep; selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (sertraline 25-­100 mg daily) may help
to alleviate symptoms of depression and anxiety if present. Cognitive-­
behavioral therapy (CBT) and/or other psychotherapeutic interventions are designed to teach children and adolescents coping skills for
controlling the behavioral, cognitive, and physiologic responses to
pain. Specific components often include cognitive restructuring, relaxation, distraction, and problem-­solving skills. Parent education and
involvement in the psychologic intervention are important to ensure
maintenance of progress. More intensive family-­based approaches are
warranted if barriers to treatment success are identified at the family
level. These could include parenting strategies or family dynamics that
serve to maintain children’s pain complaints, such as overly solicitous
responses to the child’s pain and maladaptive models for coping with
pain.

COMPLICATIONS AND PROGNOSIS

Musculoskeletal pain related to hypermobility and/or overuse may be
recurrent and related to specific activities, but is typically mild, does
not usually significantly limit activities, and is most often managed
symptomatically. Conversely, chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain
syndromes have a much greater potential to negatively affect development and future role functioning. Worsening pain and the symptoms
of depression and anxiety associated with chronic pain can lead to
substantial school absences, peer isolation, and developmental delays
later in adolescence and early adulthood. Specifically, adolescents with
chronic idiopathic musculoskeletal pain syndromes may fail to achieve
the level of autonomy and independence necessary for age-­appropriate
activities, such as attending college, living away from home, and maintaining a job. Fortunately, not all children and adolescents with these
syndromes experience this degree of impairment. Factors that contribute to the persistence of pain are increasingly understood and include
female gender, pubertal stage at pain onset, older age of pain onset,
increased psychologic distress associated with the pain, and greater
functional impairment. The likelihood of positive health outcomes is
increased with multidisciplinary treatment addressing the pain, the
functional disabilities, and the psychologic comorbidities associated
with pain.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Adapted from Anthony KK, Schanberg LE. Assessment and management of pain syndromes and
arthritis pain in children and adolescents. Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2007;33:625–660, Box 1.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 211 u Musculoskeletal Pain Syndromes
Table 211.3  Differential Diagnosis of Idiopathic
Musculoskeletal Pain Syndrome
CHANNELOPATHIES
Erythromelalgia: primary (associated with the SCN9A gene) or
secondary
Paroxysmal extreme pain disorder (SCN9A gene)
Small fiber neuropathy (SCN9A, SCN1OA genes)
Familial episodic pain syndrome (SCN11A, TRPA1 genes)
CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS
Ehlers-­Danlos syndrome
Marfan syndrome
IMMUNE/AUTOIMMUNE
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Sarcoidosis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Sjögren syndrome
Familial Mediterranean fever and other autoinflammatory recurrent
fever syndromes
Hereditary angioedema
Chronic nonbacterial osteomyelitis
Mononeuritis multiplex associated with vasculitis
METABOLIC/NUTRITION
Fabry disease
Gaucher disease
Porphyria
Mitochondrial neuropathies
Vitamin deficiency (thiamine, B12, C, D)
X-­linked adrenoleukodystrophy
OTHER
Guillain-­Barré syndrome
Multiple sclerosis
Toxic: lead, arsenic, chemotherapy
HIV
Familial amyloid neuropathy
Complex regional pain syndrome types 1 and 2
Sickle cell anemia
Thalamic stroke
Primary, metastatic, or recurrent malignancy (acute lymphocytic
leukemia, neuroblastoma)
Neurofibromatosis
Radiculopathy
Nerve entrapment syndromes
1.	Peroneal
2.	Suprascapular
3.	Anterior, posterior hip
4.	Anterior cutaneous nerve (abdominal)
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 33.2, p. 547.

211.1 Growing Pains (Benign Limb Pain of
Childhood)
James J. Nocton
The cause of benign limb pain of childhood, historically referred to
as growing pains, is unknown. Low pain threshold, overuse, and
behavioral causes have been postulated, and it is possible that there are
multiple causes for these pains. This pain affects 10–20% of children,
with peak incidence between age 4 and 12 years. Benign limb pains of
childhood are intermittent and usually bilateral, poorly localized, and
predominantly affecting the anterior thigh, shin, and calf. Occasionally,
bilateral upper extremity pain may be associated with leg pain. Children typically describe cramping or aching that occurs most often in
the late afternoon or evening. Pain may wake the child from sleep, may
be severe, and may last a few minutes to hours, but typically resolves
quickly with massage or analgesics; pain is nearly always resolved by
the following morning (Table 211.4). Pain may often follow a day with
increased or excessive physical activity. Physical examination is normal, and gait is not impaired.

1569

Treatment should focus on reassurance, education, and healthy
sleep hygiene while preparing parents and children for the possibility
that the pain may occur intermittently for years, with eventual resolution. Massage, acetaminophen, or NSAIDs during the episode are
nearly always effective.
Restless legs syndrome (RLS), seen more frequently among adolescents and adults, is a sensorimotor disturbance that may be confused with growing pains (see Chapter 31). Often familial, RLS is a
difficult-­to-­control urge to move the leg that is exacerbated during
rest and at night and is relieved by movement (see Table 211.4). There
is significant overlap in the diagnostic features of growing pains and
RLS. Moreover, these conditions can be comorbid, and there is a high
incidence of RLS in the parents of children with growing pains. RLS
appears to be best distinguished from growing pains by the urge to
move the legs, associated uncomfortable leg sensations that may not
be described as painful; worsening with periods of rest; and relief
through movement. Iron supplementation may benefit pediatric
patients with RLS.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

211.2 Small Fiber Polyneuropathy
James J. Nocton
Some patients with juvenile-­onset widespread pain syndromes have
evidence of a small fiber polyneuropathy causing dysfunctional or
degeneration of small-­
diameter unmyelinated C fibers and thinly
myelinated A delta fibers that mediate nociception and the autonomic
nervous system. In addition to pain, these children may have dizziness,
postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS), constipation and/
or gastrointestinal dysmotility, and other symptoms suggestive of dysautonomia (Fig. 211.1).
The diagnosis of small fiber polyneuropathy requires distal leg
immunolabeled skin biopsy to identify epidermal nociceptive fibers
and autonomic function testing to examine cardiovagal, adrenergic,
and sudomotor small fiber function. Genetic testing for pathogenic
variants in genes coding for sodium channels may reveal SCN9A,
SCN10A, or SCN11A variants. Some small studies have reported the
presence of autoantibodies to trisulfated disaccharide and fibroblast
growth factor receptor 3, suggestive of immune-­mediated pathogenesis. Other potential etiologies for small fiber neuropathy are noted in
Table 211.5; most cases are idiopathic. In addition, other genetic painful neuropathies should be considered (Table 211.6).
Optimal treatment of patients with small fiber polyneuropathy is
unknown. Corticosteroids and intravenous immune globulin have
been effective in very small numbers of patients.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

211.3 Diffuse Amplified Pain Syndromes
James J. Nocton
Diffuse amplified pain syndrome is more common in children than
localized amplified pain. In addition to widespread pain, children frequently have associated chronic fatigue, sleep disturbance, headaches,
chronic abdominal pain and gastrointestinal symptoms, stress, anxiety, and/or symptoms of depression (see also Chapter 212). The terms
diffuse amplified pain syndrome, chronic widespread pain syndrome,
chronic myofascial pain syndrome, and juvenile primary fibromyalgia
syndrome are often used to describe the same constellation of symptoms. Some of these children have findings that fulfill the criteria that
have been developed for adult patients with fibromyalgia by either
the American College of Rheumatology (Table 211.7) or the Analgesic, Anesthetic, and Addiction Clinical Trial Translations Innovations
Opportunities and Networks-­American Pain Society (Table 211.8 and

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1570 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 211.4  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Growing Pains Including Features of Restless Legs Syndromes (RLS)
INCLUSIONS

EXCLUSIONS

RLS FEATURES

Nature of pain

Intermittent; some pain-­free
days and nights, deep aching,
cramping

Persistent; increasing intensity, pain
during the day

Urge to move legs often accompanied
by unpleasant sensations in legs, but
may not be painful

Unilateral or bilateral

Bilateral

Unilateral

Location of pain

Anterior thigh, calf, posterior
knee—in muscles not the joints

Articular, back, or groin pain

Urge to move and discomfort
throughout leg

Onset of pain

Late afternoon or evening

Pain still present next morning

Worse later in day or night but also
present at periods of rest or inactivity
throughout the day

Physical findings

Normal

Swelling, erythema, tenderness; local
trauma or infection; reduced joint range
of motion; limping, fever, weight loss,
mass

Laboratory findings

Normal

Objective evidence of abnormalities;
increased erythrocyte sedimentation
rate or C-­reactive protein; abnormal
complete blood count, radiography,
bone scan, or MRI

Adapted from Evans AM, Scutter SD. Prevalence of “growing pains” in young children. J Pediatr. 2004;145:255–258; and Walters AS, Gabelia D, Frauscher B. Restless legs syndrome
(Willis-­Ekbom disease) and growing pains: are they the same thing? A side-­by-­side comparison of the diagnostic criteria for both and recommendations for future research. Sleep
Med. 2013;14:1247–1252.

Small fiber neuropathy

Pain

Small fiber sodium
channel dysfunction

Autonomic symptoms

Small fiber mediated
painful neuropathy

Erythromelalgia
and
paroxysmal extreme
pain syndrome

Small fiber mediated
widespread pain

Muscle cramps

• Cramps
• Muscle
pain
• Burning
• Tingling
• Stabbing
• Numbness

Small fiber mediated
autonomic dysfunction

Fibromyalgia

• Gl symptoms
• Heart rate
dysregulation
• Temperature
• Fatigue
sensitivities
• Irritable bowel
syndrome

• Widespread
pain
• Cognitive
dysfunction
• Sleep disturbances

Fig. 211.1 Small fiber neuropathy symptom clusters and neuropathy classifications. (From Levine TD. Small fiber neuropathy: disease classification
beyond pain and burning. J Central Nervous Sys Dis. 2018;10:1–6, Fig. 1, p. 3).

Fig. 211.2). Separate criteria for the diagnosis of juvenile primary fibromyalgia syndrome in children have been proposed, but these have not
been validated (Table 211.9). The evaluation of fibromyalgia tender
points has not been useful or diagnostic.
Although the precise cause of diffuse amplified pain is unknown,
there is an emerging understanding that the development and maintenance of chronic pain are related both to biologic and psychologic
factors. Diffuse amplified pain likely has multifactorial causes and is
hypothesized to be an abnormality of central pain processing associated

with disordered sleep physiology, enhanced pain perception, disordered mood, and dysregulation of hypothalamic-­
pituitary-­
adrenal
and other neuroendocrine axes, resulting in lower pain thresholds
and increased pain sensitivity. Children and adolescents with diffuse
amplified pain often find themselves in a vicious cycle of pain, where
symptoms build on one another and contribute to the onset and maintenance of new symptoms.
Diffuse amplified pain has a chronic course that can detrimentally affect child health and development. Adolescents who do not

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 211 u Musculoskeletal Pain Syndromes
Table 211.5  Causes of Small Fiber Neuropathy
PRIMARY

SECONDARY

IDIOPATHIC
Idiopathic small fiber neuropathy
Burning mouth syndrome

METABOLIC
Impaired glucose tolerance
Diabetes mellitus
Rapid glycemic control
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Dyslipidemia
Hypothyroidism
Chronic kidney disease

HEREDITARY/GENETIC
Familial amyloid polyneuropathy
Fabry disease
Tangier disease
Sodium channelopathies (see
text)

INFECTIONS
HIV
Hepatitis C
Influenza
TOXINS AND DRUGS
Antiretrovirals
Antibiotics—metronidazole,
nitrofurantoin, linezolid
Chemotherapy—bortezomib
Flecainide
Statin
Alcohol
Vitamin B6 toxicity
IMMUNE MEDIATED
Celiac disease
Sarcoidosis
Sjögren syndrome
Rheumatoid arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitis
Inflammatory bowel disease
Paraneoplastic
Monoclonal gammopathy/
amyloid

Note that a number of these conditions may present as a small fiber neuropathy and
then evolve to include large fibers.
Modified from Themistocleous AC, Ramirez JD, Serra J, Bennett DLH. The clinical approach
to small fibre neuropathy and painful channelopathy. Pract Neurol. 2014;14:368–379, Table 1.

receive treatment or who are inadequately treated may withdraw
from school and the social milieu, complicating their transition to
adulthood. Treatment of diffuse amplified pain is ideally multidisciplinary. The major goals are to restore function and alleviate pain
and to improve comorbid mood and sleep disorders. Treatment strategies include parent/child education, pharmacologic interventions,
exercise-­based interventions, and psychologic interventions. Graduated aerobic exercise is the recommended exercise-­based intervention, whereas psychologic interventions should include training in
pain coping skills, stress management skills, emotional support, and
sleep hygiene. CBT is particularly effective in reducing symptoms of
depression in children and adolescents with chronic pain and helps
to reduce functional disability.
Drug therapies, although largely unsuccessful in isolation, may
include tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline 0.1 mg/kg at bedtime;
can increase to 0.5 to 2 mg/kg as tolerated), selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (sertraline 25-­100 mg daily), and anticonvulsants. Pregabalin and duloxetine hydrochloride are approved by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of fibromyalgia in
adults (≥18 years of age); however, data regarding the efficacy of these
medications in children are limited.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1571

211.4 Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
James J. Nocton
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is characterized by chronic,
persistent limb pain, often burning in character. CRPS type 1, also
termed reflex sympathetic dystrophy, has no evidence of nerve injury,
whereas the less common CRPS type 2 is associated with a known
mechanism of nerve injury. The pain of CRPS is typically extreme and
disproportionate to the inciting event. Associated features include allodynia (a heightened pain response to normally non-­noxious stimuli),
hyperalgesia (exaggerated pain reactivity to noxious stimuli), swelling of the affected extremity, and indicators of autonomic dysfunction
(cyanosis, mottling, hyperhidrosis).
There are no diagnostic criteria specifically for pediatric CRPS; in
adults, several sets of criteria have been developed (Table 211.10); the
clinical utility of these criteria is controversial. The diagnosis of CRPS
is clinical and can be made when continuous pain is present that is disproportionate to any potential inciting event with associated allodynia,
or hyperalgesia, evidence of edema, skin blood flow abnormalities, or
excessive sweating activity, and exclusion of other disorders. Other features that may be present include atrophy of hair or nails, loss of joint
mobility, weakness, tremor, and dystonia.
Although many pediatric patients with CRPS present with a history
of minor trauma or repeated stress injury (e.g., caused by competitive
sports), a significant proportion are unable to identify a precipitating
event. Usual age of onset is between 8 and 16 years, and females outnumber males with the disease by as much as 6:1. Childhood CRPS
differs from the adult form in that lower extremities, rather than
upper extremities, are most often affected. The incidence of CRPS in
children is unknown, largely because it is often undiagnosed or diagnosed late. Left untreated, CRPS can have severe consequences for
children, including bone demineralization, muscle wasting, and joint
contractures.
The treatment of CRPS, like that of more diffuse pain syndromes, is
ideally multidisciplinary. Aggressive physical therapy (PT) should be
initiated as soon as the diagnosis is made, and CBT added as needed.
PT is recommended three to four times a week, and children may need
analgesic premedication at the onset, particularly before PT sessions.
PT is initially limited to desensitization and then moves to weight bearing, range of motion, and other functional activities. CBT used as an
adjunctive therapy targets psychosocial obstacles to fully participating
in PT and provides pain-­coping skills training. The goal of both pharmacologic and adjunctive treatments for CRPS is to provide sufficient
pain relief to allow the child to participate in aggressive physical rehabilitation. Multiple studies have shown that noninvasive treatments,
particularly PT and CBT, are at least as efficacious as nerve blocks in
helping children with CRPS achieve resolution of their symptoms.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

211.5 Erythromelalgia
James J. Nocton
Children with erythromelalgia experience episodes of intense burning
pain, erythema, edema, and heat, most often in the hands and feet (Fig.
211.3) and less frequently in other locations. Symptoms are most often
triggered by exposure to heat or exercise and typically last for hours to
days. Erythromelalgia is more common in females during adolescence,
and the diagnosis is often delayed for many years. Although many cases
are sporadic, an autosomal dominant hereditary form results most
often from gain-­of-­function pathogenic variants of the SCN9A gene,
which encodes the alpha subunit of the sodium channel NaV1.7 found
in nociceptive neurons that transmit pain signals. Age of onset for the

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1572 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 211.6  Clinical Features of Human Disorders Caused by Pathogenic Gene Variants in Ion-­Channel Genes that Lead to
Altered Pain Perception and Are Inherited in a Mendelian Manner
GENE (PROTEIN)

TYPE AND EFFECT
OF GENE VARIANT

MAIN PHENOTYPE

ADDITIONAL FEATURES

Inherited
erythromelalgia

SCN9A (Nav1.7)

Heterozygous,
activating

Onset by age 20 yr; episodic pain triggered
by warmth; feet affected more frequently
than hands

Erythema of feet

Paroxysmal extreme
pain disorder

SCN9A (Nav1.7)

Heterozygous,
activating

Onset at birth; episodic pain; sacral region
is affected most frequently; face is affected
more often than the limbs; physical triggers
include defecation

Erythema of the sacrum;
tonic attacks

Small-­fiber
neuropathy

SCN9A (Nav1.7)

Heterozygous,
activating

Onset at any age but more common in early
adulthood; persistent burning pain; feet
affected more frequently than hands

Could be autonomic
features

Small-­fiber
neuropathy

SCN10A (Nav1.8)

Heterozygous,
activating

Persistent burning pain

Could be autonomic
features

Familial episodic
pain syndrome
type I

TRPA1 (TRPA1)

Heterozygous,
activating

Onset at birth or in infancy; episodic chest or
arm pain; triggers are hunger and cold

Familial episodic
pain syndrome
type III

SCN11A (Nav1.9)

Heterozygous,
activating

Onset in first decade; episodic hand and
foot pain; triggers are intercurrent illness or
exercise

Nav, Sodium ion channel.
Modified from Bennett DLH, Woods CG. Painful and painless channelopathies. Lancet Neurol. 2014;13:587–599, Table 1.

Table 211.7  American College of Rheumatology Fibromyalgia
Diagnostic Criteria (2016 Revision)
The following three conditions must be met:
1.	Widespread Pain Index (WPI) ≥7 and Symptom Severity Scale
(SSS) score ≥5 or WPI 4-­6 and SSS score ≥9.
2.	Generalized pain, defined as pain in at least four of five regions,
must be present. Jaw, chest, and abdominal pain are not included
in generalized pain definition.

Table 211.8  Analgesic, Anesthetic, and Addiction Clinical
Trial Translations Innovations Opportunities
and Networks-­American Pain Society Pain
Taxonomy (AAPT) Fibromyalgia Diagnostic
Criteria
Core diagnostic criteria:
1.	Musculoskeletal pain defined as 6 or more pain sites from a total
of 19 possible sites (see Fig. 211.2)

3.	Symptoms have been generally present for at least 3 mo.

2.	Moderate to severe sleep problems OR fatigue

ASCERTAINMENT OF WPI
The WPI is the number of areas in which a patient has had pain over
the last week. The score will be between 0 and 19: Left Upper
Region: left jaw, left shoulder girdle, left upper arm, left lower
arm; Right Upper Region: right jaw, right shoulder girdle, right
upper arm, right lower arm; Left Lower Region: left hip (buttock,
trochanter), left upper leg, left lower leg; Right Lower Region: right
hip (buttock, trochanter), right upper leg, right lower leg; Axial
Region: chest, abdomen, upper back, lower back, and neck.

3.	Musculoskeletal pain plus fatigue or sleep problems must have
been present for at least 3 mo

ASCERTAINMENT OF SSS SCORE
The SSS score is the sum of the severity of three symptoms (fatigue,
waking unrefreshed, and cognitive symptoms) over the past week
(each given a score from 0 to 3) plus the sum of the number of
the following symptoms the patient has been bothered by that
occurred during the previous 6 mo: headaches, pain or cramps in
the lower abdomen, and depression (each given a score from 0 to
1). The final score will be between 0 and 12. For fatigue, waking
unrefreshed, and cognitive symptoms, the level of severity over the
past week is rated using the following scale:
0 = No problem
1 = Slight or mild problems, generally mild or intermittent
2 = Moderate, considerable problems, often present and/or at a
moderate level
3 = Severe: pervasive, continuous, life-­disturbing problems
• F
 or headaches, pain or cramps in the lower abdomen, and depression,
the severity for each is scored as 0 or 1.

NOTE: The presence of another pain disorder or related symptoms does not rule
out a diagnosis of fibromyalgia. However, a clinical assessment is recommended
to evaluate for any condition that could fully account for the patient’s symptoms or
contribute to the severity of the symptoms.
Adapted from Arnold LM, Bennett RM, Crofford LJ, et al. AAPT Diagnostic Criteria for
Fibromyalgia. J Pain. 2019;20:611–628.

familial form ranges from 1 to 16 years. Secondary erythromelalgia
is associated with many disorders, including myeloproliferative diseases, peripheral neuropathies, frostbite, and rheumatic diseases. The
differential diagnosis includes Fabry disease, Raynaud phenomenon
or disease, reflex sympathetic dystrophy, and peripheral neuropathies.
In contrast to Raynaud phenomenon, the pain in erythromelalgia is
relieved by cooling the affected area. Treatment includes avoidance of
heat exposure and other precipitating situations and the use of cooling techniques that do not cause tissue damage during attacks. There
is no proven reliably efficacious treatment, and NSAIDs, narcotics,
anesthetic agents (lidocaine patch), anticonvulsants (oxcarbazepine,
carbamazepine, gabapentin), antidepressants, sodium nitroprusside,
magnesium, mexiletine, and misoprostol, as well as biofeedback, medical and surgical nerve blocks, and hypnosis have had variable efficacy.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Adapted from Wolfe F, Clauw DJ, Fitzcharles MA, et al. 2016 Revisions to the 2010/2011
fibromyalgia diagnostic criteria. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2016;46(3):319–329.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 211 u Musculoskeletal Pain Syndromes
Widespread Pain Index
(1 point per circle; score range: 0–19 points)
Please indicate if you have had pain or tenderness during the
past 7 days in the areas shown below.
Fill in the circles on the diagram for each area in which you have
had pain or tenderness.

1573

Table 211.10  Budapest Clinical Diagnostic Criteria for
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
All of the following criteria must be met:
1.	Continuing pain, which is disproportionate to any inciting event
2.	Must report at least one symptom in each of the following four
categories:
• Sensory: Hyperesthesia and/or allodynia

Right jaw

Neck
Chest or Left
shoulder
breast

Right shoulder
Right
upper arm
Right
lower arm

Left jaw

Abdomen

Left
upper
Left
shoulder
arm
Left
lower arm

Right hip or
buttocks
Right upper leg

• V
 asomotor: Temperature asymmetry, skin color changes, and/or
skin color asymmetry
Upper
back
Lower
back
Left hip or
buttocks

Left upper leg

• S
 udomotor/edema: Edema, sweating changes, and/or
sweating asymmetry
• M
 otor/trophic: Decreased range of motion, motor dysfunction
(tremor, weakness, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail,
skin)
3.	Must display at least one sign at time of evaluation in two or more
of the following four categories:
• S
 ensory: Evidence of hyperesthesia (to pin prick) and/or
allodynia (to light touch, temperature sensation, deep somatic
pressure, and/or joint movement)
• V
 asomotor: Evidence of temperature asymmetry (>1°C), skin
color changes, and/or skin color asymmetry

Right lower leg

Left lower leg

• S
 udomotor/edema: Edema, sweating changes, and/or
sweating asymmetry
• M
 otor/trophic: Decreased range of motion, motor dysfunction
(tremor, weakness, dystonia) and/or trophic changes (hair, nail,
skin)

Fig. 211.2 Widespread pain index. (Modified from Fraix M. Fibro-

myalgia. In Tallia AF, Scherger JE, Dickey NW (eds). Swanson’s Family
Medicine Review, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2022. Fig 47.1.)

4.	There is no other diagnosis that better explains the signs and
symptoms.
Adapted from Harden RN, Bruel S, Stanton-­Hicks, et al. Proposed new diagnostic
criteria for complex regional pain syndrome. Pain Med. 2007;8:326–331.

Table 211.9  Suggested Diagnostic Criteria for Juvenile
Primary Fibromyalgia Syndrome (JPFS)
MAJOR CRITERIA
1.	Generalized musculoskeletal aching at three or more sites for
≥3 mo
2.	Absence of an underlying condition/cause
3.	Normal laboratory tests
4.	Five or more typical tender points*
MINOR CRITERIA
1.	Chronic anxiety or tension
2.	Fatigue
3.	Poor sleep
4.	Chronic headaches
5.	Irritable bowel syndrome
6.	Subjective soft tissue swelling
7.	Numbness

Fig. 211.3 Characteristic redness and edema of the foot associated

with erythromelalgia. (From Pfund Z, Stankovics J, Decsi T, Illes Z. Childhood steroid-­responsive acute erythromelalgia with axonal neuropathy of
large myelinated fibers: a dysimmune neuropathy? Neuromuscul Disord.
2009;19:49–52, Fig. 1A, p. 50.)

8.	Pain modulated by physical activities
9.	Pain modulated by changes in weather
10.	Pain modulated by anxiety/stress
*Thirty-­one potential tender points were listed for these criteria when proposed in 1985.
JPFS is diagnosed when all major criteria are met, plus three of the minor criteria or
when there are four tender points and five minor criteria.
Adapted from Coles M, Weissmann R, Uziel Y. Juvenile primary fibromyalgia syndrome:
Epidemiology, etiology, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations and diagnosis. Pediatr
Rheumatol Online J. 2021;19(1):22.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1574 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)

Chapter 212

Chronic Overlapping Pain
Conditions
Thomas C. Chelimsky and
Gisela G. Chelimsky
In chronic overlapping pain conditions (COPCs), several painful symptoms affecting different body systems coexist without clear
underlying pathophysiology. Other terms for COPCs include medically unexplained symptoms, functional somatic syndromes (FSS),
and central sensitivity syndromes. These disorders are probably
highly prevalent; for example, two COPCs, irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS) and migraine, each affect 10–20% of the population. Pediatric
COPC studies usually focus on populations with one painful condition
(headaches) and their psychiatric comorbidities, rather than somatic
comorbidities. The overlap of these disorders with psychiatric conditions has led both the public and the medical specialists to dichotomize these disorders artificially into “physical,” by implication, “real”
disorders and “psychologic,” by implication, “not real” disorders. This
classification ignores the unity of brain and body and hinders progress
in understanding these disorders. COPC connotes a nonassumptive
neutral position, appropriately attributing no assumed pathophysiology to the disorder, in contrast to other terms, such as “medically
unexplained syndrome,” subtly suggesting a psychologic process, more
strongly implied in the term “functional.”

PREVALENCE

The prevalence of COPCs is unknown depending on which symptom is being assessed and how much overlap exists across disorders.
A large study from 28 countries (about 400,000 participants) found a
prevalence of headache of 54%, stomachache 50%, and backache 37%,
occurring at least once a month for at least 6 months. Females had a
higher prevalence of having all three complaints when compared with
males; the prevalence increased with age. These three pain syndromes,
headache, stomachache, and backache, frequently coexist.
IBS and chronic abdominal pain affect 6–20% of children and
adolescents. Idiopathic musculoskeletal pain affects about 16% of
schoolchildren age 5-­16 years and is often associated with sleep disturbances, headache, abdominal pain, daytime tiredness, and feeling
sad. Migraines present >6 months occur in about 8% of the population (children and adolescents <20 years). Fibromyalgia is present in
1.2–6%. The prevalence of chronic disabling fatigue increases during
adolescence from about 1.9% at age 13 to 3% at 18 years. As with most
COPCs, fibromyalgia has many comorbid disorders, such as sleep disturbance, fatigue, headache, sore throat, joint pain, and abdominal
pain. The American College of Rheumatology definition of fibromyalgia incorporates some of these comorbid conditions.

SYMPTOM/DISORDER OVERLAP

Diagnostic criteria of many of these disorders overlap with one another,
making differentiation between two disorders more of a semantic issue
rather than a clinical differentiation. Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS),
clinically the most concerning symptom, shares many of the diagnostic
criteria with fibromyalgia. Patients with a single pain condition, such
as fibromyalgia, CFS, IBS, multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS), headaches, or temporomandibular joint disorder (TMJD), will typically
have another disorder. This overlap of symptoms may reflect a shared
pathophysiology, possibly a central nervous system (CNS) dysfunction, as was implied in the prior term “central sensitization syndrome.”
A CNS pathophysiology would also explain the “invisibility” of these
disorders to usual screening tools that most often target an end organ.

COPCs also harbor many symptoms that are not strictly “pain,”
although they may be equally or more disabling. Adolescents seen in
a tertiary referral center with a functional gastrointestinal disorder
(FGID) also manifest dizziness, chronic nausea, chronic fatigue, and
sleep disturbance, as well as migraines. Up to 50% of adolescents complain of weekly fatigue, and 15%, daily fatigue. COPCs are studied in
their discipline-specific silos rather than collectively as a group.
Migraine headaches are frequently associated with anxiety and
depression. Anxiety also predicts the persistence of migraine headaches. Sleep disturbance and migraine also interact closely. Poor sleep
can trigger a migraine or a migraine cluster; migraine headache itself
disturbs sleep. Juvenile fibromyalgia is associated with sleep disturbances
such as prolonged sleep latency, frequent awakening, less total sleep
time, and periodic limb movements. Adult patients with IBS also have
sleep disturbances, correlating with anxiety, depression, and stress.
The comorbidities of hypermobility Ehlers-­Danlos (hEDS) and
postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) with COPC have
been significant. Patients with hEDS may complain of widespread and
sometimes debilitating pain with or after activity, severe fatigue, handwriting difficulties, “cracking” of joints, joint swelling, joint dislocation,
subluxation, or back pain. The chronic pain reduces exercise tolerance,
with poorer quality of life and an ever-­worsening cycle because exercise is a key piece of management. Patients with FGID may also have
hEDS, fibromyalgia, chronic pain, and higher somatizations scores
than those with organic gastrointestinal (GI) disorders.
The diagnosis of pediatric POTS requires an increase in heart rate
>40 beats/min in the first 10 minutes of upright tilt test associated
with orthostatic symptoms. POTS is also associated with multiple
comorbidities, including sleep disruption, chronic pain, Raynaud-­like
symptoms, GI abnormalities, and less frequently, headaches, syncope,
and urinary complaints. Patients with both POTS and hEDS usually
have more migraines and syncope than those with POTS alone. The
prevalence of comorbid disorders in children with COPC is identical
whether they have POTS or hEDS.

PSYCHIATRIC COMORBIDITIES

Many of these disorders have significant psychiatric comorbidities.
Juvenile fibromyalgia is associated with anxiety disorders and major
mood disorders. Children with medically unexplained symptoms
generally have more anxiety and depression than children with other
chronic disorders. Other associations include disruptive behaviors,
symptom internalization, fearfulness, greater dependency, hyperactivity, and concern about sickness.

PREDISPOSING FACTORS

Female gender and older age (adolescence) increase the risk of COPCs.
Certain conditions (e.g., headache) are more common in males or have
similar prevalence across genders during childhood, but the prevalence
in females increases after puberty. Trauma or posttraumatic stress disorder increases psychologic comorbidities in juvenile fibromyalgia.
Some studies suggest that anxiety predisposes to chronic pain. A
population-­based study following children from 18 months to 14 years
of age suggested that maternal psychologic distress in early childhood
and depressive and pain complaints in preadolescence increase the risk
of recurrent abdominal pain at age 14. Postinfectious IBS is an identifiable risk factor for new-­onset anxiety, depression, and sleep disruption
in adults. Children with recurrent abdominal pain often have parents
with abdominal pain. It is unclear if this association is caused by a common environmental/genetic factor or a learned behavior of the child
imitating the parent.

NATURAL HISTORY

The natural history of COPC is not well known. Chronic disabling
fatigue in the general adolescent population persists 2-­3 years in about
25% of patients, but only 8% of youth affected at age 13 still had the
complaints at ages 16 and 18. A meta-­analysis suggests that the prognosis of CFS in children is usually good, with a small minority having
persistent disabling symptoms. The patient’s belief in an underlying

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 212 u Chronic Overlapping Pain Conditions

-43

Fig. 212.1 Brain areas demonstrating

more (red) or less (blue) activation in irritable bowel syndrome compared with
healthy control in a meta-­analysis of rectal
distention. (From Tillisch K, Mayer EA, Labus JS. Quantitative meta-­analysis identifies brain regions activated during rectal
distension in irritable bowel syndrome.
Gastroenterology. 2011;140:91–100, Fig.
3.).

-38

-32

-14

-10

0

28

36

physical disorder and the presence of psychiatric comorbidities predict
a poorer outcome.
In a study of children with FGID, the outcome depended on specific
variables. Those who perceived their abdominal pain as more threatening, with high levels of pain catastrophization and little capacity to cope
with pain because of reduced activity levels, had a poorer outcome. This
“high pain dysfunctional profile” subgroup was predominantly female
(70%) with a mean age of 12.2 years. Two thirds of this subgroup still
complained of FGID at follow-­up vs about one third of those in the other
groups. These groups included a “high pain adaptive profile” group with
similar pain levels but better adaptive skills and less catastrophization,
predominantly slightly younger (11.8 years) females, and a “low pain
adaptive profile” group, slightly younger (11.1 years), with equal males
and females but less abdominal pain, better coping mechanisms, and
less impairment of daily activities. In the high pain dysfunctional profile
group, 41% had both FGID and nonabdominal chronic pain at follow­up vs 11% in the high pain adaptive and 17% in the low pain adaptive
group. Another study following children ages 4-­16.6 years with IBS demonstrated resolution of symptoms in 58%, usually without medication. The
differences between these studies may result from the age of the groups,
with better outcome in the younger patients, as well as the number of
comorbidities and psychologic profile. Similarly, in juvenile fibromyalgia, symptoms are still present 2-6 years later in about 60% of affected
children. The psychiatric comorbidities, mainly depression, and controlling family environments are associated with a poor prognosis.

PROPOSED PATHOPHYSIOLOGY

3

0

-4

There may be dysfunction in the hypothalamic-­hypophyseal-­adrenal
axis, circadian patterns, autonomic responses, some aspects of CNS
processing, the inflammatory immune response, and the musculoskeletal system. Vagal tone measured by heart rate variability is decreased
in some children with FGID symptoms and in children with COPCs.
Alterations in the autonomic nervous system may affect the immune
system and circadian patterns. The stress response may increase muscle tone, which in turn leads to body aches and tension headaches. In
fibromyalgia the cortisol response is altered, with lower cortisol levels

45

1575

38

-20

8

50

on awakening and throughout the day. Orthostatic intolerance from
autonomic abnormalities may also contribute to poor concentration
from brain hypoperfusion and blood pooling in the lower extremities.
The pathophysiology has been better studied in myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME)/CFS. ME/CFS has been associated with joint hypermobility, orthostatic intolerance, decreased range of motion, and reduced activity. These
patients demonstrate excessive glial activation resulting in neuroexcitation,
neuroinflammation, and possibly neurodegeneration. These features may
contribute to the cognitive issues and fatigue present in this disorder.
Neuroinflammation and other changes in processing may lead to
abnormal descending inhibitory pain pathways, resulting in distal pain
and “central sensitization.” The malfunction of descending antinociceptive pathways allows pain to spread in the body, associated with increased
activity of the nociceptive facilitator pathways. These facilitator pathways
are further activated by psychologic factors, such as catastrophization,
depression, lack of acceptance, and hypervigilance. Other signals such
as pressure, sound, heat, and cold are also aberrantly processed, with
activation of areas of the brain that are typically activated only by acute
pain stimuli, such as the insula, prefrontal cortex, and anterior cingulate
cortex, as well as some regions usually not involved in pain processing.
The neuromechanisms involved in dysregulated brain-­gut interactions
in patients with FGID include changes in functional connectivity between
brain regions associated with nociceptive processing and the somatosensory cortexes. Enhanced sensory processing of the gut homeostasis
(homeostatic afferent) and attentive responses to salience stimuli (salience
network) as well as changes in certain brain regions are noted in patients
with FGID (Fig. 212.1). These alterations affect the perception of pain and
may affect the endocrine and autonomic nervous systems. What was once
called FGIDs is currently considered disorders of gut-­brain interactions.
Proposed mechanisms are noted in Figure 212.2. Research investigating the role of the microbiome in regulating microglia, astrocytes, and
immune cells may lead to central sensitization and chronic pain.

TREATMENT

In general, chronic pain should never be treated with opioids; cognitive-­
behavioral therapy (CBT) and a gradually progressive exercise program

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1576 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
KEY EFFECTORS

A

Emotional arousal network
Salience network
Central executive network
Sensorimotor network

B

ANS

C

HPA axis

FUNCTIONS

Serotonin (5-HT)
Norepinephrine
Dopamine

Affective responses to pain and aversive stimuli
Stimulus appraisal
Attentional processes
Perception of visceral stimuli

Catecholamines
Acetylcholine

“Fight or flight” arousal response (sympathetic)
“Rest and digest” (parasympathetic)

Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)
Glucocorticoids

Acute and chronic stress responses

Cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, IL-1B, TNF)
Activated mast cells
Monocytes
T lymphocytes

Altered intestinal permeability
Modulation of ENS and ANS signaling

Acetylcholine
Dopamine
Serotonin (5-HT) and
Serotonergic receptors

Bowel sensory and motor function
Regulation of mucosal secretion and blood flow
Local endocrine and immune responses

Short chain fatty acids
Secondary bile acids
Luminal 5-HT release

Altered intestinal permeability
Influence bowel secretion and contractility
Low grade intestinal inflammation
Modify visceral sensation and autonomic tone

Immune cells

D
Enteric Nervous System (ENS)

E
Intestinal microbiota

F

Fig. 212.2 Key effectors and functions of the brain-­gut-­microbiota axis. ANS, autonomic nervous system; HPA, hypothalamic pituitary axis. (From

Tait C, Sayuk GS. The brain-­gut-­microbial axis: A framework for understanding functional GI illness and their therapeutic interventions. Eur J Int Med.
2021;84:1–9, Fig. 2.)

constitute the cornerstones of treatment. The complex comorbid
nature of COPCs typically requires a multidisciplinary approach.
Because neither CBT nor exercise will have any effect in the absence
of full patient engagement and understanding, the team must include
the family and the patient, a pain psychologist with experience in
CBT, a physical therapist, and the primary care physician. Depending
on comorbid conditions, rheumatology, neurology, or gastroenterology may have important roles for symptom management and a possible alternative diagnosis. Depending on the initial symptomatology,
the differential diagnosis should include inflammatory bowel disease,
celiac disease, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, dermatomyositis, autoinflammatory disorders, Fabry disease,
porphyrias, hereditary sensory-­autonomic neuropathies, and Ehlers-­
Danlos syndrome. Red flags suggesting a medical/organic etiology for
abdominal pain (Table 212.1), headache (Tables 212.2 and 212.3), and
musculoskeletal pain (Table 212.4) must be assessed.
When a thorough evaluation for a structural cause of symptoms is
unrevealing, an important next step is patient and family education. This
should include the common presentation, the expectation that “markers” for these types of disorders would typically be absent, and the presence of solid management tools with high probability of improvement.
Families and patients need to receive encouragement to stop seeking a
“magic diagnosis and cure” and to begin the path to full recovery. Without this step, critical patient engagement in the treatment will not occur.
In our practice, we sometimes call functional disorders a problem of
“software,” in contrast to structural issues that would involve “hardware.”
We explain that successful management must change the software, not
just mask symptoms. Approaches that accomplish such a goal include
CBT and a rehabilitative program that may require physical therapy,
a vigorous exercise program with interval training, meditation, and/
or yoga. Patients are often deconditioned and may need to start with a
very low level of physical activity. In addition, their exercise tolerance
may be significantly hampered by an orthostatic intolerance syndrome
(e.g., POTS). For these reasons, we frequently recommend starting with
a water aerobics program, which provides several benefits: (1) very low
gravitational force, so the patient can be set up for success, working only
on conditioning and not simultaneously fighting an orthostatic challenge; (2) builds both limb and core strength; and (3) gentle on joints
for those with arthralgias or a hypermobility syndrome. When water is
unavailable, we recommend starting with a recumbent exercise program

such as a recumbent stationary bike. In both circumstances, we then
slowly introduce upright aerobic activities on land over 2-­3 months.
Strength exercises are also useful. A Cochrane review in adults with
painful disorders showed exercise to have minimal side effects and to
improve functionality, reduce pain, and improve quality of life. Patients
with fibromyalgia who undergo a 3-­month multidisciplinary program
with twice-­weekly physical therapy and CBT benefited in function and
physical activity level, and most importantly continued to exercise regularly at 1 year follow-­up. Pharmacologic interventions have less impact
than nonmedical treatments.
When children are missing school or are homebound, it is important
to work closely with the school to encourage reentry. This may require
modifying the school schedule initially, starting with fewer hours at
school, and providing extra time for homework on days that the children are not feeling well.
Although medications such as tricyclic antidepressants are often added
to the treatment, the improvement with these medications for chronic
pain is minimal, and the side effects need to be considered. Nonetheless,
amitriptyline and anticonvulsants like gabapentin are often used because
they help in treating headaches and abdominal pain and improve sleep
quality, a critical element to manage any chronic pain condition.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

212.1 Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
Mark R. Magnusson
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), also known as myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME), is a complex, diverse, and debilitating illness characterized by chronic or intermittent fatigue accompanied by select
symptoms and occurring in children, adolescents, and adults. The
combination of fatigue and other symptoms interferes significantly
with daily activities and has no identified medical explanation (Fig.
212.3). The fatigue does not require exertion by the patient, nor does
rest relieve it. Some consider postexertion malaise, or worsening of

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 212 u Chronic Overlapping Pain Conditions

1577

Table 212.1  Red Flags and Clues to an Organic Cause of
Abdominal Pain

Table 212.2  History-­Related Red Flags for Secondary
Headaches

Age <4 yr old
Localized pain in nonperiumbilical site
Referred pain
Sudden onset of excruciating pain
Crescendo nature of pain
Sudden worsening of pain
Fever (high fever >39.4°C suggests pneumonia, pyelonephritis,
dysentery, cholangitis, more than perforation or abscess)
Jaundice
Distention*
Dysphagia
Dysuria
Emesis (especially bilious)
Anorexia
Weight loss, failure to thrive
Positive family history (metabolic disorders, peptic ulcer disease)†
Change in urine or stool color (blood, acholic) or frequency
Vaginal discharge
Menstrual abnormalities (amenorrhea)
Sexual activity
Delayed sexual development (chronic pain)
Anemia
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Elevated stool calprotectin
Specific physical findings (hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, absent
bowel sounds, adnexal tenderness, palpable mass, involuntary
guarding, focal or diffuse tenderness, positive rectal examination
results, perianal disease, joint swelling, rashes)

Quality:
“Thunderclap” rapid-­onset headache or the “worst headache of
my life”
Recent worsening in severity or frequency
Change in quality
New-­onset symptoms consistent with cluster headache
Location:
Unilateral without alteration of sides
Chronic or recurrent occipital headache
Timing:
Awakens from sleep
Occurs in morning or causes morning vomiting
Acute or chronic progressive pattern
Positional or activity-­related variations:
Worsened in the recumbent position or when bending over
Headache experienced or worsened with cough or the Valsalva
maneuver
Associated neurologic history:
Neurologic dysfunction other than typical aura
Altered sensorium during headache
Sensory deficits or changes in vision, gait, or coordination
Other focal neurologic deficits
Seizures or syncope
Decreased visual acuity
Mental status changes (e.g., confusion or disorientation)
Regression in fine or gross motor developmental skills
Decline in cognition or school performance
Change in mood, behavior, or personality
Associated general history:
Vomiting without nausea and morning/fasting nausea or vomiting
Polyuria or polydipsia
Preschool or younger age
History of head trauma
Neck pain:
Medical comorbidities
History of ventriculoperitoneal shunt
Certain medications
Signs of systemic or localized head/neck infection
Negative family history of primary headache disorders

*Consider the five Fs: fat, feces, flatus (aerophagia, obstruction), fluid (ascites,
hydronephrosis, cysts), fetus (pregnancy or fetal-­like abnormal growth [e.g., tumors]).
†Family history is also positive for chronic pain syndromes (constipation, irritable bowel,
dysmenorrhea, and lactase or sucrase deficiency).
Modified from Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric
Symptom-­Based Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 13.8, p. 229.

Table 212.3  Physical Examination Red Flags for Secondary
Headaches
Abnormal vital signs:
Hypertension
Growth failure
Increased head circumference or bulging fontanel
Fever
Meningeal signs with or without fever
Evidence of cranial trauma
Cranial bruit
Frontal bony tenderness
Macrocephaly
Abnormal ophthalmologic findings:
Papilledema
Abnormal ocular movements
Squinting
Pathologic pupillary response
Visual field defects
Abnormal neurologic findings:
Impaired mental status
Cranial nerve palsy
Ataxia
Abnormal gait
Abnormal coordination
Abnormal reflexes
Asymmetric motor or sensory examination
Hemiparesis
Developmental regression
Precocious, delayed, or arrested puberty
Skin findings:
Café-­au-­lait or ash leaf macules
Petechiae or purpura
Facial hemangioma
Malar rash
From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 34.6, p. 553.

From Kliegman RM, Toth H, Bordini BJ, Basel D, eds. Nelson Pediatric Symptom-­Based
Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2023: Table 34.5, p. 553.

Table 212.4  Musculoskeletal/Joint Pain Warning Signals
Requiring Further Workup
• Arthritis: Erythema, warmth, swelling, pain on palpation
• Pain/stiffness in the morning
• Abnormal radiographic findings
• Pain at rest, relieved by activity
• Pain at night: Worsened by massage, analgesics ineffective
• Refusal to walk
• Extremity atrophy
• Bony tenderness
• Poor growth
• Weight loss
• Fever
• Rash
• Abnormal blood results: Including complete blood count (CBC),
C-­reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Modified from Friedrichsdorf SJ, Giordano J, Dakoji KD, et al. Chronic pain in children
and adolescents: Diagnosis and treatment of primary pain disorders in head, abdomen,
muscles and joints. Children. 2016;3:42, Table 3.

the fatigue with additional symptoms after mental or physical exertion
and lasting >24 hours, to be characteristic of CFS. A definitive causal
agent or process has not been identified, although the differential diagnosis includes infectious, inflammatory, metabolic, genetic, and autoimmune diseases. Our understanding of this condition is largely from
studies of adults and adolescents, with limited descriptions of chronic
fatiguing illnesses in younger children.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1578 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Outliers

Mean

Bodily
pain

General
health

Median

Mean scores of 213 healthy controls

100

SF-36 scores

80

60

40

20

0
Physical
functioning

Vitality

Mental
health

Role
physical

Role
emotional

Social
functioning

Subscale

Fig. 212.3 Functional status* of 471 patients enrolled in the CDC Multisite Clinical Assessment† of ME/CFS§—United States, September 2015.

*Measured by box plots of scores in the eight subscales of Short-­Form Health Survey (SF-­36) scores (25th and 75th percentile at bottom and
top of box). SF-­36 scores range from 0 to 100, with higher scores indicating better functioning. †https://www.cdc.gov/cfs/programs/clinical-­
assessment/index.html. §ME/CFS (myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome) patients show significant impairment, particularly in vitality
and physical functioning subscale scores, but with preservation of mental health and emotional role functioning. (From Unger ER, Lin JMS, Brimmer
DJ, et al. CDC Grand Rounds: Chronic fatigue syndrome—advancing research and clinical education. MMWR. 2016;65[50–51]:1434–1438.)

The illness was formally defined in 1988 as chronic fatigue syndrome because persistent unexplained fatigue was considered the
principal and invariable physical symptom. A variety of other
names have been used to describe the illness, including chronic
mononucleosis, chronic Epstein-­Barr virus (EBV) infection, postinfection syndrome, and immune dysfunction syndrome. Several case
definitions have been developed and are in use in both clinical care
and research (Table 212.5).
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) 2015 recommendations apply
to all ages and include a special focus on pediatrics. The IOM suggested new diagnostic criteria and a new name, systemic exertion
intolerance disease (SEID), to emphasize the postexertion malaise
criterion and better understand the illness (Table 212.6).

EPIDEMIOLOGY

Based on worldwide studies, 0.2–2.3% of adolescents or children
have CFS. Most epidemiology studies use the 1994 definition. CFS
is more prevalent in adolescents than in younger children. The variation in CFS prevalence estimates may result from variations in case
definition, study methodology and application, study population
composition (specialty vs general practice or general population),
and data collection (parent, self-­reporting vs clinician evaluation).
Gender distribution in children differs from that in adults, with a

more equal distribution in children <15 years old, while remaining
two-­fold to three-­fold higher in females 15-­18 years old. Few studies have reported the incidence of CFS among children <10 years
old. In adolescents in the Netherlands, the pediatrician-­diagnosed
incidence of CFS/ME was 0.01%, and in the United Kingdom, 0.5%.

PATHOGENESIS

Although the etiology and pathophysiology of CFS are unknown,
some patients and clinicians correlate the onset with a recent episode of a viral illness such as infectious mononucleosis (10–12%)
(EBV; see Chapter 301). A pathophysiologic relationship of CFS to
infection is suggested because the symptoms and biologic markers
elicited by the nonspecific innate host responses to infections in
general are present in CFS. CFS-­like illness after infectious mononucleosis is not predicted by viremia or altered host response to
EBV infection, but is associated with the severity of the primary
infection. A wide variety of other candidate viral infections have
been associated with postinfectious fatigue syndromes, particularly in adolescents and adults. SARS CoV-­2/COVID-­19 infection
has also been implicated, as patients with a history of COVID-­19
infection have presented with symptoms similar to patients with
ME/CFS, labeled long COVID, post-­acute sequalae of SARS CoV-­2
infection (PASC), or post–COVID-­19 conditions (Table 212.7) (see

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 212 u Chronic Overlapping Pain Conditions

1579

Table 212.5  Overview of Current Case Definitions for Systemic Exertion Intolerance Disease (SEID) and Past Definitions of
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome or Myalgic Encephalomyelitis
SYMPTOM

SEID

CFS

ME

Fatigue and impairment of daily
function

≥6 mo

≥6 mo

≥6 mo

Sudden onset

Yes

Yes

Muscle weakness

Yes

Muscle pain

Yes

Postexertional symptoms

Yes

Yes

Sleep disturbance

Yes

Yes

Memory or cognitive disturbances

Yes

Yes

Autonomic symptoms

Yes

Sore throat

Yes

Lymph node involvement

Yes

Cardiovascular symptoms

Yes

Yes

Headaches

Yes

Arthralgias

Yes

Yes

CFS, Chronic fatigue syndrome; ME, myalgic encephalomyelitis.
Data from Institute of Medicine. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Redefining an Illness. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2015; Jason L,
Evans M, Porter N, et al. The development of a revised Canadian myalgic encephalomyelitis chronic fatigue syndrome case definition. Am J Biochem Biotechnol. 2010;6:120–135;
Reeves WC, Wagner D, Nisenbaum R, et al. Chronic fatigue syndrome—a clinically empirical approach to its definition and study. BMC Med. 2005;3:19.

Table 212.6  Criteria for Diagnosis of Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome (ME/CFS)
Patient has each of the following three symptoms at least half the
time to at least a moderately severe degree:
• A substantial reduction or impairment in the ability to engage in
preillness levels of occupational, educational, social, or personal
activities that persists for >6 mo and is accompanied by fatigue,
which is often profound, is of new or definite onset (not lifelong),
is not the result of ongoing excessive exertion, and is not
substantially alleviated by rest.
• Postexertional malaise*
• Unrefreshing sleep*
Plus at least one of the two following manifestations (chronic, severe):
• Cognitive impairment*
• Orthostatic intolerance
*Frequency and severity of symptoms should be assessed. The diagnosis of ME/CFS
should be questioned if patients do not have these symptoms at least half of the time
with moderate, substantial, or severe intensity.
From Institute of Medicine. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2015.

Chapter 449.1). Similar features have been described in post–intensive care syndrome.
Similarities between CFS symptoms and those experienced by
patients with autoimmune and other inflammatory disorders suggests primary perturbation of immune function in the pathogenesis
of CFS. Hypogammaglobulinemia and hypergammaglobulinemia,
immunoglobulin subclass deficiencies, elevated levels of circulating
immune complexes, altered helper/suppressor lymphocyte ratios,
natural killer cell dysfunction, elevated cytokines, and monocyte
dysfunction have been inconsistently reported in adult patients
with CFS. These findings have not been consistent among studies.
CFS patients as a group differ from healthy controls, but most laboratory values of the immune parameters are not outside the normal
range.

Table 212.7  WHO Definition of Long (Post)–COVID-­19
Condition
• Post–COVID-­19 condition occurs in individuals with a history of
probable or confirmed SARS-­CoV-­2 infection, usually 3 mo from
the onset of COVID-­19, with symptoms that last for at least 2 mo
and cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis.
• Common symptoms include fatigue, shortness of breath, and
cognitive dysfunction and generally have an impact on everyday
functioning.
• Symptoms might be new onset after initial recovery from an acute
COVID-­19 episode or persist from the initial illness.
• Symptoms might also fluctuate or relapse over time; a separate
definition might be applicable for children.
Modified from Munblit D, O’Hara ME, Akrami A, et al. Long COVID: Aiming for a
consensus. Lancet Respir Med. 2022;10(7):632–634.

Autonomic nervous system (ANS) changes are suggested by the
orthostatic intolerance (OI) experienced by some patients with
CFS. OI syndromes with circulatory dysfunction include neutrally
mediated hypotension and POTS and have been observed in some
patients with CFS and could contribute to the syndrome. The pathophysiology of these manifestations among adolescents with CFS is
unclear, but in postinfectious states could be associated with unreplenished fluid and electrolyte losses associated with acute infection
or immune-­mediated injury (autoantibodies directed against ANS).
Because the widespread musculoskeletal pain in CFS is similar to fibromyalgia, and because some consider these to be overlapping syndromes,
fibromyalgia and CFS may share similarities in pathogenesis. Other
hypotheses under investigation for the biologic basis of CFS involve alterations in energy metabolism (e.g., mitochondrion, particularly as related
to exercise intolerance and postexertion malaise), alterations in sleep,
the stress response, and the hypothalamic-­pituitary axis. Understanding
CFS has proved so challenging because it likely represents more than one
underlying pathophysiology. Current studies and guidelines are attempting to stratify or subgroup patients to address this possibility.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1580 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS

The dominant symptom expressed by adolescents and adults is a
substantial reduction or impairment in the ability to engage in preillness levels of activity, accompanied by fatigue (see Fig. 212.2).
In younger children, who often do not spontaneously report symptoms, exertion induces behavioral changes, manifested by a lack of
their usual energy and reduced participation in activities. In adolescents, fatigue and postexertion malaise may lead to decreased participation in school, family activities, and social exchange.
Cognitive impairment includes reported difficulties in concentrating, which are common and indicated by reduced participation in school, difficulty keeping up with homework, and a drop
in grades. Sleep may be impaired, and nonrestorative sleep is common. Other sleep complaints include difficulty falling asleep and
staying asleep, whereas diagnosed sleep disorders, including restless legs syndrome, parasomnias, and sleep apnea, are less common. Myalgia and arthralgia may accompany fatigue and altered
sleep. Sore throat and cervical lymph node tenderness can occur but
may be part of an inciting illness. Adolescents also have increased
reports of headache, abdominal pain, nausea, and sensitivity to light
and sound with amplified pain.
Patients diagnosed with CFS in primary care practices are more
likely to report abrupt onset of their symptoms, often as part of an
initial virus-­like illness, whereas gradual onset is more common in
those identified in population-­based studies. School absenteeism is
a major social issue. In one study, two thirds of adolescents missed
>2 weeks over a 6-­week observation period, and one third required
home tutoring. Unlike school phobia, inactivity due to CFS persists
on the weekends and during holidays the same as it does during the
school week.
Although fatigue and accompanying symptoms are subjective, the
magnitude of impairment of each component can be measured by
questionnaires addressing pain and function or, in the case of suspected orthostatic instability, by recording routine supine and standing heart rate and blood pressure measurements. Fatigue cannot be
dismissed as a minor ailment. It generally manifests as lassitude,
profound tiredness, intolerance of exertion with easy fatigability, and
general malaise.
Abnormal physical examination findings are conspicuously absent,
providing both reassurance and consternation for the patient, family,
and physician. The presence of “alarm symptoms” such as weight loss,
chest pain with exertion, paresthesia, dry mouth and eyes, fevers, diarrhea, cough, night sweats, and rash is uncommon and warrants consideration of a diagnosis other than CFS.

DIAGNOSIS

There are no pathognomonic signs or diagnostic tests for CFS. The
diagnosis is clinically defined based on inclusion and exclusion criteria (Fig. 212.4). The diagnostic criteria are applicable to adults and
adolescents >11 years old because of the current requirement for a
self-­generated history. Whereas duration of symptoms is 3-­6 months
depending on age, symptom management should not wait until this
criterion is met.
CFS is difficult to diagnose in children, who may have difficulty
describing their symptoms and articulating their concerns. Sole
reliance on parental history can be fraught with confusion because
parents may also struggle to interpret their children’s symptoms and
feelings in providing accurate historical information. A combination of child and parent reporting is most effective. It is important
to document the child’s activity levels and worsening of symptoms
after physical or mental endeavors. Changes in participation in
hobbies and family or other social activities can help identify the
impact of CFS on function.
The diagnosis of CFS can be established only after other medical and psychiatric causes of fatigue and other symptoms, many of
which are treatable, have been excluded. These include medical conditions presenting with chronic symptoms, such as hypothyroidism,

Patient presents with profound fatigue

Substantial
decrease in
function

No

• Symptom management
• Consider another diagnosis

No

• Symptom management
• Reassess for 6 months
• Consider another diagnosis

Yes

Persists ≥
6 months

Yes

Post exertional
malaise and
unrefreshing
sleep

No

• Consider another diagnosis

Yes

Cognitive
impairment
and/or
orthostatic
intolerance

No

• Consider another diagnosis

Yes
Patient diagnosed with ME/CFS

Fig. 212.4 Diagnostic algorithm for myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). ANS, autonomic nervous system; HPA,
hypothalamic-­pituitary axis. (From Institute of Medicine. Beyond Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: Redefining an Illness.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2015.)
adrenal insufficiency, respiratory and food allergies, sleep apnea,
narcolepsy, substance abuse, posttraumatic stress disorder, adverse
drug reactions, and obesity. A previously diagnosed medical condition with incomplete or uncertain resolution that may explain
fatigue needs be considered.
Certain illnesses (e.g., fibromyalgia), amplified pain syndrome,
post–COVID-­
19 condition, post–intensive care syndrome, and
depression share similar symptoms with CFS but are not exclusionary diagnoses. These should be considered in the differential diagnosis in select cases. There is concern that CFS might be mistaken
for readily identifiable psychiatric disorders such as anxiety and
mood disorders, but evidence supports differences in their clinical
presentation from CFS. CFS should not be diagnosed in persons
with a prior diagnosis of major depressive disorder with psychotic
or melancholic features, bipolar affective disorders, schizophrenia

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Chapter 213 u Miscellaneous Conditions Associated with Arthritis
of any subtype, delusional disorders of any subtype, dementia of any
subtype, eating disorder of any type, or alcohol or other substance
abuse within 2 years before the onset of the chronic fatigue or any
time thereafter.
Although evaluation of each patient should be individualized,
initial laboratory evaluation should be limited to screening laboratory testing sufficient to provide reassurance of the lack of significant medical illness. Further evaluation should be directed
primarily toward excluding treatable illnesses that may be suggested
by the history, symptoms, signs, or physical exam findings present
in specific patients.

MANAGEMENT

Management of CFS is based on relief of the core and most disruptive symptoms in the individual patient. The diagnostic criterion of
6 months duration of illness should not delay evaluation and symptom management, because these may be initiated as soon as the
child or adolescent presents with a CFS-­like picture. Problems with
sleep can be addressed by encouraging patients to adopt good sleep
habits using standard sleep hygiene techniques. It may be beneficial
to refer the patient to a sleep medicine specialist for the identification and treatment of sleep disorders and disturbances. Once pain is
found not to be related to other specific disease or illness, nonpharmacologic treatment is indicated.
One of the nonpharmacologic approaches to pain management,
CBT, may also assist the patient in managing and coping with CFS.
Through explanation and changes in perception of the illness, CBT
may help patients and their families develop coping skills and provide emotional support. Improved methods of coping may allow some
improved function while living with the illness. Comorbid psychiatric
conditions such as anxiety require appropriate evaluation and intervention. Guided graded-­exercise therapy may be beneficial and added
to CBT.
Although the overall goal is to help patients with CFS tolerate
activity, children and adolescents with CFS should limit physical or
mental efforts that result in aggravated symptoms. Return to school
should be initiated gradually and systematically with the goal to
return to full-­time attendance. Home tutoring, cyber-­school, and
partial attendance can be interim steps. Parents and clinicians can
work with teachers and school administrators to define appropriate
expectations for attendance and performance for children with CFS.
Because of the crucial importance of learning socialization skills,
even brief attendance in school or participation in school activities
should be encouraged, remembering that too rapid remobilization
usually exacerbates symptoms and should be avoided.
Continued empathy and support by the treating physician are crucial in maintaining a physician-­parent-­patient relationship that is conducive to managing this illness. Careful attention must be directed to
family dynamics to identify and resolve family problems or psychopathology that may be contributing to children’s perception of their
symptoms.

PROGNOSIS

The natural history of CFS is highly variable, and patients and families understand that the symptoms will wax and wane. Children and
adolescents with CFS appear to have a more optimistic outcome than
adults, typically with an undulating course of gradual improvement
over several years. Overall, a good functional outcome has been
reported in up to 80% of patients. Poor prognostic factors include
gradual onset, increased school absenteeism, lower socioeconomic
status, chronic maternal health problems, and untreated comorbid
individual and family psychiatric disorders. Favorable prognostic
factors include patient control of the rehabilitation program, with
continuing support from health professionals and family members,
and improvement in orthostatic intolerance.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

1581

Chapter 213

Miscellaneous Conditions
Associated with Arthritis
Angela Byun Robinson and
C. Egla Rabinovich
RELAPSING POLYCHONDRITIS

Relapsing polychondritis (RP) is a rare condition characterized by episodic
chondritis causing cartilage destruction and deformation of the ears (sparing the earlobes), nose, larynx, and tracheobronchial tree. Antibodies to
matrillin-­1 and collagen (types II, IX, and XI) are present in approximately
60% of patients with RP, suggesting an autoimmune pathogenesis. Patients
may experience arthritis, uveitis, and hearing loss resulting from inflammation near the auditory and vestibular nerves. Children may initially
relate episodes of intense erythema over the outer ears. Other dermatologic
manifestations may include erythema nodosum, maculopapular rash, and
purpura. Cardiac involvement, including conduction defects and coronary
vasculitis, has been reported. Severe, progressive, and potentially fatal disease resulting from destruction of the tracheobronchial tree and airway
obstruction is unusual in childhood. Diagnostic criteria established for
adults are useful guidelines for evaluating children with suggestive symptoms (Table 213.1). The clinical course of RP is variable; flares of disease
are often associated with elevations of acute-­phase reactants and may
remit spontaneously. Although seen more often in the adult population,
RP may coexist with other rheumatic disease (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren syndrome, Henoch-­Schönlein purpura) in up to 30% of
patients. The differential diagnosis includes ANCA-­associated vasculitis
(granulomatosis with polyangiitis) (see Chapter 210.4) and Cogan syndrome, which is characterized by auditory nerve inflammation and keratitis but not chondritis. MAGIC (mouth and genital ulcers with inflamed
cartilage) syndrome has many similarities to Behçet disease (see Chapter
202). A genetic syndrome named vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-­linked, autoinflammatory, somatic (VEXAS) syndrome is caused by somatic pathogenic
variants affecting the UBA1 gene. Adolescent and adult patients (most are
male) with this syndrome may have fevers, myalgia, arthralgia, auricular
chondritis, and erythema nodosum. Approximately 50% of patients with
VEXAS meet criteria for relapsing polychondritis. Between 5% and 10% of
patients originally thought to have RP have pathogenic variants in UBA1.
Affected patients have a high CRP and ESR in addition to lower platelet
counts when compared with patients with only RP.
Many children respond to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs,
but some require corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive agents
Table 213.1  Suggested Criteria for Relapsing
Polychondritis*
MAJOR
Typical inflammatory episodes of ear cartilage
Typical inflammatory episodes of nose cartilage
Typical inflammatory episodes of laryngotracheal cartilage
MINOR
Eye inflammation (conjunctivitis, keratitis, episcleritis, uveitis)
Hearing loss
Vestibular dysfunction
Seronegative inflammatory arthritis
*The diagnosis is established by the presence of two major or one major and two
minor criteria. Histologic examination of affected cartilage is required when the
presentation is atypical.
Data from Michet CJ Jr, McKenna CH, Luthra HS, et al. Relapsing polychondritis: Survival
and predictive role of early disease manifestations. Ann Intern Med. 1986;104:74–78.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1582 Part XIV u Rheumatic Diseases of Childhood (Connective Tissue Disease, Collagen Vascular Diseases)
Table 213.2  Diagnostic Criteria for Classic Sweet
Syndrome*
MAJOR CRITERIA
Abrupt onset of painful erythematous plaques or nodules
Histopathologic evidence of dense neutrophilic infiltrate without
evidence of leukocytoclastic vasculitis
MINOR CRITERIA
Pyrexia >38°C
Association with underlying hematologic or visceral malignancy,
inflammatory disease, or pregnancy or preceded by an upper
respiratory or gastrointestinal infection or vaccination
Excellent response to systemic corticosteroids or potassium iodide

Fig. 213.1 Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA). Symmet-

ric, oval and round, reddish brown macular, papular, necrotic, and crusted
lesions on the chest of 9-­yr-­old boy. (From Paller AS, Mancini AJ, eds. Hurwitz Clinical Pediatric Dermatology, 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016:
Fig. 4-­33, p. 87.)

Abnormal laboratory values at presentation (three of four):
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate >20 mm/hr
Positive C-­reactive protein test result
>8,000 leukocytes/mm3

(azathioprine, methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, colchicine, cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, and anti–tumor necrosis factor [TNF]
agents), as reported in small series and case reports.

MUCHA-­HABERMANN DISEASE/PITYRIASIS
LICHENOIDES ET VARIOLIFORMIS ACUTA

Pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis acuta (PLEVA) is a benign, self-­
limited cutaneous vasculitis characterized by episodes of macules, papules,
and papulovesicular lesions that can develop central ulceration, necrosis,
and crusting (Fig. 213.1). Different stages of development are usually seen
at once. PLEVA fulminans or febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-­Habermann
disease (FUMHD) is the severe, life-­threatening form of PLEVA. Large,
coalescing, ulceronecrotic lesions are seen, accompanied by high fever and
elevated ESR. Systemic manifestations can include interstitial pneumonitis,
abdominal pain, malabsorption, arthritis, and neurologic manifestations.
PLEVA has a male predominance and occurs more frequently in childhood.
The diagnosis is confirmed by biopsy of skin lesions, which reveals perivascular and intramural lymphocytic inflammation affecting capillaries and
venules in the upper dermis that may lead to keratinocyte necrosis. Phototherapy has been used in some cases of PLEVA. When disease is severe,
corticosteroids have been used with questionable effect, and methotrexate
has been reported to induce rapid remission in resistant cases. Cyclosporine and anti-­TNF agents have also been efficacious in case reports.

SWEET SYNDROME

Sweet syndrome, or acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis, is a rare
entity in children. It is characterized by fever, elevated neutrophil
count, and raised, tender erythematous plaques and nodules over the
face, extremities, and trunk. Skin biopsy reveals neutrophilic perivascular infiltration in the upper dermis. Female predominance is seen in
the adult population, whereas gender distribution is equal in children.
Established criteria are useful for diagnosis (Table 213.2). Children can
also have arthritis, multifocal nonbacterial osteomyelitis, myositis, and
other extracutaneous manifestations. Sweet syndrome may be idiopathic
or secondary to malignancy (particularly acute myelogenous leukemia),
drugs (granulocyte colony-­stimulating factor, tretinoin, azathioprine, or
trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole), or rheumatic diseases (Behçet disease,
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus).
It has also been reported in association with COVID-­19, VEXAS, CANDLE (chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and
elevated temperature), Majeed syndrome, and deficiency of interleukin-1
receptor antagonist (DIRA) and pyrin associated autoinflammation with
neutrophilic dermatosis (PAAND) syndromes (see Chapter 204). The
condition usually responds to treatment with corticosteroids, treatment of underlying disease, or removal of the associated medication.

HYPERTROPHIC OSTEOARTHROPATHY

Children with chronic disease, especially pulmonary or cardiac disease,
can demonstrate clubbing of the terminal phalanges and have associated

>70% neutrophils/mm3
*The diagnosis is established by the presence of two major criteria plus two of the four
minor criteria.
Adapted from Walker DC, Cohen PR. Trimethoprim-­sulfamethoxazole-­associated
acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis: Case report and review of drug induced Sweet’s
syndrome. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1996;34:918–923.

periosteal reaction and arthritis. These findings characterize the classic
presentation of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (HOA). HOA can be primary (idiopathic) or secondary. Although rare, secondary HOA is more
common in children and is seen in those with chronic pulmonary disease
(cystic fibrosis), congenital heart disease, gastrointestinal disease (malabsorption syndromes, biliary atresia, inflammatory bowel disease), and
malignancy (nasopharyngeal sarcoma, osteosarcoma, Hodgkin disease). It
may precede a diagnosis of cardiopulmonary disease or malignancy. The
pathogenesis of secondary HOA is unknown; symptoms often improve if
the underlying condition is treated successfully. HOA-­related pain can be
disabling; in adults, management with bisphosphonates has been reported.
Evaluation of children presenting with HOA should include a chest radiograph to evaluate for pulmonary disease or intrathoracic mass. Autosomal
recessive pathogenic variants in prostaglandin pathway genes have been
described in primary HOA, also described as pachydermoperiostosis.

PLANT THORN SYNOVITIS

A diagnosis of plant thorn synovitis should be considered in children with
monoarticular arthritis nonresponsive to antiinflammatory therapy. Acute
or chronic arthritis can occur after a plant thorn or other foreign object
penetrates a joint. Unlike septic arthritis, children with plant thorn synovitis are usually afebrile. The most common organism seen with plant thorn
synovitis is Pantoea agglomerans, although cultures are often negative. The
initial injury may be unknown or forgotten, making the diagnosis difficult.
Ultrasound or MRI can be useful in identifying the foreign body. Removal
of the foreign body using arthroscopy, followed by an antibiotic course,
is the accepted therapy.

PIGMENTED VILLONODULAR SYNOVITIS

Proliferation of synovial tissue is seen in pigmented villonodular synovitis
(PVNS). This proliferation is localized or diffuse and can affect the joint,
tendon sheath, or bursa. Macrophages and multinucleated giant cells with
brownish hemosiderin are present histologically. It is unclear if the etiology
of PVNS is inflammatory or neoplastic in nature. Although findings are
not pathognomonic, MRI with contrast is a useful diagnostic tool by which
PVNS can be seen as a mass or bone erosion. Brown or bloody synovial
fluid is seen with arthrocentesis, but the diagnosis is made by tissue biopsy.
Surgical removal of the affected tissue is the therapeutic modality, and
with diffuse disease, a total synovectomy is recommended.
Visit Elsevier eBooks+ at eBooks.Health.Elsevier.com for Bibliography.

Downloaded for mohamed ahmed (dr.mms2020@gmail.com) at University of Southern California from ClinicalKey.com by Elsevier on
April 21, 2024. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright ©2024. Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

